Avicenna - Ibn Sina
A universal genius
A
MM Mk L-SHAYK al-Ra'is" (prince
among scholars) was
the title bestowed in the
Orient on Abu Ali al-Husayn Ibn Abd-Allah
Ibn Hassan Ibn AN Ibn Sina, traditionally
known in the West as Avicenna.
He is one of the most extraordinary
figures in world history. A philosopher of en¬
cyclopaedic knowledge, scientist and ex¬
perimenter, eminent theorist of medicine as
well as clinician and healer, poet and musi¬
cian, he was also a Grand Vizier (prime
minister), then a chain-fettered prisoner, an
indefatigable traveller who visited many
regions of central Asia and Persia, and the
author of a vast corpus of writings covering
almost every branch of contemporary
knowledge.
This great thinker was also a man whose
human qualities of integrity and nobility of
character gave rise to a host of legends
some of which are still told today. Accor¬
ding to one of these stories, little Husayn's
mother was bathing him in a bowl when she
unwittingly, dropped a gold ring into the
bathwater and then threw it away. When
by Muhamed S. Asimov
she noticed that the ring had gone, she ac¬
cused a servant of responsibility for its
disappearance and severely punished her.
Thereupon, young Husayn, wishing to rec¬
tify this injustice, spoke up and said:
"Mother, beg the servant's pardon for it was
not she who lost the ring". These are said to
have been Avicenna's first words.
Born in 980 AD (370 of the Hegira) to
Abd-Allah, an official at Balkh (in the nor¬
thern part of present-day Afghanistan) and
to Sitora, the daughter of a farmer from the
village of Afshana near Bukhara, Avicenna
revealed his exceptional qualities very early
in life. By the age of ten he had already com¬
pleted the usual school curriculum and
could recite all the Koran by heart. At six¬
teen he was a physician whose renown was
such that he was summoned to treat the
Emir of Bukhara himself. By curing the Emir
the young doctor unlocked for himself the
doors of the Emir's celebrated library, the
"Sanctuary of Wisdom".
"By eighteen or nineteen," Avicenna later
told his disciple and biographer Juzjani, "I
had already made myself familiar with the
whole of philosophical knowledge logic,
physics, mathematics, geometry,
arithmetic, astronomy, music, medicine and
many other disciplines so that I met no one
who was my master".
This was no exaggeration. His memory,
and the range and depth of his knowledge
were stupendous. When the library of
Bukhara burned down, people consoled
themselves by saying: "The Sanctuary of
Wisdom has not perished. It has been
transferred into the brain of Al-Shayk
al-Ra'is!"
Avicenna's relatively brief life (he died
aged fifty-seven) could be epitomized as
one of titanic creation. He worked at all
times and in all conditions. He wrote or dic¬
tated his works day and night, in prison or
on his travels, even on horseback. The Ira¬
nian scholar Said Nafissi calculated that he
wrote (or had attributed to him) 456 works in
Arabic and 23 in Persian. At least 160 books
by Avicenna are listed in the catalogues of
the world's libraries.

Shown here is a small selection from the imaginary portraits of Avicenna produced by
artists of many countries in the last ten centuries. Clockwise from top left: a study by
an anonymous artist which was reproduced many times in European editions of
Avicenna's work; fragment from a stained glass window; head discovered in 1950
beneath a layer of plaster on the wall of the Bodleian Library, Oxford; commemorative
stamp issued by Iran thirty years ago on the thousandth anniversary of Avicenna's birth
according to the lunar calendar; detail from title page of a 16th-century medical work
published in Strasbourg; portrait executed in the 1950s by an artist of the Tadzhik SSR.
Opposite page: a medal just issued by Unesco to mark the thousandth anniversary of
Avicenna's birth in the Christian calendar (for details see page 46).
A medieval engraving depicts Avicenna
seated on a throne, a laurel crown on his
head. Galen and Hippocrates are shown at
each side of him. If Galen and Hippocrates
were the fathers of medicine, the unknown
artist seems to be saying, Avicenna was its
prince and its hero.
This symbolic representation of
Avicenna's qualities is fully justified, for in
the Middle Ages the words Avicenna and
medicine were virtually synonymous. His
great work the Canon of Medicine is a
remarkable synthesis of medical knowledge,
which presents the achievements of the
most outstanding Greek, Indian, Iranian and
Arab physicians. The author's range, the
logical rigour of his thought, the con¬
ciseness and lucidity of his exposition, his
novel approach to the eternal problems of
medicine as well as to the formulation and
solution of new questions, the freshness
and originality of his thought all these fac¬
tors make the Canon a work without parallel
(see article page 13).
Translated into Latin in the twelfth cen¬
tury by Gerard of Cremona, it became for
centuries a veritable Bible of medicine. (In
fact, after the invention of printing with
movable type, it became the second most
widely printed book after the Bible.) In the
Canon Avicenna not only produced a
brilliant synthesis of his predecessors' work,
he greatly enriched medical science through k
his own observations and discoveries. *
MUHAMED S. ASIMOV, of the USSR, is Pre¬
sident of the International Association for the
Study of the Cultures of Central Asia, a corres¬
ponding member of the Academy of Sciences of
the USSR, and President of the Academy of
Sciences of the Tadzhik Soviet Socialist
Republic.

> He was the first person to describe cor¬
rectly the anatomy of human eye muscles,
and devised an explanation for the
mechanism of sight which is not far remov¬
ed from the modern conception of this
phenomenon. He explained with precision
the heart's system of ventricles and valves.
He described smallpox and measles,
illnesses unknown to the physicians of
Ancient Greece. His analysis of diabetes
does not differ greatly from that made eight
centuries later by the English specialist
Thomas Willis.
He put forward the hypothesis that cer¬
tain infectious diseases are transmitted by
"tiny organisms" in water and in the at¬
mosphere, and in the eighteenth century
this hypothesis was confirmed by the Dutch
scientist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
(1632-1723) in research using microscopes
he had constructed himself (see Unesco
Courier, June 1977). His observations on the
pulse are of very great interest (he counted
sixty simple and thirty complex variants),
and modern science has added few
refinements to his work.
He invented a number of diagnostic pro¬
cedures. The percussion method, for exam¬
ple, whereby internal sicknesses are located
by tapping the patient's body with the
finger, is associated with Avicenna,
although it was later rediscovered by the
Viennese physician Leopold Auenbrugger
(1722-1809). However, the essential impor¬
tance of the Canon lies in the principle of
"natural causality" on which it is based and
from which Avicenna drew inspiration not
only in the field of medicine but in all his
scientific work.
Modern science came into being when
scholars began to see the physical world not
as the symbolic reflection of another,
spiritual world, but as a set of natural causes
and effects which could be studied through
observation, research and experiment
leading to the formulation of new
hypotheses. The works of Avicenna turned
Western thought in the direction which
would give birth to modern science.
The Ancient Greeks had made a synthesis
of the then-known cultural values, including
those of the Orient. The culture of the
Roman Empire assimilated many elements
of Hellenism and of the science of the Orien¬
tal peoples. Then, in the medieval Orient,
came a period which can be compared for
brilliance with the European Renaissance.
Avicenna was a luminary of this age, but he
lived and worked in a cultural and historical
setting which had produced other geniuses
such as the Persian poets Rudaki and Fer-
dowsi, the physician Abu Bakr Razi, the
astronomer Abu Mahmud Khodjendi, and
the encyclopaedists al-Farabi and al-Biruni.
Avicenna sparked off a new cultural
movement which, enriched by the in¬
vigorating sources of the past, swept
westwards from the Orient. First of all it
reached Spain; then it spread to the South
of France, where it made a contribution to
the development of freedom of thought in
Europe. This process reached its climax at
the time of the Crusades, when Arab and
Byzantine cultures once more began to
spread in Europe. The thought of Avicenna
was thus an essential link in the develop¬
ment and expansion of a unique human
civilization.
It would be hard to over-estimate the in- 1
fluence of Avicenna's scientific and I
S
During the age of Avicenna, the Islamic world was creatively developing the
mass of scientific knowledge inherited from the mosaic of cultural traditions it
had encountered during its rapid expansion. As well as developing
mathematical theories of remarkable accuracy, Muslim astronomers also served
the Islamic community's practical need to determine the times of daily prayers
at different latitudes and longitudes and to work out the direction of Mecca
from every locality where prayers were performed. Avicenna himself made
astronomical observations and devised a contrivance for increasing the
precision of instrumental readings. The copper astrolabe, above right, was made
in Iraq In the 9th century AD. It was used for measuring the height of celestial
bodies and hence determining the time of day or night. Above left, iron
compasses of the kind a scholar-scientist of Avicenna's time would have used.
This richly decorated ceramic
container was used in Central Asia
in Avicenna's time for transporting
and storing mercury, large
quantities of which were extracted
and widely used in everyday life.
Special metal recipients rubbed
with mercury, the only metal which
stays liquid at normal temperatures,
could be used as mirrors.

Avicenna's Canon of Medicine has been called "perhaps the most influential single work in
the history of medicine". Written in Arabic, it would later be translated into Persian,
Turkish, Urdu and other Islamic languages as well as into Hebrew.Catalan and Latin. But
although "the prince of physicians" was the period's most illustrious figure, he did not
stand alone, for numerous medical authorities of the highest rank emerged in the Islamic
world in the 10th and 11th centuries. One of them was the Arabo-Spanish physician al-
Zahrawi (d. c. 1013) known in the West as Albucasis, whose treatise on surgery, profusely
illustrated with drawings of surgical instruments designed by the author, became the
leading textbook on surgery in Europe for some 500 years. Above, a page from the treatise.

, analytical concepts, set forth by one who
was both philosopher and man of science,
on the development of European thought.
He threw new light on Aristotle's logic by
considerably modifying the problems con¬
nected with the Aristotelian syllogism, en¬
visaging syllogisms based on categorical
judgements as well as syllogisms based on
hypothetical and conventional judgements.
But that is not all. Interesting though
Avicenna's judgements on induction, intui¬
tion and many other concepts may be, what
needs to be emphasized above all else is the
great store he set by logic. For him logic was
the very touchstone of knowledge which
makes it possible to realize "how what is not
known allows itself to be understood thanks
to what is known" and also "that all
knowledge which has not been weighed in
the balance [of reason] is not incontestable
and consequently is not authentic
knowledge".
Avicenna's contribution to logic was
stressed in the thirteenth century by the
English philosopher Roger Bacon
(1214-1294), one of the first champions of
experimental science. Bacon's appreciation
is particularly important since in Avicenna
the logician and the experimenter are
inseparable.
He formulated many original ideas which
heralded later discoveries, notably the prin¬
ciple of inertia set forth by the Italian
physicist and astronomer Galileo
(1564-1642) and Darwin's theory of evolu¬
tion. His methods of determining the
longitudinal differences between two points
on the earth's surface and the height and
azimuth of stars were reinvented five hun¬
dred years later.
It is known that on 24 May 1032, Avicenna
observed with the naked eye and described
a rare phenomenon: the passage of Venus
across the solar disc. This calls for a recti¬
fication in the history of science, for it was
long thought that this phenomenon had
been observed for the first time in 1639 by
the English astronomer Jeremiah Horrocks
(1617-1641).
If Avicenna was a pioneer in so many
fields, it is because he devoted all his life, in
medicine and philosophy, poetry and music,
education and sociology, to a single goal: in¬
creasing the sum of human happiness and
goodness. This he saw as the ultimate pur¬
pose of philosophy. Believing as he did that
there should be "understanding between
men, established standards of equity and
law", he expressed views which foreshadow
the idea of the Social Contract formulated in
the eighteenth century by Jean-Jacques
Rousseau (1712-1778).
The title of Avicenna's second en¬
cyclopaedic work, the Kitab al-Shifa (Book
of Healing) is particularly appropriate.
Whereas the Canon dealt with healing the
body, the Shifa dealt with healing the soul
so that men could become morally strong
and noble. (See article page 20).
The humanist ideas of Avicenna, who
saw in man an innate aspiration towards
beauty and harmony, and saw love as the
driving force in society, are expounded in his
Treatise on Love and in his philosophical
writings, Hayy ibn Yaqzan (The Living, Son
of the Dead), Salaman wa Absal and At-
Tayr (The Bird). They had an enriching in¬
fluence on the later development of the
literature of the peoples of the Orient and on
the work of the great poet Dante
(1265-1321).
Some specialists believe that through the
works of the philosopher and scholar Alber¬
tus Magnus (c. 1200-1280), Dante came
under a strong influence from Greco-Arab
philosophy and especially from Averroës
(Ibn Rushd, 1126-1198), who had himself
adopted many of Avicenna's ideas and also
made Avicenna known in Europe. Dante
himself remarked that he could not cite all
those of his predecessors who had influenc¬
ed him, but did include Avicenna among the
figures whose names he mentions in the
Divine Comedy.
The Persian astronomer and mathemati¬
cian Omar Khayyam (died around 1123) is
widely known as the author of the immortal
Rubaiyat (Quatrains). It is less well known
that he regarded Avicenna as his master, not
only in philosophy and the exact sciences
but in poetry, for it was Avicenna who
created the philosophical rubaiyat as a form
of expression. A number of these quatrains
have in fact survived, and they are
remarkable both for the perfection of their
poetic form and for the profundity of their
thought.
It is also recorded that Omar Khayyam,
shortly before his death, read with great
concentration the metaphysics of the Book
of Healing. As for Avicenna himself, when
he felt that he was about to die, he freed his
servants and distributed all his wealth to the
poor. On 18 June 1037 (Ramadan of the year
428 of the Hegira), he died in the desert near
the town of Hamadhan.
According to one story which has sur¬
vived, he wished to vanquish death and
achieve immortality. He is said to have
prepared forty different products which his
pupil was to administer to him in a predeter¬
mined order, immediately after his death.
The pupil faithfully accomplished this task,
and to his great astonishment the inert body
of his master became supple and youthful as
he injected the medicines. His face became
pink, he began to breathe again... and then
came the moment to administer the last cap¬
sule, which would bring about the Master's
resurrection. Unable to contain himself, the
pupil seized the capsule... but his hands
trembled, it slipped from his fingers, and the
mysterious liquid soaked away in the sand.
Fortunately, Avicenna has remained im¬
mortal in the minds of men.
Muhamed S. Asimov
Avicenna is
seated
symbolically
between two
great physicians
of Antiquity,
Galen and
Hippocrates, in
this engraving.
The doctrines of
Galen and
Hippocrates were
among the mass
of medical lore
codified and
interpreted by
Avicenna.
8
