IN 1895, the English archaeologist J.E.
Quibell, while excavating behind the
Ramesseum (the funerary temple of
Ramses II) at Thebes, discovered the tomb
of a doctor or a magician-medicine man.
Although the tomb had been looted, Quibell
recovered a large quantity of papyrus, with
hieratic writings dating from the end of the
Egyptian Middle Kingdom (approximately
1700 BC).
Amongst these writings were fragments
of famous literary works such as the Story
of Sinuhe, or the Tale of the Eloquent Pea¬
sant, but the discovery was especially
noteworthy because of one rather curious
text: a kind of index in which the words, ar¬
ranged in columns, were classified by
groups according to their meanings. Ap¬
parently, this papyrus had been used by the
Egyptian scribes as something like a dic¬
tionary or an encyclopaedia.
By modern criteria, this index must be
judged as rather haphazard, since after giv¬
ing a group of plant names, it goes on to a
series of names of birds, and then mam¬
mals, which is in turn followed by a list of
names of different kinds of bread and cakes,
cereals, and parts of the body. However, the
text then abruptly switches to a list of
geographical names, which are very well
classified, as they begin in the south and run
north, like the Nile.
One of the results of the excavations



The flooded
fortresses
of Nubia
by Jean Vercoutter
undertaken after Unesco's appeal of 8
March 1960 to save the treasures of Nubia,
was to identify positively, on site, and with
only one exception, the first fourteen
geographical names listed on the papyrus,
which is now well known to Egyptologists as
the "Ramesseum Onomasticon".
These names designate the fourteen for¬
tresses or fortified towns which defended
entry to Egypt in the south. They are: Sem¬
na South, Semna West, Semna East (or
Kumma), Uronarti, Shelfak, Askut,
Mirgissa, Buhen, perhaps Serra West or
Faras (the only doubtful case) and Serra
East, all of which are in Sudanese Nubia
(see map page 30), followed by Aniba, Kub¬
ban, Bigeh, and Elephantine, which are in
Egypt.
More than half of these fortresses are in
the most desolate but also the most
beautiful region of Sudanese Nubia. This
area, known as the "Batn-EI-Haggar" or
"Belly of Stone" is unfortunately now
covered by the backwaters of the Aswan
w #¿

Photo Paul Almasy, Unesco, Paris.
The gigantic fortress of Buhen once
protected the strategic area of the Second
Cataract between Upper and Lower Nubia.
Excavations of the Egyptian strongholds on
the Nile, with their double rows of
ramparts, moats, jutting bastions and
massive outer walls (up to eight metres
thick at the base) have revealed the
sophistication of Pharaonic military
architecture. Archaeologists reckon that
over ten million sun-dried bricks were used
to build Buhen.
Aerial view, left, taken before
the beginning of the
International Nubian Campaign,
shows the Second Cataract of
the Nile. Quadrangular outline
on large island marks the
remains of the fortress of
Dabenarti. On the left bank of
the river stood the citadel of
Mirgissa, one of the most
powerful links in a chain of
strongpoints which defended
the southern approaches to
Egypt. The Nubian Campaign
shed new light on the
importance of these fortresses,
most of which are today
submerged beneath the waters
behind the High Dam.
High Dam. Before the dam came into ser¬
vice, this stretch of land extended from a
point slightly south of Buhen, approximately
at the latitude of Wadi Haifa, to the area
above the Dal Cataract, fifty kilometres
south of Semna. Here, in addition to other
rapids, are those of the Second or "Great"
Cataract whose noise, according to the
Greeks, was so loud that it actually deafened
the people who lived on the river banks.
The very fact that the ancient Egyptians
found it necessary to construct fortresses in
such a desolate region, to which access was
so difficult, is a problem in itself. Why did
they build such massive strongholds? Why
did they construct ramparts more than ten
metres high, and fortified doors that could
be defended both from the inside and the
outside, such as those at Mirgissa and
Buhen? Finally, why were two fortresses
often built, one to the west and the other to
the east of the Nile, both at the same level,
when a handful of determined men could
have blocked entry to the mountainous
gorges through which the river rushes in a
raging torrent?
Anyone who knows the wild landscape of
the Batn-EI-Haggar at first hand or has walk¬
ed through the enormous ruins of the now-
submerged fortresses, will realize why these
questions should be asked. What power
could have threatened Egypt to such a
degree that the Pharaohs of the 12th Dynas
ty (2000-1785 BC) felt compelled to build not
just isolated fortresses but veritable fortified
complexes in the passages which were the
most difficult to penetrate?
The rapids at Semna, already a very dif¬
ficult natural obstacle, were defended by
five fortresses. One was located upstream,
at Semna South, and two more, Semna
West and Kumma, were built on either side
of the barrier of rocks which forces the Nile
into a narrow channel which at low water is
only a few metres wide. As if these were not
sufficient, two more fortresses were built in
this veritable "fortified zone", downstream
from the first line of defence: one at Uronar-
ti, right in the middle of the narrow moun¬
tain gorge where the Nile emerges from the
Semna rapids, and the other at the end of
the same gorge, at Shelfak.
At the other end of Batn-EI-Haggar was
the defence complex of Mirgissa-Buhen,
with its advance post at Askut, a central l
nucleus at Mirgissa and an annex atr
JEAN VERCOUTTER, of France, is director of
the French Institute of Oriental Archaeology in
Cairo, and was formerly director 'of the Sudan
Antiquities Service. While professor of
Egyptology at the University of Lille he headed
the Franco-Argentine expedition to Aksha and
the French archaeological mission to Mirgissa. He
is the author of numerous works on ancient
Egypt.
63

y Dabenarti, where the rapids of the Great
Cataract virtually prohibit the passage of
shipping, as Mohammed Ali's troops learn¬
ed to their cost in 1820 and Lord Wolseley's
in 1884-1885. Finally, at the northern end of
the complex, there was the fortified area of
Kor (Buhen South) and Buhen itself, along
with the two fortresses of Serra East
(Khesef-Medjayan in Egyptian) and Serra
West or Faras (Ink-taouy), which faced each
other across the river.
Obviously there must have been some
great danger 'for the Pharaohs to build ten
fortresses and two fortified camps in the
Batn-EI-Haggar area alone, to protect Egypt
from an aggressor coming from the south.
Egyptian texts reveal the identity of this ag¬
gressor: it was the land of Kush, whose
name appears on Egyptian monuments at
the very moment when the fortresses were
gradually being built along the river.
The potential danger that the land of Kush
represented for Egypt is clearly
demonstrated in a text written approximate¬
ly two centuries after the construction of the
great Pharaonic fortresses of Nubia. This
document is a dispatch which Apophis, the
Hyksos ruler of the northern, richer half of
Egypt sent to the ruler of Kush sometime
around 1580 BC.
This dispatch, it was learned from a stela
discovered in the temple of Karnak in 1954,
was intercepted by the Theban king
Kamosis, who explains: "I seized his
message south of the oasis, on the road to
Kush. It was a letter actually written in the
hand of the prince of Avaris [the stronghold
of the Hyksos kings in the Egyptian Delta]:
'I, Aouserre-Apophis, greet my son, the
prince of Kush... Are you aware of what
Egypt is inflicting upon me? Its prince
Kamosis is attacking me on my own ter¬
ritory... He has chosen to besiege two coun¬
tries so that he may oppress them: mine and
yours, and he is laying waste to them. Come
to the north, do not be afraid. He is now
fighting against my forces here. No one ex¬
pects to see you come into this part of
Egypt. I will hold him at bay until you arrive.
Then the two of us will divide up the Egyp¬
tian cities and your country will rejoice' ".
In the Karnak text, Kamosis makes no fur¬
ther reference to Kush and so we do not
know whether its ruler actually joined forces
with the Asiatic Hyksos. It may be doubted
that he did so. But this dispatch points clear¬
ly to the danger that threatened Egypt. At
any moment the country faced the risk of
having to fight simultaneously on two
fronts: in the Delta or the Syro-Palestinian
corridor against Asiatics attracted by the
wealth of Egypt, and in Nubia when Nubia
was united and hostile.
This permanent danger explains why, on
the one hand, the Egyptian rulers of the
Middle Kingdom who already had to face
Asiatic incursions in the north, attempted to
consolidate their southern frontier by
building the fortified defence system I have
described, and on the other hand, why the
Pharaohs of the 18th and 19th Dynasties
would not rest, from 1580 until 1300 BC, un¬
til they had occupied the entire territory of
Kush.
Nevertheless,, the fortresses of Batn-EI-
Haggar were not constructed for strategic
reasons alone. They were also intended to
protect and control the river route which led
from Egypt to the resources of Africa, for
the land of Kush, inhabited by the Nehesyu,
supplied Egypt over a long period with many
64
commodities including cattle, wood (espe¬
cially ebony), incense, ivory, semi-precious
stones, and "tropical" products such as
giraffes' tails, ostrich feathers and eggs, and
the leopard skins worn by Egyptian priests
when officiating at funerals. Live giraffes,
cheetahs and monkeys were also imported.
During the Middle Kingdom gold was added
to this list of goods. However, as early as
the third millennium BC, it was as a source
of manpower and primarily military man¬
power that Egypt looked to the south. The
"scouts" of Kamosis's army which fought
against the Hyksos in the Delta were Nu¬
bians.
Thus the Nubian fortresses performed a
military role by protecting Egypt from a
massive invasion by the redoubtable war¬
riors who throughout the ages lived in what
is today the Sudan, and by providing
jumping-off points for expeditions launched
in the south, along the Nile or the desert
routes. The army of Sesostris III set out
from Semna (1880-1850 BC) and crossed the
rapids of the Dal Cataract, thus preparing
the way for the annexations by the Pharaohs
of the 18th Dynasty of the entire region bet¬
ween Batn-EI-Haggar and the Third
Cataract.
Certain rather curious documents dis¬
covered with the "Ramesseum
Onomasticon" reveal another aspect of the
fortresses' military activities, that of wat¬
ching over the desert routes. These
documents, known to Egyptologists as the
Semna Dispatches, were copies of letters in¬
tended for the archives which the com¬
manders of the fortresses exchanged
amongst themselves and sent to the central
authorities. According to these texts,
patrols of Egyptians and Medja, Nubian
mercenaries enlisted in the Egyptian army,
Photo André Vila © French Archaeological Mission to the Sudan
were regularly sent into the desert. There
they often detained groups of nomads
which were brought back to the fortresses
for interrogation. The nomads were then
sent back to their own regions, after "being
given bread and beer", as the Dispatches
put it. In this way the Pharaohs were always
kept informed about what was happening in
the south and could be forewarned and
forearmed in the case of a raid on Egypt by
the Nehesyu.
The second role of the fortresses was to
maintain and promote freedom of move¬
ment on the Egyptian routes leading south.
This is why the Mirgissa slipway (see photo
this page) was constructed to enable the
boats which plied between Egypt and Nubia
to be dragged around the Great Cataract.
The "dam" built at Semna by Amenemhet
III (1850-1800 BC) fulfilled the same role
since, by raising the water level of the Nile
when it was at its lowest point, it improved
the flow of traffic along the river and made it
easier to cross Batn-EI-Haggar.
A hieroglyphic text discovered at Semna
itself sums up the dual purposes of the for¬
tresses. It is engraved on a granite stela
which Sesostris III set up in Semna West
and reads as follows: "Southern boundary
[of Egypt] made in the year 8, under the ma¬
jesty of the King of Upper and Lower Egypt,
Sesostris III, in order to prevent any
Nehesyu from crossing it, by travelling to
the north, by land or ship, or with any
Nehesyu herds; with the exception of
Nehesyu who shall cross it for purposes of
trade in Iken or any authorized, profitable
business with them, but without allowing a
ship of the Nehesyu to pass beyond Heh,
northwards, forever".
This text has been interpreted as evidence
of the first colour bar in history. However,
this is incorrect since the Nehesyu were pro-
Left, the remains of a
two-metre-wide slipway
used for dragging boats
around the rapids of the
Second Cataract of the
Nile, impassable during
the low water season.
Discovered beneath
several centimetres of
sand, it originally
consisted of a layer of
slippery Nile mud
reinforced with wooden
crosspieces, which
perished long ago.

hibited from entering Egypt not because
they were "blacks" but because they
belonged to a nation which, in terms of
power, presented a danger to the in¬
habitants of the lower valley of the Nile.
Nonetheless, the text clearly emphasizes
both the military role of the Nubian for¬
tresses in preventing an invasion from the
south, and their economic role in facilitating
and promoting trade with the same area.
We now know that the Iken referred to in
the Semna stela is Mirgissa, and that Heh is
probably the rock of Abousir which marks
the end of Batn-EI-Haggar when travelling
from the south.
Thanks to the campaigns for the
safeguarding of Nubia, we now know more
about the role played by the Nubian fort¬
resses in Egyptian history. The excavations
at Buhen, Mirgissa, Askut and Semna
South have shown how the construction of
the forts was perfectly adapted to the terrain
and have demonstrated the extraordinary
complexity of their architecture, with their
double ramparts, high and low, their
loopholes arranged so as to permit all possi¬
ble angles of fire, and their amazingly strong
outer walls, in some places eight metres
thick at their base.
These excavations have also furthered our
knowledge of garrison life. The military
posts were isolated in a hostile region and
the physical protection afforded by the
strongholds was not felt to be sufficient.
Therefore a kind of supernatural protection
was provided by magical texts engraved on
vessels and statuettes, which were "killed"
and buried in areas which the enemy was
sure to cross, thus acting as veritable magic
"mines". Such texts have been discovered
both at Mirgissa and Uronarti. All the
fortresses were undoubtedly protected by
similar texts.
As the troops were stationed throughout
the year in these fortresses, they had
gardens and presumably orchards to provide
them with vegetables and fresh fruit, which
supplemented the regular rations sent from
Egypt in packages whose official seals have
been found by the thousands. Excavations
north of the fortress at Mirgissa have unear¬
thed the homes of "civilians" who may have
organized trade with the south. We have
discovered the hearths where they baked
their bread, the large jars in which they
brewed their beer and the bowls from which
they drank.
The temples rebuilt in stone during the
reoccupation of the fortresses under the
New Kingdom (1580-1200 BC) at Semna
West, Kumma and Buhen, show that
religion was still powerful and that alongside
the troops, some of which, according to the
Semna Dispatches were recruited locally,
lived priests, scribes, artists and artisans.
They exchanged letters, copies of which
have been found near the Ramesseum at
Thebes, and also moulded and painted the
remarkable funeral masks found at the
necropolis of Mirgissa.
Exploration of the Nubian fortresses has
thus yielded outstanding results. Never¬
theless, we should not forget the destruc¬
tion of the edifices themselves, submerged
beneath the waters of the new lake. Of
course, it has been possible to dismantle the
stone temples and transport them to Khar¬
toum, but the lofty constructions which
commanded the noble and savage beauty of
Batn-EI-Haggar have disappeared forever.
Jean Vercoutter
Six hundred metres from the mighty
fortress of Mirgissa which kept
watch over the rapids of the Second
Cataract, archaeologists discovered
in a pit a cache of magic
"execration" texts and figurines. In
order to '"kill" their enemies, the
defenders of Mirgissa scratched the
texts on to ceramic vessels which
were ritually smashed and buried.
Many figurines covered with texts
(right) were also found in the pit.
Photos André Vila © French Archaeological Mission to the Sudan
The pillars of the temple built by
Amenophis III (1402-1364) at Soleb in
Sudanese Nubia are carved with about a
hundred enigmatic human portraits and
Inscriptions whose significance has long
been debated by specialists. Each portrait
shows the bust of a man whose hands are
tied behind his back; beneath it is a kind of
cartouche or frame bearing the name of the
man, his people or a region of Africa or
Asia from whence he came. This portrait
shows an African, identifiable by his
beardless face, his earring and his
headdress. His accompanying name is
Tirtir. It was once thought that the figure
depicted the Pharaoh's prisoners, but
according to another theory these images
of submission had a magical significance,
representing peoples over which some kind
of spell had been cast.
65
