Teaching disarmament
at universities :
a world survey
UNESCO'S Division of Human
Rights and Peace, in co-operation
with certain non-governmental
organizations, recently initiated a sur¬
vey that sought to discover the extent
and nature of current disarmament edu¬
cation efforts in universities in all
regions of the world. In North America,
the Consortium on Peace Research,
Education and Development (COPRED)
accepted responsibility for the effort.
The World Federation of United Nations
Associations (WFUNA) conducted the
distribution and collection of the infor¬
mation for Africa, Asia, Australia and
New Zealand, and Western Europe
(excluding parts of Austria, the Federal
Republic of Germany and Switzerland).
The Latin American survey was handled
by the Latin American Faculty of Social
Sciences (FLACSO). In Eastern Europe,
the Federal Republic of Germany, Swit¬
zerland, and portions of Austria, the
International Institute of Peace (IIP)
developed, distributed and collected the
information from the German language
surveys. We present below some gen¬
eral comments on the survey from a
paper prepared for COPRED by Profes¬
sor Leonard Gambrell.
For purposes of the survey, disarm¬
ament education was broadly defined.
Respondents were asked to
include instruction which dealt with almost
any aspect of the development, theory, or
rationale of arms policies. Likewise, they
were asked to include any sort of arms con¬
trol or disarmament related studies. Conse¬
quently, courses dealing with economic pro¬
blems associated with either the arms races
or disarmament, or with more narrow theo¬
retical or technical concepts such as deter¬
rence logic, were considered a possible part
of disarmament education.
Diversity in educational and political
systems made it very difficult for Unesco to
develop a single uniform questionnaire. It
was recognized, that even if the same ques¬
tions were asked, the diversity in perspec¬
tives and experiences in general, plus the
variation in views of the scope and nature of
what disarmament education entails, would
make a uniform survey difficult. For these
reasons, therefore, it cannot be claimed that
the survey has scientific statistical
significance, but it does provide important
information on the substance, and lack, of
disarmament education as well as insights
into several of the general problems facing
Art inspired by matters of concern to society as a whole should not be confined to art
galleries. The French artist Ernest Pignon Ernest exhibits his work in public
places streets, squares, public stairways that are associated in the collective
memory with incidents in the struggle against violence.
disarmament education endeavours.
Given the specific limitations of the survey
response, it seems fair to assert that little at¬
tention is being given to genuine disarma¬
ment education. While 73.8 per cent of
respondents offer courses on disarmament
problems or related issues, only 18.7 per
cent offer as much as one course dealing
with specific aspects of disarmament. There
is widespread general support of the notion,
but when probing deeper one finds that real
support, even in terms of long-range goaL
or interests, is lacking.
There is a recognizable resistance or indif¬
ference toward disarmament education on
the part of many of those teaching and
developing the professional literature in in¬
ternational relations and related fields. At
least part of this negative attitude may be at¬
tributed to the vagueness of the concept of
disarmament. Educators are not likely to in¬
itiate courses on a subject that does not sug¬
gest clear direction, scope and content.
The literature focusing on the moral
aspects of arms races seldom seems to be
consistent. Sometimes condemnation
seems directed at the use of violent defence;
in other instances, it appears that any type
of coercion or the mere presence of such a
threat is immoral. Even more contradictory
is an implied acceptance of conventional
arms policies coupled with condemnation of
the threatened use of nuclear weapons or
the use of "weapons of mass destruction".
By implication it is all right to use weapons
just as long as atoms are not split or the
destruction is sufficiently gradual.
One of the most negative influences on
the acceptance of disarmament education is
the treatment of the political aspects of the
topic of disarmament. Among the most glar¬
ing weaknesses is the general failure to
establish clear and precise linkage of arms
races to military doctrines and perceptions.
Overall there seems to be little appreciation
of the inherent implications that flow from a
nation's conceptualization of its strategic
and tactical defence policies. Seldom does
there appear to be any linkage of these mat¬
ters to levels and types of weapons systems.
One gets the impression that arms races are
nothing more than the consequence of habit
or lack of imagination.
It therefore appears that what is being
urged is a mere proclamation to stop arming
and it will occur. There is not sufficient
analysis and probing of the apparent
linkages between continuation of arms ex¬
pansion and such matters as the logic of
deterrence theory. Within the "logic" of
deterrence there are serious conceptual
flaws that inevitably lead to excessive
reliance upon arms and especially on nuclear

weapons. The concept promises much more
than can be delivered.
An additional problem arises from con¬
ceptual difficulties within disarmament
thought. It is sometimes postulated that on¬
ly the developed world can afford the "lux¬
ury" of thinking or teaching about disarma¬
ment. Developing nations, it is either argued
or implied, must focus on gaining and main¬
taining security.
Security, however, has several dimen¬
sions. Physical safety is only one aspect of
this concern. It is equally important to think
of the psychological or self-confidence
aspects of security. Likewise, it should be
noted, that although one thinks in terms of
national security, in political reality, the con¬
cern for security actually translates, in terms
of government policies, to mean the security
of the particular individual or groups of in¬
dividuals heading the government. Positive
economic development can and will occur
only within regimes which are led by people
who feel secure. Therefore, the effort to
promote disarmament should include an
awareness of processes that enhance this a
priori sense of security. To isolate disarma¬
ment as a separate goal or interest is a
mistake. Talk of removing weapons, or even
the study of such, will probably be viewed
as threatening in the "real" political world.
It is not very important whether peace
researchers and educators believe weapons
systems do or do not provide security. What
matters most are the perceptions of those
who have the weapons.
Within the broader conception of security
lies the possibility of establishing a clear
linkage between disarmament and security.
It is nonsense to ask political leadership to
behave in ways that do not make sense from
the leaders' perspectives. This also means
that there is a need to devote much greater
energy and creativity to improving the
chances of positively influencing those
who do not now agree with the goals of
disarmament.
- Much of the emphasis on disarmament is
somewhat misguided or misdirected. This,
in turn, has an adverse impact on the degree
of interest in disarmament education. In the
final analysis, neither development nor
disarmament can occur unless there is a
sense of general political security and confi¬
dence. Disarmament taken alone projects a
sense of defencelessness. One wonders, if
not arms, "what follows" or "what else" will
we experience? It should be recognized that
within formal academic training and espe¬
cially within international relations and diplo¬
matic history courses there seems to be little
awareness of alternative methods for pro¬
viding national security.
The failure to link disarmament proposals
with the necessity for conceptually projec¬
ting the notion of alternative approaches to
national security leaves disarmament educa¬
tion with a bleak future. If we are to reverse
this condition there must be full appreciation
of what does exist and what appear to be
important barriers to the development of
meaningful and far-reaching disarmament
education. This may require less use of the
term "disarmament" and more emphasis
upon the positive concept of alternative
views and approaches to security.
