The global
commons
Two fishing boats at sea. An engraving by the Japanese artist Hokusai (1760-1849)
Acommons is a tract of land or water
owned or used jointly by the mem¬
bers of a community. The global
commons includes those parts of the earth's
surface beyond national jurisdictions
notably the open ocean and the living
resources found there or held in common
notably the atmosphere. The only land
mass that may be regarded as part of the
global commons is Antarctica, although
several countries have claimed parts of it.
Much of the open ocean remains frontier
country in which people can exploit living
resources as they please as long as they
have the technology to do so. While the
open ocean is not as biologically rich as con¬
tinental shelf areas, it includes unique
ecosystems and provides some (and in some
cases all) of the critical habitats of several
culturally and economically important
groups of animals, notably whales and
tunas.
Species that are confined to the open
ocean should be regarded as the common
resource of all humanity; species that move
between the open ocean and waters under
national jurisdiction are shared resources.
Special provision for the conservation of
both groups of species is therefore needed,
but no satisfactory mechanism exists.
Living resource exploitation in the open
ocean is regulated only in the case of two
groups of species: tunas and whales. There
is no protection of the habitats of open
ocean species and hitherto none has been
needed. However, with the advent of deep
sea mining and the increasingly intensive
use of ocean space generally, protection is
now required. The designation by the Inter¬
national Whaling Commission (IWO- of an
Indian Ocean Sanctuary in which all com¬
mercial whaling is prohibited, while an en¬
couraging step forward, needs to be match¬
ed by international measures to protect the
habitats of the whales, dolphins and por¬
poises in that area.
Means of ensuring the conservation of
open ocean species and ecosystems
particularly ecosystems supporting the
feeding grounds of whales, salmon, and so
on, the spawning grounds of tuna, unique
areas and areas of unusual species diversity
should be devised, promoted and adopted.
An appropriate international organization
should prepare a discussion document,
possibly as a prelude to an expert consulta¬
tion, on priority species and ecosystems and
on ways and means of conserving them.
These might include the introduction of
more effective measures to regulate ex¬
ploitation and the establishment of sanc¬
tuaries where the habitats of cetaceans and
other marine creatures are protected and ex¬
ploitation is prohibited.
The International Whaling Commission
has imposed a moratorium on the taking,
killing, or treating of whales, except minke
whales, by factory ships or whale catchers
attached to factory ships. The moratorium
should be extended to all commercial whal¬
ing until:
the consequences for the ecosystems
concerned of removing large portions of
the whales' populations, and such
populations' capacity for recovery, can
be predicted;
permitted levels of exploitation are safe, ,.
and an effective mechanism exists for r
33

Antarctica, the ice-covered
continent which lies concentrically
about the South Pole, is the only
land mass that can be considered
as forming part of the global
commons. Under the Antarctic
Treaty, signed in 1959 by twelve
nations and having effect for 30
years, the area was declared a
demilitarized zone and preserved
for scientific research. A
convention regulating the taking of
living resources from the Southern
Ocean, the sea that surrounds
Antarctica, is now being
negotiated. Below, the British
Antarctic Survey station on
Adelaide Island some 100 km south
of the Antarctic Circle.
iV detecting and correcting mistakes in the
' management of any stock;
member nations of the IWC are no
longer purchasing whale products from,
or transferring whaling technology and
equipment to, or otherwise supporting,
non-member nations, or pirate whaling
ships.
The dumping of wastes at sea is regulated
by the Convention on the Prevention of
Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and
Other Matter and by regional conventions
for which it provides the framework. Those
States not yet party to this convention are
urged to join it.
It is also important to control the effects
of deep sea mining (including oil exploita¬
tion); for this to be done it is necessary to
learn what those effects are. Accordingly,
an internationally agreed area should be
established, in which deep sea mining is pro¬
hibited, as a baseline area to aid the long
term evaluation of the effects of deep sea
mining.
In addition, all nations engaged in, or con¬
sidering, deep sea mining activities or any
other activities with currently unpredictable
effects on open ocean ecosystems should:
precede commercial mining operations
or similar activities by commissioning a
comprehensive ecological survey to
determine the impact of such activities;
designate appropriate areas of the deep
sea bed as baseline reference and
resource zones in which no mining or
other significant disturbance will be
allowed, ensuring that the size and
shape of each area is such that its stabili¬
ty will be maintained;
establish guidelines for scientific
research to ensure minimum disruption
of the natural state of such areas, and
provide for full exchange of information
on the results of research.
The behaviour of the atmosphere, like
that of the ocean, is indifferent to political
boundaries. Impacts on the atmosphere in
one country can affect the living resources
of other countries, both directly and by
altering climate.
Such impacts are increasing. Acid rain
caused by excessive emissions of sulphur
dioxide, mainly in Europe and North
America, has reduced the productivity of
many lakes, rivers and forests in countries
other than the sources of the pollution.
The accumulation in the atmosphere of
other gases such as carbon tetrachloride

and methylchloroform (used in industrial
solvents), nitrous oxides from the decom¬
position of nitrogen compounds, the
chlorofluoromethanes (used in refrigerators,
air conditioners and aerosol sprays) and car¬
bon dioxide is potentially a still more
serious problem because of its possible ef¬
fects on climate. For example, it has been
estimated that if chlorofluoromethanes con¬
tinue to be released at current rates, the
ozone layer could be reduced by up to 15%
by the middle of the next century, which in
turn could impair human health and the pro¬
ductivity of the biosphere.
Major alterations of the land sur¬
face as forest clearance, massive
water impoundments and irrigation sys¬
tems, and the expansion of urban
areas also have the potential to alter local
or regional climates, for example by chang¬
ing heat and moisture exchange between
the surface and the atmosphere.
The most acute climatic problem,
however, is carbon dioxide accumulation, as
a result of the burning of fossil fuels,
deforestation and changes in land use. At
present rates of increase, the atmospheric
concentration of carbon dioxide may pro¬
duce a significant warming of the lower at¬
mosphere before the middle of the next cen¬
tury, particularly in the polar regions. This
warming would probably change
temperature patterns throughout most of
the world, benefitting some regions and
damaging others, possibly severely.
Since it would be necessary to redirect
many aspects of the world economy, in¬
cluding energy production and agriculture,
to halt or reduce further atmospheric carbon
dioxide accumulation, accelerated research
at the national and international levels is re¬
quired to determine more precisely the likely
climatic and other effects and their socio¬
economic consequences. There is also a
general need for better climatic data, for
clarification of the relative roles of human
and natural influences on climate, and for
improved understanding of the impact of
climate change on human activities.
Research into all these issues is the main
thrust of the World Climate Programme
sponsored by the World Meteorological
Organization, and this programme deserves
the strongest support of all nations. In addi¬
tion, the immediate problem of acid rain re¬
quires not merely continued research but a
reduction by European and North American
countries of sulphur dioxide emissions. It is
most important that states join and imple¬
ment the Convention on Long-range Trans-
boundary Air Pollution.
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean are
defined as all land and sea south of the An¬
tarctic Convergence (the well-defined but
fluctuating line where the cold surface
waters of the Southern Ocean sink beneath
the warmer waters of the cold-temperate
Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans).
Much of this area that is the entire area
south of 60°S latitude except for the "high
seas" is under the nominal control of the
13 parties to the Antarctic Treaty. Under this
treaty, Antarctica may be used only for
peaceful purposes principally scientific
research. Conservation of the living
resources of the land is provided for by the
"Agreed Measures for the Conservation of
Antarctic Fauna and Flora" which are ex¬
cellent but have not yet been ratified.
Currently the potential of krill (Euphausia
superba), a tiny shrimp-like creature, swar¬
ming in huge quantities in the Southern
Ocean, is attracting a great deal of interest:
it is said that the catch could rise from about
50,000 tonnes in 1 977/ 1 978 to 60 million ton¬
nes or more thereby doubling the world's
current annual fish catch.
However, krill are the major food of five
species of great whales, including the en
dangered blue whale and humpback whale,
and are also important for three species of
seals, many seabird species and several
species of fish. Unless krill harvesting is ex¬
tremely carefully and conservatively
regulated, its effects on other Southern
Ocean species could be devastating. A con¬
vention to regulate the taking of the living
resources of the Southern Ocean is being
negotiated, and is expected to be followed
by a regime for mining and oil exploitation.
Any regime for the exploitation of the liv¬
ing marine resources of the Southern Ocean
CONTINUED PAGE 38
Over 300 metres high, the stacks of a generating station at Cumberland City, Tennessee,
illustrate a trend to build taller chimneys so as to reduce the concentration of sulphur and
nitrogen oxides near the ground. However, by putting the oxides higher into the
atmosphere, the stacks cause them to be carried further. By joining and implementing the
Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution, States can take a major step in
combatting a form of pollution which by its nature disregards national boundaries. Adopted
in November 1979, the Convention obliges parties to make every effort to reduce air
pollution, especially the discharge of pollutants carried by winds across frontiers.

The Global Commons
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 35
should so regulate the krill fishery as to pre¬
vent:
irreversible changes in the populations of
krill;
irreversible changes in the populations of
the baleen whales and those seal, fish
and bird species which feed on krill, as
well as in the Southern Ocean ecosystem
as a whole;
overcapitalization of krill fishing fleets,
which could make it more difficult to
agree on a reduction of the krill take
should this prove necessary, and could
have severe impacts on fisheries outside
the Southern Ocean, due to the need to
redeploy the krill fleets during the An¬
tarctic winter.
An independent observer system should
be provided for in such regulations.
The Antarctic Treaty powers and nations
fishing or intending to fish the Southern
Ocean should exercise extreme restraint on
catch levels until understanding of this un¬
iquely productive ecosystem improves. All
harvesting should be on an experimental
basis as part of a scientific research pro¬
gramme to improve knowledge of krill and
of the Southern Ocean as a whole.
Baseline areas where no krill or other liv¬
ing or non-living resources may be taken
should be set aside and given complete pro^
tection, so that impacts outside can be
monitored and evaluated correctly. The
dimension and location of these areas
should be established according to the best
available knowledge of the ecosystems con¬
cerned. Current research efforts should be
strongly supported; and the collection,
analysis and dissemination of biological in¬
formation should be mandatory.
An International Decade of Southern
Ocean Research, focussing particularly on
ecological processes, should be initiated as
a matter of urgency. Investigation of the
possible environmental impacts of tourism,
scientific research, mining and oil exploita¬
tion, and so on, should be continued. Since
oil degrades extremely slowly in conditions
such as those of Antarctica and since
operating hazards are very high, the
feasibility of oil exploration and exploitation
in particular should be approached with the
utmost caution.
38
