Literacy a right

denied to 800 million
Modern literacy training
methods aim to link the learning
of reading and writing as closely
as possible with the realities of
the pupil's daily life and with his
cultural, economic, technical
and political environment. This
Senegalese alphabet wall-chart
is a good example of the
practical application of this
approach. Ingenious drawings
link common objects with the
shapes of letters that occur in
their names in Mandingo, a
language spoken by some three
and a half million Africans.
THE world illiteracy problem in the last
quarter of the twentieth century
could be summed up in two simple
observations: as a result of colossal efforts
many countries have succeeded in substan¬
tially reducing the percentage of illiterates in
their populations; meanwhile the absolute
number of illiterates is constantly rising
because of soaring population growth.
It has been estimated that if present
trends are not corrected, the number of il¬
literates may rise from 814 million in 1980 (or
approximately three adults in ten) to 884
million in 1990, and that mankind may enter
the twenty-first century with at least 954
million illiterate adults.
The proportion of women in these figures
is getting larger and larger. In 1960, 58 per
cent of illiterates were women; the cor¬
responding figure today is more than 60 per
cent, and in some communities virtually the
whole of the female population is illiterate.
Nearly three-quarters of the world's il¬
literates live in Asia, approximately 20 per
cent in Africa, and 5 per cent in Latin
America. Eleven Countries have a combined
illiterate population of over 400 million.
Twenty-three countries have an illiteracy
rate higher than 70 per cent. Hence the
situation is serious.
Insofar as it affects every man and woman
both as an individual and as a member of a
community, illiteracy hampers his or her per¬
sonal development and constitutes a denial
of the fundamental right to education, now
widely recognized, on which so many others
are contingent. A reversal of the present
world trend towards a constant increase in
the numbers of illiterates would therefore be
a major victory in the fight for human rights.
But illiteracy is in many respects more
than a problem of individuals and even of in¬
dividual nations. Its dimensions are world¬
wide and it has direct and far-reaching
economic and social effects on the develop¬
ment of whole regions of the world.
The map of illiteracy coincides almost ex¬
actly with that of poverty, revealing the
isolation of a large part of mankind, of
human groups which are at once the
poorest, the worst fed and the least well
cared-for. Deprived of the right to education
set forth in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, these millions of men and
women are unable to participate effectively
in the progress of the societies to which they
belong, that is to say, in the making of their
own destiny. No country can use the
benefits of science and technology on the
scale necessary for its development if its
population includes a high percentage of il¬
literates. Moreover, in changing societies.
the written word is one of the means
whereby a sense of cultural identity can be
renewed and perpetuated.
For Unesco and its Member States, to
struggle against illiteracy means to struggle
for the respect of human rights and to work
on behalf of development in the widest
sense.
In the light of the figures quoted above,
the task facing the international community
may seem a gigantic one; but it would be a
mistake to lose heart. Between 1950 and
1970, for example, the number of illiterates
admittedly increased by 83 million; but at
the same time the number of literates in¬
creased by 625 million. Likewise, the latest
available estimates show a reduction in the
illiteracy rates among the adult population
(aged 15 and over), which should fall from
28.9 per cent in 1980 to 25.7 per cent in
1990.
Whereas illiteracy among the adult
population aged 15 and over is the outcome
of a long-term situation covering several
decades, that among the population aged
from 15 to 19 gives a clearer idea of recent
developments and provides a yardstick with
which to measure the scale of the
phenomenon for a group of particular
strategic interest, namely those who swell
the ranks of the illiterate because they have
received inadequate schooling or none at all.
As a result of the effort to increase school
enrolments, it has been possible to stabilize
at between 70 and 75 million the absolute
number of illiterates in this age-group, and
the number of literates in the group should
increase by more than 60 million between
1980 and 1990. This will mean a reduction in
the illiteracy rate in this group from 21.8 per
cent in 1980 to 18.4 per cent in 1990.
Globally, the total number of literates
should increase, as a result of a gradual ex¬
pansion of schooling, by 556 million by
1990.
Unesco has been strongly committed to
the struggle against illiteracy ever since the
Organization's first General Conference in
1946, but the concept of literacy and literacy
instruction has developed significantly in the
last three decades.
Pioneering activities to awaken govern¬
ments and public opinion to the seriousness
of the problem culminated, in 1960, in a
World Conference on Adult Education, held
in Montreal, which advocated the organiza¬
tion of a vast campaign aimed at eradicating
illiteracy within a few years. According to
the terms of a Recommendation concerning
the international standardization of educa¬
tion statistics, drawn up by. Unesco two
years before, an illiterate was defined as a
person "unable to read, write and under-

stand a short, simple statement of facts
* relating to his daily life."
But there was still a need to investigate
ways and means of tackling the immense
task which the international community had
set itself. And so, in 1964, Unesco's General
Conference decided to initiate an ex¬
perimental literacy programme to pave the
way for an international campaign in this
field. The programme was centred on the
newly-developed concept of "functional
literacy". At a World Congress of Ministers
of Education on the Eradication of Illiteracy,
held in Tehran in September 1965, the con¬
cept was defined in the following terms:"
"Rather than an end in itself, literacy should
be regarded as a way of preparing man for a
social, civic and economic role that goes far
beyond the limits of rudimentary literacy
training consisting merely in the teaching of
reading and writing."
Applying this concept, the Experimental
World Literacy Programme (EWLP) was car¬
ried out between 1967 and 1973 under the
auspices of Unesco and with the co¬
operation of the United Nations Develop¬
ment Programme and other agencies of the
United Nations system. The programme's
objective was not to eliminate or even to
reduce illiteracy on a world scale, but to
"test and demonstrate the economic and
social returns of literacy and, more general¬
ly, to study the mutual relations and in¬
fluences which exist or may be established
or strengthened, between literacy train¬
ing among the working
population and development". Special
importance was attached to the imple¬
mentation of intensive and selective projects
in eleven of the twenty-two countries which
took part (Algeria, Ecuador, Ethiopia,
Guinea, Iran, Madagascar, Mali, Sudan,
Tanzania, Venezuela and Zambia).
A critical evaluation of this programme,
published in the form of a global report (see
"Bookshelf" page 34) provided a rich
harvest of significant information about
organization, financing, methodology and
international co-operation with regard to
literacy action. One of the first constructive
consequences was that programmes
launched in Algeria, India, Mali and Tan¬
zania were extended.
During the 1970s, the notion of functional
literacy was gradually extended. Over and
above the process of learning the skills of
reading, writing and arithmetic, literacy
came to be seen as part of a global educative
process conforming to the principles of
lifelong education, and acquired a new
dimension as an instrument for the liberation
of man and his full development. A declara¬
tion adopted at an International Symposium
for Literacy held at Persepolis in 1975 stated
that "literacy creates the conditions for the
acquisition of a critical consciousness of the
contradictions of society in which man lives
and of its aims. It also stimulates initiative
and his participation in the creation of pro¬
jects capable of acting upon the world, of
transforming it, and of defining the aims of
an authentic human development. Literacy
is not an end in itself; it is a fundamental
human right".
The definition of illiteracy was also chang¬
ing. A revised version of the Recommenda¬
tion concerning the international standar¬
dization of education statistics, proposed by
Unesco in 1978, declared that "a persons
should be considered 'functionally illiterate Y
The social causes
of illiteracy
SOUTH ASIA
Hunger. So long as
millions of human
beings, the great
majority of them in
the Third World, are
living precariously on
the border-line of
starvation, no
educational policy,
however well
conceived, can by
itself eradicate
illiteracy.

Lack of funds for education, results in
limited facilities, lack of teaching aids and
the use of teachers who have not always
received suitable training.
Rest
of South Asia
Indonesia
Bangladesh
Pakistan
Iran
Afghanistan
India
Diagram shows the distribution of the esti¬
mated numbers of illiterates aged 15 and over
in 1980. (Figures for the People's Republic of
China, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
are not included). It should be pointed out that,
in India, which has the second largest popula¬
tion in the world (about 600 million), great pro¬
gress is being made in tackling illiteracy and
both the illiteracy rate and the absolute num¬
ber of illiterates are expected
to fall considerably in the near
future.
Nigeria
Ethiopia
Egypt
Rest
of Africa
Brazil
Rest of
Latin
America
24
i millions L
AFRICA LATIN AMERICA REST OF THE WORLD
Education imposed from
outside. Systems of
education copied from
other countries and
which do not take into
account a nation's
specific conditions and
needs can never be
expected to come to
grips with the basic
problems of illiteracy.
Poverty. In the developing countries,
without the earnings of their school-age
children, many poor families cannot even
afford the basic essentials of life. Deprived
by harsh necessity of their schooling, these
children will grow up to swell the ranks of
the great army of the illiterate.
Isolation. When a country's population is scattered, the
establishment of schools and attendance at them
becomes much more difficult. This problem is
compounded by the fact that these isolated groups of
people are amongst the poorest and the least well-fed and
are unable to share in the progress of the societies to
which they belong.
wm

who cannot engage in all tnose activities in
which literacy is required for effective func¬
tioning of his group and community and also
for enabling him to continue to use reading,
writing and calculation for his own and the
community's development".
Against this background of experience,
Unesco has in the last few years set out to
renew the principles of its actions.
Adult illiteracy and low school enrolment
are two sides of the same coin, and so it
seemed essential to integrate efforts in each
field into a global approach in which literacy
training for adults is associated with the
general introduction of primary education.
If the causes of illiteracy are to be rooted
out once and for all, it is essential that all
children of school age should have access at
least to basic elementary education. But
despite the considerable progress which has
been achieved in many countries in this
field, it must be admitted that the overall
situation continues to be very disturbing. In
the developing countries where at present
nearly one young person in four enters
working life without having received a
minimum of education, considerable efforts
will be needed to achieve universal primary
education by the year 2000.
In 1985, if the situation is not remedied,
only 18 of the 46 African countries
(representing 23 per cent of the African
population) are likely to have enrolment
rates of 80 per cent or above. In south Asia,
the enrolment ratio in 1985 will probably be
50 per cent for girls and 71 per cent for boys.
Owing to the effects of population growth,
Africa's education systems would have
almost to triple by the end of the century
rc^^^^^^^^^^r^H
	 M, -. .. v~-
DIMANCHE Dibéér Diiboor Alet a 13 20 27 Alahada Alhadô Alahadi
LUNDI Altine Tening Altine 7 14 21 28 Tener) Teneqo Tenerçe
MARDI Talaata Talaata Talaata i g 15 22 29 Talaata Talaató Talaata
MERCREDI Alarba Ardaba Alarba ? i 16 23 30 Araba Arabo Araba
JEUDI Alxemes Arxemes Alkamnsa 3 10 17 M 31 Araamisa Araamiso Alxamisa
VENDREDI Ajuma Jumaling Aljumaa 4 n 18 25 Arijuma Arjumoo Aljuma
SAMEDI Gaawu Fugaaw Aset S 12 19 26 Si'bi'tè Sibitô Sibiti
The struggle against illiteracy is especially
complex in those Third World countries where a
number of languages are spoken. One example is
Senegal, where literacy programmes are to be
carried out in the six languagesWolof, Serer,
Peul, Diula, Mandingo and Soninkewhich figure
on this calendar. The phrase, in Mandingo, at the
top of the page reads: "That's very good".
8
just to achieve the projected enrolment
ratios, whilst those of Latin America and
south Asia would have to double.
This determination to include literacy
work in an overall strategy for the develop¬
ment of education, linking together both
formal and non-formal education, has been
confirmed by recent regional conferences of
Ministers of Education of Unesco's Member
States, especially by the regional conference
for Latin America and the Caribbean which
took place in Mexico City in December 1979.
In the "Mexico Declaration" which it
adopted, the Conference urged Member
States to "provide a minimum of 8 to 10
years' general education and establish as
their goal to incorporate all children of
school age in the system not later than
1999" and to "adopt a clear-cut policy with a
view to eradicating illiteracy before the end
of the century and to extending educational
services for adults". In addition, the Con¬
ference expressed the hope that Unesco
would put forward a major project so that
the entire population of this part of the
world may enjoy the right to education
before the end of this century.
The adult literacy campaigns which con¬
stitute the second aspect of the action pro¬
posed by Unesco may find helpful a number
of principles which the Organization has
identified from its past experience.
First of all, it is noteworthy that the most
spectacular successes in adult literacy cam¬
paigns have often been achieved in a con¬
text of profound social change or in a situa¬
tion of economic expansion and a broaden¬
ing employment market. In these circum¬
stances, literacy is regarded as a means of
enabling individuals to face a new situation
or to be active protagonists in bringing
about the desired changes in society.
Secondly, it has become clear that literacy
work can only be effective if the
beneficiaries themselves participate in it,
each adult becoming the agent of his or her
own literacy training and being aware of the
need for this personal involvement. This
principle of participation is fundamental. It
implies that literacy work is based on the
commitment of the entire population, a
commitment which can help to strengthen
its feeling of. cultural identity. Here the
choice of language or languages to be used,
a political decision which should be based
on technical and cultural criteria, is of key
importance.
A third essential principle is that of the in¬
tegration of literacy programmes: integra¬
tion both into the process of life-long educa¬
tion and into a wider context of economic
and social reforms. One of the most striking
examples of this principle is that of rural
development, which is affected by the world
food crisis, natural disasters and problems
of unemployment and under-employment,
as well as by the structure of society itself.
Self-sustained development is inconceivable
without the mobilization of the rural popula¬
tion. Literacy work can be both a con¬
tributory factor in, and a consequence of,
this mobilization, but its impact depends
ultimately on the scope of the measures
adopted and on changes introduced in other
spheres.
Integration into the process of life-long
education presupposes that literacy work is
followed up. Literacy and numeracy are
useless accomplishments unless these basic

skills are put to use in everyday life and
unless the newly literate are provided with
suitable material in the form of texts written
in their own language which take account of
their level of education and of their interests.
It has also become clear that no universal¬
ly valid model can be devised for literacy
programmes, which must, on the contrary,
be tailored to circumstances, to the social,
economic and cultural contexts and living
conditions of those concerned. The diver¬
sification of methods and content is
therefore essential to success.
But success depends, in the last resort,
on the political commitment of individual na¬
tions. Governments have a key role to play
in a field where objectives must be establish¬
ed, strategies chosen, and the nation's
energies, its material, financial and human
resources must be mobilized to make
literacy an instrument for achievement of
the necessary transformation of society.
The cost of the programes required to
combat adult illiteracy and achieve universal
primary education is immense. In addition to
intensive efforts on the part of the nations
concerned, the task demands a strengthen¬
ing of international co-operation. Many
countries involved feel that the present
volume of assistance is too small, difficult to
harness and not flexible enough to cope
with a wide variety of situations.
Unesco is committed to the fulfilment of
its role as a co-ordinator and catalyst of in¬
ternational co-operation through its pro¬
gramme studies and the collec¬
tion of information on illiteracy; helping
Member States to frame national strategies
and plans; supporting activities to train
literacy personnel; and mobilizing interna¬
tional public opinion. Unesco's role in rally¬
ing the international community could be
greatly developed if additional resources
were available. Against this background, the
1978 General Conference called on Member
States to contribute generously to Unesco's
Special Account for voluntary contributions
for literacy work.
The world illiteracy problem cannot be
remedied solely through an educational ap¬
proach dissociated from other aspects of
development; on the contrary, the objec¬
tives of development should be an inspira¬
tion for education and literacy work. In the
final analysis the problem should be seen in
the wider context of efforts being made by
the international community to establish a
new world economic and social order. Ac¬
cordingly, Unesco has pressed for literacy
work to be included as a basic component of
the Third United Nations Development
Decade which begins in 1981.
Great strides have already been made dur¬
ing the previous Decades. But the fact re¬
mains that each year vast numbers of
children deprived of schooling swell the
ever-increasing ranks of the world's adult il¬
literates. It is vitally important that, through
the solidarity and commitment of the inter¬
national community and its sense of respon¬
sibility towards these millions of human be¬
ings, this alarming trend should be halted
and reversed.
This article was prepared in collaboration
with the Education Sector of Unesco.
