The Nubian king Taharqa (690-664 BC) makes an offering to a god and receives in return the ankh or
symbol of life. This relief from a temple at Buhen, near the Second Cataract, is now preserved in the
Sudan National Museum, Khartoum.



Victory in Nubia: The Sudan
by Negm-el-Din Mohammed Sherif
THE decision to build the Aswan High
Dam by the Government of Egypt
had two very grave consequences for
the Nubians. On the one hand, it meant the
loss of their fatherland for good, and on the
other hand it entailed the complete disap¬
pearance of the cultural remains of their
ancestors.
The two aspects of the decision were too
much for them to bear; but being fully aware
of the importance of the High Dam for the
economic welfare and advancement of the
peoples of the Nile Valley in both Egypt and
the Sudan, the Nubians willingly accepted
the idea of building the Dam, thereby
sacrificing their beloved, peaceful and
beautiful homeland. But they were deeply
concerned about the known and the
unknown archaeological remains which
would ultimately be lost under the waters of
the proposed Dam.
Archaeologically speaking, Sudanese
Nubia, unlike Egyptian Nubia, was practical¬
ly unknown, for although it offered ar¬
chaeological remains from the Palaeolithic
period up to the conquest of the Sudan by
Mohammed Ali Pasha of Egypt in 1820, it
16
had never been thoroughly investigated.
Thus it was unthinkable to the Nubians that
a region of such great importance for the
history of mankind in general, and that of
Africa in particular, not to mention their own
history, should disappear beneath the water
without thorough archaeological research
being carried out into it.
Moreover, a number of important known
monuments were directly threatened by the
new reservoir and had to be saved. But it
was quite clear that the whole enterprise
was beyond the technical and financial
abilities of the Sudan Antiquities Service.
Faced with this distressing situation, the
Sudan had no option but to take refuge in
the shade of Unesco and to request aid from
the international community. On 24 October
1959, the Sudan appealed to Unesco for
financial, technical and scientific help to
save the antiquities of Sudanese Nubia. This
was followed by an appeal issued by the
Director-General of Unesco to all Member
States and institutions to extend assistance
to the Governments of both Egypt and the
Sudan so as to save the cultural heritage of
Nubia.
The international response was prompt
and extremely soothing to the hearts of the
Nubians. The campaign to save the
monuments of Sudanese Nubia began.
During the period between 1960 and 1970
the Sudan witnessed intensive ar¬
chaeological work of an unprecedented
kind. Nineteen foreign archaeological mis¬
sions worked in the Sudanese territory en¬
dangered by the waters of the Aswan High
Dam, between Faras in the north and Dal
Cataract in the south.
Outside the concessions granted to these
missions, the Sudanese Antiquities Service
conducted with its own resources a survey
whose aims were to discover and define ar¬
chaeological remains worthy of excavation
by foreign missions, and also to excavate
any site not wanted by the foreign expedi¬
tions. This survey, carried out with the help
NEGM EL DIN MOHAMMED SHERIF, of the
Sudan, is director-general of the Sudan Antiqui¬
ties Service and played an active part in the
Nubian campaign. He is also director of the
Sudan National Museum, in Khartoum, and edi¬
tor of Kush, an archaeologicaljournalpublished in
Khartoum.

of a number of Unesco experts, covered the
full extent of Sudanese Nubia between
Faras and the head of the proposed reservoir
at Dal.
Moreover, there were other surveys
beside that of the Sudanese Antiquities
Service. A Scandinavian Joint Expedition
exhaustively explored a portion of the en¬
dangered area extending sixty kilometres
south of Faras on the right bank of the Nile,
excavating practically all sites in their con¬
cession area and documenting thousands of
rock drawings. Other surveys in the region
covered rock pictures and inscriptions as
well as the investigation of Stone Age relics.
The results of the campaign in Sudanese
Nubia were extremely gratifying as far as
both scientific information and ar¬
chaeological finds are concerned. The part
of the Sudan flooded by the waters of the
Aswan High Dam is now the only region in
the entire country which has received any
systematic archaeological investigation.
Many beautiful finds have been unearthed
and a great deal of information has been
gathered. Now we can reconstruct in great
detail the history of culture and civilization in
this region of immense importance not only
for the history of the Nile Valley but also for
the history of Africa. In short, the scientific
information these unprecedented ar¬
chaeological activities yielded has enor¬
mously enriched human knowledge.
The great collections of archaeological
finds acquired as a result of this international
campaign have enriched many museums in
different countries and have enabled the
Sudan Antiquities Service to establish the
Sudan National Museum in Khartoum,
depicting the past of the Sudanese nation
from the Old Stone Age to the advent of
Islam. In the garden of this museum,
monuments removed from the endangered
area in Sudanese Nubia have been re-
erected beside an artificial pool symbolizing
the Nile, along which they had originally
been built. This garden in itself has become
an open-air museum.
These collections also helped the Sudan
Antiquities Service to reorganize a provincial
museum at the town of El-Obeir in Kordofan
Province, supplementing its exhibits to il¬
lustrate all the periods in the ancient history
of the Sudan, and to establish a new provin¬
cial museum at the town of El-Fasher in Dar-
fur Province. Moreover, two other provincial
museums have now been built and most of
their exhibits will also be finds discovered
during the international salvage campaign in
Sudanese Nubia.
The archaeological work carried out in
Sudanese Nubia has manifestly proved that
Lower Nubia is very rich in antiquities.
Moreover it has raised many questions the
answers to which are believed to lie still
buried under the sand in the archaeological¬
ly unexplored parts south of the Dal
Cataract. To find the answers to these ques¬
tions, excavations have been undertaken in
that region. Ten missions from those ex¬
peditions which took part in the salvage i
campaign in the endangered part of I
Seven metres in height and weighing thirty
tons, this colossus is one of two found
lying in the sand at the entrance to a
temple at Tebo on the island of Argo near
the Third Cataract. The statues, one of
which was found broken in two, are
probably representations of the Meroitic
king Natakamani (12 BC to 12 AD). The
statues, which now stand in front of the
Sudan National Museum, were taken the
thousand kilometres from Tebo to
Khartoum by special truck, (see photo page
15), by boat and by rail. Right, arrival at
Khartoum.
17

Left, the motif of this relief from a temple
at Semna East, a stylized representation of
the lotus intertwined with the papyrus
plant and encircling a hieroglyph meaning
"unite", is to be found on many
monuments and temple walls in Nubia. It
signifies the unification of Upper Egypt
(represented by the lotus) with Lower
Egypt (the papyrus).
Carved out of granite and with the figure of
the king standing within the protection of
its forelegs, the huge ram, below left, is
one of two which once stood in front of
the great temple of Amon at Gebel Barkal.
The ram was the symbol of Amon whose
cult was predominant at Thebes. The two
statues, which date from the reign of the
Nubian king Taharqa (690-664 BC), now
flank the steps leading to the entrance of
the Sudan National Museum in Khartoum. .
The object below, found in a house at
Meinarti, on the east bank of the Nile
above the Second Cataract, is the topmost
basin of a wine press consisting of three
basins made of brick and lined with a thick
coat of stucco. The lion spout formed the
outlet for the grape juice which flowed
down to the second and third basins. The.
installation was at first thought to be a
public bath, possibly intended for ritual
bathing, but after comparison with eleven
similar installations found between Faras
and Ikhmindi its true purpose was
established. Dating from the later Meroitic
period, it is now preserved in the Sudan
National Museum.
Photo © Sudan National Museum, Khartoum
18

, Sudanese Nubia have been operating there
since 1964, and more foreign expeditions are
expected to take the field soon.
The international campaign to save the
antiquities of Nubia will go down in history
as one of the most important achievements
of Unesco. It has been a magnificent
manifestation of human co-operation and
world brotherhood. It has constituted con¬
crete evidence that under the umbrella of
Unesco the inhabitants of our planet can
work in complete harmony, achieving
marvels for the good of humanity,
regardless of nationality, political creed or
religious belief.
Thus one of the most important results of
this international campaign, outside the
sphere of archaeology, is that it has ad¬
mirably shown the Sudanese public the im¬
portance of Unesco as a very effective in¬
strument of international co-operation in the
field of culture.
Another pleasing outcome of the interna¬
tional salvage campaign is the wide interest
it has aroused among the Sudanese people
regarding the past of their country. The
keen interest Unesco has taken in the anti¬
quities of Nubia, the intensive informational
efforts it has exerted, the international reac¬
tion to the announcement of the imminent
disappearance of a great number of sites
and monuments in Nubia, the deep concern
the whole world has expressed in connexion
with the salvage question and the rush of so
many archaeologists into Nubia have
brought home to the Sudanese the impor¬
tance of their cultural heritage; and what the
archaeologists have unveiled has clearly
manifested to them that they have a past of
which they should feel proud.
Negm-el-Din Mohammed Sherif
Below, in the cathedral of Faras workmen
remove the last basketfuls of sand and
debris that for centuries had covered this
magnificent Nativity scene. One of the
finest frescoes discovered at Faras, it
measures seven metres by four metres and
dates from the end of the 10th century or
the beginning of the 11th. After being
painstakingly removed from the wall (see
photo page 39) and fixed to a wooden
backing, it was carefully wrapped and
transported (it had to be carried part of the
way by men on foot) to the Sudan National
Museum, Khartoum.
19
