A philosopher
under fire
Avicenna's doctrines stirred up controversy
in his own time and later
by Reza Davari
THE philosophical works of Avicenna
(Ibn Sina) were violently criticized
both during his own lifetime and after
his death. Two major accusations were
levelled against him: atheism and heresy on
the one hand and a lack of originality on the
other.
Some of his opponents stressed con¬
tradictions between his thought and the
teachings of the Koran, while others regard¬
ed him as a mere compiler. And one gathers
from Avicenna's own writings that at a cer¬
tain period of his life he was ostracized
because of his ideas.
Among his most disparaging critics were
the theologian and philosopher Fakhr al-Din
al-Razi (1149 or 1150-1209) and the
'philosopher al-Ghazali (1058-1111) also
known as Algazel. But the strongest attacks
came from contemporary theologians.
In modern times, a few scholars have
challenged the originality of Avicenna's
work. Some have compared it to that of
Ferdowsi (c. 930-1020) and al-Biruni
(973-1048) in astronomy and the natural
sciences, and of al-Razi (c. 865-923) in
medicine, concluding in each case that
Avicenna's contribution was inferior. Other
critics even maintained that as a philosopher
Avicenna had merely revived and expanded
on the ideas of his illustrious predecessor al-
Farabi without making any substantial con¬
tribution of his own.
The first question one may therefore ask
is whether Avicenna was an innovator in
philosophy or a mere compiler. Al-Farabi
(872-950) was undoubtedly the founder of
Islamic philosophy. But his general views
mainly reflect fundamental principles
prevailing during the first centuries of the
Islamic era. It is therefore likely that if al-
Farabi had not existed, Avicenna would
have reached the same conclusions. For
ideas are not generated spontaneously by
men; men are dependent upon the ways of
thinking of their time.
In fact, the originality of al-Farabi himself k
has been the subject of long controversies, f
REZA DAVARI, of Iran, is professor of philo¬
sophy and dean of the arts faculty at the Univer¬
sity of Teheran. He is also the secretary of the Ira¬
nian National Commission for Unesco and the
author of many studies on philosophical and cul¬
tural subjects.
Built at Gurganj by the ruler of Khorezm, the Khorezm-Shah Tekish, who came to power
towards the end of the 12th century AD, this mausoleum is one of the rare buildings to
have survived that troubled period. Avicenna's stay at Gurganj was short but pleasant. He
was befriended by the vizier Abu-I Husayn as-Soheili and joined the circle of brilliant
scholars, which included the famous al-Biruni. at the court of the Emir of Gurganj.
29

Avicenna and al-Farabi
(872-950) were not
only great
philosophers they
both made valuable
contributions to the
advancement of the
theory of music. Al-
Farabi's Grand Book
of Music has been the
subject of a modern
study and Avicenna
devoted the last
chapter of his Book
of Healing to music.
Both men gave
descriptions of the
tambura, a lute-like
musical instrument
popular in their day.
Left, a Tadzhik, four-
string tambura in
mulberry wood, made
at the beginning of
this century and
modelled on the
ancient instruments
of Khorasan.
Photo © Academy of Sciences
of the Tadzhik SSR, Dushanbe
Seven years Avicenna's senior, al-Biruni was one of the great figures
who mark a high point of Islamic culture. The two men had a famous
confrontation at which al-Biruni questioned Avicenna about Aristotle's
study De Cáelo (On the Heavens). The drawing above was made by al-
Biruni to illustrate the view expressed by Avicenna concerning the
disposition of the four elements (earth, air, fire and water) between the
earth and the moon.
Photo © Anderson - Giraudon, Paris
Left, detail from the
School of Athens,
one of four frescoes
painted by the great
Italian artist Raphael
in the Stanza della
Segnatura, in the
papal apartments of
the Vatican. In the
centre can be seen
Aristotle and Plato,
two towering figures
of the Athenian
school of philosophy,
by whom Avicenna
was profoundly
influenced.

Averroës (Ibn Rushd), Ibn Khaldun and their
contemporaries accused him, as they accus¬
ed Avicenna, of amalgamating philosophy
and religion. But here criticism comes from
two diametrically opposed camps. While al-
Ghazali and Fakhr al-Din al-Razi stigmatize
the philosophers for views which they con¬
sider incompatible with religious teaching,
and go as far as to label them heretics,
Averroës and Ibn Khaldun regard
philosophy and religion as two separate
paths both leading to the same goal.
Al-Farabi and Avicenna were convinced,
however, that their ideas were in line with
religious thought. They conceived true
religion as a philosophy and maintained that
philosophy was the heart of religion. Like al-
Farabi, Avicenna used philosophy to inter¬
pret certain verses of the Koran. He con¬
sidered philosophy central to Sufism, an
idea which he discusses at length in the final
chapter of his work Isharat wa Tanbihat.
During the nineteenth century, Shi'ite
thinkers and scholars in Iran revived the idea
of the separateness of religion and
philosophy, which Averroës had so pas¬
sionately defended. But, whereas Averroës
gave pride of place to philosophy, the
Iranian scholars' main concern was to
defend religion. "Greek philosophy... but
for how long?" they asked, echoing the
Bahai Sheikh. "Study also the philosophy of
the believers."
To sum up, what some consider a heresy
and others a mixture of Greek ideals and the
fundamentals of religion forms the very
essence of Islamic philosophy. But this
philosophy is far from being a mere copy of
Greek thought, though it has certainly
drawn inspiration from it. If Averroës, for
example, had confined himself to inter¬
preting Aristotle, his name would never
have been remembered in the history of
human thought.
An anecdote related by Avicenna himself
illustrates this point. Avicenna read Aristo¬
tle's Metaphysics forty times, but it was only
with the aid of al-Farabi's commentary on
the Metaphysics, the De Interpretatione,
that he finally succeeded in overcoming the
difficulties he found in the text. Al-Farabi's
true merit, according to Avicenna, was that
he started the process of incorporating
Greek philosophy into the Muslim view of
the world. Al-Farabi served as a link bet¬
ween Aristotle and Avicenna by drawing
together the ideas of the first and the value
system of the second.
We lack detailed information about the
subjects which made it hard for Avicenna to
understand the Metaphysics, and therefore
cannot give precise opinions on the matter.
It is very likely, however, that his main dif¬
ficulty lay in commenting on Aristotle's key
ideas, in the context of a philosophy fun¬
damentally based on the belief in the ex¬
istence of God.
This anecdote about Avicenna's dif¬
ficulties also illustrates the dual relationship
between Greek and Islamic philosophy: on
the one hand, the first exerted an influence
on the second, and on the other, there was
a contradiction between their respective
views of the universe. If Avicenna
distinguishes between the possibility of ex¬
istence and essence (entity), it is because he
attributes objects to the Supreme Being
who, for him, is the first cause of all being.
The existence of objects is not the same as
Aristotle's God seen as final cause and pure
thought. But it represents science, will,
power and life... The Supreme Being is the
vital force in all beings. Everything that ex¬
ists or will exist is part of His knowledge.
Since these differences in attitude on ex¬
istence and the meaning of causality led to
the creation of new schools of philosophy, it
is clear that Avicenna's philosophy and that
of the Ancient Greeks differed not merely in
detail, but rather on fundamental principles.
Before Avicenna, al-Farabi had rated
revelation and prophecy with wisdom. He
had come to the conclusion that a prophet
attains active wisdom through thought and
that revelation is to be found in the associa¬
tion of active wisdom and thought.
Avicenna more or less agrees with al-
Farabi except that, for him, prophecy and
the message rank above all else in the
perfection of man. When he finds himself
unable to expound a religious topic, he ad¬
mits his own imperfection and falls back on
interpretation of the Koran or the Prophet.
Since he is incapable of explaining the resur¬
rection of the body, he maintains that he
follows the Prophet in this matter. And, like
al-Farabi, he believes that the social order
should conform to the religious order, and
that the Prophet is the chief of the Medina.
In all his philosophical writings Avicenna
sought to achieve a synthesis between
philosophy and mysticism, rationalism and
spiritualism. After an encounter with the
mystic Abu Said Abu Khevi, he is said to
have stated: "All that Abu Said sees, I
know." And Abu Said answered: "All that
Abu Ali (Avicenna) knows, I see."
Reza Davari
if$&*(*$
The Persian poet
Ferdowsi (930-1020
AD) was another of
the great
contemporaries of
Avicenna, who was
an avid reader of
Ferdowsi's epic
masterpiece the
Shah-Nama or Book
of Kings. Left,
illustration dating
from 1556 AD by the
artist Mohammed
Murad Samarkand!
for an episode in the
Shah-Nama, the
"Marriage of the Son
of Feridun". Avicenna
was also an
accomplished poet,
but some of his
detractors, somewhat
unfairly, drew
unfavourable
comparisons between
his poetry and that of
Ferdowsi.
31
