The master-builder
of the Italian Renaissance
by Renato Cevese
Andrea di Pietro, known to history as Palladio, was born in 1508
in Padua in northern Italy, where his father was a miller.
In 1524, when he was sixteen years old, he moved
to nearby Vicenza where, until about 1540,
he worked as a mason in the workshops of the town's two most famous sculptors:
Giovanni di Giacomo di Porlezza and Girolamo Pittoni di Lumignano.
It was in order to earn a living
that he undertook this sort of manual work
in which he was called
upon to execute bases,
capitals, architraves
and cornices for altars,
tombs and porticoes,
rather than statues
and figurative sculptures.
Palladio underwent a long period of
rigorous training to become an ar¬
chitect, a profession he was to practise
from 1540 to 1580 (the year of his death)
with unflagging and painstaking skill in
every corner of the Italian provinces of
the Véneto and the Friul. In his
eagerness to read De Architectura, the
celebrated treatise by the Roman ar¬
chitect Vitruvius (Ist century BC) who
was regarded as the incontestable
"legislator" of the laws of architecture,
Palladio learned Latin, which was to give
him access to the broadest horizons of
ancient scholarship. At the same time,
his frequent visits to Rome enabled him
to visit the ancient monuments still ex¬
isting in the regions he passed through
on his way.
Andrea also displayed keen interest in the contributions which
treatises by such Renaissance figures as Leon Battista Alberti and
Sebastian Serlio had recently made to the science of architecture.
Throughout his life he seized every opportunity to further his
studies and research. So we can be sure that he was in contact
with famous masters like Sansovino and Giulio Romano who, like
Serlio, travelled to Vicenza to advise on the consolidation and
restoration of the endangered fifteenth-century loggias surroun¬
ding the Gothic palace of Ragione.
For Palladio, who lived in a small town that had seceded from
RENATO CEVESE, of Italy, is secretary of the scientific council of the An¬
drea Palladio International Centre ofArchitectural Studies at Vicenza (Ita¬
ly) andprofessor of the history of architecture at the faculty of engineering
science of the University of Padua. He is the author or'Villas de la Provincia
de Vicenza lin collaboration with M. Barbieri and M. Magagnato) and Las
Villas de Andrea Palladio. He contributed a study on Palladio's work to the
Palladio exhibition held in Vicenza in 1973.
the Most Serene Venetian Republic,
personal contact with the great ar¬
chitects of the age was a highly
stimulating experience. He was also ex¬
cited by the new ideas brought to Vicen¬
za from Rome by Gian Giorgio Trissino
dal Vello d'Oro, a wealthy aristocrat,
humanist scholar, philologist and poet,
as well as an architecture enthusiast.
Trissino became Andrea's patron,
gave him the name Palladio [as an allu¬
sion to the Greek goddess Pallas Athena
and to a character in one of Trissino's
poems] and generally assisted him by in¬
troducing him to Vicenza's wealthy
aristocracy, often taking him along on
visits to Rome. Because of his social
position and his privileged place at the
Papal court, Trissino was able to in¬
troduce Palladio into the most influential cultural circles in Rome,
thereby enabling him to rub shoulders with the artists who were
then engaged in renovating the capital of Christianity: from
Michelangelo to Pirro Ligorio, from Antonio da Sangallo the
Younger to Giacomo Barozzi da Vignola.
Andrea Palladio was an interested and attentive observer of
works by these masters which were in an advanced state of con¬
struction, as well as of buildings by architects of the past. He was
also able to obtain from architects or their disciples first-hand in¬
formation about future projects. He was always ready to take from
contemporary architecture any innovations that might interest
him. At the same time he sought to achieve a thorough mastery of
the structure and form of ancient monuments. These he
measured, sketched and later incorporated into his own work, not
with the free-and-easy superficiality of the "antiquarian" dilet¬
tante, but with the keen intelligence and application of one who
had assimilated the logic of their form and construction through k
studying their surviving parts. f
15

**-#.
The church of San Giorgio Maggiore in Venice is one of the finest
achievements of Palladio, the great Italian architect who died four
hundred years ago. The airy cupola, vigorous pilasters with half-
16
columns, as well as the dynamic treatment of space, are typical of
Palladio's religious architecture. Above, view of the left arm of
the transept, as seen from the open gallery inside the cupola.

Palladio filled a vast number of folios with the plans and sket¬
ches of monuments of Antiquity which are today preserved in the
Civic Museum in Vicenza and at the Royal Institute of British Ar¬
chitects in London; some of these precious documents he used to
illustrate the fourth book of his Treatise on the "ancient Temples
found in Rome" and "others in Italy and outside Italy".
Palladio's art abounds in references to Roman architecture, not
only in his persistent use of the orders in the façades of palaces
and villas, in the loggias of the Basilica of Vicenza, in the pro¬
scenium of Vicenza's Olympic Theatre and in the church of //
Redentore in Venice but above all in his plans for certain urban
buildings and villas, and especially in the convent complex of the
Carita in Venice.
In the eighth decade of the sixteenth century, while Italian ar¬
chitects were embarking on the tormented path of Mannerism,
Palladio publicly proclaimed the Classicist creed which he would
never refute, by bringing the form of the Greco-Roman theatre to
Vicenza and evoking in his Villa Rotonda or round villa, the time-
honoured ¡mage of the Pantheon in Rome. In his last years, he
practised a more forceful and vigorous Classicism than ever. It
could well be that the excessive liberties taken by his contem¬
poraries in their interpretation of antiquity inspired in Palladio a
desire to proclaim the superiority of the ancients, the inimitable in¬
ventors of "exemplary" structures.
Any distinguished artist soon gains recognition through the
strength of character which marks him out from the rank and file.
The great artist always embodies something new, projecting
himself into the future with intuition far ahead of his time, or
achieving a remarkable synthesis of the forms and thought with
which he lives and works.
Where Palladio broke new ground in architecture was in his con¬
ception of the villa, the mansion or stately home which originated
not so much in the landed gentry's desire to flaunt their wealth and
power, still less in aesthetic requirements, as in a glaring economic
need. Before Palladio's time, most Italian country houses were
buildings with modest architectural pretensions, designed to
house the lord and master of the estate, when he left the town for
the country in order to direct in person the cultivation of his land
and the harvesting of his crops. Around such houses, which were
often set within a battlemented enclosure, were farm-workers'
quarters, stables and poultry-houses. Near the farmyard, or scat¬
tered over the estate, were other thatched cottages and more
stables.
Palladio combined into a single architectural entity the master's
house, which formed the central part of the building, and the out¬
buildings, on each flank. Viewed from the front, the outbuildings
appear as wide porticoes, lower than the central hall, as wide
wings, sometimes aligned with the central façade, sometimes pro¬
truding in front of ¡t. But Palladio was not a man to allow his
genius to be shackled by a fixed and immutable design, and he
continually introduced modifications, bending the wing porticoes
at right angles, or curving them into a semi-circle. Sometimes he
even shut off the court or farmyard into' an oblong perimeter of
continuous porticoes reminiscent of the ancient forum dominated
by the temple.
The master-builder from Vicenza also introduced important in¬
novations in palace construction. Palladio built a total of eight
palaces and three public buildings. And, had he been able to bring
to completion his projects for the Capra, Trissino, Angarano and
Garzadori palaces, Vicenza could lay even greater claim to its title,
"Città d'Autore"a city created by one man's genius.
In Palladio we have the interpreter and protagonist of a common
cultural consciousness and a man with a bent for the precise and
the practical: the genius who invents and the engineer who builds.
For Palladio was both poet and technician. Unlike Leonardo da
Vinci and Filarete in the Milan of the Sforzas, he was prevented by
historical circumstances from conceiving a model city. Palladio
was not a town planner in the modern sense of the word, but his
projects and constructions nevertheless convey an impression of
his extraordinary intelligence and a sensitive awareness of what a
town or city should be.
Palladio varies his conceptions with inexhaustible imagination. It
is above all in the palaces he designed that he shows himself an
heir to Venetian cultural traditions which gave priority to at-
CONTINUEO PAGE 21
17

The
triumphs
of
Palladio
II Redentore (upper photo at
left) on the Venetian Island of
Giudecca is a masterwork of
church architecture designed by
Palladio towards the end of his
life. It was built as a votive
temple to "our Redeemer" on
the occasion of a plague which
smote Venice and the Véneto in
1576 and 1577. The unflagging
inventiveness of Palladio's
treatment of space is admirably
displayed in the harmony
between the lengthwise thrust
of the nave and the soaring
ascension of the cupola. The
Tempietto Bárbaro, another late
work (lower photo, left), was
built at Maser near the famous
Villa Bárbaro (see photo page
24). The round cupola and the
columns and pediment of the
portico recall the Pantheon at
Rome, a monument of Antiquity
to which Palladio often looked
for inspiration. The architect,
near to death, broke with his
usual practice and had his name
carved on a frieze at the side of
the building.
18

Photo © Giraudon, París
Drawing of the Baths of Diocletian, above
right. Is one of many in which Palladio
reconstructed from surviving ruins the
appearance of ancient Roman monuments.
It bears a strong resemblance to the façade
of Palladio's Villa Foscari, right, on the
outskirts of Venice.
Palladio's art drew
sustenance from the
cultural heritage of
Greece and Rome
and in itself
contributed largely to
the revival of interest
in Antiquity. The
architect's strong
attachment to the
classical tradition is
even symbolized in
his name, which was
bestowed on him by
his patron Trissino as
an allusion to Pallas
Athena, the Greek
goddess of wisdom.
Left, the so-called
"melancholy
Athena", a sculpture
preserved in the
Acropolis Museum,
Athens.
Photo © Electa Editrice, Milan. Civic Museum, Vicenza
Although engraving
in neoclassical style
(left) is entitled The
Triumph of Palladio,
its ornate baroque
flourishes are in no
way Palladian. It
appeared as an
illustration in an
edition by James
Leoni, of Palladio's
treatise Quattro libri
del/'architettura,
published in 1716.
Right, an artist's
reconstitution of the
forum of ancient
Rome with the
Capitol in the
background. Ruins of
such monuments
provided Palladio
with models for his
works.
Photos © Centro Intemazionale di Studi di Architettura "Andrea Palladio", Vicenza,
Document from A History of Architecture by Sir Banister Fletcher. © Charles Scnbners Sons, New York
19

Photo © Studio Coloz di Fornari e Ziveri. Galleria Nazionale, Parma Photo © Giraudon, París
Painting above left. The Basilica of Vicenza and the Rialto Bridge, is a fantasy on the
theme of Palladio and Venice by the Venetian artist Canaletto (1697-1768). In this view of
Venice with the famous Rialto bridge, Canaletto replaced the actual Rialto bridge with a
bridge project (presumed to be for the Rialto) which was produced by Palladio and
published in his architectural treatise Quattro Libri (below). On each side of the bridge are
two of Palladio's finest achievements, the Palazzo Chiericati (left of painting) and the
Loggias of the Palazzo della Ragione, or Basilica (right), both of which are in Vicenza not
Venice^ Photos on opposite page show these buildings as they are today. Above right,
view of modern Venice shows the real Rialto bridge, which was built a few years after
Palladio's death to plans by Antonio da Ponte.
Photo © Electa Editrice, Milan
DDD j D I

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 17
mospheric and pictorial value, and created perforated walls in
which the empty spaces predominated over the solid areas of
masonry. But, unlike the Venetian façades which are joined
together like so many multi-coloured tapestries exposed to the
sun, with their beautiful marble inlaid work, Palladio's palaces
display to all the world the vigour of their structures and stand out
because of his impressive three-dimensional use of the orders. This
is especially noteworthy in those palaces where Palladio used giant
half-columns (the Loggia del Capitaniato and the palace of Porto
.Breganze), orders which are not merely an ornament appended on
to the framework of the architectural fabric, but an integral part of
it, thereby fulfilling the dual function of composition and adorn¬
ment.
Here and there in Palladio's designs one comes across echoes of
Raphaël, Bramante, Giulio Romano, and Sebastian Serlio; but
these are mere reminders, simple allusions to the work of others.
So forceful is Palladio's creative instinct, which renews everything
within its purview, that such allusions lose any link they may have
had with the originals and take their place in an architectural
language which has no parallel.
It was not until the early 1560s that Palladio turned to ec¬
clesiastical architecture, to which he would devote much of the re¬
mainder of his life, especially in Venice. In 1561 he began to build
the magnificent convent complex of the Carita. In the following
year he undertook the building of the façade of San Francesco
del/a Vigna; and in 1566 he drew plans for the Church of San
Giorgio Maggiore, on the island in the Venp.tian Lagoon, opposite
St Mark's Square. In 1576 and 1577 he designed the temple of //
Redentore in the Giudecca. All these works enhanced the
magnificence of the already resplendent city of the Doges.
In work on the church of San Francesco delta Vigna, Palladio
was faced with a façade begun by Sansovino years before. The
plan he adopted was one which he would repeat time and again in
other churches: the superimposition of two façades which corres¬
pond to the division of space within the church. One, reinforced
with gigantic half-columns, was the same height as the central
aisle of which it formed the front, the other, which fronted the
two side aisles, was adorned with decorative fasciae (except in the
case of San Francesco della Vigna).
Palladio's genius is most evident in the force and impact of his
treatment of space; tripartite in the church of San Giorgio Mag¬
giore, a tribute to ancient Italic tradition and the more recent tradi¬
tion of Venice; unitary in the church of II Redentore, where the ar¬
tist appears to have reconstructed the atmosphere of the Roman
baths.
In the church of // Redentore there are three spatial "moments":
the first corresponds to the long processional hall, which opens
out into the chapels in the two apses; the second to the three-
aisled chancel; and the third to the quiet atmosphere of the choir.
The spatial thrust is lengthwise, in an area whose sides are
delimited by the powerful twin columns of the pilasters that
separate the six chapels; it rises upwards in the central mass of the
chancel and is transformed into a pure and resonant pattern of
light, in the monks' choir.
The overall effect of this sequence of spatial "episodes", each of
which fulfils a specific function, is to make II Redentore one of the
major architectural achievements of all time. At the sides of the
chancel and the choir, the two slender bell-towers rise sharply
against the lofty dome, built according to the traditions of Venice
and of the East.
Construction of the Teatro Olímpico (Olympic Theatre) in Vicen¬
za, begun in March 1580, was interrupted by Palladio's death in
August of that year. The theatre, which would be completed in
1584 by another great architect of Vicenza, Vincenzo Scamozzi,
was commissioned by the members of the Accademia Olímpica of
Vicenza, who were lovers of classical literature and wanted a
theatre in which Greek tragedies could be performed. As their
resources were limited, Palladio was compelled to use humble
materials for building the ancient-style theatre structure: the tiers
of seats and the orchestra were of wood; the podium was of
masonry and wood and the façade of the proscenium was of
masonry. A part of the perimeter walls was also built of wood.
The space available was rather narrow, and so Palladio set out
the tiers of seats in a narrow semi-ellipse, instead of the traditional
semicircle. As a result, he had to restrict the depth of the orchestra
but was able to erect a majestic, high, proscenium so vibrant in its
forms as to be a piece of theatre in itself. The statues he placed in
the niches of the simulated windows (see back cover) on the i
pediments and the columns, in front of the pilasters of the square |
Photos © Centro Internazionale di Studi di Architettura "Andrea Palladio", Y'cenza
The Palazzo Chiericati in Vicenza
(top photo) is one of Palladio's
most elegant constructions. Only a
small part of the Palazzo was built
during the architect's lifetime but
his original design was substantially
respected by those who followed
him. Lower photo, the loggias of
the Palazzo della Ragione or
"Basilica", at Vicenza were
designed by Palladio to cover the
fabric of a medieval Palazzo.
Planned in the late 1540s, they are
an outstanding example of the
growing richness and imagination
of Palladio's style.
21

columns and on the crest of the central arch, seem to reflect and
echo the gesticulations of the participants in the drama being
acted out beneath them.
The impact of Palladio's work, like that of all great men, was
destined to be felt beyond his own time, especially during the eigh¬
teenth and the first half of the nineteenth century when there was
a revival of interest in Antiquity. Then Palladio's mansions and
villas rather than his churches and palaces were taken as models
for both town and country residences by architects in many coun¬
tries, in England and Ireland, France and Germany, Poland and
Russia, Italy, Scandinavia and the United States.
Renato Cevese
Palladio and world
architecture
Palladio is one of the most influential figures in the
development of Western architecture (photos
opposite page), above all in the Anglo-Saxon world
where a vogue for palladianism began in the 18th
century. One great admirer of Palladio's work was the
seventeenth-century French painter Poussin, who
took the neoclassical building in his Ashes of Phocias
(detail, left) directly from a Palladio drawing of the
Roman temple at Trevi. The façade has a striking
kinship with that of the famous Villa Rotonda, or Villa
Almerico near Vicenza (below) which is widely
considered to symbolize what Palladio sought to
achieve in secular architecture.
22

The Palladian style can be seen in
Monticello, the famous mansion Thomas
Jefferson built for himself at
Charlottesville, Virginia (USA).
The Villa Krollkarnia, built in Warsaw
(Poland) by Demerlini (1786-1789).
Left, design entered by
Jefferson (under a
pseudonym) in a
competition for the
President's House in
Washington, D.C. was
directly inspired by
Palladio's Villa Rotonda. The
project was not adopted.
Pavilion at Castle Howard, Yorkshire (UK)
was designed by Sir John Vanbrugh and
built in 1724-26. The influence of Palladio's
neoclassical pavilions is again apparent.
The Villa Lopukhin at
Vvedenskoe (USSR)
designed by N. L'vov.
Above drawing of a project for a village of workmen's dwellings was
done in 1761 by Claude-Nicolas Ledoux, one of the most brilliant and
original adapters of the Palladian style in French architecture. The
project never came to fruition, but parts of another visionary scheme by
Ledoux, the Royal Saltworks at Arc-et-Senans in Franche-Comté, were
actually built (below). The treatment of volumes, soberness of
decorative features and harmony of buildings and landscape suggest
Ledoux's debt to Palladio.
23

Above left, central part of the proscenium
of the Olympic Theatre in Vicenza (see also
back cover). Although Palladio closely
followed a Greco-Roman model in this, his
last commission, the theatre nevertheless
bears the unmistakable imprint of his
creative imagination. Particularly
remarkable is the use of perspective in the
central corridor to conjure an impression of
depth from the limited space available.
Among those captivated by the Theatre is
the Spanish painter Salvador Dali, who
once wrote : "If I had to choose the places
which have made the strongest impression
of mystery on me, I should include
Palladio's theatre at Vicenza as being most
aesthetically mysterious and sublime".
Above right, Dali's 1937 painting Palladio's
Thalia Corridor. Right, another poetically
imaginative interior in a building by
Palladio. Paintings by Paolo Veronese
produce surprising illusions in a room of
the Villa Bárbaro at Maser.
24
