A forerunner
of modern science
by Abid S. Sadykov
BEYOND all question, Avicenna (Ibn
Sina), whose million-word encyclo¬
paedia the Canon of Medicine
remained the supreme medical reference
book for six centuries, can be considered
the greatest physician of all peoples, places
and times. Furthermore, his philosophical
encyclopaedia, the Book of Healing, and his
Book of Knowledge, a work written in Per¬
sian, place him among the world's foremost
thinkers. Indeed, so great is his renown as a
philosopher and a physician that it has tend¬
ed to overshadow his contribution to the
development of the natural sciences.
Yet Avicenna worked intensively on
physics, astronomy, mathematics and
mineralogy, and put forward a number of
productive ideas of great overall impact on
the natural sciences of his times, and which
remain topical even today. One such prob¬
lem, for instance, was that of movement
and the measurement of movement. In this
highly important branch of physics, he bas¬
ed his analysis on two concepts: the rapidity
and slowness of movement. He viewed
them quantitatively and qualitatively: "The
quantity between the start of that which
went before and the end of that which
follows is the measure of the rapidity or
slowness of movement".
"That which passes in a short time moves
quickly", he observed, and advanced the
theory that speed depends on what in
Left, this fearsome panther head
embellishes a bronze perfume phial
dating from the 11th century. Found at
Khulbuk in Tadzhikistan, the phial is
22.4 centimetres in height. On one side
is inscribed the name of the maker, Ali
Ibn Abu Nasr, and on the other an Arab
Ibn Abu Nasr, and on the other an Arab
maxim: "The occasion brings forth the man".
modern physics is termed "mass": "That
which is smaller should move more quickly,
and that which is larger more slowly; but in
reality, we see the reverse".
Avicenna distinguished between the
speed of light and of sound. "Thunder can
be seen and heard", he wrote. "Thunder
(lightning) is seen at one time, but heard at
another, after it (the sound) has moved in
the air and gradually reached the hearing".
In other words, he established the difference
in the speeds of the two forms of movement
of matter.
Avicenna was the first to formulate such
concepts as the "quantity of movement",
"motive force" and "impulse", which were
propounded in the mechanics of Western
Europe in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries. He heads the long list of scien¬
tists Huyghens, Leibnitz,
D'Alembert, Thomson, Kirchhoff and
others who worked on the problem of the
measurement of movement, although no-
one prior to Descartes, and subsequently
Leibnitz, treated it on a genuinely scientific
basis. Be that as it may, Avicenna's con¬
tribution should be noted in the recorded
history of physics.
To modern science, Avicenna's investiga¬
tion of the problem of the unity of space and
time is far from irrelevant. "Movement has
two quantities beside itself: one is the length
of its path..., the other quantity... is called
time". In other words, Avicenna sees space
and time as the quantities of movement.
Following Aristotle and a few later
thinkers, he denied the existence of a void,
advancing the theory that neither movement
nor repose can exist in a void. He adduced
that "in a void there can be neither natural
nor forced movement or repose. Any body
which is in a place either moves or is in a
state of repose. Thus by this argument and
by other proofs, it is established that bodies
do not exist in a void".
Such ideas on the part of Avicenna to
some extent laid the foundation for the law
of inertia: the body is "in its place", i.e. not
influenced by an external force. His refuta¬
tion of the void and the support it has lent
this fertile scientific tradition prepared the
ground for the future recognition of many
fields of physics, including gravity and
electromagnetics.
He made interesting conjectures about
the transmission of energy and light.
"Bodies act upon each other in two man¬
ners," he asserted, and defined those man¬
ners as: "by contact as when ice touches
something, it cools it, or when wind con¬
tacts something, it moves it; in another
manner, as when green grass leaves a green
light on an adjacent wall, or when human .
faces leave an imprint in the observer's eyes
or in the mirror".
Extrapolating his views to the field of
"cosmic" phenomena, he asserted as had
previously Aristotle and his disciples that
many empirically observed phenomena are
connected with, for instance, the influence
of the Moon. He wrote: "The light and
forces emanating from the Sun and other
luminaries influence our world. Among the
most obvious influences of the heaven and
the Moon is that the Moon... causes the sea
tides to flow".
In correspondence with al-Biruni, Avicen¬
na advanced his own version of the principle
of the conservation of movement,
postulating that both presently and poten¬
tially, a sphere was neither light nor heavy.
CONTINUED PAGE 44
ABID S. SADYKOV is a Soviet scientist speciali¬
zing in organic and bio-organic chemistry, about
which he has written some 600 works, including
five monographs. A member of the USSR Aca¬
demy of Sciences, he is President of the Aca¬
demy of Sciences of the Uzbek Soviet Socialist
Republic. His works include an article on the ori¬
gins of chemistry in Central Asia, and the
influence of Avicenna on its development.
41

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 41
"The proof is," he wrote, "that either the
potentially light and potentially heavy are
such in their whole, as is seen in the case of
the particles of elements, which remain mo¬
tionless in their natural places... or (they) are
such in their parts and not in their whole, as
we may see in combinations of elements,
which are neither light nor heavy since, if
some combinations of the elements move
upwards, then the other half of them must
move downwards". This theory may be said
to approximate to a grasp of the principle of
the conservation of movement, which was
further developed by Galileo, and sub¬
sequently, by Descartes and Newton.
Avicenna's thinking on anthropogeny,
which encapsulates the most advanced
ideas of his time, is of unquestionable in¬
terest. For instance, he put forward the
theory that man's origins lie in an animal
species. He wrote that until a species "has
acquired all the senses that are capable of
apprehending the things perceptible to the
senses, neither can nature, of necessity,
transform it from an animal to a rational
species". Of course, this theory is still well
behind that of Darwin, but it may
nonetheless be viewed as a kind of
hypothesis which no one prior to Darwin
was able to turn into a genuinely scientific
theory.
Avicenna's creative approach to some
problems of physics and mechanics is
shown in the Kitab al-Shifa (Book of Heal¬
ing) and the Danish-Nameh (Book of
Knowledge), and also in separate treatises
and in correspondence with al-Biruni.
Defending the theory of the "motive force"
put forward by the sixth century Alexan¬
drian philosopher 'John Philoponus, and
considering the problem of the relationship
between "forced" and "natural" move¬
ment, Avicenna propounded his own theory
of the mechanics of movement. The gist of
it is that "a kind of incorporeal kinetic force"
or dimension to some extent the
equivalent either of impulse or of kinetic
energy is imparted to the moving body. In
Western European science, this incorporeal
dimension was later termed "impetus".
Avicenna's theory exerted considerable in¬
fluence on the views of many scientists.
Eastern and Western, and lies at the origin
of the theory of impetus finalized in the four¬
teenth century by the French philosopher
Jean Buridan.
In his treatise The Measure of Wisdom,
Avicenna described a number of simple
machines and mechanisms for lifting and
moving loads, and also several complex
mechanisms consisting of pulleys,
windlasses, levers and screws. Not content
with describing the mechanisms known in
his times, he suggested a few new combina¬
tions which we do not find in his
predecessors' works, even in those of the
ancient Greek scholar Heron of Alexandria,
who illustrated the main achievements of
antiquity in applied mechanics. The prin¬
ciples Avicenna described were the basis of
various devices used throughout Central
Asia for raising water or processing oil,
grains or cotton.
Neither can his contribution to the
development of geometry and pure
mathematics be overlooked. In his commen¬
tary on Euclid's Elements, for instance, he
attempted to improve the structure of the
latter's axioms in order to provide a
theoretical foundation for geometry. In
arithmetic, he introduced the Indian method
of testing the simplest functions by using
the number 9, and generalized its use for
finding the cubes of numbers. In this field as
in many others he helped to promote the
development of abstract thought in the
Islamic countries.
Avicenna also wrote works on astronomy.
His Message to Zarrin Gis, daughter of
Qabus Ibn Washmgir, the ruler of Gorgan, is
lost to us, but al-Biruni was acquainted with
the Message and analysed it in his Geodesy.
To us, the value of this work is that it con¬
tained Avicenna's radically new method of
determining the difference in the
geographical longitudes of two localities. Its
gist is as follows: the culmination of the
moon is observed at the meridian of a locali¬
ty of which the longitude is unknown. Then
the position of the moon is calculated using
tables compiled for a locality whose
longitude is known. The difference between
the calculated and observed positions of the
moon is translated into the difference in
local times at the two localities, and that will
be the difference in their geographical
longitudes. Avicenna formulated this
method in Gorgan between the years 1012
and 1014. Exactly five hundred years later, in
1514, the method was rediscovered in
Europe by the astronomer Johannes Werner
(1468-1528).
In Isfahan, where his fates took him,
Avicenna built an observatory and, using in¬
struments he himself invented, made con¬
tinuous observations of the luminaries over
a period of several years. The result was his
ephemerides, or tables showing the daily
positions of the planets in relation to the
ecliptic. His calculations have proved more
accurate than those of the ancients. He was
among the first medieval astronomers to
prove that the sun's apogee is not fixed. He
invented a special instrument combining
several large rulers set in elevation, which he
used to determine the altitude and azimuth
of the luminary. To refine his
measurements, he used an original method
which subsequently became known as
Nonius' method, after the Portuguese
scholar Pedro Nunhes, or Nonius, who
rediscovered this method in the sixteenth
century.
Avicenna had no special knowledge of
chemistry, although he undoubtedly knew
of some chemical reactions from mixing
compound medicines, for instance, where in
some cases the number of components was
as high as thirty or forty. However, he un¬
doubtedly sponsored the development of
that science by his uncompromising critique
of alchemy. Here is what he wrote in the
Book of Healing on that score: "Alchemy is
far behind nature, and cannot catch up with
it, although it endeavours to do so. As
regards the pretensions of alchemists, then
they can produce no genuine change of
species. They can perform good imitations,
painting red metal white so that it resembles
silver, or yellow so that it resembles
gold. ..But the substance of those metals re¬
mains unchanged thereby..."
In his pursuit of science, Avicenna attach¬
ed enormous importance to water omnific,
dissolvent, uniting and destructive. In some
cases, he saw the solution of substances in
water as transformation. He gave special
preference to mineral waters, because of the
metals dissolved in them: if mineral waters
contained salts, gold and silver, then they
were beneficent to the human organism! Of
all waters, he considered the best, because
of its solvent qualities, to be "purified"
water, which could be obtained from or¬
dinary water, and he proposed a very
original technique for obtaining a kind of
distilled water: a layer of wadding is placed
over a cauldron of boiling water, and from
time to time it is removed and wrung out...
On metals too, Avicenna's views were his
own, and he placed special emphasis on
mercury. From the ninth to eleventh cen¬
turies, this metal was extensively used in
Central Asia: according to available informa¬
tion, several hundreds of metric tons of mer¬
cury were then extracted there.
At the same time, the mining of other
metals was quite advanced. Like his
predecessors and contemporaries, Avicenna
viewed gold, for example, as the most
perfect of substances, the sovereign
mineral. He also recommended the salts of
some heavy metals for external use. The
techniques for making sublimates of mer¬
cury were known to Avicenna's contem¬
poraries. The physical and chemical proper¬
ties of sublimate were also known, and it
was recommended for treatment of external
complaints. Gold and silver were deemed
excellent medicaments for strengthening the
heart and cleansing the blood. In addition,
he described the use of finely-ground glass,
salts, antimony, iron, lead and blue vitriol for
treating diseases of the eye and some other
organs.
Avicenna postulated that various
substances interact together, forming a mix¬
ture in which one of the components
predominates. A simple substance, he
thought, could not produce other
substances. In these views, an embryo of in¬
organic chemistry is not hard to detect.
Where Avicenna's contribution to
mineralogy and geology is concerned, pride
of place must go to the classification of
minerals he proposed, with its very rational
division into four groups: stones, ores, fuels
and salts. That division was taken over in its
entirety by European mineralogy as of the
late Middle Ages; it was maintained in the
Renaissance, and virtually until the nine¬
teenth century. Even the first classification
of minerals by chemical composition, which
was proposed by Torbern Olaf Bergman of
Sweden in 1780, sub-divided all minerals in¬
to Sales (salts). Terrae (earth and stones),
Bitumine (hydrocarbons) and Metalla
(metals): an exact repetition of Avicenna's
system. To commemorate his services to
mineralogy, one of the thallic minerals
discovered in the Uzbek SSR has been nam¬
ed avicennite.
Finally, it may be mentioned that Avicen¬
na thought the erosive effects of wind and
water to be one of the factors in the forma¬
tion of valleys and ravines. Considering the
fossilized sea creatures known at the time,
he said that the lands where they had been
found had formerly been sea-beds. He ex¬
plained correctly that earthquakes were due
to deep-seated geological processes.
"If I see somewhat further than
Descartes, that is because I am standing on
his shoulders", declared Newton. And if
modern science has advanced so far since
Avicenna's day, then that is only because it
has "stood on the shoulders" of many
pioneers, including, of course, those of
Avicenna himself.
Abid S. Sadykov
44
