Women
and
apartheid
'Black South African women
stand on the lowest rung
of the ladder of oppression'
by Frene Ginwala and Shirley Mashiane
Photo Eve Arnold © Magnum, Paris
WIILE apartheid affects the lives of
all black South Africans with hor¬
rifying brutality, it is harshest in
its effect upon African women. As an
African in a racially differentiated society, as
a worker in a system dependent upon, and
therefore structured to provide, cheap
labour, and as a woman in a society controll¬
ed and dominated by men, the African
woman stands on the lowest rung of the lad¬
der of oppression.
The experience of apartheid, its direct im¬
pact upon African women, the manner in
which it circumscribes their lives and im¬
pinges upon every aspect of their existence,
the denial of a family life, the control of their
labour, the limits on movement, the subor¬
dinate status, the poverty, the struggle for
survival through the myriad laws, regula¬
tions, restrictions, permits and denials, all
have served to raise the political con¬
sciousness of African women in South
Africa.
In the South African legal system, African
women are considered as dependent upon
men, who themselves have no rights. Under
the Natal code, women have a status of
perpetual minority. Regardless of age,
education or economic status, a woman
may not inherit or own property in her own
right, enter into contracts or obtain credit.
She is always under the guardianship of her
father, her husband or other male relative.
Under customary law, the father's estate
generally passes to the male heirs only.
Laws incorporating similar provisions apply
in other parts of South Africa. In areas
reserved for Africans, land is not allocated
to women.
In rural areas, where the migrant labour
system has made women the effective
heads of households, they can only ad¬
minister or manage what land or income k
' there is on a day-to-day basis, for they re- r
FRENE GINWALA, of South Africa, is a lawyer
and writer now living in exile in London; and
SHIRLEY MASHIANE, formerly South African
but now British, is a lecturer in social studies at a
technical college in Liverpool. Both are members
of the African National Congress.
13

main dependent upon their husbands for
decision-making.
In urban areas, women are dependent on
men for a roof over their heads. African
women are not allocated housing and can¬
not be registered tenants of rented houses.
Widows, divorcees and deserted wives can¬
not automatically remain in their homes. For
them and for single women the choice, if
choice it be, is either to become a lodger or
live in a single hostel.
In the areas where an African woman is
considered separately from father/
husband/son/male relative, the apartheid
system again works to her detriment. Apar¬
theid does not consider the African family as
a unit. Africans do not qualify for married
and family allowances in taxation. For pur¬
poses of residence or movement in South
Africa, Africans, regardless of sex, are con¬
sidered as single individuals. Throughout
what is designated as white South Africa (87
per cent of the land area), each member of
an African family mother, father and
children over sixteen has to qualify
separately as a single unit of labour for the
right to reside in the area. Even when such a
"right" is acquired by more than one family
member, it does not follow that they may
live together as a family unit.
In the 13 per cent of South Africa where
the white-made law does not make it illegal
for an African family to live together, there is
little land and what may be available is erod¬
ed and employment opportunities are
minuscule. The system created to provide
cheap labour forces the family apart, with
the job-seekers vying with each other and
the labour bureau bureaucracy for the
"right" to labour alone in "white" South
Africa. Upon the woman falls the burden
not just of reproducing labour but also of
ensuring her own survival and that of
her children, and the old, the sick and the
handicapped.
In pre-colonial societies, women were
usually subject to the control of chiefs,
headmen and heads of families. The division
of labour, though sexually differentiated,
was not simply biologically based, nor was it
egalitarian. However, traditional societies
did afford women respect, protection and
security. Colonial laws and later the apar¬
theid system have removed the responsibili¬
ty owed to woman by the society, denied
her protection and security, and at the same
time entrenched further her disabilities.
Within the Bantustans, one finds mirrored
the undemocratic and male-dominated
political structures of the white rulers. Some
features of "traditional" society are being
revived out of their historical and social
context. The first act of the Gazankulu Ban-
tustan was the legalization of polygamy.
The Transkei has introduced polygamy and
corporal punishment for girls. The position
of women was strikingly illustrated by the
arbitrary dismissal of a woman minister,
Stella Sigcau, on the grounds that she had
become pregnant though unmarried.
The Bantustan leadership collaborates in
the relocation of labour-intensive industries
to designated border areas where female
labour in particular is easily exploited. The
Bantu Development Corporations and in¬
dividual officials are frequently involved in
such enterprises, paying wages that are ap¬
pallingly low even by apartheid standards.
The Bantu education system entrenches a
conception of women's "traditional" role.
While limiting the scope of training offered
to all Africans, technical training for girls is
limited to domestic science curricula.
Neither the public service nor the tribal
universities will allow married women to re¬
main in employment.
For a woman, confined by the system to
the rural areas, the immediate concern is
survival for herself, her children and parents.
In recent years her difficulties have been
compounded. The designation of Ban¬
tustans as "foreign" countries has shifted
the costs of feeding, housing, education

and providing for families on to economies
that are not viable and unable to sustain the
population. In white South Africa, units of
labour may enter and remain only so long as
they are needed. What have been callously
termed the "superfluous appendages", the
women, the children, the old, the sick and
the handicapped, must go back and remain
in the Bantustans.
The relentless drive to remove Africans
from the urban areas and to move com¬
munities around arbitrarily has resulted in
the uprooting of over three million people.
To this must be added the eviction of
African labour tenants following the increas¬
ed mechanization of white farms. More and
more people are pushed into areas where
the land cannot support the existing popula¬
tion and the employment opportunities are
few. In KwaZulu, sites for the resettlement
of 300,000 people are being sought. Within
the last decade the resident population of
QuaQua has increased from 24,000 to over
200,000.
The figures mount up to staggering totals
and the implications are appalling when one
realizes that "resettlement" is a synonym for
dumping people on empty wasteland. The
population on the barren land thus increases
and with it the burdens on the women.
Women are no longer able to go legally to
the urban areas to take up employment. The
only opportunities available to them are the
two sectors with the lowest pay and the
greatest exploitation: agriculture and in¬
dustries set up in the border areas where in¬
dustry is exempted from even those few
safeguards provided for black workers under
the apartheid system.
Rather than accept such employment,
many defy the law and go to the urban areas
illegally. Some join their husbands and try to
establish some kind of family life in "squat¬
ter" camps. Others go to find employment.
For all of them, pass raids, detention, prison
and fines are considered as the price to be
paid for survival in apartheid South Africa.
For, despite having to spend months of
each year in prison, they are better off than
if they had remained in the rural areas. The
Financial Mail last year published the results
of a survey that revealed that there was a
702.7 per cent improvement in living stan¬
dards for a worker from the Ciskei who
works illegally in Pietermaritzburg for nine
'months and spends three months in prison.
A worker from Bophuthatswana who works
illegally in Pretoria for three months and
spends nine months in prison is still 28.5 per
cent better off. A Lebowa worker who
works illegally in Johannesburg for six
months and spends six months in prison im
proves his living standards by 170 per cent
(Financial Mail, 12 October 1979).
For women, who earn less than men, the
improvement would be correspondingly
lower. The real economic conditions in the
Bantustans can be gauged when one recalls
that, even after a 700 per cent improve¬
ment, the majority of male workers in urban
areas earn wages below the poverty datum
lineand women's wages are lower still.
There are women literally scratching for
food in the parched soil of the Bantustans.
There are women slaving for meagre wages
in the fields and in the border industries.
There are also women in tens of thousands
who live with their families and obtain
employment in defiance of apartheid laws.
Last year 20,290 women were arrested
for contravening pass and influx control
laws. (Rand Daily Mail, 4 March 1980).
Husbands and children are kept illegally in
"single" domestic quarters. Men and
women who qualify by apartheid regulations
to live only as "singles", live together in
squatter camps. Long established com¬
munities, arbitrarily removed elsewhere,
return and live illegally.
A small number of women are permitted
to live legally in the urban areas, for they
qualified before the total proscription was
"For a woman confined by
the system to the rural
areas, the immediate
concern is survival for
herself, her children and
parents. The designation of
Bantustans as 'foreign'
countries has shifted the
costs of feeding, housing,
education and providing for
families on to economies
that are not viable and are
unable to sustain the
population."
Photo John Seymour © Parimage, Paris.
"The majority of women employed in the urban areas are
domestic workers. Though many employers require them
to reside in quarters provided in their backyards, they are
not permitted to have husbands or children to stay with
them overnight... Domestic workers are not covered by
protective legislation and their wages are notoriously low."
Photo Abbar i Gamma. Paris
15

, introduced. The majority of women
employed in the urban areas are domestic
workers. Though many employers require
them to reside in quarters provided in their
backyards, they are not permitted to have
husbands or children to stay with them over¬
night. Contract domestic workers are re¬
quired to sign a statement acknowledging
that violation of these regulations would
lead to a cancellation of the contract.
Domestic workers are not covered by any
protective legislation and their wages are
notoriously low. Over 60 per cent of
economically active African women are
employed as domestic or agricultural
workers in sectors where no minimum
wages are laid down and no unemployment
insurance is available.
Throughout the economy, African
women on average earn less than half the
amount African men are paid/ and only eight
per cent of white men's average earnings.
The Industrial Conciliation and Wage Acts
permit differentiation on the grounds of sex
and, in more than 240 job categories,
minimum wages for men are fixed at a
higher figure than minimum wages for
women (Financial Mail, 18 May 1979).
Because of their lower pay scales, African
women are often preferred in labour-
intensive industry, and the number
employed in manufacturing has increased
steadily. Occasionally employers replace
male workers with women. An example that
illustrates the changing pattern of using ever
cheaper labour is provided by the Natal tex¬
tile industry. At an early stage the workers
were mostly Coloured and Indian men. In
the 1930s, white women became significant
but their numbers fell rapidly in the 1940s,
with African men and Coloured and Indian
women being employed in greater numbers.
In the 1950s, African men were in the major¬
ity but a decade later African women were
being employed. Today women, mostly
African, form about 70 per cent of the work
force.
Apartheid regulations have a logic and
purpose, and the system is designed to en¬
sure the availability of cheap exploited
labour. The legal dependence of women,
the migrant labour system and impoverish¬
ment of the rural areas, the precarious
nature of any status a woman may acquire
and the refusal to recognize African family
units have combined to create a state of im-
permanence and insecurity and have served
their purpose in making African women the
cheapest form of labour within the apartheid
system.
Yet the struggle to live together where
they choose, to take what work is available
in defiance of the machinery of the State,
continues. Women of the Barolong people
continued to return to the village of Majeng
from which they had been removed. The
first group that returned was arrested and
found guilty of trespass; the second was
returned to the new area of Vaalboschhoek.
Thé return and arrest of a third group
brought recognition of their grievances from
the magistrate and a decision from the
. authorities to find them a more suitable area
for resettlement.
At Crossroads the resistance to removal
has been on a larger scale. Crossroads is
called a "squatter camp", but it has shown
itself to be a viable community in which the
bonds have grown stronger due to the
people's struggle to remain where they are.
Faced with the prospect of being moved,
the Crossroads Women's Committee has
succeeded in organizing the residents and in
mobilizing national and international sup¬
port. They have staked their claim to per¬
manence by establishing a school. The
women have kept watch to deter surrep¬
titious demolition of houses; they have
gathered in groups the better to confront
the police and demolition squads. They sat
down in the fields and demanded to be ar¬
rested as a group. They sat down before the
bulldozers and refused to move. They
dramatized their struggle in theatre and have
taken it across South Africa and projected it
upon the television screens of Europe and
the United States.
They have not yet won the right to remain
permanently, but four years after an applica¬
tion was first made to the courts to remove
more than 10,000 people, Crossroads is still
there and the people have not moved.
It should not be forgotten that the white
South African society is also a society
dominated by males. Even among the
privileged white group, women are
noticeable by their absence in organs of
decision-making. Though enfranchised
since 1930, there are today only two women
among the members of the all-white Parlia¬
ment and none in the Cabinet. The Broeder-
bond, which controls all the instruments of
power in the country, does not allow
women as members and no women are to
be seen at the senior levels of the National
Party.
There are no women among the directors
Above, members of the African National Congress Women's
League outside a pass control office. Women have played a major
role in the liberation struggle. One leading figure, Lilian Ngoyi, who
was president of the Women's League in the 1950s, died in March
this year after 16 consecutive years under a banning order which
meant that she was forbidden to write or speak in public or to meet
with more than one person at a time. The African National Con¬
gress (ANC) is the oldest liberation movement in South Africa.
Since it was founded in 1912 the ANC has advocated equality bet¬
ween blacks and whites and a non-racial, democratic South Africa.
It tried for fifty years to bring change through peaceful means. The
President of ANC, Chief Albert Luthuli, was awarded the Nobel
Peace Prize in 1961, the first African to be so honoured. The ANC
was banned in 1960 following the Sharpeville massacre when police
16
fired on a peaceful demonstration killing 69 people. The Govern¬
ment declared a state of emergency and thousands were arrested.
In response to continued state violence and . concluding that
peaceful resistance was impossible, the ANC went underground
and formed a military section, Umkhonto We Sizewe, which means
"Spear of the Nation". Many ANC leaders, including Nelson
Mandela, are serving sentences of imprisonment. The programme
of the ANC is enshrined in the Freedom Charter adopted 25 years
ago. It declared that South Africa belongs to all who live in it and
calls for no discrimination on the grounds of race or sex and a
redistribution of the land and wealth of the country. Right, view of
the Crossroads "squatter camp", near Cape Town. For four years
the women of Crossroads have resisted attempts by the South
African Government to remove the settlement's 10,000 inhabitants.

of the Anglo-American Corporation. No
woman is at the head of any major South
African industry, mining house, finance or
banking institution. White women also suf¬
fer from discrimination in wages. On
average they earn only 44 per cent of the
earnings of their male counterparts and the
sectors of white employment in which white
women are found are also those with the
lowest white wage scales.
Yet, when compared with black women,
white women are privileged indeed. To a
degree unknown in the rest of the world,
they are free from domestic labour and
responsibility. Most importantly, they have
the franchise and legal opportunities which
would allow them to shape a more
egalitarian society. This they have not done.
Cushioned by their comfort and privilege,
they have in general even refused to
acknowledge the oppression of black
women and failed to recognize their own.
Some white women have understood and
concerned themselves with the causes of
oppression in South Africa. A few Afrikaner
women from the most exploited of the white
working class helped to build trade unions
across racial lines. A small number of white
women have perceived the nature of apar¬
theid and have worked with the liberation
movement.
But the majority are cocooned by their
privilege. Most of those who see beyond it
concentrate on the symptoms rather than
the causes. They have formed organizations
and groups that reject politics but fail to
recognize that political power is at the root
of the problem. They call for peace but ig¬
nore the need for justice and a people's right
to fight for it. They call for contact across
racial barriers, extending one hand while
propping up separate development with the
other.
Their efforts are directed towards charity
and humanitarian assistance for the suffer¬
ing. They busy themselves making the
"slave quarters" in their immediate environ¬
ment more comfortable rather than tackling
the root cause of the suffering of the black
people apartheid. This is not to deny their
contribution in alleviating suffering but it is
necessary to differentiate such organiza¬
tions from the emancipatory organizations
of the oppressed, and such efforts from the
liberation struggle.
South African women recognize that it is
not men who oppress them but the apar¬
theid system. They do not seek or want a
liberation that will give them equality to
share the oppression of African men. For
them, the liberation struggle is the battle for
the liberation of all the South African
people, men and women, black and white,
from the apartheid system.
That is not to say that victory over apar¬
theid is seen as automatically removing the
oppression of women, nor that after na¬
tional liberation women will begin a new
struggle for their liberation. Rather they see
the two as intertwined. For, in the course of
the liberation struggle, the question is asked
and must be answered from apar¬
theid, but after that what kind of society ?
The Freedom Charter embodies the
aspirations of the oppressed people of
South Africa and is the programme of the
national liberation movement. In its clauses
there is a commitment to equality of status,
franchise and economic rights for men with
women.
The goals of the liberation struggle are
refined as the struggle progresses. But it is
in the process, too, that attitudes are
fashioned and the foundations laid for the
realization of such goals.
To the extent therefore that women par¬
ticipate in the liberation struggle they will be
able to influence and determine their status
and role in the new society and help to
create the egalitarian structures and condi¬
tions of a free South Africa.
The liberation struggle of the South
African people has received a wide measure
of international support. In their areas of
competence, non-governmental organiza¬
tions have sought to isolate apartheid South
Africa. They have recognized that the im¬
position of mandatory economic sanctions
against the Pretoria regime under Chapter
VII of the UN Charter is the single most ef¬
fective action the international community
can take in support of the liberation struggle
and have campaigned within their countries
and internationally for such action.
International agencies, governments and
non-governmental organizations have also
taken steps to provide direct assistance to
the liberation movement. There is a need for
assistance to be given, focused specifically
on the requirements of women, to help
them overcome the particular impact of
apartheid on women and to promote their
fullest participation in the liberation struggle
and in the development of a free and
democratic South Africa.
Frene Ginwala and Shirley Mashiane
17
