The structure of hunger
by Muzammel Huq
THE ARMS TRADE
WE live today in a world in which there is not much cause for
optimism.
Huge sums of money are being spent on arms that could
and should be spent on development and in meeting the crying needs
of the Third World. Meanwhile, the arms race continues, more than
half a million of the world's best scientists are employed in perfecting
ever more sophisticated weapons, and military research and develop¬
ment accounts for more than seventy per cent of all scientific
research being carried out in the world. The waste of resources in¬
volved is evident to all, but it must be remembered that some in¬
dividuals and organizations are making enormous profits out of this
situation.
At the same time. Third World countries are afflicted by poverty,
hunger and malnutrition, which are due, it is claimed, to the popula¬
tion explosion. But the causes of hunger are structural; people do not
go hungry because food is not available. Even in 1974, during the
worst food crisis the world has known, stocks of grain were sufficient
to provide for everyone in the world. But more and more people are
unable to pay for the food they need. Unless and until structural
changes are made in the production system, increase in agricultural
products will have little effect on the causes of hunger.
South Asia today, for example, has a twenty-two million ton food
surplus and at the same time millions of people in the region are starv¬
ing. Hunger is, therefore, a matter of structure rather than of produc¬
tion and a rise in production alone cannot alleviate world hunger.
Development programmes established for Third World countries
are directly linked to the militarization of several of these countries.
Technology and ideas are being introduced into highly structured
societies, even though no analysis has been made of the socio¬
economic consequences they entail, simply because they are linked
to the existing world military order.
Perhaps the time has come for every nation to re-examine the
whole concept of national security. Whose security is being defend¬
ed, that of an economic or political class, or that of the entire popula¬
tion of the country? Wages are kept down and cheap labour enclaves
maintained, strikes are prevented and supplies of raw material are ob¬
tained from the Third World at low prices, all in the name of national
security. This is a dangerous concept which must be abandoned.
Militarization of the police and of paramilitary organizations is go¬
ing ahead at a tremendous pace in the Third World today. And this
militarization is required to support the internal power structure and
to maintain the status quo within various developing countries.
There are a few glimmers of hope. Throughout the world today
there is growing concern about military establishments and the
resources they are monopolizing. Another encouraging factor js that
the myth that defence industries generate employment is no longer
believed. Research has shown that investment in any other field than
armaments manufacture would generate more employment, whether
in the industrialized or the Third World. Thus, without a serious re¬
examination of the existing military order it will not be possible to
establish a new and more just world order.
MUZAMMEL HUQ, of Bangladesh, is director of the Institute for the Study
of Rural Resources, Noakhali, Bangladesh. He is the author of a number of
works on militarism, development and human rights. Since 1963 he has been
a close collaborator of Amnesty International. This article is based on a
speech made at the international Peace Forum, held in November 1979 at
Unesco headquarters in Paris.
