Sermons in stones
The musings of a modern Egyptian poet
before the temples of Abu Simbel
by Tewfik El Hakim
THE first time I went to Nubia was to
visit the temple of Abu Simbel on its
original site, before it was dismantled
and rebuilt on the top of the mountain in
order to protect it from flooding after con¬
struction of the High Dam. This grandiose
project of moving a temple from its resting-
place of three thousand years, without
changing any facet of it, and without mislay¬
ing a single stone, is one of the great
achievements of which Unesco may be just¬
ly proud.
We left Aswan by steamer for the south
where the famous temple stood with its four
statues representing Ramses II, with his wife
Nefertari at his side, Ramses immensely tall,
and the small figure of Nefertari barely
reaching up to her husband's knees.
The steamer ploughed through the Nile,
passing on either bank the houses of the Nu¬
bians, built of dark earth, on the walls of
which they had drawn figures and faces
which were striking in their simplicity and
their vivid colours. This art of drawing was
doubtless inherited from the distant past,
from their ancestors. I do not know whether
they were inspired by instinct or heredity, by
a secret awareness, by meditation or by a
deliberate will to imitation; for the Nubians
are simple folk. They live at one with the
silence of nature and the art of their
ancestors.
At last we reached the temple and the
boat was about to berth. " Ramses, im¬
pressive, with his four statues sculpted into
the mountain, and his wife Nefertari, seem¬
ed to be welcoming us.
After disembarking, we approached them
and I began to contemplate them... I felt
then that these figures of stone were not as
mute as one might think. They talk to each
other and understand each other, even
though no movement crosses their mo¬
tionless lips, and even though no-one hears
them.... But I did hear them; I knew what
TEWFIK EL-HAKIM, of Egypt, is one of the
great contemporary writers of the Arab world, he
drew on his experience as a magistrate for his
book The Magistrate's Diary; other well-known
works include The Confused Sultan, Schehere-
zade, Pygmalion, The Cave-Dweller and Fate of a
Cockroach. He was formerly Egypt's Permanent
Delegate to Unesco.
they were saying. ..perhaps because of the
spiritual bond that united us through time.
I cried out to them: "I am your son ! I hear
what you say !". And I took out a sheet of
paper and a pen to write down their strange
conversation. Looking up at the rising sun,
Ramses uttered these sybilline words:
"Every morning the Nile still flows at my
eight feet and the sun shines on my three
faces, since my fourth countenance has
been effaced by the hand of time."
Nefertari:
"That is so, my dear husband,
This morning is the same long morning;
and the sun lights up my four faces;
time does not obliterate my fourth face;
for I hide under the sky of your shadow".
Ramses:
"Yes, it is the sun on the East bank.
It appears through the hills covered with
golden wheat;
And the first monkey cries from the top of
my temple
And the sailor cries from the top of the sail:
A boat appears on the horizon
With shining white lances:
it has vanquished the black pirates;
sleep flies away from the eyelids
and birds fly away from their nests;
but everything is now asleep."
Nefertari:
"Yes, everything around us sleeps,
except the Nile which flows on:
the rings in its waves
resound like silver
as it washes the ground
next to our feet."
Ramses:
"Yes; it is the same long morning
unchangeable as the mountain;
And you and I are now part of the mountain.
And all the things around us disappear."
Nefertari:
"Only the Nile flows on
even when it dies;
Osiris rent in fragments
and from every fragment sprouts a blade of
grass.
From the countries of the North
where the sun deposits its gold on bare
heads,
From the countries of the South
where the vine and the olive tree grow ripe.
People come.
They come to make their offerings;
Fervour and admiration
shine in their eyes.
And it is a long unchanging morning
as old as thousands of years."
This was their conversation. Who can be
sure that they remained silent throughout
the centuries? Who can be sure that their
eyes of stone see less than our eyes of
glass? I feel that they know all there is to
know about the things around them. But do
they understand exactly what is going on
around them today? They see the boats
bringing admirers from the North and
South. Admiration is a feeling they know
well. They were admired when they were
flesh and bone and now this admiration is
given to their statues and their temple. They
know and understand this. But today, at
Abu Simbel a strange feeling assails them,
as if something unusual is about to happen.
They read it in the eyes blue, green, brown
and black that rest on them. They wonder
at the reason for such a host of visitors.
Why all these workmen, these boats, this
machinery, all this equipment and these
massive quantities of cement and concrete?
They also wonder what misfortune has
befallen these forsaken villages on both
banks of the Nile, which have remained as
silent as embalmed falcons.
Many events have taken place in more
than three thousand years: some powers
have been supplanted by others, and disap¬
peared; cults and religions have changed.
Only one thing has remained unchanged:
their firm conviction that they had been
placed for eternity on this spot which
touches the waters of the Nile: "You and I
are now part of the mountain and all the
things around us disappear." The
foreboding of some serious happening was
now clearly reflected on the face of Ramses.
I looked at each of his faces and on every
one of them I read the same concern.
Should I tell him the truth? When the visitors
had disappeared after the guide who was
telling them the story of the Pharaoh, I
stood alone in front of Ramses; I decided to
speak out, to tell-him the truth:
"Yes," I said, "something is about to hap¬
pen; something you will find hard to believe,
something which even I find astounding !"
The black pirates, the thieves of light, the
baboons, the sons of the sun, fell asleep on
the frieze of the temple awaiting the light of
day; Ramses could not shut his eyes. He
who had slept over the glories of yore began
58

\
^
^ v
*w
t
\
^

At the far end of the Inner
sanctuary in the Great Temple of
Abu Simbel are four statues
representing (from left to right) the
god Ptah of Memphis, the god
Amon of Thebes, Ramses II and the
god Re-Horakhty of Heliopolis (see
also photos on pages 56 and 57).
The statues and the bench on
which they are seated were hewn
out of the living rock of the
mountain. The faces have badly
deteriorated, and multicoloured
paintwork which once adorned the
sculptures has completely faded.
The forearms, which have almost
entirely disappeared from three of
the figures, may have originally
consisted of movable segments. A
sacred barque, shown in bas-relief
on the walls (not visible in photo)
may have stood on pedestal
in centre of the sanctuary.
h to be awakened from his dreams of the past
by sounds from the North; the sound of the
pick-axe breaking the rocks reverberated in
his head. And he whispered in his wife's ear:
"Can you hear that?" Nefertari too was
awake, and as anxious as her husband.
Ramses continued speaking: "Where are we
going? Can it be possible that we are being
moved after so many long centuries?"
In times gone by everything stayed in its
place. Man had genius, but nature was all-
powerful. The mountain was the mountain.
Man built temples and altars. He sometimes
copied the mountain: he built the Pyramids.
And there his power ended. But today he is
no longer satisfied with imitation. He is able
to transform nature itself according to his
wishes. The temple was situated at the foot
of the mountain. But the High Dam raised
the level of the waters of the Nile and the
temple is being moved to the top of the
mountain.
And the miracle came to pass. Ramses
and Nefertari could not really understand it.
But every now and again they were assailed
by doubt: Ramses looked at the Nile and
said: "It is strange, but I never realized that
the river was so low and our temple so
high!"
And Nefertari replied:
"What can you mean, my beloved husband?
The Nile is always the Nile".
"That may be so", replied Ramses, "but
the distance between the temple and the
river is no longer the same."
Nefertari laughingly replied: "Are you
suggesting that the temple has flown to the
top of the mountain like a bird?"
And Ramses went on: "This temple is no
longer where it used to be... But I do not
understand how that could have
happened".
And Nefertari answered: "Why do you
say that? Just look around you and you will
see that nothing has changed."
And Ramses looked around him. In the
distance he saw a half-clad peasant turning
a Shaduf to water his field; and he saw
another peasant working a plough drawn by
two cows. He could see the Sakieh. He saw
the same donkeys bearing the same palm-
leaf sacks. Everything was the same.... only
his temple had changed. And he could not
understand how it had come about.
Ramses thought that the God Ptah,
depicted on the wall of his temple, could

supply him with the answer. But Ptah did
not know. He never went outside the tem¬
ple. He had seen nothing.
Ramses asked him if he had heard any
rumours of what was going on, from the
visitors who flocked to bring him offerings.
The God Ptah sighed and said:
"All I hear from my visitors are complaints
and petitions. They bring me offerings
which only benefit the priests". And he add¬
ed sadly: "I have always wanted people to
come and see me for the sake of friendship,
just to have a chat and give me news of the
outside world. That would have filled my
lonely hours and broadened my horizon, and
then I could have been able to advise you
sometimes".
"Why did you never ask us?"
"I did once, but my visitor did not under¬
stand."
"Perhaps he was afraid lest he wearied
you with useless chatter?"
A smile spread over the face of the God
Ptah, and he said:
"Useless chatter! That is all I ask for. You
can keep your offerings and your honours,
and give me a little bit of useless chatter!"
"Do you think that that is easy? The
priests only allow people into the temple if
they have petitions to make and offerings to
give".
"I do not want their offerings".
"You do not, but the priests do!"
And so my visit to Abu Simbel came to an
end. I took the boat back and thought of.
Ramses, Nefertari and the God Ptah as I
contemplated the beautiful landscape of
Nubia. For the Pharaoh and his wife I wish¬
ed for peace in their environment. I wished
that the God Ptah would find a friend, and I
prayed to Heaven to give me the chance to
go back to Abu Simbel.
Tewfik El Hakim
Photo of feluccas on the Nile (above) was taken around
1890 by G. Lekejian of Cairo. Below, the kiosk of Trajan at
Philae before the construction of the first Aswan Dam,
photographed by J. -P. Sebah around 1870. These rare
documents belong to the recently rediscovered historic
photographic collections of the Harvard Semitic Museum.
Photos © 1979, The President and Fellows of Harvard College for the Harvard Semitic Museum, Cambridge, USA
