How Ibn Sina became Avicenna
Transmitted to Europe, his writings sparked off an intellectual revival
by Salvador Gómez Nogales
IT would be inconceivable to celebrate
the thousandth anniversary of Avi¬
cenna's birth (in the Christian calendar)
without examining the debt Westerners owe
to this great Oriental genius.
The influence of Avicenna in the West was
immense, giving birth to an intellectual move¬
ment, "Latin Avicennism", which bore his
name. This influence made itself felt in three
major areas: philosophy, the sciences
(especially medicine), and literature.
In philosophy, Avicenna dealt with all the
branches of Aristotelian enquiry: logic,
physics and psychology, metaphysics,
ethics, economics and politics, philosophy
and religion. He was also one of the great
theorists of mysticism.
In the sciences he influenced posterity in
almost every field in which he worked. From
medicine, mathematics, astronomy, alchemy
and astrology, to geology and geography,
mineralogy, herbalism, zoology and the
natural sciences, there is hardly an area into
which he ventured without whetting the
curiosity of later scientists.
Avicenna's artistic sensitivity can be felt in
his scientific and philosophical works, above
all in his mystic treatises. He also authored
several didactic poems on logic and medicine
which found an echo in the work of later
thinkers, including men of such stature as the
Cordobán philosopher and scientist Averroës
(Ibn Rushd) (1126-1198).
Another accomplishment of Avicenna the
artist and humanist was in music, where his
writings would leave a mark on the work of
later theoreticians.
As for his influence in the Arab-speaking
West, that is Muslim Spain or al-Andalus
(Andalusia), it has to be admitted that An¬
dalusian thinkers, with very few exceptions
and for reasons that remain obscure, were in¬
itially extemely hostile to Avicenna.
We do not know exactly when Avicenna's
thought reached Muslim Andalusia, but the
first person to be acquainted with it there was
the great Spanish thinker Ibn Hazm, who
died in 1064 AD, and was more or less a con¬
temporary of Avicenna. Ibn Hazm never
travelled to the East, but according to the
modern Spanish historian Asin Palacios, he
studied the works of Oriental writers in the
libraries of Andalusia.
But convincing evidence- of Avicenna's
direct influence in Muslim Andalusia does not
appear until the twelfth century with Ibn
Tufayl (d. 1185) whose familiarity with the
SALVADOR GOMEZ NOGALES, of Spain, is
professor of Arabic metaphysics and philosophy
at the philosophy faculty of Alcalá de Henares
and at Madrid's "Comillas" University. He also
directs the seminar on Arab philosophy at Spain's
Institute of Hispano-Arab Culture. Vice-President
of the International Society for the Study of
Medieval Philosophy and a member of the Aristo¬
telian Society (UK), he is the author of over a
hundred scholarly publications.
great thinker's work suggests that Avicenna
was by then known to Andalusian scholars.
Ibn Tufayl knew that Avicenna's Shifa
(Book of Healing) was remarkable for its
commentary on the works of Aristotle, and
that Avicenna had written another original
work [The Philosophy of the Easterners) in
the tradition of the Neo-Platonists, in which
he parted company with Aristotle. He was
also aware that not everything in the Shifa
originated with Aristotle. This is an impor¬
tant detail, not only because of the familiari¬
ty with Avicenna's work which it presup¬
poses but because it explains why Averroës
would later show hostility to Avicenna.
Ibn Tufayl was also familiar with Avicen¬
na's treatises on mysticism, and it was in
furtherance of this non-Aristotelian, esoteric
aspect of the philosopher's work that Ibn
Tufayl wrote the philosophical novel on
which his reputation rests, The Self-Taught
Philosopher. Both the novel's Arabic title,
Hayy ibn Yaqzan, and its two main
characters, Absal and Salaman, are taken
from Avicenna.
And so the evidence tends to show that
Andalusians were familiar with Avicenna's
works by the middle of the twelfth century.
The relations between Avicenna and
Averroës fall into a category of their own.
Divergences between the two far out¬
number the points on which they agree, and
Averroës fiercely attacks Avicenna at every
possible opportunity.
There were two main reasons for
Averroës's aversion. The first of them,
Photo © Réunion des Musées Nationaux, Pans
then relatively common among Islamic
philosophers, was the hostility he felt
towards the Mutakallimun (theologians who
philosophized about the articles of the
Islamic faith) from whom, according to
Averroës, Avicenna derived some of the
proofs which made him break with Aristotle.
The second reason, which may have ir¬
ritated Averroës even more because it seem:
ed to be more fundamental, was that by
blending certain Neo-Platonist and
Aristotelian theses Avicenna had
adulterated Aristotelianism. Perhaps the
most flagrant example of this is Avicenna's
espousal of the Neo-Platonist principle that
the One can proceed only out of the One.
When Averroës, concurring with the
Islamic theologian and philosopher Al-
Ghazali (1058-1111), refutes Avicenna's
proofs, the arguments he uses to defend
philosophy are simple: Avicenna's proofs
are not those of Aristotle, nor do they derive
from any of the classical philosophers.
Hence it is Avicenna who is at fault and not
philosophy, as Al-Ghazali had argued. Thus
the thread running through Averroës's
philosophy, insofar as it constitutes a reply
to Avicenna, is a return to pure
Aristotelianism, eschewing the mystical
adulterations which had been introduced by
Al-Farabi (872-950) and by Avicenna
himself.
But in one field medicine Averroës
does accept Avicenna's superiority, and his
admiration is evident in his commentaries.
For just as Averroës is recognized as Avicen- k
na's equal or superior in philosophy, in f
32

Between the 8th and the 15th
century an Arab civilization
took shape on the Iberian
peninsula which had a far-
reaching influence, above all in
the Christian West. At times
the confines of Muslim Spain
* (al-Andalus as it was known in
Arabic) stretched over the
greater part of the peninsula.
For much of the period
Córdoba was the main centre
of this blossoming culture: it
grew to be the biggest city in
the West, with a population of
250,000; it boasted a university,
a magnificent mosque (right,
the ceiling of the antechamber
to the mihrab, the room
indicating the direction of
Mecca); its cultural and
commercial life was intensely
active. It was the birthplace of
great writers and philosophers
such as Ibn Tufayl, Averroës
and Maimonides, who
transmitted to Europe the
learning which reached them
from the Orient, including the
scientific and philosophical
writings of Avicenna. Apart
from the Great Mosque of
Córdoba, al-Andalus produced
other famous monuments such
as the Alhambra of Granada,
the Giralda and Alcázar of
Seville, and the Aljaferia
palace at Saragossa. Their
influence on the Christian
architecture of the Iberian
peninsula and beyond was
striking, and can be seen (below)
in these arches in the cloister
of San Juan de Duero, at Soria.
Below left, 10th to 11th-century
Persian ceramic with Kufic inscription.
Photo © Mas, Barcelona
4
ÖIM»
Í ,
5?
w&

, medicine it is acknowledged that Avicenna
outranks him and that Avicenna's influence
on posterity was far greater.
By the second half of the twelfth century,
Avicenna's intellectual citizenship was so
well established in Muslim Andalusia that it
began to alarm the religious authorities. This
concern is reflected in the couplets of the
Valencian Ibn Yubayr (1145-1217), who
complained of the emergence of a sect
whose intellectual leaders were Al-Farabi
and Avicenna. Ibn Yubayr claimed that this
sect was exlusively concerned with inanities
and substituted the false wisdom of
philosophy for the true wisdom of religion.
As for Avicenna's mystic doctrines, they
reached Muslim Spain indirectly, through
the work of Oriental mystics such as al-
Ghazali and Suhrawardi, who were influenc¬
ed by him. But it has been established that
his mystical works were read also at first
hand by the Spanish Arabic-speaking
philosophers as well as by the mystics such
as Ibn Arabi of Murcia.
This is the point at which to trace the
spread of Avicenna's work through the Latin
West, noting especially how Spain acted as
a bridge in this process.
During the twelfth and thirteenth cen¬
turies, Spaniards produced many transla
tions from Arabic into Latin, and these were
republished on a large scale during the fif¬
teenth and sixteenth centuries. European
humanists and scientists formed such a high
opinion of the achievements of Arabic
science in Spain that many of- them
unhesitatingly classified as Spaniards cer¬
tain Oriental thinkers such as Avicenna, who
had never set foot on Spanish soil.
The modern historian of science George
Sarton considers Muslim Spain to be the
most important cultural centre of the Middle
Ages. Indeed, fifteenth century Europeans
were so dazzled by Andalusian culture that
many of them believed that the brilliance
came from Spain and not from the Orient.
This widespread error was not new: the
thirteenth-century Spanish bishop and
chronicler Lucas de Tuy, for example,
believed that Aristotle himself was Spanish.
Many thought that all the names in the Latin
translations were Spanish, and the Italians
of that time transformed Avicenna into a
Cordobán. It is interesting to note that the
great thinker's name, Ibn Sina in Arabic,
was immortalized in the West in the form
which it assumed in Muslim Andalusia.
The interest which the Arabs, and more
specifically Avicenna, aroused in the West
can be gauged from this flow of transla
tions. Specialists have underscored the ma¬
jor contribution of Spain to the translation
movement, often referring to the School of
Toledo. But important though it was,
Toledo was not alone in producing the
massive spate of translations. Translators
from all over the Iberian peninsula, working
alone or in groups, inundated the Western
world with Latin and Hebrew versions of
Arab texts.
Spain was thus the main conduit through
which Avicenna's work flowed into Europe,
at a moment, moreover, when his ideas
came as a windfall for medieval philosophy.
Scholasticism the system of Western
Christian philosophy that flourished from
the eleventh to the fifteenth century owed
its renewal to two movements in whose for¬
mation Avicenna was a key figure: the
transformation of Aristotelianism into a but¬
tress of religious thought, and the revival of
Augustinianism through direct contact with
Greek and Iranian Neo-Platonism.
All medieval European philosophers were
acquainted with Avicenna's work: they
either accepted his teachings or were engag¬
ed in refuting them. And even those who at¬
tempted to refute him assimilated at least
some of the values which imbued his
writings.
Detail from a 13th-century
engraving showing the great
Cordobán philosopher and
physician Averroës conversing
with Porphyry. Averroës
contested many of Avicenna's
philosophical ideas and took
issue with him on the respective
value of philosophy and religion.
Nonetheless his contribution to
the diffusion of Avicenna's work
in the West was considerable.
Right, cover of an Arabic edition of
Avicenna's Canon of Medicine
published in Rome in 1593. The
Canon was one of the first books to
be printed and published after
Gutenberg' s invention of movable type.
34

Medieval authors not only drew on him,
they made him one of the great authorities
for their doctrines, probably invoking his
name more often than that of any other
thinker except for St. Augustine, Aristotle,
Boethius and St. John of Damascus. So
preponderant did his influence become that
without him medieval philosophy would un¬
doubtedly have taken quite a different turn.
Very few of Aristotle's works were known
in the Latin West when the translations of
Avicenna began to pour into Europe. The
translations provided three things: a far
more complete understanding of Aristotle
than Christendom then possessed; a com¬
mentary on Aristotle's principal works; and
a philosophic codification of Aristotelian
problematics which offered a synthesis of
philosophy and religion.
The Arabs, and particularly Avicenna,
directly influenced Scholasticism not as a
variant of Greek Aristotelianism but by pro¬
viding original new perspectives. They exer¬
cised their influence not only on heterodox
philosophers but on the orthodox outlook of
the great Christian thinkers. So powerful
was their impact that the English theologian
and philosopher Roger Bacon (1214-1294)
could present Avicenna as one of the line of
the great prophets.
The Aristotelian aspects of Avicenna's in¬
fluence are felt most strongly in Thomism
(the philosophico-theological system of St.
Thomas Aquinas [1225-12741), in the
thought of the British theologian Duns
Scotus (1265-1308), and later in the work of
the sixteenth-century Spanish theologian
Francisco Suárez. This influence found its
way into the Dominican school through the
first original metaphysical synthesis of
Thomas of York (d. 1260). But Avicenna's
presence is most notable in the work of the
two main Dominican architects of Thomism,
St. Albertus Magnus (c. 1200-1280) and St.
Thomas Aquinas, and in that of their great
commentators, Tommaso de Vio, Cardinal
Cajetan (1468-1534) and John of St.
Thomas (1589-1644). In opposition to
Thomism is the Aristotelianism of the Fran¬
ciscan school, under the aegis of Duns
Scotus. It is interesting to note how both
Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus support
opposing doctrines by citing Avicenna.
But it is mainly in the Augustinian tradi¬
tion that a Latin Avicennism comes to light.
All of Avicenna's illuminative wisdom blends
perfectly with Augustinianism, giving it a
badly needed systematic framework.
Avicenna's influence on philosophy is by
no means confined to the Middle Ages. To
the extent that medieval Christian thought
has a place in modern philosophy and
theology, Avicennism still occupies the
place assigned to it by history.
There are two areas in which Avicenna's
thought still carries weight. First, his in¬
fluence is notable in modern subjectivism,
from Descartes to Kant. It is equally evident
in all the ontological proofs for the existence
of God, from Henry of Ghent to our own
times. Finally, in formal logic Avicenna was
eight centuries ahead of the West. It was
not until the Renaissance that arguments set
forth by Avicenna reappear.
This brings us to the second area in which
Avicenna influenced the West, namely that
of the sciences.
When Westerners look to Spain in search
of the splendours of Islamic culture, they are
actually looking for the "new science" of the
Arabs, which Avicenna undoubtedly per¬
sonifies. He was deeply interested in
mathematics, but as a philosopher rather
than as a technician, in the manner of a late
Neo-Platonist. He also produced many
works on astronomy and astronomical
observations. His astronomic teachings,
along with those of Averroës, were ex¬
pounded at the Universities of Bologna,
Padua and Ferrara.
CONTINUED PAGE 38
CMW8 *ti*An«* n«»*i.iti(.' ofußruhj
n .V««i nM
ROM AE,
In Typographia Mcdicea
M.D.XCIII.
fMm ly*yi>
1» I.T«»li/r 'tin' 75 '..
The "prince of physicians" is
seated in the professor's chair in
this engraving from a Latin
edition of the Canon dating
from 1520-1522.
	
35

Left, the University of
Brussels, where
a course on Avicenna was
offered
as late as 1909.
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 35
In Avicenna's time astronomy was related
to astrology, a subject for which the Arab
philosophers generally speaking showed lit¬
tle sympathy, and even less for the
alchemical elements derived from it. Never¬
theless, the introduction of Arabic alchemy
into the Latin world is an established
historical fact, and Avicenna played a crucial
role by imposing a more balanced attitude
among European thinkers faced with the
more fantastic and purportedly mystical
tendencies of other, less objective and less
responsible authors. He helped the West to
preserve a critical approach to the im¬
postures of alchemy. The second work on
alchemy to be translated from Arabic to
Latin was the relevant chapter of Avicenna's
Kitab, in the version produced by Alfred of
Sareshel around the middle of the twelfth
century.
In the Latin version of his authentic
treatise on alchemy and mineralogy, which
was often mistaken for the appendix to the
Fourth Book of Aristotle, he expounds a
theory which the more thoughtful Latin
authors would later take up. In this work,
Avicenna condemns alchemy, especially
where it concerns the transmutation of
minerals, thus flying in the face of the most
widely accepted notions of his time. He ad¬
mits only that skilled artisans working with
special tinctures can obtain from other
metals imitation gold and silver. But, in
Avicenna's view, the real transformation is
impossible and cannot be defended either
scientifically or philosophically. Avicenna's
views were cited in nearly all the treatises of
the thirteenth century, and later, in the Latin
world. The encyclopaedist Vincent de
Beauvais (d. 1264), while admitting the
possibility of transmutation, was sufficiently
influenced by Avicenna to express certain
reservations.
It is, on the other hand, generally forgot¬
ten that Avicenna was one of the main
sources of geological knowledge for the
Latin Middle Ages, the principal work 'of
reference being the Kitab al-Shifa in the
translation of Alfred of Sareshel. The
general principles of geology as understood
by the great encyclopaedists of the thir¬
teenth century, notably Vincent de Beauvais
and Albertus Magnus, are drawn principally
from Avicenna. When they explain the mo¬
tions of the sea, erosion, and the origins of
mountains, they are simply repeating
Avicenna's doctrines. Avicenna was prob¬
ably the Christian world's richest source in
herbalism and botany, as well.
Turning to zoology, wa are confronted
with this surprising statement by Sarton:
"The real fountainhead of Aristotelian
zoology. East and West, from the eleventh
38

century on was the Arabic summary of the
nineteen books by Ibn Sina. In a sense we
might even say that Ibn Sina was indirectly
the main fountainhead of medieval
zoology...".
To conclude this discussion of the
sciences, it should be pointed out that in its
Latin translation Avicenna's encyclopaedia
made many of the notions of Arab physics
familiar in the West. Avicenna was one of
those who transmitted to medieval physics
the Arabs' far-reaching studies of motion,
contact, force, vacuums, the infinite, light,
heat, the finite speed of light, and their in¬
vestigations of the specific gravity of bodies.
The theory of gravity and the tables of den¬
sities of both liquids and solids entered
Europe by way of the Arab world.
Avicenna's Canon was, for example, the
main source used by the Florentine physi¬
cian Dino del Garbo (d. 1327) for his work
On Weights and Measures, while Avicenna
was one of the new authorities cited by
Peter of Albano or Padua when he com¬
pleted his Liber compilations de
Physiognomia during his stay in Paris in
1295. Avicenna, like Averroës, also influenc¬
ed the medieval theory of colours.
But it is medicine that constitutes perhaps
the most brilliant chapter of Avicenna's life,
and one that made him until relatively
recently one of the great masters of Western
thought. His undisputed sway in this
discipline was based on two works, the
Canon and the Aryuza, a diadactic poem on
medicine (see article page 13). Still read to¬
day, the Canon was for seven centuries
regarded in the West as an authoritative
manual for instruction in and the practice of
medicine. Between 1150 and 1187 it was
translated in its entirety by Gerard of
Cremona. It was subsequently translated no
less than eighty-seven times, mostly into
Latin but often into Hebrew. All of these
translations were done in Spain, Italy (above
all Sicily), and the South of France.
It would be safe to say that Avicenna held
undisputed authority as long as medicine
was predominantly theoretical, and that his
influence waned with the coming of ex¬
perimental science.
The Canon gradually became the basis of
medical instruction in all universities. It was
part of the oldest recorded medical cur¬
riculum at the Faculty of Medicine in Mont¬
pellier, as established in a Bull of Clement V
dated 1309, and remained a part of the
Montpellier curriculum until 1557. True
enough, ten years later, preference shifted
to Galen, but Avicenna continued to be
taught there until the seventeenth century.
The fact that an Arabic edition of his work
was brought out in Rome in 1593 is some in¬
dication of the regard in which he was held.
At the outset, Arabic medicine was more
theoretical than practical, and it may be that
one of the shortcomings of Avicenna's in¬
fluence was that his theoretical brilliance
constituted an obstacle to practical research.
But this does not alter the fact that in ex¬
perimental surgery he served as guide to a
succession of brilliant practitioners.
Thus Guglielmo Saliceti (c. 1210-1277),
physician and surgeon of Piacenza, wrote a
general treatise on medicine whose title.
Summa conservation/s et curationis, is
reminiscent of Avicenna's great en¬
cyclopaedic work. Avicenna is among the
authors most frequently cited by him.
Medieval treatises on medicine often con¬
tained an introduction to anatomy. All of
them referred to and plagiarized the Cation
which was considered as the supreme
medical authority of the Christian world, just
as it was in the world of Islam.
In prophylaxis and pharmacology as well,
Avicenna was the Europeans' undisputed
master. Cardo of Milan, who practised in the
second half of the fourteenth century, wrote
a work entitled A Regimen for the Plague, in
which he summed up the prophylactic
techniques then in use. One of his principal
sources was Avicenna. At about the same
time, Franchischino de Collignano, a Floren¬
tine physician, wrote a treatise on the plague
in which he used Galen and Avicenna as his
main authorities. Another treatise. De
Venenis, is largely derived from Avicenna.
Traces of Avicenna's influence can also be
found in medieval European ophthal¬
mology. In an anonymous treatise on this
subject written in the second half of the thir¬
teenth century, Avicenna is the most fre¬
quently quoted author, and almost all the
ophthalmological works of fourteenth-
century Europe rely heavily on Arab sources,
and mainly on Avicenna.
In obstetrics and gynaecology too Avicen¬
na stands out as one of the great masters of
the Middle Ages. The highest praise that
could be bestowed on a doctor in medieval
times was to call him "another Avicenna". In
accordance with this practice, the Italian
physician Gentile da Foligno was styled "the
soul of Avicenna". Consulted by Cino da
Pistoia about the case of a seven-month
child, he wrote a treatise citing a number of
authoritative sources including Aristotle,
who had cited an instance of an eleven-
month baby, and Avicenna, who had
discussed that of a fourteen-month child. Da
Foligno also wrote a commentary on the
chapter of Avicenna's Canon relating to
fevers.
Avicenna's influence on Spanish authors
of this era and on earlier medieval writers
also extended to semiology or diagnosis
through external symptoms such as obser¬
vation of the pulse. Sarton believes that
Avicenna can be considered the founder of
semiology.
Finally, psychotherapy and para¬
psychology were another field in which
Avicenna was ahead of his time. When
medieval writers theorized about
psychological methods of healing they
illustrated their works with the most
spectacular cures which he achieved. The
Frenchman Nicole Oresme (c. 1323-1382),
one of the fourteenth century's greatest
scientists, .went along with Avicenna in
believing in thought transference, but re¬
jected his suggestion that human thought is
capable of moving objects without physical
contact.
But there inevitably came a moment when
Avicenna's influence as the great authority
in medicine went into decline. A reaction
against him set in during the Renaissance,
with the development of a tendency to go
directly to the Greek sources instead of us¬
ing Arabic intermediaries. Leonardo da Vinci
rejected Avicenna's notions of anatomy
(although the lack of an adequate
vocabulary forced him to continue using
Arabic terminology). The physician and
alchemist Paracelsus (c. 1490-1541) burned
the Canon in Basle in a public display of
repudiation. The Englishman William Harvey
dealt Avicenna's work a severe blow with
the publication in 1628 of what he con¬
sidered to be his great discovery, the circula¬
tion of the blood, which was unknown to
Avicenna.
What Harvey did not know was that this
discovery had been made four centuries
before, even preceding the Spanish
theologian Michael Servetus (15117-1553),
by the Arab Ibn al-Naphis (1210-1288), who
used Harvey's own argument concerning
the thickness of the wall separating the ven¬
tricles of the heart, in a critical commentary
on Avicenna's theory.
Little by little, philosophic and theoretical
medicine made way for the practical and ex¬
perimental medicine of modern times. Even
so, the University of Brussels continued to
offer a course on Avicenna's medicine until
1909.
Today it is possible to study medicine
without recourse to Avicenna's Arabic texts.
It is impossible, on the other hand, to ignore
the immense role of human thought,
Eastern as well as Western, over the cen¬
turies, and to forget the great debt that
European culture owes to Avicenna in
philosophy, mysticism, the natural sciences
and medicine.
Salvador Gómez Nogales
39
