m
Photo Igor Zatin, Tass. Unesco exhibition "Full Participation and Equality' A blind sculptor at work.



The handicapped tenth of humanity
by Federico Mayor
IT is reckoned that about 450 million people roughly 1 0 per cent
of the world's population suffer from some form of physical,
sensory or mental handicap. The figure may be even higher
around 13 per cent according to recent estimates by the World
Health Organization (WHO). Still more serious is the fact that the
problem, seen in both quantitative and qualitative terms, shows no
signs of diminishing.
To such underlying causes of deficiencies and impairments as
parasite-borne diseases, infections during pregnancy and acute
malnutrition during gestation and the early months of life, must be
FEDERICO MAYOR, Spanish biochemist, is Deputy Director- General of
Unesco. A former fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, he has been professor of
biochemistry and director of the department of biochemistry and molecular
biology at the Autonomous University of Madrid. He has also been Rector of
the University of Granada and Spain's Vice-Minister of Education and
Science. He has produced an extensive output of scientific works, including
studies on the biochemical analysis of the causes of mental retardation.
added such recent trends as the rising number of road and industrial
accidents, as well as the effects of alcoholism and drug addiction.
The problem of disability is thus one facing industrially developed
and developing countries alike. Though the causes and nature of the
handicaps may differ, the outlook is (albeit for different reasons)
everywhere equally gloomy.
Moreover, these remarks take no account of endemic warfare,
which, given the size and nature of modern weapons, may assume
catastrophic proportions. The prospects are no brighter when we
look in this direction, either.
Everything humanly possible must be done to prevent the occur¬
rence of handicaps and disablement. And where, in spite of all our
efforts, cases of disablement exist, it is the duty of the authorities
and society at large to do their utmost to attend to them as they
deserve, to improve the situation of the handicapped as far as
available knowledge permits and make sure that they lead as normal
a life as possible.

The International Year of Disabled Persons proclaimed by the
United Nations must mark the start of vigorous, imaginative and
concerted action at the international level, in favour of all those suf¬
fering from congenital or acquired disabilities. The theme of the In¬
ternational Year is "full participation and equality": total equality,
and participation as full as personal circumstances permit in each
case. Fortunately, the world is increasingly moving towards a per¬
sonalized approach to education and health care. Every individual is
unique, and this must be the focal point of all action and every
strategy.
The International Year of Disabled Persons provides us with an ex¬
cellent opportunity to lay the groundwork and this is a genuine
moral duty for the meticulous individual care and attention which
handicapped people deserve and need. With a sense of hope and ex¬
pectation which we must not disappoint, they are waiting to see
how the international community is taking them into consideration
and is preparing to offer them all the aid within its power.
In 1981 , we must, each and every one of us, do all we can to make
those around us aware of the extent of the problem, and above all of
the need to take organized and effective action to ensure preven¬
tion, care^nd rehabilitation by exploiting to the full our resources of
scientific and technical knowledge. Moreover, and let there be no
misunderstanding on this point, we must do this without the
slightest hint of doing "good works" or providing misplaced charity.
A question of human rights is involved.
Whoever finds himself or herself debarred from exercising certain
of those rights should have the opportunity to enjoy fully those
rights that are consistent with his or her condition. In recent times,
these rights, which have been duly recognized by the United
Nations, have been written into the constitutions of a number of
countries. This is an example which should be emulated because it is
a touchstone of the concern with which a country treats all its
citizens, without making any exceptions or displaying any
preferences.
In my view, the first right of any disabled person is not to be
disabled. In other words, the most important thing is to use all the
means within our power to prevent disablement, whether physical,
sensory, or mental, from occurring. Hence, we must pursue our
researches, in order to learn more about the origins of disabilities; at
the same timeand this is where the most flagrant inequality and in¬
justice liewe must apply the knowledge already available.
A great deal can be done in terms of legislation, assistance,
education, employment and prevention. There is much to learn from
the experience of other countries through exchange of information
and findings. If we are to be aware of the problem, we must be in¬
formed about it, and if we are to become involved, we must be
aware.
The year 1981 must usher in an era in which increased concern is
shown for all disabled persons and in which national and interna¬
tional endeavours are co-ordinated. How can this be done? At the
national level, through the work of various associations in the crea¬
tion or mobilization of effectively-run scientific and public informa¬
tion systems; through the introduction of preventive measures (such
as genetic counselling, vaccination, early diagnosis, the laying-down
of standards in order to prevent or reduce accidents on the roads
and in industry; the keeping of a just peace, and so on); through the
development of special education characterized by the maximum
degree of integration and by the most individual approach possible
consistent with the nature and severity of the disability; through full
rehabilitation and incorporation into the workforce; through as full a
participation as possible in cultural, political, social and economic
life; and, lastly, through the dismantling of architectural or other
barriers.
At the international level, it will entail concerted action by the
competent specialized institutions (in particular the World Health
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the International Labour Organisation, and Unesco) and
other organizations such as UNICEF and the World Food Pro¬
gramme, together with the indispensable assistance of the relevant
non-governmental organizations, with a view to drawing up
guidelines which, as they come to be accepted and implemented by
the different countries, will enable 1981 to be seen as the beginning
of the end of a situation that urgently calls for unlimited collabora¬
tion in the fields both of human rights and of solidarity between all
men and nations.
As an Organization that is most outspoken in its opposition to any
form of discrimination, Unesco cannot fail to advocate the fullest
possible integration of disabled persons into society, with full ac¬
count being taken of the specific details of each individual case. We
should set our face firmly against compartmentalization, for if the
"right to be different/ ' is wrongly interpreted, it may turn into de
facto segregation, whereas the real aim is to achieve the opposite.
This is why "specialized" help should be given to parents, both in
their present and in their future plans, in a manner consonant with
the gravity and degree of irreversibility of the disablement affecting
their children. This is why priority must be given to helping the fami¬
ly, since, in most cases, no other school or place of training or in¬
stitution can or should replace it. This is why disabled persons must
be helped and educated in every possible way. This is why it is
necessary to assist and train specialist teachers, as well as those
who can make any kind of contribution to the integration process.
Last but not least, this is why society and all its members must be
"specially educated", so that they can facilitate integration and,
with courage and respect for human solidarity, can narrow down the
"differentness" and "dependence".
If the International Year of Disabled Persons is primarily a year for
the completest possible integration of every individual disabled per¬
son, it will also herald a new, clearsighted approach to an issue that
is of the deepest concern to us all.
At its recent General Conference in Belgrade, Unesco unanimous¬
ly adopted a resolution inviting its Member States to devote special
attention to establishing and implementing all measures that could
benefit disabled persons. Countries from every corner of the earth
and at every level of development voiced, through their represen¬
tatives, their profound commitment to the problems of disabled per¬
sons. The action which some of them have already decided to take,
or are planning, gives additional cause for hope.
On the threshold of 1981, deeds not words are called for if that
hope is not to prove a disappointment to those who are so much in
need of encouragement.
Federico Mayor
"A handicap is not simply the corollary of a disa¬
bility, it is also in part imposed by society. Fur¬
thermore, the definition of a handicap varies
according to a country's culture, traditions and
level of development. In a rich country a blind
person can, for example, obtain a complete edu¬
cation giving access to a profession, whereas in
most developing countries he or she may not
have access to education; such a person would
be handicapped not only by a disability, he or
she would have an additional handicap imposed
by the social and economic conditions in his or
her country. One of the major objectives of the
International Year of Disabled Persons is preci¬
sely to encourage governments to eliminate pro¬
gressively all such forms of handicap, of which
disabled persons are the victims."
Zala Lusibu N'Kanza
Executive Secretary
for the International Year of Disabled Persons
