V
n
<
3»»
M
|7Ï%,
* .
%.
t. %
ft

The poverty trap
The plight of the
Least Developed Countries
by Henri Lopès
and
Huynh Cao Tri
T
'HE concept of LDCs (Least Developed
Countries) is relatively new. Long
regarded with suspicion by the other
developing countries, it originated among
the industrialized nations who supported a
selective system of preferences graduated
according to product and country, in op¬
position to the Third World's proposal to set
up a single system of trade preferences.
Three criteria were finally adopted by the
United Nations General Assembly in
November 1971 for defining the LDCs:
a very low level of per capita in¬
come $200 per person and per year
in 1979 as against an average of $700 in the
developing countries taken as a whole and
$8,000 in market economy industrialized
countries;
a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in
which the industrial sector's contribution is
10 % or lessagainst 19 % in the develop¬
ing countries as a whole;
a literacy rate of 20 % or less.
There were originally 25 LDCs, but the of¬
ficial list now includes the following
31 States: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Benin,
Bhutan, Botswana, Burundi, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros,
Ethiopia, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Haiti, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Malawi, Maldives, Mali,
Nepal, Niger, Rwanda, Samoa, Somalia,
Sudan, Uganda, United Republic of Tan¬
zania, Upper Volta, Yemen Arab Republic,
People's Democratic Republic of Yemen.
The largest number (twenty-one) of these
countries are on the African continent; eight
belong to the Asian region and one each to
the Caribbean (Haiti) and to Oceania
(Samoa). Their combined population is
275 million or about 13 % of the total
population of the developing countries
(China not included).
Though the LDCs differ widely in size of
population, political regime and geographic
situation, they all share a number of com¬
mon features:
a high percentage of their population
depend for their livelihood on agriculture,
usually carried out at subsistence level, and,
at best, integrated to only a slight degree in¬
to the modern monetary system. They all
have poor communications systems;
industrial production in the LDCs is
usually very small both in absolute terms
and in percentage. Most of them have such
a tiny economic growth rate that their per
capita income often tends to decrease in¬
stead of rising;
for various reasons the LDCs generally
have been unable to create an export sector
which would enable them to finance their
import needs. And where exports do exist
they are usually limited to two or three basic
products;
natural resources vary from country to
country, but in most cases even where
mineral resources have been discovered
they are not yet being exploited. Many LDCs
in fact do have large mineral and hydroelec¬
tric resources but their development calls for
concerted and combined efforts. In others,
these resources are scarce or non-existent
and the situation can only be improved by
making better use of the country's human
resources;
all these countries, however, are very
short of trained personnel capable of plan¬
ning, organizing and administering the
development process, as is shown by their
very low literacy rates and figures of school .
and university enrolments; f
HENRI LOPES, former prime minister of the
Congo, is at present consultant to the Director-
General of Unesco concerned with the Organiza¬
tion's Medium-Term Plan.
HUYNH CAO TBI, of China, is senior pro¬
gramme specialist in Unesco's Division for the
Study of Development. He is the author of many
publications on development problems.

r the people of the LDCs suffer from
malnutrition; they lack clean drinking water,
as well as basic health and education ser¬
vices. The world's highest birth and death
rates are to be found in these countries. As
the president of the World Bank put it,
"their populations live in a state of absolute
poverty";
domestic savings in the LDCs are
negligible and there is a very low level of
investment;
most of them rely largely on interna¬
tional aid, which covers a considerable part
of their imports. Worse still, the gap bet¬
ween these countries and the rest of the
developing world is growing, as is the gap
between the latter and the industrialized
world.
This dire situation, which has been called
"the scandal of the century", has often pro¬
moted generous gestures: in very critical cir¬
cumstances or in times of natural disaster
rescue operations organized by the interna¬
tional community have saved human lives.
While such efforts should not be minimized,
it must be stressed that what the LDCs need
is not a temporary remedy for their ills, but a
cure, or, better still, the means to cure
themselves.
For they hold the key to their own salva¬
tion and should be prepared to mobilize their
peoples resolutely in a long-term effort,
using strategies inspired by the lessons of
the first two United Nations Development
Decades.
The first decade sought to achieve social
progress through improved living conditions
and a greater degree of freedom. But social
progress was seen merely as a fall-out from
economic growth, estimated at 5 % of
Gross National Product (GNP), and was to
be achieved by increasing industrial and
agricultural production.
The second development decade cor¬
rected the initial strategy by giving greater
importance to social aims. It stressed the
need for reforms in domestic structures and
recommended limiting the privileges of the
elite in poor countries, in particular through
a more equitable distribution of national
income.
In each case, development was based on
existing (liberal or planned economy)
models, but in order to use these models ef¬
fectively the developing countries, especially
the LDCs, first had to make up for years of
backwardness. It is clear today that gross in¬
equalities are hidden behind the apparently
satisfactory global results of the seventies.
The 38 low-income countries classified by
the World Bank as "low-income developing
countries" achieved an annual economic
growth of only 3.9 % during the sixties, and
of 3.6 % during the 1970-1978 period. Dur¬
ing the latter period there was even a
decrease in gross domestic product in some
of these countries. Over the whole period
1960-1978, GNP growth in the low-income
group averaged 1 .6 % annually, and it fell in
seven countries.
In the past few years it has become clear
to the international community that
development cannot be equated with
reproducing systematically the dominant
foreign production and consumer models,
or even with fulfilling economic objectives
when these have no cultural content. The
concept of "endogenous development"
with its three components the cultural
dimension, autonomy and popular participa¬
tion in development is now universally
recognized. This strategy aims at
substituting a new international economic
order based on equity and solidarity for in¬
terdependence based on inequality.
This kind of development satisfies several
fundamental needs including: harmonious
social relations, brought about within the
community through justice and social con¬
cord and between nations by greater equity
in the distribution of benefits; a balance bet¬
ween man and nature in the environment
and habitat; and more democratic and
humane methods of development achieved
through broader participation of groups and
individuals at all stages of the planning pro¬
cess. (Participation is seen not only as a
means of achieving development but also as
responding to a basic human need, a form
of self-education in civic and social matters
and a fundamental human right.) The aim,
in other words, is to achieve global,
multidimensional and integrated develop¬
ment. And this unified approach involves
not only active participation of all citizens
both as agents and beneficiaries of develop¬
ment, but the use of multidisciplinary
methods of analysis.
Meeting the economic and cultural
demands of an endogenous, man-based
development strategy should enable each
country to acquire optimum control over all
development operations at national level.
But experience also proves that a State
can meet all the social, human and political
preconditions of endogenous development,
it can work out a carefully prepared plan and
still not achieve adequate progress in
development or even economic growth. In¬
evitably there comes a time when the pro¬
blem of financing development arises and it
then becomes clear that this problem cannot
be solved simply by distributing existing
capital in a more equitable way. What is
even more serious is that there seems to be
no prospect of drawing on national savings
in the LDCs, at least so long as they keep
their present structures.
The investment needs of these countries
are considerable and always exceed a
tolerable percentage of their gross national
product. According to the World Health
Organization, even if the LDCs were to in¬
crease their health spending by 10 % an¬
nually, their investments in this sector in the
year 2000 would amount to only about 5 %
of the sums now being spent in most in¬
dustrialized countries. Third World industry,
according to another study, will require $25
to $35 billion per year in foreign capital dur¬
ing the coming decade; it is now receiving
less than $10 billion annually.
Despite the many resolutions passed
unanimously both by the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) and by the U.N. General
Assembly, the industrialized countries are
still a long way from the target of allotting
0.70 % of their GNP to official development
aid. In the member States of OECD (the
Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development), the average rate is only
0.08 %; and it is 0.01 % in planned
economy industrialized countries, which do
not consider themselves responsible for the
plight of the developing world. OPEC
member countries, on the other hand, are
already devoting 0.20 % of their GNP to of¬
ficial development aid. As to China, which is
a developing country and has recently been
classified as a group on its own, it has
stressed that its aid "cannot be compared to
that of the developed countries", but must
be considered as a form of economic and
technical co-operation between developing
nations.
9
During the United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries held in Paris
from 1 to 14 September 1981, many delega¬
tions emphasized that what they expected
from the industrialized nations should not be
seen as an act of charity but rather as a
gesture of solidarity and even as enlightened
mutual interest. They stressed that the
plight of the developing countries in general
and of the LDCs in particular was not due to
fate or to any intrinsic incapacity, but was
the consequence of an historical relationship
of domination and exploitation based on
force.
It is true that aid received from the in¬
dustrialized world enables the developing
countries to increase their exports. But their
needs are such that they inevitably use any
additional income that this brings in to buy
essential goods from the developed coun¬
tries. The latter therefore stand to gain from
any increase in the poor countries' resources
produced by an expansion in their exports.
The prolonged recession of the mid-
seventies has highlighted the important role
played by Third World markets in compen¬
sating for the fall in demand in the in¬
dustrialized countries and in limiting
unemployment in these countries. Between
1950 and 1980, overall exports to the
developing world from OECD member
states made it possible to create thirty
million jobs in the industrialized world.
While the developing countries showed
their solidarity with the LDCs during the
Paris conference and supported all their
claims, they also stressed that the plight of
the LDCs is only one aspect of the problems
facing the developing world as a whole and
that commitments made to help these coun¬
tries should not be used as an excuse for
reducing official aid to the rest of the Third
World or allowing it to stagnate at its pre¬
sent level. This was by no means a
superfluous precaution, for some of the in¬
dustrialized countries are inclined to use the
present world recession as an excuse for
evading their duty of international solidarity.
It is extremely important that the interna- .
tional community should realize that the f


only true and lasting form of development is
global, planetary development. The aim of
the Paris conference was to urge the donor
countries to go beyond declarations of in¬
tent and make firm, concrete commitments
leading to a new programme of action for
the 1980s.
In spite of the lessons of the first two
development decades, the discussions tend¬
ed to be dominated by short-term economic
problems at the expense of vital cultural and
social issues. And here Unesco's represen¬
tatives drew attention to the part the
Organization could play in the war against
poverty and injustice.
Unesco is prepared to put its experience
in education and literacy training at the
disposal of any country that asks for it.
Education and literacy can provide the
peoples of the LDCs with the tools they
need for the task of national construction.
Both can play a decisive role in improving
nutrition and health. This calls for a restruc¬
turing of educational systems, curricula and
methods so as to take proper account of the
fundamental objectives of development and
the national culture. Too many schemes
have failed because they neglected the
cultural identity of the societies involved.
Unesco also has a great deal of experience
in communication, another field vital for
development; it provides the means of
transmitting technical knowledge, influenc¬
ing attitudes and behaviour and making the
public aware of the many and varied kinds of
effort that national development involves.
Unesco's Social Sciences sector can help
to find solutions to many grave problems
facing the developing countries. The
phenomenon of poverty, for example, is
linked to a variety of factors economic,
THREE POINTERS TO POVERTY
Photo © Glraudon, Paris. Bibliothèque Nationale
Of all the developing countries,
the LDCs (Least Developed
Countries) are the poorest, the
weakest economically and the
most hampered by structural
difficulties. According to the
United Nations, the expression
"least developed countries"
means the weakest in terms of
three main economic and social
criteria: low income per capita
Gross Domestic Product of $200
or less (in 1979 the annual per
capita GDP in these countries
averaged $183 as compared with
$674 for all developing countries
and $8,217 for market economy
countries); low literacy rate20
per cent or less; and low share
of manufacturing in total
output 10 per cent or less
(often it is less than 4 or 5 per
cent). These three criteria are
symbolized by: above, a coin
from ancient Lucania, right, a
school in Nepal, and, opposite
page, a baseball factory at Port
au Prince, Haiti.
Photo Claude Sauvageot, taken from Enfants du Monde © Editions Jeufie Afrique and Claude Sauvageot, Paris
8

social, cultural and human. Analysis of the
interaction between production factors and
social relations, and between technical pro¬
gress and cultural values, the study of the
socio-cultural conditions in which the
transfer of science and technology takes
place, and of the way in which the different
sectors of development (production, ex¬
change, distribution and socio-cultural ac¬
tivities) function and influence one
another all this offers the social sciences a
vast field for research and -reflection.
Over and above the international com¬
munity's concern for the immediate plight of
the Least Developed Countries, what is real¬
ly at stake is how to achieve human solidari¬
ty on a global scale in an increasingly in¬
terdependent world. As Unesco's Director
General, Amadou Mahtar M'Bow, has put
it: "Never has the world been so closely knit;
but never has its diversity been so
striking...; the world emerges as a whole all
of whose parts are interrelated." This idea
should serve as a basis for the new interna¬
tional economic order and later perhaps for
a new and more humane world order which
we hope to build.
Henri Lopès and Huynh Cao Tri
Photo Alex Webb © Magnum, Paris
