Right, air view of the old town of Kairouan (Tunisia). Its pattern of baked-clay roofs
criss-crossed by long, narrow alleyways could symbolize the ancient cities and
districts in many countries which have become major tourist attractions. Dazzled
by the beauties of the landscape and the splendours of historic sites and
monuments, tourists on a short visit may sometimes fail to make real contact with
the life of the people in the host country. How to provide short-stay holidaymakers
with the chance to return home with a real appreciation and understanding of
different ways of life? this is one of the challenges facing modern tourism.



Mass tourism
and
cultural traditions
by Abdelwahab Bouhdiba
r
ALTHOUGH mass tourism might seem
to be an instrument for promoting
peace and understanding among
nations and friendship among peoples, its
growth has been viewed in some circles with
great concern.
Many people feel that exposure to hordes
of visitors is bound to alter popular attitudes
and beliefs, that tourism changes men¬
talities and spreads new concepts relating to
work, money and human relationships, and
destroys the ties that bind the people to their
religion and ethics. In short, tourism is seen
as a factor of acculturation in the worst
sense of the word, and even of moral decay.
This accusation warrants calm and objec¬
tive analysis. We hope that this brief study
of the situation as it exists in Tunisia will
help to put the general question in a better
perspective.
For Tunisia, tourism is something that has
developed recently, suddenly and by no
means accidentally. Until independence the
Tunisian hotel industry was insignificant.
Nowdays over a million and a half tourists
visit the country each year. They spend over
fifteen million nights here and statistics
show a strong upward trend. The annual in¬
crease may be as high as 20 to 25 per cent.
The year-round figures are one tourist to
every three inhabitants, and three "visitor-
bednights" to each inhabitant.
Naturally, certain regions tend to be more
heavily "invaded" than others. On the island
of Djerba every single person depends on
tourism, either directly or indirectly, for his
or her livelihood. In Hammamet more than
half the local families are engaged in it.
Naturally, as there is no "tradition" of
tourism, as" such, in these regions, the
phenomenon tends to look like a more or
less well planned invasion. Hotels are
mushrooming. The entire coast of the Gulf
of Hammamet has been taken by storm
while the "hinterland", barely 100 or 200
metres from the coast, remains deserted.
Land speculation has spawned a new breed
of landowners. The local people have not
always benefitted from this manna from
heaven.
Tourism was introduced into Tunisia
deliberately. Tunisians realized that vacation
facilities, sun and sea, are as much con¬
sumer products as anything else and can be
marketed. With the incentives given to the
construction industry and through use of
the plentiful supply of semi-skilled labour,
the hotel industry very soon proved itself
able to alleviate the serious problem of
chronic under-employment.
As it turns out, job creation in the tourism
sector costs as little as one twentieth of the 1
cost in the traditional industrial sector. At ^-
the present time the hotel industry employs |
more than 30,000 people. What is more, ©
tourism has proved one of the key sectors in ~
which profit margins have been sufficiently I
large to attract both national and foreign o
capital. The hotel industry has also opened' §>
the door to a whole chain of new employ- J
ment opportunities. Last but not least, |
tourism has helped a great deal witru s
Tunisia's balance of payments problems, r |

r

PALMY DAYS? In host countries tourism was once thought of simply as a money-spinning
passport to economic development. Today it is increasingly seen to have complex and
sometimes unexpected cultural side-effects when it brings peoples together in an artificial
situation in which real communication may be difficult.
y In short, disproving the pessimism of
earlier studies and despite the risks and fluc¬
tuations and the very real uncertainty of the
sector, tourism has proved, at all levels and
for everyone concerned, at least for the time
being, a source of economic prosperity.
At the same time it is easy to see that only
the economic factors have been taken into
account. This of course is understandable,
considering the urgency of combatting
economic backwardness, and the fact that
during the 1960s development was still a
very real problem. There were very few of us
who could distinguish between develop¬
ment and growth and who understood the
importance of the human and cultural
aspects. The human problems thus, as it
were, forced themselves upon us in a spon¬
taneous and quite haphazard fashion. Little
by little we have been obliged to face up to
the impact that tourism has had on our at
titudes, our values, our beliefs and our
outlook on life.
Let us disregard value judgements about
the behaviour of the tourist himself. Much
more significant is the relationship between
the tourist and the host population. To
begin with, the simple fact of the physical
presence of groups of foreigners is bound to
create new circumstances that affect per¬
sonal relationships. The tourist does not
come on any kind of business, but solely for
recreation. He expects a whole range of ser¬
vices from us for which he is ready to pay at
a price that is naturally assessed somewhat
differently by the two parties but from which
both stand to gain, although in varying
degrees. This relationship with tourists is
something completely new.
According to the traditional concept of
relations between people, the bonds of
hospitality are sacred. "Drinking water and
eating salt" together creates a mystic bond,
and hospitality is a communion from which
grow lasting ties. Tourists, however, are
guests of a different kind. Our tourist visitors
are no longer rare passers-by sent by pro¬
vidence. They are sent to us in mass by
travel agencies. Quantity dilutes quality. A
close relationship between host and guest is
no longer possible. Both know from ex¬
perience that it will not last beyond the week
or ten days' stay.
The occasional friendship that turns out
to be exceptionally long-lasting cannot be
said to be the rule, but applies only to a tiny
minority. What was once the absolute rule
of traditional hospitality turns out to be no
more than a quirk of behaviour outside the
norm. All the more since the tourist circuit is
so organized, stereotyped, standardized and
mechanized that it hardly lends itself to any

outpourings of the heart or to any meetings
of minds.
The same kind of comments could be
made, of course, about the general develop¬
ment of economic relations. Traditional
economic production was centred on the
family where much of the work consisted of
services for which there was no payment.
The extension of the wage system to so
many levels of the domestic economy has
transformed into commodities services that
were traditionally provided on a reciprocal
basis. Instead of a society based on services
mutually rendered we have a society in¬
creasingly dominated by money, in the form
of the price tag.
There always was, however, one sector
where money was very little involved... the
recreation sector. Leisure activities were free
in every sense of the word. It was un¬
thinkable, for example, to have to pay to see
people dance (and even more so to pay to
dance oneself), to ride on a camel, or to
bathe in the ocean. Now all these activities
have to be paid for and have become highly
lucrative.
Tourism did not create this profiteering
mentality from scratch. It simply speeded up
its development and accentuated it. But we
must make sure that entire sectors of the
population do not lose their natural sense
of hospitality, and their traditional good
manners.
But there is something even more impor¬
tant. With the advent of tourism the fun¬
damental patterns of the consumer society
are in process of infiltrating our own society.
The tourists are Westerners on vacation
who come here for a week of leisure and to
get away from the year's accumulation of
fatigue and worry. The tourist is a worker
who has escaped. After slaving away all year
he is allowing himself a change of scene and
pace, régime and life-style. One might say
that tourism introduces the behaviour of a
wasteful society into the midst of a society
of want. The rift between rich and poor
societies here is no longer merely a
theoretical scandal based on academic
analysis. It is everyday reality.
The tourist's most insignificant posses¬
sion represents a fortune or a dream for
many of the Tunisians called upon to serve
him and to come into contact with him,
whatever may be involved a beach ball, a
beach towel, a lipstick or a pair of
sunglasses. There is something diabolical
about this cpnstant temptation and this in¬
vitation to taste the extravagant and still for¬
bidden fruits of the consumer society. There
is a tremendous temptation to imitate and
emulate the tourist.
In an enquiry into the problem of juvenile
delinquency we were obliged to recognize
that tourism with its perpetual temptations
is an important factor in the misconduct of
our young offenders. We discovered that
juvenile delinquency in no way stemmed
from the need to satisfy primary and im¬
mediate needs, but rather from secondary
needs created by the development of a dif¬
ferent mentality, new styles of behaviour, a
new outlook on life.
Tourism has undoubtedly played a role in
the changing pattern of morality. The tourist
comes to have a good time. He wants
cabarets, dance halls and night clubs. And
to enliven things and create an "ambience",
the local public is always welcome. There is
no lack of critics to protest against these
dens of "vice and debauchery". It would be
wrong, however, to blame tourism alone for
a trend which in our view is far more
generalized.
The impact of tourism on traditional
values and attitudes is real enough but
should not be blamed for everything. It is
simply a factor in accelerating a develop¬
ment that is already under way. Tourism
acts as a catalyst, working in the same direc¬
tion as the historical trends in the society as
a whole. The main question is whether
tourism, by speeding up developments
which we see as inescapable, might not
throw the machine out of gear when it is
already being subjected to contradictory
forces. The creation of new needs is an in¬
tegral part of the development process. The
ideal would be for new needs to appear only
when society is ready with the means to
satisfy them.
As an industry, tourism's role is to create
these means. But as a social phenomenon
its tendency is to reduce the impact of the
means thus developed by causing these
needs to appear prematurely. The problem is
whether tourism, which is a production
system geared to satisfy the consumption
desires of outsiders, can develop in a climate
of economic and moral austerity.
From another angle, tourism could be
seen as a missed opportunity. It provides an
opportunity for peaceful and friendly
dialogue with those who in the past were
not always favourable to us. Thus the
education of the public and particularly of
those sectors that come into direct contact
with our visitors must aim at instilling the
highest standards not only of welcome,
courtesy and helpfulness but also firmness,
dignity and strong national pride.
We should therefore like to see tourism
become more of an encounter and less of a
tour. An encounter is an exchange leading
to discovery. The tourist who comes to visit
my country does exactly what I do myself:
he expresses himself in terms of his own
culture. And this is how it should be; for it is
the jolt of encountering others that tells him,
by contrast, what he is.
Unfortunately, it does not always happen
like this. The tourist does not always live up
to our expectations, for a simple reason that
has to do with his essential motivations.
Basically the tourist comes to see the coun¬
try rather than the people. He is someone
who passes by without really seeing
anything. And in any case, what does he
want except to have his own prejudices con¬
firmed and enjoy the comforts he is used to,
including the false ideas he entertained
about the country he is visiting?
Cultural mediation is virtually nonexistent.
Local or international intermediairies, travel
agencies, airline companies, hotel chains,
are merely financial intermediaries, with no
pretensions to cultural interpretation. One of
the sumptuous brochures that various com¬
panies use to "sell" our country speaks of:
"Tunisia, the sunny terrace of Africa", "An
enchanting country with vast stretches of
sandy beaches", "A fairy-tale oasis with a
prestigious past", "A revelation of the orien¬
tal lifestyle". Every effort is made to draw
the attention of the potential customer to
the landscape and never to the people. And
when Tunisian culture is mentioned it is
always with reference to the past. Only the
brochures and folders produced by the Tuni¬
sian Tourist Office in several languages, il¬
lustrated with coloured photographs, try to
give our visitors a clear and authentic idea of
our country.
The main thing is to emphasize the
cultural side of tourism. Without running
counter to the deep-seated motivations of
the tourist who wants to relax and get away
from things, we can try to give him what he
wants while offering him the opportunity to
make real contact with the local people. In
this respect, experiments such as the
Festival of Tabarqa deserve to be better
known, looked at more closely, improved on
or perhaps used as pilot experiments.
Lectures before and during his stay, first-
class artistic events, round-table discus¬
sions, guided tours with better-calibre
guides, exhibitions, documentaries all this
is no doubt very expensive, but it would
make the tourist's visit a genuine encounter k
with the country, its culture and its people. F

Generally speaking, a major mass infor¬
mation and education drive is necessary.
Tourism could and should be seen as a
powerful factor for understanding between
nations and for international friendship. Cer¬
tain measures would of course have to be
taken, first of all among the people of the
host country. They should be urged to
regard the tourist as just another person, a
guest but not necessarily a model to copy.
With the great diversity of mankind there is
no need for subservience or imitation.
But any kind of action, whether national
or international, must be put into effect step
by step. Tourism is an all-embracing term
which covers many different things.
However, we need to define the. different
types of tourist if our strategy is to have a
practical impact. Moreover, tourist types
vary from.one cultural group to another. For
example, they could be classified according
to whether or not they know the language of
the country, their financial means, their
demands, and their socio-cultural level.
The camera does not lie or does it? Below, market-day scene in a Latin American town.
Certainly each different type has its own
identifiable motivations. Once these have
been determined, we can do a better job of
trying to satisfy them. Certain other areas
also need rethinking or even reorganizing
from scratch: archaeological tourism,
sports-oriented tourism, company, profes¬
sional or trade union tourism associations.
In short, tourism needs to be diversified
and multiplied, and given new life and spirit.
Obviously this does not mean that the
economic dimension should be overlooked
or underplayed. We are even prepared to ad¬
mit that it should have priority. Nonetheless,
although all progress involves some social
cost, this does not mean that we should
passively let things take their course.
Tourism could be turned to better advan¬
tage, often at little cost, by using a lot of in¬
telligence and imagination.
It is wrong to see it either as the way out
of our countries' economic difficulties or as
a curse that will plunge our societies into
disorder. It will not bring us ready-made
modernity, although it speeds up the moder¬
nization process and may change its course.
It need not destroy our values nor upset our
beliefs. It simply hastens a trend that started
several decades ago and has been forced by
the overall policies practiced by our country.
If we succeed in reaping the maximum
benefit from the set of circumstances that
tourism brings in its wake, tourism may be
used as the starting-point for an attempt to
open a dialogue between nations.
ABDELWAHAB BOUHDIBA, of Tunisia, is pro¬
fessor of Maghrebian sociology at the University
of Tunis and director of Tunisia's Centre of
Economic and Social Research. He is a member
of the United Nations sub-commission on preven¬
tion of discrimination and protection of
minorities, and the author of many published
works including Sexuality in Islam and Raisons
d'Être.
