The rights of menta
How far are t
The Declaration on the Rights ofMentally HandicappedPersons, proclaimedby the United Nations General
Assembly on 20 December 1971, marked an important step forward for the world's mentally handicapped.
One of the documents on which the UN Declaration was based was a "Declaration of Generaland Special
Rights of the Mentally Handicapped" which had been developed and adopted by the International League
of Societies for the Mentally Handicapped (ILSMHI. The League (now the InternationalLeague ofSocieties
forpersons with Mental Handicap) is a Brussels-based non-governmental organization which was founded
In 1960 to promote the Interests of the mentally handicapped. Its membership Is drawn from over 60
countries. A study carried out in co-operation with the League In 1974-1975 reached the conclusion that no
country in the world had then implemented alt the rights set forth in the UN Declaration for any of its
ARTICLE 1
The mentally retarded person has, to the
maximum degree of feasibility, the same
rights as other human beings.
Is the mentally retarded child provided with the same right to life,
including the same medical life-saving remedies at birth and later,
as another child?
Is the basic right to have a caring parent or parent surrogate,
who provides both nurture and advocacy, supported to the same
extent as for a normal child? Can a retarded child be adopted?
Is the retarded child entitled to education for at least the same
number of years as other children?
Is the mentally retarded adult permitted to vote unless he or she
has been specifically found ineligible under a general law specifying
when the franchise may be denied?
Is the retarded person given the same help and protection by the
police as are other citizens?
Is the retarded person advised of his rights and responsibilities as
a citizen in ways which he can understand?
the members of the police force oriented to understand the
retarded person's behaviour?
If charged with a crime, is the retarded person presumed inno¬
cent until proven otherwise? Is this presumption accepted by the
general public and the police?
groups of retarded persons or individuals often refused the
use of public premises such as playgrounds, buses, restaurants,
etc., simply on the grounds that they are "different" or perhaps
disconcerting to other clientele?
Is there any kind of "oversight agent" to assure that basic rights
are enforced?
ARTICLE 2
The mentally retarded person has a right to
proper medical care and physical therapy
and to such education, training, rehabilita¬
tion and guidance as will enable him to
develop his ability and maximum potential.
Is there a maternal and child health service which reaches all ex¬
pectant mothers and their infants with prenatal care, well-baby
care, and early intervention for infants who appear to be "at risk"?
Is the medical care given to infants and children who are known
to be handicapped of as high quality as is given to children believed
to be "normal"?
Is the same quality of dental care, immunization, routine screen¬
ing for hearing and vision impairments, and the like, provided for
retarded as well as for other children? Is this quality the same in
the various clinics, group practices and special residential facilities?
Do foster parents who care for retarded persons have access to
medical care for them of the same quality as they would expect to
secure for their own family members? Do foster children in fact
receive equal care?
retarded persons given doses of tranquilizing drugs in excess
of those given to persons not considered retarded? Is this done for
the convenience of the persons caring for them, to make them
more docile?
a mentally retarded person with an ordinary physical
disorder or disease requiring hospitalization be admitted and
receive the same quality of care, degree of attention to his comfort
and wishes, and the same privileges of having visitors, etc, as other
citizens having the same illness?
Are the rights of the retarded person respected to the extent that
he is encouraged to participate in decisions about his treatment to
the full degree of his understanding? Are explanations of conditions
and proposed treatments made to him in language he is most likely
to understand? If he cannot participate, is his parent or guardian
fully informed and consulted?
If there are free public schools for normal children, are there also
free school programmes especially suited to the needs of the
retarded of the same ages which are sufficient in quantity, quality,
geographical distribution and accessibility? If parents pay tuition for
normal children, do they have to pay more for education of their
retarded children? Are there provisions for even the most severely
and profoundly retarded who live at home?
the educational provisions for children in residential facilities
at least as extensive and suitable as for those living in natural
homes? And vice versa?
Is the education programme oriented toward developing social in¬
dependence (as far as possible) for the retarded person? Are there
programmes leading to appropriate employment in economically
valued jobs which actually exist in the economy of the country?
Does the fact of having been in a special school or class cause
discrimination in employment unrelated to the person's actual abili¬
ty to do the job?
Are there programmes for the proper preparation of teachers,
therapists, counselors and physicians to meet the needs of the pre¬
sent and future services?
ARTICLE 3
The mentally retarded person has a right to
economic security and to a decent standard
of living. He has a right to perform produc¬
tive work or to engage in any other mean¬
ingful occupation to the fullest possible ex¬
tent of his capabilities.
there barriers daws, attitudes) which prevent a mentally
retarded person from obtaining a job which he is capable of perfor¬
ming?
Are there circumstances under which he may be paid less than
another person for an equal amount of work?
persons in residential facilities who work regularly at tasks
which contribute to the running of the facility (janitorial work, kit¬
chen work, etc, beyond what would be their share in their own
homes) paid a fair wage for this work? Are they permitted to keep
at least part of their earnings for their personal use (rather than
paying it all toward the cost of food and shelter at the facility)?
If a retarded adult is unable to earn at least as much as would be
considered a "living wage" for another worker, is there a system
(social insurance, compensation) which permits him to receive a
regular income from public funds as a matter of right?
Is the social insurance or assistance benefit sufficient, consider¬
ing the additional costs of living which handicaps may impose?
Are there family allowances or "invalidity" allowances paid to the
parents (as well as foster parents) who maintain their child at
home, to assist them in meeting the extra costs of caring for such
a child, as compared to a normal child? Are similar allowances
available for disabled adults?
Is there a national health service or a national system of paying
for health care such that the services of hospitals, clinics, physi¬
cians, etc. are either free or available at a cost no greater than a
non-handicapped person would pay?
there adequate insurance (or other alternative) against
unemployment ? Does the mentally retarded worker have the same
rights as other workers?
If there are laws which require or favour the employment of han¬
dicapped peisons, are the mentally retarded also covered by these
provisions?
If the retarded adult needs further training (vocational or other
adult education) is it available to him on a basis at least com¬
parable to other persons?
ARTICLE 4
Whenever possible the mentally retarded
person should live with his own family or
with foster parents and participate in dif¬
ferent forms of community life. The family
with which he lives should receive
assistance. If care in an institution becomes
necessary, it should be provided in surroun¬
dings and other circumstances as close as
possible to those of normal life.
Do physicians, teachers and other professional persons who ad¬
vise the family give the family encouragement to keep their child
with them? Is practical help given to make this more feasible?
Are parents and foster parents respected as the people who have
the first responsibility for the care, nurture and education of their
retarded child as for their normal child?
Do professional people share their knowledge of the child's condi¬
tion and potentials for growth with the parents or foster parents,
and assist them to understand how to foster growth in accordance
with such potentials?
community recreation and leisure time facilities open to
retarded persons? Is any effort made to provide adapted program¬
mes (for example, special swimming fessons)? Are these facilities
physically accessible (free of architectural barriers) to retarded per¬
sons with physical handicaps? Are the churches and religious
organizations open and receptive to retarded persons? Are public
attitudes accepting of people who are different?
If residential care is provided other than in natural homes and
foster family homes, are the facilities homelike? Are they situated
in residential areas? Are the conditions of living such as to en¬
courage the retarded residents to become as personally indepen¬
dent as possible, and to make choices for themselves in respect to
activities, friends, articles of personal use, clothing, etc.? Does the
individual have a choice among alternative arrangements? Does
this include a choice to have a single room or to choose with
whom he will share quarters? If he is unable to make a choice for
himself, does his personal representative have an opportunity to do
so?
Do such facilities accommodate persons of both sexes? Are they
convenient to local transportation? Do the conditions encourage
the retarded residents to participate in community activities and to
behave in as culturally normative a way as is compatible with the
degree of handicap?
residential facilities distributed in the various residential
neighbourhoods so that there is not an excessive concentration in
any one area and so that the residents have opportunity for infor¬
mal interaction with neighbours and normal peer groups?
Are the families of residents actively encouraged to visit frequent¬
ly and informally the retarded member who is living away from
home? Does he have something to say about when and how he
visits them?
steps taken to minimize expressions of prejudice or
discrimination by neighbours toward retarded persons living
or moving into apartments, hostels, etc. in the community?
architectural barriers to persons with physical handicaps
reduced to a minimum?
there appropriate daytime activities outside the home for per¬
sons who are too handicapped to be employed for wages?
ARTICLE 5
The mentally retarded person has a right to a
qualified guardian, when this is required, to
protect his personal well-being and interests.
18

lly retarded persons
hey observed ?
mentally retarded citizens, nor any of the rights fully for all of Its retarded citizens. Consequently, the
League set up a task group to prepare materials which would help its member societies to initiate steps
toward the implementation of these rights in their respective countries, the first step being to make a
careful analysis of the extent to which the rights were currently observed in practice. On this double page,
the Unesco Courier presents the text of the United Nations Declaration, accompanied by a series of
searching questions drawn up by the League's task group. We hope that these, questions will draw
Increased attention to the condition ofmentally handicappedpersons and will help readers to work out for
themselves how well each major right is being applied in their country.
Is there a formal procedure for determining whether a person is
impaired in such a way as to require a guardian (limited or plenary)
and does such procedure provide for (1) evidence to be presented
both for and against the finding, (2) legal representation for the
retarded person, (3) adequate professional evaluation of his specific
capacities and deficits relative to his making appropriate decisions
for himself in his own interest and according to his own
preferences?
Is the legal procedure to declare a mentally retarded person in
need of guardianship, or the actual appointment of a guardian, as
the case may be, costiy, or are provisions made for these pro¬
cedures to be carried out without cost to the person or his family?
a person identified as mentally retarded becomes of age, is
he necessarily presumed to be incompetent? Is he so treated by
parents and others without objective verification?
happens to a mentally retarded person when he is orphan¬
ed or has no family or is abandoned by his family? Are active in¬
terventions assured in this situation? Are there alternatives to ad¬
mission to an institution?
Are there available persons qualified to act as guardians of in¬
dividuals when no appropriate relative or friend offers?
there public or private agencies legally authorized to in¬
tervene on behalf of mentally retarded persons where their welfare
is threatened?
Do specific guardianship societies for the mentally retarded exist
independent of agencies providing care and training? Are there pro¬
grammes to assure the appointment of a guardian (limited or
plenary) if needed?
there other forms of public or private advocacy of retarded
persons apart horn or instead of, guardianship? Is there active
recruitment of volunteers to act as guardians or as "citizen ad¬
vocates"?
there any public officer who acts as guardian either in an
emergency or when no other is available?
Are the directors of institutions or other persons who serve the
retarded professionally considered ineligible to act also as guar¬
dians of their clients/patients?
there legal provisions to assure that the person entrusted
with the guardianship of a mentally retarded person does not
neglect the person or mismanage his funds? Are there special
follow-up programmes for mentally retarded people who have been
found in need of guardianship?
Is it possible to separate guardianship of the person and guar¬
dianship of property?
Are there provisions for "limited guardianship", i.e. assignment of
decision-making responsibilities to the guardian only to the extent
necessary in the individual case?
Is a seriously incapacitated person who has some residual capaci¬
ty to make decisions allowed to take advantage of that capacity?
ARTICLE 6 (first part)
The mentally retarded person must be pro¬
tected from every kind of exploitation,
degrading treatment and abuse.
Do the regular protective services for abandoned, neglected or or¬
phaned children extend equally to retarded children?
nurses, physicians and social workers show equal zeal in
reporting cases of child neglect or abuse, or malnutrition, etc. for
retarded children as for others? For those in institutions also?
Are professional protective workers instructed to deal with the
retarded and how to do it?
Are mentally retarded children or adults exhibited or exposed to
visitations by members of the public or by the press or professional
workers under circumstances which would be considered inap¬
propriate in a regular public school or hospital?
Are retarded pupils given the least desirable classrooms in the
school buildings, or usually expected to use buildings abandoned
for use by normal people?
"labeling" applied for purposes other than constructive
diagnosis and prescriptive programming or scientific study?
Are there places where the surroundings of the retarded persons
are made visibly humiliating such as by the use of bars on win¬
dows or by requiring the retarded persons to be seen by strangers
in inferior clothing, or not clothed?
Are reporters or comedians rebuked when or if they use insulting
language in referring to the mentally retarded, or if they make slur¬
ring jokes?
ARTICLE 6 (second part)
...If prosecuted for any offence, he shall
have a right to due process of law with full
recognition being given to his degree of
mental responsibility.
Is the mentally retarded person entitled to all the legal safeguards
due to any other citizen accused of a crime?
Is the person who is recognized as mentally retarded and who is
unable to understand police and judicial procedures afforded proper
assistance in the exercise of his rights?
Do the police receive any training and guidance in the recognition
and pre-trial handling of mentally retarded persons suspected of
crime?
Does the mentally retarded person have a right to the presence
of a lawyer, relative, or friend during the course of any police inter¬
rogation? Does he (or his guardian or parent) have an opportunity
to choose the person who will represent him?
Does he have a right to the guiding hand of counsel (lawyer) at
every stage of a criminal proceeding?
In any prosecutorial proceedings, is a person believed to be men¬
tally retarded entitled to a diagnosis and evaluation of his social
capability by qualified experts?
Does that evaluation include a determination as to whether he is
"fit to stand trial" Ce. mentally competent to understand pro¬
ceedings and assist his counsel in his defence)?
If found not fit to stand trial, is the retarded person entitled to a
reasonably prompt opportunity to have a trial or to have the
charges against him withdrawn?
if the retarded person (charged with crime but found not fit to
stand trial) is diverted to civil authorities on grounds of his alleged
dangerousness, is he entitled to proper legal safeguards to the
same extent as any other alleged "dangerous" person not accused
or convicted of any crime?
At a criminal trial, is the mentally retarded person entitled to the
defence of "diminished mental responsibility" or similar defence to
mitigate or excuse from punishment in such cases in which the
person lacked the mental capacity to form a criminal purpose, or
had some such degree of incapacity?
If convicted of a crime, or if otherwise placed in custody, is the
mentally retarded person entitled to receive treatment in the least
restrictive setting suited to his needs, his degree of responsibility
and the public's safety?
If placed under custody (except for a specified short period of
time), is he entitled to an automatic periodic review and a right of
appeal to independent, higher authorities?
ARTICLE 7
Whenever mentally retarded persons are
unable, because of the severity of their han¬
dicap, to exercise all their rights in a mean¬
ingful way or it should become necessary to
restrict or deny some or all of these rights,
the procedure used for that restriction or
denial of rights must contain proper legal
safeguards against every form of abuse. This
procedure must be based on an evaluation of
the social capability of the mentally retarded
person by qualified experts and must be sub¬
ject to periodic review and the right of
appeal to higher authorities.
Before any procedures to deny or restrict rights are initiated, are
other less restrictive or non-restrictive procedures fully considered,
such as those which provide him with counseling, advice, or social
and emotional support for his own decision-making and action?
Before any restriction is considered, is an evaluation made of his
social capabilities as related specifically to his ability to exercise the
right in question having in mind that many citizens are expected to
make decisions for themselves which do entail risk and which may
not always have the most desirable results? If rights are to be res¬
tricted, is the determination of need for such restriction preceded
by a careful evaluation of the retarded person's specific capabilities
which is carried out by experts in the evaluation of social compe¬
tence in persons who are mentally retarded? Is the expert evalua¬
tion interdisciplinary?
a person is found incapable of exercising certain rights, is
this finding based on essential protection, i.e. is the restriction
necessary to protect the individual himself or others from signifi¬
cant harm?
Is any restriction which is imposed limited only to the specific
activities (i.e. exercise of specific rights) in respect to which the
person has been found incapacitated, leaving to him those rights he
may prudently be allowed to exercise?
If some restriction is so required, is the restriction carried out in a
way which imposes the minimum degree of constraint needed to
accomplish 'its purpose? (i.e. limited guardianship rather than ple¬
nary guardianship; supervision rather than committment, commu¬
nity based rather than institutional care, if possible, etc.)
Does the retarded person, his family, or other interested person
receive prior notice in advance of any serious restrictive procee¬
dings?
Is the person, his family, or his friends entitled to the assistance
of advocates to act on behalf of the mentally retarded person in
any proceedings?
Does the retarded person have access to a qualified representa¬
tive (attorney, advocate) whose interests do not conflict with his
own?
Are the opportunities to ask for reconsideration or independent
review of any restriction, both at the time imposed and later,
appropriate to the degree and duration of the restriction? Is there
also automatic periodic review?
if the rights involved are fundamental ones, are the proceedings
judicial in character?
the mentally retarded person or his representative have
opportunities of submitting information to the tribunal, appearing
before it, and challenging information submitted by others?
Is the retarded person or his representative informed of his right
to appeal and given assistance, legal and otherwise, in exercising
that right?
Does the retarded person (or his natural advocate, e.g. relative,
general guardian) have a right to select the attorney or other per¬
sons who may represent him in such proceedings?
Congress Proceedings. 7th World Congress of
the ILSMH oh Mental Handicap. Edited by
Lebenshilfe für Behinderte, Österreichischer
Dachverhand © 1978 ILSMH
19
