The prophetic vision
of Simón Bolívar
Simón Bolívar (1783-1830)

by Manuel Maldonado-Denis
SIMON Bolivar, the "Liberator", always be¬
lieved that the freedom of the peoples of
America would never be fully achieved if
it did not include Cuba and Puerto Rico in its
liberating embrace. Without the liberation of
Cuba and Puerto Rico, those last "two jewels
of the Spanish crown", efforts to rid the conti¬
nent of the colonialist scourge would remain
incomplete, in addition to which the in¬
dependence of the Latin American peoples
would be everlastingly threatened by what
Marti, years later, was to describe as the tiger
perpetually stalking the peoples of what, with
his acute historical vision, he called "Our
America".
Bolivar was by no means unaware of the
hopes and aspirations of the peoples of the
Caribbean. On the contrary, his wide-ranging
revolutionary action was largely shaped by his
Caribbean experience. For example, we know
of his exile in Jamaica and of his celebrated
"Letter from Jamaica" of 1815, in which he
outlined his historical plan for the continent
and included Cuba and Puerto Rico in his il¬
lustrious scheme of things. We also know of
his representations to the Haitian revolutionary
Petion and of his pledge to free the black slaves
on Venezuelan soil. The Liberator was utterly
committed to seeing the whole of Latin
America freed from Spanish colonialism.
In this context, the famous "Letter from
Jamaica", which he wrote in Kingston on
6 September 1815, should be highlighted. In it,
he wrote: "The islands of Cuba and Puerto Rico
whose populations, taken together, must
amount to some seven to eight hundred thou¬
sand people, are the most peaceful posses¬
sions of the Spanish because they are out of
touch with the independent nations. But surely
those islanders are American too? Are they
not humiliated? Do they not seek well-
being?" In fact, what Bolivar was doing here
was to call for the liberation of Cuba and
Puerto Rico since their inhabitants were peo¬
ple belonging to the concert of Latin
American nations, and at that early stage in
the liberation struggle, when it was difficult
even to start to see the triumph of the in¬
surrectionist forces, Bolivar's vision was
inspired.
Reliable historical evidence exists to show
that Bolivar never abandoned his commit¬
ment to seeing Cuba and Puerto Rico
become free and sovereign nations. The
Liberator even visualized the setting-up of a
military expedition to liberate the two
islands, but the domestic and international
situation prevented him from carrying out
his plan.
It should not be forgotten that at the time
Bolivar's revolution was in its infancy, pro¬
duction throughout the Caribbean was bas¬
ed on the enslavement of the negroes. The
only exception was that of the Republic of
Haiti, whose glorious epic of emancipation
from slavery culminated in the achievement
of independence. A significant consequence
of this was that, as one of the conditions
agreed with Haitian president Petion, in
return for Haitian support for the Latin
American independence struggle Simón
Bolívar undertook to free all negro slaves in
the liberated continental territories.
Bolivar also conceived the idea of the
Great Congress which was to take place in
Panama in 1826. The aim of this Congress
was to unite all the Latin American peoples
in a great federation of free and sovereign
peoples. But the United States was opposed
to the independence of Cuba and Puerto
Rico and accordingly frustrated Bolivar's
historic plan.'
Bolivar was a Venezuelan aristocrat who
was prepared to abandon all he possessed in
the cause of the freedom of what he called
"Southern America", a Southern America
that had ethnic and cultural features of its
own which distinguished it from the other
America, that of the North. The Liberator ex¬
tended his internationalist and Latin
Americanist view of things over the Carib¬
bean, a racial and cultural kaleidoscope on
which all the great empires of the period had
converged. The liberation of Cuba and Puer¬
to Rico was part of Bolivar's grand design,
but forces that were too strong even for his
extraordinary capacity for revolutionary ac¬
tion prevented him from seeing this part of
his vision fulfilled.
As the enemy of slavery and servitude,
Bolivar laid the groundwork for the eradica¬
tion of slave labour and slavery on the conti¬
nent. The great revolutionary example he set
paved the way for the future both of the
countries which he had liberated and of
those that were still fighting for their
freedom.
The history of the Caribbean would not be
the same without the thought and action of
Simón Bolívar. But, even today, there are
Caribbean peoples which have not yet suc¬
ceeded in transforming Bolivar's ideals into
reality. This is why, two hundred years later,
Bolivar's ideology is still relevant. Marti was
not mistaken when he said that "there is still
work for Bolivar in America".
MANUEL MALDONADO-DENIS, Puerto Rican
essayist, is professor of political science at the
social sciences faculty of the University of Puerto
Rico. He is the author of many essays about his
country, notably Puerto Rico, Mito y Realidad
(Puerto Rico, Myth and Reality).
15
