Science,
pseudo-science and racism
by Albert Jacquard
MAN'S spontaneous and apparently
natural reaction to a setback is to
find the culprit, who necessarily
has to be someone else, or "other" people.
In a similar situation a group will react by at¬
tributing its misfortunes to some other
group or, preferably, to a sub-group of its
own kind."
These instinctive, infantile, cowardly reac¬
tions bear no relation to a reasoned analysis
of events in the real world and their causes,
but they seem to be so widespread and so
persistent that there are few grounds to
hope that they can be made to disappear. If,
in spite of everything, we must keep this
hope alive, we can only to do so through
"science", a somewhat solemn name for the
efforts of the human mind to understand the
real world.
Strangely, it is in the name of science that
overtly racist attitudes are beginning to re-
emerge in certain Western societies. People
refer to "recent biological discoveries" or to
"the latest genetic research" as justification
for their attempts to classify men in certain
categories or "races", and above all to com¬
pare these races according to various criteria
and to rank them in hierarchies.
However, what scientists are actually say¬
ing, especially those working in genetics,
the discipline most directly concerned, runs
counter to any such claim. Any attempt to
make biology serve as a basis for elitist
theories is rooted in a fundamental
misconception, whether the "elite" consists
of certain individuals within each group, or
of certain groups in themselves.
It is essential, therefore, that scientists
should in the present circumstances speak
out, for it is their duty to describe clearly and
ALBERT JACQUARD, French geneticist,
teaches at the universities of Paris VI and Geneva,
and is head of the genetics department of
France's National Institute of Demographic
Studies (INED) in Paris. Among his published
works are Genetics of Human Populations,
Freeman Cooper and Co., San Francisco, 1978.
23

The Arabic word for dice, az-zahr, gave its name to a once-popular
game called Hazard. As its name implies. Hazard is a game of
chance, like all dice-games, since it is impossible to know exactly
how the dice will fall. Or is it? If only we knew much more about the
phenomena involved in throwing a dice then perhaps if would be
possible to predict the result of each throw, thus removing the ele¬
ment of chance from the game. This may seem a far-fetched idea but
it serves to highlight the infinitely more complex processes involved
when we "dice with life". According to Albert Jacquard the number
of potential variations involved in the transmission of genes by
parents to their children is so immense that we may never know
enough to exclude the element of chance from our understanding of
the process, and must predict its outcome on the basis of probability.
Drawing from Le Second Souffle de la Créativité. Marthe Seguin/ Fontes. © Dessain and Tolra publishers. Pans
^ publicize the discoveries made in their
disciplines. Reasoned arguments, unswayed
by sentiment, are needed to combat the dif¬
ferent forms of racism. For this, clarity is
vitally important, so we must carefully
define the terms we use.
To be "racist" is to despise someone else
simply because he belongs to a group. This
group may be defined by many different
criteria: colour of skin, language, religion,
genetic inheritance or cultural heritage. And
so it is more realistic to talk of racisms rather
than racism. The first requisite of each form
of racism is a definition, firstly of how to
classify people into relatively homogeneous
and distinct categories, and secondly, of
how to establish a scale of values applicable
24
to these categories. In other words, the dif¬
ferent "races" must first be defined, and
then ranked in a hierarchy.
In the case of a species which has
gradually become differentiated into
definitively and strictly separate populations
as a result of a series of separations, the gap
between the genetic or cultural structures of
two populations widens as they move fur¬
ther in time from the initial split. It is thus
possible to attempt to reconstitute the
genealogy of these successive separations,
taking as a starting point the structures
which can be observed today.
On the other hand, when the history of a
species does not take the form of a tree
which has become progressively differen¬
tiated, resembling instead a network of
amalgamations and exchanges between
distinct populations (i.e. migrations), this at¬
tempted reconstitution is doomed to failure,
save in exceptional cases. Our knowledge of
the present state of the groups does not
allow the steps which have led to this state
to be retraced. In the case of the human
species, which is remarkable for its
nomadism, this difficulty is particularly
great.
To be sure, geographical distance has
prevented exchanges between populations
living on opposite sides of the globe; migra- .
tions have come up against sometimes in¬
superable natural obstacles; cultural dif-

ferences have raised barriers and isolated
certain groups genetically. But the history of
human populations is so intertwined that
none can be described without reference to
its exchanges with many others. Little by lit¬
tle, each has come to be related to the
others. At the same time, natural processes
(the foremost being that of sexual reproduc¬
tion) have given. rise to and sustained a
remarkable degree of diversity within each
population.
Mankind is an aggregate of persons,
families, ethnic groups, and nations, all of
them different. But these differences can
only be classified at the cost of an arbitrary
impoverishment of our view of individuals
and groups. The most rigorous form of
classification concerns genetic inheritances:
the degree of frequency with which various
genes occur in each of two populations be¬
ing seen as a token of the degree of
dissimilarity between these populations.
If confined to a small number of genes,
the attempt at classification will soon pro¬
duce results, but they will vary from one
group of genes to another. If, for example,
we take the genes responsible for the syn¬
thesis of melanin, a pigment which ac¬
cumulates in the skin and gives it a dark col¬
ouring, we find that, where these genes are
concerned, blacks differ very greatly from
yellow or white people.
As for the genes responsible for the activi¬
ty of lactase, the enzyme which makes it
possible to digest milk, they are very fre¬
quent among North European populations,
slightly less so in the Mediterranean region,
but very rare in Asia and Africa. The
classification of people into two groups,
based on the frequency of these genes,
would set the Europeans apart from people
from the other continents.
In the case of two biological charac¬
teristics whose genetic mechanism is well
known, the Rhesus blood system and the
HL-A immunological system, both result in a
classification of people into two groups,
with Asiatics and Eskimos on one side, and
Indo-Europeans and Black Africans on the
other.
Depending upon the criteria selected
skin colour, persistence of lactase, or im¬
munological "systems" our view of the
relations between the three major human
groups classically referred to alters com¬
pletely: it may arbitrarily be claimed that the
populations of Europe resemble those of
Africa more closely than those of Asia, or
the reverse.
This is because the history of humanity
cannot be expressed in the form of a pro¬
gressively ramified tree. Instead, it consists
in a network of exchanges, mergers and
separations. It is therefore a mistake to try to
devise a classification that can have no
global validity.
The impossibility of devising such a
classification is confirmed by research which
is not based on some arbitrarily selected
characteristics, but on a synthesis of infor¬
mation concerning all the different
characteristics studied.
Where many sets of genes are involved, it
is possible to express the various
resemblances and differences between the
genetic structures of two populations in
terms of "distance". The definition of race
here means attributing populations with
small distances between them to the same
group, and populations separated by a large
tmj
Biologists investigating the way in which characteristics are
transmitted from parents to children make a fundamental distinction
between what they call the genotype (the total of the genes that an
individual inherits from its parents) and the phenotype (what an in¬
dividual is: its appearance, bodily structures, etc.) Whatever happens
to an individual, its genotype does not change, whereas the
phenotype is the outcome of interaction with the environment during
the individual's growth and development. Drawing above is a
schematic representation of this process. Circles in lower part of
drawing (A) represent the genotypes of a father, mother and child. In
middle layer (B) the three are shown by silhouettes depicting their
"characters" (i.e., their phenotypes). Columns joining the circles to
the silhouettes (C) illustrate the way in which the changing
phenotype is "governed" by the unchanging genotype. Top layer (D)
symbolizes all the physical, cultural and other influences to which
the phenotype is subject from its external environment.
5 i
CO
< 5-
II
Z -
"Sil
5?
m
©I
oí
D_ 1^
^>

"The only value judgement
with any scientific backing
concerns the importance of
differences for their own
sake... The more different we
are the more I give to my
neighbour and the more I
receive from him in return".
A Neolithic artist carved a
human face in this sea-shell
from Tongsamtong (Republic
of Korea).
^ distance to two distinct groups. In the case
of human populations, this method cannot
be conclusive.
Basing his research on the best-known
blood systems, the Harvard geneticist R.
Lewoutin has shown that the distance bet¬
ween two populations belonging to different
"races" is, on average, not more than 7 or 8
per cent higher than the distance between
two populations of the same race.
In other words, if belonging to a given
race or a given nation is not without
significance as regards genetic structure, its
consequences are very limited; an Eskimo or
an African could well be closer to me
genetically than the policeman in my village.
This is not to deny the differences between
the various human groups. But the web of
similarities and dissimilarities is so intricate
that the picture becomes blurred as soon as
an attempt is made to incorporate all the
available data.
_ So the geneticist's answer, when asked
about the meaning of the word "race", is
categorical; insofar as the human species is
concerned, there can be no objective and
stable definition of this concept.
Experience shows that thé classifica¬
tion of humanity into more or less distinct
groups usually goes hand in hand with a
value judgement distinguishing the "good"
from the "bad". Thousands of examples
could be cited of writers who are convinced
that they are not racists and yet take it for
granted that their own group is the best. A
book read by several generations of French
children, Le Tour de la France par Deux En¬
fants, presents stereotyped portraits of
Whites, Blacks, Yellow people and redskins,
and affirms that "the white race is the most
perfect."
Current attempts to establish a hierarchy
of races seek to envelop themselves with an
aura of scientific respectability by making
reference to research in a variety of
disciplines, notably those concerned with
explaining the evolution of species and
those that study the various manifestations
of intellectual activity.
For over a century, explanations of evolu¬
tion have been dominated by Darwinism.
The key concept of this theory is that of the
survival of the fittest; those individuals best
26
fitted for the "struggle for life" have the best
chances of surviving and transmitting their
genetic inheritance to the next generation.
According to this theory, the biological
structure of the population undergoes
transformation as a result of this inequality
of individual capacities, desirable
characteristics spread, and undesirable ones
gradually die out.
When, thanks to the Austrian botanist
Gregor Mendel, it was understood that sex-
ed beings transmit not their characteristics
but the genes governing these charac¬
teristics, it became necessary to modify this
theory and to attribute a "selective value"
not to the individuals or to their
characteristics but to the genes they
possess. Darwinism was supplanted by neo-
Darwinism whose approach is basically the
same.
However, the attribution of a "value" to
people or to genes can be highly misleading.
By definition, this value corresponds ex¬
clusively to the gene's ability to transmit its
biological inheritance, i.e. to procreate
children. Individuals who die without off¬
spring are thus "of no selective value". To
classify them as "inferior beings" is to con¬
fuse their selective value and their value as
human beings.
This blunder has been made many times
by those who have extrapolated a social
Darwinism from the original biological Dar¬
winism, and have advocated a type of soci¬
ety in which the powerful must "naturally"
prevail over the weak. Contemporary
Western thought has been deeply influenc¬
ed by this kind of reasoning, which many
regard as dictated by "the laws of nature".
The fact is, however, that nature really
teaches us the exact opposite of this hierar¬
chical vision.
One of the consequences of natural selec¬
tion ought apparently to be the gradual stan¬
dardization of populations. Since the
"good" drive out the "bad", in due course
only the best genes remain, and there is less
diversity. Now, analysis of the genetic in¬
heritance of various species shows, on the
the contrary, that this diversity is maintain¬
ed. One unexpected discovery made by
biologists, which has gradually been con¬
firmed over the last ten or fifteen years, is
the extent of "polymorphism", the ex
istence of a wide field of variation within a
given population.
This discovery has led to a fundamental
revision of neo-Darwinism. This revision has
taken two directions: certain scientists are
developing a "neutralist" theory, from
which the concept of selective value has
been eliminated; others retain the concept
but give it a much more complex definition,
giving weight to the interaction of several
genes on a single characteristic. In either
case, this revision renders obsolete all
reasoning based on the existence of a scale
of values according to which individuals,
characteristics or genes may be set in a
hierarchy.
The mechanisms at work in nature do not
select the best and weed out the less good:
they preserve the sustained coexistence of a
wide variety of characteristics. If we are to
learn from nature, then we ought to rank ,
groups not according to the quality of their
characteristics, but according to the variety
of these characteristics. The "best" group is
the one that has managed to preserve the
greatest diversity, whatever the content of
this diversity.
Our judgements on our fellow men often
concern their psychological rather than their
physical characteristics. It is the role of the
psychologist to define with greater precision,
the various traits of the personality, and for
nearly a century now. Western
psychologists have sought to turn their
discipline, with all its nuances and subtle
distinctions, into a "scientific" discipline.
For this, they have introduced quan¬
titative criteria. In particular, they have
popularized the intelligence quotient, or I Q,
a parameter that supposedly measures the
activity of our intelligence. Admittedly,
psychologists themselves denounce the
abuses that have arisen in connexion with
the cult of I Q. Even so, this quotient figures
prominently in many misconceived
arguments; it serves to justify often harsh
decisions concerning children's school
careers, and it has been the crux of the con¬
troversy provoked in the United States by
the revival of a certain kind of racism.
This is not to deny the usefulness of the
concept of I Q. But it is necessary to define
the limits of its significance: I Q indicates the
position of an an individual on an arbitrarily
defined scale of reference within a given
population, at a specific moment in time.
This indicator is extremely imprecise, and its
stability is little-known and probably low.
Despite these limitations, certain scien¬
tists have used I Q to compare human
populations. The most famous study is the
one conducted by the American
psychologist Arthur Jensen, who in 1969
compared Blacks and Whites in the United
States and concluded that there was a
15-point differential in favour of the latter.
This conclusion depends upon the factors
to which the observed difference is at¬
tributed. This involves a delicate genetic
concept known as inheritability. Certain
psychologists have totally misunderstood
this concept: they have forgotten that the
inheritability of I Q merely measures a
resemblance and have used it to attribute
I Q differentials between populations to
genetic factors.
This is not to deny the influence of
genetic inheritance on a characteristic such
as intellectual activity. Clearly, the medium
for this activity, namely the central nervous

system, is produced from the genetic in¬
heritance, but its ontogenesis also requires
the intervention of the environment. The
outcome will depend upon the way they in¬
teract. But to try to measure the relative in¬
fluence of each is meaningless.
Thus it is impossible to base a classifica¬
tion of the "intellectual potential" of dif¬
ferent human groups on observable intellec¬
tual performance, or even to ascribe observ¬
ed variations, as certain doctrinaire thinkers
have tried to do, to genetic differences.
The very concept of intellectual potential
is indefinable. Attempts to establish a hierar¬
chy of races on the basis of this criterion are
not just mistaken: they are absurd. Ex¬
perience unfortunately shows that it is
harder to combat an absurdity than to clear
up a mistake.
The chief lesson to be learned from
genetics is that the groups to which we
belong do indeed differ from each other, but
that the individuals within each of these
groups are even more different still.
The only value judgement with any scien¬
tific backing concerns the importance of dif¬
ferences for their own sake, without at¬
taching a plus or a minus sign to these dif¬
ferences. I am neither superior nor inferior to
anybody else; I am different from
everybody; the more different we are, the
more I give to my neighbour and the more I
receive from him in return.
This is not an assertion dictated by a
moral system; it is the central lesson of
genetics. It is a serious matter that this
lesson should have been distorted to justify
racist doctrines. It would be easier to com¬
bat this kind of perversion of the truth if
communication between scientists and
public opinion were better organized. In this
field, the activities of Unesco could prove
decisive for the future of us all.
H Albert Jacquard
