The world
of Islam
Muslims
of
the Soviet Union
by Ziyauddin Khan Ibn Ishan Babakhan
Muslim scholars in the library of the Miri-Arab madrasah (see caption page 34)
at Bukhara, in the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic.
"You are the noblest nation that has ever
been raised up for mankind. You enjoin
justice and forbid evil. You believe in Allah. "
(The Qur'an, III: 110)
IN the Soviet Union Islam is professed by
people representing dozens of nations
and ethnic groups. The proportion of
Muslims is highest in central Asia, the
Caucasus and the Middle Volga regions.
The majority of these Muslims profess the
Islam of the Hanafite school of the Sunni
trend, but there are also Shafi'ites in the
northern Caucasus, Shi'ites in Trans¬
caucasia and Isma'ilis in the Pamirs.
Striving to build the most just and pros¬
perous society free from social conflict and
class struggle, the Muslims of the Soviet
Union scrupulously carry out all the
prescriptions and rites of their Holy Religion.
The month of Ramadan is a great and
joyful event for every Muslim. In the Islamic
tradition it is the holiest month, that of the
obligatory fast from dawn to sunset.
Muslims in the Soviet Union prepare for it in
good time. Already during the month of
Sha'ban which precedes it special sermons
are preached in the mosques by the Imam-
khatibs in which they explain the
significance of the fast.
The advent of the month of Ramadan is
marked by another important custom. From
the first days of the month groups of
children of the faithful visit the houses of
other believers to wish them health and hap¬
piness, singing traditional songs concerning
the holy month and asking Allah to send the
master of the house a lusty son. In return
the faithful lavish sweets and presents on
the children.
Muslims fast with great zeal and in exact
conformity with the prescriptions of the
Holy Qur'an; they say their prayers five
times a day and in the evening they go to the
mosque to take part in the Salat al-Tarawih
(optional prayers said only during
Ramadan). Many of the older Muslims begin
to fast two months before Ramadan which
for the Muslims of the Soviet Union is tradi¬
tionally a period when friendships and family
ties are strengthened. Grown-up children
who have their own homes or families visit
their parents and receive their blessing.
Friends and acquaintances visit one another
and a particular effort is made to ensure that
no Muslim is left without help.
This is also the time of the ancient na¬
tional rite of Iftar; a Muslim family will invite
several dozen fellow-believers to break the
fast after sundown with them and this is
often accompanied by prayers and readings
from tne Holy Qur'an by a member of the
clergy. As a result of rising standards of liv¬
ing, almost every believer manages to invite
a group of the faithful to his house at
28

least once during the month of Ramadan for
this nightly breaking of the fast.
The Lai/at al-Kadar, one of the most
revered nights in the month of Ramadan,
when Allah started to send down the Qur'an
to the Prophet Muhammad (Peace be on
Him), is celebrated by all the Muslims in the
Soviet Union. In some places it is marked by
solemn services and special sermons in the
mosques, while in others it is more of a fami¬
ly occasion with readings from the Holy
Qur'an and prayers to Allah.
On the first day of the month of Shawwal,
the month after Ramadan, begins the
solemn feast of Id al-Fitr which marks the
ending of the fast. On the eve of this feast
every Muslim contributes a Sadaka al-Fitr, a
voluntary offering originally intended for the
poor but, now that living standards have
considerably improved, are made to the
mosque to be used for benevolent purposes
such as the restoration of cultural
monuments and as contributions to the
Soviet Peace Fund.
On the feast day solemn services are con¬
ducted and famous theologians preach ser¬
mons concerning the principles of the
Islamic Faith, the need to do good and the
desire of Muslims for peace and friendship
among peoples. The celebrations also have
a worldly aspect; in the republics of central
Asia the mosques are surrounded by im¬
provised bazaars which offer various oriental
sweets, soft drinks and toys for children,
while swings and other entertainments are
also available. In the country areas horse-
riding is a popular attraction.
Another memorable feature of the fast of
Ramadan is the Khatm Qur'an, the recital of
the whole of the Holy Qur'an by heart. The
ability to recite the Holy Qur'an by heart ac¬
cording to all the rules is highly appreciated
throughout the Muslim world and Muslims
in our country have long been noted as ex¬
perts in this art. Those who can perform this
feat are given the title of Hafiz, the keepers
of the Holy Qur'an. To this day hundreds of
people keep this noble tradition alive,
displaying their skill not only during the fast
but also at the regular Friday services or on
other festive occasions. At an international
competition on the occasion of the 1,400th
anniversary of the sending down of the Holy
CONTINUED PAGE 78
MUFTI ZIYAUDDIIM KHAN IBN ISHAN
BABAKHAN, is Chairman of the Muslim Reli¬
gious Board for Central Asia and Kazakhstan, one
of four such Boards of Muslims in the USSR. A
well-known figure in the world of Islam, he has
attended many international Muslim conferences
and is a member of the Supreme Islamic Council
for Mosques at Mecca. His book Islam and the
Muslims in the Land of Soviets was published in
English by Progress Publishers in 1980, on the eve
of the 15th century of the Hegira (Hijra).
Í
Once the capital of a powerful Khanate, the ancient city of Khiva, in the Uzbek SSR, is
now preserved as a "city-museum". The old walled inner city contains palaces, mosques,
minarets and madrasahs (colleges) which, like the Kutlug Mourad Inat madrasah, seen
here at the end of a narrow stone-paved street, bear the imprint of the eastern Muslim
architectural style. .
29

MUSLIMS OF THE SOVIET UNION
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 29
Qur'an, Rakmatulla-kori Kasymov from An¬
dizhan, in the Uzbek Soviet Socialist
Republic, was named as one of the best
reciters in the whole Islamic world.
Following the example of the Prophet
Muhammad (Peace be on Him), who com¬
bined prayer and meditation with active ser¬
vice to his land and to all mankind, the
Muslims of the Soviet Union combine ser¬
vice to Allah and the observance of religious
rites with due and conscientious fulfilment
of the social obligations deriving from their
sacred duty towards the people of their
country and to all men.
The World Muslim Congress has publish¬
ed a number of pamphlets on Islamic
teachings in the modern world. One of
them, dedicated to the Daruriyat Sitta, the
six basic requirements of Islam concerning
food, clothing, housing, education, health
and security, stresses in particular that "It is
the duty of every Muslim State to guarantee
the satisfaction of these basic needs for all
its citizens, both Muslim and non-Muslim."
A Muslim State which does not do so, says
the author of this pamphlet, fails in its
Islamic duty. On the other hand, if the policy
of a non-Muslim State conforms to the six
basic requirements of Islam, points out the
author, it fulfils to a considerable extent the
tasks inherent in Islam.
One cannot but agree with this point of
view. Indeed, a non-Muslim State which,
like the Soviet Union, grants its Muslims
freedom of religion so that they can adhere
to its canons and helps them rise to the level
of modern civilization from a state of
political dependence and economic
backwardness does greatly contribute to the
goals of Islam.
Ziyauddin Khan Ibn Ishan Babakhan
