The Sunna: the Guiding Voice of Tradition
The Sunna (the word means custom, use and wont)
comprises the deeds and utterances of the Prophet
Muhammad and acts and sayings to which he gave his
unspoken approval during his ministry.
Second in authority only to the Qur'an, it consists
essentially of the Prophet's commentaries on the
Qur'an and of rules of conduct laid down for the entire
Islamic Community.
Known also as the Hadith (tradition of the Prophet),
the Sunna was the source of a host of practical rules
by which judges were guided during the earlier cen¬
turies of Islam before the codification of the corpus of
Islamic law. Even today it continues to be a source of
law in many countries which apply, whether wholly or
in part, the Shari'a, or Holy Law of Islam.
Muhammad made a clear distinction between the
Qur'an, the word of God dictated to him by the angel
Gabriel which could not be altered even in the slightest
detail, and the inspiration which prompted him in his
daily life to words or acts approved by God. Sometimes
a revelation would correct a decision made by the Pro¬
phet himself. The Prophet personally supervised the
collation of the Qur'an, but not of theiHadith.
At first, the Sunna was handed down from memory
by the companions of the Prophet. Some of them, like
Abd'Allah Ibn Amr and Anas Ibn Malik, noted down the
Prophet's words and actions during his lifetime, others
did so only after his death. Most of them, however,
passed on their knowledge orally to their disciples.
Sometimes, to resolve a legal or moral problem, a
precedent would be sought in the life of the Prophet on
which a decision could be based.
The early generations of Muslims felt the need to col¬
late and authenticate the Hadith of the Prophet. Many
"traditionists", or scholars of the Sunna, set out to col¬
lect the oral traditions, often travelling great distances
to receive them at first hand from those to whom they
had been directly transmitted.
The body of the Tradition soon swelled considerably.
In some cases Hadith were invented to give credence
to a particular view or doctrine, and in others, through
an excess of piety, edifying sayings or moral teachings
were falsely lent the authority of the Prophet's name.
Towards the second century of the Hijra, therefore, it
became essential to authenticate each Hadith by
establishing a chain of transmission beginning with the
last authority and ending with the original authority, a
task which developed into a discipline in its own right.
Biographical studies were made of the people who
figured in these chains of transmission in which their
antecedents, ideas, doctrines and degrees of honesty
were examined so as to allow an assessment to be
made of the reliability of their words.
Thus every Hadith came to consist of two parts the
Isnad, which consisted of the names of the persons
who handed on the substance of the tradition to one
another, and the Matn, or text of the tradition itself, as
in the following example :
(i) Isnad : Al-Homaidi told us that according to Sufian,
on the authority of Yah'ya Ibn Said el-Ansari, that
Muhammad Ibn Ibrahim at-Taimi had informed him that
he had heard Alqama Ibn Waqqas al-Laithi say: "I
heard Umar Ibn Khattab" (may God be pleased with
him) say from the minbar (pulpit) that he had heard the
Messenger of God (peace be upon Him) express himself
in these words:
nil Matn: "An action can be judged only by its
intention."
Six great collections of Hadith are recognized as
authoritative the Sahih (authentic collections) of al-
Bukhari and of Muslim, and the Sunan (traditions) of
Abu Oawud, al-Tirmidhi, al-Nasa'i and Ibn Madja, all of
which were compiled during the 3rd century of the
Hijra (9th century ADV
