A rogues' gallery
of fakes
Text © Copyright.
Reproduction Prohibited
THE history of forgery and imitation goes
back many centuries. The Roman
appreciation of Greek Classical sculpt¬
ure in stone and bronze prompted extensive
imitation that is now extremely difficult to
detect, while blatant forgery of early silver
coins from many cultures in the Empire was
recorded in verse by the Roman poet
Phaedrus during the reign of the Emperor
Augustus.
Coinage has always been a prime target
for debasement because of the immediate
financial rewards that result. We find early
examples of counterfeiting amongst the
subject peoples of the Roman Empire, par¬
ticularly in Britain. Around AD 198, during
the reign of Severus, the silver denarius was
already debased by the addition of about
42 per cent copper, but imitators took the
devaluation much further. We also know
from excavated clay moulds impressed from
original coinage that the folk of Whitchurch
in Somerset (U.K.), during the last quarter
of the third century AD, produced their own
silver antoniniani once official minting in the
area had ceased.
Attitudes to fakes and the reasons for
their existence have changed many times in
the past. Roman materialism seems to have
been very akin to that of our present genera-
by Stuart J. Fleming
tion while in the medieval era there was a
greater interest in an item's subject matter
than its age.
The year 1524 marks the earliest
documentation of forgery amongst Euro¬
pean paintings, in Pietro Summonte's
discussion of the activities of a Neapolitan
artist, Colantonio, some seventy years
earlier. A portrait of the Duke of Burgundy
was so well reproduced that the merchant-
owner from whom the original had been
borrowed accepted the return of Colan-
tonio's version without suspicion.
A little more than a century later there
began a saga that remained untold until
1871. A work commissioned from Hans Hol¬
bein the Younger, in 1525, The Madonna as
Protectress of Jacob Meyer, Mayor of
Basle, and his Family, passed through
several hands before reaching an Amster¬
dam dealer, Le Blond. Then the "Madonna"
developed a split personality.
STUART J. FLEMING, a British physicist who is
currently scientific director of the University
Museum, University of Pennsylvania, is an inter¬
nationally recognized authority on thermolumi¬
nescence dating of ceramics and bronzes. This
article has been extracted from his book Authenti¬
city in Art: The Scientific Detection of Forgery,
published by the Institute of Physics, London and
Bristol, in 1975.
One version (probably the original) even¬
tually entered the Ducal collection at Hesse.
A second version was pawned to a firm of
Venetian bankers and found an honoured
place in the Dresden Collection in 1743. Only
when the two panels were brought together
in the last century did the second version
proclaim its seventeenth-century style by
comparison with the original. The copyist
(possibly Bartholomeaus Sarburgh) felt he
had to introduce some "improvements", the
figures becoming smaller and the architec¬
tural surround more dominating. Current
taste demanded more space of movement
and a colour scheme of deeper, richer tones.
Some later case histories kept their
secrets for a much shorter time. Luca Gior¬
dano, at the end of the seventeenth century,
found himself in court for painting in the
style of Durer. The work, Christ healing the
Cripples, bore the renowned "AD"
monogram prominently enough while Gior¬
dano's own signature was concealed
elsewhere in the picture. Oddly enough he
was not found guilty, as it was judged that
he could not be blamed for being able to
paint as well as the German master. The
more recent court judgement of one year's
imprisonment on Han van Meegeren, in
1947, for his "Vermeer" imitations wask
scarcely more severe. f
24

jipir
Opposite page below, a pastiche (or forgery) of an ancient Etruscan wall-painting on a
terra-cotta slab. Each element in the work is the copy of a detail from an authentic piece
of Etruscan art, and the forgery, which seems to display a remarkable unity of conception,
is actually a kind of jigsaw puzzle of different motifs (below). The painting depicts Troilus,
son of King Priam, and his sister Polyxena, about to fall into an ambush laid by Hercules.
(The forger cunningly showed only part of the chequered fountain, letting it be supposed
that it was completed with another, missing, plaque, with Achilles lurking behind it.)
Photos above show the origins of the different motifs used in the pastiche: 1) Detail from
a clay altar from Corinth; 2) Fresco from the Etruscan "Tomb of Bulls" at Tarqulnia (Italy).
Detail shows Achilles waiting to ambush Troilus; 3) Banquet scene painted on a Greek
wine-jar; 4) Detail of fresco from "Tomb of Augurs" at Tarquinia; 5) Terra-cotta wall-plaque
of "female figures" unearthed at Banditaccia (Italy); 6) Decorative frieze on funeral urn
from Tarquinia (detail).
25

> Forgeries fall into three main categories.
The first of these, fakes without a model,
is rare. The path to acceptance can be
made easier if the subject chosen has some
connexion to a legend or a fragmentary
documentary reference. The fourteenth cen¬
tury provides us with one of the better-
known examples of a fake based on a
legend. Political manruvres against the
Knights Templars in 1306 included a claim
that they worshipped an idol called
Baphomet. The production of these idols
(small mis-shapen stone figures covered in
meaningless inscriptions) probably dates
from the time when this story was popular,
in the literature of the Gothic revival.
Fakes designed to fit in with genuine
documentary evidence include some
remarkable wholesale inventions of a com¬
plete, spurious artistic style, such as that of
the Obotrites (a Slavonic tribe from the
Mecklenberg region later over-run by the
Huns) and of the Moabites who came to
public attention in 1869 with the discovery
of a genuine inscription related to their King,
Mesha.
Archaeological material has been par¬
ticularly susceptible to this kind of forgery.
Gustav Wolf, in 1907, announced the
discovery of cremations among Danubian
peoples who first raised cattle and farmed in
the region of Wetterau in the fourth millen¬
nium BC. The unearthing of about a hun¬
dred of these graves led to the revision of
academic belief that skeleton burial was the
custom of those times. Finely-pierced flint
tools, notched bone implements and
carefully arrayed necklace beads all helped
to compound a funerary assemblage. Wolf,
in his autobiography, gave full credit for the
finds to his co-excavator, Bausch, and died
oblivious of the fact that he had been
deceived by that very man.
The Old Stone Age and Neolithic cultures
offer great potential to the forger because of
the simplicity of workmanship required and
the ready availability of media (flints, shales,
antler bone and cave-wall rock) all ready for
embellishment in hitherto unacknow¬
ledged ancient styles. Hieroglyphs cry out
for interpretation, our fascination increasing
in direct proportion to our ignorance. New
languages emerge; new cross-linkages are
established between cultures and the situa¬
tion becomes more and more confused.
Runic inscriptions have been particularly
prone to forgery. The Ura Linda Chronicle,
with .its notion that the Finns and Magyars
are blood relations and its assertion that the
Frisians are a Chosen People, was readily in¬
corporated into the early racialistic attitudes
of the Nazi Party in 1933. The Rune Stone of
Minnesota served, for a while, as evidence
of a Viking occupation of America by the
end of the tenth century, long before Col¬
umbus set foot there.
Similar unique documents have appeared
intermittently, including the last words of
Moses to the children of Israel written on
leather by an Egyptian scribe, Uanious, and
scripts of a "new" Phoenician historian call¬
ed Sachuniathon. The Frenchman, Vrain
Lucas, was a specialist in this type of pro¬
duction. In the course of a long career he
forged thousands of original manuscripts
purporting to stem from the hands of an il¬
lustrious gathering including Julius Caesar,
the Apostle Paul and Joan of Arc.
We find scarcely any examples of fakes
with no' such literary associations, possibly
because forgers realize that they will not fit
into any art historian's "data-bank" and are
therefore liable to immediate rejection.
Alterations and additions to a work supply
our second category of fakes. We might
mention, as an example, a painting with
figures in the style of the seventeenth-
century Dutch painter Philips Wouwerman
superimposed upon a genuine landscape by
his near contemporary Jan van Goyen. The
presence of both artists' monograms sug¬
gested the work was a joint effort but it now
seems probable that the parts of the paint¬
ing attributed to Wouwerman are the work
of one Robert Griffier.
Simple anthropomorphic sketches on
bone and small sculptural reliefs executed
on stone can endow Neanderthal man with
unexpected skills while similar schoolboy
rock-carvings have been known to rise to
the status of national treasures.
The third and most common form of
forgery is that of pastiche, that is to say, an
object that derives its detailed units from a
variety of similar elements in authentic
material. Our illustrations (pages 24 and 25)
show this process for an "Etruscan" paint¬
ing on a terra-cotta slab, the authentic form
of which would have decorated a niche of a
tomb. The scene is that of Troilus, son of
Priam, leading his horse to water, accom¬
panied by his sister, Polyxena. The fountain
is only shown in part so that we could an¬
ticipate the existence of a further plaque, to
be mounted to the left, displaying a
treacherous Achilles waiting to pounce
upon the unsuspecting prince.
This legend is depicted in a fresco from
the "Tomb of Bulls" at Tarquinia in Italy
which provides the main theme and, in
detail, is the source of the fountain chequer¬
ing. Polyxena enters the scene via a frieze of
this ambush that appears on the Corinthian
"Timonidas" flask, but she now has the
shawled dress-style of the females on a
plaque excavated at Banditaccia, near
Cerveteri.
The reined horse is derived from a
funerary urn from Tarquinia with many of
the outlines and muscle emphases
reproduced with almost mathematical preci¬
sion. The same accuracy of drawing is in
evidence in the lion mouth-piece of the
fountain and the upper border "tongue"
design that occur together on a Corinthian
clay altar. Fresco details are faithfully copied
with the birds taken from the wrestlers'
scene in the "Tomb of the Augurs" and the
small decanting jug taken from the "Tomb
of the Lionesses". Greek vases supply the
water pitcher (from the "Onesimos" bowl in
Brussels) and the crouching dog (from the
"Eurytios" krater in the Louvre). Every com¬
ponent is readily available in photographs of
books of the past two decades, often
helpfully in colour.
An alternative source of information for
the would-be forger is the showcases of
museums. This is most convenient for single
leaves of illuminated manuscripts; three-
dimensional objects, parts of which are not
visible through the front glass partitions, are
often poorly executed. In the past engrav¬
ings and woodcuts proved a valuable in¬
spiration both for transfer into easel paint¬
ings and extension into an extra dimension
as marble or terra-cotta statuary and stone
reliefs. Similarly, medals supply small-scale
versions of portraiture that translate well in¬
to stone reliefs of grander proportions while
offering less risk of anachronism in costume
and hair styling.
Slavish plagiarism is rare. It only appears
at all commonly in the field of drawings,
where it was common practice of the
leading studios of the past to give each ap¬
prentice old prints to copy as part of his
education. The eighteenth-century English
painter Sir Joshua Reynolds produced
"Guercino" sketches with consummate
ease. Michelangelo deliberately set out to
deceive his master, Ghirlandaio, by copying
a head, smoking the surface of the paper to
simulate the effects of ageing, and exchang¬
ing his product for the original. Raphael,
whose popularity was at its zenith in the
nineteenth century, has been copied
repeatedly even to the extent of enlarging
small folio details into full-scale cartoon
elements.
Surfaces often need major treatments to
give them the necessary antique ap¬
pearance. Cracking of a paint surface is an
ageing effect that follows from the pigment
or priming layers being too rigid to cope with
the stretching of the flexible canvas or panel
support. Once the oil medium has dried a
simple rolling-up of a canvas will simulate
this cracking quite well.
Other "recipes" include application of a
heavily-contracting varnish or stiff glue to
break up the picture's surface. Alternatively,
some kind of heat treatment followed by
rapid cooling causes shrinkage of the sup¬
port at too great a rate to be taken up by the
paint layers. For paintings on wooden
panels the paint break-up usually runs
parallel to the fibre structure of the wood
and so the pressure directions require some
deliberation. A final brush with soot
highlights the damage.
A "fly-blown" appearance can be produc¬
ed by stippling some areas with a stiff-bristle
brush in a matching colour to create an illu¬
sion of antiquity. Swiftly applied restoration,
damp-staining and blotching of paper, rim-
chipping of pottery and the use of worm-
eaten wood are all stock-in-trade skills of the
ambitious faker.
Similar ageing effects giving an ap¬
pearance called craquelure, occur in the
glazes of ceramics. The glaze ingredients
fuse during kiln-firing and a glassy coating
seals the pores in the underlying clay. If,
during cooling, the clay cools less than the
glaze the latter is put under stress and
coarse fissures appear on the surface. This
crackling is due to kiln treatment and in no
way indicates antiquity. The passage of time
leads to the development of many more,
much finer crazing lines. This must be quite
a difficult effect to simulate, judging by the
rarity of good craquelure on established
fakes, but examples do exist.
In the case of metals, corrosion of the sur¬
face, termed patination, records the effects
of long-term exposure to the atmosphere or
burial moisture. The copper content of
bronzes oxidizes to form amorphous cuprite
which, in turn, reacts with carbonated water
to form the familiar green encrustations of
malachite. Other impurities in the metal, like
tin, may preferentially oxidize to give a
silvery sheen.
Sulphur and chlorine, present in the at¬
tacking moisture, each give rise to different
characteristic tarnishing effects. Unfor¬
tunately, the softening tone that patination
produces on the raw, shining metal seems
CONTINUED PAGE 34
26

ROGUES' GALLERY OF FAKES
(continued from page 26)
to have been to the taste of other civiliza¬
tions besides our own. Vasari, in his discuss¬
ion of technique in the Renaissance era,
comments on the desirability of artificial
ageing treatments such as oil-blackening,
"pickling" in vinegar and even varnishing.
Silver often carries a slight purplish tinge
owing to chloride corrosion. However, this
is a slow reaction compared with oxidation
or chlorination of any copper present so that
alloyed systems like those encountered in
debased coinage usually suffer these reac¬
tions first. Chemical induction of artificial
surface degradation poses no particular
difficulty.
Despite the simplicity of the notion few
deliberate artificial treatments offer the faker
a better reward than burial of his work for a
year or so to allow nature to begin the "age¬
ing" process. Although this requires pa¬
tience and a steady nerve (someone else
may accidentally dig up the forgery before
the market is ripe) the method remains an ef¬
fective one. Even the slightest traces of sur¬
face concretions or roots marks together
with a degree of "natural" damage and the
inevitable softening in decorative brightness
can only be helpful in generating a good ar¬
chaeological provenance for a fake that has
been subjected to a period of burial.
This does not always work, particularly if
the forger is careless in preparing a burial
spot. In 1905 the Abbé d'Aguel, anxious to
demonstrate that trade between Egypt and
Gaul dated back to Neolithic times, an¬
nounced the discovery of a number of finely-
worked flint implements and weapons.
These, according to the Abbé, had been
dug up from the sealed sedimentary
limestone layers on the Ile de Riou, off the
Marseilles coast. Experts soon became con¬
cerned that the surfaces of the objects had a
bright, almost lacquered appearance the
kind of surface patination found on objects
which have been exposed for long periods
to a dry desert atmosphere, not on articles
buried in limestone for thousands of years.
The material was certainly authentic and
Egyptian but its voyage from Egypt to
France had been rather more recent than the
Abbé claimed.
.Stuart J. Fleming
