Childhood awakening
A Jamaican experiment

by Marigold Thorburn
THOSE of us who grew up in loving homes with parents who
played with us and gave us toys seldom stop to think how
important these things were to our eventual growth and
, development. Yet they are of enormous importance, for without
them we learn slowly, if at all. If you have no toys as a baby how do
you learn to focus on an object or grasp it?
It was to remedy situations of this kind that early childhood
stimulation programmes were devised. In poor countries lack of
stimulation is more often due to lack of knowledge and poverty than
to deliberate neglect, but the result is the same are slow
and regarded as dull when ¡n fact they are merely uninformed.
There are, of course, other causes of delayed development, for
example, a disability due to illness or brain damage. In these cases
doctor and therapist have to work very closely together and obtain
the enthusiastic co-operation of the parent, grannie, auntie or other
parent substitute. The parent has as much to learn as the child; he or
she needs to understand that handicapped children are not-
necessarily helpless or dependent and that given more attention and
training results can be achieved that make the extra effort involved
well worth while. When a child suffers from both parental indif¬
ference and malnutrition, the health and social welfare workers have
to make a special effort to rouse the interest of and motivate the
parents. In all these situations education is the key.
The Jamaican Early Childhood Stimulation Project ¡s a continuous
remedial action programme designed to meet the individual needs of
the child and to arouse and hold the imagination of the parent,
usually the mother, and get her involved in the learning process.
The Jamaican project is based on a North American model
modified to fit local needs and resources. It consists of four main
stages.
First, the children needing help have to be identified. Mothers,
members of the family and friends are often the first to recognize
that a child's development is slower than usual. The most common
signs are lateness in sitting, walking or talking. Sometimes a doctor
or nurse on a routine visit to a clinic notices the tell-tale signs of late
development. In other instances late-developing children are
detected by means of simple tests carried out in day nurseries and
creches. In all these cases children can be brought to our offices for
confirmatory checks and examinations.
At the second stage, if a child is found to have a significant delay
in development, a further in-depth assessment, including the
establishment of a full case history and a complete medical examina¬
tion, is carried out in our offices. On the basis of our findings a pro¬
gramme of treatment and intervention is drawn up.
During the third stage this programme, which consists mainly of
various forms of teaching and training, is put into practice in the
child's own home. One very important aspect is that the mother
becomes fully involved in the programme and herself carries out the
teaching at home in between the weekly visits of the social auxiliary.
The final stage involves a review and evaluation of the child's pro¬
gress. The mother brings the child back to our offices once every
three months or so for this reassessment and, if necessary, the pro¬
gramme can then be adjusted.
The Jamaican project is supervised by a public health service
nurse, but this task could be carried out by anyone with the ap¬
propriate training and experience, such as a teacher or a social
worker. Identification of children in need of help is the responsibility
of specially trained workers of the Jamaica Youth Corps.
Assessments are made with the help of the Portage Check List, a
systematic, sequenced list of child behavioural skills and aptitudes,
each aptitude on the list corresponding to a specific item of the
education programme. In this way the child, the mother and the
social auxiliary form a mutually dependent team.
In Jamaica, the auxiliaries, known affectionately as "Crashies"
because they had been through an accelerated training or crash
course, were selected from participants in a special employment
programme. In the new project being carried out in St. Catherine the
auxiliaries have been recruited from the local communities and the
parents themselves are also being trained.
MARIGOLD THORBURN, of Jamaica, is regional co-ordinator with the
Caribbean Institute on Mental Retardation and Other Development Pro¬
blems, at the Northern Caribbean University, Kingston.
This innovation has worked well and each auxiliary visits about a
dozen homes a week. The auxiliaries work under the guidance of a
supervisor but it is they who keep in touch with the mothers.
Medical assessment is undertaken by a doctor. Exercises and ac¬
tivities are specially developed for each child and involve the use of
simple toys, often made from waste materials.
In 1978, five years atfter the Early Childhood Stimulation Project
started in Kingston, we decided to take a look at what had happened
to some of the children who had participated in the project from the
very beginning. Half of them were still involved in the project and the
remainder are attending either ordinary elementary schools or
special schools for handicapped children.
The progress made by fifty-six children who had had continuous
care over a period of eighteen months was also assessed. The
children were divided into three groups mildly, moderately and
severely handicapped and progress was measured by the average
number of skills learned by the children during the period. This was
compared with what would be expected of a normal child. Over a
given period of time a normal child would probably learn six skills per
month. We found that the mildly and moderately handicapped
children gained 50 per cent more skills than would have been ex¬
pected in normal children. The children of the severely handicapped
group, however, did not do so well, but they nevertheless acquired
more than twice as many skills as they would have been expected to
learn without any stimulation.
Many medical conditions can cause delays in development, retar¬
dation and other types of handicap. Among. the commoner ones
found in our project were Down's Syndrome, brain damage due to
complications at birth, jaundice after birth, meningitis, epilepsy and
rubella contracted by the mother during pregnancy. In almost one
fifth of the children seen it was impossible to determine the cause of
handicap.
In almost all these conditions early stimulation can produce
remarkable results and it is anticipated that, in the long run, children
who have benefited from early stimulation programmes will meet
with fewer problems in their education and have better prospects of
achieving'independence in their adult life. Furthermore, seeing the
improvement in her child, the^ mother becomes more optimistic
about its future. The combination of loving care and well planned
stimulation can, therefore, produce real progress.
There are still those who think that it is too expensive and, indeed,
scarcely worth the trouble to provide help for children with delayed
development. In Jamaica we have shown that the cost per child can
be remarkably low (280 Jamaican dollars per child per year), that
there is no need for highly specialized staff since ordinary, well-
motivated, intelligent people can be trained for the work involved,
and that, with proper care and attention, children with delayed
development can become happy, useful, productive and indepen¬
dent adults. Marigold Thorburn
The Jamaican Early Childhood Stimulation Project for children
with delayed development relies for its success on close teamwork
between the child, the mother and the social auxiliary (below),
backed up by the doctor in the clinic. The auxiliaries visit the
children's homes once a week, but between visits the mothers
themselves continue the programme of educational stimulation
and training (opposite page).
