Slavery and sugar.,
the bitter aftertaste
by Manuel Moreno Fraginals
10
IS there such a thing as a Caribbean iden¬
tity? The question has often been raised,
and the fact that it continues to be asked
demonstrates either that there is no
awareness or certainty about this identity or
that there are forces that stand to gain by
denying its existence. In our view, "cultural
identity" is the historic result of the common
evolution of common socio-economic
factors.
The wide arc of the Antilles forms an
island ecosystem with common climatic and
geological characteristics and, in early
times, with similar flora and fauna. From the
moment when the Europeans burst on to
the South American scene, the islands'
geographical location made them the natural
meeting-place of seaways to the Spanish
Empire and, in a sense, the "imperial fron¬
tier". As a frontier, the Antilles were to be
the site of the battles of the plundering col¬
onial wars. Thus, there was an early stage at
which these islands had to play a part in the
Empire. But they also had exploitable
resources, which, in addition to the role they
played in support of the empire, were impor¬
tant for their own economic potential. Dur¬
ing the eighteenth century, Cuba, for exam¬
ple, was the centre of defence of the
Spanish Empire and an outstanding pro¬
ducer of tobacco and sugar; Jamaica was an
island of sugar plantations and a key base
for the English navy.
The islands' shared climate, their
geographical situation in the arc of the An¬
tilles and their similar physical characteristics
made possible, in most of them, the
development of the slave sugar plantation
system. For this type of plantation required
terrain with specific physical features; it had
to be near the sea, have a particular
temperature and degree of rainfall, have
forest resources available, be near cattle
supplies, and have excellent maritime com¬
munications between the buyer's market
(Europe) and the labour supply market
(Africa).
MANUEL MORENO FRAGINALS, Cuban
historian and university teacher, is adviser to the
Centre of Caribbean Studies of the Casa de las
Americas, in Havana. His most recent published
work is Distintegration/Abolition of Slavery in the
Caribbean.

The islands of the Antilles were peopled
by a common indigenous stock which was
eliminated through a common historical pro¬
cess. The aboriginal cultures of the Carib¬
bean appear to go back as far as 2500 BC.
The colonizing process which befell these
peoples sparked off systernatic annihilation
in which the barbarous exploitation to which
they were subjected was accompanied by
epidemics, the breakdown of their
economy, the psychological shock of the
conquest and even premeditated extermina¬
tion. The extinction of the Indians in the
islands colonized by Spain was widely
publicized by the English, the French and
the Dutch; but what was not made common
knowledge was how the English, French
and Dutch themselves systematically exter¬
minated the indigenous populations of the
islands they conquered.
On these systematically depopulated
islands, a common economic structure was
established: the slave plantation, a typical
creation of European capitalism. Rather
than being the invention of any particular
European colonizing power, it was the result
of accumulated colonial experience. The
plantation system of the type adopted by
the Portuguese at Sao Tomé was transfer¬
red to America by the Spaniards. The
Hispano-Portuguese model was developed
by the English and French (Jamaica and
Santo Domingo are tragic examples of this
development), and was later taken up again
by Spanish colonialism, making the ex¬
ploitation in Cuba even more complex.
This point is emphasized because
historians tend to speak of different
categories of "slavery" according to
whether it was imposed by the English,
French, Portuguese, Spaniards or others.
There is only one type of slavery and its sole
aim is the exploitation of labour; the ex¬
ploiter's nationality is of little importance.
We reject the idea that there are different
types of slavery depending on the religion of
the exploiter as well as the notion that there
are "benign" and "malignant" forms of
slavery. For the enslaved mass, slavery was
always the same; the differences in the
degree of exploitation were due to economic
factors rather than to superstructure.
Nor do we accept any type of racial con¬
notation that might suggest a preference on
the part of the slave-masters for Africans.
Africans were enslaved because Africa was
the labour market that was available, cheap
and near; when conditions changed in the
nineteenth century Chinese and East Indians
were brought in.
The same system of enslavement and
commercialization was attempted with the
West Indian indigenous populations. As ear¬
ly as 1494, Admiral Christopher Columbus
himself selected fifty native inhabitants of
Hispaniola (Santo Domingo), who were sent
to Spain to be sold as slaves. And, accor¬
ding to Bartolomé de Las Casas, Columbus
reckoned that by selling all the Indians of
that island along with other merchandise he
would realize profits to the tune of forty
million maravedíes. As early as 1508 hunts
for natives to be sold into slavery were
legalized in the Caribbean. And if the
statistics provided by Pedro Mártir de
Anglería are correct, between 1508 and 1513
some forty thousand Caribbean slaves were
hunted down and sold to work in the gold
mines. Colonial barbarism resulted in the li¬
quidation of the indigenous population; the t
small aggressive groups which remained )
Few traces have survived of the
indigenous peoples, notably the
Carib and the Arawak, which
inhabited the Caribbean islands
before they were discovered by the
Spaniards. Within a few decades of
European colonial rule these
peoples had been virtually
annihilated, and today only a
handful of their descendants exist,
scattered throughout the region. A
few small but skilfully crafted
examples of their culture have been
preserved. Above, skeletal head
carved in black basalt (22 cm high)
was a religious or ceremonial object
used by an Arawak-speaking people
of the Taino culture of Puerto Rico.
Below, anthropomorphic stone
head (12 cm high, 17 cm long) from
the Dominican Republic. It is one of
the prized "three-pointed stones"
discovered in the Antilles which
may have been an animist symbol
of the Taino civilization.
Photo © Museo del Hombre Dominicano, Santo Domingo
11

From the 15th century on, various European powers used the island
of Gorée, less than 4 kilometres off Dakar (Senegal) as a port of
call or an entrepôt for the Atlantic slave trade. It was there,
packed in dank cellars or the torture chambers set aside for those
who resisted, that young Africans waited to be shipped to the
plantations and manufactories of the New World, especially those
of the West Indies. One of the great tragedies of history, the slave
trade played a crucial part in shaping the cultural and political
destiny of many parts of the Americas. In December 1980, in
recognition of the cultural and historical importance of the island's
architectural heritage, the Director-General of Unesco, Mr.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, launched an international appeal for the
safeguard and restoration of Gorée. Above, map of the island as
shown on an engraving of 1779.
^were a hindrance to production and they
were exterminated in a systematic genocide
whose most typical expression was that
indulged in by the English and by the French
in Martinique.
From the sixteenth century onwards plan¬
tation complexes began to be established in
the Spanish Caribbean islands: Santo Dom¬
ingo, Puerto Rico and Cuba. In the seven¬
teenth century the system spread to the
Lesser Antilles, and later to Jamaica. The
plantation economy began to be dominant
in the islands. The Lesser Antilles were
covered with plantations and there was no
land left for other forms of economic
development, or even for the slaves to
escape to from the plantations. In the
Greater Antilles plantation areas alternated
with other exploitations and the possibilities
of social development were greater. These
differences of scale resulted in differences in
the socio-economic levels of the planta¬
tions, but otherwise most of the common
characteristics remained.
Each plantation, when it was established,
was simply a collection of human beings and
in no sense constituted a society. At this in¬
itial stage the plantation could be compared
to a prison nearly all of whose members
were of African origin, although they came
from different ethnic groups, and were bet¬
ween 18 and 30 years old. There was a
marked imbalance in the sexes; women only
formed between 10 and 30 per cent of the
population and it was not rare to find planta¬
tions comprising men alone.
Under this repressive system, working
time was strictly regulated and leisure time
was eliminated; diet was determined accor¬
ding to the economic considerations of the
masters; housing was planned for economy
and security, and clothing followed mass in¬
dustrial production patterns; sexual life was
subject to reproductive requirements; family
relations were paralyzed by the imbalance
between the sexes.
This set-up, typical of virtually all the plan¬
tations at the time of their foundation,
changed with the passage of time.
Clandestine hierarchical relationships were
established among the slaves, bonds of in¬
terests and brotherhood were created, and
the birth of children led to the formation of
family nuclei, generally of a matriarchal
type, since within the repressive system of
the plantation a father could not take
responsibility for his offspring. There was a
process of social integration, but it was
hindered by the decline of the group since
the mortality rate was higher than the birth
rate (a logical result of the imbalance bet¬
ween the sexes, and the prison regime) and
new influxes of slaves became necessary to
maintain the level of the work force. Never¬
theless, a process of socialization was oc¬
curring as a result of one unifying factor all
were slaves and free men were excluded.
The plantation required an import-export
centre which, moreover, provided a whole
series of services that formed the infrastruc¬
ture of the business. Thus there developed a
kind of urban centre, in which both slaves
and free men were to be found, but without
the prison ethos of the plantation and con¬
sequently with different social relationships.
Thus, the city-country distinction which is
typical of all societies assumed a more
definite connotation in plantation societies.
Furthermore, under pressure from external
factors (price of slaves, price of plantation
products, etc.) and internal factors
(economic viability of the enterprise, ap¬
plication of technological advances, im¬
poverishment of the land, etc.), the planta¬
tions gradually developed until they ac¬
quired specific social characteristics that
were common to all the islands.
Regardless of the social level they had
achieved, the plantation slaves of the Carib¬
bean were subjected to a common process
of deculturation. By deculturation is meant
the conscious process whereby, for pur¬
poses of economic exploitation, the culture
of a human group was uprooted so as to
facilitate the expropriation of the natural
wealth of the territory in which it was
located and/or to use the group for cheap
unskilled slave or semi-slave labour. In
American plantation societies deculturation
can be seen as a technological expedient for
obtaining maximum labour efficiency.
Deculturation was a conscious process
used on slaves in order to deprive them of all
identity. Their very names were wrested
from them. Out of thousands and thousands
of documents about slaves in the Caribbean
we only found twenty in which the original
African names of the slaves appeared. Their
eating, living and dress patterns were
destroyed, their music and their religion
were banned, and their masters' language
was imposed upon them. The slaves could
only resist this process of deculturation by
maintaining their original cultural values in
12

clandestinity. Thus began a struggle bet¬
ween the dominant culture which strove to
be a factor of integration and subjugation,
and the dominated culture as an integrating
factor of resistance. This dialectical conflict
was to be one of the basic sources of Carib¬
bean culture.
This process cannot be understood,
however, if we start from the classic tradi¬
tional anthropological schema which con¬
siders that in such cases a process of
"transculturation" or "integration" occurred
whereby African cultural values were in¬
serted into European moulds. The reality of
the Caribbean islands was quite different.
From the beginning it was a question of new
societies to which Africans and Europeans
came at the same time, the former as a sub¬
jugated people in a war of capitalist plunder,
and the latter as the exploiting group. There
was no pre-existing society imbued with
African contributions. There was basically a
system of economic exploitation in which
the dominant class created a culture for
itself which was also destined to be imposed
on the dominated class.
Naturally, this culture was based on
Eurocentric values and patterns which were
reworked, re-created and updated in relation
to the economic, political and social situa¬
tion on the plantations. Confronting the
dominant culture was a culture of resistance
which stemmed originally from African
values and patterns that disappeared, were
re-elaborated or transmuted into the class
struggle process, when they came up
against both imposed deculturation and a
repressive system.
And thus, at a given moment, the slave
plantation system disintegrated. The pro¬
cess of disintegration occurred at different
times and with different characteristics in
the various islands. In some the plantations
disappeared, in others they were transform¬
ed into modern plantations where the traffic
in human beings continued. There were far-
reaching migratory movements between the
West Indian islands and new peoples were
brought out to work in the canefields. To
change the origin of the people exploited is
not, however, to change the essential
nature of the exploitation.
For these historic reasons, the descen¬
dants of the former slaves, mainly Negroes
and mulattoes, constituted the poorest,
most unprotected and exploitable stratum of
society. Culturally, they were profoundly af¬
fected by different forms of prejudice and
social discrimination. They were deliberately
isolated and excluded, and attempts were
made to stir up conflicts among them which
would make it difficult for them to constitute
themselves into a cohesive class. The
cultural forms contributed, created and re¬
created by these groups were closely linked
to the situation of social exclusion,
economic exploitation and cultural rejection
imposed upon them by the dominant class.
Seen from this angle, the essence of a
study on cultural identity ought to lie in the
analysis of the forms in which this culture of
resistance endured or was used or re¬
created. Studies that analyse the symp¬
tomatic characteristics of this culture, but
not its real structures, speak of "dual"
societies or "plural" societies. These
theories are supported by extremely in¬
teresting observations from outside, but
they overlook the fact that cultural dif¬
ferences are not merely the opposition oik
Photo Bibliothèque Nationale © Société de Géographie, Paris
The basis of Caribbean colonial society was the plantation, a closed world in which
confrontation between white master and black slave shaped many aspects of the
region's culture. This divided world revolved around two poles. In close physical
proximity but alien in spirit: the "great house" of the master and the cabins of the
slaves. The master lived in his mansion with his family and household slaves. The huts
of the slaves formed a world apart ¡n which the black labourers lived in conditions
which were often inhuman. Photo above was taken in Martinique in 1882. Below, a
group of huts in a Curaçao plantation.
Photo © Luc Joubert, Paris. Nelly and René Depestre Collection 	
1
J t
UN
«U.ll vlffB " >j^
W KjL
Ll j±AÍ
pi W".
<r^nnr .nw"-'i	 ^1
Sugar, slavery and single-
crop agriculture are the
leitmotif of Caribbean
history. But if sugar headed
the list of crops it was
closely followed by tobacco
and some Caribbean
countries, notably Cuba,
have won a world-wide
reputation as tobacco-
producers. The manufacture
of the famous Havana cigars
requires a high degree of
craftsmanship, while artistry
and imagination are also
lavished on their packaging
and presentation. Left,
a striking design for
a cigar-box label.
13

. European and African values whose cultures
interact in the abstract; on the contrary they
relate to very real class confrontations.
Other more idealist studies tend to seek
African graftings on a European stem. And
there are those who have dedicated
themselves to listing Africanisms in order to
determine how many of them, and with
what degree of success, have penetrated in¬
to pre-established moulds. Then again there
are those who, with a certain an¬
thropological complexity, have elaborated
the theory of social exclusion. But, as it has
been rightly pointed out, "although many of
these people have been barred from access
to total participation in society, or even the
most minor benefits of citizenship, they
have never been excluded from contributing
to the economic order". Indeed, their
marginality as citizens is a result of the
capitalist regime.
The role of the Afro-Latin-American
peoples of the Caribbean as suppliers of
notoriously cheap labour, and especially the
movement of Haitians, Jamaicans,
Dominicans, Puerto Ricans and others to
the United States and to the capitals of
Europe, has reduced the average total cost
of labour at the less skilled levels.
Marginalization has not meant taking away
from these men their status as exploited
people or creators of wealth.
Just as negative is the quest for identity
based on colour ("Négritude") or remote
African cultural roots, even though it
originated within the exploited peoples
themselves. These theories forget or
overlook the fact that exploitation of slave or
semi-slave labour was not a problem of col¬
our, since whites and Indians and later
Chinese, East Indians and Polynesians were
also exploited and enslaved. "Négritude",
which was early in its history a powerful and
beautiful rebel cry of a group standing out
against prejudice, has run the risk of being
transformed into an ideology. The return to
Africa, the recognition of roots, bring
something of undeniable value to the Carib¬
bean peoples the identification of one of
its sources and a sense of solidarity towards
peoples who for centuries have been ex¬
ploited and impoverished. But beyond these
limits it loses its validity, for Caribbean
culture is not African but a culture created
and re-created, under specific conditions, in
the crucible of the Caribbean.
Colonial or neo-colonial interests have
tried to perpetuate the sense of Caribbean
cultural diversity. To the real barrier of dif¬
ferent languages has been added the
isolating or distorting claim that each island
feels and acts as an independent cultural,
and hence political, world. In some cases,
the effort has even been made to persuade
certain islands to seek their identity in the
metropolis or in foreign lands, and hot in
themselves. The real identity of the Carib¬
bean is questioned and even denied. But the
history and the reality expressed in their ar¬
tistic manifestations show quite the op¬
posite. Caribbean artists and social scien¬
tists today have a much more important task
than a simplistic quest for African elements
in their culture or comparative analysis with
present-day African cultures. This task is the
study of specific phenomena of integration
and of common symbolic forms that have
developed in the Caribbean during the pro¬
cess of consolidation of the new societies
born there.
B Manual Moreno Fraginals

