Louis Braille
A touch
of genius
by Serge Guillemet
THOUGH blind people in France enjoyed
certain privileges during the Middle
Ages, their situation was generally
very precarious. Their main activity was beg¬
ging and the highways and byways were full
of desperately poor blind men and women,
drifting wretchedly from place to place.
They were a frightening sight with their dull,
expressionless eyes, ill-assured gait and
torn, dirty clothes.
The second half of the eighteenth century
was marked by humanitarian trends. Valen¬
tin Haiiy, a young civil servant, was moved
and deeply disturbed by the plight of the
blind in the community, the state of
dependency and inferiority in which they
were kept and their consequent lack of self-
respect. He was particularly outraged in
1771 at the way they were exploited at
fairs made to wear cardboard spectacles
and perform discordant tunes on broken-
down musical instruments with the scores
turned upside down. It was then that he
decided to devote his life to improving the
lot of the blind and he became their first
teacher.
His school the Royal Institution for the
Blind was established in 1784 and Haüyset
about teaching the sightless to read by
printing in relief ordinary letters of the
alphabet, much enlarged and stylized. These
early books for the blind were few in
number, cumbersome and very expensive.
Yet the letters and words painstakingly
deciphered by sightless students who could
not yet write, awakened in them an im¬
mense thirst for knowledge. Valentin Haiiy
had created the climate necessary for further
research and paved the way for a new leap
forward.
SERGE GUILLEMET, who is himself blind, is
director of studies at the National Institute for
Young Blind Persons, Paris. From 1975 to 1978 he
was inspector of education at the French Ministry
of Health. The co-author of a noted study on the
education of blind, visually handicapped and
deaf-blind children and adolescents, he has taken
part in many radio broadcasts both in France and
abroad.
This was to be the work of a remarkable
man, Louis Braille, who lost his sight as the
result of a stupid accident. The son of a
saddler, he was born on 4 January 1809 at
Coupvray, a small village to the east of Paris.
As soon as he was able to walk, the boy
used to spend his days in his father's
workshop, playing with pieces of leather he
found there. One day, when he was three
years old, the knife he was handling slipped
and entered his eye. The infection which
developed soon spread to the second eye
and, by the time he was five, Louis was
completely blind.
His family, however, refused to give up
the struggle. They wanted the boy to be
given an education and every possible op¬
portunity to develop. So Louis was sent to
the village school where his lively in¬
telligence and excellent memory enabled
him to make good progress. Far from being
a passive pupil and an object of pity he took
an active part in the work of the class along
with his sighted school fellows. His father
taught him to read by hammering nails into a
plank to form the letters of the alphabet.
The village schoolmaster, however, decid¬
ed that Louis deserved to be given special
training and, in 1814, at the age of ten, he
was sent to the Royal Institution for the
Blind, in Paris. The school, at that time, was
housed in damp, cramped and very
unhealthy premises (and many of the blind
students, including Louis Braille himself,
later developed tuberculosis).
The new pupil showed himself to be ex¬
ceptionally gifted.
In 1821, a former captain of artillery,
Charles-Marie Barbier de la Serre
demonstrated to the blind students a system
of "sound" or "night-writing" which he had
developed to enable soldiers in the field to
communicate with one another during the
hours of darkness. It was a phonetic system
of raised dots in which the different sounds
were represented by two columns of six
dots.
Young Braille (he was then only twelve
years old) was not satisfied with Barbier's
system: there were too many dots, no spell¬
ing was required, and there were no accents
or symbols for mathematical and musical
notation. But the idea of using raised dots
had been born. It was to develop in Louis
Braille's mind as a means of freeing his
fellow-students from the drudgery of a very
limited system of education.
He continued to attend school regularly in
the daytime, but spent the evenings working
out and experimenting with a more effective
system of reading and writing for the blind.
During the summer holidays which he spent
with his family in his beloved Coupvray, the
peasants would often meet him sitting by
the roadside, busily "pricking away" at a
thick sheet of paper.
Louis was not yet sixteen when, at the
end of 1824, he came up with an idea of
genius an alphabetic code based on the
various permutations of six raised dots set
out in two parallel columns of three (See
page 23).
We all have two shoulders, two hips and
two knees. Put a raised dot on each of these
points and you get the idea of the basic let¬
ter much enlarged of Louis Braille's
system.
For the first ten letters of the Roman
alphabet: A B C D E F G H I J, the dots are
only on the shoulders and hips. The follow¬
ing ten: KLMNOPQRST, repeat the
"design" of the first ten, with an additional
dot on the left knee. The next five: U V X Y
Z, also repeat the first letters of the alphabet
but with extra dots on both knees. And
finally the last symbols: CH GH SH TH WH
ED ER OU OW and W duplicate the com¬
binations of the first ten with an additional
dot on the right knee.
Altogether sixty-three permutations are
possible with this system. The distance bet¬
ween two Braille dots is 2 or 2.5 millimetres,
and to decipher a text the reader slides his or
her fingertips along the embossed line.
In 1829, Louis Braille published a short
work presenting and explaining his system,
which he had completed by adding symbols
for punctuation and mathematical and
musical notation. The final version of his
script was published in 1837.
Braille's invention was greeted with en¬
thusiasm by his pupils and colleagues at the
Royal Institution where he was now a
teacher, and his script was immediately
adopted, for it proved far superior to the
classical system of reproducing Roman
characters in relief.
But Barbier de la Serre was jealous of the
young inventor and continued to press for
the adoption of his "sound writing", while
sighted teachers at the school still favoured
ordinary letters in relief and were reluctant
to let the blind use a different code for the
alphabet. Later other systems of relief
writing were suggested in place of Braille,
including the New York point and Moon
systems.
Despite constant ill-health and a very
heavy workload by 1818 he was teaching
geography and algebra, to which he later
added music, and had become organist at
the Paris church of Saint-Nicolas des
Champs Louis Braille continued to strug¬
gle to gain recognition and make his system
more widely known.
Gradually his script came to be adopted
throughout the world. This modest and
compassionate man all those who ap¬
proached him spoke of his kindness thus
became the benefactor of blind people
everywhere. He died on 6 January 1852 at
the Institut National des Jeunes Aveugles in
Paris aged only forty-three.
Used today for transmitting knowledge in
every field of human endeavour, the Braille
script can be mastered by scholars and sim¬
ple folk alike. Modern electronic appliances
are now available for transcribing ordinary
writing into Braille, but Louis Braille's
original code still serves its purpose.
In many countries blind children now at¬
tend school along with their sighted fellows,
and are provided with textbooks, dic¬
tionaries and other Braille materials, while
specialized libraries offer books and journals
in Braille.
Yet innumerable blind people are still
denied the opportunity of benefiting from
Louis Braille's invention. It is to be hoped
that these men and women will soon be pro¬
vided with the means of acquiring
knowledge and education so that they can
lead useful, productive lives and play an ac¬
tive role in their communities.
Louis Braille restored the dignity of the
blind as human beings. His alphabet of dots
is a star that lights their darkness.
26
