Photo Michel Claude - Unesco
The world
at our fingertips
Have you a friend who is blind? If so,
take out this Braille text and give it to
him or her. It contains the following mes¬
sage, printed in English, French and
Spanish Braille:
"Unesco Braille Courier published in
English, French, and Spanish by the Uni¬
ted Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, 7 Place de Fonte¬
noy, 75700 Paris, France, Telephone 577
16 10. This free, quarterly magazine for
the blind contains articles specially selec¬
ted from the Unesco Courier on all
aspects of education, science, culture
and communication. Requests for copies
should be sent to the Editor-in-chief at
the above address. "
Sighted persons who may wish to read
the text should refer to the Braille alpha¬
bet reproduced on page 23. The English
text of the message covers the whole of
the first of the 4 Braille pages (page 19 of
the magazine). Braille reads from left to
right, but since for production reasons
these pages have been inserted side¬
ways, to read the English text you must
first turn the magazine Topen at page 18-
19) round longwise so that the "top" of
the ink-printed pages is to your left. The
top line of embossed dots, running paral¬
lel to the serrated outside edge of the
page, shows where the text begins.



The Unesco Braille Courier
by Frederick H. Potter
FREDERICK H. POTTER, who is himself blind,
is Managing Editor of the Braille edition of the
Unesco Courier.
AT the time of Unesco's first involve¬
ment with visually handicapped
people in 1949, when the Govern¬
ment of India requested the Organization's
assistance to bring order to replace the
chaos of the multifarious, unrelated adapta¬
tions of the Braille system in many coun¬
tries prospects for most of them of
receiving suitable education and vocational
training were poor.
Unesco's response was to establish a
World Braille Uniformity Programme which,
by the end of 1953, had achieved recognized
success. It was, though few seemed to ap¬
preciate it at the time, a fine example of
what can be accomplished when people of
different languages and cultures work
together for the common good. Not only
was agreement reached on literary codes, so
that blind people throughout the world
might read the same Braille books, learn
foreign languages through Braille, exchange
ideas and experiences in Braille letters, but
important progress was made on the use of
the embossed script in music and science
notations.
There followed the launching of the
World Braille Council, which was to enable
all other Braille matters to be discussed at an
international level. World Braille Usage, an
important reference book for those involved
in Braille printing, improving Braille codes
and creating new ones in developing coun-
18
tries, was published by Unesco in 1953, and
an up-to-date edition will appear this year. A
new publication, Working with Braille, will
also become available in 1981. These in¬
itiatives aroused great interest in Unesco
among people who could not read our
magazines and pamphlets through lack of
sight, and, as the years passed, this interest
intensified in proportion to the growth of
Unesco's activities. Many inquiries were
received from the visually handicapped
about the Organization's aims, history, and
programme, but when told that there was
no documentation in Braille, they felt ex¬
cluded and wondered about the "right to
information".
I remember most vividly that spring day in
1974, when an advance copy of Unesco's
first publication for the blind arrived from
the printer, and how my admiring fingers
caressed those beautiful, neat Braille
characters. It was a general pamphlet on
Unesco in English, French, and Spanish,
containing the answers to all those ques¬
tions which had been addressed to us. This
was a big stride forward, and two years later
appeared issue number one of the six-
monthly magazine, the Unesco Braille
Review, composed of articles from different
Unesco periodicals.
Red Thread Riddles, a fun-book for blind
and sighted children from six to ten years of
CONTINUED PAGE 24

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 18
age, was produced as part of Unesco's In¬
ternational Year of the Child Programme in
1979. The text, consisting of word puzzles,
is in ordinary print and in Braille; the simple
illustrations are embossed and in colour. In a
class of children who can see and others
who can not, it shows the former exactly
what Braille is and how it is used, and the
latter acquire greater self-confidence
through being placed on a par with their
fellows where this book is concerned.
It follows the current trend towards in¬
tegrating the visually handicapped child into
the ordinary education system, rather than
providing him with the traditional, separate
form of instruction in specialized institu¬
tions. In the past, after the completion of
studies in such a sheltered environment, the
emergence into the hurly-burly of the
workaday world caused many young blind
people serious problems of re-adjustment.
Red Thread Riddles has also been a boon to
blind mothers with young, sighted children,
for it is usually the first book they have ever
been able to read together. Only an English
version is available at present, but it is hoped
that adaptations in other languages will be
produced later this year.
In March 1980, the six-monthly Unesco
Braille Review became the quarterly Unesco
Braille Courier (most of the Review's
material had come from the Unesco
Courier). It is published in English, French,
and Spanish, at the moment, but plans are
afoot for the production of other language
versions. English and Spanish editions are
printed in Grade 2 (contracted) and Grade 1
(uncontracted) Braille respectively, while the
French edition is in both uncontracted and
contracted Braille. Care should, therefore,
be taken to state which form is required
when requesting French copies: people who
can read intégral may find abrégé quite
beyond them.
The decision to make no charge for the
Braille magazine remains unaltered. The ma¬
jority of non-sighted people live in develop¬
ing countries: they are usually very poor and
cannot afford to pay for a Braille publica¬
tion. Thus, being available to all who can
read it, the Unesco Braille Courier is an in¬
centive for blind people to become literate,
which helps open up to the road to educa¬
tion and the possibility of a higher standard
of living. That so few of the 70 million
sightless people in the world today are able
to read Braille, is one of the most challeng¬
ing facts for Governments to ponder over
during this International Year of Disabled
Persons. Illiteracy is so much more prevalent
among the blind than among the sighted
because, when budgetary allocations are
made in many countries, little attention is
given to the educational needs of the
former.
Publication of the Unesco Braille Courier,
the only Braille magazine produced by the
United Nations system, makes available to
blind people, for the first time, all the
resources of a major international magazine
published in twenty-five different language
editions, thus placing them on an equal
footing with the estimated million and more
sighted readers of the Unesco Courier.
It contains articles of general appeal
which reflect current trends of thought and
action in Unesco on world problems, articles
describing peoples and their living condi¬
tions in different lands, a wide variety of
cultures, and physical features in various
regions of the world. Of course, the special
interests of our readers are taken into ac¬
count by the selection of material on sub¬
jects such as all forms of music, scientific
and technological advances which may have
some application to the improvement of ap¬
paratus or services for the visually disabled,
innovations in special education, etc. Ar¬
ticles must not be too long, for, when

transcribed, one page of ordinary print
becomes three or four pages in Braille.
To judge from letters we have received,
this publication is the most popular Unesco
achievement to date among people who
cannot see. "It is a new light in our
darkness", wrote a young man in an African
country. One of our printers said that he and
his staff always enjoyed working on it,
"because the articles are so different from
those usually published in Braille."
Increased longevity in industrial countries
over the past thirty years has changed the
average age of sightless members of their
populations; more than half of them now
lose their sight after the age of fifty, a time
of life when it is difficult to acquire the sen¬
sitive touch necessary for reading Braille
with one's fingers. To solve this problem,
recording our magazine on cassette is a
possible future development. In whatever
form it is received, it is hoped that the
Unesco Braille Courier will continue to help
satisfy that hunger for information and
knowledge which is just as acute among
blind people as among any other members
of society.
Frederick H. Potter
25
