
Unifying
the fundamental
forms of energy
by Abdus Salam
Nobel Prizewinner for Physics, 1979
UNTIL about two decades ago, physicists be¬
lieved that there were four fundamental forms
of energy: the gravitational force; the electric
force (including magnetism); the strong nuclear
force, which is responsible for the powerful attrac¬
tion among protons and neutrons, the particles that
compose nuclear material; and the weak force
which plays a vital role in changing one kind of sub¬
atomic particle into another.
Now it is commonplace that all these forms of
energy can be made to interconvert the gravita¬
tional into the electric, for example (hydroelectricity
is a manifestation of this), or the strong nuclear into
electromagnetic (as when the nuclear energy in the
sun's interior converts into the electromagnetic
energy of the heat of the sun's rays).
Twenty years ago, my colleagues and I suggested
that there were indications that the weak nuclear
form of energy was basically simply identical with
the electromagnetic. This was not just a matter of
interconversion of one form of energy into another.
Our results went deeper. In our view, there should
be no basic distinction between electricity and
nuclear forces. We said that they were simply iden¬
tical. We suggested that under suitable conditions
in the laboratory this identity, normally hidden,
could be made manifest.
The first indication of the theory's correctness
came in 1973, when the European Nuclear Research
Laboratory in Geneva (CERN) found experimental
evidence of neutral currents which are an essential
part of the predictions of the theory. The clinching
evidence was provided in 1978 by the Stanford
Linear Accelerator in the United States which, in an
epic experiment, confirmed its second aspect its
heart as it were the unification of the elec¬
tromagnetic force with the weak nuclear to one part
in four thousand as predicted. An experiment at
Novosibirsk by a group led by Professor Barkov fur¬
ther confirmed this.
The next task is to test if the third form of energy
(the strong nuclear) is also part of this unity.
Together with some colleagues, we have drawn up
a theoretical formulation and suggested ex¬
periments to test the idea. These experiments have
begun in the United States of America, in Europe
and in India. If the results are positive, in about
three years we shall have demonstrated that all
nuclear force not just the weak nuclear is iden¬
tical with the electric force which binds an atom
together.
There will then remain the final goal of uniting the
gravitational force with the newly recognized
electro-nuclear force. The epitome of this will be to
find that the force which makes an apple fall or
which keeps the moon in orbit, the force of gravity,
is an aspect of the same unity of which the electric
force or the nuclear forces are part.
As announced at a meeting 'of the European Physical
Society held on 14 July, in Lisbon, the preliminary results
of an experiment carried out recently at a depth of some
2,000 metres at the Kolar gold mines in India supports
Dr. Abdus Salam's theory and seems to have shown that
three of the four fundamental forces indeed form a single
electro-nuclear force. Editor
