The eye
of
the heart
by Rahmatullah
ISLAM is not only a religion, a social
system and a form of culture. It is also
a deep mystical tradition that has
developed over the last fourteen centuries.
Muslim gnoseology distinguishes four
forms of knowledge accessible to man
which, according to the Vll/13th century
Persian Shi'ite philosopher Nasir ad-Din at-
Tusi, are symbolized by four liquids. The
first is sensory perception of the
phenomenal world acquired through the five
senses of the body and the reasoning faculty
of the mind; this is what we call science. It is
symbolized by water, which is a clear
liquid and easy to assimilate.
The second is intuitive knowledge ac¬
quired through the mind's imaginative facul¬
ty; this is the realm of art, literature and
philosophy in the usual sense of the word,
i.e. speculative thought. It is symbolized by
milk, which is a more nourishing drink.
The third form of knowledge is the objec¬
tive study of the supra-sensory experience
of prophets and mystics and of their
teaching; this is philosophy in the
etymological sense of the word, i.e. love for
divine wisdom (theosophia, hikmat ilahiya).
It is symbolized by honey, which is even
more nourishing, and delicious as well.
The fourth kind of knowledge is direct ex¬
perience of supra-sensory Reality acquired
without the intermediary of the physical or
mental faculties through the development of
man's potential powers of spiritual percep¬
tion; it is revelation, divine inspiration or the
mystic dream. It is symbolized by wine,
which transports the drinker to the depths of
himself. It is this celestial knowledge and not
the terrestrial alcoholic drink that is
celebrated by the famous VI /12th century
Persian poet Omar Khayyam in his
Ruba'iyat.
A century later Umar Ibn-al-Farid, the
greatest Arab mystic poet, wrote in his
poem In Praise of Wine :
We drank to the memory of the Beloved a
wine which enraptured us before the vine
was created...
He who has lived on this earth without rap¬
ture has not really lived, and he who has not
died from his rapture is devoid of reason.
For Muslims the supreme example of a
mystical experience is that of the Prophet
Muhammad on the two great "Nights"
celebrated in the Islamic calendar. The first
is the Night of Power, when Muhammad
received the first Qur'anic revelation through
the intervention of the angel Gabriel. The se¬
cond is the Night of the Ascension, when
the Prophet, transported to the Rock of
Jerusalem, had a brief foretaste of the
Resurrection.
Thus the Qur'an, the word of God enun¬
ciated by the Prophet, and the Hadith, or
"sayings" of Muhammad handed down by
his companions, constitute the main source
of mystical meditation in Islam. Particular at¬
tention is given to those verses of the Qur'an
which are of a symbolic nature; the Book
itself encourages this: "Allah gives parables
to men so that they may take heed". (XIV:
25).
Among the Prophet's Hadith are some in
which God speaks in the first person.
Because of this they are called qodsi (holy).
One of the most frequently quoted says: "I
was a hidden Treasure, and I wished to be
known; so I created the world". These in¬
spired words have been the object of special
study by lovers of wisdom.
Mystical meditation also draws from the
almost inexhaustible corpus of writing and
sayings by Muslim mystics which has grown
up in all parts of the Islamic world. Some of
them were prolific writers and produced
monumental works. This was the case of
Muhy'iddin Ibn al-Arabi (born in Andalusia,
died in Damascus in 637 AH/1240 AD).
Shortly before his death he drew up a list of
his 270 works, the longest of which, Meccan
Revelations, comprises 560 chapters.
The Mathnawi of Jalal al-Din Rumi (born
in Balkh, died in Konya in 672 AH/ 1273 AD)
is a 45,000-line epic poem of profound
wisdom and striking beauty. Rumi was the
founder of the Mawlawi Sufi Order, better
known in the West as the whirling der¬
vishes. Two great Persian mystics, Farid al-
Din 'Attar (Vll/13th century) and Jami
(IX/15th century) compiled biographical!
RAHMATULLAH is an authority on Islamic
mysticism. A British citizen (born in the Indian
sub-continent) he is the author of a number of
specialized articles on aspects of Islamic
philosophy.
63

Sufi (Islamic mystic) calligraphers have
often practised a kind of "double"
mirror writing in which the right side of
the composition is a reflection of the
left. Right, giant calligraphy of the
word Huwa "Him" (God) in the
mausoleum of Rumi, the great Sufi
poet in the Persian language, at Konya
¡Turkey). This balanced, harmonious
mirror calligraphy expresses the Sufi
unity with God. Left, portrait of Ja la I al-
Din Rumi (604-672 AH/1207-1273 AD)
also known as Mawlana ("Mevlana",
Our Master, in Turkish). The founder of
the fraternity of the whirling dervishes,
Rumi is considered to be one of the
greatest mystic poets of all time. Apart
from prose works he wrote the Divan-e
Shams e-Tabrizi (The Collected Poems
of Shams of Tabriz) and a vast poem of
some 45,000 verses, the Masnawi, a
veritable mystical epic which has
profoundly Influenced Islamic thought.
-dictionaries and anthologies of the
aphorisms of other Muslim mystics.
But it is mystical poetry that has had the
greatest impact on the Muslim masses. At
first it was written in Arabic, the religious
and cultural language of Islam, but it
gradually spread to other languages.
Whether they wrote in Persian like Hafiz of
Shiraz (Vlll/14th century), in Turkish like
Yunus Emre (Vlll/14th century) or in Urdu
like Khwaja Mir Dard (Xll/18th century), all
described their supra-sensory experience:
Last night, at sunset, I was freed from
anguish; and in the darkness of the night, I
received the Water of eternity.
(Hafiz).
Now, I can offer my doubts to plunder...
For I have renounced myself,
I have discarded the veil which covered my
eyes,
And I have achieved union with the Friend.
(Emre)
Whither, 0 Dard, has my heart cast its
glance?
Wherever I look, I see none but Thee.
(Dard)
The Muslim mystics have always had a
universal outlook. Husain Ibn Mansur al-
Hallaj, the IV/IOth century mystic and mar¬
tyr, sums it up very well when he writes: "I
have pondered on the religious denomina¬
tions, striving hard to understand them, and
I consider them as one principle with many
branches. Do not ask a man therefore to
adopt one denomination rather than
another, for that would divert him from the
essential principle. It is the principle itself
which must seek him out, for through the
principle all greatness and all meanings
become clear. Then will man understand".
In his Book Uniting the Two Wisdoms,
the Ismaili philosopher-poet Nasir-i
Khusraw, who lived in Persia in the V/11th
century, demonstrated the harmony bet¬
ween Greek philosophy and Islamic
gnosticism. Similarly, in the Xl/17th cen¬
tury, prince Dara Shikoh, son of the Indian
emperor Shah Jahan, and himself a mystic,
asserted that, apart from a few superficial
differences of terminology, Sufism and the
Advaita Vedanta (the philosophical system
of Brahmanism) were fundamentally the
same thing. It has been pointed out that one
finds in Sufism tales relating to the Buddha,
such as those on which Ibn Sina (Avicenna),
the great V/11th century philosopher-
physician of Central Asia, based his Tale of
Salman and Absal.
"We created man. We know the promp¬
tings of his soul, and are closer to him than
the vein of his neck", God says in the Qur'an
(L: 16). And one of the Prophet's Hadith
quoted by the mystics says: "He who knows
his soul (nafs) knows his Lord". It is through
the hidden depths of his being that man can
hope to know supra-sensory Reality. But
such knowledge cannot be attained through
the physical or mental faculties. To
recognize this limitation of human nature is
to have a presentiment of the supra-sensory
world, as Abu Bakr, the first caliph of Islam,
puts it: "Praise be to God who gave His
creatures only one path to His knowledge:
their inability to know Him". And the lll/9th
century Egyptian mystic Dhu n-Nun-al-Misri
said: "He knows God best who thinks he
knows Him least".
Knowledge of supra-sensory Reality can
be attained only through the development of
a faculty of spiritual perception called the
Eye of the Heart. But this is a grace from
God and cannot be acquired through the will
of man. "I saw my Lord with the Eye of my
Lord", says the Prophet. And 'Attar ex¬
plains: "You must know God through God
Himself, not through yourself. He, not
human wisdom, shows the path that leads
to Him."
The Heart (qalb) or spiritual Soul is an on-
tological state or level of being between
human nature (nasut) and divine nature
(lahut). It is the rampart (barzakh)
separating the two seas mentioned in the
Qur'an (XXV: 53). It is the ¡nterworld, the
celestial Earth between the terrestrial earth
and Heaven. It is the angelical world Calam
al-malakut) of the angel Gabriel. It is the
spiritual centre, symbolized by the Ka'ba at
Mecca and by the Rock of Jerusalem,
towards which the aspiring mystic travels in
order to accomplish his esoteric pilgrimage,
the Great Pilgrimage. It is the Active Im¬
agination or Intellect contemplating the in¬
telligible world. It is the Throne of God. One
of the Prophet's Hadith qodsi quoted by the
mystics says: "My earth cannot contain Me,
nor can My heavens, but the Heart of My
faithful servant can contain Me".
The Heart or the spiritual Soul only
reflects its own Soul which is the Holy Spirit
(ruh al-qods) or Soul of the Soul. "The Soul
is concealed in the body, and Thou art con¬
cealed in the Soul," says 'Attar. "0 Soul of
the Soul, Thou art greater than everything
and before everything. All is seen through
Thee, and Thou art seen in all things".
The Holy Spirit is the Face of the Lord
mentioned in the Qur'an (LV: 27), the Belov¬
ed of the mystics, and the Active In¬
telligence of the philosophers. It is the divine
Nature (lahut) which conceals the divine
Essence (hahut) or divine Abyss.
64

Ibn 'Arabi described his mystical dream in
these words; "Active Imagination achieved
in me such strength that it showed me my
mystical Beloved in a corporeal, objective,
extra-mental form, as the angel Gabriel ap¬
peared corporeally to the Prophet. At first I
did not have the strength to gaze upon this
Form. It spoke to me; I would listen and
understand... I never ceased to gaze upon
this Form whether I was standing or seated,
moving or at rest".
I saw my Lord with the Eye of the Heart,
says Hallaj. "I asked: Who art Thou? and He
answered: Thou." For to the mystic only
God really exists; any existence outside of
Him is as unreal as an image in a mirror.
Amadou Hampaté Bâ, a disciple of Tyerno
Bokar Salif Tal, a Muslim mystic of negro
Africa, has expressed this very well:
"Basically, there is only one existence: that
of God, one letter: alif (the first letter of the
Arabic alphabet); one number: 'one'. ". Bet¬
ween microcosm and Macrocosm there is
therefore a fundamental unity of being
(wahdat al-wojud) like the identity of
substance between a drop of water and' the
ocean, as Omar Khayyam explained:
The drop of water began to weep, because
it had been separated from the Ocean.
The Ocean began to laugh, saying: "It is we
who are all;
Verily, there is no other God outside
ourselves;
And all that separates us is a single, a/most
invisible speck".
But the microcosm cannot claim to be the
Macrocosm, any more than a drop of water
can claim to be the Ocean. Concern for
maintaining the absolute transcendence of
God, together with a fear of descent into
pantheism, gave rise to the hostility of the
exoteric authorities against the Muslim
mystics. Because he had exclaimed while in
ecstasy, "I am the real Truth (haqq)", Hallaj
was beheaded in Baghdad in 309 AH/
922 AD. Five centuries later, in distant Java,
another Muslim mystic, Sjech Siti Djenar,
was to be executed for a similar pronounce¬
ment made in a state of ecstasy.
It was the famous V/11th century
theologian Abu Hamid al-Ghazali who
restored mysticism to the mainstream of
Islam. He relates in his autobiographical
treatise how, after a spiritual crisis during
which he doubted the truth of religion, he
realized that mysticism was the best an¬
tidote against scepticism and constituted
the loftiest aspect of religion. In his most
famous work, Vivification of the Religious
Sciences, he reminds the community of
the mystical tendency which had marked
Islam in the time of the Prophet and his
companions.
In the Vl/12th century, Abd al-Qadir
al-Jilani, a hanbalite jurist who became a
Sufi, established the Qadiriyya religious
brotherhood which developed rapidly and
became the most important Sufi Order.
The development of the faculty of
spiritual perception is an act of God, not of
man, but man nevertheless can hasten this
event, as the Prophet explains in one of his
best known Hadith qodsi: Nothing that
brings my servant close to Me is more ac¬
ceptable to Me than the fulfilment of the
duties I have prescribed for him. In addition.
My worshipper constantly draws nearer to
Me through supplementary acts of devotion
until I love him. And, when I love him, I am
the hearing with which he hears, the sight
with which he sees, the hand with which he
strikes, the foot on which he walks".
Speaking of the Heart, Rumi asks: "Do
you know why your mirror reflects nothing?
It is because it has not been cleansed of
rust. If it had been rid of all rust and all
defilement, it would reflect the light of
God's sun... He who recognizes and con¬
fesses his faults moves swiftly towards
perfection. But he who considers himself
perfect does not move towards the Omni¬
potent. No sickness can ravage your soul
worse than imagining yourself perfect".
The Prophet said: "For each thing there is
a solvent that removes rust; and the solvent
of the Heart is the invocation of God." And
the Qur'an says: "Pray to your Lord with
humility and in secret" (VII: 55). This is the
esoteric prayer, the Great Prayer. Sultan
Muhammad Aga Khan, Imam of the Ismaili
Shi'ites, develops this in the following way:
"It is said in the Qur'an that we live, act and
exist in God. This concept is often express-
ed»in the Holy Book in terms that are both
strong and poetic. When the deep meaning
of these words becomes clear to us, we are
ready to receive the gift of revelation".
"He who knows God, loves Him; and he
who knows the world renounces it," said al-
Hasan al-Basri (ll/8th century), one of the
first Sufis. And the Prophet said: "In this
world be like a stranger or a traveller". And
ad-Din Attar declared: "Destroy yourself;
therein lies perfection. Renounce yourself;
this is the pledge of your union with Him.
That is all". But renouncing the world does
not mean shunning the world, as the
Xlll/19th century African warrior-
philosopher al-Haj 'Omar has explained;
"Asceticism does not consist in withdraw¬
ing from the world, but in banishing it from
one's heart."
For renunciation is the result of a struggle
waged amid the trials and temptations of J
65


VunuS fmremiz
*f'^\s^mm\
//| *" & ^m
H
ISw^l« r^vr
IPrA^.ùfrycr ^^9 *kif7t.
| ^rz^uy^s^^^s^sx^^s^s^^ Il
3t** Wmca. JO J»**-
Above, portrait of the poet and Sufi
(Islamic mystic) Yunus Emre, one of the
great figures of Turkish literature. Little
is known about his life. He was born
around the middle of the Vll/13th
century, lived in Anatolia, and died
c. 719 AH/1320 AD. Tradition has it that
he was poor, of peasant origin, and
belonged to a dervish religious
fraternity. His work, written in Turkish,
expresses deep feeling in direct, simple
language. It marked a sharp break with
that of the other writers of his age who
were steeped in Persian culture and
book-learning, and
has had an enduring influence on
Turkish lyrical poetry.
-this world against one's demanding self
(nafs al-amarrah), the "egoity" that men call
Satan. This is the inner battle (jihad), the
Great Battle. And the Pakistani mystic
Muhammad Iqbal (1877-1938) urges us to
struggle ceaselessly:
Do not dally on the shore
where life's melody dies a gentle death.
Leap into the sea, fight with the waves,
for immortality is won through struggle...
Happy the man whose soul knows no
repose.
Jami, author of two great love poems,
Layla wa Majnun and Yusuf wa Zulaykha,
maintains that passionate human love
prepares man for Divine love: "If you would
be free, be a prisoner of love. If you would
be happy, open your heart to the suffering
of love. The wine of love brings warmth and
rapture; without it there is nothing but icy
selfishness... You can pursue many ¡deals,
but only love will deliver you from yourself.
If you long for a draught of the mystic wine,
sip first the wine of appearances".
Sultan Muhammad Aga Khan explains it
admirably in these words: "He who is for¬
tunate enough to arouse and feel the love of
a human being should give himself up to it
66
and respond gratefully, considering it a
blessing and a source of pride... But, just as
the joys of human love surpass all that
wealth and power can bring to a man, so
spiritual love and revelation the fruit of this
sublime perception, of this direct vision of
Truth, which is a gift and a grace of
God surpass all that the deepest and most
sincere human love can bring us."
"All paths lead to God," says Rumi. "I
have chosen that of dance and music... He
who loves, feeds his love by listening to
music, for music reminds him of the joys of
his first union with God".
The fact that the XIV/20th century has
produced such great Muslim mystics as the
Moroccan Ahmad al-'Alawi, the Pakistani
Muhammad Iqbal, the Peul Tyerno Bokar
Salif Tal, the Libyan Ahmad Zarruq and the
Iranian Sultan Muhammad Aga Khan proves
the extent to which mysticism is still alive to¬
day in Islam. And it will remain alive, as is
stated in this Hadith of the Prophet Muham¬
mad: "The world will always have forty men
like the Friend of the Merciful (the prophet
Abraham). Through them you will receive
both food and drink."
M Rahmatullah

