African youth
between tradition
and modernity
by Boubakar Ly
The United Nations has proclaimed 1985 International
Youth Year and, as a major contribution to its prepara¬
tion, Unesco has just published Youth in the 1980s (see
inside back cover). The book includes a synthesis
report on the prospects for youth in the present
decade, which was presented to the General Con¬
ference of Unesco at its twenty-first session, and a
panorama of the situation of young people around the
world. The article below is based on extracts from a
chapter devoted to the rapidly changing world of
African youth.
Abrief examination of the position of
youth in traditional African society
reveals certain characteristic fea¬
tures. The first is the limited and relatively
small-scale character of traditional society,
which was organized on ethnic, tribal, clan
and lineage rather than on national lines.
The real social group was often made up of
the living descendants of a known common
ancestor. The latter were grouped together
within! the villages, where they were
members of other non-kinship groups such
as age-groups and affinity groups.
The whole social system was held
together by regard for the ancestors, who
were the cornerstone and guarantors of the
social order. Tradition legitimized by the
ancestors was the main factor for social
integration.
Young Africans grew up in this social and
ethical context. Indeed, either individually or
collectively they were taken in hand by the
community and its various institutions and
personalities at every stage of their lives.
From earliest youth their families taught
them to live within a broad social setting;
and this eventually accustohned them to'the
presence of others.
The community at large for its part show¬
ed them adults as interchangeable, and gave
every adult the right to take part in their up-
BOUBAKAR LY, Senegalese educator, is lec¬
turer in sociology at the University of Dakar. He is
the author of many sociological studies ofAfrican
institutions. The present article has been adapted
from "African Youth Between Tradition and
Modernity", his contribution to Youth in the
1980s, just published by Unesco (see inside back
cover).
28
bringing. Similarly with age-groups, which
acted as a finishing-school by giving young
people a collective education consisting
essentially of training for independence.
Education was in general diffuse, infor¬
mal, pragmatic and functional. Vocational
training formed no small part of it: in tradi¬
tional African society it was one of the
dimensions of human kind, for it was part of
life. Training was progressive, in step with
the acquisition of maturity in life. Vocational
training was concerned inter alia to
reproduce the position of the father, mother
or other person in charge of the child. Social
and occupational mobility were unknown in
this kind of society. The reproduction of the
position of the "authorities" in charge of the
young person was facilitated by family tradi¬
tion, which acted here as a justificatory
ideology. Tradition as ideology served to fix
the young person in his or her occupation
and place in society. In other words, society
suggested to young people that their place
in society was prestigious because it was
that of the founding ancestors and all their
descendants from time immemorial.
In such a context work of whatever kind
carried prestige. Young people accepted
and loved their trades. They were in a hurry
to finish their training and take their place in
the family production structures, which
society skilfully portrayed as imbued with
both honour and prestige.
Once their training was complete, young
people were started off in life by society.
This "starting-off", be it noted, took place
when society judged it opportune. It took
the form of declaring the young person's in¬
dividuality within the community. The
young man or woman came in a sense to
model his or her life on that of the group.
Traditional African society neither allowed
nor encouraged young people to become in¬
dependent. "Liberation" in traditional socie¬
ty consisted of splitting off in order to
become more firmly embedded in the group.
Young people did, of course, show signs of
impatience and rebellion, but these were the
marks of their eagerness to acquire as soon
as possible the freedom to take root.
Society as such was never challenged. No
one tried to break away from parental care
and start life elsewhere: indeed, young peo¬
ple aimed rather to integrate themselves into
society by becoming more responsible and
playing a part in perpetuating it. The act of
freedom lay in the will to play a part in
perpetuating society. Once young people
became responsible members of society,
they helped to perpetuate it by up-dating at
their level the traditional models of authori¬
ty, which were in fact distinctively African
cultural models.
Reference to models of authority and
dignity was facilitated by another aspect of
the education of young people, namely the
teaching of history.
This society was, after all, founded on the
ancestors: and consequently it was con¬
tinual reference to them (and hence to the
history of the group) that helped to forge,
sustain and reinforce the sense of belonging
to a community. The history of the group
was young people's constant companion;
they were steeped in it, because they were
always in the line of descent. Genealogy was
not merely a fact, it was also a value.
Ancestry had prestige value, like a coat of
arms. The roll-call of ancestral names was a
matter of pride. When consciously asserted
it served to make the young man or woman
part of an honourable line, within an
honoured structure.
This continual reference to the history of
the family, through mythical or legendary
ancestors and some actual heroes, was an
effective technique of psychological integra¬
tion, designed to reinforce community spirit
by broadening its base so as to make it in
some respects comparable to present-day
national pride.
The existence of this community spirit
was a major factor in developing in young
people the readiness to serve already
fostered by their family education.
The system of values was such that youth
had a duty to serve. Any youngster was
available and could be called on at any time
by any adult or by the community to do a
service. Community service was thus far
from being a chore; it was part of life. By
and large, African youngsters in traditional
society, as turned out by the educational
system, were characterized by a number of
inter-related traits, namely the habit of living
with other people, willingness to serve,
sense of identification with their parents, ac¬
ceptance of their lot and devotion to their
trade, dedication to the values of the com¬
munity, and acute awareness of member¬
ship of and identification with the group.

These traits combined with others to pro¬
duce a type of African man who has been
represented as the epitome of "peasant
humanism".
African youth, which in the traditional
period attracted attention for its adaptation
to society, began to set society problems
and to see itself as a problem when African
society underwent radical changes. These
changes were primarily introduced by col¬
onization, but were then taken up and
developed on new lines by the independent
régimes.
The problems of youth have taken on a
new aspect in modern society. The latter
developed out of colonization, and has cer¬
tain characteristic features: market
economy, complex organic division of
labour, population growth, emergence of
towns and the formation of national political
entities. Moreover, it is part of a world
characterized by unequal development, by
colonial, neocolonial and generally im¬
perialist domination.
It is in this general context that youth has
become a problem and society has become
a problem for young people. It is difficult to
separate youth from other social groups, as
is often done. Its problems are bound up
with those of society as a whole, their
specificity has probably been exaggerated.
It can be argued that the essential feature
of the position of modern youth is failure to
integrate. Modern African youth is malad¬
justed, both objectively and psychologically,
to society. There are several reasons for this.
Probably one of the most remarkable
phenomena of contemporary African socie¬
ty is population growth and the number of
young people. In 1976, of a total popula¬
tion of 413,000,000, 253,469,000 or some¬
what more than half were young people
below the age of 24. The annual average
growth rate of the population of Africa from
1975 to 1980 has been estimated at 2.8 per
cent.
This general population growth has been
accompanied by an internal rearrangement
of the structure of society; and paradoxical
as it may seem, scope for the individual's in¬
tegration into society has diminished.
What has happened is that the social
group in which young people grow up has
become narrower, kinship no longer being
as important as it used to be. Clans and
lineages have disappeared and been replac¬
ed by the extended family, and in the cities
by the nuclear family that is now taking
over. This narrowing of the social field is ac¬
companied by a process of individuation.
The individual is becoming a sociological
fact.
The extent to which nuclear families and
individuals are becoming independent has,
however, been exaggerated. In the country¬
side the problem does not arise, whilst in the
towns relatively extensive kinship networks
still exist. Nuclear families and individuals
form part of social networks, and it is rare to
find either quite alone. There is always some
kin in the background: if necessary it may be
some form of surrogate. It is, after all, com¬
mon in Africa to find that where no real
(biological) kinship exists a surrogate
(social) kinship takes its place. It is in this
context that modern youth must be con¬
sidered. The social system in which it is
growing up is new, but retains some of the
characteristics of traditional society.
The State has replaced the traditional clan
community as the all-embracing society on
which modern African young people de¬
pend. From now on it is the State that gives
them their political status and nationality,
and also takes over responsibility for their
education. In other words, an abstract, ra¬
tional, bureaucratic grouping unconnected
with the family has replaced a concrete
grouping based on emotional ties and linked
with the family because rooted in kinship.
Moreover this new phenomenon, the
State, is not the result of the inner
dynamism of African society. To establish
itself, it had to "cut into the flesh" and
replace what Lévi-Strauss calls "home¬
made models". The African State was
established from outside, which explains
why it is not always functional in relation to
the pre-existing social structures, even
though African societies have adopted it
and (in the sociological sense of the word)
reinterpreted certain aspects of it.
Nowadays there is practically nothing any
more between the family and the State, and
many sectors of traditional education that
were presided over by intermediate institu¬
tions such as age-groups, initiation groups
and the adult community have fallen by the
wayside. The modern family can no longer
undertake them, and the State as conceived
is not designed for such tasks. Hence
education today is in smithereens, and the
State, which has replaced the all-embracing
community, accepts responsibility for only
one aspect of education t- intellectual
training.
All contemporary African societies sup¬
port the current world movement according
to which elementary education is the right of
every citizen. The Universal Declaration of
Human Rights lays an obligation on all
States signatories to the Charter of the
United Nations to give their citizens elemen¬
tary education. At Addis Ababa in 1961
Africa adopted a resolution under which all
participating States undertook to achieve
universal compulsory education by 1980.
The obstacles they encountered in fulfilling
the objective were discussed at the Nairobi,
Lagos and many other conferences.
Despite the considerable efforts that have
been made, Africa today is still a continent
in which ignorance is pretty well-developed.
In 1970 it accounted for 18.7 per cent of
total world illiteracy for the 15 and over age-
group. This figure is expected to reach
19.7 per cent in 1990. For the same year
(1970) African illiterates from 15 to 19 made
up 26.8 per cent of the world total for this
age-group. In 1975 51.5 per cent of children
from 6 to 1 1 , 31 .2 per cent of those from 12
to 17 and 5.8 per cent for those from 18 to
23 were enrolled in schools. In all only
32.3 per cent of young people from 6 to 23
were at school. The school-attendance rate
for this age-bracket was expected to reach
41.8 per cent in 1980. The percentage of
girls attending school for the period
1965/1975 is 6.8. Hence a great many young
people are still outside the educational
system. Since the extra-familial training "in¬
stitutions have virtually ceased to exist,
some young people are thus left without any
collective training. Those in rural areas may
still, in default of a general education, be
taught a trade. This is more than can be said
of urban youth, who are often doomed to
receive no schooling but that of the streets.
The second difficulty that modern schools
encounter flows from the fact that they no
longer train the complete man. The effect of
their approach is to fragment what was once
an all-round education. African societies did
not have schools: they represent a cultural
phenomenon from the history of other
civilizations. The school, in its classic form,
is concerned with only part of map's
psychological whole, namely the intellect.
Intellectual training has now replaced all-
round education, and modern Afrirjan
schools are concerned with only one side of
a child's personality. The result is that a
cieavage has developed that affects the
structure of the personality. Children
operate within two unconnected worlds,
family and school. The point has been made
that in Africa "starting school" represents
entry to a cold, abstract, rational, intellec¬
tual world quite different from the emotional
world of the family. It is true that this
cleavage between the two worlds is a
universal phenomenon and that in all
societies going to school for the first time is
traumatic for children. Nevertheless, in the
case of Africa there is the further point that
school and family represent different
cultural worlds. The cleavage between
school and family tends to persist, like the
fragmentation of the educational process.
Schools are divorced from society. The
transition from family to school means mov¬
ing from one language to another. The use
of a foreign language is in itself an alienating
factor; but then so is the subject-matter
taught. Specialists have been very struck by
the unsuitability of school syllabuses.
African cultural situations do not occur in
the texts set for children, and real life is not
reflected in the facts or values. The situa¬
tions, actions, behaviour, attitudes and
words used often have no African flavour. In
view of this it is hard for children fully to
understand the models they are given or to
identify with them.
The situation has the additional drawback
of instilling (often unconsciously) foreign
life-styles. Hence schools play no small part
in the alienation of young Africans, and will
probably continue to do so in the years to
come unless the situation is remedied.
Traditional society automatically saw to
the training and placing of the young, but
modern society has run into difficulties over
this. Because of the complexity of the divi¬
sion of labour, trades have proliferated and
professional mobility has increased along
CONTINUED PAGE 32
29

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 29
with them. Under the new system of values
in Africa, occupations have become in¬
dividualized, and young people no longer
necessarily ply their parents' trades. They
have in a sense been "liberated", but only at
a price. Apart from the peasantry and cer¬
tain craft industries, families no longer pro¬
vide vocational training. The State, which
has replaced the traditional collective institu¬
tions, does not provide it either. It is active
in certain limited sectors such as education
(general or technical), and for some time has
attempted to give out-of-school training.
The state of education being what it is, a
great many young people find themselves
without any vocational training.
Nothing is done for children not attending
school, or for all those who have been
weeded out by successive selection steps or
have had to give up school for one reason or
another. These young people without voca¬
tional training make up with some adults the
mass of the unemployed.
Youth unemployment in particular has
been a matter of concern to the authorities,
especially since it has a number of causes
and effects, such as the flight from the land.
"The first evidence of unemployment
came not from statistics but from the ap¬
pearance in the towns of people who ob¬
viously had nothing to do. They came in in¬
creasing numbers, and lived in shanty
towns..."
The flight from the land is due among
other things to the unprofitability of
agricultural work and its seasonal character.
It is brought about by lack of land. The
migrants come to town to earn money. The
importance of money in modern African
societies has been noted. The monetariza-
tion of the economy drives people to go and
look for money where it is to be found, i.e.
mainly in the towns.
This has certain consequences for the
towns, such as "vagrancy", to mention only
one, though this term is not always quite ap¬
propriate. After all, it is questionable
whether "vagrancy" is the right word for
certain features of African life that are
described as such. "Vagrancy" is a relative
notion, and varies according to the cultural
context. The term is inappropriate to the
situation of those young people who come
to town on the off chance, and then live by
their wits in an economy based on living by
one's wits. For underdevelopment leads to
an attitude of "all's grist that comes to the
mill", and to the emergence of trades that
not only are not regarded as such in other
cultures but do not even exist in them.
Hence the youths you hear calling out
"Madam, let me carry your shopping bag"
or "Madam, let me look after your car", and
the paper boys and shoeshine boys found in
many African societies all "trades" plied
only by young people.
It has been stressed that those who leave
are the marginals of the community: but this
is not always the case. Those who
leave especially the young people are the
representatives of the community. Hence
migration is an organized affair, as it often
was in traditional society. The young have
all the more reason to leave because they
realize that the low profitability of
agriculture does not always allow them to
make a living. New needs have appeared
both in the country and the towns. The
flight from the land may be expected to con¬
tinue in the years ahead, and even to be in¬
tensified by the economic crisis.
In a society needs are related to historical
and cultural development. In the case of
Africa, young people in modern society can¬
not have the same needs as their parents at
their age. They aspire to certain forms of
consumption offered by modern society.
They also experience a state of affairs that
their parents could in the nature of things
not experience, namely boredom. Nothing
worthwhile happens in town or coun¬
try still less in the country than in
the towns. Youth does not feel itself involv¬
ed in any "grand design" or general
mobilization. Furthermore, now that
modern society has lost its sense of fun,
young people no longer enjoy themselves in
a worthwhile way.
What young people come to town to look
for is a chance to be. Here the idea of magic
combines with the spirit of adventure. Peo¬
ple go to town because something might
happen there that certainly does not happen
in the country. Migration is therefore a way
of achieving freedom, all the more because
A
y
1 Á

young people can no longer feel at home,
especially after being introduced at school
to a modern cultural world with which they
can no longer fully identify. Nor can they
any longer fully identify with their parents,
though remaining emotionally attached to
them. Very often when asked about their
parents young people reply that they are
"decent folk" who make considerable
sacrifices and work for a pittance. They also
reproach them (and this shows how deeply
they resent their situation) with accepting
their lot. Their parents' occupations are no
longer regarded as prestigious, and by and
large young people have lost interest in
manual pursuits. In other words, a very im¬
portant factor for social integration, which
worked normally in traditional society, can
no longer do so.
Unable to identify with their parents,
young people are sometimes faced with
problems of authority. They often reproach
adults with no longer having authority and
no longer knowing how to bring them
up in short, with no longer taking them in
hand as they would like to be taken. The
question is how parents are to re-establish
their authority, and how young people are to
be persuaded to ply manual trades. The
future will increasingly see a rift between the
situation of parents and the aspirations of
young people, especially among the peasan¬
try and the urban rank and file.
Unfortunately the crisis of authority in
modern society often leads to delinquency.
Delinquents are generally in an abnormal
family situation. Merely moving from coun¬
try to town does not automatically produce
delinquency; it all depends on the situation
they are moving into. In most cases delin¬
quents find themselves in a social (and par¬
ticularly a family) vacuum. Young people
very often turn to the State, asking of it
something it cannot give. The same is true
of those parents who, reacting as they
would have done in traditional society, try to
hand over to the State in this case to the
police children they have difficulty in con¬
trolling. The State often only acts when the
misdemeanour has been committed, and
then applies repressive remedies.
This State intervention after the event il¬
lustrates the difficulties facing modern
African society. The family as a factor for
social cohesion is not supported by institu¬
tions in our all-embracing society. Modern
society does not take responsibility for
young people (or does so badly); and in view
of this vacuum they withdraw into
themselves and try to find their own solu¬
tions. The social vacuum will become more
acute, and young people are increasingly
turning in on themselves in order to fill it.
This brings us to the problem of
psychological integration through con¬
sciousness of belonging to a nation, i.e. na¬
tional awareness.
Traditional society managed by continual
reference to the history of the group to
create an awareness of shared allegiance,
attachment to lasting values and acceptance
of society's goals. Modern society, despite
the attempts that have been made, is not
quite able to bring about and sustain a
minimal awareness of belonging to a single
group, because of ideological and political
divisions. There are also the difficulties that
stem from ethnic and tribal differences,
which although they have sometimes been
exaggerated are nevertheless real. Modern
African youth is thus often deprived of an
important dimension in the shaping of its
social and cultural personality, namely an
opportunity to identify with the group and
its shared values. In Africa the State, which
as has often been shown preceded the na¬
tion, has the historic task of building na¬
tional awareness. This national awareness is
inseparable from awareness of political
"Africanity": they are dialectically linked.
Here again the integration of youth presup¬
poses that modern African societies find
suitable ways of inculcating in it the idea of
its "Africanity", in which cultural values play
a considerable part.
This task will be the easier because
despite all the difficulties mentioned African
youth is not incurably alienated. The striking
thing in Africa, and this needs emphasizing,
is the strength of tradition. Traditional
African society is still alive; it has extra¬
ordinary powers of survival and hence of
recovery.
B Boubakar Ly
"Modern society, despite the
attempts that have been made,
is not quite able to bring about
and sustain a minimal
awareness of belonging to a
single group, because of
ideological and political
divisions... Modern African
youth is thus often deprived of
an important dimension in the
shaping of its social and
cultural personalityan
opportunity to identify with the
group and its shared values. "
33
