Unesco
and special education
for handicapped children
Photo Eduardo Gajeiro, Unesco

Alarge proportion of the population
in all countries (10 to 15 per cent)
is affected by handicaps, whether
sensorial, motor or mental, which limit their
capacity to benefit from an ordinary educa¬
tion. The handicapped require an education
adapted to their potential, their capabilities
and their needs "special education" as it
has come to be called which will enable
them to develop their skills in order to
become full members of the society to
which they belong and to achieve personal
development towards independence.
Special education is thus the educational
component of rehabilitation. It is needed for
all those individuals who experience or are at
risk of experiencing significant and continu¬
ing difficulties in learning and in adjusting to
normal educational opportunities made
available to other persons.
It need hardly be said that special educa¬
tion has always been a matter of prime in¬
terest to Unesco, an interest that was
underlined in 1966 when at its 14th session
the General Conference of Unesco authoriz¬
ed the Director-General to "develop a pro¬
gramme in special education for handicap¬
ped children and young people on the basis
of voluntary contributions from Member
States."
Since then significant advances in
teaching techniques and important in
novative developments have taken place in
the field of special education, particularly
during the past decade, and much more can
be achieved in the teaching of handicapped
persons than was previously thought possi¬
ble. Many of these advances in teaching
techniques can be adapted to the needs of
developing countries with limited reserves of
materials and personnel.
In the light of these developments the
General Conference of Unesco, at its 20th
session held in October-November 1978, in¬
structed the Director-General to "formulate,
with the assistance of outside experts, a
comprehensive, long-range programme of
action designed to enhance the rights of all
handicapped persons to an appropriate
education which meets their needs and
aspirations".
As a first step an international meeting on
special education, attended by experts from
fourteen countries, was held at Unesco
headquarters in Paris in October 1979. The
experts drew up a statement of principles
by which Unesco's programme should be
guided.
Reaffirming the right of every child to an
education, the experts declared that the pur¬
poses and goals of education were essential¬
ly similar for all children, even though the
techniques required to help individual
children progress might be different. Some
children would require substantial modifica¬
tion of the educational programme while the
needs of others could be met by only minor
variations. Educational resources for han¬
dicapped students should be comparable to
those available for other students and ap¬
propriate to meet their special and often
long neglected needs.
The experts pointed out that while special
educational programmes would necessarily
entail additional expenditures and each na¬
tion was faced with the fact that it had insuf¬
ficient funds to meet all its purposes, the
costs of failing to provide early identification
and education of handicapped children and
subsequently to train those children and
place them in the work force were much
greater. Studies of rehabilitation and educa¬
tion programmes across the world showed
that the economic advantages from such
programmes in productivity, payment of
taxes by handicapped persons and reduced
need for welfare assistance and disability
stipends, outweighed the costs. Failure to
educate and train handicapped persons in
proportions equal to the provisions of ser¬
vices for the non-handicapped, because of
the problem being perceived as a lower
priority, resulted later in expensive pro¬
grammes to care for the untreated disabled.
Developing nations, as they formulated new
approaches to educating children, should be k
aware of the problem other nations had had |
WORLD CONFERENCE IN MADRID, NOVEMBER 1981
How can physically and mentally
handicapped persons best be given the
opportunity to become involved and
integrated into daily life as independent
and productive members of their
communities? This question, together
with the problem of the prevention of
handicaps, will be the focus of discussion
at a major international conference to be
held in Madrid later this year, from 2 to
7 November. The conference is being
prepared by Unesco in collaboration with
the Spanish Government and with the
help of the competent intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations
(especially the United Nations, the World
Health Organization, the International
Labour Organisation and the United
Nations Children's Fund). The Madrid
Conference will be multidisciplinary in
nature and will provide a forum for a wide
exchange of experience, views and
information on the present state of
education for handicapped people and an
occasion on which "the main lines of
international action in favour of special
education and in favour of prevention, of
re-education and of assistance for the
physically and mentally handicapped will
be studied and defined".
13

( ¡n following this approach of giving a low
priority to the handicapped.
Special educational services should, the
experts declared, be tailored to meet the
assessed and agreed needs of the individual
student and should lead to clearly stated
curriculum goals and short-term objectives
which should be regularly reviewed and
where necessary revised. They should be
within reasonable travelling distance of the
pupil's home or residence except in special
circumstances where the pupil's needs
could not be met by these means. They
should be comprehensive, serving all per¬
sons with special needs irrespective of age
or degree of handicap. No child of school
age should be excluded from educational
provision on grounds of severity of handicap
or receive educational services significantly
inferior to those enjoyed by any other stu¬
dent. They should offer a range of choices
commensurate with the range of special
needs in any given community.
The experts devoted part of their discus¬
sion to the question of the integration of the
handicapped into the normal educational
system, a matter about which there is still
considerable controversy, which is reflected
in the articles on pages 16 and 20 of this
issue of the Unesco Courier.
Special education programmes would in
the future be found in a variety of settings,
with some disabled children able to par¬
ticipate in a regular school setting, while
others would require very intensive pro¬
grammes. There should be, as a basic
assumption underlying educational and
other efforts on behalf of the handicapped,
a commitment to integrating the disabled
person as fully as possible into the com¬
munity of non-handicapped persons.
History was replete with examples of un¬
necessary segregation of disabled, and con¬
sequent substandard treatment and
discrimination.
Integration of the handicapped into the
normal educational system was an increas¬
ingly common practice. Short - and long-
term studies showed that achievement
among handicapped people who were
educated in a specialized setting was no
greater than that of .those educated in
regular classes. The special class or school
tended from the outset to take a pessimistic
view of the pupils' potential, which under¬
mined their chances since they were inclined
to conform to this pessimistic ¡mage.
It was necessary to stress the positive ad¬
vantages of integration. With integration
there was less need for costly special
building and additional highly specialized
staff; in developing countries, educational
facilities were extended to more children; a
handicapped child adapted more easily to
living in ordinary society the earlier he or she
began to do so; the non-handicapped grew
up with the handicapped and learned to ac¬
cept them and their disabilities from the
beginning.
The experts pointed out, however, that
integration was not the answer to every
problem and it did not mean the mere
physical placement of handicapped children
in ordinary schools. It required very careful
planning and preparation of teachers, and
the development of support services.
Care should always be taken to ensure
that integration was in the best interests of
the child. For this reason the needs of each
individual child had to be considered, and
decisions made as to what type of educa¬
tional provision, given the options available,
would best suit him or her.
Finally, the experts stressed that, ¡n view
of the discrepancies in types and degrees of
handicaps as well as the diversity of condi¬
tions in different countries, there was a need
for a variety of appropriate educational pro¬
vision for handicapped children; some might
need special schools, others separate pro¬
grammes for part of the day or for certain
periods of their lives, while other children
could profit from a regular classroom with
some extra periods of instruction or help.
Countries would have to study what was
best suited to their conditions and develop
their strategies accordingly.
Photo La Nacion-Unesco
ACCESS TO WORKS
PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT
In line with objectives of the International Year for Disabled Persons, Unesco has taken steps to
facilitate access by disabled persons to works protected by copyright.
A request has gone out to Member States to help meet a pressing need in developing countries
for printed works and audio-visual materials. Assistance is also being sought in arranging for the
holders of copyright to assign the reproduction, translation or adaptation rights for Braille
publications and audio-visual materials designed for handicapped persons on preferential terms
to publishers in developing countries.
A second programme has been undertaken jointly with the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO) in co-operation with the World Council for the Welfare of the Blind (WCWB).
States party to the two major copyright Conventions, the Universal Copyright Convention and
the International Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, administered
respectively by Unesco and WIPO, have been asked to consider questions relative to the free
flow of recorded and embossed reading materials for blind and physically handicapped readers.
Comments on a study prepared by the WCWB will be used as the basis for recommendations
aiming to define and harmonize international co-operation and provide the widest possible access
to materials for the visually handicapped. A similar study is being undertaken regarding the
problems facing the hard of hearing in co-operation with the World Federation of the Deaf.
INTERNATIONAL RESPECT FOR
THE RIGHTS OF THE DISABLED
What legal protection is offered to handicapped children by existing international instruments?
The answer to this important question can be found in La protection des Droits des
Personnes Handicapées par Différents Instruments Internationaux ('The Protection of the
Rights of Handicapped Persons by Different International Instruments"), which is being published
(in French! by Unesco later this year. (An abridged version in English is in preparation!. Most
international organizations have long been concerned, each in its own field of competence, with
promoting the rights of handicapped children. But the texts they have produced are scattered as
to their sources and of variable legal value. The Unesco publication presents analytical
assessments of international texts relating to the handicapped child in the fields of civil,
economic, professional, social and family life. Through this work Unesco is seeking to persuade
governments to ratify existing conventions and to respond to the need to generalize these rights
in a single international convention. Left, handicapped persons demonstrate in defence of their
rights in Costa Rica.
14

r~
Photo i Bester Kanyama, Salisbury
Photo © Centre for Special
Education, Chimbóte, Peru
UNESCO'S CO-ACTION PROGRAMME AND THE
INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF DISABLED PERSONS
Unesco's Co-Action Programme, which offers individuals, groups and institutions the opportu¬
nity of participating in self-help community projects throughout the world, has decided,
during the International Year of Disabled Persons, to concentrate its efforts on providing
much-needed equipment and training facilities to schools and centres for the handicapped in
the developing countries. Photos show three of the many schools and centres receiving aid.
Above, the Waterfalls Centre, Zimbabwe, for children suffering from cerebral palsy; below
left, the Centre for Special Education at Chimbóte, Peru, a school for blind and deaf children
and for children with speech and learning problems, as well as those suffering from multiple
handicaps; below right, the Sri Sangwal School, Thailand, which accepts physically handicap¬
ped children from kindergarten to tenth grade. All these establishments are in urgent need of
funds and Unesco receives fresh requests for help every week. Anyone -individuals, groups,
institutions-can help, either by sending a donation in support of a particular project (Unesco
will supply a list of all the projects in hand) or by making a contribution, however small, to
Co-Action's General Fund. Administrative costs are borne by Unesco and the entire sum sent
will go to the project. You can also correspond directly with the people running the project
(Unesco will supply the address). Donations, as well as requests for further information,
should be sent to: Unesco, Co-Action Programme, OPI, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris.
Photo Sudchit Bhinyoying, UNICEF
