Ecology
the genesis of a science
of man and nature
by Francesco di Castri
DURING the last ten years ecology has
become a fashionable word. It is
used frequently on radio and in daily
conversation and everybody thinks they
know what it means. But do they really?
Even among specialists there are con¬
siderable differences of opinion as to what
ecology is supposed to be and what it is sup¬
posed to do and, hence, how it should be
defined.
What exactly is ecology? A moral
philosophy and a form of action for the pro¬
tection of plants and animals? A political
party? A protest movement against nuclear
energy and pollution? A neo-Romantic year¬
ning for a return to Nature? A scientific
discipline derived from biology? Or
something of all these things? Is it a
philosophy, a message, a myth or a science?
There is no doubt in my mind that ecology
is first and foremost a science, but to say
positively when it began is a more difficult
matter. If it is seen as a science with a
clearly-defined corpus of knowledge and an
established methodology, then ecology is of
recent origin and has had an eventful
history. If, on the other hand, it is con¬
sidered merely as a scientific approach, it is
very ancient.
The works of Roman authors such as the
philosopher Lucretius, the poet Virgil or the
agronomist Columella already contain
elements of ecological principles. But these
are also to be found in all the other ancient
civilizations, and probably more frequently
in the East than in the West. Stretching a
FRANCESCO DI CASTRI is director of
Unesco's Division of Ecological Sciences. A
biologist, he was formerly Professor of Animal
Ecology at the University of Chile, at Santiago,
and director of the Institute of Ecology of
Valdivia, Chile, which he founded in 1969. He was
an active participant in the International Biological
Programme and was the first vice-president of the
Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environ¬
ment (SCOPE) of the International Council of
Scientific Unions (ICSU). He assisted in the
preparation of the United Nations Conference on
the Environment, held at Stockholm in 1972, and
has been Secretary of the International Co¬
ordinating Council of Unesco's Man and the
Biosphere Programme since it began in 1971.
point one could even say that, in order to
survive the harsh climate and hunt reindeer
and mammoth, cave-men had to show a
more highly developed ecological sense than
many modern ecologists.
The word ecology itself (from the Greek
word oikos, meaning home, habitat) was
coined in 1869 by the German scientist Ernst
Haeckel who used it to define the science
which studies the relationship between an
organism and its environment. Haeckel, a
far-sighted biologist and supporter of Dar¬
win's theories, peppered his writings with
new and often harmonious-sounding words
most of which are forgotten today.
"Ecology" was his most successful creation
judging by its popularity and the scientific
achievements it has encouraged.
Coining new words, incidentally, has
been the besetting sin of generations of
ecologists. The quaint, unwieldy and
sometimes incomprehensible neologisms
which they have invented are often an un¬
conscious way of concealing a lack of preci¬
sion in concepts and methods. These un¬
necessarily complicated terms certainly have
not helped the different schools of ecology
to benefit from one another's influence;
neither have they encouraged planners to
use the results of ecological research or
helped to familiarize the public with
ecological thought and action.
The genesis and especially the evolution
of ecology were very different from those of
the other sciences. Most sciences biology
is an example could be represented as a
tree trunk from which sprout a number of
branches (cytology, histology, physiology)
themselves subdivided into smaller and in¬
creasingly specialized ramifications
(molecular biology, neurophysiology, etc).
Ecology, on the other hand, would be
shown as a mass of roots, all converging to
form a common trunk: first botany, zoology,
climatology, the soil sciences and physical
geography; then biochemistry and
microbiology (for studying the processes of
biological production) and advanced
mathematics (for model construction) and,
finally, sociology, human geography,
psychology and even economics.
It would be difficult to claim that this com¬
mon trunk, ecology, is as consistent and
homogeneous as that of the other sciences.
The various disciplines that form it have not
yet harmonized their approaches and in¬
teractions. Perhaps they never will com¬
pletely. Yet it is this broad convergence of
disciplines which gives ecology its strength,
equipping it to face increasingly complex en¬
vironmental problems and to deal with the
multiple facets of social and natural systems
in which any change, even if it is limited to a
single element in the system, is bound to set
off a series of chain reactions affecting all
the others.
This is the crux of the dialectical debate
between the two types of sciences. The
analytical or reductionist sciences on the
one hand which set out to dissect and
dissociate the elements of a structure in
order to define them and study them in
depth, and, on the other, the synthetic or
holistic sciences (from the Greek word
holos, meaning whole), of which ecology is
the best example, that attempt to 'grasp a
system in its entirety by studying the inter¬
actions between all its elements.
This distinction should not be taken as a
value judgment. These two scientific ap¬
proaches, both equally important, are by
nature complementary and this might well
be better reflected in practice.
The fact remains that during recent
decades the reductionist sciences
(molecular biology, biochemistry and
biophysics) have taken overwhelming
precedence over ecology and the natural
and human sciences, not only in the financ¬
ing of research, but also as regards
academic and social prestige and in science
planning. In order to reverse this trend
ecology must prove much more convincing¬
ly than in the past its raison d'être in terms
of present-day science and society. .
I have not attempted to give a precise
definition of ecology and its achievements
because its research methods and even its
goals are developing so fast that any static
formula describing a single moment in its
evolution would appear forced and artificial.
Instead, I will try to tell the fascinating
story of a branch of science which has
always been trying to find its way, especially
during the last twenty-five years, but which
has now begun to find its true vocation

bringing together in one single study the co-
evolution of man and nature.
At the beginning of the present century,
ecology was still a descriptive study of
nature, a sort of natural history which drew
inspiration from the works of the great 19th
century explorers -and naturalists. Among
these was the Frenchman Jean-Henri Fabre
whose Souvenirs Entomologiques, written
between 1870 and 1889, still impress the
reader with their accuracy of observation
and their lyrical descriptions of natural
phenomena. Before long, however, more
detailed studies were to be made of the en¬
vironment in which given species live, and
of their symbiotic and antagonistic relation¬
ships with other species. This auto-ecology,
or ecology centred on a single species, had
and still has important applications, in par¬
ticular in the biological control of plant
pests, research on disease carriers and the
prevention of parasite-borne infections.
But each species, even when studied in
conjunction with those that influence it
directly, is only a tiny instance among the
thousands of plant, animal and microbial
species which inhabita given area a forest,
a pond or a beach. This realization led to the
development in the mid-1920s of
synecology, that is to say the ecology of
communities of species. (In this connexion
special mention should be made of the
names of August Thienemann, J. Braun-
Blanquet and Charles Elton.)
Basic concepts began to be applied, such
as the "food chain" and the "pyramid of
numbers", in which the number of in¬
dividuals decreases progressively from
plants at the base to herbivorous and
predatory animals at the summit. Vito
Volterra, G.F. Gause and Umberto D'An-
cona put forward mathematical laws gover¬
ning the population dynamics of interacting
groups of species. These studies proved
especially useful in aquatic ecology where
they helped to solve problems related to sea
fishing and to promote understanding of
phenomena such as insect invasions.
The publication in 1949 of Principles of
Animal Ecology, a collective work by five
American authors W.C. Allee, Alfred
Emerson, Orlando Park, Thomas Park and
Karl Schmidt drew attention to two impor¬
tant trends, one positive, the other negative.
It demonstrated that ecology in its wide-
ranging disciplines had adopted a strictly
scientific approach. But it also showed that
the new science was dissipating its efforts in
too many different directions, and above all
that it lacked a basic study unit similar to the
atom in physics, the cell in cytology, the
tissue in histology or the organ in
physiology.
This study unit was to be the ecosystem.
It can be described as an entity precisely
defined in space and time which includes
not only all the organisms inhabiting it, but
also physical conditions of climate and soil,
as well as all interactions between the dif¬
ferent organisms and between these
organisms and physical conditions.
An example of an ecosystem would be a
tropical forest, at a given place and time,
with thousands of plant, animal and
microbial species living in its soil and air
space with millions of specific interactions
taking place between them, the various in¬
fluences exercised on the life of these in¬
numerable beings by climate and soil, and
the changes the latter undergo as a result of
the organisms' activities and of the very ex¬
istence of the forest.
The term ecosystem was first proposed in
1935 by Arthur George Tansley. And in 1942
Raymond Lindeman pioneered the concep¬
tual and methodological bases for studying
these highly complex systems: the energy
flows and the nutritional cycles which pass
through all the living and non-living com¬
ponents of the ecosystem.
The story of Lindeman who died at the
age of 27 before his twenty-page paper ap¬
peared posthumously in the journal
Ecology illustrates the constraints to
which the progress and development of a
science can be subjected. In this particular
case, the constraints were imposed by the
scientific establishment itself. His article,
which has influenced ecological theory over
the last thirty years and is regarded today as
a classic, was first turned down by the jour¬
nal's scientific advisers. Lindeman was too
far ahead of his time.
It should be noted that other authors,
especially the Russians and Germans, have w
also suggested terms which to some extent f
THE EVOLUTION OF AN IDEA, This graphic
illustrates the five major stages leading to the
modern concept of ecology. The word
"ecology" was coined in 1869 by the German
biologist Ernst Haeckel, and by the beginning
of this century it had come to mean the study
of a single species and its biological
relationships with its environment (1). The
mid-1920s saw the meaning extended to cover
the study of communities of species and such
notions as "the food chain" and "the pyramid
of numbers" (2). By 1950 scientists had
developed the notion of the "ecosystem" as a
unit of study involving all the interactions
between the physical environment and the
species living in it (3). The next step was
recognition, in the 1970s, that the most critical
areas for study were the interfaces or zones
where different ecosystems meet and that
these ecosystems together make up a whole
which we call the biosphere (4). The final
development, which has become one of the
cornerstones of Unesco's Man and the
Biosphere (MAB) Programme, has been
recognition of man's dominant role within the
biosphere (5), his responsibility for its evolution
and, consequently, the need to take into
account such intangibles as man's perception
of his environment and the quality of life.

cover the concept of the ecosystem. But
these words were not very successful, partly
because they were often unwieldy and partly
because works on ecology and specialized
journals were written predominantly in
English. Eugene P. Odum's book. Fun¬
damentals of Ecology, in particular, publish¬
ed in 1953 and translated into several
languages, greatly contributed to the suc¬
cess of the term ecosystem.
The ecosystem concept, moreover, is in
line with Ludwig von Bertalanffy's General
Theory of Systems; the whole represents
more than the sum of its constituent parts,
since its main feature is the interaction tak¬
ing place between its various elements.
During the 1950s and the first half of the
1960s the application of this concept led to
studies on the efficiency of energy capture
and entry into the ecosystem through the
photosynthesis process, on the efficiency of
the transformation of matter as it passes
from one link in the chain to another, and on
the recycling and recovery of nutrients in the
"soil compartment". These studies helped
to elucidate the phenomena responsible for
the biological productivity of the ecosystem.
Analogies between the functioning of an
ecosystem and the metabolism of an
organism have enabled researchers to grasp
the relationships between different levels in
the organization of life.
However, the study of an ecosystem in its
totality called for a more sophisticated
research tool, which was to be supplied as a
result of progress in computer technology
and information processing that made it
possible to construct models of complex
systems. It also required more ample
resources than those hitherto available and
the large-scale organization of groups of
researchers from different disciplines.
These three conditions existed in several
industrialized countries and led to the im¬
plementation of the International Biological
Programme (1964-1974). This was the
period of Frank Blair's Big Biology and
ecological research carried out on a far
larger scale than ever before.
The achievements of the International
Biological Programme (IBP) were
undeniable. The methodologies developed
for the Programme have been adopted
almost universally. And specialists are
beginning to understand the functioning of
certain ecosystems, particularly the simpler
systems of the tundras, certain lakes and
deserts, coniferous and deciduous forests,
and steppes and temperate zone grasslands.
But research has come up against great dif¬
ficulties in studying systems as complex as
those of tropical rain forests, or as varied as,
for example, Mediterranean scrub. In any
event, the series of reports on the results of
the IBP that have appeared in several
languages will provide a basis for understan¬
ding the biology of ecosystems in the next
twenty or thirty years.
But the International Biological Pro¬
gramme, like all innovative undertakings,
had its weaknesses. In the first place, the
complexity of the research together with the
cost of operations prevented most of the
developing countries from taking part,
especially since no provision had been made
for a parallel training programme for
specialists. In addition, so much emphasis
was given to data collection that it has not
yet been possible to process a quite con¬
siderable mass of information, and it pro¬
bably never will be.
8

A stylized version of the
ancient Egyptian sign for life
(the "ankh", held by the
Pharaoh Tuthmosis III in the
stone effigy, opposite page)
is incorporated into the
symbol of Unesco's
Programme on Man and the
Biosphere. The sacred bond
which in former times united
man to the earth, considered
as a divinity, appears
symbolically in certain
landscapes shaped by man
and in branches of traditional
knowledge such as the
Chinese feng-shui, which
held that human activity
should accord with the
interests of nature. Left, the
ancient Sassanian circular
city of Gur, near modern
Firuzabad or Fars, in Iran.
Dating from the 3rd century
AD, its plan is a reflection of
the spherical universe of
ancient cosmology. Below
left, a Mexican fishing village
built on a lagoon on the
Pacific coast. The compass,
below, enabled a Chinese
practitioner of feng-shui to
determine the appropriate
sites for tombs, temples or
dwellings, and the best way
to use land. Circles on the
face correspond to the points
of the compass, astrological
influences and features of
the landscape.

So complex are the situation
and interactions with which
ecology is concerned that the
ideal ecologist, if he existed,
would be a kind of
superman, his brain stuffed
with expertise acquired in
the study of a whole range of
scientific and social
disciplines. Such a man, of
course, does not exist, and
this is why interdisciplinarity,
or team work between
groups of scientists each
representing a different
discipline, has become a
prerequisite of modern
ecological research. Left,
self-portrait by the Romanian
artist Paul Neagu.
Photo Tom Scott © Scottish Natrona! Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh
. Perhaps even more serious is the fact that
certain scientists allowed themselves to be
carried away by the sophistication of the
huge computers available to them: some of
the ecosystem models seem to have been
conceived as ends in themselves rather than
as research tools, and the prediction poten¬
tial of other models is too low. Several fun¬
damental questions have yet to be resolved:
to what extent can the results obtained in a
given site be extended to ecosystems of the
same type in other parts of the world? To
what extent can man's intervention in the
ecosystem work to his advantage and even
increase its productivity? And, when such
intervention occurs, what factors ensure the
ecosystem's stability?
Moreover, as the IBP drew to its close, it
became clear that study of the interactions
between ecosystems was just as important
as study of those taking place within a given
ecosystem. In fact, the most ecologically
critical areas are those where two zones
meet. The interfaces between different
ecosystems, such as, for example, the
coastal fringe where land meets sea along
the coast and, in tropical regions, the border
areas between forest and savannah. Similar¬
ly, economic land exploitation systems are
not based on a single ecosystem but on ex¬
changes of energy, materials and people
between different and complementary
ecosystems. Ecology has become increas¬
ingly complex, focusing on the study of in¬
terfaces (or zones of ecological and cultural
interpénétration) and of the various grada¬
tions of effects to which ecosystems are
subjected by man.
But the main problem for the International
Biological Programme was that it had taken
place between two major periods. Launched
at a time of peak economic growth, it ended
in 1974 in a very different period, marked by
three major trends. Following the en¬
vironmental crisis of the early 1970s there
was a new awareness of the limited
character of natural resources and of the
10
dangers threatening the entire planet; the
energy crisis with its economic and social
consequences was looming in many coun¬
tries; and in the developing world there was
a growing realization that the gap between it
and the industrialized world was widening.
In this atmosphere of crisis, politicians and
planners turned to the ecologists with
urgent questions, but the scientists were
unable to provide answers, for, until then,
the time factor had not been sufficiently
taken into consideration in ecological
research.
The developing countries had been made
more aware of these problems by the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environ¬
ment, held in Stockholm in June 1972, and
were entitled to expect realistic advice from
ecologists on the potential use they could
make of ecosystems, especially in tropical
regions and arid zones. But since the
economic and social aspects of these ques¬
tions had not been considered, ecologists
were in no position to provide this advice.
Moreover, in the industrialized countries,
protest movements had jumped on to the
ecology bandwagon and were pressuring
governments to reverse the industrial
policies of the consumer society, which they
considered alienating and dangerous, and to
replace them with a new "quality of life".
It is interesting to analyse how profes¬
sional ecologists reacted when ecology was
suddenly catapulted into the public arena as
a political platform and a means of pressure.
Some were alarmed by the confusion in the
use of terms resulting from ecology's new¬
found popularity and by the fact that
ecological concepts had suddenly become
commonplace. Certain countries, notably
France and Spain, even adopted a new ter¬
minology to distinguish between ecology
specialists (écologue, ecólogo) and political
pressure groups or protest movements
(écologistes, ecologistas). Some specialists
in fact joined these movements, taking up
the cause of social change with varying
degrees of realism or naivety, demagogy or
sincere political commitment.
There was nothing really disturbing in the
ferment of ideas and the mix of personalities
that resulted from all this activity. And, in
fact, the ecology movements sometimes
succeeded, directly or indirectly, in per¬
suading governments to take greater ac¬
count of the ecological dimension of
development. Indeed, to some extent, it has
highlighted the ecologist-scientist's sense of
social responsibility. And one can only
welcome the trend to regard ecology as "a
science for every man and for every day".
We come now to the most recent
developments in the history of ecology. It
is now recognized that , environmental
problems affect all countries of the world in
varying ways and degrees. It is also general¬
ly acknowledged that there are certain prob¬
lems of a global nature, such as the long
distance transport of pollutants, the pollu¬
tion of oceans, or changes in the at¬
mosphere's ozone layer and concentrations
of carbonic gas, which transcend political
frontiers. "Only one earth" was the slogan
of the Stockholm conference. And, as
everyone knows, the phenomenon of life is
only possible in the biosphere, a thin layer
(very thin on land, much deeper on the
oceans) that envelops this planet. The term
biosphere, which was coined in 1926 by the
Russian scientist V.l. Vernadsky, a pioneer
whose work is still amazingly modern in cer¬
tain of its aspects, indicates ecology's
ultimate goal. In the biosphere, man plays a
dominant role and consequently his respon¬
sibility for its evolution should be the most
urgent of our priorities.
It was in this historical and conceptual
framework that Unesco's "Man and the
Biosphere (MAB) Programme" was launch¬
ed in November 1971, following a recom¬
mendation made at the Biosphere Con¬
ference held at Unesco in 1968. MAB

benefited at the outset from the
methodology worked out during the I nterna-
tional Biological Programme and learned
from both its successes and its weaknesses.
The programme soon directed its ac¬
tivities towards action in the field, adopting
very simple principles and procedures. The
first task was to solve concrete and specific
land use planning problems which, in the
view of both local planners and scientists,
deserved to be given top priority. To solve
these very complex problems, inter¬
disciplinary research teams had to be
created. Research activities were linked to
training, to field demonstrations and en¬
vironmental education. And, because of the
inevitable budgetary constraints that exist in
all countries, full use was made of interna¬
tional machinery to co-ordinate national ef¬
forts and thus multiply the human and finan¬
cial resources available. Finally, MAB ap¬
plied the experimental method of "learning
by doing", drawing experience from the
successes and failures of field work, and
adopted a flexible approach in response to
the changing needs and emerging priorities
of the various countries.
It is thanks to this adaptability and this ex¬
perience acquired in the field that MAB has
been able to develop its activities so rapidly
during its ten years of existence. The pro¬
gramme's point of departure was the study
of man from the "outside", i.e. the impact
of human activity on the various ecosystems
(tropical and temperate forests, savannahs,
prairies, tundras, lakes and rivers, moun¬
tains and islands). Subsequently, in a grow¬
ing number of research projects, man came
to be considered as an integral part of the
ecosystem and of the biosphere, becoming
in fact the central element of study.
This changeover from "man the outsider"
to "man the insider" is not merely a play on
words. It marks a real revolution in concepts
and particularly in methods, for ecology has
begun to take into consideration the intangi¬
ble and non-quantifiable elements of human
activity and thought the different percep¬
tions which populations and individuals
have of development and of the quality of
life, their aspirations and their feelings of
belonging and of accomplishment.
The methodological difficulties raised by
this new approach are far from being solved.
Clearly, many ecologists find it hard to work
with data that cannot be quantified and
therefore cannot be treated on the same
basis as other data. Nevertheless, "par¬
ticipation" has become the key concept in
the new generation of MAB activities par¬
ticipation of the local population at the
outset when research priorities are planned,
participation of the various disciplines of the
natural and human sciences, and participa¬
tion of decision-makers and planners.
This issue of the Unesco Courier presents
specific examples of MAB projects in four
major priority areas. They illustrate how the
very fragile ecosystems of the humid tropics
can be used without being destroyed; how
the ecological constraints of certain
marginal regions (aridity, cold and altitude)
can be turned to account in developing
these zones; how parts of the biosphere's
representative ecosystems can be preserv¬
ed, not by excluding man from these areas,
but by using him, in fact, as the main con¬
servation agent; and, finally, how life can be
organized in the urban areas, where the
greater part of mankind will be concentrated
in the year 2000, by applying a global
ecological approach which respects man's
dignity and position in the system.
We have now covered the various phases
through which ecology has passed, from its
beginnings to the present day: descriptive
natural history; study of the environment of
a single species; study of ecosystems; study
of the interactions between ecosystems;
study of the biosphere; and study of man in
the biosphere. The last phase, "man in the
biosphere", is the most "natural" since it
completes the evolutionary cycle, reproduc¬
ing in terms of science what has been man's
situation from the very beginning, i.e. an in¬
tegral part of the biosphere, evolving along
with all its other components.
What does the future hold in store for
ecology? There is every reason for con¬
fidence provided ecology can rid itself of
certain weaknesses: it must abandon its
jargon without giving way to generalities
and over-simplification or departing from
scientific rigour; it must prefer action to
preaching and learn through action; above
all, it must cease to be a negative science
(no to pollution, no to deforestation, no to
industrial development, no to intensive
agriculture) and become a science which
provides realistic and specific alternative
solutions to the problems of development.
Its strength lies in its capacity to grapple
with the real problems of our time, to main¬
tain the flexibility and adaptability that will
enable it to face unforseeable situations in
the future, to build on participation as an
operational basis for helping people to live
more harmoniously with one another and
with nature. At a time when science in
general can claim to be increasingly univer¬
sal, ecology can affirm its originality by tak¬
ing as its lodestar the specificity of individual
ecosystems and the cultural identity of dif¬
ferent peoples.
Is ecology a natural science or a human
science? The answer is that it is both, but
not a natural science that excludes man, nor
a human science isolated from nature. It is a
science, but one that can only fulfil its role if
those who are engaged in it are deeply
aware of their responsibility in the evolution
of the human condition.
H Francesco di Castri
"...ecology can
affirm its originality
by taking as its
lodestar the
specificity of
individual
ecosystems and the
cultural identity of
different peoples".
Left, a Bolivian
village in the Andes.
11
