Few men or women have made a
greater mark on twentieth-century
science and philosophy than Pierre
Teilhard de Chardin, who was born in
France a hundred years ago.
In 1965, ten years after the death of
Teilhard and Albert Einstein, Unesco
organized an international symposium as
a joint tribute to two men who were so
different In so many respects, but whose
thinking was so profound and universal.
In September 1981, to mark the
centenary of Teilhard de Chardin's birth,
forty specialists in various disciplines of
the exact and human sciences attended a
symposium on Teilhard's work, held at
Unesco headquarters In Paris. On the
following pages the Unesco Courier
presents extracts from some of the con¬
tributions to the symposium in which
scholars from every continent took part.
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin in
1931, at the age of 50. He had
just returned to continue his
work in China after his first
visit to the United States.
Photo © Fondation
Teilhard de Chardin, París
24

TEILHARD DE CHARDIN
philosopher, palaeontologist, theologian
O
A bold vision
of the universe
by François Russo
PIERRE Teilhard de Chardin, the
theologian, philosopher and
scholar, whose thinking and
work have made a valuable contribution
to religious, philosophical and scientific
thinking by suggesting an outline for a
civilization of the Universal... It was in
these terms that Unesco's General Con¬
ference in Belgrade in 1980 expressed
its unanimous decision to celebrate in
1981 the centenary of Teilhard's birth.
In accordance with the wish of the
General Conference, an international
symposium on Teilhard's life and work
was held at Unesco Headquarters in
Paris in September 1981. It was attend¬
ed by some forty palaeontologists,
specialists in prehistory, ethnologists,
philosophers and theologians, who had
come from eighteen countries and
every continent. The Director-General
of Unesco, Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow,
and the President of France, Mr. Fran¬
cois Mitterrand, each gave an address
at the closing session.
FRANÇOIS RUSSO, philosopher and historian
of science, is adviser to the International Catholic
Centre of Unesco, in Paris.
Such a tribute may have caused sur¬
prise in some quarters. Although the
scientific work of Pierre Teilhard de
Chardin may still have the esteem of
palaeontologists and prehistoria ns,
among scientists working in other
disciplines it is far from being so well
known and appreciated, and the
general public is even less familiar with
it. As for his philosophical and religious
thinking, it seemed to have faded into a
certain obscurity, after arousing wide
interest and enthusiasm during the
decade following his death (the Roman
Catholic authorities did not authorize
the publication of his writings in these
fields during his lifetime).
The Unesco symposium showed that
Teilhard's personality and the various
aspects of his thought still command
the attention of noted specialists, even
if many of them do not share his
religious convictions.
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin was born
in Auvergne, France, on1 May 1881, in¬
to a well-do-do Christian family.
Nothing in his childhood, save an early
fascination with rocks and minerals,
foretold that he would become a man of
grand perspectives and an indefatigable
explorer, enthralled both by the future
and by the past of the world and
mankind.
In 1899, he joined the Jesuit
novitiate. His years of religious training,
begun in France, took him to the British
island of Jersey where he became in¬
terested in mineralogy and geology
while still pursuing his philosophical
studies. Next they took him to Egypt,
where he taught physics at the College
of the Holy Family in Cairo and confirm¬
ed his taste for the earth sciences, and
then to Hastings in England, where he
devoted his leisure hours from theology
to palaeontology.
However, it was not until 1912 that
he really embarked on his scientific
career. At the Museum of Natural
History in Paris, he met Marcellin
Boule, famous for his work on the
Neanderthal skeleton from La Chapelle-
aux-Saints in France. Then came the
war, in which Teilhard served as a
stretcher-bearer from 1914-1919. Dur¬
ing this period he wrote the essays
which were later collected and publish¬
ed under the title Écrits du Temps de la
Guerre (Wartime Essays). ~
With the coming of peace, he return¬
ed to his work in Paris at both the v
Museum of Natural History, where he f
25

, worked notably with a young student
named Jean Piveteau, now a member
of the French Academy of Sciences,
and at the Institute of Human Palaeon¬
tology, where he made the acquain¬
tance of Abbé Henri Breuil, whose
discoveries, especially in the field of
prehistoric art, would become widely
known.
In 1922, Teilhard submitted his doc¬
toral thesis on "mammals of the French
early Eocene". The year 1923 was of
decisive importance for his scientific
career, for it was then that he visited
China for the first time. He remained
there until 1946, returning to France
several times for short visits and under¬
taking missions to Ethiopia and Somalia
in 1928-1929, and later to India, Burma,
and Indonesia.
Teilhard returned to France in 1946,
and the following year was offered a
chair at the Collège de France, which
his religious superiors, uneasy about his
audacious views, forbade him to ac¬
cept. For the same reasons he was ask¬
ed to leave Paris in 1951. He settled in
New York where the Wenner Gren
Foundation for Anthropological
Research sent him on two short, but
important, missions to southern Africa
in 1951 and 1953. Teilhard died in New
York, on Easter Sunday, 10 April 1955.
Teilhard de Chardin's scientific work,
published in eleven volumes, comprises
over 4,000 pages. No matter how
unified his thought may be, his scien¬
tific work was not in any way "cor¬
rupted" by his religious and
philosophical views, although it was
nourished by them. It forms a clearly
autonomous unit in his work as a
whole.
Although Teilhard's scientific interest
primarily concerned the origins of man,
this subject occupies only a small frac¬
tion of his scientific writings, which are
devoted primarily to the geology of
China and, to a lesser degree, of other
parts of Asia. There are two reasons for
this. First, Teilhard understood very
early on that a convincing explanation
of the origins of man presupposed a
Photo © Fondation Teilhard de Chardin, Paris
Teilhard and his friend the noted French prehistorian Abbé Henri
Breuil (at right) photographed near Peking in 1935 on a visit to the
tombs of the emperors of the Ming dynasty which ruled China from
the 14th to the 17th century. 1935 was also the year of Teilhard's first
visit to Java and the sites where specimens of Pithecanthropus
(Java Man), had been discovered.
A coherent picture of the world
Teilhard anticipated the research of science which attempts to bring
together in a single whole the laws of the infinitely great and the infinitely
small...
According to Teilhard, an ¡mage of the whole world could be arrived at as
the result of a complete system of knowledge in which Man occupies the
principal place. "True Physics", he wrote, "is that which will one day suc¬
ceed in including Man in his totality in a coherent picture of the world." Our
epoch is that of a great synthetizing of knowledge and of philosophical
debates on the "anthropologization" of the sciences, and at such a moment
such an approach seems particularly necessary and precious.
A.A. Zubov
Ethnographic Institute of the Academy
of Sciences of the USSR
(Extract from an address given at the Unesco symposium
16-18 September, 1981)
geological investigation carried out in
great detail. Second, when appointed
to the Chinese Geological Service in
1929 Teilhard was called to undertake
numerous geological missions in almost
all the regions of China along with his
compatriot Father Emile Licent, a
number of Chinese geologists, and
other scientists from Europe and
America. In particular, he was a
member of the Chinese branch of the
French Haardt-Citroën expedition in
1931-1932.
Teilhard was also to play an impor¬
tant role in the excavations at the
famous site of Chou-K'ou-tien near
Peking. If he did not discover in China,
in 1929, the first skull of Homo erectus
26

or Sinanthropus, the stage in the evolu¬
tion of man which preceded Homo sa¬
piens, he was one of the principal
organizers of the team which explored
the site for more than ten years and
made a noteworthy contribution to the
proof that Sinanthropus knew of fire
and could make tools.
Although less exhaustive, Teilhard's
work on human palaeontology in the
south and east of Africa also deserves
consideration. Teilhard anticipated the
belief that greater efforts in the search
for the origins of man should be con¬
centrated in these regions where
outstanding discoveries have been
made since the beginning of the 1960s
in connexion with the first hominids,
Australopithecus and Homo habilis,
which could be the ancestor of Homo
erectus.
What distinguishes Teilhard from the
majority of the great scientists of our
era is that he wished, without in any
way impairing his scientific work, to be
more than a scientist in the strict sense
of the term. It was not that he under¬
rated science; on the contrary, no one
more than he has proclaimed its full
scope and significance. But he was cer¬
tain, nonetheless, that what he had to
say went further than science.
Moreover, he intended to conduct in¬
vestigations into the Totality of the
Universe, of Man and of Humanity from
an evolutionary and dynamic viewpoint,
proposing to study not only their past,
but their future in the light of their past.
His message is marked by so pervasive
a concern for synthesis and unity, that,
as Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow noted
at the Unesco symposium, "his
thought, like a musical composition,
cannot be understood in fragments".
However, to explain it, it must be divid¬
ed into certain major theses, distinct,
but closely interrelated.
These theses may be grouped into
two categories, although Teilhard
himself never presented them in this
way. The first category consists of
those views directly linked to science,
more exactly, to palaeontology and the
theory of evolution. The second con¬
sists of ideas further from science
which issue especially from his
philosophy and Christian faith.
The awakening planetary consciousness
According to Teilhard de Chardin, the human community is undergoing a
radical transformation of consciousness. We are evolving from a state of
tribal-national awareness to global consciousness. Through a process which
he calls "planetization", the forces of evolution have shifted from
divergence to convergence. When mankind first appeared on the earth,
groups diverged into separate tribal units. However, the spherical shape of
the earth, the increase in population and the rapid development of com¬
munication in recent times have caused consciousness to converge and in¬
tensify. Out of this process, global consciousness is emerging...
Teilhard's concept of religion helps us understand the religious
phenomenon of our times in both its ecumenical and secularizing trends. His
concepts of the convergence and complexification of consciousness clarify
the meeting of religions. His understanding of the spiritual power of matter
makes it possible to see the process of secularization in a spiritual light. Yet
his thought is not merely a harmonious synthesis to be admired at leisure,
but the call of a prophet ringing out across the future, challenging the
religions to be active forces in our time to harness and direct human energies
at this critical moment in history: so that the secular will reach fruition in the
spiritual and the spiritual wiil encompass and activate the energies of the
secular. It is in this sense that Teilhard's thought has had and, I believe, will
continue to have an impact on the religious consciousness of the twentieth
century.
Ewert H. Cousins
Philosopher, Fordham University, New York
(Extract from an address given at the Unesco symposium
16-18 September, 1981)
Among the theses in the first
category there is, first of all, the law of
complexity-consciousness, which had
been sketched out before him, but
which he expounded in its full scope.
According to this, the course of evolu¬
tion offers us two intimately related,
parallel forms of growth, one in com¬
plexity, especially of the nervous
system and the brain, the other in the
psyche and consciousness.
This law, fundamental for Teilhard,
hardly goes beyond science in the strict
sense. Is it not remarkable, as the
Unesco symposium clearly demon¬
strated, that this law is almost
unanimously acknowledged today by all
those who seek to understand the
process of evolution, no matter what
their philosophical and religious
convictions?
More personal, less commonly ac¬
cepted, although rooted in the direct
extension of the law of complexity-
consciousness, is Teilhard's basic view
that the appearance of life is not an ac-
Science and technology the new factor
Teilhard de Chardin was one of the earliest thinkers in the West to realize
that modern science and technology are not just an extension of the old
tradition, but represent an entirely new factor in the universalization of
mankind which no creative theologian could afford to ignore.
Karan Singh
Ministry of Education and Culture
New Delhi, India
(Extract from an address given at the Unesco symposium
16-18 September, 1981)
cident, an anomaly, but the result of an
inevitable process, the ascent of the
Spirit crowned by the appearance of
man. Evolution, which had formerly
moved along diverging paths, began to
converge toward man, its final blos¬
som. Teilhard summarizes this view in
his great work Le Phénomène humain
(The Phenomenon of Man), as follows:
"The centre of perspective, Man is at
the same time the centre of construc¬
tion of the Universe".
Another of Teilhard's ideas, closely
linked to science but going further than
it, specifies the nature of the evolutio¬
nary process. This process is a con¬
stant progression, but with critical
points or thresholds such as the pas¬
sage from matter into life, the birth of
reflexion linked to hominization. Here
Teilhard went along with the formula of
Julian Huxley, the distinguished British
biologist who was Unesco's first
Director-General: "The appearance of
man is evolution become conscious of
itself".
Another threshold brings us to the
second category of Teilhard's major
ideas, those which are less directly, if at
all, related to science, and concern the
spreading of Humanity all over the
earth. This process is undoubtedly a
fact, but from it Teilhard draws con¬
sequences for the future of Humanity
which go far beyond this simple fact.
This point is demonstrated by the
way Teilhard develops his major views
on the future of Humanity "taken in the
mass". He does not tell us what will
necessarily happen, but under what
conditions Humanity can be "saved".
27

^ Humanity is free to submit to them, but
there is no guarantee that it will avoid
catastrophe: "There is no summit
without an abyss", he writes.
Those conditions, which he believes
that all men no matter what their con¬
victions must recognize as the sole path
to the true fulfilment of Humanity, are
found essentially in the idea of con¬
vergence. Humanity unites not like ants
in an ant hill, but in a union in which
people are not uniform, much less
crushed, but attain their full develop¬
ment, each with his or her own
originality and specific vocation. In his
famous phrase union differentiates,
Teilhard summarizes this view which
implies that by going beyond the
horizons of religions, which he con¬
siders too constricting, we work for the
realization of universal love love of the
earth, love of great human enterprises,
which he styles as "faith in man"; love
which should unite all man by guiding
them toward a "supreme Someone".
Teilhard puts the progress of
knowledge, the sciences, in the
forefront of these human enterprises.
More than most contemporary scien¬
tists, he recognized the full significance
and value of research. The pursuit of
knowledge is far more than a game, far
more than a search with utilitarian aims.
In giving himself to science, man must
aspire "to know in order to be more".
Although religions, even the Chris¬
tianity which was his own faith, still
often show little interest in science,
because they underestimate it or even
fear that it may do them harm, Teilhard
believed that religions should co¬
operate with science and that only thus
would Humanity find true unity.
Even if at one point in his life Teilhard
believed that the major world religions
did not attach as much importance to
this question as he would have wished,
in his later writings he fully appreciated
what each of them could contribute to
convergence, union, and the spiritua-
lization of Humanity. Seeing Humanity
as destined to converge towards unity,
Teilhard formulated the concept of
what he called the Omega point, a point
of ultimate convergence marking the
final perfection of Humanity.
At first Teilhard presented this
Omega point as an idea arising out of
pure philosophic deduction. It was only
later, realizing that only Christians were
following him, that he affirmed, without
confusing them, the junction of the
Omega point and Christ. The universal
Christ embraces all things, gives them
their full content, and is alone capable
of uniting them in a love of which he is
the true source.
It is not hard to understand why the
ideas in this second category, the
specifically religious concepts con¬
sidered above, have not convinced
everyone, far-reaching as they are.
28
Moreover, although Teilhard was
concerned with the future of Humanity,
it may seem surprising that he gave so
little consideration to art or culture, to
political realities such as the State and
nation, and more seriously, to human
malice, to the problem of Evil, the im¬
portance of which he minimized and the
origins of which he insufficiently ex¬
plored. But do not all great thinkers
have their weaknesses?
However lyrical Teilhard's philoso¬
phical and religious writings may be,
they are with rare exceptions of a high
intellectual quality. But Teilhard was
not a pure technician of thought. No
matter how valid his thinking may be,
he developed it to serve a course of ac¬
tion, the complete and genuine fulfil¬
ment of Humanity.
This accounts for the warmth, for the
occasional vehemence, of what he has
to say. He undoubtedly wished to con¬
struct a synthesis, but above all he
wanted to say what he had "seen" and,
in his own words, "to express fervent
views". These views have had their im¬
pact on so many different minds,
cultures and convictions.
H Francois Russo
Photos © Citroën Archives, Paris
The indefatigable globe-trotter
Throughout his life Teilhard travelled, with little respite, through Asia, Africa, America and
Europe In a passionate quest for material to help him develop his bold synthesis of the
evolution of man and the universe since earliest times. Except during wartime, he rarely
spent more than two years at a time on the same continent. In 1931, after returning from
the United States, he took part as a geologist in the French Haardt-Citroën expedition, a
motorized trek which in the face of extreme difficulties opened up a route through Asia
from Beirut to Peking. For six months Teilhard travelled through northern China (top
photo, the expedition makes Its way through the Toksum Pass; above, in the Gobi desert).
Opposite page: the expedition crosses the site of the Ming tombs (top photo) before
reaching Peking (right) after a 12,115-km-long journey.

29
