Left, this Qur'an was copied
on vellum during the ll/8th
century, probably in Mecca
or Medina. It is in an early
Arab script called al ma'il
and is believed to be one of
the two oldest extant Qur'an
manuscripts.


Islam's Holy Book
In the name of Allah the Compassionate
the Merciful
Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Creation,
The Compassionate, the Merciful
King of the Last Judgement
You alone we worship, and to You alone
we pray for help
Guide us to the straight path
The path of those whom You have
favoured, not of those who have incur¬
red Your wrath, nor of those who have
gone astray.
The Qur'an (the Koran) is the Holy Book of the
Muslims. In Arabic, qur'an means "reading" or "recita¬
tion". It contains all the revelations made by God
through the archangel Gabriel to Muhammad over
about the last twenty years of his life.
Muhammad, for Muslims the last of the prophets and
the chosen Messenger of God, described how these
revelations were made in the following terms:
"They happen in different ways; sometimes Gabriel
takes the form of a man who speaks to me as a man
speaks, sometimes he ¡s another kind of being with
wings, and I remember all that he says. At other times,
it seems as if a bell were ringing in my ears-and that
is the most terrible ordeal-and when this state of
ecstasy fades I remember everything perfectly as if it
were engraved on my memory."
The Qur'an is written in Arabic and is divided into 114
surahs, or chapters, sub-divided into verses, They are
of unequal length and are arranged not chronologically,
but in order of decreasing length, except in the case of
the first surah which is entitled al-Fatiha (the Exor¬
dium) and which has only seven verses (see above). It
is considered the epitome of the Holy Book and is the
only part of the Qur'an that must be recited at every
prayer.
For Muslims, the Qur'an is a guide through the whole
of human life, temporal as well as spiritual, individual
as well as collective. It is for all men, without distinc¬
tion, in all countries and for all time, since, according to
the Holy Book, there will be no further revelation.
The sacred text does not follow a chronological order
and the messages dictated to the Prophet at Mecca,
before the Hijra, are interspersed with those received
at Medina.
The Meccan surahs, which make up about one third
of the Qur'an, were addressed to a hostile and pagan
community and constitute a kind of ethical code that
teaches charity, perseverance and purity. They also
have a marked eschatological character, reminding the
believers that the Last Judgement awaits them.
The Medina surahs, which constitute about two
thirds of the Qur'an, are interspersed with legal
prescriptions necessary to the communal life of the
new society established in Medina.
The revelations continued to occur, until the Prophet's
death in the eleventh year of the Hijra (632 AD).
The fragments of the Qur'an were put together under
the direction of the Prophet himself. After each revela¬
tion, he dictated the words received from Gabriel to
one of his literate companions, indicating the exact
place this new element was to occupy in the complete
work. Muhammad chose a thematic rather than a
chronological arrangement; apart from some very long
texts in which several problems are discussed, the
chapters are generally made up of revelations from dif¬
ferent periods but dealing with the same subject. This
gives the Book a logical structure.
The work of transcription lasted for the whole of the
Prophet's ministry. After his death, the community was
not allowed to change the long sequence of Qur'anic
revelations either by addition or suppression.
The task of establishing a complete and definitive ver¬
sion of the Qur'an in a single book devolved upon the
Prophet's successors. Since paper was unknown at
that time to the inhabitants of the Arabian peninsula,
the first Muslims in Mecca and later in Medina record¬
ed the revelations on crude and perishable materials
-pieces of leather, wooden tablets, the shoulder-blades
of camels, date fibre, soft stone, etc. The texts thus
recorded were often fragmentary and showed certain
divergencies.
The text of the Qur'an was also preserved by the
hafiz, believers who had learned it by heart from the
mouth of the Prophet. After his death many of them
perished during the wars of apostasy, which broke out
when certain Muslims rejected Islam and refused to
pay the compulsory alms, or zakat. In order to
safeguard the Qur'an and complete the verification of
its text by those hafiz who were still alive, the first
Caliph, Abu Bakr, on the advice of Umar (who was
later to succeed him), commanded that the various
fragments be assembled into a single work. It is said
that Umar himself wrote down the sacred text in one
volume. But it was the third Caliph, Uthman, who reign¬
ed from 23 to 36 AH (644 to 656 AD), who drew up the
complete and official version of the Qur'an.
The Qur'an established not only a religion but also a
language -Arabic.
In Muhammad's time a large number of Semitic
dialects were spoken in the Arabian peninsula. The
divine revelation was made in the idiom of the power¬
ful Quraysh tribe and thus the Arabic language became
a vehicle of civilization for hundreds of millions of
people. The first known book in Arabic, the Qur'an is an
inspired text of great formal perfection. It is written in
prose although some of its verses rhyme.
Although it has been translated into nearly all
languages, Muslims throughout the world must recite
in their prayers a few verses from the Qur'an in the
original Arabic.
(Unless otherwise stated, quotations from
the Qur'an appearing in this issue of the
Unesco Courier are taken from the English
translation by N.J. Dawood).
8
