Biogas :
the Indian
experience
Technical feasibility alone
is no guarantee of success
by Tushar K. Moulik
FACING the inflationary consequences
of a rapidly mounting import bill for
oil, the Indian Government some
years ago launched an all-out compaign to
promote the use of biogas produced by
"gobar" gas plants. Various incentives such
as subsidies and low interest credit facilities
were offered to householders willing to in¬
vest in the family-size units, which produce
two to three cubic metres of gas per day.
Nevertheless, the results of the campaign
fell far below the Government's targets,
with not more than five to six thousand
plants being installed annually. What is
more, as many as 50 to 70 per cent of India's
reported 70,000 gobar gas plants today are
thought to be inoperative.
What are the reasons for this lack of per¬
formance? After all, the technology of the
gobar gas plant as promoted in India is said
to be simple enough to allow the units to be
constructed and handled efficiently by
village craftsmen.
However, an evaluation of India's gobar
gas programme clearly reveals that it is sub¬
ject to four major constraints related to:
1) the prevailing social and economic struc¬
ture; 2) cultural practices and values; 3) in¬
formation about and knowledge of the
technicalities of the process of anaerobic
digestion; and 4) the availability of skilled
manpower.
The small, family-size biogas plants pro¬
moted in India require three or four cattle to
provide the necessary input of dung. A plant
of a size requiring less than this number of
cattle for dung-input is economically not
profitable. In addition to this technological
requirement, the cost of each plant, around
5,000 rupees, is prohibitive.
The Indian families which fulfill these
financial and cattle ownership requirements
cannot account for more than 10 to 15
per cent of the rural population. The
technological requirements thus exclude a
significantly large proportion of India's
population, comprising small and marginal
farmers and landless labourers, from using
family-size biogas plants.
Closely related to this basic question are
the two important constraints of space and
water. A three-cubic-metre family-size plant
would require about 27 square metres of
land area for the plant and the compost pit.
It is also advisable to build the plant within a
six-metre radius of the kitchen in order to
provide an efficient supply of gas for cook¬
ing. But in many villages in India dwellings
are clustered so closely together in a net¬
work of narrow lanes and alleys that it is
often rare to find a villager who owns and
can spare the minimum required land area
near his homestead for the biogas plant.
Scarcity of water is an equally serious
resource constraint in many villages. To
enable a biogas plant to operate smoothly,
cow-dung and water are mixed in the ratio
of 4:5 by volume and the resulting slurry is \
fed into the digester. Where water is scarce I
Movable cover
Photo top of page, an Indian woman cooks on
biogas. Right, an Indian biogas digester
installation. Water has to be added to ensure the
smooth operation of the installation and this can
be a serious constraint in areas where water is
scarce. With some seven million biogas digesters
already installed, China leads the world in biogas
development. Above, cross-section of a Chinese-
designed biogas digester.
Drawing Unesco Courier. Source : A. Van Buren, London
33

( and has to be carried from a far-off well or
other source, bringing the necessary
number of buckets for the biogas plant adds
another burden to an already arduous task.
Lastly, and perhaps one of the most im¬
portant economic factors accounting for the
non-adoption of biogas plants, is the way in
which villagers perceive the opportunity
cost of the available alternative fuels used
for cooking and heating, mainly firewood,
dung-cakes and agricultural wastes.
"Why bother about a gobar gas plant
when we can get firewood (thorny bushes)
around the village to be used as fuel?" asked
a farmer in Rajasthan. When reminded that
very soon the available firewood source
would be exhausted, the farmer replied:
"So far it hasn't happened. We've been
using the same firewood source for ages.
Why should it run out now?"
Another factor is that the direct benefits
of a biogas plant in the form of cooking gas
and manure are perceived to be notional
since there is no direct cash-flow of income
from the plant. Since cash income is the
crucial motivating force for a large section of
the rural population, its absence removes
any immediate incentive to adopt a biogas
plant.
Linked to these socio-economic forces,
there is a host of prevailing cultural practices
and norms which seriously inhibit the pro¬
motion of family-size biogas plants in India.
Firstly, there are strong inhibitions about the
use of human excreta as feeding material for
biogas plants, and about cooking food over
gas generated from slurry containing human
excreta.
The second and perhaps one of the most
serious cultural constraints is the role and
status of women in decision-making. The
most conspicuous and immediate
beneficiaries of biogas plants are the village
women. Not only does biogas save them
from the arduous job of cooking for hours in
a smoke-filled kitchen, with the consequent
health hazards, it also provides them with
more leisure because they spend less of their
time cooking and cleaning soot-stained
utensils. The household is also likely to
economize because the utensils last longer.
But these benefits are not usually given high
priority in the rural households, essentially
because the decision-making for investment
is generally done by the men, who do not
consider the benefits for the women as an
urgent necessity. Because of this attitude,
when plants break down, in many cases
they are allowed to remain out of order for a
long period without attention and repair,
and eventually many of them are irreparably
damaged.
But a still more serious constraint faced in
the rural areas stems from the adjustments
and changes required in various traditional
habits and practices in order to use biogas
efficiently. It is often complained, for exam¬
ple, that chapatis cannot be properly
roasted on a gas burner, and that dais
(pulses) take a long time to cook on gas.
Gas has also been found to be inappropriate
for preserving milk, which for this purpose is
generally kept heating over a slow, steady
fire for a whole day. Thus the introduction
of biogas requires a series of interrelated
changes and adjustments in certain deep-
rooted norms and practices.
But in spite of the limiting factors describ¬
ed above, more and more villagers in India
34
are becoming aware of biogas plants.
However, there is a striking lack of
knowledge of the essential facts about
biogas plants not only among interested
potential users but also among those who
have already adopted the system. In many
rural areas there seems to be a persistent
myth about the "magic" of the biogas plant,
a technology which is alleged to produce
fuel and fertilizer from waste, free of charge
and without any effort. This fashionable
myth about biogas plants is clearly the result
of inadequate and distorted information.
Given the exploratory state of biogas
technology and the consequent lack of
dependability in its performance, the
negative attitudes of the users are bound to
be aggravated unless there is a thorough
sharing of knowledge and experience bet¬
ween users and promoters. False promise
and inadequate information can only breed
unrealistic expectations and lead ultimately
to extreme distrust.
The question of manpower is crucial in
the process of promoting the use of biogas.
An assessment of the problems involved in
promoting family-size biogas plants as part
of a decentralized energy system in rural In¬
dia reveals that there is an enormous con¬
straint in this field. In spite of continuing
claims about the simplicity of current biogas
technology, it requires very careful technical
supervision and guidance in order to install,
repair and maintain. The technical expertise
of this kind is simply not locally available in
most Indian villages.
The list of constraints outlined above
looks formidable, but many of them can be
surmounted over a period of time provided
that appropriate organizational efforts are
made in a planned manner. Operationally,
one of the important goals of such efforts
should be to develop local skills and
knowledge through a sustained education
and training programme. For in the last
analysis a decentralized energy system of
family-size biogas plants in rural India can
only operate successfully when it is least
dependent on external resources.
The example of China is perhaps most
relevant here. Through a continuous pro¬
cess of technical training, China has been
developing a small pool of skilled manpower
in each production team to administer and
monitor the biogas promotion programme.
India needs a similar strategy.
What is required is planning at the local
level, using local resources and promoting
the fullest participation of the local people in
the whole process of planning, education
and monitoring. In order to develop sustain¬
ed local participation, a carefully designed
massive training programme is absolutely
imperative. Such a programme should not
only include the technical aspects of biogas
production but also other related aspects of
the question such as analysis of local con¬
straints, local energy planning methods,
data collection and monitoring, and
methods of integrating biogas energy into
other development activities. 9
TUSHAR KANTI MOULIK is a professor at the
Centre for Management in Agriculture of the In¬
dian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad. A
specialist in the social and economic development
of rural communities, he has served as a consul¬
tant with various national and international agen¬
cies. He is currently engaged on several multi-
disciplinary research projects on rural develop¬
ment in India.
