Disabled characters
in search of an author
by Tordis Orjasaeter
Photo Laurence Brun © Petit Format, Paris
TORDIS ORJASAETER, of Norway, is
associate professor at the Norwegian Advanced
College for Special Education, and the author of
several books on children's literature. The present
article has been extracted from "The role of
children's books in integrating handicapped
children into everyday life", a background paper
prepared for the Seminar on Books and Disabled
Children organized by Unesco in co-operation
with the Bologna Children's Book Fair in April
1981.
IT is important for handicapped children
to meet themselves in children's
books, to see pictures and read about
children like themselves, their lives, prob¬
lems, feelings, circumstances. And it is im¬
portant for other children to get acquainted
with handicapped children, since an unfor¬
tunate segregation policy in many of our
countries has for decades placed many han¬
dicapped children outside our neighbour¬
hoods. It is thus all the more necessary that
we meet them in books to prepare the soil
for Integration.
Mentally retarded, physically handicapped
or other disabled children almost never see
children like themselves on television or in
films, unless the programme specifically
concerns handicapped children. They
almost never belong to their environments in
the mass media as naturally as other children
do. If one never reads about anyone like
oneself or meets anyone like that in televi¬
sion or on the radio, it is a sort of affirmation
that one is not good enough or does not
belong anywhere or has no value.
During the last decade quite a few books
have appeared about handicapped children,
but many of them are not good enough.
They often activate our mechanisms of re¬
jection and make integration even more dif¬
ficult. Because literature influences us for
better or for worse, especially when we are
children, it is important to evaluate it critical¬
ly. So many books are well-intentioned, and
their authors have surely tried to encourage
understanding, and yet the results are disap¬
pointing.
There is the hidden rejection found in k
many well-intentioned books where healthy f
31

young people who meet handicapped per¬
sons are filled with gratitude for their own
good health. The underlying attitude is that
the normal thing is to be healthy, beautiful
and charming and the handicap somehow
is a kind of punishment for our sins.
In children's books about handicapped
children we frequently find a certain princi¬
ple of compensation so heavily stressed that
it constitutes a hidden sort of rejection: blind
people who automatically, almost by virtue
of their blindness, are so exceptionally kind
and good and have such a good ear for
music; or the brave boy in a wheel-chair.
The blind characters in children's books
are mostly girls it seems so suitable that
girls should be sweet and gentle and play
the piano. The characters in wheel-chairs
are mostly boys, extraordinarily clever boys,
the best companions anyone can think of
and such excellent referees in a football or
baseball game. The handicap is compen¬
sated far beyond reasonable limits.
One might say that such books provide a
certain degree of information about the han¬
dicapped. But on the whole they give a false
picture. A handicap does not automatically
make anyone into an extraordinarily fine per¬
son. The opposite pattern of rejection is
heavily utilized in cheap serial literature, in
which most frequently the villain is physical¬
lyt handicapped. This kind of reading is a
hothouse for discrimination against the han¬
dicapped.
There are so many misleading books
about mentally handicapped children. Some
typical examples: many authors use the
description HI when they write about mental¬
ly retarded children. They are not ill, no
more than other children unless they have
measles or colds or something like that.
They are not ill, they are retarded in their
mental development.
Other authors tell us that an autistic child
can suddenly become normal if his brother is
kind to him, or a girl stops stuttering if she
gets a pet, and another boy starts talking
when he gets a friend, although he has
never been able to talk before. Such things
may happen, but very rarely. Handicapped
children do not become "normal", they just
become grown-ups.
The most common pitfall is to concen¬
trate only on the handicap and make han¬
dicapped children very special. The truth is
of course that a child with a handicap is first
and foremost a child.
We need books containing good
psychological descriptions of the handicap¬
ped person as one of the main characters
and books where handicapped children
belong to their environment as naturally as
do other people. Happily, books exist ¡n
which the author shows both insight and
poetic power. A typical feature of many of
these books is that the author himself states
that his books are written both for children
and for adults. Many of these authors have
experienced a handicap, either personally
Drawings Kasumi Matsushita © Keiko Yoshimura-Kasumi Matsushita, 1980, Publishers Kaisei-Sha, Tokyo
t>tzb t^^fe/u
The Disabled are People Too
is the title of a recently
published book in the form
of a poem by twenty-five-
year-old Keiko Yoshimura,
who was stricken with
cerebral infantile paralysis at
the age of fourteen months.
It ¡s a frank account of what
it feels like to be physically
handicapped and confined
to a wheelchair. The book is
entirely illustrated with
striking black and white
representations of a
wheelchair, the work of
Keiko's long-time friend,
artist Kasumi Matsushita.
THE DISABLED ARE PEOPLE TOO
If I am honest with myself
I admit
I don't like going out
I like people
But I hate crowds
I hate places where there are
likely to be crowds
Amusement parks are not fun
for me
Department stores are hell
In cinemas I am a nuisance
If I am honest with myself
I admit
I don't really like going out
If people stare at me
I hate it
If people pretend I am not there
I hate it
But why should I feel this way?
I am "people" too
I am not a creature from another planet
I am not a freak either
I don't have to hide away
I have an appetite for life,
I enjoy good things to eat and drink
I enjoy feeling
I sleep, dream and wake
I think, laugh and cry
I enjoy feeling
Why do people stare at me?
or look away from me?
Why do they treat me differently?
My heart behaves normally
It beats as it should
It is quite ordinary
The disabled are people too
All people are different
What is so special about my difference
A friend warned me
Be strong, be brave, she said
I thought about being strong and brave
What did being strong mean to me?
If I am not strong now
how should I become strong?
If I need to become strong
there must be a way
How would I change
If I were strong?
Would amusement parks be fun?
Would I enjoy department stores?
Would I like crowds?
A friend warned me
Be strong, be brave, she said
I don't understand becoming strong
Perhaps being strong
is not for me
If I were strong
People might be afraid of me
Better by far that I be brave
People will still stare at me
or look away from me
But if I am brave I shall not mind
Keiko Yoshimura
32

or among their children, friends or
neighbours.
Most children's books about the han¬
dicapped tell us about children with physical
or sensory handicaps, and the authors' in¬
tention is quite obviously to make the
readers identify themselves with these
children. Books about mentally handicap¬
ped children are fewer in number and mostly
written from the point of view of a sister or
brother.
During the last decade we have seen a
number of photographic picture books
about handicapped children. Children who
read them are usually as fascinated by this
documentary material as by fiction. It ac¬
quaints them with handicapped children in
their daily life. Such books are often ex¬
cellent for handicapped children as well;
they can look at pictures of and read about
children who look like themselves and
have to struggle with some of the same
frustrations.
Especially interesting are picture books
made by authors or artists who are
themselves parents or siblings of handicap¬
ped children using their personal experience
and love, trying to tell other children how it
can be for a family to have a handicapped
son or daughter, sister or brother.
In many cases it is a relief to read about
the experiences of others. It can be a help
towards seeing one's own situation in a
wider perspective. There is comfort in
knowing that others have been through the
same experience, even if their conditions
and situations in life are utterly different. For
some people fiction can be an inspiration
towards giving new Insight, awareness and
acceptance.
H Tordis Orjasaeter
Photos Shozo Murase © Graphic Design Associates, Tokyo
Picture books
to be seen with the hands
Why are there so few books for the blind with pictures that can be
"seen" with the hands in the same way Braille texts can be "read"
with the finger-tips? This was the question that inspired Japanese
designer Shozo Murase to produce a five-volume work In which
the illustrations are in relief. The illustrations on this page are from
the volume which aims to give blind children an understanding of
the shape of things in nature and of how they change during the
four seasons of the year. Photos above, the development of a
tulip; left, an octopus.
33
