Biosphere reserves
by Vladimir Sokolov
and Piotr Gounin
A
bird that dislikes flying, prefers to run and
climb trees and hides its food in its
burrow like a mammal (the saxaul jay), a
bird that can sing like a lark, chatter like a magpie,
whistle like a man and bray like a donkey (the
wheatear), a type of sparrow that never drinks, '
the world's biggest lizard (the "sand crocodile" or
monitor lizard which can attain a length of one
and a half metres) these are some of the
stranger denizens of the huge (34,600 hectares)
Repetek Biosphere Reserve in the desertic
Karakum region of the USSR.
The Soviet Union has a proud record of nature
conservation with one hundred and twenty-five
State reserves covering a total area of over eight
million hectares. Seven of these State reserves,
including Repetek, have been designated as
biosphere reserves forming part of Unesco's Man
and the Biosphere (MAB) network of biosphere
reserves. The six other reserves are: The Berezina
Reserve, in the Byelorussian SSR a low-lying
area of alluvial sands and glacial moraines almost
entirely covered with broadleaf and spruce forests
typical of the Russian plain; The Caucasus
Reserve, located in the western part of the
Left, a stretch of the Repetek biosphere
reserve, situated in the Kara-Kum desert,
and two of the bird species found there:
above left, the Egyptian Vulture (Neophron
percnopterus) and, above right, the
Isabelline Wheatear (Oenanthe isabellina).
Biosphere reserves are protected areas
where nature conservation is combined
with basic scientific research, climatic and
pollution observation and measurement,
and environmental education. Drawing,
right, illustrates the various functions of a
biosphere reserve, here set in a northern
temperate ecosystem. The Core zone (1)
contains a representative example of the
major natural ecosystem of the region, in
this case mixed and coniferous upland
forest. The core zone is strictly protected
and serves as a background area or control
for studying man's impact on the natural
environment. The Buffer zone (2) surrounds
the core zone and serves as a protective
screen. It contains areas in which the
ecosystem has been modified by such
human activities as agriculture, timber
extraction and cattle raising. Facilities and
activities in the buffer zone as illustrated
here include (A) traditional land use;
(B) carefully controlled recreation of a non¬
destructive, non-polluting type; (C) facilities
for basic research, laboratories for
measurement, scientific analysis, etc.;
(D) experimental plots used to study
specific plants under controlled conditions;
(E) environmental monitoring, including
continuous observations of rainfall,
temperature and air pollution levels;
(F) teaching the general public about
environmental problems and nature
conservation.

in the USSR
Caucasus mountains a typical mountain land¬
scape covering all altitudinal zones and including
broad-leafed forests, fir forests, glaciers and
alpine meadows; The Pnoksko-Terrasny Reserve,
in the basin of the Oka river a good example of
the ecosystem of the East European plain; The
Sary-Chelek Reserve, in the Chathal mountain
range in south-west Tian-Chan it has an ex¬
tremely diverse and complex vegetation ranging
from nut-fruit forest, spruce forest and mountain
grasslands and its fauna includes the white-
clawed bear and snow leopard; The Sikhote-Alin
Reserve, along the coast of the Sea of Japan its
vegetation is dominated by coniferous and broad-
leafed forests, but includes several relict and
endemic species; The Central Chernozem
Reserve, in the central Russian uplands on the
borders of the Kursk and Belgorod regions a
characteristic oak-steppe forest of the European
part of the USSR, containing rare examples of
undisturbed meadow-steppe.
All seven biosphere reserves had previously
been functioning as State natural reserves for
quite a considerable period (the reserve at
Repetek, for example, was founded in 1928) and
have long records of observations on the basic
components of nature. This facilitated the first
stage of ecological monitoring taking inven¬
tories of plants, animals, micro-organisms,
ecosystems and processes. Another advantage
was the existence of research units within or close
to these reserves.
Thus the Prioksko-Terrasny biosphere reserve
includes the Biosphere Station of the
Agrochemistry and Pedology Institute of the
USSR Academy of Sciences, and the Sand
Desert Station of the Desert Research Institute of
the Turkmenian Academy of Sciences is situated
in the Repetek reserve.
The seven biosphere reserves naturally do not
cover all the variety of nature in the USSR and the
USSR National Committee for MAB is conduc¬
ting preparatory work for the establishment of a.
second series of biosphere reserves, first of all in
Siberia, Kazakhstan and Central Asia where the
rate of development requires rapid, profound and
detailed investigation.
The Prioksko-Terrasny biosphere reserve, in the Oka river basin about 120 kilometres
south-west of Moscow.
Every biosphere reserve is charged not only
with the general task of monitoring and studying
the effects of pollution on the natural environ¬
ment but also with more specific tasks such as
observing the influence of various types of
economic activities on the local ecosystems on a
regional scale. In addition the biosphere reserves
may be used as study grounds for the training of
personnel for other countries.
Training courses of this type are conducted at
the Repetek reserve, where participants from
developing countries are instructed and trained in
various aspects of nature conservation as applied
to deserts. It is worth mentioning that not long
ago deserts were considered to be "errors of
nature" and not worth conserving, whereas in
fact they are extremely rich in biological
resources.
The Repetek reserve'in the USSR is so far the
only biosphere reserve in the temperate deserts of
Central Asia and its functioning as well as the
establishment of other reserves in this climatic
zone is of the utmost importance for the rational
use of natural communities in the desert.
Thus the objectives of the MAB biosphere net¬
work are highly complex and require a further
strengthening of co-operation at every level: na¬
tional, bilateral, regional and global. Man has
reached a stage in his development when his ac¬
tivity has to be commensurate with the capacities
of nature. Researchers throughout the world have
a priority task to learn to use the resources of
the biosphere without upsetting its balance.
VLADIMIR SOKOLOV, of the Soviet Union, is
chairman of the USSR MAB National Committee
and vice-chairman of the International Co¬
ordinating Council for the MAB Programme. He is
director of the Institute of Evolutionary Mor¬
phology and Animal Ecology of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, and chairman of the
theriological section of the International Union of
Biological Sciences.
PIOTR GOUNIN, Soviet geographer and
specialist on arid lands, is a senior member of the
Institute of Evolutionary Morphology and Animal
Ecology of the USSR Academy of Sciences. He is
scientific secretary of the USSR MAB project 8
on biosphere reserves.
31
