I
Photo Jonathan Blair c Woodfin Camp, New York
The most popular but not necessarily the most economic biomass
conversion process is undoubtedly the production of ethyl alcohol
(ethanol C2H5OH) from sugar-cane and maize. The world's leading
producer is Brazil, above, producing 3.2 billion litres of alcohol
from sugar-cane, sorghum and cassava. The alcohol can be
blended with petrol to a proportion of up to 20 per cent alcohol
and run in a conventional car engine without adjustment.
However, in case of need, cars can run on pure alcohol after
adjustments.
The cost of alcohol in Brazil is higher than most gasoline sold in
Europe in 1980. Nevertheless, the indirect benefits are judged very
beneficial to Brazil. They include the saving of foreign exchange,
the creation of new employment, the encouragement of domestic
technology and industry.
The United States is also deeply involved in the promotion of
ethanol production and has set a target of approximately
3,477 million litres a year of alcohol for fuel use by 1982. Most of
the distilleries use corn as feedstock. Other countries known to be
interested in bioconversion to ethanol include Australia (cassava)
and New Zealand (beet).
Some economists feel deep disquiet at the use of food grains to
produce motor spirit. They feel that It will lead to the rich getting
transport and the poor getting starvation with land currently used
for food production being used for fuel. Several situations can be
envisaged in which production is economic. The developing
countries with a surplus agricultural production but an energy
deficit, such as Brazil, Sudan, and Thailand, are likely to have the
strongest incentives to develop large biomass energy programmes
in order to reduce their dependence on imported energy. Most of
the countries with viable alcohol programmes are likely to belong
to this group. Many of the large developing countries, such as
Bangladesh and Pakistan, however, are net importers of both
agricultural products and energy. In most of these countries
ethanol production is likely to be attractive only if based on
surplus low-cost biomass materials such as molasses and
agricultural crop residues (or sugar-cane during periods of world
sugar surpluses). In countries with surplus energy, such as Mexico,
Nigeria, and Venezuela, there is little incentive to launch major
biomass energy programmes.
Sources : United Nations Development Forum, 1981 , and Finance and Development, 1980



Brazil's green gasoline by Benedicto Silva
TODAY, in a world threatened by the
exhaustion of oil as an energy source,
Brazil is well placed to become the
first country to enter the post-petroleum era
without abandoning its network of
highways or cutting back on the manufac¬
ture and use of motor vehicles. The Brazilian
way of facing, the energy crisis is to
transform vegetable matter into ethyl
alcohol, or ethanol, in such quantities that
as of this year the country has the capacity
to supply at least 20 per cent of its
automotive fuel needs in this way. It is ex¬
pected that ethanol production will continue
to mount until Brazil achieves self-
sufficiency as a non-stop producer of
renewable energy.
It has been shown both theoretically and
experimentally that alcohol can compete on
equal terms with gasoline (petrol) as a fuel,
although it has a lower heating value. An
engine specially designed to run on alcohol
can be regulated in such a way that ethanol
has a slight edge on petrol in terms of
kilometres per litre. Ethanol also has the
outstanding advantage of reducing pollutant
emissions by half.
32 '
The raw materials Brazil needs for large-
scale ethanol production are sugar-cane,
manioc and other plant products. Sugar¬
cane is more productive than manioc in the
sense that it is a better agent for photosyn¬
thesis; in other words it produces more
energy per hectare under cultivation.
However, it is a seasonal crop and its pro¬
duction cycle is less than six months a year.
The advantage of manioc is that it enables
the distilleries to run continuously. In other
words it is useful to rely on both plants to
guarantee an uninterrupted flow of
automotive fuel.
It has been calculated that by using
scarcely two per cent of its cultivable land
Brazil could achieve the enviable position of
being the first country in the world to be
self-sufficient in indefinitely renewable fuel.
Moreover, the efforts needed to carry out
such a programme would probably be big
enough to absorb all the available man¬
power in Brazil. Besides, planting,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting, milling
and fermenting sugar-cane and manioc pro¬
vide jobs which require little more than basic
training. Preparing the necessary work-force
does not require long and costly training
programmes.
As far as transportation costs are involved
(the creation and operation of an ethanol
distribution network) they will be lower than
for petrol since the new fuel can be produc¬
ed in virtually all the States of Brazil.
Finally, it is hoped that the alcohol pro¬
gramme will generate between 250,000 and
a million new jobs in the next few years,
especially in the agricultural sector. The
creation of new employment opportunities
in rural areas will in its turn help to brake the
urban migration which is one of the major
problems facing Brazil's cities.
BENEDICTO SILVA, of Brazil, is director of the
Documentation Institute of the Fundación Getu/io
Vargas and editor in charge of the Portuguese
language edition of the Unesco Courier.
