ABC International
A future for every blind child
by Pierrette Posmowski
THE place: a town in northern Bangladesh. The time: any week¬
day during term-time. Two boys are sitting side by side in a
classroom, the older one busily writing away with a pen, while
the younger, a look of intense concentration on his face, moves his
hands regularly across a kind of board with a ruler attached to it. The
younger boyyou will have guessed is blind and the contraption
he is using is a Braille set.
The Edward School at Mymensingh, north of Dacca, is one of
47 establishments in Bangladesh practising "integrated education".
It has a dozen blind pupils who work and play alongside sighted
youngsters in a normal school environment. The education they are
receiving will equip them to lead productive, independent lives and
take part in many of the community's activities on an equal footing
with sighted people.
These children, however, are a tiny, privileged minority. To be
born or to become blind is a terrible infirmity by any count. In a
developing country it is all the more tragic in that disablement is
often considered a stroke of fate which nothing can alleviate. So the
blind child is left to vegetate, growing up in isolation without any
kind of stimulus or occupation when he is not actually looked upon
as subnormal and hidden away in shame.
Extreme poverty combines with disablement to produce a vicious
circle of cause and effect. Every year, it is estimated, some
100,000 children in the developing world lose their sight through
vitamin A deficiency associated with chronic malnutrition. 17,000 do
so in Bangladesh, for in this country of 90 million people, 80 per cent
of the population live below the poverty line.
It was against this backbround that Dr. Michael Irwin arrived in
Dacca early in 1977 as UNICEF's representative in Bangladesh. A
British physician who has worked for the U.N. for nearly twenty-five
years, his task was to direct the very big programme, in terms of
both staff and funds, which UNICEF is carrying out in that country.
"One of the things the struck me almost immediately", he recalled
in a recent interview, "was the very large number of blind children.
No one is quite sure of the total, but it must be at least 50,000."
So in April 1978, together with several Bangladeshi friends. Dr. Ir¬
win set up an organization called Assistance for Blind Children or,
simply, ABC. Among the personalities and professions represented
on its executive committee are Mr. Habibullah Khan, Minister for
Jute, (now Acting President); Mr. Monsur A. Choudhouri, of the
Bangladesh National Society for the Blind; Mr. A.M. Mufazzal, Ex¬
ecutive Editor of the Bangladesh Times; Mrs. Munira Khan, of the
Women's Voluntary Association, Mrs. Salma Khan of the Social
Welfare section of the Planning Commission; and Dr. Rabiul Husain,
medical adviser. Central Hospital Management, Bangladesh Na¬
tional Society for the Blind. One of ABC's main activities is to pro¬
vide funds to carry out sight-restoration operations on young
children who are blind because of some congenital defect like con-
PIERRETTE POSMOWSKI was, from 1963 to 1980, editor of Unesco
Features, a press and radio service published monthly by Unesco in
English, French, Spanish and Arabic. This article is based on an interview
with Dr Michael Irwin, president of ABC International and senior adviser
on childhood disabilities at UNICEF headquarters. New York.
genital cataracts. These can be removed by simple surgery in a
hospital environment.
In less than two years, between 1978 and 1980, about 300
children one third of them girls have had such operations under
ABC sponsorship. "To see a child's life changed in this way is one of
the most exciting memories I have of Bangladesh," Dr. Irwin said.
ABC is also supporting the government drive for integrated
education. In the past two years it has opened five hostels attached
to regular schools, where blind pupils can live when their homes are
too far for them to travel to and fro to class every day. And a total of
110 children are receiving stipends to pay for their residential and
educational expenses. Several of them. Dr. Irwin said, are near the
top of their class.
ABC also provides equipment such as Braille kits, watches and
radio sets. But perhaps its most exciting venture is the vocational
training work it recently started with blind village children in the
Mymensingh area.
In the traditional village environment, blind children leadvery pro¬
tected and unproductive lives. They get no formal education and,
even if it were available, they would be unlikely to benefit from it.
ABC has helped to introduce them to agricultural or farm activities
such as vegetable-growing, poultry-raising, fish culture or looking
after cattle.
The latest ABC project, currently being developed with the
Bangladesh Department of Social Welfare, is the establishment of
mobile teams to test the sight of children who normally would not be
reached through the school or the health systems. This should help
reduce blindness in the villages, for early detection and treatment of
a defect or an infection can often prevent a child from losing his
sight.
In the Third World impairments are generally due to chronic
malnutrition, faulty child-bearing practices, accidents or preventable
diseases often linked to extreme poverty. Nutritional blindness, of¬
ficially known as xerophthalmia or keratoma lacia, is actually the
destruction of the tissues of the eye caused by a combination of
severe malnutrition and a great lack of vitamin A.
This condition is widespread in the rice-eating areas of Asia,
where green vegetables are not usually included in the diet because,
culturally, people are not accustomed to them. "In Bangladesh",
Dr. Irwin observed, "you find natural sources of vitamin A growing
wild throughout the country in the green leaves of plants and
vegetables. Normally, these are eaten only by cattle, and yet they
could be given perfectly well to human beings."
UNICEF is helping to combat nutritional blindness in several coun¬
tries in the area by providing massive supplies of vitamin A cap¬
sules the tune of 30 million a year in Bangladesh alone. These
are distributed by community workers to as many children as pos¬
sible under the age of six: in 1979, for example, 70 per cent of the
children in that age group received the required two capsules during
the year.
But more important than such emergency measures are long-term
efforts to teach people where to find natural sources of vitamin A.
Several health and nutrition education programmes of this kind are
being launched in Bangladesh and neighbouring countries.
One example ¡s a project started in the state of Tamil Nadu in
south India where it is estimated that 6,000 children lose their sight
34

The Edward School at Mymensingh, Bangladesh.
Accompanied by the local mayor, a health worker
from an ophthalmologics! clinic in Latin America
goes through the market looking for people
suffering from eye infections and persuading them
to have treatment. Several Latin American
countries have launched vigorous campaigns
aimed at preventing blindness by rapid detection
and early treatment of eye diseases.
every year. At the Nutrition Rehabilitation Centre attached to Rajaji
Hospital in Madurai young patients are treated for night blind¬
ness white spot which appears on the eye when the diet is lack¬
ing in vitamin A and can lead eventually to complete loss of
sightwhile their mothers are taught how to cook five nutritious
meals a day on only one rupee (15 cents). The meals consist of ragi
(a cereal grass) and groundnut gruel, wheat and bajra flour mixture,
with greens like drumstick leaves, spinach and a slice of papaya.
Last year, 26 children suffering from night blindness were treated
at the Madurai centre. But they are only a fraction of those in need
of care. To reach rural children the centre has started a training pro¬
gramme for balsevikas (child care workers) who take a short course
at Madurai and then return to their village community to spread the
good word.
This experiment is typical of the new approach to prevention and
rehabilitation which draws upon resources already available within
the family and the community. In both the industrialized and
developing worlds there is increasing realization that to put a disabl¬
ed child in an institution is not always the best solution. Such special
schools tend to accentuate the child's isolation; they are expensive
to run and benefit relatively few children. A more realistic approach
advocated by organizations like Unesco and WHO is to preserve the
child's normal development as much as possible by integrating care
and education into existing services. As Dr. Irwin put it:
"By adding a few simple concepts to the training of community-
level, workers para-medics, health and rural social workers, and
primary schoolteachers you can make them aware of the problem
and show them what can be achieved by preventive action and
modest rehabilitation efforts."
The success of ABC in Bangladesh has led to the establishment of
ABC groups in other Asian countries: India and Sri Lanka to begin
with and, more recently, Malaysia and Pakistan. In India, for exam¬
ple, several children are being sponsored at schools in the Bombay
area and the extension of ABC projects to Pune and Bangalore is be¬
ing explored; while in Sri Lanka financial support has been given in
recent months for several sight-restoration operations, and in
Pakistan ABC is providing 300 Braille Kits.
To co-ordinate the activities of these groups and increase
awareness of the plight of blind children ¡n the developing world
ABC International was set up in April 1980 with offices in New
York(*).
Support for ABC's activities has come from organizations around
the world, including the Christoffel Blindenmission, in the Federal
Republic of Germany, the Royal Commonwealth Society for the
Blind, in the U.K., and Helen Keller International in the U.S., as well
as a number of smaller foundations and individuals.
But funds are still needed, and needed urgently, for the number of
blind children being assisted in south Asia is pitifully small less
than 3,000 out of 50,000 sightless youngsters under 15 in
Bangladesh, and about 15,000 out of 250,000 in India.
Twenty dollars (or £10, or 100 French francs) will pay for:
a sight-restoration operation on one eye for a child suffering
from congenital cataract. (In Bangladesh, the National Society
for the Blind pays the surgeon, but the cost of an attendant to
stay with the child in hospital, the general anaesthetic, food and
travelling expenses between the child's home and the hospital
are covered by ABC);
a Braille kit for a child in the integrated school programme, con¬
sisting of the various instruments required in class packed in a
strong wooden box;
full residential and educational expenses for one month at one of
the five hostels maintained by ABC.
Smaller contributions of, say, $2 (£1 or 10 francs) would pay for a
pair of "cataract glasses" manufactured locally; while, at the other
end of the scale, $5,000 (£3,000 or 30,000 francs) would cover the
construction and furnishing costs of a residential hostel, built of
brick, with a concrete floor and metal roofing.
Sir John Wilson, director of the Royal Commonwealth Society for
the Blind, once said that "it is only in the statistics that people go
blind by millions: each person goes blind individually in his own
predicament". Keeping that in mind, ABC is striving to ensure "A
future for every blind child".
* ABC is one of the projects being sponsored by Unesco's Co-Action Pro¬
gramme during 1981 International Year of Disabled Persons. Further infor¬
mation on the project and details of this international scheme which helps to
provide equipment and training facilities for schools and centres for the han¬
dicapped in the developing world, can be obtained from: "Co-Action", OPI,
UNESCO, 7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris. Contributions should be clearly
marked: "ABC International Bangladesh".
35
