The world
of Islam
Renewal and
by Siti Baroroh Baried
SURPRISING though it may seem to
non-specialists, Indonesia, on the
other side of the globe from the
birthplace of Islam, is the home of a larger
Muslim population over 120 million than
any other nation. And yet in this archipelago
of over 3,000 islands strung across the
Equator, Islam has been helping to shape
the course of history for hundreds of years.
In the present century, especially, after In¬
donesian thinkers and scholars came for the
first time into contact with the vital centres
of Islamic thought, a powerful Islamic
reform and modernization movement came
to the fore. It exercised, and continues to
exercise, a wide influence in such fields as
education, culture and social welfare. One
of the organizations belonging to this move¬
ment, the Muhammadiyyah, has played a
pioneering role in the Indonesian women's
movement.
The origins of Indonesia's vast Muslim
community can be traced back directly to
the proselytizing efforts of Arab and Indian
missionaries who initially had to carry out
their work without any patronage or
assistance from the rulers of the country,
relying solely on the force of persuasion.
It is impossible to fix a precise date for the
introduction of Islam into the Malay Ar¬
chipelago, of which present-day Indonesia is
a part, but it may have been brought there
by Arab traders in the early centuries of the
Hijra. Trade with China, through Ceylon,
began to expand rapidly at the beginning of
the l/7th century, and by the middle of the
ll/8th there were large numbers of Arab
traders in Canton. Later, from the IV/10th
until the IX/15th century and the arrival of
the Portuguese, Arabs were the undisputed
masters of trade with the east.
We may therefore conjecture with
reasonable certainty that Arabs must at a
very early period have established trading
settlements on some of the islands of the
Malay Archipelago, just as they did
elsewhere. Although no mention is made of
these islands by Arab geographers before
the IV/10th century, the Chinese annals,
under the date 54 AH/674 AD, give an ac¬
count of an Arab chief who, it may be con¬
jectured from later evidence, could have
been the head of an Arab settlement on the
west coast of Sumatra.
Missionaries must also, however, have
come from the south of India, judging from
certain characteristics of the Islamic
theology which was adopted in the islands.
This is important because they brought with
them a form of Islam which had inevitably
been influenced by Hinduism and, since
Islam had already crossed Persia before it
reached India, had also received Persian
cultural influence. The Indian missionaries
SITI BAROROH BARIED, of Indonesia, is pro¬
fessor of Islamic Studies at the State Islamic Stu¬
dies Institute, Yogyakarta, and professor of Indo¬
nesian Language at Gadjah Mada University,
Yogyakarta.
belonged to the Shafi'yyah sect, which still
holds sway in parts of southern India, while
the Shi'ism of which traces are still found in
Java and Sumatra must also have come
from India or from Persia.
Islam probably gained its first real
foothold in Indonesia sometime late in the
Vll/13th century when the Islamic Kingdom
of Samudra Pasai was founded in northern
Sumatra. Its Sultan's tomb, dated
696 AH/1297 AD, has survived and bears an
inscription written entirely in Arabic. Echoes
of the persistent relationship between the
archipelago and India and Persia were evok¬
ed in the following century by the famous
Arab traveller Ibn Battuta (see page 23) who
described how the Sultan of Samudra had
entered into friendly relations with the court
of Delhi and how, among the learned doc¬
tors of the law favoured by this devout
prince there were two of Persian origin.
The spread of Islam throughout the ar¬
chipelago was a long process which lasted
for centuries and was marked by the rise and
fall of a succession of Islamic kingdoms in
Java, Celebes, Borneo, Molucca and Sum-
ba. As it gained ground the new faith came
into contact with local cultures, especially
the mixture of animism and Hinduism that
had hitherto prevailed, and acquired as a
result certain features which went against
strict Islamic principles. Sufis and groups of
mystics were the chief architects of this ex¬
pansion, and an inclination towards
mysticism came to be characteristic of Islam
in Indonesia. It has been said that these
mystic teachings fostered a blind faith rather
than a spirit of enquiry into the laws of
Islam, carried out in harmony with ¡deals of
development and progress, and that Islam's
greatness during these shadowy,
kaleidoscopic centuries was only apparent in
a handful of outstanding figures. But until
the Xlll/19th century the Muslims of the ar¬
chipelago did not affirm their personality
and identity.
It was the invention of the steam ship and
the development of sea travel which gave a
remarkable new impetus to Islam in In¬
donesia. Now for the first time well-to-do In¬
donesians were able to make the pilgrimage
to Mecca. This marked the real beginning of
direct communication between Indonesian
Muslims and the birthplace of Islam, and
brought them into contact with Muslim
leaders from other countries such as Egypt,
Syria, India and Algeria.
Many Indonesian pilgrims stayed on in
Arabia to study the teachings of Islam from
original sources, and closely followed the
rise of the reformation movement launched
by the Wahabi group, Jamaluddin al-
Afghani and the Egyptian Muhammad Ab-
duh. Some of these scholars wrote books
on religious subjects in various Indonesian
languages. When they returned home,
where they became known as the Islamic
Reformists, they set out to lead Indonesian
Muslims back to a form of Islam based ex¬
clusively on the Qur'an and the Sunna, to
simplify the religious service, and to get rid
of everything which was extraneous to the
Islamic faith.
A theologian and trader named Kyai Haji
Ahmad Dahlan was one of the leading
figures in this movement. Dahlan realized
that Muslims in Indonesia were facing a
crisis of faith, and in Yogyakarta in 1330
AH/ 1912 AD he founded an organization
called the Muhammadiyyah, which was
dedicated to the purification of Indonesian
Islam and the elimination from it of animistic
influences. In its early years the Muham¬
madiyyah functioned through the pesan-
tren, the traditional institution of Islamic
learning in Indonesia, but in the course of
time it became a highly organized movement
active in education, social welfare, culture,
health, economic life, the law, publishing,
the youth movement and the women's
movement.
A striking example of Dahlan's pro¬
gressive approach was his decision to create
a women's section of the Muhammadiyyah.
Since many parts of the Qur'an and the
Sunna are addressed to women and con¬
cern their rights and duties, he reasoned,
then women must be instructed in the
teachings of Islam if they are to enjoy these
rights and carry out these duties. He was
also fully aware of the potential of women,
as well as men, in building the Muslim com¬
munity. In this preoccupation with educa¬
tion, Dahlan shared the ideals of Kartini, the
Javanese woman who is considered to be
the first Indonesian champion of equal rights
and education for women. The difference
was that Kartini observed the lives of
women in aristocratic society, whereas
Dahlan, travelling to remote parts of the
country on business, saw at first hand the
wretched conditions of women living in
poverty.
The women's section of the Muham¬
madiyyah, the Aisyiyah, came into being in
1335 AH/1917 AD. It began its existence in
the village of Kauman Yogyakarta where it
built in 1341 AH/1923 AD Indonesia's first
mosque for women, then considered to be
an important step forward to reform. Today,
half a century later, the organization is still
as active as ever in carrying out its mission
through the establishment of schools, or¬
phanages and hostels for girl students, and
through organizing courses on themes rang¬
ing from mental health to handicrafts.
In 1346 AH/1928 AD Aisyiyah was one of
seven women's organizations which took
the initiative of holding the Indonesian
Women's Conference. This led to the crea¬
tion of the federation, now known as the In¬
donesian Women's Congress, which groups
all Indonesian women's organizations and of
which Aisyiyah is still a member.
It continues to work for the progress of In¬
donesian women, and its activities, thanks
to Dahlan's farsightedness as a reformist, il¬
lustrate one of the many contributions
which the Islamic modernization movement
has made to life in Indonesia.
30

reform in Indonesia
^tfSá
A gathering of members of the Aisyiyah, the women's
section of the Muhammadiyyah Muslim reformist
movement in Indonesia.
31
