7 am so afraid
they will laugh at me'
by Barbro Lundahl
ANNA is a mentally retarded woman
in her thirties. She went to school
under the system of special educa¬
tion for the mentally retarded. After leaving
school she tried to work on the open labour
market but was forced to give up when she
found she could not cope with the
demands. At present she is living with her
boyfriend and taking care of the household.
The dialogue below is from a conversation
with psychologist Barbro Lundahl in which
Anna tells how she experiences her han¬
dicap, of how she is ashamed and afraid,
and how she feels herself to be on the
' outside.
Anna: To be retarded is to be not well...
When something is wrory in the head...
When a person can't do as much as other
people... like graduate from high school or
work in a hospital like others do. Things go
slower for the retarded... But maybe that's
why I'm retarded... Because tr&re's
something wrong in my head?
Barbro: Who has told you that you are
retarded?
Anna: My mother said that I'm a little
retarded, and... I'm not like other people.
Barbro: In what way are you not like other
people?
Anna: Everything goes so slowly for me, I
move so slowly, I forget things, and when I
talk, it sounds funny and no one
understands what I say. I think they don't
understand me because I'm not like other
people... That I'm a kind of scapegoat.
Barbro: When was the first time you felt like
that? Can you remember?
Anna: Yes, in school. It feels bad to be
retarded. It's so depressing to be retarded. I
want to be well, like other people. Well and
happy. But I just feel unhappy.
Barbro: Is it something to be ashamed of,
being mentally retarded?
Anna: Inside of me, I think it's ugly to be
retarded... Like when people look different
from other people, or when they look sick. I
think I look different from other people
when I'm retarded.
Barbro: You mean that you must look
strange because retarded people look
strange?
Anna: No, I don't look as strange as them.
But inside me I feel strange that I'm retard¬
ed. I just want to cry, just cry.
Barbro: Have you been able to talk to
anyone other than to your mother about
being retarded?
Anna: At my job, where I worked before...
they used to say "she's cracked."
Barbro: Did they say that? How did you
feel?
Anna: Unhappy.
Barbro: Haven't you ever tried to explain
why some things are hard for you, what the
reason is?
Anna: No, I don't dare. I would feel even
dumber. Maybe I feel like that now, when I
tell you.
Barbro: What do you think I feel about
people who are retarded?
Anna: That they are like other people.
Barbro: If you think that, why would you
feel dumb when you tell me things?
Anna: I just feel like that inside me.
Barbro: What do you feel about other
retarded people? Would you rather be with
them or with other people?
Anna: I want to be with normal people.
Listen. . . can I ask you about something? We
who are taking this course... are we all
retarded?
Barbro: Yes, more or less. It wouldn't be
right to call all of those taking this course
retarded, but every person here has had dif¬
ficulties in school. You think a lot about your
boyfriend... Was that what you wanted to
know... if he's retarded? Is that important
for you?
Anna: That's not so important. But I don't
dare tell him I'm retarded. He might want to
break up.
Barbro: Do you really believe that? Don't
you think he has understood that ifs hard
for you to do certain things and that he likes
you anyway? This being retarded... it's only
one part of a whole person. You have so
much more you can feel things and show
what you feel. And you can do lots of dif¬
ferent things. It's on/y a few things which
are hard for you to do. You're worth just as
much as a person as anyone else.
Anna: Yes, but I don't want to be retarded.
I want to be well. My sisters aren't retarded.
Barbro: No, they have hada little more luck
in life than you have... You say that you
aren't well. Have you ever wondered if there
is a medicine that retarded people can take
and be well?
Anna: Yes, but that wouldn't work, ifs too
late. Can you see I'm retarded?
Barbro: That is a hard question to answer.
But I don't think it shows on you. I think you
look like most other people.
Anna: But here, inside my head?
Comments: Anna is deeply unhappy over
her mental retardation, which she ex¬
periences as shameful and unattractive. She
dare not talk about it and expects no
understanding from those around her. Thus,
it is natural that she, like many other mental¬
ly handicapped persons, tries to conceal her
handicap. She mentions several times that
she believes other people can see that she is
retarded. She says that she wants to be
normal. She separates herself from other
mentally retarded people when she speaks
of them both as "they" and "we".
Anna needs much support and help in
learning to accept and stand up for herself.
It has been my experience that this is com¬
mon among adult mentally retarded people.
They must be given opportunities to talk
about themselves and their situation in an
atmosphere where they dare bring forth all
their ideas and questions. They must
understand that they are not suffering from
some shameful disease which cannot be
talked about.
They need to know which of those dif¬
ficulties they experience are due to mental
retardation, and which are due to
discrimination experienced in social con¬
tacts, both official and informal. We who
work with the mentally handicapped must
seek out their opinions and then respect
those opinions, rather than present patent
solutions to their problems.
We must learn to listen with a sensitive
ear and be open and honest in our contacts.
Only then can we expect the mentally
handicapped to be able to express their own
wishes for their lives, to set goals and to
take the responsibility necessary to realize
those goals.
BARBRO LUNDAHL is a Swedish psychologist
with many years experience of working with the
mentally retarded. She is the author of a book on
psychology specially written for use by the men¬
tally retarded.
17
