The scientific achievement
by Abdul-Razzak Kaddoura

of early Islam
"In the creation of the heavens and the
earth, and in the alternation of night and day
there are signs for men of sense; those that
remember Allah when standing, sitting and
lying down, and reflect on the creation of
the heavens and the earth, saying: Lord,
You have not created these in vain. Glory be
to You! Save us from the torment of Hell-
fire..."
(The Qur'an, 111:190, 191)
The nilometer on the island of Roda in the
Nile at Cairo was built in 246 AH/861 AD by
the mathematician Ahmad Ibn Mohammed
al-Faraghani on the orders of the Caliph al-
Mutawakkil. The building was linked to the
Nile by three tunnels and the central,
graduated column enabled the floods of the
Nile to be measured.
SCIENCE is man's endeavour to under¬
stand, by his own efforts, the world
around him and himself. Muslims have
always maintained that their faith not only
did not hinder such efforts but that it ex¬
pressly enjoined the believers, to undertake
them, and gave the necessary guidance for
their success.
This striving after knowledge has been a
constant commandment of Islam. It goes
back to the very beginning of the Revela¬
tion. From that first memorable day until
they succumbed for a time to external and
internal ills, the Muslims never ceased to be
at the forefront of science and technology.
It is, of course, impossible here to do full
justice to their great achievements and we
shall only mention one or two highlights in
the fields of mathematics, physics, medicine
and chemistry.
Mathematics, according to the English
mathematician Godfrey Hardy, is about
beautiful patterns of logical thought. It is
thus akin to music, poetry, painting and
other arts which attempt to compose
beautiful patterns of sounds, words, col¬
ours, etc. For Muslims, this pursuit of
abstract mathematical harmony was par¬
ticularly appealing and was directly linked
with their practice of art and architecture,
poetry and music.
Among the many advances made by
Muslim mathematicians, the one that could
be singled out is perhaps their elaboration of
the positional notation for the expression of
numbers, and, probably most important of
all, the use of the concept and symbol of
zero. This legacy has since become the
foundation of our number system.
No major scientific advance is of course
ever the product of a single individual or
even of one culture. Science and technology
are the result of continuous accumulation by
successive generations of men and women
from different parts of the world and are
thus the truly common heritage of all
mankind. This was beautifully stated by one
of the greatest scientists of all times,
Newton, when he said that if he was able to
see further than his predecessors, it was
because he stood on the shoulders of
giants. Having said that, and due credit
given to those from whom they borrowed,
including the Babylonians, the Indians, and
the Greeks, the achievement of the Muslims
in handing down to us the present basis of
our reckoning system is indeed of the very
first magnitude. This is popularly recognized
down to the present day by the name of
Arabic numerals, a term in universal use.
There are other obvious traces of Muslim
mathematics in contempor;ry terminology.
One of them is the Word algebra which
comes from the Arabic al-Jabr meaning the
restoration of something incomplete. This
mathematical discipline was perfected by
the Muslims on the basis of earlier work.
The major contribution in this field was
made by one of the greatest, perhaps the
greatest, among Muslim mathematicians:
Muhammad Ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi who
lives on today in the modern concept of the
"algorithm", a term derived from his name.
His book entitled Kitab al-mukhtasar fihisab
al-jabr wa'l-muqabalah (The Concise Book
on the Calculation of Restoration and Equa¬
tion) introduced algebra to Europe through
its Latin translation. The modern symbol for
an unknown, x, is derived from Shay which
is the Arabic word (meaning "thing")
originally used in Muslim texts on algebra.
Trigonometry, another of the major
mathematical disciplines, was essentially
established by the Muslims. The word
"sine", which designates the basic
trigonometric function, is the direct transla¬
tion of the Arabic original jayb. Many basic
trigonometric relations were elaborated by
Muslim mathematicians.
On the basis of Greek results, and in par¬
ticular those of Euclid, the Muslims made
great contributions to geometry. One of the
most eminent Muslim workers in this field,
although his modern fame does not
recognize this essential facet of his genius,
was Omar al-Khayyam. Another great
Muslim geometer was Nasir al-Din al-Tusi,
who wrote a commentary on the Elements
of Euclid.
Like almost every noted Muslim
philosopher, al-Tusi also devoted part of his
writing to natural philosophy, which, in his
day, included physics as well as the life and
the earth sciences. The work of Muslim
physicists was always characterized by a
delicate sensitivity to fundamental
theoretical principles (reflecting their ad¬
miration and reverence for God's creation)
and a practical approach (devoted to cater¬
ing for the needs of God's creatures).
Starting from a deep knowledge and
criticism of Aristotelian natural philosophy
(physics), Muslim scientists undertook a
thorough examination of the foundation of
this subject. The extensive correspondence
exchanged between al-Biruni, the leading
Muslim physicist, and the great Ibn Sina
ABDUL-RAZZAK KADDOURA is Unesco's
Assistant Director-General for Natural Sciences
and their Application to Development. He was
formerly Rector of the University of Damascus.
45

-(Avicenna) is a towering intellectual achieve¬
ment where all physical concepts of the day
are carefully analysed. It reminds one of the
Einstein-Bohr correspondence on the inter¬
pretation of quantum mechanics.
The study of motion in particular, and of
mechanics in general, led Muslim scientists
to advance the solution of several important
problems. Among these are the motion of
projectiles, the concept of momentum (cen¬
tral to contemporary physics and which was
developed by Ibn al-Haytham), the braking
of the motion of a body by the material
medium through which it moves, the fall of
bodies under the action of the force of gravi¬
ty, and the variation of the force of gravita¬
tional attraction between two bodies as a
function of their distance. All these con¬
tributions, and many others too numerous
to be mentioned here, paved the way for the
major scientific revolution initiated by
Galileo and crowned by Newton.
The science of optics was essentially
established by Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen)
who is rightly called the father of optics. His
Kitab al-manazir (The Book of Optics),
which was translated into Latin, is con¬
sidered to be the most important medieval
work of its kind.
Among his many achievements are the
study of atmospheric phenomena, parabolic
and spherical mirrors and their aberrations
(in connexion with which he gave his name
to the famous Alhazen's problem whose
solution requires that of a fourth degree
equation which Ibn al-Haytham solved by
geometrical methods), and the first enuncia¬
tion of the minimum path principle for light
which was later perfected by Fermât and
became called by his name. Ibn al-Haytham
also did fundamental work in the study of
refraction, and discovered an approximation
to its law which was later established by
Snell and Descartes.
It is important to note that Ibn al-Haytham
was, at the same time, a skilled experimen¬
talist, building pieces of equipment with his
own hands, and a consummate theoretician
thoroughly familiar with the most
sophisticated mathematical techniques of
his day. By this blending of theory and ex¬
periment he anticipated modern science
which was born, according to Bertrand
Russell, from the merging of Greek specula¬
tion with Arab empiricism.
Ibn al-Haytham combined in his investiga¬
tions the skills of a physicist with the art of a
physician, and it was therefore natural that
he should have studied human vision with
particular effectiveness. He describes, with
great precision, the various components of
the eye, their individual functions and inter¬
relationships. Rejecting the false tactile
theory (according to which light is con¬
stituted by feelers emitted by the eye and
used to detect the seen object), which was
prevalent among pre-Muslim workers, he
correctly maintained that the eye is only the
receptor of light emitted by luminous
bodies.
Care of the eye was a major interest of
Muslim medicine. The ophthalmologist was
a familiar character of the society of Islam.
Under the name of Kahhal (from Kuhl which
means Kohl), he simultaneously practised
medicine, supplied (and sometimes even ap¬
plied) make-up, and often acted as a confi¬
dant and counsellor. If modern knowledge
leads us to ask whether "the eye is not an
external extension of the brain", it is
remarkable that this intimate link between 3
46
's';-' -
f.
^tK^i^U^^jJUs^^^, .ki

The mathematical table, right, is a
detail from a Vl/12th century
manuscript, Al-Bahir fi "dm as-Hisab
(The Book of Enlightenment on
Arithmetic), written by the
mathematician, doctor and philosopher
As-Samawal Ibn Yahya al-Maghribi who
died at Moragha in about
575 AH/1180 AD. It consists of a system
of numbers, arranged triangularly,
giving the coefficients of the expansion
of the expression (a + b)m, where misa
whole number. Inset right, the same
table which is known in the West as
Pascal's Triangle, after the famous
French mathematician and writer Blaise
Pascal who re-discovered it during the
17th century and was long thought to
be its originator. In his manuscript,
which is now preserved in the Hagia
Sophia Library, Istanbul, al-Maghribi
states that he copied the table from the
works of the Arab mathematician al-
Karaji who was born towards the end
of the IWIOth century. Thus the Arab
version of the table pre-dates Pascal's
version by at least six centuries.
During the golden age of Islamic
science, the theoretical aspect of music
was regarded as a branch of
mathematics and leading Muslim
scientists, including Ibn Sina and Qutb
al-Din al-Shirazi wrote whole treatises
on music. The close links between
music and mathematics is apparent in
this page (above left) from the section
on music of al-Shirazi's Durrat al-taj, an
encyclopaedia of philosophy and
science written in Persian. At that time
science was not strictly
compartmentalized as it is today and
most of the leading figures of Islamic
science were at home in several
disciplines. The great physicist Ibn al-
Haytham also made his mark as an
astronomer and a meteorologist and
was known as "the father of optics". A
qualified physician, he took a special
interest in ophthalmology and was one
of the first to recognize that the eye
was a receptor of light emitted by
luminous bodies. Below left, diagram of
the human eye from a treatise on
ophthalmology now in the Egyptian
National Library, Cairo.
Around the Vll/13th century, many
Muslim scientists were fascinated by
complicated mechanical devices,
gadgets and automata such as those
described in the Kitab fi ma'rifat al-
hiyal al-handasiyyah (The Book of
Knowledge of Ingenious Mechanical
Devices), written in 602 AH/1206 AD by
the engineer al-Jazari. Right,
illustration of one of his hydraulic
devices which he describes laconically
as "for use in the household".

The "Elephant CLock", an illustration from a version of al-Jazari's Book of
Knowledge of Ingenious Mechanical Devices dated 715 AH/1315 AD. The clock is
a marvel of ingenuity. Time is indicated on a scale to which the figure in the
howdah points and by openings (not visible) under the canopy that change from
black to white every hour. Every half hour the bird at the top revolves and
whistles, the mahout strikes the elephant and the figure above the falcon causes
the latter to drop a pebble into the dragon's mouth. The dragon's head drops
down carrying the pebble to a vase on the elephant's back and the pebble falls
inside the elephant where it strikes a gong.
the two was at the centre of Muslim
(ophthalmology.
Arabic has supplied Latin, and through it
(other European languages, with a rich ter¬
minology. One of the most authoritative
treatises on the subject is Tadhkirat al-
Kahalin (The Handbook of Ophthalmologists)
(written by the famous Ali Ibn Isa who was
the first to propose the use of anaesthesia in
(surgery.
But the name that comes most naturally
(to mind when one speaks of Islamic
medicine is that of the "prince of
physicians", the great Abu Ali Ibn Sina
((Avicenna). A child prodigy who memorized
(the Qur'an at a very early age, he was self-
taught in many subjects. A scholar of ad¬
mirable self-discipline and vast learning, he
(wrote works which remained for centuries
the standard references for medicine both in
Islamic countries and in Europe. His al
Qanun fiat-tibb (the Canon of Medicine) has
had incomparable influence on medical
practice and theory. It was translated into
many languages and remained, until the late
Middle Ages, the foremost medical treatise.
(it was based on the best knowledge
available in Ibn Sina's time, including, in
particular, his own observations and
discoveries which included the important
(results he obtained in the study of
epidemiology (applied for example to tuber¬
culosis), of meningitis (which he was the
first to describe), and of psychic disorders.
Most, if not all, Muslim men of science
(were highly versed in several scientific
(disciplines, in addition to being often at
| home in other branches of knowledge in¬
cluding philosophy, literature and one or
several of the arts. This general rule is
| nowhere as true as in the case of Muslim
physicians. Many of them, and certainly
their leaders, such as Ibn Sina (Avicenna),
| Ibn Rushd (Averroes), al-Kindi, and al-Razi
| were truly encyclopaedic men partaking of
practically all fields of knowledge of their
| times.
It is no coincidence that the Arabic word
| in common use today to designate a physi¬
cian (tabib), coexisted, during many cen-
| turies, with another word (hakim) whose
precise meaning in Arabic is "sage".
| Although hakim is less often used today
| than tabib, particularly among the educated
people in countries where Arabic is the
native language, its use has by no means
I disappeared and may in fact be re-asserting
itself with the present trend towards a return
I to cultural roots.
This unity of the various sciences, em¬
bodied in the polyvalence of their most emi¬
nent practitioners, was also reflected in the
conjunction of their transmission to the
students. Many of the hospitals, which were
a distinctive character of the Muslim world,
had schools (madrasahs) attached to them
where the future physicians were trained in
the theoretical aspects of their art, while the
clinical side was catered for by practical ser¬
vice in the hospitals.
The hospitals were often, and certainly in
the case of the most important ones,
academic and professional institutions of a
very high standard. They possessed in addi¬
tion to the usual components, libraries, lec-
ture halls, living quarters for the teachers,
the students, and most of the technical sup¬
porting staff, and many other facilities. The
institution of waqf (an endowment or trust
fund), which played such an important role
in Muslim life, ensured that the hospitals
48

MMMWt$&M*WM%&^&&:£-
Cape
specially
woven for
King Roger II
of Sicily
on the occasion
of his coronation |
in 525 AH/1130 AD, some
forty years after the end of a period
of 200 years of Muslim rule in the island. It is bordered with a woven Arabic script in which
is recorded the date of its manufacture as well as a prayer for the king couched In traditional Arabic terms.
Islamic textile designs and techniques spread from Sicily throughout the West and Turkish, Persian
and Arab designs are still current in Europe today.
had dependable and continuous means of
support.
Medicine is of course much more than
medical science, and to describe the many
contributions of the Muslims to its various
facets as a science, a healing art and a social
service, would be a formidable task. It
should be stressed, however, that Islam has
a rich tradition enjoining upon the believers
a code of personal and collective behaviour
conducive to a healthy state. The Qur'an
and the traditional Hadiths of the Prophet
give numerous and clear instructions about
personal hygiene (in particular through the
ablutions and in preparation for prayer),
dietary habits ("We, as a people, do not eat
until we feel hungry, and when we do eat,
we stop short of satiety", says one Hadith),
physical exercise ("Teach your children
swimming, archery, and horse-riding",
commands another), and many other
guidelines ensuring a healthy mind and
body.
Two social practices deserve particular
mention. One is the dispensation of
medicinal and other drugs which is the
business of the druggist (al attar) who often
acted also as an auxiliary medical practi¬
tioner (barbers also filled this latter function
in part). The other is the very important in¬
stitution of the public bath (al hammam)
which was a major meeting place acting at
the same time as a club (used alternately by
the two sexes) for social entertaining and
festivities, as a cleansing place and as a
forum for some kind of physical and
psychological relaxation for people going or
having just gone through periods of physical
and/or mental stress. An interesting in¬
stance of this last aspect is the universal
practice, which has waned in recent times,
of taking women to the hammam a certain
period after their giving birth, in a big group
of relatives, for a purificatory and festive
ceremony.
The notion of birth underlay the work of
the Islamic alchemists who, according to
Seyyed Hossein Nasr, in his book Islamic
Science, saw "the ¡deal of alchemy as a
form of obstetrics which delivers gold from
the bosom of nature".
Although alchemy should not be regarded
as a kind of protochemistry, the history of
chemistry is inseparable from it. The study
of chemistry was started by the Muslims in
their earliest days, but it was mainly the
philosopher, physician and alchemist Jabir
bin Hayyan (also known as Geber) who
made the first major Muslim contribution to
chemistry. Jabir bin Hayyan lived in the
second century AH (eighth century AD) and
wrote an impressive number of books
among which Kitab al-Sabin (book of the
seventy), and Kitab al-mizan (book of the
balance) are of particular importance.
The next major Muslim chemist is
Muhammad ibn Zakariyya al-Razi who was
also an outstanding physician. It was he
who proposed the classification of
substances into mineral, vegetable and
animal categories. He is credited with impor¬
tant advances in the study of several
chemical processes including that of distilla¬
tion. It is believed that he was the first to ex¬
tract alcohol from fermented substances
and to use it for medical purposes. The word
alcohol is of Arabic origin. The original word
could be al Kuhl (meaning Kohl) or al gaoul
(mentioned in the Qur'an and prob¬
ably denoting the objectionable ingredient in
wine).
The present state of Islamic science is of
course far from comparing favourably with
its prestigious past. But this sad situation
(for the Muslims and for the world as whole)
should not lead to an excessively un¬
favourable assessment of science and
technology in Dar-il Islam (The Domain of
Islam). One must recall first the impressive
numbers of Muslim scientists and engineers
already practising, or being trained, in all the
countries of the vast Muslim world. It is
beyond all doubt that this generation, and
the next one, will produce, because of their
sheer numbers, many outstanding scien¬
tists, some of whom are already among us
(Professor Abdus Salam was awarded the
Nobel Prize in Physics for 1979 and is thus
the first Muslim scientist to have achieved
this distinction).
Islamic countries are, for their part, in¬
creasingly aware of the fact that the
renaissance of Islam is linked with a new
flowering of science and technology within
the Umma (the Islamic Nation). They recall
the Hadith of the Prophet (May God bless
Him and give Him peace): "The end of this
Nation will only be secured through what
secured its beginning". Muslim countries
are therefore determined to work not only
individually but, more importantly, collec¬
tively, and in co-operation with all other na¬
tions of the world, to contribute to the
development of science and technology.
They have " recently founded the Islamic
Foundation for Science, Technology and
Development, whose Director-General is an
eminent Muslim scientist, Dr. Ali Kettani.
The Foundation has at present a modest
budget of fifty million dollars, but a signifi¬
cant fraction of the Islamic Fund for
Development, which amounts to two thou¬
sand million dollars will, as was stated at the
Islamic Summit Conference in Taif in
January 1981, be used for science and
technology. On this road to scientific and
technological renewal, the Muslims recite
reverently the words of God:
"And say: My Lord,
Lead me in with a just ingoing, and lead
me out with just outgoing; grant me
authority from Thee, to help me".
(XVII: 80)
M Abdul-Razzak Kaddoura
49
