SAINT BENEDICT
OF NURSIA
The only authority for the facts of St. Benedict's life is book 2 of the
Dialogues of Pope Gregory the Great, which was written around 593-594,
almost fifty years after the saint's death. This medieval miniature from the
Miracles of St. Benedict by St. Gregory, Adrevaldus and Almoin (1437)
shows Gregory listening to testimony about the life of St. Benedict.
A voice across
the centuries
by Gregorio Penco
Jl J/ BEAR, my son, the precepts of
BiH the Master and lend him thine
I I heart's ear. Receive with
gladness the teaching of a good father, that
in its practice and in the exercise of obe¬
dience, thou shalt return again to him from
whom base contumacy hath led thee
away".
begins the "Rule of Saint
Benedict", a document written some 1500
years ago that was to become one of the
foundation stones of monasticism in
western Christendom.
All that we know about the life of Saint
Benedict, the author of this document, is
contained in Book II of the Dialogues of
Saint Gregory the Great (Pope Gregory I).
Benedict was born in the year 480, of good
family, at Nursia, Umbría, Italy. After a brief
period of schooling in Rome, impelled by a
desire for a closer union with God and by a
strong sense of vocation, he withdrew to
the solitude of a cave near Subiaco, while
still a young man, where he devoted his life
to prayer and penitence.
There he lived for three years, attracting
by his devoutness so many disciples that he
was obliged to found thirteen communities
in the region. Later, he left the area, moving
south to found the famous monastery (in its
chequered history it has been destroyed and
rebuilt four times) at Monte Cassino where,
in 547, he was to die. r
GREGORIO PENCO, of Italy, is a Benedictine
monk at the monastery of Agrano, near Novara,
Italy. A noted theologian, he is a specialist in
monastic history.
31

Works of art inspired by St. Benedict, many of them painted by great masters, would
have a prominent place in any portrait gallery of Christian saints. In the 15th-century
fresco, above, left, by the Italian painter Mariano di Matteo da Roma, St. Benedict is
shown deep in meditation. Fingers to his lips, he enjoins his monks to silence. Quite
different in spirit is the drawing of the "patriarch of Western monks" by the great
Flemish painter Peter Paul Rubens, above right. It was executed around 1605 after an
earlier portrait by Giovanni Bellini. St. Benedict, shown holding a crook in one hand
and an open Bible in the other, is accompanied by St. Mark. The authority of his gaze
and bearing reflects the decisive role played by St. Benedict in European history.
32

This miniature from the Miracles of St. Benedict by the medieval Flemish chronicler
Jean de Stavelot shows a famous episode in the life of St. Benedict as recorded by
Gregory the Great. St. Benedict is admonishing the Gothic king Totila, who then
dominated much of Italy, with the words: "You commit acts of great evil, you have
done many wrongs. Put an end to your cruelty!" This appeal for peace and justice,
courageously addressed by the sequestered monk to one of the mighty figures of his
age, here appears as a symbol of the superiority of the word over the sword.
^ Saint Benedict was, above all, an ascetic,
a contemplative, a "man of God" as his
biographer called him. Yet he was also a
legislator who expressed and codified his ex¬
perience of monastic life in his famous Rule
which was destined primarily for application
in the monastery at Monte Cassino, but also
in other monasteries that little by little came
to adopt it.
The monastic movement had, indeed,
been in existence in the West for some two
centuries before Saint Benedict's time and
had already produced a number of notable
figures, such as Saint Martin of Tours, as
well as various monastic rules. What it lack¬
ed, however, was a balanced, reasonable,
harmonious code which would make the
monastic life accessible to people not en¬
dowed with exceptional physical and
spiritual qualities and which, above all,
would provide monastic communities with a
solid, wisely-conceived organizational
framework capable of withstanding the
vicissitudes of time.
Saint Benedict was inspired by a pro¬
found faith, and it was upon this faith that
he based his entire spiritual edifice. In this
respect, the Benedictine Rule has been
described as being "Christ-centred", since,
to the eye of the faithful, the presence of
Christ can be discerned in everyone,
whether abbot or monk, sick person or pass¬
ing guest.
Since the community for which it was
drawn up was formed and exists above all
for religious purposes (seeking after God),
the Rule gives pride of place to prayer,
which Saint Benedict called Opus Dei, the
supreme work of God. Periods of prayer are
allowed for at fixed times of the day, con¬
sisting of readings of psalms and lessons.
The Bible, accompanied by the commen¬
taries of the Church Fathers, is thus the
basic text of prayer. By means of prayer the
monk can express the renewed gift of
fellowship with God both in personal collo¬
quy and in a collective act of praise in which
all creation is united in celebration of the
greatness of God in the world and
throughout time. Linked in this manner to
the Bible and the liturgy, monastic prayer
has an essentially objective character quite
distinct from that of other spiritual schools
which tend rather towards the introspective,
contemplative approach.
Work is another fundamental component
of the Rule. Indeed, so essential was it con¬
sidered to be that later tradition coupled it
with prayer in the formula Ora et Labora
(pray and work), although these words do
not actually appear in the text of the Rule.
Previously left almost entirely to slaves,
work not only offered an escape from
idleness, so harmful to the spirit, it also pro¬
vided a means of subsistence and of helping
pilgrims and succouring the poor. The Rule
speaks explicitly of Arti, that is to say, of the
activities undertaken by the monks within
the monastery. Work in the fields was left to
the peasants, although the Rule provides for
the monks to take part in this work when
necessary. It also gives instructions on what
33

"Slave or free man, we are all one in Christ, and we are militant under
one Lord, bearing an equal yoke of servitude", wrote St. Benedict in his
Rule. The abbot, leader and father of the monks, takes no important
decision withour consulting the community or the council of seniors,
and some writers who have described the organization of the
Benedictine life have even spoken of "monastic democracy". This detail
from a fresco in the Benedictine monastery of Monte Oliveto Maggiore
near Siena in Italy shows the Benedictine community eating in silence
which is broken only by the monk reading aloud. It forms part of a
series of scenes from the life of St. Benedict painted by the Italian artist
Sodoma between 1505 and 1508.
constitutes a suitable ration of food and the
time to be allotted to sleep and rest, the
Abbot being allowed a wide margin of dis¬
cretion in these matters.
These apparently simple regulations, des¬
tined for the closed world of the monastery,
cut off from society, were to prove extre¬
mely fruitful during the succeeding centu¬
ries. Born just after the fall of the Western
Roman Empire, in 476, Saint Benedict lived
in a period of profound change, of crises
and upheavals whose effects were felt as
much by ecclesiastical as by other institu¬
tions.
It was a period marked by intensified
transmigrations of peoples which were to
give birth to the Europe of the Middle Ages.
And, although there are no grounds for sup¬
posing either that the Popes gave any expli¬
cit instructions concerning the formulation
of the Benedictine Rule, with a view to the
conversion of these people to Christianity,
or that this was in the mind of the Saint
himself he had no wish to deviate from his
¡deal of solitude and detachment from the
world the regulations he had drawn up
were to be decisive for the future.
With the foundation of the Holy Roman
Empire under Charlemagne, in the 9th cen¬
tury, and under his successors, the Benedic¬
tine Rule was more and more widely adop¬
ted until it became virtually the sole body of
monastic regulations of the period. This
meant that innumerable monasteries had the
good fortune to find themselves governed
on the basis of a wise and compassionate
Rule, while at the same time retaining vir¬
tually complete autonomy.
At the end of the 6th century, Pope Gre¬
gory the Great had sent some forty monks
under Saint Augustine to convert England
to Christianity. Later, from the 8th to the 9th
century, Anglo-Saxon monks, under the
leadership of Saint Boniface, were in their
turn to land on the continent, penetrating
into the heart ôf Europe to regions un¬
touched by Roman civilization, to convert
the Germanic peoples to Christianity. They
then took their message to the Scandina¬
vians and the Slavs, and in this way, over
the centuries, the spread of Christianity and
the expansion of monasticism went hand in
hand.
The time came, however, when the
monasteries felt the need to emerge from
their isolation and to band together into lar¬
ger associations to defend themselves from
external threats. The first of these associa¬
tions, the precursors of the great religious
orders, was centred on the famous monas¬
tery founded at Cluny, in Burgundy, France,
in 910. Many others followed suit, notable
among them being Citeaux, the monastery
which Saint Bernard and some thirty of his
relatives and friends were to enter two cen¬
turies later.
As it expanded, Benedictine monasticism
followed fairly closely the evolution of both
Church and society, associating itself with
the Church in the task of spiritual reform to
counter interference from the outside world,
but acting in concert with society in the
introduction of new craft techniques and in
the development of agricultural production
and trade.
Situated, in many cases, beside the main
communication routes, whose upkeep they
ensured, the monasteries provided hostels
for pilgrims and, later, full-scale hospitals for
the sick. But, above all, the Benedictine
34

1">V C ifIHptí' wi - -*t>} V
-<- .,T.r,r ..-»."/
ill*1 r.t?.^iwilwr»rr tir.r
c cir^fw? Ar î.aiif.t
By the end of the 12th century there were over 100,000 Benedictine
monasteries in Europe. Their impact on European culture and civilization
was far-reaching: their scribes and copyists helped to transmit the literature
and learning of Antiquity to the modern world, and their schools were the
leading educational institutions. Above, 15th-century miniature showing
Constant the African, an 11th-century monk in the great Benedictine
monastery of Monte Cassino in Italy, diagnosing an illness through
uroscopy. Constant was instrumental in transmitting elements of the Arab
pharmacopeia to Europe. Below, the scriptorium, or scribes' copying-room,
in the abbey of Echternach (Luxemburg) as depicted in an 11th-century
miniature.
'Pray and work"
An original feature of St. Benedict's Rule is
the stress it lays on the importance of
manual work in the spiritual life, the
monk's day being divided between prayer
and work, and governed by a strict
timetable. Bells were rung when it was
time to pass from one activity to another.
Top, the ringing of bells is depicted in the
initial "E" in an illuminated Bible (c. 1250)
from the abbey of Saint-Eloi in northern
France. Above, preaching monk carved on
a stall from the abbey of Saint-Lucien,
Beauvais (France). Carving on another stall
from the same abbey (below) shows a
monk working a butter churn. As a result
of their "work ethic" the Benedictines
made a decisive contribution to the
economic and social life of medieval
Europe. Manual work is still coupled with
prayer in the daily activities of the monk.

While St. Benedict was living as a hermit, the fame of his sanctity
spread and disciples flocked to hear him preach. Tiny painting
(above) in the margin of a mid-15th-century breviary from the abbey
of Grammont (France), shows the monks of Vicovaro beseeching
him to become their abbot. Later his followers would preach the
length and breadth of Europe. In 529 Benedict founded the
monastery of Monte Cassino on the site of an ancient temple to
Apollo halfway between Rome and Naples. The monastery (below)
was an important cultural centre in the Middle Ages when its monks
produced outstanding manuscripts and paintings. It has been
destroyed and rebuilt several times, most recently after the Second
World War.
^ monasteries gave an extraordinary impetus
to the life of the mind at a time when there
existed very few other institutions in a posi¬
tion to do so.
Each monastery had a library and a writ-
ting room for the transcription of manu¬
scripts required both for the religious offices
and for the cultural education of the monks.
At a time when the outside world was ex¬
periencing a disturbing cultural decline, the
monastic libraries represented virtually the
sole repositories of knowledge. In tran¬
scribing and preserving not only sacred
Christian texts but also classical Greek and
Latin literature, the Benedictine copyists
rendered an invaluable service to civilization,
maintaining its continuity in face of the
threat of irreparable rupture.
Nevertheless, Saint Benedict and his suc¬
cessors will be remembered primarily for the
spiritual values which they kept alive and
spread throughout Western Europe up to
the start of the modern era. Then the chang¬
ing conditions of the times made necessary
the development of new religious orders
with more clearly defined aims and that were
better prepared for the apostolic mission. In
the organization of work, in the sense of
prayer and in the collective life of the
monastery were to be found the specific ac¬
tivities and conditions of life that together
constituted the values that Benedictine
monasticism sustained and propagated in ,
medieval society. The very soul of Europe
was moulded by Saint Benedict and his suc¬
cessors who created a culture which,
despite the diversity of its national and local
forms, was profoundly unitary because it
drew inspiration from a single source, hav¬
ing a single faith based on the Bible and the
tradition of the Church.
For centuries, the ideal of saintliness re¬
mained that formed by the monastic life,
and Benedictine saints, whether canonized
or not, can be counted in their thousands,
among whom were spiritual leaders, ad¬
visers to popes and emperors, founders of
monasteries and of cities, and evangelists
who carried the word to the people. They in¬
cluded many great thinkers, Doctors of the
Church such as the Venerable Bede, Saint
Damien, Saint Anselm and Saint Bernard,
who contributed to the emergence of a par¬
ticular kind of theology known as "monastic
theology" because it was appropriate to a
life of prayer and the quest for union with
God. Their writings, highly esteemed by the
student of today, are of lasting value
because they stress the unity of prayer and
life, of faith and charity, of religion and
culture. Thus the influence of Saint
Benedict's spiritual legacy still makes itself
felt across the centuries, and from the past
his voice still brings enlightenment to
modern man.
H Gregorio Penco
36
