The Water Decade (1981-1990)
1981 marks the start of the International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade, a worldwide
co-operative effort to provide "clean water and adequate sanitation for all by the year 1990". The
Decade has been declared by the United Nations GeneralAssembly in response to a human tragedy
of enormous proportions: more than half the men, women and children living today have no ready
access to clean drinking water, and fewer still have facilities for sanitary waste disposal. Over the
next ten years many groups will join forces to remedy this situation, which gravely affects human
health and productivity and severely impedes development progress. Participants will include
governments of both developing and industrialized countries, non-governmental industry, schools
and colleges, the media and several United Nations agencies, including Unesco.
WATER is essential for life. It makes up nine-tenths of the
human body's volume and two-thirds of its weight. This
vital element covers about three-quarters of the earth's
surface. But some 97.4 per cent is saltwater in oceans, and 1.8 per
cent is frozen in polar regions.
Fresh water, needed by human beings to sustain life, health and
productive activities, constitutes only 0.8 per cent of the world's
supply... and nobody knows just what portion of this amount is
contaminated.
For half the world's people... and three-fifths of those living in
developing countries... reasonable access to a safe and adequate
drinking water supply is still more a wish than a reality.
Water is first and foremost a physiological necessity; without one
or two litres of water daily, a person cannot survive. Some twenty to
fifty litres a day of safe water, conveniently available for drinking,
'food preparation, and hygiene, are generally considered essential to
sustenance of the minimum acceptable standard of living.
About twenty litres is the quantity of water usually used when the
source, such as a well or a standpipe, is within a reasonable
distance up to about 200 metres from the home. Installation of
patio connections increases consumption, often to about fifty litres.
With house connections and the simplest indoor plumbing, in¬
cluding a pour-flush toilet, 100 litres a day per person is normally the
minimum level of consumption.
In developed countries and in the wealthier parts of cities in
developing countries, average daily consumption is generally a
multiple of this amount, ranging between 200 and 400 litres a day
per person. In addition to basic human requirements (or larger
residential consumption), water for industry and commerce, which
typically accounts for 30-60 per cent of total consumption in an area,
is also essential to sustenance of productive life and employment.
In many instances the present difficulties of procuring water are
so great that a significant effect of improvement is a saving of time
and energy. In a study of the effects of rural water supply projects
on women in Kenya conducted by the Co-operative for American
Relief Everywhere (CARE), for example, it was reported that nearly a
fifth of rural households spent more than six hours each day collec¬
ting water. A third of the total work time of female heads of
households was devoted to collecting water, while only 17 per cent
was spent in preparing food and 21 per cent in economic activities,
such as farming, herding, and marketing.
The problem is not confined to rural areas; in one of the poorer
parts of Douala, Cameroon, that was covered in a recent project
The underground drinking-water reservoir
at Montsouris, Paris, France.
Photo Doisneau © Rapho, Science et Avenir, Pans
supported by the World Bank, for example, there were only two
standpipes for 50,000 persons, and some residents walked as far as
five kilometres to fetch water.
Another basic need is the sanitary disposal of human waste that
is, its disposal in such a way as to remove it from human contact.
People generally seek to dispose of their excreta as cheaply and easi¬
ly as possible, and in many rural areas where population density is
low it is usually possible to do this without any large investment in
waste-disposal facilities. In most urban areas, however, where the
concentration of population is greater, a higher level of service is re¬
quired for waste-disposal facilities in order to protect the health of
the community and prevent degradation of the environment.
There is a wide range of facilities that can be used, from simple
latrines to the type of waterborne sewerage known in most advanc¬
ed countries. The need for sewers, as opposed to less expensive on-
site disposal techniques, depends considerably on the permeability
of the local soil, but, broadly speaking, it can be said that sewers in
typical urban residential areas will not function when water con¬
sumption is less than 100 litres a day per person but will be essential
when consumption reaches 200 litres a day per person. Techniques
and systems of waste disposal, like water supply, must be planned
with the needs of industry and commerce taken into account.
The best estimate, on the basis of 1975 country data collected by
the World Health Organization (WHO) and of other information
available to the World Bank, is that fewer than 500 million of the
2,000 million people in the developing countries not including the
People's Republic of China had access to adequate supplies of
safe water and adequate waste-disposal facilities.
The 1,500 million without these basic services consisted of some
1,100 million to 1,200 million in rural areas, or more than 80 per cent
of the total rural population, and 300 million to 400 million, or bet¬
ween half and two thirds of the population, in the urban areas. The
large majority of the former were dependent for water on shallow
wells and natural surface water, of unreliable quality and often at
substantial distances, and for waste disposal on the fields. The ma¬
jority of the latter were in areas that had water-supply systems, but
which were working only a few hours a day or delivering water of
unsafe quality.
The WHO data indicate that the number of people with access to-
public water-supply systems increased dramatically between 1970
and 1975, from some 400 million to around 750 million, but popula¬
tion growth was also substantial during the same period, and the
number of persons not served changed little. The information
reported, moreover, refers only to access and does not indicate the
condition or reliability of the water-supply system.
Levels of urban service in India, for example, are reported to have
increased from 60 per cent in 1970 to 80 per cent in 1975; the number
of people served by house connections or public standpipes increas¬
ed from 66 million to 107 million, and the backlog of population not
served was cut from 44 million to 27 million. At the same time,
however, there was a rapid decline in the quality of service. In many
of the largest cities, customers who had had eight to ten hours of i
service in 1970 had only two to three hours by 1975. Whenever inter- f
11

v-
WHAT THE
n
Photo Dominique Roger, Unesco
Estimates on what it will cost
to provide everyone with clean
water and adequate sanitation
by the year 1990 have varied
widely.
At the United Nations Water
Conference in Mar Del Plata,
Argentina (1977), the price tag
put on the Decade was
$140,000 million. More recently,
however, the World Bank has
produced figures generally
considered more realistic.
Costs are dramatically
affected by choices of
technology and scope and level
of service.
The costliest option, based
on house connections for water
supply at $120-150 per
head and water-borne sewage
(e.g., flush toilets) at $250 per
head is priced in excess of
$600,000 million, or $60,000
million annually (in 1978 U.S.
dollars). It assumes that:
There will be 100 per cent
coverage by 1990;
Rural households will be
served with standpipes or
handpumps and individual
latrines;
Urban households will
receive water taps of their own
and will be connected to a
sewerage system.
A second option is based on
more use of less sophisticated,
lower cost technologies such as
handpumps and pit latrines,
which are perfectly capable of
providing an acceptable level of
service in both urban and rural
areas. It also takes into account
a wider mix of service levels,
and an 80 per cent level of
coverage by the Decade's end.
This figure, the one now cited
most frequently, is $300,000
million, or $30,000 million
annually.
Every day tens of millions of people in the developing countries consume vast amounts of
time and energy carrying heavy loads of water over long distances. In many places, the
trip may take as many as six hours and use up more than half the day's energy.
Women and children bear the greatest burden. Instead of a journey to school, the day can
begin for a child with a long, difficult walk to fetch water. The daily trek uses many hours
women might otherwise spend on more productive educational or income-earning pursuits
which could improve the quality of life for all in the community.
12

DECADE WILL COST
On what basis are these total costs determined?
NEEDS :
1990 population of developing countries needing
water supply and sanitation (in millions).
Water Sanitation
Urban 640 650
Rural 1,570 1,670
Total 2,210 2,320
COSTS :
Per Capita costs of alternative types of water supply
and sanitation (1978 US$).
Urban Rural
Water Supply
with house connection $120 $150
with standpipe 40 40
with handpumps 25
Sanitation
with sewerage 250 250
with septic tank 100
with latrine 30 20
SERVICE LEVELS:
Case 1* : (100 % coverage using 1980 WHO Target
Urban Service Standard Distribution)
Urban Water Supply 70 % house connection
30 % standpipe
Sanitation 40 % sewerage
40 % septic tanks
20 % latrine and
communal latrines
Rural Water Supply
Sanitation
20 % house connection
40 % standpipe
40 % handpumps
80 % sewerage
20 % latrines
Case 2* (80 % coverage with service standard as
suggested)
Urban Water Supply
Sanitation
Rural Water Supply
Sanitation
40 % house connection
40 % standpipe
25 % sewerage
15 % septic tanks
40 % latrine and
communal latrines
10 % house connection
30 % standpipe
40 % handpumps
10 % sewerage
70 % latrines
* Both sets of figures are only rough approximations. They are
bound to rise further when costs of operation and maintenance are
added to installation costs.
Source : World Bank, Basic Needs
Disposal, Dec. 10. 1979, pp. 6-7.
Water Supply and Waste
, ruptions in service occur, the safety of the water is also in doubt.
These are among the reasons why the global estimate given of the
number of those who receive adequate service falls below the
number officially reported to have access.
At least two thirds of those without adequate water service are to
be found in South and Southeast Asia. The middle-income develop¬
ing countries, particularly in Latin America and the Mediterranean
region, where there is a high proportion of house connections, have
achieved higher standards of service than other regions.
The figures reported for waste-disposal facilities are somewhat
less reliable than those for water and may give an unduly optimistic
picture. They nevertheless indicate only a very small increase bet¬
ween 1970 and 1975 in the percentage of the population served by
adequate waste-disposal facilities, from 25 per cent to 27 per cent,
and, with growth of population, a substantial increase in the ab¬
solute number of those not served.
These figures are based on very modest definitions of access to
waste-disposal facilities. The usual practice is to regard the ex¬
istence of a latrine at a home as evidence that satisfactory facilities
exist. In congested areas, however, most latrines do not meet
minimal public health requirements. Often they are not designed to
be accessible to children. Poorly designed and constructed pit
privies, furthermore, frequently contaminate nearby shallow wells.
The principal consequence of highly deficient water supply and
waste-disposal is a heavy burden of disease, with consequent suffer¬
ing and hardship, stunted human growth and development, and
diminished productivity.
The most reliable indicator of the overall state of health in a coun¬
try is life expectancy. At the end of the 1940s life expectancy in the
developing countries was estimated to be about thirty-eight years.
By now it is believed to have increased by about 40 per cent, to
some fifty-three years, while in the more highly developed countries
life expectancy is now about seventy to seventy-five years.
For subpopulations characterized by extreme poverty, malnutri¬
tion, inadequate water supply, insanitary disposal of wastes, and
lack of health services, however, there has probably been no im¬
provement in health. The low life expectancy at birth is largely a
reflection of extraordinarily high mortality rates of infants and young
children. If deaths among children under the age of five years could
be reduced to rates similar to those in the industrially developed
countries, life expectancies in the developing countries would be on¬
ly three to five years less than those in Western Europe and North
America.
Water and excreta are prominent factors in the transmission of
most of the more serious diseases of the developing world.
Gastrointestinal infections are the leading causes of both death and
disability in most developing countries. In many areas diseases
related to deficiencies in water supply and waste disposal are con¬
tributory causes of most infant deaths and account for a large pro¬
portion of adult sickness.
Studies made in recent years show clearly, however, that these
problems can seldom be overcome by a single measure or remedy. A
combined approach is usually required that includes ample water
supplies, hygienic disposal of excreta, and education in water-use
practices and household hygiene to change traditional beliefs and
habits; improved garbage collection is sometimes also essential, par¬
ticularly in densely populated, low-income areas. In order to be fully
effective, improvements in water supply and waste disposal must
extend throughout the community, so that risks of infection in
public areas and neighbouring houses are also reduced.
The need to increase the quantity of water available is often more
important than the need to improve its quality, but occasionally this
point is misunderstood and exaggerated. In principle, of course,
water that is adequate for personal and household cleansing does
not need to meet the safety standards of water for drinking and
cooking. The mistaken inference is sometimes drawn from this fact
that the water-supply problem can be adequately overcome by
teaching people to boil the small quantities of water required for>
drinking.
The difficulties of this solution are threefold. First, it is much more
easily said than done; it is hard to keep water segregated in con¬
tainers, and thirsty children in particular tend to drink whatever
water is convenient. Second, it is a very expensive solution; it can be
calculated that the kerosene alone required to boil each day the
quantity of water that a person requires for drinking, cooking, and
minimal personal hygiene would cost at least $20 a year. Third, it i
neglects the extent of the problem. I
13

UNICEF estimates that about 15 million
children below the age of 5 die in the
developing countries every year. The absence of
safe water and sanitation plays a major part in
this tragedy. If everyone had access to safe
drinking water and sanitation, infant mortality
could be cut by as much as 50 per cent
world-wide.
According to the World Health Organization
(WHO), approximately 80 per cent of all
sickness and disease can be attributed to
inadequate water or sanitation. For example :
Diarrhoea directly kills six million children in
developing countries every year, and contributes
to the death of up to 18 million people.
Trachoma affects some 500 million people
at any given time, often causing blindness.
Parasitic worms infect nearly one half of the
entire population of the developing countries,
often with very serious consequences. For
example, 200 million people in 70 countries
suffer the debilitating effects of schistosomiasis.
Malaria yearly kills one million children
below the age of two in Africa, south of the
Sahara, alone.
Diseases related to water and sanitation (or
lack of them) may be grouped into five general
categories:
Water-borne diseases spread by drinking
or washing hands, food or utensils in
contaminated water, which acts as a passive
vehicle for the infecting agent.
Water-washed diseases spread by poor
personal hygiene and insufficient water for
washing. Lack of proper facilities for human
waste disposal is another contributing factor.
Water-based diseases transmitted by a
vector which spends a part of its life cycle in
More than four billion people live on our water-rich planet. But over a billion must
drink dirty water. Nearly two billion have no toilet. The World Water and Sanitation
Decade aims to ensure that by 1990 everyone has enough clean water and adequate
sanitation. The cost: US$30 billion a year for ten years five times more than present
global spending.
14

water. Contact with water thus infected
conveys the disease-causing parasite through
the skin or mouth.
Diseases with water-related vectors
contracted through infection-carrying insects
which breed in water and bite near it, especially
when it is stagnant.
Fecal disposal diseases caused by
organisms that breed in excreta when sanitation
is defective.
These diseases exact a high toll in human life
and suffering.
The boxes on pages 13-17 are based on documentation produced by the
Inter-agency Steering Committee for the International Drinking Water Supp¬
ly and Sanitation Decade, of which Unesco is a member, and on Unesco
sources. The main article has been largely adapted from Water Supply and
Waste Disposal (September 1980) one of a series of booklets prepared by the
World Bank on the subject of basic needs.
k In practice, provision of good-standard water in rural areas usually
requires only that springs and wells be properly located, con¬
structed, operated, and maintained, while in urban areas the
marginal cost of treating water to make it safe for drinking, cooking,
and personal hygiene is typically very small far less than the $20 a
person that would be required for boiling.
There is considerable evidence that the economic burden of
disease and ill health that is in large part the result of deficiencies in
water supply and waste-disposal is very great in developing coun¬
tries, particularly for the poor. Various studies and estimates indicate
that in these countries disease typically takes up about a tenth of the
average person's potentially productive time and, in addition, affects
risk-taking and initiative adversely, disrupts the education and nur¬
ture of children, stunts physical development, and causes vast suf¬
fering and hardship. The gastrointestinal diseases reduce absorption
of nutrients, in acute cases by as much as 30 per cent. The malnutri¬
tion occasioned by gastrointestinal disease compromises the
defences of the body against infections and is therefore largely
responsible for the diarrhoea-measles-pneumonia complex that kills
a fifth or more of the children born in many developing countries.
Meeting the goal of the International Drinking Water Supply and
Sanitation Decade will be a gigantic task. If everyone in the world is
to have clean water and adequate sanitation by 1990, new water
supply and sanitation facilities will have to be provided for half a
million people every day during the ten-year period.
The United Nations system has evolved strategies for the Decade.
These emphasize promotion and support of national Decade pro¬
grammes through technical co-operation; building up national
capacities and generating dynamic self-sustaining pro¬
grammes, promoting technical co-operation among developing
countries; and encouraging the flow of external funds into national
Decade activities. Several organizations in the United Nations
system (the UN, ILO, FAO, Unesco, the World Bank, UNICEF and
UNDP) have formed a "Steering Committee for Co-operative Ac¬
tion" to co-ordinate their work with Governments in planning and
implementing water supply and sanitation activities.
All countries whether well advanced in the development of
water supply and sanitation or badly in need of better facilities will
be involved.
As a means of working towards Decade goals. Governments are
developing "National Action Plans". A number of countries have set
up National Action Committees to co-ordinate and support Decade
activities.
Besides improving their own national water and sanitation ser¬
vices the industrialized countries are expected to provide more
resources for projects related to the Decade within their bilateral pro¬
grammes of assistance to developing countries... to harmonize in¬
ternational assistance from various governmental and other
organizations... and to increase their contributions to multilateral
Decade-related programmes.
The primary commitment is coming from the developing countries
themselves.
It is their Governments which can accord water and sanitation
adequate priority... integrate schemes with national social and
economic plans for other sectors... allocate required financial,
technical and human resources. They can organize the necessary
machinery and infrastructure at national, regional and local levels,
provide bodies to co-ordinate activities, and devise well-prepared
projects able to attract external aid.
And it is their people, so desperately in need of improved facilities,
who can assume major responsibility for ensuring that they are pro¬
vided and maintained.
15

MALAWI:
A
community
approach
COMMUNITY participation is
the cornerstone of natio¬
nal drinking water supply
policy in Malawi, an East African
country with a population of just
over 5 million.
Local involvement at all stages
is largely responsible for the
remarkable progress made
toward the Government's high-
priority goal of providing
everyone with a safe, potable
water supply no further than
400 metres away by the year
1990. The target is well within
reach: clean water is already
available to at least 70 per cent of
the country's urban dwellers and
35 per cent of the rural in¬
habitants (who make up 90 per
cent of the total population).
Typical of Malawi's success
with this approach is the Mulanje
West project in the southern part
of the country where 75,000 peo¬
ple living in an area of 257 square
kilometres are served by 460
village taps.
The problem was that the
traditional shallow wells in this
area and even the river several
miles away were running dry.
The water cycle had been under¬
mined by cutting of trees to clear
land for cultivation thus reducing
the land's ability to retain water.
Villagers appealed to the
Government's Ministry of Com¬
munity and Social Welfare for
Photo Seitz. UNICEF



Unesco
and the
International Decade
Water resources assessment and management. Many
Unesco activities within the framework of the International
Hydrological Programme (IHP) relate to the goals of the
Decade. Several IHP themes relating to water resources
assessment, water quality protection and allocation of water
resources can provide inputs to the Decade. In 1981 Unesco
is to develop three major regional projects (in Latin America,
the Arab States and Africa) on the rational management of
water resources in rural areas, the purpose of which is to
determine the most appropriate ways of developing and
conserving water resources to meet the economic and social
needs of rural communities.
Water-related education and training. Within the water-
related educational programmes and training courses
sponsored by Unesco more emphasis will be placed on
drinking water supply and sanitation. One example is the
regional course being organized at Arusha, Tanzania, for the
training of personnel in the techniques and methods of
prospecting for water in the hard-rock areas of Africa. The
IHP National Committees established in some 110 countries
will be encouraged to promote and participate in the
Decade.
Education in hygiene and water use. Education
concerning hygiene and patterns of water use is an essential
element in the overall strategy of the Decade. Carefully
designed programmes that teach people about the links
between clean water, hygiene and health will have to be
developed, a task for which many countries will need expert
guidance. Unesco's contribution will be concerned with the
planning and implementation of a comprehensive
programme aimed at massive health education at the
community level focussed on the issue of clean water and
sanitation.
Public motivation and participation. In addition to the
development of grassroots health education projects,
Unesco will have a responsibility for national and provincial
public promotional programmes in support of the Decade.
Unesco will also be able to contribute through its activities
in the fields of environmental education, engineering
education (civil and sanitary engineers) and community
motivation and participation and integrated rural
development.
Information systems and services. Unesco's General
Information Programme is aimed at facilitating access to
scientific and technological information and its effective use,
and contributing to the development of information
infrastructures and the theoretical and practical training of
information personnel and users. This Programme will be
able to provide technical guidance for the development of
the Programme on Exchange and Transfer of Information
(POETRI) which is to constitute the information support of
the Decade.
16

assistance. This was done
through their District Develop¬
ment Committee, consisting of
members of parliament, tradi¬
tional authorities and local
leaders of the ruling Malawi Con¬
gress Party. The Ministry then
drew up a design for the system.
Steel pipes would take water
from a pool in the fast-flowing
Likhobula River to a sediment
tank where sand and flood debris
would be screened. The water
would then be conducted by
gravity through an asbestos ce¬
ment main pipeline, to sixteen
storage tanks situated in the hills
just above the villages. Plastic
pipes would convey it to in¬
dividual village taps, providing
enough for each person to use
some 23 litres a day.
In October 1972, the villagers
began to plan for their system.
They staked out an area in their
fields for the main pipeline so
that no crops would be sown
there. They began digging and
pipe-laying the following
February and March, after the
rains had made the ground soft.
Village leaders established a
committee to organize construc¬
tion. All villages which would use
the scheme were to share the
labour. As 30 kilometres of
trench were needed for the
asbestos cement pipe (supplied
by UNICEF) the committee divid¬
ed the length into five sections,
assigning several villages to work
on each. About two hundred
people men, women and even
children worked on each of the
sections every day until a trench
1 .20 m deep and 80 cm wide was
completed. Enthusiasm was so
great that, often, people who
had finished their allotted work
for the day stayed on to do even
more.
Project assistants, chosen
from the community, were given
three weeks' training to enable
them to cope with pipe-laying
and other more difficult tasks.
Next came installation of
branch lines which villagers com¬
pleted by laying piping (also sup¬
plied by UNICEF) in 210 kilo¬
metres of trenches they had dug,
80 cm deep and the width of a
hoe. The operation was com¬
pleted when they chose sites for
their village taps and built con¬
crete aprons and drains for them.
In areas where new gravity
water supply systems are install¬
ed, villagers are visibly delighted
and celebrate the opening of
each tap with singing and danc¬
ing. Health has improved
measurably in such areas, as was
evident in 1973-74 when the
country was hit with a cholera
epidemic. While 20 persons in an
average village of 350 were af¬
fected, villages with tap water
had no more than one case, and
in each instance that person had
visited another town.
With self-help labour, gravity
systems are constructed at amaz¬
ingly low costs, which rarely ex¬
ceed $10.00 per capita, even
when the training component is
added. They are designed to last
100 years and operating costs are
nil.
Malawi's villagers also supply
labour for protected shallow
wells in those areas where this
technology is the best solution to
water supply. Village committees
supply bricks and sand and use
their ox-carts to transport
materials. The Government pro¬
vides cement, a concrete slab
and parts for pump assemby.
These wells cost less than $1.00
per person served.
It has been found, however,
that they are easily contaminated
if not protected. To deal with this
problem, the Government has
developed a simple pump, made
from local materials, which is
bolted to a concrete lid, encloses
the entire well, and can be
operated even by children. Its
cost is $25-$30 as compared to
$700-$1,000 for deep well
pumps.
In Malawi's urban areas,
Government policy mandates
that people pay for their water.
Fees are imposed because it is
recognized that people in towns
tend to have full-time jobs, which
makes it difficult to organize dig¬
ging crews. In any case, it would
be neither desirable nor possible
to limit benefits to those who
participate in construction.
Charging for water in towns also
serves to prevent waste, and is a
means of discouraging urban
migration and the accompanying
problems of slums, high un¬
employment and over-exten¬
sion of facilities experienced
by many developing countries.
The Government's commit¬
ment, external support and the
vital contributions of the local
people make it almost certain
that Malawi will meet the
Decade's goal of clean water for
all by 1990.
In the Sudan, members of a rural community at work installing a safe new water supply pipeline. If the
Decade is to achieve its objective of clean water and adequate sanitation for all by 1990, maximum
participation by those who will benefit from the new systems is essential.
17
