X-ray microfluorescence
and a Merovingian treasure
X-RAY microfluorescence is a spectro-
metric technique which can be used
to analyse the constituent elements
of any material. The spectrometer consists
of a source of X-rays which "excites" the
material to be analysed, a detector which
measures the radiation emitted, and two
analysers which divide the radiation into
rays.
This apparatus is particularly well adapted
to the needs of museological research. Its
results rank between those produced by the
electron probe microanalyser and those
yielded by classic X-ray fluorescence spec¬
trometers.
X-ray microfluorescence makes it possible
to analyse, directly and without causing the
least damage, all types of objects and ar¬
chaeological materials, whether they are
conductors (metals) or nonconductors
(ceramics, glass and organic compounds),
and whatever their shape or size. It can thus
be used both with large-scale works of art
(paintings or archaeological specimens), or
with tiny samples of powder, glaze, solder,
encrustations, corrosion, patina or painting
materials.
Using this technique, direct analysis can
be made of tiny areas of an object, ranging
from a tenth of a millimetre to a dozen
millimetres in diameter. If specially adapted,
it can be used to analyse samples only a few
dozen microns in diameter. In this case, the
sample must be preserved, for since the sen¬
sitivity and precision of X-ray micro-
fluorescence are constantly improving, it is
useful to be able to complete preliminary
analyses later on.
This non-destructive technique, recently
developed by the French Museums'
Research Laboratory, proved its worth in
analysing the treasure of Queen Aregunda,
wife of the Merovingian King Chlotar I
(c. 497-561 AD), whose tomb was
discovered at Saint-Denis in 1959 by Michel
Fleury. This is the only Merovingian royal
tomb which has ever been identified, except
for that of Childeric I, discovered at Tournai
in 1654. Queen Aregunda's tomb contained
a rich store of precious objects.
A painstaking laboratory study was made
of the treasure, which consists of a pair of
pins, ear-rings, a long pin, two round fibula,
a signet ring, ornaments for a belt, garters
and shoes, and gold sleeve bands.
The state of the objects was such that it
was impossible to take samples, and
analysis of the gold or silver alloys of which
they were made was carried out directly on
the surface using X-ray microfluorescence.
The analysis was effected at several points
on each of the jewels in order to obtain
quantitative results, taking into account
possible changes in the surface composition
due to deterioration of the gilding and niello-
work.
The results showed that each pair of ob¬
jects was made of a different alloy, whereas
the objects in each pair were made of the
same alloy. Examination through a binocular
magnifying glass also showed that the
workmanship of one object in each pair was
highly skilful, while the other revealed an in¬
ferior level of craftsmanship. It could be
deduced from this that each pair of objects
was from the same workshop (since the
composition of the alloy was the same) but
that one item in each pair had been made by
the master craftsman and the other by an ar¬
tisan.
Gold and silver pin encrusted with garnets. It
was buried near the Queen's breast.
These two circular gold clasps encrusted
with garnets fastened Queen Aregunda's silk
tunic at the neck and waist.
16
