At the dawn of the fifteenth century of the Hegira
The message of Islam
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco
IT is fourteen hundred years since the
Prophet Muhammad, who for ten years
had been calling upon the people of
Mecca to walk in the way of God, found
himself forced into exile.
In Mecca he had gathered about him a
group of faithful followers but had also
made unrelenting enemies who, after vainly
trying temptations and threats, planned to
murder him. He therefore decided the time
had come for his community to leave. Ac¬
companied by the loyal Abu Bakr, he set off
in secret one evening from the town, arriv¬
ing at last, after a long and dangerous
journey across the desert, in Yathrib, where
his companions had gone before and where
the villagers welcomed him with open arms.
Of this humble settlement the Prophet
made Medina, the town of towns which was
to become the second of the holy cities of
Islam, and this small oasis he made the point
of departure for a new civilization.
The epic story of the exodus, or Hegira,
contains several clues as to why the
message brought by Muhammad came to be
identified, after him, with the hopes of so
many peoples, adding a new spiritual,
ethical, political and social dimension to
their lives.
The first significance of that message is its
universality; it was by addressing
themselves to the whole man and to all men
that the Prophet and his companions were
to build a new society, that the first Caliphs
were to carry Islam beyond the boundaries
of the Arabian Peninsula, and that their suc¬
cessors were later to spread its influence
over a vast area linking Asia, Africa and
Europe.
The message proclaimed by the Prophet
indeed radically widened the spiritual
horizons of the peoples that received it, il¬
luminating their lives with a faith transcen¬
ding the contingencies of everyday ex¬
perience, placing political matters on an
ethical basis and ensuring the full rights of
every individual within the community.
For the freedom of the Muslim communi¬
ty is a fabric of which the warp and weft are
individual freedoms, that can only flourish if
the whole community flourishes; when the
latter is threatened or attacked, each in¬
dividual is affected or hurt in his innermost
being; and when its members are prevented
from living their lives fully by participating
freely in the life of society, that life is in¬
evitably impoverished and society ceases to
be itself.
The rights of each individual proceed from
the absolute equality of all before God.
"You are all equal as the teeth of the comb",
said the Prophet. This basic equality, unaf¬
fected by the privileges of birth or the
vagaries of fortune, implies a legal and moral
responsibility equal for all. Hence, each is
answerable to God and to men for his own
conduct and for the conduct of the com¬
munity's affairs.
Islam breathed upon worlds which had
previously been worlds apart in history,
geography, language and culture the unify¬
ing breath of a shared hope which drew
them closer together in many ways, setting
up a constant current of mutually enriching,
cross-fertilizing exchanges.
At the same time, Islam was receptive to
the knowledge to be obtained from all the
cultures it came across in the course of its
expansion. The Prophet advised believers to
seek knowledge ''from the cradle to the
grave" and for that purpose to go "to China
if need be"; Islam, starting out with a unique
vision, consequently developed an aptitude
for taking the accumulated intellectual
wealth of the peoples sharing the same faith
and the main elements of the rest of the
world's stock of knowledge and combining
them into an integral whole.
The teachings of Islam have thus kept an
ever-renewed relevance; and the epic
adventure of the Hegira, during which these
teachings took shape, has continued to in¬
spire minds and hearts. Muslims today recall
the many episodes of that story as if they
were about people but recently departed
from this life whose memory remains very
dear to them, whose words and deeds still
have the power to move them deeply, and
whose example continues to inspire their
thoughts and actions.
They "recall the moving story of how the
companions of the Prophet entered Medina
and of the brotherly welcome which the Par¬
tisans accorded to them, receiving them into
the bosom of their families and sharing their
homes and their belongings with them.
They then find themselves dreaming, in the
here and now, of another such surge of
solidarity between peoples, each feeling
others' needs as his own and all who enjoy
plenty stretching out the hand of friendship
to those stricken by war, by want, by ig¬
norance and disease.
Muslims also tell how once the Prophet
was explaining his plan for an impending
battle. One of his companions having asked
whether this plan partook of Revelation or
stemmed from his own understanding, the
Prophet replied that it was the fruit of his
own deliberation. The companion then gave
his own views on the battle plan and finally
persuaded the Prophet to change it. Then
the Muslims of today all find themselves
dreaming of such another climate of cordial
brotherhood as would allow the lowliest to
express himself fearlessly before the most
highly respected, in that atmosphere of
mutual tolerance which is the essential
prerequisite of democracy for all.
Muslims yet again tell of the Caliph Umar,
the spiritual and temporal head of a by now
immense Islamic State, who, being over¬
come by weariness, lay down in the shade
of a palm tree where one of his subjects,
seeing him, stopped and addressed to him
these infinitely tender words: "Thou hast
accomplished thy public duties, Omar, thou
hast served justice and with a heart set at
rest thou hast fallen to sleep". Who can help
but dream, today, of the renewal of that
same sense of equality whereby the ruler
would be a man among men, so devoted to
the good of his fellows that each of them
would, in turn, feel a little responsible for
him?
These values of freedom, responsibility
and solidarity enlightened and purified by
faith, are as essential to man today as in the
days of the Prophet. Now as in the past and
in the future, they offer man an ideal to live
by, such that his highest spiritual aspirations
irradiate the. humblest acts of his daily life.
I Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
