2. Tropic islands
in search of a future
Interview with José Brito,
Cape Verde's Secretary of State for Development
Courier The group of "Least Developed Countries" seems to be
a very varied assortment Is there any common denominator for
these thirty-one States?
Brito Yes, they are indeed very diverse and, at first sight, it is dif¬
ficult to see what the little islands of my country. Cape Verde, with a
total populatioh of 300,000, can have in common with, for example,
Bangladesh, which has a hundred millioh inhabitants. Obviously the
priorities are not the same. But there is a cornmoh denominator, and
probably ohly ohe: the fundamental problems faced by the develop¬
ing world education, health and employment are more serious in
these countries than elsewhere and the governments find it even
more difficult to solve them.
This is true even when a country is rich in natural resources. Guinea,
for example, has large mineral deposits, while Cape Verde has none;
but Guinea is not yet in a position to develop as it would wish and
lacks the means to exploit these resources itself. In other words, the
Least Developed Countries face obstacles they cannot overcome
without considerable support from the international community.
13

CASE STUDIES
Courier What specific problems does Cape Verde face and could
you explain why you lack the means to resolve them?
Brito I can answer you in two words: infrastructure and person¬
nel. As far as the economic infrastructure is concerned we inherited
practically nothing from the colonial system. The country had been
living on direct aid from the suzerain power and when it became in¬
dependent it was not even able to feed its own population. As an
agricultural country in a semi-arid zone it is part of the Sahelian
climatic system Cape Verde depends almost entirely on rainfall
agriculture; very few areas are irrigated and droughts have had
disastrous effects. There are still food shortages even today.
Though it is an archipelago consisting of ten islands and five islets,
its ports are insufficient to allow the free flow of people and goods.
At the time of independence industry was non-existent.
In a situation like this what can be done to provide employment and
prevent emigration? There are 300,000 Cape Verdeans living in the
islands and probably as many if not more living abroad. In fact, there
is a positive aspect to this emigration at present since it enables us to
correct our trade deficit, for our imports vastly exceed our exports.
Nevertheless, emigration also has its dangers since it is usually the
most qualified people who emigrate and as a result we are in the
paradoxical position of having a very high rate of unemployment and
an enormous lack of executive level personnel. This is characteristic
of most of the Least Developed Countries: they lack qualified staff to
run the economy and the civil service.
Courier Isn't a high rate of illiteracy another characteristic of the
Least Developed Countries?
Brito It certainly is a qualification for membership of the group.
Yet it is clear that if these countries are to acquire the techniques
needed for development, they must have a high literacy rate. Il¬
literate peasants don't take easily to innovation; they stick to tradi¬
tional methods which, often, do not allow them to rise above a sub¬
sistence economy. In Cape Verde, however, this problem is less
acute than elsewhere. There are still too many illiterate adults, but
more than ninety-five per cent of children of school age are now
receiving primary education. What is much more serious is that we
do not have the qualified personnel or the resources to increase our
production and so reduce our dependence on other countries. This
is another characteristic of the Least Developed Countries and the
developing countries in general: often they can see a way of solving
their problems but haven't the means of doing so.
Courier When you speak of the problems of manpower, or
human resources, are you thinking in terms of the problems of voca¬
tional and technical training?
Brito Yes, that is a concrete example of the type of problem we
are facing. We have to educate workers and set up vocational train¬
ing centres, and this training must continue within industry. But we
haven't the money to open such centres, to establish technical col¬
leges and maintain them, nor have we the staff to man themat
least, not Cape Verdeans.
Courier Yet there are plenty of qualified and competent Cape
Verdeans.
Brito Yes, but they are abroad. One can't really talk about a brain
drain. We have been independent now for six years about the time
it takes to train a first batch of professionals. These young people
should soon be coming back from the foreign universities where
they have been studying, but we know that many won't. This is
nothing new. It happened long before independence. Many Cape
Verdeans have become nationals of other countries and hold posi¬
tions of responsibility. Among the highly qualified people only a
small number come back to work in Cape Verde. It is true that the
terms we offer are not very attractive; salaries are low and there is an
acute housing shortage, but the development of our country calls
for sacrifices.
Courier All the developing countries face these problems.
Brito Yes, but they are more acute in Cape Verde because of the
emigration I mentioned earlier which is a tradition with us. Cape Ver-
14
deans don't emigrate just anywhere. They know where to go and
find it easy to adapt. I mentioned the economic advantages and
disadvantages of emigration, but there are also cultural ones.
Foreign contacts and exchanges can have some very salutary ef¬
fects. As a people we have no inhibitions with regard to other
cultures and find it easy to integrate elements from them into our
own. This open-mindedness, which is the hallmark of our culture,
enables us to adopt any useful innovations. But there is one
"cultural danger" that has a direct effect on the economy and that is
the importation of consumption patterns completely unsuited to our
resources and which lead to public demand for goods that local pro¬
duction cannot provide.
Courier Will the government go on giving priority to agriculture?
Brito Yes, we must concentrate on fighting the desert and the
problems connected with drought. This means reallocation of the
land, reafforestation, soil conservation, as well as increasing water
resources and supplies and extending the areas under irrigation. A
programme of this kind calls for large-scale investment. In Cape
Verde the cost of developing one hectare of land clearing it of
stones, improving the soil and protecting it against erosion is ex¬
tremely high.
Fortunately, the people understand the need for this work and are
able to take part in it. These schemes for soil protection and irriga¬
tion create jobs and therefore help in the fight against unemploy¬
ment. Moreover, the agricultural sector is likely to attract investment
and loans, so we hope to solve the problem of finance without too
much difficulty. This is practically the only area in which national
production can be increased.
The organization of these various activities calls for a series of an¬
cillary measures such as agrarian reform, the creation of credit
facilities and agricultural extension services. We know full well,
however, that the possibilities of agriculture are limited by factors
such as climate, demographic pressure and the amount of land
available. A time will come when increased productivity will no
longer generate development. So we must prepare for the next
phase industrialization. We intend to concentrate on processing
industries, canneries and enterprises producing building materials.
We are also thinking of establishing industries linked to Cape
Verde's geographic and economic position as an international
staging post. These would include merchant shipping as well as
fuelling and transit facilities, warehouses, etc.
But, once again, to reach this phase we need trained personnel. If
we don't want to lose control of our economy we must train Cape
Verdeans and organize them into peasant and worker production co¬
operatives. Furthermore, we must adapt the public services to cater
for this co-operative system and set up institutions capable of direc¬
ting public enterprises in other words, establish a coherent system
to control production.
In my view, one of the great mistakes made by developing countries
in the past has been to start by setting up production structures and
then, at a later stage, trying to solve their manpower problems. We
must go about it the other way round and start with the human
problem, not forgetting that basic to this is the provision of health
services and food supplies.
Courier A programme of this kind calls for considerable finance.
Where do you see the aid coming from in the present international
situation?
Brito We have developed co-operative links with as many coun¬
tries as possible. We believe that the more dependent a country is
economically, the more independent it should try to be at the ethical
and political level, and that therefore it should avoid ranging itself
with one group rather than another. That is why non-alignment
seems to us to be the only path open to the developing countries if
they want to avoid becoming satellites. In fact, non-alignment could
become an international force capable of reducing conflict and ten¬
sion and of increasing the world's concern for the problems of
development.
