Lascaux
Saving a sanctuary
of prehistoric art
THE prehistoric painted cave of Lascaux is situated near the little
town of Montignac in the Périgord region of south-west France.
The whole area is rich in prehistoric sites, but it is in the lime¬
stone cliffs which run beside the winding course of the Vézère river
that the ancient rock shelters and caves are most abundant.
The Lascaux cave was discovered on 12 September 1940 by four
children from Montignac while they were playing among the pines
and chestnut trees on a steep slope above the river a kilometre or
two outside the town.
The opening of the cave, barely 80 cm square, was half hidden
beneath a layer of dead leaves. It plunged vertically into the hillside,
ending in a pile of debris and rubble.
In the next few weeks, the undergrowth surrounding the entrance
was cleared, and an enormous pit several dozen metres wide was
dug in front of the hole. The excavations provided virtually direct ac¬
cess to the grotto which, because of the animals depicted on its ceil¬
ing and walls, was to become known as the Hall of Bulls.
Access to the cave had probably never been easy. After the last of
the cave artists had left, rocks falling from the roof gradually piled up
and sealed off the grotto for thousands of years. Air currents and
water infiltrating through the debris caused little damage, except
possibly during the period at the end of the Ice Age, when
geologists believe that the calcite hollows known as gours were
formed. The calcification of the surface of the cone of rubble, the
formation of stalactites, and the infiltration of sand and clay washed
down by glacial meltwater must have consolidated the barrier at the
entrance. Studies would later show the importance of this barrier in
preserving the frescoes on the walls of the cave. The roof of the
limestone vault, between six and eight metres thick, was covered by
a layer of impermeable clay. As a result, the paintings, including the
"unicorn" situated less than ten metres from the original
passageway, remained in a perfect state of preservation.
The listing of the site as a historic monument on 27 December
1940 enabled the French authorities to intervene on what was a
piece of private property, and the owner was wisely persuaded to
erect a wooden door at the entrance to the cave. However, this was
mainly to prevent uncontrolled access by the public, not to preserve
the grotto's "microclimate", the significance of which was still
unsuspected.
Major operations at Lascaux did not begin until World War II was
over, and it was not until 14 July 1948 that, with a stone staircase, a
bronze door, an entrance hall and a paved pathway through the
grotto which had been equipped with protective barriers and
lighting, Lascaux was opened to the public.
The scenes portrayed in colour on the brilliant white calcite crust
are a supremely beautiful and impressive display of Palaeolithic art,
with their remarkably skilful use of the relief of the cave walls to
depict animals caught in mid-movement, and their highly individual
mixture of "perspectives and profiles. The conservation of the fres¬
coes called for scrupulous care and constant supervision.
In July 1955, the curator noticed that during peak visiting periods
condensation coloured by pigments from the frescoes was dripping
from the walls and ceiling. Scientific investigation established that
this was caused by the carbon dioxide exhaled by the visitors.
In 1958, an air conditioning system was installed. The air in the
cave was sucked through a filter to remove dust, decarbonated, and
to a constant temperature of 14°, while the humidity was
kept close to dew point (95-98. per cent). This electronically
regulated system was hooked up to a turnstile which recorded the
number of visitors entering the cave.
It proved so successful in eliminating condensation and purifying
the atmosphere that the owner was authorized to keep it running at
full power at the height of the summer tourist season, when on
some days over a thousand visitors filed through the grotto.
In September 1960, the curator noticed a green spot, so tiny as to
be scarcely perceptible, on the ceiling of the cave. Despite the ap¬
plication of a treatment recommended by the Pasteur Institute, tests
the following year showed that more spots had appeared. And so, in
March 1963, the Minister of Cultural Affairs, André Malraux, ap¬
pointed a special committee of scientists from a wide range of
disciplines to investigate the problem and propose solutions. It took
over ten years of dedicated efforts and close collaboration between
scientists from over a score of laboratories before the frescoes were
finally saved.
The closure of the cave, on 20 April 1963, was no solution to the
problem. The colonies of microscopic plant organisms which were
the source of the danger continued to spread, and within a few
months had increased from three to 720. Laboratory tests revealed
the presence of many species of algae, as well as growths of ferns,
mosses and fungi. Shock treatment was clearly required to eliminate
these sources of pollution.
After making sure that the paintings would not be harmed, the
scientists rid the cave of bacteria in the air by spraying the cave with
Photo © Institut de Photographie Scientifique et Médicale, Faculté de Medicine, Marseilles, France
antibiotics. The algae on the walls, which had by now spread out in¬
to 1,350 colonies, were gradually destroyed by spraying with solu¬
tions of formalin, in concentrations of 1:10 on the cave floor, 1:20 on
the bare rock, and 1:200 on the paintings. After two years of treat¬
ment, the micro-organisms had been totally wiped out, but in order
to prevent further contamination, visits were limited in number and
duration, and the intensity of the lighting was considerably reduced.
Regular analysis of the bacteria and the algae in the atmosphere and
on the floor of the cave, and inspections of the walls and ceiling
have made it possible to limit precautionary measures against new
outbreaks to a minimum.
Scarcely had the biological attack been repulsed, however, than a
new threat to the paintings materialized. The right-hand wall of a
smaller cave which leads out of the Hall of Bulls and is decorated
with stags, began to disappear under a fine crust of calcite crystals.
The same thing began to happen, to a lesser extent, to the unicorn
in the main grotto.

Photo © Archives Photographiques Paris/SPADEM
Left, the head of a
huge, four-metre-long
bull at Lascaux. The
mysterious, three-
pronged sign In front of
the bull is thought to be
a symbol of the male
sex. The visitors who
thronged Lascaux
during the fifteen or so
years that it was open
to the public disturbed
the delicate
microclimate of the
cave which had for
thousands of years
preserved intact this
amazing gallery of
prehistoric art. The cave
became excessively
humid and crystalline
formations such as the
calcite crystal (opposite
page) began to appear.
The only way to combat
this "white sickness"
was to re-create the
original microclimate
and this unfortunately
involved closing the
cave to the general
public.
After examining the formation of the calcite crystals by means of
microphotography, the scientists undertook a comprehensive ex¬
amination of the entire structure and climate of the cave, using
various other ultra-modern hydrological and geological techniques.
The outline of the cave, and its relation to the surface of the hillside,
were plotted in detail. The soil was analysed and, by means of a ver¬
tical photogrammetric survey carried out every 5 mm, contour lines
were established for all the painted areas. The pigmentation of the
paintings was examined in depth and content, and the temperature
of the soil was studied by infra-red radiometry. At the same time, the
temperature at various points on the cave walls was measured to
within 1 /100th of a degree, and the volume of the enclosed space
was accurately determined (1,778 m3). Aerodynamic studies were
carried out to detect the existence of microclimates through data
provided by electronic equipment which recorded in minute detail
the temperature, humidity, carbon dioxide content and barometric
pressure.
The processing of all the data obtained over several years led the
scientific committee to decide on a course of action designed to
preserve as far as possible the "natural" climate of the cave, and
more particularly to prevent changes in temperature, humidity and
carbon dioxide content.
Air entering the cave is now chilled; excess carbon dioxide of
natural origin is tapped at its source (the so-called "Wizard's Well")
and pumped out of the cave. Partitioning of the cave into several
compartments also helps to stabilize the temperature (at 13°),
humidity (at 98 per cent), and carbon dioxide content (at 1 per cent).
No more than five visitors, who must be bona fide scientists, may
enter the cave on any one day. The cave is completely sealed on two
days each week.
Eighteen years after the cave was closed to the public, the wall
paintings of Lascaux have been saved from what had seemed to be
certain destruction.
