The world
of Islam
The impact
on
black Africa
by Sulayman S. Nyang
Built in 1951, the central mosque at Kano is the largest in Nigeria.
THE expansion of the religion of Islam in
Africa had great significance for the
peoples of the continent. Since Islam
came to Africa as a belief system that prided
itself on its command of the written word
and on the material culture associated with
the Word of Allah Himself, it is certainly not
surprising that its propagators found it
necessary to teach their doctrines and rituals
while trading with the inhabitants of African
Kingdoms on or below the Sahel.
This intercourse between the Arabs and
the Berbers, on the one hand, and Black
Africans to the south on the other, opened
the door to greater cultural penetration.
When we look at the balance sheet of
Arabo-lslamic/African relations, we find
that the major contribution of Islam in the
continent is in the field of intellectual, social,
and cultural development.
Islam introduced a new way of looking at
life, man and community. Whereas
previously the African man lived primarily in
a self-enclosed world which restricted his
cultural and mental encounters to the en¬
vironment of his primary ethnic group, the
impact of Islam on his consciousness gave
rise to a sense of cosmopolitanism. The con¬
version of the tribal African exposed him for
the first time to the brotherhood of Islam,
whose borders were beyond what his eyes
could see and whose message was aimed at
and directed to, all men and women living
on this planet.
On the social plane, the conversion of the
tribal African to the religion of Muhammad
opened, to a certain degree, the door of
inter-ethnic co-operation. The fact that the
Muslim propagators were in most cases
merchants made the converts more recep¬
tive to the new ideas and new wares
brought into their areas by their fellow co¬
religionists.
Islam provided a common moral basis for
commerce and trade and the Shari'a guided
all the Muslim merchants in their dealings
with one another and with their non-Muslim
customers. In addition, in areas of endemic
conflict there was a need for readily iden¬
tifiable neutrals to serve as go-betweens,
and the parties to conflicts granted special
treatment to those who, by virtue of their
trade or profession, were considered
non-combatants.
The close relationship between trade and
Islam made it possible for the new convert
to develop gradually some degree of trust
and confidence in men who did not
necessarily speak his language but embrac¬
ed the teachings of his newly adopted
religion. This new attitude towards non-
members of one's ethnic group was certain¬
ly revolutionary, and its potential for greater
inter-ethnic co-operation could not be
dismissed lightly.
Though Islam was not the factor responsi¬
ble for the immediate founding of the three
great West Sudanese empires, the fact re¬
mains that these empires and their rulers
profited from the Islamic symbols of their
day and their cultural and economic systems
were, in varying degrees, exposed to the
forces and pressures of the faraway Islamic
centres of civilization to the north and
northeast.
In fact, in talking about the Islamic con¬
tribution to the social universe of the
African, one could argue that the arrival of
Islam in the continent widened the horizons
of the traditional African to some extent.
Whereas in the past this man entrusted his

The oasis cities of Tichitt (above), Ouadane, Chinguetti
and Oualata, in the Mauritanian Sahara, are the last
reminders of the former greatness of a region which
lay at the cross-roads of major caravan routes linking
the Maghreb and the Sahel. Their fame as centres of
intellectual as well as commercial exchange attracted
scholars from throughout Islam. At Chinguetti, the
starting point for caravans setting out for Mecca, a
great library was established, and here too an original
architectural form took shape which blended the
ideals of Islam with the African cultural tradition.
Today the trade routes pass elsewhere and these once
great cities are threatened by drought, decay and
desert advance. In February 1981 the Director-General
of Unesco launched a solemn appeal for international
action to safeguard these historic sites for posterity.
destiny to the spirits who resided in a well, a
tree or a stream and saw man's life as a link
in a chain of beings going back to a mystical
founder of his clan or tribe, and whereas he
wished to placate the gods and the
ancestors, under the Islamic religion he
found that his life was for an appointed term
and that his deeds on earth had a meaning
specific to himself.
He also learned from his Islamic mentors
that whatever he did in his lifetime would be
accounted for in the hereafter, and the only
way he could save his soul and himself at
the Day of Judgement was to accept the
responsibility of living. This is to say that the
conversion of the traditional African meant
his gradual realization of the spiritual
loneliness of man in the world and his
responsibility for living up to the expecta¬
tions of his religion.
Such an understanding of self and life
gave rise to the attempt on the part of many
African converts to put into practice the
rituals and teachings of Islam. It was indeed
in their attempt to live up to the Islamic ideal
that many traditional Africans learned to
pray with fellow Muslims, or to stand alone
before Allah. In their desire to win the
favours of their Maker, they learned to fulfil
the expectations of the Qur'anic teachings
on cleanliness and modesty in clothing.
At the institutional level, one can argue
that the religion of Islam introduced several
changes in African life. The arrival of a
Muslim scholar in an African community
most often led to the establishment of the
Madrasah (Qur'anic school). This new in¬
stitution gradually replaced, or co-existed
with, the traditional centres of education,
and the students who were brought before
the Qur'anic teacher were slowly inducted
into the Islamic culture from the north and
northeast.
Besides the Qur'anic school, there were
other institutional forms of cultural borrow
ing. With the gradual penetration of the
African consciousness, Islam began to in¬
vade the African conceptual world and soon
the process of linguistic absorption started
to take effect. Consciously or unconscious¬
ly, the newly converted African Muslim
began to drop traditional words in his
language in favour of borrowed Islamic
terminology.
A classic example of an African language
that has been very much penetrated by the
Arabo-lslamic influence is Wolof. The arrival
of Islam not only affected the Wolof's con¬
ception of time, it also substituted many
Arabic terms in his vocabulary. As an il¬
lustration, let us take the names given to the
seven days of the week. As a result of the
Arabo-lslamic influence, the Wolof
language, as spoken in the Senegambian
region, carries four Arabic words for Tues¬
day (Arabic Thalatah), Wednesday (Al-
Arba), Thursday (Al-Khamis) and Friday (Al-
Jummah). This is a phenomenon that is
widely known in the African communities
that have established long contact with the
Islamic religion.
Another example of institutional borrow¬
ing was the Tariqa (Sufi brotherhood). The
arrival of the Sufi brotherhoods ushered in a
train of developments which affected the
history of many African societies south of
the Sahara. It is well-known in the growing
literature on the Islamic jihads in Africa
south of the Sahara that the followers of the
Sufi brotherhoods played an important role.
A further contribution of Islam is the suc¬
cessful adoption of the Arabic script for the
reduction of African languages into writing.
This Arabo-lslamic cultural contribution is
by no means insignificant. Indeed such a
development in Africa's cultural history led
to the emergence of a limited form of
literacy among many of the Muslim peoples
of the West Sudan.
The first products of this newly imported
technology of intellectual conservation were
the epistles and explanatory comments writ¬
ten down by the ulema (men versed in
Islamic religion and law) in the West Sudan.
It is quite conceivable that many of the West
Sudanic ulema found it desirable from time
to time to reduce to writing their thoughts
on certain matters affecting the education of
their students.
Another possible reason for the
emergence of the written forms of the ver¬
nacular was the desire of the more ag¬
gressive propagators of the religion to make
their message more accessible to the rank
and file of their Islamic movement. Some
scholars have recently suggested that the
earlier literary products of the African ver¬
nacular languages that adopted Arabic or
even a European language, cannot be
classified as literature. They were merely the
first manifestation of a foreign script at the
service of an African language.
They also believe, and quite correctly,
that "... such texts in the West African
languages were usually merely parallel to the
more important and prestigious originals in
the particular languages of the given
cultures and powers." But regardless of the
limitations of the newly established
technology of intellectual conservation,
there is strong evidence that such a develop¬
ment had a great impact on the traditional
African's social universe.
SULAYMAN S. NYANG, Gambian educator, is
currently associate professor of government and
public administration at the Center for African
Studies, Howard University, Washington, D.C.
He is the author of a number of studies relating to
Islamic, African and Middle Eastern questions. A
longer version of the present article was presen¬
ted at the World of Islam Conference organized
by the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
held at Unesco HQ in Paris in December 1980.
33
