The courage
to take risks
by Edward V. Roberts
EDWARD V. ROBERTS, who has been a
quadriplegic (paralyzed in both arms and both
legs) since 1953, directs California's Department
of Rehabilitation from a wheel- chair with an at¬
tached respirator. Under his leadership the
Depanment has become the principal state agen¬
cy providing services for disabled people.
ONLY a few years ago people like my¬
self were considered objects of
charity. In many ways we were
lucky if we obtained the kinds of services we
needed to become part of the mainstream.
I remember the attitudes that I faced at
fourteen years of age, when, in about four
days, I changed from an aspiring athlete to a
helpless cripple. We know how devastating
that can be for individuals and for their
parents who cannot know the future. I look
back to the time when my greatest fear was
what would happen when my parents died.
Their greatest fear was exactly the same
thing. I remember the doctors telling my
Himself confined to a wheelchair, a
Japanese worker welds wheelchair
frames in a productive, semi-sheltered
workshop at Beppu City, Japan.
Disability
10

mother that I would be nothing more than a
vegetable.
We know that disability is not the over¬
riding factor, but instead it is a motivation; it
is believing in yourself and having people
around you believe in you; with teachers
who know that if they have the right kind of
skills and knowledge and a basic belief in
you, nothing is going to stop you. No bar¬
rier, whether it is a ramp to get on to the
podium, a communication barrier for a deaf
person, reading for a blind person, or a
barrier imposed by attitudes about people
who are labelled retarded, can stop that
motivation.
In terms of my own development, one of
the things that helped me the most was that
I was not segregated. My community did
not have a separate school for the disabled.
They had to figure out a way to get me from
my bed as a literal shut-in to begin my
education again. I had to overcome the fear
of going out and having people stare at me
because I was different.
Then in my senior year of high school, I
discovered it is not too bad to have people
stare at you. You can take it in a negative
way, or a positive way. In a negative way,
you can say a person is weird or different; in
a positive way, you can be a celebrity. You
might as well take it in a positive way or you
will remain a shut-in. There were people
around me who encouraged me to begin to
come out. They cajoled me in a way. From
that time, I was beginning to recognize that I
had some choices, and that to get anything,
I had to learn how to take risks.
Risk taking is something that too many
young people with disabilities are sheltered
from, for a variety of reasons. Young people
with disabilities often do not learn how to
take that next risk. I remember when I was
at the University of California in Berkeley
and I fell in love. It became incredibly in¬
convenient to have to take an attendant with
me everywhere. I had been told for years
that I could not drive a power wheelchair,
that I was too severely disabled. But I decid¬
ed to take the risk because I had a lot at
stake. At the beginning, I had some crashes
but then I learned how, with some help, to
make it work for me.
We have moved a long way in the last
twenty to thirty years. We recognize that
people have limits, but that we cannot
define those limits per person. If there is
anything I have learned about in my own
life, it is this whole issue of limits. So many
times I was told that I could not do this or
that. I was even rejected by the very depart¬
ment I now direct. I was told that I was too
disabled to work.
It is important that we work together to
help society understand the vast potential of
people with all kinds of disabilities. I myself
strongly reject the idea of a hierarchy of
disabilities, where a person with a disability
who can "pass as normal" is considered
more socially acceptable than a person who
is visibly "different". We all have potential
and the right to fulfil that potential.
I have devoted much of my life to en¬
couraging the coalition of people with
disabilities and I am convinced that together
we can be an incredibly powerful force for
change. We know that a disability is not so
terrible but we also know that the fears,
ignorance and isolation that often accom¬
pany a disability are terrible. Each of us can
serve as a role model for others. My courage
can help a person with a very different
disability take control of his or her own life.
We can also enrich one another's life. Here
I'm reminded of my friends, Dennis Santine
and Bob Metz, who enjoy rafting down the
wild white waters of the Stanislaus River in
California. Dennis is blind and Bob is a
quadriplegic but that doesn't stop them.
They share their strengths and both benefit
from it.
If there is one message that I leave with
you, I would like it to be how much we all
share in the problem of attitudes. The at-
titudinal barriers that prevent a quadriplegic
from living a life of purpose and value also
isolate and degrade a person with other
special needs. We are in this together. The
stereotype connected with one disability im¬
pacts on the life of a person with a totally
different disability. We can only change all
that by working together.
Concentration and determination at the
1980 Olympic Games for the
Handicapped at Arnhem, Netherlands.
Fu Yuchuu, a high school student at
Qiogdac, China, cannot walk, but her
friends make sure that she never misses
school or the fun of leisure activities.
is not the overriding factor, instead it is a motivation'
11
