An African
approach by Gustave-Justin Nlo
IN traditional African society, care is
lavished on the mentally handicap¬
ped child, who is brought up and
taught by its mother and father. The
youngster will be given a taste of work
in the fields (with the cacao trees,
groundnuts and maize), of household
jobs (drawing water at the spring, split¬
ting logs, fetching wood from the
bush, washing clothes and utensils), or
he may learn the rudiments of a craft.
He will be initiated into traditional rites,
take part in funeral ceremonies,
palavers and confessional assemblies.
If the child is seriously handicapped,
the family will do the best it can to
educate him and give him the utmost
help and support in the home.
In the rural areas the mentally han¬
dicapped child has always been a fully
accepted member of the African ex¬
tended family, that expansive unit
whose hospitality is not confined to
father, mother and children but en¬
compasses aunts, cousins, and uncles.
Since one advantage of the extended
family is that all its members feel an
acute sense of their responsibilities to
each other, the handicapped child can
find food and lodging in every
household in the village. He gives a
helping hand to all and sundry and ¡s
cossetted in return. Everyone in the
village stands by him, for his fate is not
solely the concern of his father and
mother.
The village faces many problems
when it comes to his schooling.
Specialized institutions are few and far
between, and in such schools as exist
GUSTAVE-JUSTIN NLO, of Cameroun,
is secretary-general of the Association of
Parents of Handicapped Children, in
Yaounde.
in the vicinity no one will agree to take
him on because he will be a nuisance
during lessons. Only in rare cases will
the family be able to afford to send him
to a specialized institution in town; and
he will usually have to stay in the
village.
As a rule, the children's handicaps
are detected by specialists during infor¬
mal consultations, at school, and in
child- and mother-care centres.
Some families are ashamed to tell
the truth about their child because a
preliminary examination may diagnose
his handicap as due to some such
cause as chronic alcoholism or a
hereditary defect. However, such in¬
formation must be noted if the
teachers are to receive reliable informa¬
tion about the child.
When a child has been accepted by a
centre, most parents expect to see him
miraculously transformed into some¬
one who can be reintegrated into the
productive world, whereas in most
cases his "normalization" can only be
partial.
In any case, the role of the institu¬
tion is complementary to that of the
family, which must give regular sup¬
port to the teachers. It is in collabora¬
tion with the teachers, for example,
that the family will encourage the
youngster to take upa craft for which
he shows a special aptitude, such as
carpentry, basketwork, pottery, sew¬
ing, farming or gardening. Then, when
the child is properly apprenticed, those
concerned with following his progress
will advise the parents how to help him
make his way in working life, for the
support of the family will continue to
be the mainstay of his integration into
the modern world.
