Conservation
for development
by Walter Lusigi and Jane Robertson
T
1 HE biosphere is like a self-regenerat¬
ing cake, and conservation is the
conduct of our affairs so that we
can have our cake and eat it too. As long as
certain bits of the cake are not consumed and
consumption of the rest of it is kept within cer¬
tain limits, the cake will renew itself and pro¬
vide for continuing consumption. For people
to gain a decent livelihood from the earth
without undermining its capacity to go on sup¬
porting them, they must conserve the
biosphere."
This image of the biosphere, evoked by
Robert Allen in his book How to Save the
World, neatly summarizes current attitudes
towards conservation and underlines how
much the concept has evolved over the years.
Four centuries before the Christian era Plato
was complaining that the mountains of Greece
were being stripped of their trees. He was sad¬
dened to see the beauty of his homeland mar¬
red. Others who followed him were less con¬
cerned with beauty than with practical mat¬
ters, with natural resources considered as
commodities useful for specific purposes. The
Romans who argued for the conservation of
certain forested areas wanted to ensure a con¬
stant supply of wood for the construction of
warships; in the Middle Ages yew trees were
planted and protected solely to provide long¬
bows for archers, and the monarchs and great
landowners of Europe set aside forests for
their personal hunting pleasures and as a
source of game for their banqueting tables.
Many of these royal forests the Bialowieza
Forest in Poland and the New Forest in
England are but two examples stand to this
day, vestiges of the ubiquitous mixed forest
that once covered this part of the world.
This was conservation of a sort. But the
humbler people of those times, albeit un¬
consciously, were practising a perhaps more
important form of conservation throughout
their lives. For it must not be forgotten that the
traditional land use practices of farmer and
peasant existed in harmonious balance with
the natural environment. The elaborate ter¬
races on hillsides, whether in Indonesia, in Italy
or in the Andes, the primitive but efficient ir¬
rigation systems in arid and semi-arid areas,
the open animal ranges of the African savan¬
nah and the intricate jigsaw puzzles of field
and hedge in north-western France were all
created and maintained by man, and his cons¬
tant action provided a large variety of habitats
for a whole range of wild and domestic
animals, insects, plants, reptiles and birdlife
which evolved within the framework of
these man-made agro-ecosystems. In Asia,
respect for wild animals and plant life was
perhaps even more developed and, indeed,
was raised to the level of dogma in certain
religions.
In the western world, the industrial
revolution radically altered this situation of
balance and harmony with nature. The new
industrial towns encroached on agricultural
land and subsistence farming dwindled as
farmers developed new methods to make
the land more productive in order to feed the
growing urban populations.
Gradually, during the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, a reaction set in
against the waste and degradation of the
land these changes involved. In the United
States of America the wholesale destruction
of natural resources and the massacre of
birds and animals such as the passenger
pigeon and the Great Plains buffalo
precipitated the formation of a conservation
movement. In 1864, the Yosemite Valley,
with its beautiful landscapes and awe-
inspiring groves of giant sequoias, was
designated a protected area, administered
Below, view of the Glacier National Park; Montana, one of the 36 protected areas in the USA designated as biosphere reserves.
With reserves ranging from the Aleutian Island National Wildlife Refuge to the Everglades National Park, the U.S. biosphere
reserve network now covers every biogeographical province within the country's territory.

by the State of California, and in 1872 the
Yellowstone region of Wyoming was pro¬
claimed a national park, but under Federal
supervision. These two parks, reserved for
man's recreation and aesthetic pleasure,
were the forerunners not only of a national
system of parks but also of similar initiatives
throughout the world and by the 1920s
national parks were to be found in every
continent.
The birth of the national parks movement
marked a major step forward in the evolu¬
tion of the concept of conservation, the im¬
portance of which has become increasingly
evident during this century as industrial
growth and the population explosion place
greater and greater pressure on the world's
natural resources.
However, for a number of reasons, the
national park concept has not always travell¬
ed well. In many cases the mistake has been
made of believing that conservation
methods can be transplanted directly
without being adjusted to suit the new en¬
vironment and with no attempt being made
to assess local cultural values, local fears
and local needs.
This applies, for example, in Africa. Living
in balance with the environment has always
been an integral component of African
culture. From childhood the African is
taught to co-exist with the natural world
around him and that he is part and parcel of
the system. African religions refer specifical¬
ly to the preservation of natural things and
it is taboo to kill more than is needed for
survival.
The communal land ownership system
was also designed to enhance this living in
balance with nature. In pastoral societies
wildlife was regarded as "second cattle" and
was especially used during droughts when
cattle were scarce. Throughout the years
Africans evolved a form of co-existence with
the wildlife around them which permitted
both to survive.
The era of colonization and settlement
and the two world wars that followed did
much to destroy the sense of harmony with
nature that had been part of the African
heritage for so many years. The Kenyan ex¬
perience provides a classic example.
During both world wars there was large-
scale slaughter of wildlife, with the meat be¬
ing used to feed prisoners of war. After the
war, a concentrated effort was made to
develop agriculture in Kenya. Wild animals
were regarded as pests, destroying crops
and competing with domestic livestock for
pasture; it was thought to be in the best in¬
terests of the country to kill off as many wild
animals as possible and this policy was
ruthlessly implemented.
It was against this background that the
Society for the Preservation of the Fauna of
the Empire was formed to protect the
WALTER LUSIGI, of Kenya, is deputy director
of Kenya's National Environment Secretariat. A
former habitat ecologist with the Kenya Wildlife
Management Project of the United Nations, he is
co-ordinator of the MAB Integrated Project on
Arid Lands (IPAL).
JANE ROBERTSON is a consultant with
Unesco's Division of Ecological Sciences. An
ecologist concerned primarily with nature conser¬
vation, she collaborates with the Secretariat of
the World Heritage Convention and with the
MAB biosphere reserve project.
This poster is
used by Senegal's
National Parks
Service to
publicize the
cause of wildlife
protection.
dwindling wildlife population. The Society
immediately demanded some control over
the indiscriminate slaughter of wildlife, and
the establishment of national parks and
reserves. First a system of reserves covering
virtually the whole of the country was
established, and game could be hunted only
on permit. Later, in 1946, the first national
park was established, to be quickly followed
by others. These were game preserves
where no settlement or hunting were
allowed.
But the needs of Africans in Kenya receiv¬
ed little consideration in this period. First,
the European settlers had ousted many
Africans from their traditional homelands.
Then the introduction of laws which allowed
hunting by permit only made their normal
subsistence hunting illegal. Finally the crea¬
tion of national parks reduced still further
the land available to them. Thus, for the
African, the national parks have been one of
the mechanisms that forced him from his
home, and the penalties imposed for in¬
fringement of the game laws have solidified
his negative attitude toward wildlife and its
conservation.
Meanwhile, ironically enough, the parks
are becoming less and less suitable as
habitats for wildlife, primarily because of
measures originally taken to preserve them
for that purpose. The parks of Kenya were
founded on the premise that nature would
be allowed to take its course and no human
intervention would be allowed. But most of
the parks were established on derived
grasslands, which had been partly maintain¬
ed as grassland by fire. In the absence of
fire, the land is reverting to woody vegeta¬
tion which is unsuitable for game adapted to
open plains.
The Kenya experience has been con¬
sidered at some length, firstly, because it is
an experience which, apart from specific
details, it shares with many other countries
in Africa and elsewhere, and, secondly,
because it highlights the need for a further
evolution in our thinking about
conservation.
If conservation is to win acceptance from
local populations it must take into account
cultural mores, and the long-standing ties
between the population and the natural en¬
vironment. Planning must be based on an
evaluation of cultural, political and socio¬
economic as well as ecological factors, and
conservation must take local human needs
into consideration, in both the short and the
long term. It must offer a solution to the ap¬
parent contradiction between conservation
and development needs.
CONTINUED PAGE 34
29

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 29
The biosphere reserve concept developed
within Unesco's Man and the Biosphere
(MAB) Programme contains the elements of
this alternative approach. This concept at¬
tempts to combine the preservation of
ecological and genetic diversity with fun¬
damental and applied research, education
and training.
Significantly, great emphasis is placed on
the co-operation and participation of the
local population and to some extent the
term "reserve" is misleading as it is not in¬
tended that biosphere reserves be forbidden
areas surrounded by protective, separating
barbed-wire fences. Scientific research
within these reserves is not confined to the
ecology of the fauna and flora but also con¬
cerns the rational use of natural resources
in connexion with the economy of the
surrounding region.
One major difference between biosphere
reserves and national parks is that whereas
the latter are often chosen for their natural
beauty, biosphere reserves are selected as
representative examples of the world's ma¬
jor ecosystems in order to preserve samples
of the world's ecological diversity.
As man has altered and transformed the
face of the world from time immemorial, by
definition biosphere reserves must include
man-modified ecosystems where certain
forms of human intervention constitute im¬
portant ecological factors which must be
continued on a sustainable basis if the
ecosystem is to be perpetuated.
In biosphere reserves a combination of
conservation and manipulative research is
carried out. Generally speaking, a biosphere
reserve consists of a strictly protected cen¬
tral "core" zone in which the natural
development of the ecosystem, untouched
by man, is monitored. The core zone
therefore acts as a baseline or control
against which the impact of man on similar
ecosystems elsewhere can be compared.
The core zone is surrounded by a larger
"buffer" zone in which research is carried
out on the impact of various types of land
use such as traditional agriculture, ex¬
perimental agriculture, recreational ac¬
tivities, etc.
Today, within the framework of the MAB
Programme a network of 193 biosphere
reserves, covering most of the world's major
biomes, has been established in 50 coun¬
tries. The results of research carried out
within these reserves is exchanged through
MAB's computerized Information System.
In some cases even closer co-operation is
achieved through the "twinning" of reserves
covering the same type of ecosystem but in
different parts of the world. jn
This is the case, for example of the
Berezinsky reserve in the USSR and the Isle
Royale National Park (which is also a
biosphere reserve) in the United States of
America.
A biosphere reserve is much more than
just another conservation unit. Indeed, the
biosphere reserve concept marks the latest
stage in the evolution of the concept of con¬
servation. Going beyond the important first
stage of preservation, it involves research in¬
to the wider question of man's use and
modification of entire ecosystems. It
resolves the apparent contradiction between
conservation and development and con¬
stitutes a new approach towards the
maintenance of mankind's biological life-
support system.
B Walter Lusigi and Jane Robertson

