Sounds from silence
China's deaf children find a voice
by Li Hongtai and Shen Jiayin
IN old China the severely deaf, who cannot hear spoken language
and thus fail to develop the power of speech, were subjected
to widespread discrimination and deprived of the chance to be
educated.
Today attitudes have totally changed. Education is provided for
the deaf ¡n schools whose target is to help their students to achieve
all-round development.
Methods also have evolved. In the old days most teaching was
done by means of gestures and facial expressions. This hindered the
development of the students' ability to handle language and express
their ideas.
To improve the education of the deaf, the Ministry of Education of
the Central People's Government decided in 1954 to launch pilot
speech teaching projects in certain schools for the deaf in order to
develop the pupils' oral ability. Two years later, it was decided to
start oral teaching in all schools for the deaf throughout the country.
The basis of this speech teaching is the Chinese Phonetic
Alphabet. This alphabet has a comparatively small number of letters
and is worked out in accordance with the phonemes, or speech
sounds, of putonghua, the common speech of the Chinese
language. It makes it easy for deaf children to learn pronunciation.
The teaching materials used combine the study of transliteration
with recognition of characters and words. The children learn to
recognize characters and words and study the language on the basis
of the learning of pronunciation. This approach overcomes the
obstacles caused by the fact that the same Chinese character can
represent a number of different sounds.
Whenever a new letter is introduced in the textbook, it is il¬
lustrated with diagrams and pictures of lip-rounding. The teacher
demonstrates the position of the tongue and the lip movements
while the pupils use mirrors to watch and imitate. Some letters are
aspirated, some are not. The pupil is made to feel the difference by
placing the back of his or her hand in front of the mouth to feel for
the air flow. Some sounds are made with the vocal cords vibrating,
others are not. The pupil learns to distinguish between them by
touching the teacher's throat or his own. In a word, the pupil's
senses of sight and touch, as well as his sixth sense, are brought ful¬
ly into play to help him or her to grasp the correct way to articulate
each letter.
The thinking of deaf children is necessarily linked to visual images
and acts. It is thus essential that the teachers demonstrate real ob¬
jects and use their histrionic gifts to the utmost. It is equally impor¬
tant that the meaning of the words should not be misunderstood. In
the case of words or phrases that are difficult to define clearly, pupils
are encouraged to apply them to real-life situations.
It is mainly through lip-reading that the pupils learn new things.
However, this does not work with certain sounds such as ge, ke,
and he. It is hard to distinguish between these sounds unless lip-
reading is backed up by other means. So far the major tool used for
this is the hand alphabet formulated in accordance with the Chinese
Phonetic Alphabet. This alphabet is part of the syllabus in schools
for the deaf because it can be used to express all the syllables in the
LI HONGTAI, of China, is dean of Peking's No. 1 school for the deaf. He
helped to produce the first set of Chinese textbooks for the deaf, and is a
correspondent with two periodicals for the deaf, The Deaf in China and
Newsletters for the Education of the Deaf.
SHEN JIAYIN, of China, teaches at Peking's No. 4 school for the deaf, and
was formerly on the staff of the Shanghai school for blind children. She is
also concerned in the editing of textbooks used in schools for the blind, deaf
and dumb, anda correspondent with The Deaf in China and Newsletters for
the Education of the Deaf.
f^b^U¿)
Chinese language. By looking at the diagram, forming the hand
alphabet with his fingers, and uttering the sound with his oral cavity,
the pupil is using three sense-organs at a time. This imprints what he
is learning more firmly on his memory and also helps to reinforce his
grasp of ways of articulation.
Nevertheless, this hand alphabet has certain drawbacks when it is
used to spell out a syllable which ¡s usually made up of three
phonemes. This means making a large number of finger
movements, which might be acceptable when spelling out words,
but not when it comes to sentences. Accordingly, some teachers
began to think of the possibility of using a manual alphabet to spell
out syllables instead of single phonemes. In collaboration with
specialists from the Chinese Written Language Reform Research In¬
stitute, we have designed a system for finger-spelling syllables one
at a time in which both hands are used (see diagram this page).
A pilot programme using these "manual syllables" is being carried
out in a small number of schools, and the preliminary results suggest
that they are easy to use. The changes in lip and finger movements
are closely co-ordinated, and sign language thus becomes more sim¬
ple, expressive and vivid in supplementing speech.
Thus the approach to speech training for deaf pupils which we are
now beginning to systematize is.based on oral teaching. Other forms
of expressing language are used in support, and training in the use
of the written language is reinforced.
H Li Hongtai and Shen Jiayin
26

Eloquent hands enable a deaf Chinese youth to bring a smile to the face of his
deaf companion. In China manual systems of communication (opposite page)
are used in support of oral teaching for the deaf, to help them overcome their
additional handicap of speech difficulties.
27
