Reggae music exploded into existence among the urban poor
of Jamaica in the early 1960s and rapidly won an international
following, especially among young people. The drums and
guitars of Reggae masters beat out pulsating sounds which are a
synthesis of African and Afro-American rhythms, accompanying
lyrics which draw not only on contemporary events and the
timeless themes of passion, but also on harrowing folk
memories :
When I remember the crack of the whip
My blood runs cold
I remember the slave ship
When they brutalized my very soul.
The roots of Reggae no one knows for certain where the word
comes from run deep into the past of Jamaica where, as
elsewhere in the Caribbean, slaves kept alive the rhythms, songs
and dances of Africa.



Reggae:
a Jamaican musical phenomenon
by Sebastian Clarke
Text © Copyright
Reproduction prohibited
THE first batch of Africans shipped by
the Europeans to the so-called "New
World" arrived in Jamaica in 1509.
Although the Spaniards reaped great
economic benefit from the island, they did
not fully exploit it. It was not until 1655
when invading forces sent by Oliver
Cromwell arrived to make a systematic at¬
tempt to wrest "all the vast territories held
by Spain in the Caribbean", that the
economic transformation of the island was
completely undertaken. The British found
the island underpopulated and under¬
developed. Jamaica was thus easily con¬
quered by the British from the Spanish with
the aid of Africans.
Although the Africans were indeed
enslaved, their will for resistance and
rebellion was not broken. Thus rebellions
characterized the history of Jamaica. Slaves
who escaped ran to the hills and established
the type of social, cultural, political and
religious systems that they were accustom¬
ed to in Africa. These runaway slaves were
known as Maroons.
They fought against the British and
created havoc and fear in the minds and on
the properties of the slave-masters. Thus
the British, failing to make meaningful in¬
roads in destroying the Maroons, despite
the presence of great numbers of British
military officers, finally pacified them, sign¬
ing peace treaties with them and granting
them the right to stay on their lands.
By the end of the eighteenth century the
Maroons were finally broken as a dissident
and united opposition force. The Africans,
however, in spite of the abject condition of
slavery, still retained large elements of their
SEBASTIAN CLARKE, Trinidad-born writer and
journalist, has written widely on the modern
Caribbean arts. He is the editor of New Planet, an
anthology of modern Caribbean writing (1979)
and the author of Jah Music, published by
Heinemann in 1980. He is currently working on a
biography of Bob Marley.
cultural history. They evolved means of
communication through the invention of
patois, a combination of English and African
languages but phpnetically spoken within
the context of African languages. They sang
songs about their conditions, played games
on special occasions such as Christmas,
beat their drums, dressed up in elaborate
African-derived costumes, and danced.
Many of their forms of religious worship
remained unchanged. This was due to the
fact that the orthodox religious denomina¬
tions had no real interest in converting
Africans. The priests conducted baptisms
en masse, and for money. However, the set¬
ting up of the Ethiopian Baptist Church
under George Liele, an Afro-American
preacher and a former slave, created a great
deal of interest for Africans because the
manner of worship was similar to their own
and the offer of redemption and salvation
was a way out of slavery after death.
In the 1860s there was a great religious
revival in Jamaica, and it was centered in the
parish of St. Thomas where George William
Gordon, a coloured Baptist preacher and a
member of the local council, along with Paul
and Moses Bogle, played a great role. Not
only did they help to rekindle the flame of
religion, but they^also stood for justice for
the poor. This led directly to what is now
known as the Morant Bay Rebellion of 1865.
To suppress this protest against the treat¬
ment of the poor, the might of the British
militia was invoked, and both Gordon and
Paul Bogle were killed. It is important to
recognize the significance of this event in
the lives of the people from this area,
because it was from this parish that
Rastafari, both as a religious and political
' phenomenon, later originated. The Rastafari
movement takes its name from Ras Tafari,
as the Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia
was known before he was crowned in 1930.
The history of Rastafari is inseparable
from that of Marcus Garvey, who was born
in the parish of St. Ann's and very early
demonstrated an interest in bettering the
conditions of the poor (see opposite page).
After moving to the United States in 1916
Garvey built a formidable organizational
base from which he attempted to tackle the
problems of black people, not only in the
United States, but world-wide.
When the American government in an at¬
tempt to stem his influence engineered
jealousy and dissension in his movement
and had him jailed and then deported for
fraud, Garvey rebuilt his movement in
Jamaica and at one of his conventions was
supposed to have said to his followers,
"Look to Africa where a black king shall be
crowned, for the day of deliverance is near".
People consulted their Bibles for confir¬
mation and found it in relation to passages
mentioning Ethiopia and the breaking of the
seven seals, and especially to "the Lion of
Judàh, the Root of David...", etc. When
Ras Tafari (Selassie) was crowned in 1930
he revived the titles of old, "The Conquering
Lion from the tribe of Judah, King of Kings,
Lord of Lords", etc. But even before the
coronation of Haile Selassie, the concept of
Ethiopianism had contributed greatly to af¬
firming in the minds of black people that
although the European attempted
desperately to project that Africans were
savages before the coming of the European,
and that they had made no contribution to
world culture and civilization, this was a
falsification of history. This affirmation took
the form of rejecting the Bible as a weapon
devised by the European to keep blacks in
mental bondage and of insisting that blacks
ought to create new religious systems from
that, of ancestral Africa. Not surprisingly, a
great deal of literature was written, and peo¬
ple sought it out. This expanded the debate
on African culture and gave indications that
black people were prepared to govern their
own lives.
The coronation of Selassie set the seal on
the acceptance of a new religious faith. Early
pioneers of this faith were Leonard
CONTINUED ON PAGE 46 43

>fR
KaVI . -. "
El
^H
Photo Jacques Pavlovsky © Sygma, Paris
Reggae is a Jamaican musical phenomenon
whose emergence parallels that of other
popular musical forms such as Soul and
Rock and Roll. Reggae music was the
creation of the special genius of the urban
poor, the "sufferers" of Jamaica's capital,
Kingston. Drawing on the spiritual
resources of the sufferers, it has a
stridency and an incantative magic that has
captured the minds and bodies of people all
over the world, for Reggae has become a
truly international phenomenon. Above,
Reggae's most renowned exponent, the
late Bob Marley, accompanied by the
l-Threes group, during a concert given at Le
Bourget, France, in July 1980, which
attracted an audience of many thousands
of Reggae fans.
44

^Jf J I - IB E
^ ^ > \ "
ft
&k A.
** r
i
- *\\ **B^b ' JH
" ^
A
K| b
l M m i <J
^ lafcÜL. TrtÉl
L *?
^m^^^
The music is an important force within the lives of the black community, whether living in Jamaica (above) the Americas or Europe.,
45

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 43
P. Howell, Joseph Nathaniel Hibbert and
H. Archibald Dunkley. In varying degrees
they felt the wrath of official society. They
were harassed, hounded down, locked up,
physically attacked, and their locks, the long
plait-like strands they sometimes wore,
shaved off their heads. In the early days of
Rastafari, the philosophical input was not
confined solely to Jamaica. Black church¬
men from Afro-America, South Africa, An¬
tigua and Jamaica itself, took the concept of
Ethiopianism and Garvey's philosophy, and
wrote important documents that con¬
tributed meaningfully to the articulation of
Rastafari.
In its philosophy Rastafari was in the main
anti-colonialism and an affirmation of
African cultural and social history. It offered
both religious and political alternatives and it
was based on the focal point of Africa, Haile
Selassie as a man of divinity because of his
ancestral connexion with the King Solomon-
Queen of Sheba union and the long un¬
broken line of kings since then. Whether or
not Selassie was a despot is insignificant to
the movement that his acceptance, has
created in the psyches of the people. It is
revolutionary because it overturns the no¬
tion of white kings and queens and the cen¬
tral focus on Europe.
In this quest for cultural authenticity, it
would have been contradictory for
Rastafarians to be singing European-created
songs in the context of European music.
They thus fashioned their own songs, adap¬
ting the psalms from the Bible, as well as
creating new religious songs out of their
own religious experience. The Burru people,
descendants of the Ashanti of Ghana, were
one such people in Jamaica who survived
with their drumming intact. Rastafarians
gave the Burru their new religion and ac¬
cepted the Burrus' African drumming in ex¬
change. All this occurred in the slums of
West Kingston which were a refuge for the
poor and outcast.
In the 1940s Afro-American music was
popular with Jamaicans. This phenomenon
continued in the 1950s with Rhythm and
Blues (R & B) and Boogie Woogie (an
outgrowth of musical styles born out of
similar deprivation to that known by
Jamaicans, and sharing a similar ancestral
base Africa). The music was played on
sound systems (modern-day discos) as well
as on the radio. People also had short-wave
radio that could pick up radio stations in the
American South (Jamaica is about 160
kilometres from Miami).
Young singers like Owen Grey, Winston
Jackie Edwards, Laurel Aitken and Alton
Ellis used to imitate the styles of the Afro-
American music. The dominant element in
Boogie Woogie was the rhythmic impres¬
sion of the piano. It played a specific
rhythmic style that Jamaican musicians lik¬
ed. And when, in the early 1960s, Afro-
American R & B was being superseded by
Rock and Roll, Jamaicans could not feel any
great emotional attachment.
Thus they retained the element of the
piano rhythm and began to devise new ideas
to blend with it. Firstly they continued in the
R & B idiom, then they moved gradually
towards creating their own music. This oc¬
curred around 1962, significantly, the year in
which Jamaica achieved its independence.
The musicians, because they came from
the urban poor from whom the philosophy
of Rastafari issued, were obviously political¬
ly and culturally aware. Thus compositions
were sometimes titled after events that were
occurring both in Jamaican society and in
the world. "Independence Ska", for exam¬
ple, was composed by the Skatalites, the
foremost Jamaican musical backing band.
As early as 1958, Rastafarian music, i.e.
drumming, was placed on a popular record
by the Folkes Brothers, "Oh Carolina" (an
old Afro-American tune). The record was
produced by the legendary Jamaican artist
Prince Buster who imitated the sound of a
saxophone with his mouth because he could
not have afforded the use of a real sax¬
ophone, and the drumming was immortaliz¬
ed by the late Count Ossie, the man most
responsible for the popularity of this sound.
After Jamaica received its independence,
opportunities for local Jamaicans to control
power and reap financial rewards were
greater than before. Political rivalry was
already part and parcel of the Jamaican
political scene. In the 1960s and 1970s, this
escalated, drawing in the urban poor whose
singer/sufferers expressed the nature of
their social environment in songs.
Popular Jamaican music has a genetic
connexion with other Caribbean music. In
the 1950s the most popular indigenous
music was Mento, which was a combination
of calypso and musical rhythm from the
Spanish-speaking Caribbean. In the late
1970s and the 1980s, Jamaican music has
shown proclivities for calypso. The latter
provides the rhythmic ingredient which is
expressed by the local Jamaican musicians
as a fusion with Reggae. But what is impor¬
tant is that the themes of calypso have
directly influenced the lyrics of the Jamaican
singer. The themes of Trinidadian calypsos
have in fact been reworked and transposed
into the Jamaican cultural context, in now-
popular Reggae songs.
Today therefore, as in the beginning,
Reggae music is not limited to one musical
concept or to one thematic preoccupation.
There are songs that speak of love, death,
destruction, war and other topical subjects.
The music is, though, inextricably linked
with the struggle for political liberation for
black people globally. And when the music
speaks of liberation it is not speaking simply
of colour limitations.
The music has been accepted by black
people living all over the world as their own
music. Thus black people in Europe, for ex¬
ample, are making significant contributions
to its development. They are adding new in¬
strumental ideas to give the music colour
and are welding their experience of other
music, particularly Afro-American Soul and
Jazz, to give a new dimension to Reggae.
The music is obviously an important force
within the lives of the black community,
whether living in Jamaica, the Americas or
Europe. In the latter situation it has given
strength and resolve to those experiencing
the harshness of European racism and pre¬
judice and has forced them to resist these
experiences.
Stylistically, Jamaican music is changing
every day. New styles of drum and bass
combinations (the foundation of the music)
are coming into play, and different ways of
communicating a song have become a
characteristic of the Jamaican or black
singer. Undoubtedly the late Bob Marley
contributed largely to the world acceptance
of Reggae, without compromising his
political vision, but the music itself
transcends Bob Marley and expresses the
deep spiritual resources, wishes and aspira¬
tions of the black world for eventual
freedom and justice. As long as suffering is
the norm of the black experience. Reggae
will be relevant to the human condition.
I Sebastian Clarke
46
