Marcus Garvey
and the African
dream
by Kenneth Ramchand
IN the first half of the twentieth century there
sprang up in the Caribbean and in North
America a number of movements in which
people of African origin turned for support to that
heritage and root. Their labour had sustained
economies, and the right to belong had been
dearly bought, but New World Negroes were not
at ease in the Western societies to which their
ancestors had been shipped. Emancipation, they
were told, had come; but for the mass of Negroes
it seemed long gone. The conditions under which
they lived as supposedly free men were at least as
demoralizing, especially after the First World
War, as those their chained ancestors had
endured.
At no time in the history of the world, for the
last five hundred years, was there ever a serious
attempt made to free Negroes. We have been
camouflaged into believing that we were made
free by Abraham Lincoln, that we were made free
by Victoria of England, but up to now we are still
slaves, we are industrial slaves, we are social
slaves, we are politicalslaves, and the New Negro
desires a freedom that has no boundary, no
limit. "
(The Philosophy and Opinions
of Marcus Garvey)
Of the movements that arose to bring emo¬
tional sustainment and practical support to the
victims of this depressing scene, the most spec¬
tacular was that surrounding the Jamaican Mar¬
cus Mosiah Garvey, founder of the Universal
Negro Improvement Association. Born a colonial
on August 17, 1877 Garvey died an obscure exile
in the British metropolis in 1940. Between these
two dates, Garvey rose to fantastic eminence
among Negroes in America. He was the Black
Moses, the spiritual leader sent to lead his people
out of bondage; he was also the maker of the
political kingdom. His Excellency the Provisional
President of Africa.
"/ asked: 'Where is the black man's Govern¬
ment? Where is his King and his kingdom? Where
is his President, his country, and his ambassador,
his army, his navy, his men of big affairs?' I could
KENNETH RAMCHAND, of Trinidad and
Tobago, is Reader in West Indian Literature at the
University of the West Indies. Among his publish¬
ed works are West Indian Narrative, The West In¬
dian Novel and its Background, West Indian
Poetry and An Introduction to the Study of West
Indian Literature.
not find them, and then I declared: 7 will help to
make them. ..' I saw before me then, even as I do
now, a new world of black men, not peons, sen's,
dogs and slaves, but a nation ofsturdy men, mak¬
ing their impress upon civilization and causing a
new light to dawn upon the human race. "
(The Philosophy and Opinions
of Marcus Garvey)
At its height in the mid-1920s, Garvey's
Association is estimated to have numbered bet¬
ween four and six million, with branches,
members, or supporters in all the countries where
there were people of African origin.
Garvey envisaged a day in the future when all
Negroes would have returned to a united and in¬
dependent Africa. In the meantime, however.
New World Negroes could contribute to the cre¬
ation of a free Africa to which they could look for
protection as they journeyed in the world, and to
which they could return if necessary; "a nation of
our own, strong enough to lend protection to the
members of our race scattered all over the world,
and to compel the respect of the nations and
races of the earth". In their adopted countries, at
the same time, they could organize themselves
"for the absolute purpose of bettering our condi¬
tion, industrially, commercially, socially, religious¬
ly and politically."
However, as a result of mismanagement, in¬
competence, greed and corruption among his
lieutenants, most of Garvey's economic projects
foundered like the broken-down ships he was sold
by white owners at black market prices for his
Black Star Shipping Line which he intended to be
the foundation of Negro trade and the symbol of
repatriation.
His educational aims were more nearly suc¬
cessful, but not as he originally intended. After
founding the Universal Negro Improvement
Association in Jamaica in 1914, Garvey proposed
the establishment of colleges for Jamaican
Negroes on the model of Booker T. Washington's
Tuskagee Institute. It was in order to consult with
Washington himself on this project that Garvey
planned the 1 91 6 visit to America which led to the
shifting of the base of his operations to the United
States. His enduring educational enterprise,
however, was the founding of the weekly 777e
Negro World, which ran from 1918 to 1933. In its
pages, Garveyism was expounded in detail, and
readers were educated in the glories of African
history and the heroism of Negro revolts, and the
comparative savagery of European peoples.
"When Europe was inhabited by a race of can¬
nibals, a race of savages, hated men, heathens
and pagans, Africa was peopled with a race of
cultured black men, who were masters in art,
science and literature; men who were cultured
and refined; men who, it was said, were like the
gods. "
(The Philosophy and Opinions
of Marcus Garvey)
There were inconsistencies and confusions in
Garvey's thinking and in his actions, and it would
be easy to use these to condemn him as an ex¬
tremist and a crackpot, as many Negro intellec¬
tuals did at the time. His island antagonism
towards the brown and light-skinned class of
Jamaica was transferred to the Negro intelligent¬
sia, whom he invariably saw as lackeys of White
America.
He co-operated for a time with the Ku Klux
Klan because he shared with them the wish for
racial purity and the emigration of the Negro from
the United States. Always rash and undiplomatic,
Garvey skirmished with authority many times until
at last they did for him, convicting him on a flimsy
and put-up charge of using the U.S. mail to
defraud investors in the Black Star Shipping Line.
Garvey was deported from the U.S. in 1928 and
returned to Jamaica where his brown and light-
skinned antagonists were waiting. Humiliated at
home, the failing prophet went into exile in
England where he died a beaten and disillusioned
man.
In 1964 Garvey's body was disinterred from its
London tomb and returned to Jamaican soil.
Several years later he was officially proclaimed a
National Hero. Even before this, both his contem¬
poraries and those who never experienced his
movement had begun to separate the follies and
foibles of this vain, egotistical and insecure man
from his enduring achievements.
Those elements in his philosophy or opinions
that were sound were not new, many of them
having been put forward by Negro intellectuals or
men of letters of some of whom Garvey had
probably never heard. Yet this skilful orator,
showman and propagandist extraordinaire com¬
municated with ordinary Negroes and touched
their hurts as no one had done before. Nobody
before Garvey had been able to organize a mass
movement of such size and enthusiasm from the
vast Negro proletariat. Nobody had so stirred
their imagination. "I shall teach the black man to
see beauty in himself." Nobody had given them
such self-esteem.
42
