The Dream
"On a certain night, after completing the
Prayers and liturgical recitations ordained
for the hours of night, I continued to
meditate. And lo! deep in ecstasy, I had a vi¬
sion. There was a lofty Khanqah I house of
Sufis); it was open; I was myself within the
Khanqah. Then suddenly I saw that I had
gone forth from it. I saw that the totality of
the universe, in the structure it reveals, con¬
sists of Light. Everything had become one
colour, and all the atoms of beings, through
their own mode of being and their specific
character, proclaimed: "I am the Truth". I
could not properly interpret the mode of be¬
ing which made them utter this proclama¬
tion. When I had perceived this state in a vi¬
sion, rapture and exaltation, an extraor¬
dinary longing and delight, welled up inside
me. I wished to take flight in the air. I no¬
ticed that at my foot was something
resembling a piece of wood which
prevented me from taking my flight. Carried
away with emotion, I stamped on the
ground in every possible manner until this
piece of wood came away. Like an arrow
shooting from a bow, or rather with a hun¬
dred times more force, I rose and flew off.
When I reached the first Heaven, I saw that
the Moon had melted, and I passed through
the Moon. Then, returning from this state
and from this absence, I came back to
myself".
Shams al-Din Lahiji
Shams al-Din Lahiji Id. 911AHi 1506AD) is a
Persian mystic known for his commentaries
on a classic of Sufism, The Mystic Rose
Garden (Golshan-e raz) by the great Persian
mystic Mahmud Shabestari.

Mystic voices
Zubaida and the Sufi
On this page we present two
extracts from The llahi-nama or
Book of God by the great Persian
mystic poet Fand al-Din Attar
(Circa 537-627 AH1 1 140- 1230 AD)
translated into English by John
Andrew Boyle. (The translation,
with a foreword by Annemarie
Schimmel, was published by the
Manchester University Press in
1976 and forms part of the Unesco
Collection of Representative
Works). Doctor, pharmacist and
perfumer, Attar (whose name
means "He who trades in
perfumes") wrote a prose work
containing much information on
the mystics, Tadhkirat ul-Auliya
(abridged English translation,
Biographies of the Saints 1961) as
well as several major works of
poetry, notably Mantiq-ut-Tair
(Eng. transi. The Conference of the
Birds, 1955) and Mosibat-nameh
(The Book of Affliction).
Zubaida was seated on a camel-lifter, journeying auspiciously
upon the Pilgrimage.
A gust of wind blew the curtain to one side: a Sufi caught sight of
her and fell headlong to the ground.
He set up such a crying and commotion that no one could silence
him.
Perceiving that Sufi Zubaida whispered to a eunuch:
"Free me quickly from his noise even though it cost thee much
gold".
The eunuch offered the man a purse of gold: he would not take it,
but when he was offered ten purses he gave way.
Having accepted the ten purses of gold, he ceased at once to cry
and to utter pitiful moans.
Zubaida, perceiving the true state of affairs, that that Sufi had
turned away from the mystery of love,
Told the eunuch to bind his hands and to break his seven limbs
with blows of the rod.
He cried out: "What then did I do that I should suffer these
endless blows?"
Said Zubaida: "0 lover of thyself, what wilt thou do henceforth,
liar that thou art?
Thou didst pretend to love such a one as I, and yet when thou
wert shown gold thou hadst enough of loving me.
I have found thee nought but pretence from head to feet, and I
find thy pretence to be false.
Thou shouldst have sought after me; since thou didst not I knew
for certain that thou wert feeble in action.
Hadst thou sought after me, all my goods and property, all my
gold and silver, would have been thine absolutely.
But since thou soldest me I resolved to punish thy ardour.
Thou shouldst have sought after me, 0 foolish man, and then all
would have been thine at once."
Fix thy heart on God and thou shalt be saved; if thou fix thy heart
on men thou shalt be afflicted.
Close tightly to thyself all other doors; seek out His door and fix
thy heart upon it entirely,
So that through the dark cloud of separation may shine the light
of the dawn of knowledge.
If thou find that light thou shalt find also the way to knowledge.
The saints that raised their heads to the moon were guided by the
light of knowledge.
Story of Bishr Hafi
Bishr Hafi was walking along early one morning drunk with the
lees of wine and yet pure in his soul.
When he found lying in the road a piece of paper on which was
written the name of God.
All he had in the world was a single grain. He sold it for musk. See
what gain!
At nightfall that God-seeking man perfumed the name of God
with his musk.
That night, just before dawn, he dreamt that there came a Voice
to him saying:
"0 thou who didst raise My name from the dust and with
reverence didst both perfume and purify it,
I have made thee a seeker of the truth; I have both perfumed and
purified thee".
0 Lord this sweet-singing 'Attar has perfumed Thy name with the
perfume of his poetry.
And yet what though he sang sweetly? Thy name has always been
perfumed.
Still by Thy grace make him the dust of Thy doorway; make him
famous with Thy name.
He can expect nothing save from Thy grace, for he can produce
not a single act of devotion.
67
