Caribbean encounter
A journey through the history, peoples
and places of the Antilles
by Alejo Carpentier
Photo Goursat © Rapho, Paris
THE Caribbean has played a unique
and privileged role in the history of
the American continent. Here in the
Caribbean was the reality of the new
horizons, new forms of vegetation and new
lands first described by Christopher Colum¬
bus in his log-book. Indeed, it was through
that log-book and the letters Columbus
wrote to the Catholic Monarchs narrating
his successive voyages that the idea of
America was instilled in people's minds,
giving them, for the first time, a complete
picture of the world in which they lived.
They learnt that their planet was round and
they could set about exploring it in full
knowledge of where they were going. For
the first time in history they knew in what
world they were living.
So important and so far-reaching in its
consequences was this event that it could
be said to have been the most significant
historical event ever, forming a watershed in
the history of the world dividing humanity
into two categories: those who lived before
the discovery of America, and those who
came after.
America, then, had been discovered,
when suddenly, through a combination of
circumstances, these lands, and especially
those of the Caribbean, became the setting
of the first symbiosis, the first recorded
meeting between three races which, as
such, had never met before: the whites of
Europe, the hitherto unknown Indians of
America, and the Africans who, although
familiar to Europeans, were completely
unknown on the other side of the Atlantic. It
was a monumental symbiosis of extra¬
ordinary significance in its scope and the
potential cultural contributions it offered, a
symbiosis that was to give rise to a com¬
pletely original civilization.
Yet hardly had the discovery been made
and no sooner had the New World, as it
came to be called, begun to be known than
a negative factor emerged which was sub-
ALEJO CARPENTIER of Cuba, who died last
year, ranks among the most distinguished
novelists in the Spanish language. His books have
been translated into many languages and include,
in English editions, The Kingdom of this World
(1957), The Lost Steps (1957), published by
Knopf, New York, Explosion in a Cathedral
(Gollancz, London, 1963) and Reasons of State
(Partridge, London, 1976). A musicologist, he
also wrote A History of Cuban Music and many
articles and essays on Latin American literature
and music. The text published here has been
adapted from a talk broadcast on Cuban TV dur¬
ing the third Caribbean Festival of Arts
("Carifesta"), held in Cuba in 1979.

The curving arc of the Caribbean islands, as shown in a map published in Amsterdam in 1662.
THE CARIBBEAN ARCHIPELAGO POPULATION
ANTIGUA 74,000 JAMAICA
BAHAMAS 225,000 MARTINIQUE
BARBADOS 265,000 MONTSERRAT
BERMUDA 58,000 NETHERLANDS ANTILLES
BRITISH VIRGIN ISLANDS 12,000 PUERTO RICO
CAYMAN ISLANDS
CUBA
12,000
9,728,000
ST. KITTS-NEVIS
AND ANGUILLA
DOMINICA 81,000
ST. LUCIA
ST. VINCENT
AND GRENADINESDOMINICAN REP. 5,124,000
GRENADA 97,000 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
GUADELOUPE 330,000 TURKS AND CA/COS ISLANDS
HAITI 4,833,000 U.S. VIRGIN ISLANDS
POPULATION
2, 133,000
325,000
13,000
246,000
3,317,000
67,000
113,000
96,000
1, 133,000
6,000
104,000
sequently to be offset by a more positive
development.
To start with the negative factor. The idea
of colonialism was born with the discovery
of America. Before the Spanish came to
America, the Portuguese, those extraor¬
dinary navigators, had reached the limits of
Asia, had explored what they called the "the
spice islands" and, with some English and
French rivals, had voyaged on as far as India
and sailed down the coasts of Africa. But
they never thought of establishing colonies
in the strict sense of the term. They set up
trading posts, went in search of merchan¬
dise and offered merchandise in exchange.
They negotiated and bartered and, although
there may have been places where ten,
twelve or fifteen families settled, they were
the families of traders with no thought in
their heads of colonization.
The Spaniards, on the other hand, went
to America with colonization in mind. The
first great colonizer to land in America after
the discovery was the eldest son of Colum¬
bus, Diego, who arrived with his wife Maria
Toledo, the niece of the Duke of Alba. He
founded a small Renaissance-style court at
Santo Domingo where universities and
theatres were soon established and through
the streets of which once strolled Gonzalo
Fernandez de Oviedo, who was to become
the first chronicler of the West Indies.
The concept of colonization already seem¬
ed firmly established. But history has its sur¬
prises and people had not reckoned with an
unforeseen factor the African Slaves.
Transported from the continent of Africa,
the negroes, who arrived in America in fet¬
ters and chains, crammed into the bowels of
pest-ridden vessels, were to be sold like
merchandise and to be subjected to the
most degrading conditions to which it is
possible to reduce human beings. Yet with
them they brought the germ of the idea of
independence. With the passage of time it
was to be these pariahs, these outcasts of
the human race, who were to give us no less
a gift than the concept of independence.
Were we to have a map on which a small
red bulb lit up to indicate every uprising of
negro slaves on the American continent, we
should see that, from the sixteenth century i
onwards, a bulb has always been flickering I

Panoramic view of the lies
des Saintes, above, is a
composite of three photos
taken one balmy day in
1899. "What marvels!"
Christopher Columbus had
exclaimed when he made
landfall in the Caribbean
four centuries before.
Sketch-map (right) was
drawn by the great
navigator in 1493. It shows
the north-western coast of
Esparíola ("the Spanish
island", now Haiti and the
Dominican Republic). The
north is indicated by a cross. y¿* *{f*ot*\ c«* * »
y somewhere. The first great uprising took
place in the sixteenth century in the mines of
Buria in Venezuela, led by the negro Miguel,
who succeeded in creating an independent
kingdom with a court and even a dissident
church with its own bishop.
Very shortly afterwards, the uprising of
the Cariada de los Negros occurred in Mex¬
ico and so frightened the colonial powers
that the Viceroy, Martin Enriquez, felt com¬
pelled to mete out such terrible punishments
as castration, with no consideration of mer¬
cy or justice, on any negro who fled into the
mountains. Shortly afterwards there was an
uprising in the stockade of Palmares, where
the runaway slaves of Brazil created an in¬
dependent kingdom that resisted the
numerous expeditions which the Por¬
tuguese colonists sent against it and main-
6
tained its independence for more than sixty
years.
In Surinam, at the end of the seventeenth
century, there was a rebellion led by three
black leaders: Sant Sam, Boston and Arabi,
who succeeded in holding out against four
Dutch expeditions sent to quell them. There
was the rebellion of the "tailors" in Bahia,
and that in Cuba led by Aponte. But special
mention must be made of the Oath of Bois
Caiman on account of its far-reaching
historical importance.
In a place known as Bois Caiman, or the
Forest of the Alligators, contingents of
slaves from the French colony of Saint
Domingue, now Haiti, met on a stormy
night and swore to proclaim the in¬
dependence of their country, an oath that
was to be fulfilled and made reality by the
great leader Toussaint Louverture (see
page 14). The true concept of independence
was born with the Oath of Bois Caiman. To
the concept of colonization which the
Spanish had brought to Hispaniola was op¬
posed, in the same country, the concept of
decolonization. This was the beginning of
the wars of independence and of the anti-
colonial wars that were to continue right up
to the present day.
When we study the celebrated mid-
eighteenth century Encyclopédie of
Voltaire, Diderot, Rousseau and
d'Alembert, men whose ideas had such an
influence on the leaders of our wars of in¬
dependence, we find that the concept of in¬
dependence in that great work was still
purely philosophical and was concerned
with the independence of man before God

Cruel facts contradict any attempt
to portray the Antilles as an idyllic
paradise, for the history of the
Caribbean has been punctuated by
volcanic eruptions, earthquakes and
cyclones. One of the world's most
terrible natural disasters occurred
at two minutes past eight on the
morning of 8 May 1902, when
Martinique's highest volcanic
mountain. Mont Pelée, suddenly
erupted. In less than a minute the
town of Saint-Pierre and all its
population (some 28,000) had
perished in the holocaust (left).
Cyclones, which in Caribbean
mythology are hurricanes fed by
the wrath of Hu-Ra-Khan the wind-
god, have also brought great
suffering to the peoples of the
Antilles. Thirteen of them were
recorded in the 17th century, 33 in
the 18th, 28 in the 19th, and in this
century their number is higher still.
The havoc wreaked by some
particularly devastating cyclone has
left a gaping wound in the
collective memory of every
Caribbean island.
and the monarchy. It speaks of freedom of
the will and of man's individual freedom, but
it does not speak of political independence.
By contrast, what the Negroes of Haiti were
demanding and in that respect they were
the precursors of all our wars of inde¬
pendence political independence and
total emancipation.
Many people may object that the Oath of
Bois Caiman was only taken in 1791,
whereas the United States had achieved in¬
dependence years before. Nobody would
deny this. It should not be forgotten,
however, that when the thirteen North
American colonies were freed from the
tutelage of the King of England and became
an independent nation no longer subject to
the British throne, there was no change in
the pattern of life in those colonies. The land
owners were the same and the great
property-owners and merchants continued
to live as they had before. It did not occur to
anybody that the slaves might be eman¬
cipated. Before that stage was reached,
they had to wait for the American Civil War.
In other words, it was business as usual in
the United States after the Declaration of
Independence.
This was not the case in Latin America,
however, since, after the revolts in Haiti,
which were followed shortly afterwards by
the wars of independence, culminating in
the final victory at the battle of Ayacucho in
1824, the structure of the social order and
social life changed completely with the
emergence of the créole, a figure who
already existed but had not been considered
of any political account.
Who was the creóle? The word creóle first
appeared in old American documents from
the 1570's or thereabouts. Broadly speaking
the Creoles were people born on the new
continent of America, either of mixed
Spanish-Indian or Spanish-Negro blood, or
else were Indians or Negroes born in
America but living alongside the colonizers.
The creóles, however, felt that they were
overlooked and neglected. In his Letter from
Jamaica, one of the most important
documents we possess concerning the
history of America, Simón Bolívar the
Liberator spoke in these words of the status
of the Creoles, including the more affluent
among them, in the times prior to the wars
of independence which he was instrumental
in promoting: "We were never Viceroys or |
Governors save for very exceptional I

treasons; we were seldom archbishops or
bishops, and never diplomats; we were
soldiers but no more than subalterns; nobles
without any real privileges. Lastly, we were
neither judges nor bankers, and we were
almost never merchants".
The history of America as a whole
displays one very important feature, namely
that it only developed in terms of the class
struggle. We have had no dynastic wars
over succession to the throne, as in the case
of Europe; there have been no internecine
wars like the Hundred Years' War (which
was a feudal struggle); we have had no
religious wars in the strict sense of the term.
Our constant struggle over several centuries
was first of all between the conquistadors
and the subjugated and oppressed in¬
digenous class. This was followed by the
struggle of the colonizers against the con¬
quistadors.
The colonizers, who arrived later, set out
to create an oligarchy and impose their
authority, and succeeded in destroying the
conquistador class, almost all of whose
members ended up in poverty or destitution
or were murdered or dispossessed of their
The machete, or long Antillean cutlass, is a
familiar object both in the workaday world
and in the landscape of the Caribbean
imagination. It is widely used for cutting
sugar-cane, for clearing paths, for pruning in
the banana plantation (left) and for topping
freshly-picked coconuts. It has also served as
a weapon in liberation struggles and is
wielded symbolically in certain dances (below).
»

lands. Very few of them lived out their lives
to a happy end.
The colonizers, become the aristocracy or
oligarchy, then turned against the creóles.
Eventually, with the coming of the wars of
independence, the native inhabitants of
America rose up against the Spanish. But
the conquering creóles in their turn created
a new oligarchy against which the slaves,
the underprivileged and the growing middle
class had to fight. This class included almost
all the intelligentsia intellectuals, writers,
professors and teachers, in short, that ad¬
mirable middle class that was to continue
growing throughout the nineteenth century
right up to the start of the present century.
In this phase of the struggle, which was to
continue until the middle of this century,
and is still going on, the sense of nationhood
of the American countries had begun to af¬
firm itself. In other words, after prevailing all
over the continent, the creóles began to
seek their own special identity and, at a later
stage, with the growing independence
movements in the Antilles, there arose an
awareness of being Jamaican, Martiniquais
or Curaçaoan, in short of being nationals of
the separate islands forming the vast Carib¬
bean world and of having characteristics of
their own and being conscious of them.
When we contemplate the entire span of
the Caribbean, we stand amazed at the
gallery of great men it has offered us over
the centuries men who have forged our
history. They show that there exists what
might be termed a "Caribbean humanism".
Our great men never confined their action or
thinking, or the example they set, to their
own orbit but projected themselves on to
the neighbouring peoples. There was both
an exchange of people and an ¡nterpenetra-
, tion of ideas. There has always been
amongst us a strong urge for mutual
understanding in the context of our com¬
mon aspirations.
Admiral Brion, who was from Curaçao,
supported Bolivar in the independence
struggles of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador,
Peru and Bolivia. Petion, the President of
Haiti asked Bolivar to abolish slavery in
Venezuela in exchange for his moral and
material support in the war. Máximo
Gómez, who won independence for Cuba,
was a Dominican. The parents of the Maceo
brothers, who fought in the Cuban in¬
dependence struggles, had taken part in the
war of independence of Venezuela. And a
Cuban, Francisco Javier Yanes, signed
Venezuela's act of independence. The great
José Marti, the apostle of Cuba's in¬
dependence, whose eventful political and
historical career took place against the
backdrop of the entire Caribbean, bequeath¬
ed us many moving pages, imbued with a
sense of truth and profound love, on
Venezuela, Guatemala, Mexico, and the
countries of the Caribbean in general.
Through this exchange of people and
community of ideas, the mainland areas of
Mexico, Venezuela and Colombia, which
were peopled by African slaves in the same
colonizing process, as were Peru, Guayaquil
and Brazil, ultimately came to form part of
the Caribbean conglomeration which we are
now beginning to perceive and understand
in its entirety, as we compare what unites us
and what makes each of us unique, our
similarities and our differences, the birth¬
right of the individual and the common
heritage of us all.
B Alejo Carpentier
fitt
Perched almost a thousand metres above the Caribbean on a
rugged headland in northern Haiti, the citadel of Laferrière,
above, was built as a bastion to defend the newly independent
country against possible invasion by returning colonialist
forces. General Henri Christophe, one of the leaders of the
victorious national uprising, initiated the construction of the
imposing fortress in the early 19th century. Twenty thousand
men are said to have worked for nine years on the project,
depicted in naive painting below. This symbol of the liberation
of Haiti, already seriously damaged by an earthquake in 1842, is
today threatened by adverse climatic conditions, humidity and
encroaching tropical vegetation. At the request of the
Government of Haiti, the Director-General of Unesco, Mr.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, launched an appeal on 10 March 1980
for the safeguard of the cultural heritage of Haiti, calling on the
international community to express "the brotherhood of men
through the dialogue of their cultures".
