w
Photo Charles Harbutt © Parimage, Paris



Crucible of change
by René Depestre
THE map of the Caribbean is the stuff
that dreams are made of. At this
cross-roads of the planet, history has
given rise to especially complex centres of
civilization, with the baroque, the picar¬
esque, the magical, the epic and the
marvellous intermingling and criss-crossing
one another with equal exuberance at the
political, social, religious and cultural levels.
Their five centuries of existence afford suffi¬
cient perspective for us to be fully aware of
and to identify, within the West Indian ar¬
chipelago, a family of peoples and cultures
formed in the mould of history. These
RENÉ DEPESTRE, Haitian author, has published
several volumes of poems, essays and fiction in¬
cluding Un Arc-en-ciel pour l'Occident Chrétien
(published in English as A Rainbow for the Chris¬
tian West, University of Massachusetts Press,
1977) and Poète à Cuba, (Poet in Cuba). He has
collaborated on two collective works produced by
Unesco, Africa en América Latina ("Africa in
Latin America") and América Latina en sus Ideas
("Latin America through its Ideas"), and is cur¬
rently a member of the Unesco secretariat.
peoples and cultures were moulded, on the
one hand, by the diversity and concordance
of the material and spiritual conditions of life
under colonization and, on the other, by the
ardently pursued fight for freedom and
liberation from those conditions.
For a long time our islands, the frontiers
of five distinct empires, were defined, not in
terms of their own intrinsic realities, but in
relation to Europe, Africa and the other
Americas. Today, however, it is possible to
study, interpret and understand from within
the internal system of values proper to our
societies. The Caribbean is intensely present
on the world scene in all its problematic
singularity, its music, its arts and letters, its
identity crises, and its dynamic thrust
towards change.
Prior to their encounter in the western
hemisphere, those peoples involved in the
colonizing experience knew nothing of one
another. This ignorance of their spiritual and
physical characteristics facilitated the pro¬
cess of ontological misrepresentation which
typifies the course of their history. The
natives of the islands knew nothing of the
Europeans or the Africans; conscious of be¬
ing Arawaks, Siboneys, Tainos, Caribs,
their surprise was, therefore, all the greater
when they heard themselves suddenly refer¬
red to generically as Indians!
It was not too long before a similar
semantic anomaly affected the self-image of
the Yorubas, Bambaras, Ibos, Mandingos
from Africa south of the Sahara as a result
of their deportation under the existential
travesty of being blacks', negroes or col¬
oured people. Moreover, this tendency to
identify members of the species "racially"
had disguised as whites peoples who had
their own ethnic specificity as Spaniards,
French, English, Dutch, Portuguese etc. In
the context of the American colonies,
necessity wore a white mask. The ignominy
and violence of this racial antagonism com¬
pounded the universal conflict of master and
slave, settler and native. Prospero and
Caliban.
From this time on, the somatic features
and physical appearance of Africans, Euro¬
peans, and natives of the Caribbean con¬
stituted so many social signs which served
to identify the relationship of domination
and dependence between conquerors and
their victims. It became standard practice to
argue for a cause and effect relationship bet¬
ween skin colour, the facial structure of dif¬
ferent human groups and the particular i
forms of insertion into nature and society. I
16

I M
<^c
Dancing is so much a part of voodoo, the folk religion of the
people of Haiti, that the Swiss ethnologist Alfred Métraux
classified the cult among the "danced religions". In voodoo
ceremonies (above) an active part is played by initiates known as
hounsis (a word from the Fon language of West Africa meaning
"wife of the god") who constitute with the male priests (houngan)
and the priestesses (mambo) a fellowship devoted to the cult of
the loa or spirits. Each loa has its own distinctive pattern of
drumbeats and its own dances of African origin such as the
boumba, the gabienne, the calenda and the nago grand-coup.
During the dance the women often seize the hem of their dress
with both hands and raise and lower it slightly in time to the
rhythm. The attributes of the loa are depicted in symbolic designs.
the vévé, whose outlines are traced on the ground by sprinkling
flour, ashes, coffee grounds or brick dust. Shown below are three
metal vévés. The heart without dagger (left) is the magic attribute
of the goddess Erzulie-Dantor, queen of beauty and love, protector
of homes and fresh-water ponds. The goddess Ayizan la-Grande
(centre) must be invoked at the beginning of every voodoo
ceremony. Like her husband Atibon Legba, the Haitian lord of the
crossroads and the meeting of the ways, she watches over doors,
houses, public places and markets. Vévé at right is that of the
marassa or twins, which have an honoured place in voodoo and
are connected with the rain. Like the other loas they belong to
various African peoples.
17

k Because of this reduction of the social and
"cultural conflicts of colonization. to racial
factors, the human essence of workers
belonging to the different ethnic groups of
Africa was itself reduced to the absurd
notion of the natural-inferiority-of-the-
negro, while the human essence of the set¬
tlers from the different nations of Europe
was elevated to the no less extravagant no¬
tion of the natural-superiority-of-the-whites.
In short, it amounted to a mythological and
semiotic reductionism which supplied a
basis for the ease of conscience of the set¬
tlers who had freely left Europe, at the same
time that it debased and weakened the
states of mind of slaves brought by force to
the Caribbean.
This mental and physical "blocking out"
was preceded by that of geography.
Cheated of the fabulous East which he had
set out to find, Columbus gave the name
West Indies to the islands he took over. But
when the totality of "the lands discovered
on the other side of the Oceanic sea" were
being named, the star of Amerigo Vespucci
shone with a more brilliant light than that of
the Spanish Admiral, and these lands were,
therefore, called America. Everything took
place as if Europe, in order to carry through
its fantastic plans in the western
hemisphere, felt obliged to disguise at one
and the same time the field of operation of
its colonial activity and the realities of the
diverse protagonists engaged in it.
Thus, in common with the other countries
of the continent, the Caribbean's entry into
modern history took place under a false
identity. Disguised under a multiplicity of
masks, humanity in our regions acquired a
fresh consciousness of the forms, contours
and horizons of the planet. Europe's audaci¬
ty permitted it to reap the benefit of rich ex¬
perience in various agricultural, alimentary,
astronomical, naval and military fields. It
achieved a new mastery over land and sea;
and navigation, map-making, and evaluation
of distances, currents and winds advanced
accordingly.
The plantation system represented the
economic axis of this progress. The Por¬
tuguese had already tested this system on a
modest scale on the island of Sao Tomé.
Within the West Indian archipelago it under¬
went a spectacular expansion as a result of
the slave-trade and the boost this gave to
the production of sugar, tobacco, coffee,
cotton, cocoa, indigo and spices. Moreover,
the African biological fuel enabled interna¬
tional commerce and mechanized industry
to profit to the fullest extent from the
technological innovation of the first in¬
dustrial revolution as applied in the planta¬
tion economy, namely, the steam engine,
energy transmission, original lubrication
methods, improvement of windmills, etc.
For three centuries during which it function¬
ed as the energizing force of the world
market, the production of the West Indian
plantation was one of the essential
mechanisms for the accumulation of capital
and one of the historical causes of the scien¬
tific and cultural success of the West.
To expedite this success, Europe tried
first of all to "deculturate" the Indian and
African manpower. Itself a territory of cross¬
bred peoples produced by the Graeco-Latin
and Judaeo-Christian symbiosis, Europe
feared, nonetheless, the consequences of
cultural cross-breeding in the Americas.
But, in order to advance its commerce and
industry, it required an army of strong-
18
armed servants rather than an orchestra of
coloured Graeco-Latins interpreting the
spirit of their ancestors on the hills of the
new world.
Representatives of what they considered
to be a divinely-sanctioned political, social
and cultural order, the Europeans had no in¬
tention of assimilating exotic models to their
cultural heritage. They assumed that the
Yoruba, Fon, Fanti-Ashanti and Congolese
gods would efface themselves before the
Catholic saints because all that was not
white was barbaric or savage. Consequent¬
ly, the descendants of Africans were invited
to forget all about their past, to take leave of
their own imaginations and identity, and to
acquiesce in the dulling of their own con¬
sciousness and sensibility.
Fortunately, the socio-cultural process
reserved for the Caribbean took another
route. The new peoples formed in the Carib¬
bean melting-pot did not entrust themselves
to the providence of empires in order to
forge the essential elements of a new identi¬
ty. Caught up in their own problems and
trapped in the "racial" myth, they did not
believe that all that they had to do to pass
from "barbarism" to "civilization" was pure¬
ly and simply to imitate the behaviour, arts
and customs of Europe.
Cultural anthropology has made much of
the acculturation of the descendants of
Africans to European models and symbols.
Above all, it has advanced the idea of
"reinterpretation" according to which the
"African mentality" is seen as having re
mained unchanging in its relationship to
work, law, religion, the family, and liberty
throughout the long Caribbean process of
r cultural cross-fertilization.
This phenomenon required the historical
inputs and creative energies of the descen¬
dants of both Africa and Europe. The
cultural contribution of the slave africanized
the consciousness and the se the
mind and the body of the colonizer. In the
same way, the innovations of the latter
europeanized the African imagination. This
gave rise to a dynamic mutation of identities
which is perfectly summed up in the con¬
cept of creolization found in West -Indian
societies.
This notion of Creolism is fundamental in
all that has to do with the knowledge, inter¬
pretation and understanding of historical
phenomena in the Caribbean. The African
and European heritage, transformed by the
social metabolism of the plantation regime,
culminated in original ways of thinking, feel¬
ing, acting and dreaming. As a result of the
mixing of cultural elements inherited from
the two continents, along with the pre-
Columbian contribution, the Caribbean
became that New World imagined too soon
by Columbus, at the moment when his
Europe was feverishly engaged in applying
its masks to the history of other continents.
The originality of the Caribbean and Latin-
American world in general is the result of a
sustained cross-breeding which enabled the
oppressed peoples of the region to discover
themselves by tearing away little by little all k
the masks of colonization. r

In Haitian voodoo, the Ogou
(known as Ogun in the
candomblé religious ceremony
of Brazil and the santería of
Cuba) are a family of spirits or
divinities (loas) whose members
are blacksmith-gods. The name
of Ogou is often found
associated with others, (such as
the names of saints), reflecting
the syncretism of African beliefs
with those of Europe and of the
pre-Columbian world. Opposite
page, at the festival of Ogun at
Undo (Nigeria) a priest has
draped around his neck a snake,
one of the god's favourite
animals. Chango (the Shango of
Brazil and Trinité) is another loa
of Haiti and one of the most
popular gods of Caribbean
mythology. The god of storms
and hurler of thunderbolts, he
also protects the fertility of
women and passes through
cyclones and flooded rivers
unscathed. Left, a fire-bearer
joins in the festival of Shango at
Ede (Nigeria).
Left, a painting from Haiti
depicting the festival of Agoué-
Taroyo, lord of the sea and the
isles, fresh water, rivers, lakes,
ponds and springs. He often
appears to the faithful in the
form of a fish. Among his
symbols is a small sailing ship
which can be seen on the altars
of voodoo temples (houmfors)
and which is carried amid great
ceremony during the festival in
his honour.
19

k Who, then, are these Caribbeans who
never allowed themselves to be Graeco-
Latinized? What is it that characterizes them
by contrast with Europe, Africa, the other
Americas, and the rest of the world?
Today it is easier to describe the condition
of our societies than in 1815 when, in the
eyes of Simón Bolívar, such an undertaking
appeared "at one and the same time extraor¬
dinary and terribly complicated." Since that
time the peoples concerned have
themselves decided to put an end to the car¬
ving up of their history effected by suc¬
cessive interventions of the colonial sword.
They have looked for, and some have even
found, adequate responses to the identity
conflicts which the natives of the Caribbean
have had to face since the struggles for
liberation sustained by such men as Tous¬
saint Louverture, Simón Bolívar, José Martí,
Marcus Garvey and Peralte.
Today in the Caribbean, new
methodological tools exist which permit the
re-evaluation of the history of our societies.
New conceptual frameworks enable us -to
avoid the ethnocentricity which consisted in
bringing all reflection back to the a priori
judgements contained in the ideologies of
colonialization. The tenacious "racial"
preconceptions which weighed so heavily
on the concepts of anthropology and
historiography are in the process of losing
their appeal thanks to interdisciplinary
research which has made possible an ex¬
haustive knowledge of the extremely com¬
plex historico-cultural processes which ex¬
plain both the astonishing diversity and the
unquestionable unity of cultures in the
Caribbean new world.
Much more is now known of the history
of the movements of resistance to coloniza¬
tion which many generations of Maroon
negroes inspired from 1519 up to the end of
the nineteenth century. The works devoted
to the Republics of the Maroons have
destroyed the myth of the supposed spirit of
resignation which, it was assumed,
characterized the African slaves. It has been
found, in fact, that the presence of the
Maroons not only represented a social and
political phenomenon, but also signified a
spiritual activity which permitted workers on
the American plantations to create for
themselves a new set of values in religion,
magic, music, dance, popular medicine,
creóle languages, cooking, oral literature,
sexual life, the family and many other areas
of social life.
In quest of a new existential basis for their
identity, the slaves of the Caribbean took
over and redirected the dynamism implicit in
the anguish of the "negro condition" which
had been invented for them, and thereby
cultivated in themselves the universal sense
of liberty. They discovered in the process re¬
joinders to the crises which threatened to
dull or to efface their social consciousness
and their sensibility. Like their predecessors
in the Roman Empire, they imagined native
religions of defence endowed with symbolic
and mythological structures corresponding
to their unfulfilled desires as terribly
humiliated and oppressed men.
This cultural influence of the Maroons did
not make- itself felt with equal force in all of
the areas of life and culture. The languages
of the masters were not pervaded
everywhere by Maroon influence, even if the
very real impact of African languages has
been noted in the case of the Spanish and
the Portuguese of the Americas. With the
20
exception of the creóle languages of Haiti,
Martinique and Guadeloupe, the papiamen¬
to of Curaçao and Aruba, and the West In¬
dian and Guyanese "Pidgin" jargons, the
Maroon influence on European idioms did
not become general.
Similarly, the juridical traditions of West
Africa, along with the political and
economic modes of thought proper to the
pre-colonial societies of the African conti¬
nent were stifled. Techniques and arts such
as iron-working, weaving, and statuary,
sculpture in wood and ivory, and other ex¬
pressions of the African genius, were lost
sight of because of the "purely socio¬
economic sensibility" of colonial America.
The historical effects of the Maroon ac¬
tivities were not enough, either, to exorcize
"Uncle Tom" attitudes, the fear and the
shame of being "negro", the inferiority com¬
plex, imitative behaviour, and the forms of
social ambivalence characteristic at times of
the way in which Caribbeans behave.
To be sure, the slave-traders of the
economic traffic have disappeared from the
scene, but even in this period of active
decolonization certain "elites" are, alas,
engaged in imitating with tragic results the
institutional models of empires old and new,
as well as parodying mental processes com¬
pletely opposed to the specific outlook and
attitudes of those who live in our islands.
Nevertheless, the facts are there: a
general renewal of mind and sensibility is
winning out over the phenomena of colonial
recurrence. Memory and imagination are
busy finding new functions for the cultural
heritages which our peoples have patiently
incorporated into their everyday life, their
work, and their most secret dreams.
The Caribbean basin which a
Manichean vision of history presents as
lands in flames surrounded by a boiling
sea is in the process of living a new
chapter in its historic adventure. At last free
to assume its own identity, the archipelago
in its totality has something of its own to ex¬
press and is doing it with vigour in every
field of thought and action. Indeed, the data
of history, ecology, society, play, politics
and religion frequently take on an epic
dimension in the life, as well as in the
cultures of the region.
As to the literary and artistic activity of the
Caribbean, it is characterized by a sensibility
which is Dionysian, solar and dream-like all
at once, and which brings together within
the same compass picaresque realism and
popular surrealism. A dazzling gulf exists
between the human being and his Caribbean
environment: the elemental joie de vivre (in
spite of atrocious social misfortunes) is
found side by side with the almost erotic
pleasure produced by a harmony of sounds,
colours and forms. In this respect, and
without underestimating the role of
literature and the plastic arts, music oc¬
cupies in the Caribbean the first place in the
aesthetic apprehension of lived experience.
The Caribbean bow will one day break the
last side of the triangle within which colonial
commerce has hitherto enclosed its destiny
and release, in every direction where
fellowship beckons, its arrows of music, art,
fiction and poetry. On that day the world will
learn that the disorders of history and
geography can be transformed into a state
of health reflecting both the imaginative life
and real experience of societies.
H René Depestre
