Teachers, disciples and the
by Mohammed Allai Sinaceur
The madrasah ("school") was the university of the Islamic world in
the first centuries of the Hijra. The curriculum was based largely on
the Qur'an, the Hadith (see boxes pages 8 and 9) and Islamic
theology and law, but other disciplines were also taught such as
grammar, literature, mathematics, and sometimes medicine (with a
hospital being attached to the madrasah). Education was free in the
madrasah, which was supported by the system of waqf (pious
endowments), and students were awarded bursaries and provided
with lodgings. The teacher lectured from a pulpit while his pupils sat
in a circle around him. Below, the great mosque of Qarawiyyin at
Fez (Morocco) is the centre of one of the world's oldest universities,
founded in 245 AH/859 AD. It stands in the heart of the Medina (old
city). In 1960 the university's teaching activities were transferred to
buildings outside the old city.
THE Qur'an is one of the most beauti¬
ful hymns to knowledge. It invites
study, harmonizes mystery and rea¬
son, and exalts those who meditate on the
creation and are just towards their fellow
men. All these themes are brought together
at the beginning of the LV Surah, "The Mer¬
ciful", which reads:
"It is the Merciful who has taught you
the Qur'an. He created man and taught
him articulate speech. The sun and the
moon pursue their ordered course... He
raised the heaven on high and set the
balance of all things, that you might not
transgress it. Give just weight and full
measure."
The gift of language in a universe govern¬
ed by order and moderation and the quest
for honesty and justice in dealings between
menall these are different expressions of a
single design. And it is through the Qur'an
whose spirit permeates a whole system of
learning that the Muslim receives his first in¬
itiation and gains his first apprehension of
the world. The knowledge generated by the
Qur'an reassures and liberates because it
shows the way to the comprehension of
things, to self-knowledge and recognition of
others.
It is therefore a special kind of knowledge
which frees man from the debilitating quest
for absolute truth, which recognizes that
progress is a continuing process and that its
meaning and ends are justified only by the
benefits it brings to humanity. The ideal of
the perfect man wholeheartedly and
unhesitatingly defending the rights of God
and persevering in the performance of his
duties lies at the heart of the extraordinary
flowering of culture and the all-
encompássing curiosity that incorporated
and assimilated the wisdom and skills of
past civilizations.
The exigencies of learning and the
demands of humility are linked in the obliga¬
tion to learn and to know, to understand and
to pass on the results of research and
knowledge, as is symbolically expressed in
the parable of Moses related in the Surah of
the cave.
According to tradition, Moses claimed to
be the wisest among men. He came to
realize his temerity when he met al-Khidr,
"one of Our slaves to whom We had given
of Our grace and of Our knowledge". (A
slave, according to the Qur'an, is a man who
fulfils his religious obligation, a pious man,
who is the slave only of God and to whom is
MOHAMMED ALLAL SINACEUR, head of
Unesco's Division of Philosophy, was formerly a
department head at the French National Centre of
Scientific Research and later professor of socio¬
logy at Hassan II University in Casablanca
(Morocco). A member of the Academy of the
Kingdom of Morocco, he has published a number
ofarticles, notably on philosophical questions and
the history of mathematics.

ethics of learning
granted saving powers of mind, will and
word.) What better reward for the passion
of learning, what better fulfilment for the
duty of knowledge than this pious man's
meeting with Moses, who came upon him
after a difficult quest!
"Moses says to him: Can I follow you on
the true path, so that you may teach me a lit¬
tle of what you have been taught?" The no¬
tion of path is akin to the modern concept of
method. But here the method is a path, not
a ready-made formula for a solution. It is a
way to be followed, a road along which one
is led and to which one asks to be led.
The master, "Our slave", answered: "You
will not be patient enough with me. How
should you be patient when you do not
understand?"
Learning calls for patience. Nothing is
learned in haste. Learning means suspen¬
ding one's judgment for a while. But the
master does not refuse to teach, nor does
the disciple scorn to follow. For both, the
teaching relationship is maintained not by
hierarchy but the difference of function.
Moses said: "If God so wills, I shall be
patient and not disobey thee." Though
Moses was a prophet and knew all that
.divine science could teach, he received this
answer: "If you follow me, ask me no ques¬
tion unless I speak first."
A lesson in listening, but also and above
all an exercise in the virtue of silence.
Silence is a form of wisdom that few people
practise. Without it one cannot reach one's
inner self, and if one does not know one's
self one is deaf to the words of others. This
is the meaning of the parable: for the Qur'an
the master/disciple relationship symbolizes
the quest for knowledge at whatever price;
the patience required to achieve it; the
spiritual discipline needed to assimilate it;
and meditation on its consequences.
The parable also teaches that insight en¬
tails foresight, and that the consequence of
the act of knowing is part of the act itself.
All teaching is seen in an ethical context.
And the ethic holds good for all knowledge,
sacred or profane, legal or medical,
technical or theoretical. It is the basis of
every method of acquiring and imparting
knowledge.
The frequency of the terms to know, to
learn, to teach, and the amount of literature
about them show the importance of
knowledge and its diffusion in Islam, as well
as the realization that knowledge is bound
up with human and social responsibilities
and that the teacher's role, therefore, is
always more ethical than technical. Hence
the universal value for man of knowledge
which affects his destiny, his fulfilment and
the conquest within himself and outside
himself of the dialectics of change.
The teacher/pupil relationship must
therefore be exemplary. It is modelled on the
transcendental God taught Adam and its
meaning is confirmed by revelation; the Pro¬
phet, God's Messenger, is first and foremost
a teacher, the mu'a/im, we are told, of an
almost illiterate and innumerate community.
Prisoners were set free if they taught ten
Muslim children to read. And the Suffah
mosque, built when the Prophet came to
Medina at the beginning of the Hijra, whose
anniversary we are now celebrating, was the
first institution to teach "the Book and the
Wisdom".
The unique quality of Islam is that it
preserved both the transcendent and the
human reference of knowledge by combin¬
ing faith and knowledge without restricting
the latter to revelation or if such a distinc¬
tion can be made making it subservient to
revelation's ends.
The logic inherent in faith teaches that
"truth can be distinguished from
falsehood", that it leads "from darkness to
light" and embodies the rights of God and
the rights of man, religion and scholarship.
Hence the extraordinary versatility of the
root "Urn" in the verb "to know" and its
derivatives which can be applied at all levels
and to all disciplines.
Islam's originality lies not only in the ex¬
ceptional importance it attaches to
knowledge, but also in the ceaseless quest
for learning perceived and defined as a com¬
mon heritage which no man may
monopolize. Nothing is more foreign to'
Islam than a system that limits the use of
knowledge or restricts its circulation submit¬
ting the flow of scientific or technical infor¬
mation to the needs of the market, of effi¬
ciency and profitability.
The belief that knowledge is designed for
the entire community obliges the scholar to
pass on his learning to all those who seek it. ]
- tu* *i4
u
vi
1 1 IT
uli j 111
I I ! Ill
III III
¿ * *%* V«,
[#Là '4Mb
^5jEf-s
ill», ^5 ^J
^»
A
Be'*"1
Photo © Malaysian Embassy, Paris A lecture In progress at the University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur.
35

-That it represents a legitimate aspiration is
shown in this appeal by one of the prophets:
"Lord, increase my knowledge." That the
scholar is worthy of respect is implied in this
question: "Are they who know equal to
those who know not?", and the Qur'an also
bids us heed the scholar: "If you do not
know, ask of them who do.".
Knowledge, moreover, signifies a never-
ending learning process, an infinite possibili¬
ty of improvement and progress. Islam
tends to concentrate less on speculating
about the nature of knowledge and on
evolving a science of knowledge than on
making it a "productive" reality, more im¬
portant for what it aims at and for the
changes it brings about than for what it is.
The fundamental relationship established
between knowledge and action is based on
Right, pupils in this rural primary
school in Afghanistan learn to read and
write and acquire a grounding in
religion by learning verses from the
Qur'an read out by their teacher. They
are also taught geography, natural
sciences and maths.
Photo © Laurence Brun, Paris
Students at work in a physics
laboratory in Omdurman, Sudan.
Photo Jean Mohr, Unesco
this concept. Any act that contradicts
knowledge calls knowledge itself into ques¬
tion. This idea is expressed in the popular
saying: "Knowledge unapplied is like a
cloud without rain". Though the delights of
learning for its own sake are often proclaim¬
ed, knowledge must also be useful in the
widest sense, serving the spiritual, intellec¬
tual or material needs of mankind. For
reciprocity between diverse elements is part
of the spirit of Islam, which combines
secular education (adab ad-dunia) and
religious education (adab ad-din) without
losing sight of the difference between them.
Science and technology must be guided
by practical principles compatible with
man's destiny and the preservation of the
heritage entrusted to him as God's lieu¬
tenant on earth, as the vessel of revelation
responsible before God for Nature as well as
for himself, since he has accepted the
awesome honour of this mission before
which "the mountains themselves drew
back".
Knowledge was also inseparable from
education, the paideia of the ancient
Greeks. The notions of 'ilm (knowledge/
science) and of 'adab (humanistic or moral
training) are always related, as is shown by
their derivatives ta'lim and ta'dib, signifying
respectively education resulting in
knowledge, and education as a way to
enlightenment and to moral elegance. In
other words: well-founded knowledge and a
high sense of social obligations, an ideal
which unites the defence of God's rights
and the demands of life on earth. Or again:
all that is needed for the complete develop-
Üt&
£jr~

ment of man's moral and intellectual
personality.
The 'alim, or man of learning, was a
teacher before being a specialist.
Knowledge cannot be reduced to informa¬
tion acquired from books and other sources.
The teacher played such a vital role in the
educative project of the community that the
Qur'an exempted him from fighting in time
of war. For the Muslim, he embodied an
ideal that raised education and knowledge
to the status of a social ethic and aesthetic.
As a VI /12th century author expressed it:
"Knowledge without education is like a fire
without fuel; 'adab without knowledge is
like a mind without a body."
The master was a living example of what
he taught, committed to the message he
transmitted, a motive force for social change
insofar as he himself was capable of change.
One can see why folk wisdom has preserved
the idea that knowledge proceeds out of the
mouths of men provided, of course, that
such men be wise, accomplished and wor¬
thy to serve as an example. Above all, one
can see that education is not just a diligent
and studious apprenticeship but a socializ¬
ing processa training for living and being
which is not limited to fighting ignorance
but reforms the spirit, teaches it to be serene
and spares it the torments of anxiety and all
vain questings of the soul.
Thus Ibn-Hazm, seeking a goal that
everyone could aim at, discovered only one:
to rid oneself of anxiety or, as the Qur'an
puts it, to find tranquillity, serenity and
peace. Knowledge is the opposite, not only
of ignorance, but also of stupidity, impa¬
tience and unreason (humq); as stated in an
early Vlll/14th century manuscript of a
treatise on the superiority of knowledge over
intellect (Fi tafdil al-'ilm ala-l'aql), it is
serene, enlightened understanding much
more than an "academic and intellectual"
accomplishment.
Moreover, a distinctive feature of Islamic
education is that it considers the way
knowledge is transmitted to be as vital as its
substance, whence the importance of the
master/disciple relationship as an essential
component in the handing down and recor¬
ding of traditions. This explains the original
kind of "diploma", the ijaza, awarded by a
scholar to his disciple as a licence to teach. It
is a certificate granted not by an institution
but by an individual. Such a diploma was
given to the explorer Ibn Battuta at
Damascus in the year 726 of the Hegira by
the learned Zeinab, daughter of Kamal ed-
Din Ahmed, son of 'Abderrahim Al-Maqdisi.
Originally the ijaza was required only for
teaching the Hadith or sayings of the Pro¬
phet. In order to attribute a given saying to
the Prophet, the teacher had to have at his
command a chain of reliable sources. He
had also to be familiar with the traditions
concerning other works existing in several
versions, like Malik's classic work the Kitab
al-Muwatta, and with the ways in which this
information was handed on. The develop¬
ment of a methodology for ascribing books
to their authors made it possible to extend
the chain of evidence to nearly all important
texts. It was not enough to get knowledge
from books. One had to go to the sources,
obtaining suggestions and advice from the
scholar in person. This explains why
scholars travelled so widely, as well as
Islam's passion for knowledge and
understanding.
Unlike similar phenomena at the time of
the Renaissance, this eagerness to learn was
not inspired by a desire for geographical
conquest. Knowledge was not the concern
of Conquistadores. It meant learning from a
master, and the self-taught student had not
yet become respectable. The word tashif
means "falsification"; etymologically, it is
related to sahifa, the page of a book, and,
by extension, means someone who may use
incorrectly a word taken directly from a
sahifa. Learning acquired only from books
was therefore not highly regarded in any of
the sciences. Every journey into knowledge
was a spiritual quest in which the communi¬
ty of scholars was united in time and space;
it explains why Islam's method of appren¬
ticeship was a spiritual voyage much more
than a mere technical or intellectual process.
Implementation of the moral system
described in treatises on the duties of
teacher and taught, like that of al-Ghazali,
who lived at the time when education was
becoming institutionalized, was made easier
by the fact that the teacher was free from
administrative duties. He treated his pupils
as if they were his own children, com¬
municating to them his own delight in learn¬
ing. As intellectual functions were separate
from administrative tasks, teaching could be
independent and flexible, unclouded by the
fear of failure, and due account could be
taken of each pupil's natural learning rhythm
and rate of intellectual development.
For his part, the pupil was expected to
reflect on the questions he was asked, for,
according to the tafdil (see above), if one
understands a well-framed question one is
already half-way to its solution; the pupil
should be freed from material preoccupa¬
tions so as to devote himself entirely to
study and was entitled in this respect to help
from the community; he should avoid sterile
argument and hasty judgments, and be able
to sustain a discussion of conflicting view¬
points, weighing the force of different
arguments and developing a dialectical ap¬
proach; he should also be able to appraise
the value of knowledge in practical terms,
not allow himself to be discouraged by the
difficulties of study and respect his master
who would respect him as his own child.
The teaching ethic of Islam can be summ¬
ed up in one word: dialogue. It is a perfect
conversation between master and disciple,
because what the one says is coloured and
attuned by the attentive presence of the
other. This teaching method fosters critical
acuteness and envelops the subjects under
discussion in that ideal atmosphere which
makes debate one of the highest pleasures.
The ethic posits a world where there is
room for everything, including poetry,
which is more than a mere recreation. The
creation of the madrasah (originally a centre
for studying law) as a means of passing on
knowledge provided an institutional basis
for this teaching without diverting it from its
true purpose.
The madrasahs were not created to satisfy
the demands of a State ideology; they were
conceived first and foremost as an act
of piety. They solved the pupil's practical
problems of board and lodging and provided
teachers with a regular salary, but the
State's intervention did not interfere with
the schools' autonomy or with academic
freedom.
The symbol of this academic freedom was
the mosque, which had fulfilled this
teaching role since the beginning of Islam.
From the time of the Prophet, its classes or
halqa had been centres of learning, and so
they have continued to be until modern
times at the al-Azhar mosque, in Cairo, the
Qarawiyyin, in Fez, and the Zaytuna, in
Tunis, as well as in rural zawiyas and in small
local mosques which have always given
religious instruction.
These study circles where the scholar sat
side by side with the student and the
craftsman, all united in a common quest for
knowledge, existed in a wide variety of in¬
stitutions. Teachers and pupils first met in
the mosques the madrasah proper was
established only in the fifth century of the
Hijra (11th century AD). But in the mean¬
time "houses of wisdom" were created, the
first at the time of Mu'awiya I whose reign
began after the death of AN in 40 AH/ 661
AD, and who we are told "devoted much
time to study".
Houses of learning, libraries and obser¬
vatories multiplied, broadening the scientific
horizon of Islam, diversifying knowledge
and creating specialities without ever sever¬
ing links between the various sciences. A
house of wisdom equipped with a library
and run by a Shi'ite with a Hanafite scholar
as director of studies would provide oppor¬
tunity for interdisciplinary discussion. Such
meetings were also organized by the Majalis
al-Nazar or scientific councils composed of
jurists from various law schools, as well as
theologians and eminent traditionists.
Among specialized establishments, par¬
ticular mention should be made of the
madrasah where law (fiqh) was the chief
subject of study. It was the home of dars,
the law lesson. Originally, this took place in
the masjid or mosque-school. But, unlike
the madrasah, the masjid did not provide its
students with board and lodging.
More generally, any place of prayer, any
holy place, the tomb of a saintly person or a
place of pilgrimage could be a centre of
teaching. So could the zawiyas, centres of
study run by a brotherhood, that linked
together the poorest and the most far-flung
regions of the rural world through a network
of libraries and learning. This may explain
the surprising fact that there was less il¬
literacy before the colonial era than after it.
Foremost among the zawiyas were the
famous centre at Tamagrout in south
Morocco, the Ahmed Baba centre at Tim¬
buktu, in Mali, and the dara (schools) of
Senegal. They taught the Qur'an, law, tradi¬
tion, adab, grammar, logic and arithmetic.
For even specialized institutions could ac¬
cept only pupils already proficient in
humane studies and grammar.
The pupils could be children being in¬
itiated into religious and social life, town
artisans, craftsmen, potential faqihs
(theologians) or even masters' assistants.
The teacher or mudarris, was primarily a
specialist in law. He was assisted by a depu¬
ty or na'ib and by an under-master. Classes
took the form of lectures, or commentaries
on a text read aloud by one of the best
pupils and explained, discussed and analys¬
ed as to subject and form by the teacher ac¬
cording to his speciality law, tradition,
logic, reading and study of the Qur'an,
arithmetic, geometry and astronomy.
All these subjects were using the same
methods up till a few decades ago in the
mosques, masjids, cathedral-mosques or
universities, or institutions like the )
37

-Qarawiyyin, where the Malaki school held
sway, and the Zaytuna, which also taught
Hanafite law, not to speak of astronomy for
which there was a long tradition: one of the
last astronomical treatises dates from the
year 953 AH/1372 AD.
A popular practice in teaching was to use
didactic poems, with a commentary given
by the teacher. Some of these poems were
so highly thought of that they were
translated into Latin, like Ibn Sina's (Avicen-
na's) poem on medicine which begins by
praising God who has given all men access
to knowledge. Other poems dealt with
grammar, logic, arithmetic, etc.
It is because of this continuing educa¬
tional tradition and aim that Islam today is
not a civilization of the past. While recogniz¬
ing the value of other civilizations it has re¬
mained true to its own culture, to the ideal
of educability.
From the earliest initiation into the Qur'an
to the highest levels of study, the Islamic
educational system, which expressed the
scientific sensibility of a whole society, finds
in this dual approach a path toward the
universal and the assertion of its own identi¬
ty. Whatever changes may take place in the
system, and changes are taking place, they
are not dictated by the need to adapt, but by
the wish to strengthen and enrich itself, to
preserve and assimilate the best wherever it
may be found: God Himself revealed the
Qur'an through repeated manifestations in
the course of man's troubled history, a
history which is not a series of disconnected
events but a confrontation with the perils
that man must sometimes face for his own
good.
The Islamic ethic permeates the concept
of education. Underlying it is the idea that
man must change in order to change the
world, for God changes nothing in men until
they have changed what is in themselves.
This calls fora return to the generalization of
teaching, education and culture advocated
by Islam an essential precondition of any
attempt at progress or renewal.
Islam is not an inquisitorial religion; "I
have not been commanded to probe the
hearts of men", says one of the Prophet's
Hadith. It tends rather to exteriorize faith in
cultural and social life, establishing a com¬
munal, but not a mass, culture, that is both
responsible and inventive, ethical and scien¬
tific, and harnesses random progress to
achieve ordered change. For change must
have an object, a goal, that cannot be reach¬
ed by technical means alone, but only if one
enlists in its cause the human will, that spark
which carries man's future through from age
to age. No other light can guide those who
believe man is capable of achieving the
changes required of him. Like Moses in the
parable, we must learn that to man is given
little knowledge and perhaps much joy.
Mohammed Allai Sinaceur
38
