14
Toussaint Louverture
Haiti's tragic hero
Toussaint Louverture (1743-1803)


BROTHERS and friends, I am Toussaint
Louverture; my name is perhaps
already known to you. I am intent on
vengeance. I want liberty and equality to be
respected in Santo Domingo, and I shall
work until this goal is achieved. Join us,
brothers, and fight alongside us for the same
cause.
The man who, in 1793, at the age of fifty,
was addressing himself in these terms to his
unfortunate companions, had reached a
point in his life when he felt ready to give
himself completely to a task which
transcended that of his own destiny.
Toussaint Breda was born on 20 May 1743
in the residence of the same name, at the
place called Haut-du-Cap. He was a descen¬
dant of Gaou-Guinou, an African prince of
the Aradas group. His godfather Pierre Bap¬
tiste taught him how to read and write. The
French he learnt opened the way to such
works as the Commentaries of Julius
Caesar, the Reveries of Marshal Saxe, the
History of the Wars by Herodotus and above
all the famous Histoire Philosophique des
Indes by the Abbé Raynal. The latter work
represented an exceptional "opening"
(ouverture) for his imaginative genius and for
the name under which the slave of Breda
was to distinguish himself.
In addition, his familiarity with his
country's medicinal plants, and the
rudiments of veterinary science, which he
had acquired while working in the stables of
his master Bayon Libertat, enabled him to
exercise unquestionable influence over the
Maroon negroes of the mountains once he
had joined them. His small stature, taciturn
and fragile air, and ugly features cloaked a
great strength of character, combined with
outstanding powers of physical and mental
endurance which brought him phenomenal
success when directing the operations
which took place in Santo Domingo (Haiti)
from 1791 to 1803.
The principal historical claim to fame of
Toussaint Louverture is that he transformed
groups of Maroon negroes into a seasoned
and disciplined army of liberation. His con¬
summate skill in guerilla tactics, plus a
shrewd appreciation of when to com¬
promise, enabled him to exploit to the max¬
imum the colonial rivalries between the dif¬
ferent empires represented oh the political
and military stage of the Caribbean.
The closing years of the 18th century
brought eventful times to the colony of San¬
to Domingo where Toussaint Louverture had
set in motion the irreversible process of
emancipation. Toussaint was aware that the
new power directing France since the coup
d'état of the 18th Brumaire would put in
question the fragile conquests of the Haitian
Revolution. His fears were justified, for
Bonaparte lost no time in introducing a
decree which made it obligatory to place on
all the flags of Santo Domingo the following
inscription: "Gallant black people,
remember that the French people and only
the French people recognize your liberty and
the equality of your rights". Toussaint
Louverture reacted sharply to this measure:
"It is not", he said, "a circumstantial liberty
conceded to us alone that we wish, but the
unequivocal adoption of the principle that no
man, whether he be born red, black or white,
can become the property of his fellow-men."
"When Toussaint Louverture appeared on
the scene", Aimé Césaire has written, "it
was to take the declaration of the rights of
man literally, to demonstrate that a pariah
race does not exist, that there are no
marginal countries, and no people meriting
exceptional status. It was to embody and
particularize a principle."
Such a universal extension of the law was
quite unthinkable for Napoleon Bonaparte
who dispatched an expedition to Santo
Domingo under his brother-in-law General
Leclerc in order to re-establish slavery. Dur¬
ing the night of the 7th and 8th of June 1802
Toussaint Louverture fell into a trap set for
him by General Brunet. Conducted on board
the vessel Le Héros, he was taken to France
and captivity in the Fort de Joux in the Jura
mountains where, on 7 April 1803, he died of
hunger, cold and nostalgia. At the moment
of his capture he made the following declara¬
tion : "My overthrow means only that the
trunk of the tree of Black liberty has been cut
down. But that tree will grow upward once
more from its myriad and profound roots."
A few months after these prophetic
words, on 28 November 1803, Toussaint
Louverture's right hand man. General Jean-
Jacquès Dessalines, proclaimed the in¬
dependence of Haiti at Fort Dauphin. Such
was the combat of Toussaint Louverture, "a
combat for the transformation of formal law
into real law, a combat for the recognition of
man, and a combat, in short, which explains
why the revolt of the black slaves of Santo
Domingo found, and continues to find, a just
place in the history of universal civilization".
H René Depestre
