Special schools
or integrated education?
77. 'Our task
is to bring
the retarded
into the community
from which
they have been
excluded'
by Marten Söder
AT the end of the 1960s, normaliza¬
tion and integration became
widely accepted watchwords for
those concerned with the welfare of mental¬
ly handicapped children. According to this
new approach, the mentally retarded were
to enjoy the same conditions as other
children, living with them and attending
their schools. This outlook was largely a
reaction to the formerly prevalent view
which had resulted in the segregation of
mentally retarded youngsters in special
schools and institutions.
The integrationist viewpoint contrasts
sharply with its predecessor not only on the
measures to be undertaken on behalf of the
handicapped but on other important points,
such as the definition of what constitutes a
handicap. According to the segregationist
thesis, mental retardation is an absolute,
unalterable defect and nothing can be done
about it. Mentally retarded people are defec¬
tive and the appropriate action is to separate
them from the rest of society. Segregation is
in any case part of the natural order of
things.
The integrationist position, on the other
hand, stresses that handicaps are relative, in
the sense that they only exist in relation to a
MARTEN SÖDER, Swedish sociologist working
with the Swedish Centre for Working Life, has
been involved for the last 8 years with questions
concerning the mentally handicapped in Sweden.
He has also participated as an expert in con¬
ferences sponsored by the United Nations and
OECD. His doctoral dissertation, "Organization of
Services, Ideologies of Care and Integration", is
being presented at the University of Uppsala this
month.
given environment. This approach is coup¬
led with a more dynamic, optimistic belief in
the potential of mentally handicapped peo¬
ple than the static pessimism of the segrega¬
tionist view. It holds that integration is the
"natural" condition, and that segregation is
caused by social and political decisions to
separate the handicapped from the non-
handicapped. Such decisions attach a label
to the handicapped which stigmatizes them
and limits their possibilities of living a "nor¬
mal" life.
Since segregation is created by social and
political decisions, so the integrationist
argument continues, then integration can be
brought about when the authorities take
measures which separate the handicapped
as little as possible from the non-
handicapped. In schools one might imagine
a kind of sliding scale of integration whereby
a handicapped child in an ordinary class is
"more integrated" than he or she would be
in a special class, while a special class form¬
ing part of an ordinary school is "more in¬
tegrated" than a special school.
In Sweden, integration of the mentally
handicapped has taken the form of "facility
integration", whereby special schools have
been assigned classrooms in ordinary school
buildings, as opposed to "individual integra¬
tion" whereby individual handicapped pupils
are taught in ordinary classes. During the
1970s, facility integration took place at a
rapid rate, and today over 90 per cent of
Sweden's special school classes are in¬
tegrated on ordinary school premises.
Before examining how successful this ap¬
proach has been, let us first examine the
idea of integration and its implications,
especially as they appear in the Swedish
context.
Many writers who have studied the ques¬
tion have made a sharp distinction between
a superficial, "organized" form of mixing
handicapped and non-handicapped persons
and a more genuine and psychologically
meaningful integration which they often
refer to as "social integration". The latter
assumes that social relations will be
established between the two groups, and
some writers also stress how important it is
in this respect that handicapped persons
should feel a sense of security in their rela¬
tions with others.
This distinction calls into question a fun¬
damental assumption of the integrationist
position, the belief that handicapped per¬
sons are segregated from the rest of the
community primarily by the special educa¬
tional measures taken on their behalf. But
surely this ignores the possibility that
segregationist mechanisms may also exist in
the "normal" environments in" which the
handicapped person may be placed. Here
the integrationist viewpoint runs the risk' of
romanticizing the real world by regarding it
as a welcoming community in which de¬
viants are automatically accepted in a "nor¬
mal" context when decisions are taken to
place them there. In the desire to abolish
segregative measures taken by the
authorities, the segregative measures of the
real world may be overlooked.
This leads to another point on which the
integrationist position is vulnerable to
criticism. This is its assumption that the in-
20

Photo © Thomas Bergman, from Who Understands Us?, Liber publishers, Stockholm
tegration of mentally retarded children in
school is somehow synonymous with what
sociologists call their "societal integration",
their full integration into society as
adults or at any rate that there is no incon¬
sistency between these two processes. But
school, it might be argued, is not the same
as society. Integration Into the school,
therefore, cannot be the same as integration
into society. In response to this it is often
said that integration into school constitutes
a means to the end of societal integration.
One way of testing whether this is so in
practice is to examine the avowed alms of
schools regarding their mentally retarded
pupils. In the case of Sweden the results of
such an enquiry are illuminating. According
to Swedish law, special schools for han¬
dicapped children aim to "promote the
development of the pupils into harmonious
people and into competent and responsible
adults." In this respect there is no
divergence between the alms of the special
school and those of the ordinary com¬
prehensive school. However, other texts
relating to the curricula in the two types of
school tell a different story.
In the special school, the teacher is to
"endeavour to promote [the pupil's] per¬
sonal development", whereas in the com¬
prehensive school the aim is to "endeavour
to promote his personal maturity into a free,
independent and harmonious person."
Whereas the special school sets out to
"develop all aspects of the pupil, encourage
alertness, provide motivation for study and
work and promote emotional balance", the
pupils at the comprehensive school are to
"prepare themselves for their roles as active
citizens in the society of tomorrow." In the
special school, each pupil is to be brought to
"develop his various qualities and come to
terms with personal problems", whereas his
peers at the comprehensive school are "in
the long term to be a positively creative
power in the development of society."
This comparison between the aims of or¬
dinary comprehensive school education and
those of special school education makes it
clear that in Sweden at any rate the aims of
the special school centre more on the in¬
dividual than those of the ordinary school.
The special school sets out to produce well-
adjusted and "harmonious" mentally retard¬
ed adults who are able to cope with their
personal problems. The ordinary school sets
out to produce active, productive and
critical citizens who are capable of full par¬
ticipation -in society. Given this disparity of
aims, it is hard to see how integrating
special schools into the ordinary education
system can lead necessarily to societal in¬
tegration.
Another problem arising from the integra¬
tionist approach is its emphasis on social
goals at the expense of educational ones.
For although special education may not aim
at the societal integration of the handicap¬
ped, this does not mean that it has no aims
as regards the pupil's adult life. In order to
"promote the development of the pupils into
harmonious people and competent and
responsible adults", special demands are
made in the special school, such as "the
need to gear teaching to the individual level
and special characteristics of each pupil in
various areas of learning and training". The
special measures required consist of
creating smaller groups for tuition and pro¬
viding more resources than are usual in the
ordinary school system.
But these demands for specially arranged
learning situations always produce segrega¬
tion in some form or other. And so if we are
seeking to promote social integration, these
educational demands must be questioned.
Here there is an obvious conflict between
the alms of social integration and the educa¬
tional demands ensuing from the need to
produce "competent and responsible
adults". The integrationist view often
obscures this conflict of alms.
The conflict between educational and
social goals has not yet become acute in
Sweden, because integration has taken the
form of facility integration. This is one of the
conclusions which may be drawn from a
large-scale project to evaluate the integra¬
tion of special schools for the handicapped
into the ordinary school system which was
recently carried out by the department of
sociology at the University of Uppsala. A
number of different concepts, each describ¬
ing a different kind of integration, were for¬
mulated as a starting point for our studies.
We differentiated between four forms of in¬
tegration: physical, functional, social and
societal.
By physical integration we mean the
reduction of the physical distance between
the mentally retarded and the non-retarded.
By functional integration we mean the
reduction of the functional distance bet- 1
ween the two groups when they use dif- 1
21

, ferent equipment and resources. Functional
integration is therefore a question of the
joint utilization of resources.
Social integration entails a reduction in
the social distance between the two groups.
Social distance implies both lack of contact
and the psychological feeling of being cut
off. The mentally retarded are socially in¬
tegrated if they form part of a community
with non-retarded persons, come into
regular and spontaneous contact with them,
and feel themselves to be a natural part of
the group.
Societal integration refers to adults, as in¬
dicated above, and signifies that the mental¬
ly retarded have, as adults, the same access
to resources as others, the same opportuni¬
ty to influence their own situation, have a
productive working role, and form part of a
social community with others.
By using these terms we were able to
describe various aspects of integration in
terms of physical distances and of the extent
to which resources were jointly used by both
handicapped and non-handicapped. This
conceptual framework also enabled us to
bring into focus the problems involved in
relating physical and functional integration
on the one hand, and social and societal in¬
tegration on the other. And this, as shown
by the above critique of the integrationist
view, is a matter of particular urgency.
In Sweden, facility integration has first
and foremost taken the form of physical In¬
tegration. To some extent it has also involv¬
ed the special school and the ordinary
school making use of joint resources. Facili¬
ty integration has thus been associated with
a degree of functional integration.
Any more advanced form of functional in-
tegraiton in the shape of co-operation at the
teaching level has, however, been a relative¬
ly rare occurrence. With respect to social in¬
tegration, in general it can be said that this
has not taken place.
Thus one of the big question marks con¬
cerning the integration of special schools in
Sweden is why so little co-operation and
social contact has developed from the
"base" formed by facility integration. For
such co-operation is usually sporadic, con¬
sisting of joint activities of an exceptional
nature.
Nevertheless, school staff were con¬
sistently favourably disposed towards full-
scale co-operation between the two types of
school. From a study of fifty . integrated
schools, it emerged that approximately 80
per cent of teachers in both the ordinary and
the special school were in favour of co¬
operation in one of the practical subjects.
Even though there may be a difference bet¬
ween expressing a favourable attitude on a
questionnaire and accepting the conse¬
quences in practice, it would seem to be a
simplification to blame the low occurrence
of co-operation on lack of interest on the
part of the teachers.
Perhaps one reason why there has not
been more co-operation is that co-operation
has been regarded only as a subsidiary goal
of integration. Instead, the emphasis has
been laid on promoting physical integration
and the co-ordination of certain resources.
There has been surprisingly little discussion
of how facility integration affects the actual
educational work within the special school.
It is difficult to make any general
assessments about social integration in the
22
facility-integrated school. But it we were to
attempt to characterize the social relations
between special school and ordinary school
pupils, they might best be described as "ac¬
cepting indifference". The mentally retarded
pupils were, as a rule, accepted by their
peers in the ordinary school. There was vir¬
tually never any systematic harassment or
bullying. But more positive relations were
also uncommon. Facility integration has not
resulted in any actual social Integration.
However, the "normal" school environ¬
ment is in itself poorly suited to social In¬
tegration of the mentally retarded. Social
contact between pupils is largely along class
lines, and contact between school classes at
different levels ¡s uncommon. The lack of In¬
tegration of mentally retarded pupils must
be seen in this light.
Another factor which renders social In¬
tegration more difficult is that the special
schools have such large catchment areas.
"Normal" children attend the same school
as their friends at home, at least at the
primary and middle levels. By and large the
same children mix together at school and ¡n
their leisure time at home. Mentally retarded
pupils often have long journeys to school.
The non-retarded friends they have at home
go to other schools, and their friends at
school live near the school. This is a fact
which also makes it more difficult for men¬
tally retarded pupils in the same class to
meet during their leisure time.
The conflict between educational and
social goals really comes to a head,
however, where individual integration is In¬
volved the mentally retarded pupils
go into ordinary classes. This is generally
regarded as the most far-reaching form of
integration. Although the underlying
assumption is that putting a handicapped
child in an ordinary class automatically leads
to him or her becoming "socially
integrated", in a sense integration of this
type also means that the mentally retarded
pupil is confronted with the segregative
mechanisms existing in the class.
At the same time, when individual in¬
tegration is pursued, the conflict between
the possible gains that might be made ¡n
social relations and the educational
demands made by the curriculum becomes
manifest. The "normal" school environment
articulates and puts a premium on those
very intellectual achievements which the
mental disability of the retarded pupil does
not allow him to produce. As in the case of
social segregation, it ¡s the "normal" school
environment which operates in a segregative
manner.
Dictionary definitions of the term integra¬
tion tell us that ¡t means uniting separate
parts in a whole. According to the integra¬
tionist view, the detachment of the mentally
retarded as a "separate part" arises as a
result of social and political decisions and
the special educational measures which are
taken by the authorities. Our task, uniting
the parts into a whole, consists in bringing
the retarded into the community from which
they have been excluded. But this view
disregards the fact that segregation takes
place in our society and in our schools ir¬
respective of such official action: the educa¬
tional and social measures of segregation
are a part of the reality of the "normal"
school. The problems in what we have call¬
ed the integrationist view arise from a
refusal to accept that this is the case.
I Marten Söder
3 Photos Unesco. From a slide presentation of a Unesco project
on "Innovative information and examples of good practice
in education of the handicapped".
