High-speed
language learning
How to study while you 'sleep'
by Mira Vaisburd
TO master a foreign language well
enough for use as a means of com¬
munication is extremely difficult.
Nature and society provide children with the
conditions necessary for learning their
mother tongue, but it is impossible to
reproduce these conditions in adult life.
People are not, as a rule, faced with the
need to use a foreign language until they
have completed their education and have
embarked on their careers. While they are
still studying, it is a problem that appears
remote and not very real. Study of a foreign
language is thus most often undertaken out
of necessity.
Foreign languages are usually included in
secondary and higher education as part of
the general curriculum and the general
timetable, with no allowance whatsoever
being made for the special features of
24

Lithography Roland Topor © Topor-Olivetti
language learning. The result is that the
length of the language courses and the in¬
frequent contact between teachers and
students create conditions that are com¬
pletely contrary to the general principles
governing the acquisition of language skills.
In secondary schools, it is thus only possi¬
ble to learn the rudiments of a foreign
language, making further study necessary.
Studying a foreign language involves in
particular: (a) memorizing a very large
number of speech units, a large proportion
of which are difficult to classify; (b) master¬
ing these units thoroughly enough to be able
to use them automatically; and (c) learning
how to use these units in accordance with
the rules of the language, and using them in
a suitable way from the point of view of the
needs of communication.
Accelerated language-teaching involves a
considerable concentration of lesson time,
with at least four hours of lessons every day.
The purpose of this is to prevent students
from forgetting the chief danger when
learning a foreign language.
There are two main ways of accelerating
the teaching of foreign languages. The first
is to ensure that the content, methods,
organization and equipment used
correspond exactly with the objectives being
pursued. The second way is to exploit the
students' character to the full by introducing
personalized teaching. These two
approaches are closely related, but each has
its own peculiarities and sphere of
application, the first being within the
framework of traditional education, the
second being the use of new methods with
which we are concerned here.
Experiments have been made with
teaching during natural sleep, "hyp-
nopaedia", or in conditions of rhythmic
sleep induced by the use of a special ap¬
paratus, "rhythmopaedia", and with the im¬
parting of information to persons in a state
of relaxation, "relaxopaedia".
The method used most widely during the
past few years has been "suggestopaedia",
which exploits the functional reserves of the
brain by the use of suggestion, i.e. by the
use of composite suggestive action on the
student's personality.
Research on these methods is based on
observation of the fact that memorization is
quicker and easier when active control is
relaxed and when the role of the un¬
conscious processes in higher nervous ac-k
tivity is enhanced. }
25

< This research has shown that teaching by
hypnopaedic methods is two to two-and-a-
half times more effective than ordinary
methods. The process of memorization
comprises ordinary classroom lessons with a
teacher (forty-five minutes); listening to a
reading of the study programme and
repeating it out loud in bed, before going to
sleep (fifteen minutes); hearing the pro¬
gramme, played more and more softly, for
fifty-five minutes after falling asleep; hearing
it again, starting softly and growing increas¬
ingly louder, for twenty to thirty minutes
before waking up. The whole hypnopaedic
teaching programme was composed of
thirty-nine teaching units. As a result of this
course, 2,500 words, combinations of words
and basic models were assimilated.
A variant of hypnopaedia is
rhythmopaedia. A state of sleep is induced
in the student with the aid of an electro-
hypnosis apparatus which produces a
monotonous, rhythmic effect on the ner¬
vous system. The student is then fed with
information. It is possible, by varying the
frequency of the light and sound impulses,
to maintain in the student the depth and in¬
tensity of hypnotic inhibition most suitable
for the imparting of new
information.
Teaching during sleep has numerous ad¬
vocates, but even more numerous op¬
ponents. Doubts are expressed about the ef¬
fects that teaching in these conditions may
have'. But since hypnopaedia is used in con¬
junction with other teaching methods, and
the students always have a very strong
motivation for learning, it is impossible to
isolate the effect of the influence on the
student while asleep. Application of hyp¬
nopaedic methods presupposes special con¬
ditions, specially equipped premises, and a
special régime for those being taught.
But the most important objections come
from doctors, who maintain that tampering
with the sleep mechanism may disturb it and
provoke nervous disorders. On this account,
hypnopaedia has not been widely practised,
although research in this field has given
results that are certainly interesting from the
point of view of the possible intensification
of teaching.
Of greater popularity in the USSR is the
notion of teaching in a state of relaxa¬
tion and physical relaxation induc¬
ed by suggestion. Observations and ex¬
periments have established that memoriza¬
tion is easier in this state than in ordinary
conditions.
Through muscular relaxation and
autogenous training, students attain a state
of physical and mental calm in which they
are conscious of the weight and warmth of
the right arm. In this state, sensory percep¬
tion of factors extraneous to the information
presented is reduced, the brain is freed of
external inhibiting processes, attention
becomes more selective, and concentrates
wholly on the information presented.
Relaxopaedia is not regarded as a
separate method of teaching but rather as a
useful part of the normal teaching process
which speeds the assimilation of language
material and leaves more time free for
creative language-learning activities.
The average number of words students
are able to assimilate in the course of one
lesson is fifty to sixty. Data available show
that the best ratio of relaxopaedic to or¬
dinary teaching sessions is one to five.
A special method for feeding information
into the memory unconsciously has been
devised by Professor B. I. Khachapuridze, in
Tbilisi. By means of a special disc with a slot
in it, placed in front of the lens of a projec¬
tor, and rotating at a speed of seventy to
ninety revolutions per minute, the list of
words to be learned is shown on the screen.
The students are familiar with the words
and their translation, since they have already
been projected on to the screen in the or¬
dinary way, and read out by an announcer.
The students repeat these twice, with their
translation, after the announcer, and the
teacher explains any special points to be
noted about individual words. The list con¬
tains about thirty words.
The rapid rotation of the disc makes it im¬
possible to read these words when they ap¬
pear a second time on the screen, but the ef¬
fect of such a repetition is nevertheless very
considerable since memorization by
students using this method is, on average,
42 per cent better than with the ordinary
method only.
The term "accelerated teaching
methods"most frequently refers to the in¬
tensification of teaching through the use of
different kinds and forms of sug-
gestopaedia. Whatever differences there are
in the approaches adopted, they are all bas¬
ed on the idea of influencing students by
New techniques for speeding up language learning are used in this language lab at the
Maurice Thorez State Foreign Language Institute in Moscow. A dozen European languages
are taught at the Institute.
Photo L Pakhomova © APN, Paris
/
'M

This young student from
Uzun-Agach in Soviet
Kazakhstan is using a tape-
recorder to help improve her
English accent.
suggestion, evolved by a Bulgarian scientist,
Georgi Lozanov, director of the Scientific
Research Institute of Suggestology.
Suggestology is based on the principles of
joy and relaxation, and of the unity of the
"conscious and the unconscious". A special
atmosphere is created in the lessons a
climate of trust and joy which produces a
desire to learn and confidence in one's abili¬
ty. This is achieved by constant praise and
encouragement from the teacher, by the
choice of psychologically compatible work¬
ing pairs, and by informal classroom
arrangement.
The effect of suggestopaedic teaching
methods is that the learning situation ap¬
proximates to a very great extent to a non-
academic situation, and psychological bar¬
riers hindering natural behaviour are
eliminated. The formerly unused memory
capacity of a student is brought into play
and his mind and feelings are laid wide open
to the influence of the teaching with a clari¬
ty, trust and interest characteristic of
childhood. The adult stops feeling embar¬
rassed and willingly assumes the role pro¬
posed, naturally and unselfconsciously per¬
forming a large number of linguistic and
other exercises, and using new speech units
as freely as though he had been familiar with
them all his life.
However, the methodological assump¬
tions of suggestopaedia do not by any
means all find support. There is also
criticism of the results obtained with this
form of teaching. It is said that it leads to
ungrammatical use of language, that
students do not learn how to form new
sentences independently, and that they can¬
not read anything that they have not en¬
countered in oral practice.
To acquire these abilities, the very con¬
siderable emphasis on language mastery,
i.e. knowing the rules for using various
models in the language, is not enough-
Soviet educationalists note that language
skills are being formed with insufficient
linguistic experience and with no out-of-
class work at all, which means the pupil
does no independent work on the language.
The changes and additions being made by
Soviet educationalists to the sug¬
gestopaedic teaching system are designed
to eliminate these defects. Teachers and
theoreticians are trying to find a way of
combining, in accelerated courses, the living
language, games and music with the
rudiments of linguistics, without which
mastery of any language is inconceivable.
An accelerated language course may be
complete in itself or it may constitute a par¬
ticular stage in the process of learning a
foreign language. As complete cycles there
are, for instance, ten-month courses (full-
time) and two-year courses (part-time), for
qualified specialists.
These courses intensify the learning pro¬
cess by means of improved instruction by
using the best modern methods for the
teaching of foreign languages. Teaching
methods are selected with an eye to the
special characteristics of adult students,
who want to know the reason for everything
and are averse to purely mechanical work.
A short course on comparative Russian-
English grammar has thus been recently in¬
troduced for beginners in some institutions
(e.g. in the department for technical
students at the Maurice Thorez Moscow
State Foreign Language Institute). It is also
compulsory to include in the syllabus, either
at the beginning or at the end, a short stage
using suggestopaedic methods. This,
however, is replaced in some instances by
the use of relaxopaedic or rhythmopaedic
methods.
If suggestopaedic methods are used as an
independent course of study, it is either as
an introduction to independent language
work, enabling students to have confidence
in their own ability and to believe that
positive results are attainable, or as a form
of advanced training.
In the case of scientific workers, use is
made of what is known as total
immersion nine-day courses of eight to ten
hours of classes per day. These are designed
to brush up people's knowledge of a
language before setting off to a conference,
for instance; to demonstrate their ability to
use, in discussion, vocabulary accumulated
in the process of reading; or to give them an
oral foundation for the further study of a
foreign language.
The part played by accelerated teaching
methods should not, however, be thought
of as confined only to the contribution they
can make to the relatively small number of
people attending courses. The development
of these methods contributes to the
improvement of foreign-language teaching
as a whole.
This should take place within the context
of further improvements in the planning
system and in even fuller use of the potential
in higher education institutions in which, in
the Soviet Union, almost half of our
scientific specialists (doctors and candidates
for doctorates) are today concentrated.
MIRA VAISBURD, of the USSR, is Senior
Scientific Worker of the Institute of Scientific
Research on the Content and Methods of Educa¬
tion of the USSR Academy of Pedagogical
Sciences. The author gave a more extensive
treatment of the subject of this article in a study
published in Unesco's quarterly review of educa¬
tion Prospects (Vol. X, No. 3).
27
