The developing world
demands
a place in the sun by Abdou Moumouni Dioffo
THE developing countries of Africa,
Asia and Latin America are privileged
for the most part as regards renew¬
able energy resources the sun, the wind,
the heat gradient of the tropical seas and the
photosynthetic process in tropical forests.
This is an important asset and, in years to
come, it could lead to the development of a
global energy policy in which the in¬
terdependence of these countries will
guarantee their independence.
But harnessing solar energy in areas
where it is readily accessible calls for a
choice between different technological op¬
tions, and the countries concerned must ex¬
amine very carefully what the direct and in¬
direct repercussions are likely to be on im¬
portant areas of their national life such as
the economy, population distribution, land
use planning, and the choice of a model of
industrial development which, in the long
run, could change the course of their social
and cultural development.
Whether the applications of solar energy
are thermal, mechanical or electrical, the
selection of plant and equipment most likely
to promote economic, social and cultural
progress has first and foremost obvious
economic implications. According to
whether equipment is imported or produced
wholly or partly on the spot the national
economy has to face problems such as cur¬
rency shortages and economic dependence
on the exporting country or inability to meet
investment costs and uncertainty as to
the viability of the equipment under local
conditions.
The demographic implications are
generally less apparent. But where rural
solar equipment for pumping water, grind¬
ing flour and providing light and power for
domestic and community use is centraliz¬
ed, the population will tend to concentrate
round these points. And here lies a danger
for the country in question; exercising what
is supposed to be a purely technological
choice, it could very well end up as a cen¬
tralized society on the lines of the in¬
dustrialized nations, with all the accompany¬
ing social and cultural consequences.
Similarly the adoption of a technology
based on very powerful solar plants from
100 kilowatts to several megawatts is
bound to lead to concentrations of another
kind, where all the main economic and in¬
dustrial activities are grouped round places
equipped with energy-producing installa¬
tions. The type of society that will emerge is
likely to be a replica of the "consumer socie¬
ty", with moral values entirely alien to the
national culture. This represents a real threat
ABDOU MOUMOUNI DIOFFO, of Niger, is a
physicist who has been director of his country's
Office for Solar Energy (ONERSOL) since 1969.
Last year he was appointed rector of the Univer¬
sity of Niamey.

A portable solar still developed
and manufactured by the Office
of Solar Energy (ONERSOL) in
Niamey, Niger. Small solar stills
providing less than 200.000 litres
of water per day have an
important role to play in parts of
west Africa, such as the coastal
region of Mauritania and
northern districts of Mali and
Niger, where the water supply is
brackish. For larger installations,
however, there seems little
prospect at present of solar
desalinization installations
becoming competitive with
those using conventional fuels.
Photo Stambolis © Unesco. From Solar Energy for Educational Buildings, by C. Stambolis with P. Vastarais, Heliotechnic Press, London 1981
to the cultural identity of the peoples of the
developing countries.
Finally, as regards land use planning, a
whole complex of factors has to be taken in¬
to account so as to ensure the balanced
development of all sectors of the economy
(agriculture, stock-breeding, agro-food in¬
dustries and production of building
materials), as well as the wise use of natural
resources to safeguard the environment (in¬
cluding measures to limit or eliminate over-
grazing, deterioration of arable land and
destruction of the plant cover), and a ra¬
tional distribution of industry.
So, more than the type of technical pro¬
cess or even the size of plants, the model of
technological development must be taken
into account when establishing a national
strategy that will give solar energy a place
among accessible energy sources. The
stakes are enormous, since the
technological option selected can either
perpetuate the developing country's
dependence on imported science and
technology or promote the development of
a national capability. The provision of solar
plants on a turnkey basis and the so-called
"transfer of technology", as this type of
transaction is grandly termed, are a delu¬
sion. This must be clearly understood if
decisions are to be based on the country's
real development priorities and not on com¬
mercial considerations divorced from the
people's true interests.
The countries of Africa, Asia and Latin
America enjoy extremely promising natural
conditions for tapping the sun's power, but
because scientific and technological
research has lagged behind they sometimes
lack the know-how needed to develop solar
equipment. The industrialized countries, on
the other hand, are at a disadvantage with
regard to climatic conditions but possess the
industrial bases essential to such develop¬
ment. Genuine co-operation between the
two groups of countries both in scientific
and technological research and in industrial
production is therefore a prerequisite for the
efficient utilization of solar energy to benefit
millions of people in the rural areas of the
Third World.
In the developing world the level and main
trends of solar energy research vary con¬
siderably from one country to another.
Though a great deal of interest has been
generated in this field, the activity of
research institutions often stagnates,
because human and financial resources are
in short supply, and researchers work in
isolation. In such cases it is easy for foreign
firms and organizations offering technical
assistance or bilateral co-operation to effect
what amounts to a "take-over" of national
institutions. The only effective solution lies
in increased scientific and technical co¬
operation between developing countries of
the same region or even different regions.
Then, and then only, can the question of co¬
operation between developing and in¬
dustrialized nations be approached on a
sound basis taking into account the interests
of all concerned.
It was not until the "oil crisis" that large-
scale solar research programmes were
launched by a number of industrialized
countries. At present most of these pro¬
grammes have only very limited targets (the
provision of auxiliary power for domestic
and industrial heating and supplementary
electricity supplies). But their true purpose
in the long term is to develop alternative
energy sources that could be substituted for
the world's rapidly dwindling oil supplies
and, in the short term, to exploit the huge
market of the developing countries to
develop solar equipment in highly lucrative
conditions. To all intents and purposes this
would mean that research and industrial
production would be virtually financed, if
not subsidized, by the developing countries
themselves.
A radical change of approach is therefore
needed to establish genuine co-operation in
this field between the two groups of coun¬
tries. Given the present oil crisis, the. role of
solar energy in the long term and its short-
and medium-term possibilities in many
developing countries, it is in the interests
of both parties to come to grips with the
situation.
Industrial co-operation between devel¬
oped and developing countries in the pro¬
duction of solar installations also raises
many complex problems. The international
division of labour at present reduces the
developing nations to the role of mere pro¬
ducers of mineral and agricultural raw
materials, creating an uneven pattern of ex¬
change which perpetuates the economic
dependence of the Third World on the in¬
dustrialized world. The latter today virtually
monopolizes the various industries basic to
solar energy production, including the
metallurgy of iron and ferrous metals and
that of aluminium, copper and other non-
ferrous metals; glass and transparent
plastics; and heat insulation processes that
use minerals or organic substances. Yet the
raw materials used in all these processes
come mainly from the developing countries.
In most cases they are partially processed
before being exported. This is the case with
aluminium oxide from Guinea and Ghana
which is processed on the spot or in
Cameroon; copper from Zaire and Zambia;
and the petroleum products of Nigeria,
Algeria and the Middle East.
To reinforce the developing countries'
self-sufficiency, industries manufacturing
finished and semi-finished products could
be established in the raw material-producing
countries, provided such measures were
supported by industrial co-operation on a
world scale. This would be in everybody's
interests in the long run. In the present
energy crisis the under-exploited hydroelec¬
tric potential of Africa, Asia and Latin
America seems to offer an ideal source of
power for processing from start to finish the
many minerals found in these areas. r
15

y A basis would thus be provided for the
establishment of light industries producing
components for solar plants electronic
parts, precision engineering, metal and
mechanical equipment, etcand economic
development at national level would be
guaranteed by the interdependence of the
various industries.
This approach would lead to a new inter¬
national division of labour beneficial to the
entire world economy and, by bringing
about a marked lowering of production and
transport costs as well as retail prices, it
would speed the introduction of solar
energy, since under this system plants
would be constructed from start to finish in
the places where they are to be used. In rela¬
tion to the new world energy consumption
pattern the foreseeable consequences are
such that there should be no difficulty in
gaining unanimous acceptance for this set
of measures.
H Abdou Moumouni Dioffo
W*
***»
WrWmm *»** **
1«»
1
Above, photovoltaic panel in the courtyard
of a school in Niger powers the school's
educational television set. Right, the
Maine-Montparnasse skyscraper in the
heart of Paris.
16
T"
H HI!) 111!IV
