Caliban's revenge
by Roberto Fernández Retamar
AT the beginning of the nineteenth cen¬
tury, one of the first actions of the
victorious revolutionaries of Saint-
Domingue, the French part of the island of
Hispaniola, was to re-baptize their fledgling
nation Haiti, the name by which it had been
known by its original inhabitants.
More than a century and a half later, the
victorious revolutionaries of Cuba (which
had kept its original name) were to change
the names of the suburbs round the capital,
Havana. Country and Biltmore, the residen¬
tial areas of those who had benefited from
the social order that had been swept away,
resumed their ancient names of Cubancan
and Siboney.
This sanctioning of liberation struggles by
the elimination of place-names of European
origin (or, in the case of Cuba, of both Euro¬
pean and North American origin) and the
reinstatement of names connected with the
true discoverers of the region has been a
repeated practice in the Antilles. Yet,
curiously enough, neither the inhabitants of
Cuba nor those of Haiti had any ethnic links
with those peoples whose words and names
they brandished to proclaim their determina¬
tion to achieve complete independence.
The landing of the Europeans in the An¬
tilles misnamed "discovery" had
heralded the arrival of what the Cuban José
Martí, writing in 1877, described as a
"devastating civilization, two words which
a contradiction in terms and therefore, in
themselves, an indictment of a historical
process". And indeed, subjected as they
were to forced labour, hunted down like
wild animals, defending themselves in vain
against vastly superior arms, driven to mass
suicide or succumbing to contagious
diseases previously unknown to them, the
indigenous peoples (mistakenly called "In¬
dians" by the Westerners) had been virtually
annihilated within a few decades of the ar¬
rival of the Europeans. Yet they left behind
them words (many of which have entered
the European languages), the cultivation of
a variety of plants, some artefacts, and
habits such as smoking.
Neither the Haitians nor the Cubans
could, then, have been intent merely on
renewing a tradition that had been cut short
centuries earlier with the extermination of
the peoples who had given birth to it and
kept it alive. But the reintroduction of an¬
cient words and names harks back to the old
controversy about the "noble savage"
which is inextricably bound up with all our
part of America and especially with the
Caribbean. It was sparked off by the sudden
arrival in Europe, at a time when capitalist
development was in its infancy, of news of a
"New World".
The first peoples of this "New World"
whom the Europeans came to know were
the inhabitants of the Antilles. There is a
reference to them in the letter, dated
15 February 1493, in which Christopher Col¬
umbus, writing from his ship off the Canary
Islands, announced his "discovery" to
Europe.
These peoples formed two main com¬
munities which had spread out into the An¬
tilles from the northern part of South
America the Arahuacos (Arawaks), who
also included the Siboneyes (or Ciboneyes)
and the Tainos, and the Caribs, who were
eventually to give their name to the

"Mediterranean of the Americas". The first
of these peoples were of a peaceful disposi¬
tion, whereas the second were warlike. They
were to form the basis of the two main
images of the peoples of America which
fuelled the discussions of European thinkers
for centuries.
The first stirrings of this controversy arose
among the Spanish in the sixteenth century
and centred on the conquest and rights of
the misnamed "Indians". Among those who
spoke out on behalf of the Indians were men
like Bartolomé de Las Casas, the most
dynamic and celebrated among them, Fran-
' cisco de Vitoria, and Antonio Montesino,
who in a sermon delivered in 151 1 convinced
Las Casas of the rightness of his cause.
Among those who were against the Indians,
and hence in favour of enslaving them, were
men like Gonzalo Fernandez de Oviedo and
Ginés de Sepúlveda. The fiercest polemic
was that between Sepúlveda and Las Casas,
the man whom Simón Bolívar called the
"Apostle of the Americas", for his brave
defence of our indigenous peoples.
The repercussions of the reports on these
peoples of another world were not confined
to Spain alone. As early as 1516, the
Englishman Thomas More conjured up his
vision of an ideal country, Utopia, whose
resemblance to the island of Cuba was
pointed out in 1963 by the Argentine writer
Ezequiel Martinez Estrada. Moreover, in
1580, the French humanist Michel de Mon¬
taigne published his essay Des Cannibales,
in which he wrote that "there is nothing bar¬
baric or savage about those nations, from
what has been said about them; what hap¬
pens is that people brand as barbaric
everything alien to their own customs".
This assessment, with variations, was
kept alive as a sort of working hypothesis by
what we would now call the left wing of the
Western bourgeoisie in its revolutionary ad¬
vance and appears to have reached its
culmination in 1754, when Jean-Jacques
Rousseau wrote for the Academy of Dijon
an essay answering the questions: What is
the origin of the inequality between men? Is
it sanctioned by natural law?
Rousseau has been saddled with the
reputation of having lapsed into inane and
ingenuous thinking about the purported ex¬
cellence of the "noble savage". Yet when
we read what he wrote, he cannot be taxed
<
©
Caribbean countries and peoples
today are grappling with a legacy of
economic dependency created in
the past by the single-crop
plantation economy and their status
as mere appendages of their
colonial masters. Left, a modern
sugar factory in Barbados.
with having held such ideas. Perhaps more
than anybody else, he stressed the
hypothetical nature of such a creature. In his
view, "it is not a simple matter to distinguish
what is original from what is artificial in the
existing nature of man or to be perfectly ac¬
quainted with a state that does not exist,
has perhaps not existed, andprobably never
will..." (author's italics).
There can be no doubt, however, that in
developing his hypothesis, Rousseau often
had in mind the American peoples en¬
countered by the Europeans, especially the
inhabitants of the Caribbean, although
this is very revealing he would also
make reference to the Black African. The ex¬
amples he adduced for his "noble savage"
are sometimes "black" and sometimes (or at
the same time) the "Caribs of Venezuela",
the "Hottentots of the Cape of Good Hope"
and, on yet other occasions, the "savages of
America", the latter being the most fre¬
quently cited. He was to refer repeatedly to
these peoples, and especially to the Caribs
who, in his view, were "of existing peoples,
those who are least remote from their
natural state".
Rousseau's thesis is well known: "those
who were responsible for civilizing man...
were responsible for losing humankind". His
work is a condemnation of what, until then,
had been regarded as civilization and the
heralding of a fresh start which would
preserve the goodness of the natural man in
a new stage of development. The course of
history being what it was, this new start was
to be nothing other than the great bourgeois
revolution of 1789.
The Europeans' rather hazy perception of
the peoples they encountered on their arrival
in the Caribbean was to be used from
More (in whose Utopia slavery still exists)
right through to Rousseau to defend the
notion of the original goodness of the
human being, which had been corrupted by
society as Europeans knew it, and to form
the theoretical basis of a new society. At the
same time another very different view of the
indigenous peoples of the Caribbean was
evolving, at first in parallel with the
Rousseauist view, but then diverging from it
and transcending the context of the Carib¬
bean and even the Americas as a whole.
This view, like the first, originated with Col¬
umbus who, when translating into a Euro¬
pean language what he heard the in¬
digenous people say in a language (Taino)
he did not know, mentioned the existence of
Caribs, whom he also called Cambas "the
people of the Great Can" (The Great
Khan it should not be forgotten that, on
his first voyage, Columbus thought that he
had arrived in Asia) and cannibals, very
fierce peoples who were said to eat human
flesh.
Whereas the other inhabitant of the An¬
tilles was the conjectural "noble savage",
this one was the no less conjectural "ignoble
savage", regarding whom the most deter¬
mined opponent of Las Casas, Ginés de
Sepúlveda, resuscitating Artistotle's thesis
of the natural-born slave, wrote: "The
Spanish are perfectly right to exercise their
dominion over these barbarians... who are
so inferior to the Spanish in moderation, in¬
telligence and all manner of virtue and
human sentiments that they are as children
to adults, women to men, the cruel and in¬
humane to the exceedingly meek, the exag¬
geratedly intemperate to the continent and
moderate, in short, I was about to say as
monkeys to men".
This "ignoble savage" was to be given a
literary incarnation as Caliban in
Shakespeare's play The Tempest.
Shakespeare's Caliban/Carib/cannibal is a
misshapen monster imitating man, a
creature whom the European enchanter.
Prospero, has robbed of his island home and
has taught to speak his (Prospero's)
language and who owes his survival to the
fact that his labours are essential to his
master. Perhaps never before or since has a
major literary work shown the frightening
reality of colonialism in so clear a light.
The cannibal/Caliban is the hypothetical
creation of the right wing of the nascent
Western bourgeoisie which spread its ex¬
ploiting Prósperos and exploited Calibans all
over the earth. And here it must be recalled
that while the basis for Rousseau's
hypothesis of the "noble savage" was
sought in the examples of the aborigines of
the Antilles and Black Africans, the sub¬
stantive cannibal, in the sense of a bestial
man-eater, was to be applied not only to the
Caribs whatever the etymology is
worth but above all to the caricatures of
Africans with which people throughout the
world became familiar through the seeming¬
ly innocuous Tarzan films.
It was the sad destiny of the first in¬
habitants of our region to have inspired ad¬
mirably evocative verses and celebrated
works of art for the burgeoning European
bourgeoisie and yet to have failed to survive
the brutal impact of its "devastating civiliza¬
tion". Since they had been decimated and
since fresh Calibans were needed as labour,
millions of Africans were uprooted from
their great continent and were set down as
slaves in our region, and not a few Asians
subsequently suffered the same fate. The
Caribbean peoples of today were bom of the
still-continuing mix of the descendants of
European oppressors and African and Asian
oppressed. Only in this harsh light is it possi¬
ble to understand why the first country of
the Antilles to gain its independence and the
first to introduce a new social order have
both reclaimed their pre-Western heritage,
the painful heritage of the exterminated
Caliban who discovered and enriched the
places where we now live.
However, that heritage alone cannot ac¬
count for the cultural identity of the Carib¬
bean following the arrival of the Europeans.
The new Caribbean is one of the three main
areas forming what we call "our America".
These areas have been termed Indo-
America, Afro-America and Euro-America
and correspond on our sub-continent to
what the Brazilian anthropologist Darcy
Ribeiro has called pilot peoples, new
peoples and transplanted peoples.
What these peoples have in common is
that they were first colonized and then neo-
colonized, and were yoked, as exploited ter¬
ritory, to the world capitalist system. What
they also have in common are a large
number of features of widely differing
character, and this is why they form a
ï v
unit, r
ROBERTO FERNANDEZ RETAMAR, Cuban
poet and essayist, is a professor at Havana univer¬
sity and director of the magazine Casa de las
Americas. His essays and anthologies of his
poems have been translated into a number of
languages.
39

But that unit does not imply uniformity or
monotony, nor does it absolve us from sing¬
ling out the characteristic specific to each
area.
Our area, which is sometimes called Afro-
America, is that situated around the Carib¬
bean forming the society based on the plan¬
tation system, whose rich human inputs of
African origin have had a decisive impact
on our culture and on our lives and were
later supplemented by a variety of Asian
contributions.
The history of the immediate past of the
modern Caribbean is therefore the history of
the sea which, at the dawn of capitalism,
witnessed the arrival of the European con¬
querors and saw them engage in quarrelling
and pillage. It was this sea that saw the
emergence, at the beginning of the nine¬
teenth century, of our first victorious revolu¬
tion, the formidable Haitian Revolution
which (before Spain and Russia) succeeded
in defeating Napoleon's troops, abolished
slavery and paved the way for the in¬
dependence of Latin America. At the end of
the century, that same sea was to witness
the first tangible movement, organized by
Marti, to stem modern imperialism, then in
its infancy, and, in this century, the triumph
of the Cuban revolution.
Our cultural identity must perforce refer
back to that turbulent historical environ¬
ment. It does this with a growing awareness
of how much we have in common, in spite
of having been (and in some cases still be¬
ing) subordinated to different metropolitan
powers and consequently speaking different
languages. We have experienced col¬
onialism, neo-colonialism, imperialism,
under-development and racism; feudal
estates, plantations ar.d one-crop
economies; slavery, Atlantic crossings and
the slave trade; landowners, overseers,
slaves and maroons; sugar cane, coffee and
bananas; the sugar mill, the plantation
house and the humble cabin.
Although the fruits of syncretism are not
always the same, they are at times very
similar to each other, as in the case of Hai¬
tian voodoo, Jamaican pocomania and
Cuban santería. And nothing, perhaps,
demonstrates more clearly our shared identi¬
ty than our wond-renowned music. That
"riotous innovation out of the Indies", as
Alejo Carpentier has fittingly put it, could be
heard from the very first years of the Con¬
quest and continues to live on today in
guarachas, rumbas, congas, sones, boleros,
mambos, cha-cha-chas, calypsos, reggae,
merengues, tamboritos, sambas, bossa
novas and salsas. Nor should we forget that
the slave culture of the plantations which
developed over the centuries also embraced
the south of what is today the United
States, where the meeting of Africa and
Europe gave birth to negro spirituals, the
blues and the powerful jazz that are the first
cousins of our own music.
We have, however, yet to assume our full
identity and we shall not do so until the last
traces of colonialism and neo-colonialism
have disappeared from the region. Only then
shall we be in a position to assert, through
the multiple roots that have contributed to
making us a world people, our role as an
essential meeting-place in the history of
mankind, a history in the making of which
we shall no longe'r be passive onlookers but
active protagonists. That process is already
under way.
H Roberto Fernández Retamar
40
