IVANUSHKA
PRINCE OF SIMPLETONS
by Valentin Berestov
This horse which "gallops higher than the murmuring forest and lower than the moving cloud" and
"brushes the meadows and fields with its tail" is the steed of Ivanushka, one of the most popular figures
in Russian folklore. A hero who is by turns the son of the Tsar and a simpleton, Ivanushka was immor¬
talized in the 19th century by the Siberian writer Pyotr Ershov. The above drawing is by Tatiana
A. Mavrina, a noted Soviet illustrator of children's stories, especially those of Pushkin. Her outstanding
work has been recognized by the International Board on Books for Young People, which has awarded
her its Hans Christian Andersen medal.
EVERY nation has its own fund of amusing stories about
simple-minded and eccentric folk, and more mysterious
fairy-tales in which knights errant overcome monsters to
save members of their family, beautiful maidens or mankind in its
entirety from all manner of fates worse than death. The Russians
are no exception. But, as the saying goes, fools sometimes rush in
where angels fear to tread; and when they do the characters from
the former type of story become the heroes of the latter.
One well-known figure in Russian folklore is Tsarévitch Ivan,
the noble prince; but it is another hero, Foolish Ivanushka, the
unattractive, shabbily-dressed, soot-stained lad, who, to the great
delight of listeners and readers of the tale, captures the iridescent
firebird Zhar-ptitsa, wins the heart of the most beautiful girl in the
world, plunges into the nether regions, swims across the ocean and
flies up beyond the clouds to drink tea and converse amicably with
the Sun and the Moon sometimes as an honoured guest,
sometimes as a visiting relative.
I was still a very small child when I first heard the tale of
Ivanushka from my country-woman grandmother. I well
remember how his fabulous horse rose up before me, in the
darkness of the night, every time I listened to the story.
But even without a story-telling grandmother I would have
discovered and appreciated Ivanushka at an early age. Every Rus¬
sian child is familiar with the poem about Konyok-gorbunok, the
VALENTIN DIMITRIEVICH BERESTOV is a noted Soviet poet and
author of children's books. A specialist in literary detection, he has
discovered hitherto unidentified verses by Pushkin, on whom he has writ¬
ten a number of essays. He has published over 40 books of poems, some
written specially for children.
small, unsightly horse with long ears and a pair of humps, whose
odd appearance matches that of his master, who is none other than
Ivanushka.
How this poem came to be written is almost a fairy-tale in itself.
In 1834, at the age of nineteen, a young man called Pyotr Ershov
travelled to the Russian capital from the Siberian city of Tobolsk,
to "look and learn". Siberia was a land rich in story-tellers; in¬
deed, they formed a sort of rural aristocracy and were much in de¬
mand as companions on hunting trips and wood-cutting expedi¬
tions into the forests and on the fishing boats that ventured out in¬
to the northern seas. Listening to them during the long dark nights,
the weary peasants and fisherfolk forgot their burdens and were
mentally transported into a completely different world.
The young man from Tobolsk had listened to many of their tales
as a child; and he had just discovered the stories in rhyme written
by the great poet Pushkin. Suddenly, an astonishing thing hap¬
pened event that in its own way resembled one of Ivanushka's
adventures: Pyotr Ershov himself sat down and wrote a magnifi¬
cent tale in verse, as rich in language and imagery as the popular
stories he had heard and as poetic as anything written by his
recently-discovered master.
It was to be his only masterpiece. Throughout the rest of his life,
which was full of labour and misfortune, his writing never rose
above the commonplace. As director of the high school at
Tobolsk, he was cut off from his roots among the people and the
magic spark which had transformed him for a brief moment during
his youth died out.
Maxim Gorky, who greatly appreciated Ershov and regretted
that none of his subsequent writings matched his first youthful ef¬
fort, urged the critic Chukovsky to continue where Ershov had left
30

off. The book of tales in verse intended for the tiniest children aged
between two and five that Chukovsky produced in the 1920s was a
great and immediate success.
The first and most important collection of tales of this kind had
appeared in 1855 and 1863 in three volumes edited by A.N.
Afanasiev, with the title Russkie Narodnye Skazki (Russian
Popular Tales). "Particularly interesting in these tales", wrote
Afanasiev in the first edition, "is the role played by the youngest of
three brothers. Most of the tales begin with the time-honoured for¬
mula: "Once upon a time a man had three sons; two of them were
clever, but the third was stupid". The elder brothers are smart, in
the everyday, market-place sense of the term, and are only con¬
cerned with feathering their own nest. The third son is stupid in
that he lacks this practical wisdom; he is a simple, guileless soul
who shares in the troubles of others to the extent of neglecting his
own security and interest".
According to custom, the entire inheritance, including the right
to perform heroic deeds and miracles goes to the two elder
brothers. Ivanushka, the third son, is not even favoured with in¬
telligence or good looks. He is, as it were, kept on the sidelines, on¬
ly allowed to participate when his brothers have failed in some
enterprise. Only later does it become clear that the "smart"
brothers, playing the game according to their own selfish rules, are
of little account when compared with the "stupid" Ivan, and that
their role in the story is to reveal that his inferiority in comparison
with them is, in fact, the source of his strength.
Ivanushka is indeed a paradoxical character, equally capable of
lying lazily on top of the stove, letting his thoughts wander or
catching flies, and of leaping into action while his brothers are
snoring away, oblivious to all around them. In one tale, their dying
father begs the three of them to take turns watching over his tomb
at night. The two elder brothers think it far more sensible to sleep
comfortably in their beds when their father dies and send
Ivanushka to keep watch in their place. As a result he undergoes
the experiences originally intended for them.
Ivanushka's three nights of vigil resemble the sleeplessness of the
philosopher, the poet or the lovesick swain. In his trance-like state,
various things happen. His dead father appears and they talk
together. On the third night his father presents him with a fabulous
horse: "The horse gallops, the earth trembles, flames burst from
its ears and smoke from its nostrils".
Presenting his horse to Ivanushka, his father says: "May it serve
you as it has served me". But the horse in question is no ordinary,
stable-loving steed. Whistled up or called by an incantatory phrase,
it appears from nowhere, and just as suddenly disappears. Sivka-
burka, as it is called is, in fact, a magic horse, symbolizing the
spiritual testament of the father, the blessing which fathers at all
times have given their offspring, the message handed down from
generation to generation by all peoples, past, present and those to
come. The horse is in fact Pegasus, the symbol of poetry, the trav¬
eling-companion of inspiration. And the gift of inspiration is what
Ivanushka possesses in the highest degree.
In one of the tales, Ivanushka one day emerges from the horse's
mouth transformed into a smartly dressed, handsome young man.
Obviously he has now become one and the same person as
Tsarévitch Ivan. With other suitors, he attempts to leap, on
horseback, to the window of a high tower where the Tsar's
daughter is sitting, to kiss her and take from her hands the hand¬
kerchief which is the pledge of their forthcoming marriage. Three
attempts are allowed and on the first day Ivan almost reaches the
goal, winning even his brother's admiration.
Suddenly, the handsome knight disappears and in his place there
stands the stupid lad, who asks: "Wasn't that me?". Ivan's
remark, which provokes unrestrained mirth on the part of his
brothers, seems to be designed to test them, to find out whether
they indeed love him and whether, if only for a moment, they can
imagine him as a winner, as the object of general celebration.
The winner, like Cinderella, wishes to remain anonymous. All
the young people are invited into the palace, where they drink beer
and jealously watch to see whether someone wipes his lips with the
precious handkerchief. Nobody notices Ivanushka, who is sitting
behind the stove, black with soot, his hair tousled, watching the
proceedings with his mouth wide open. Only on the third day is he
offered a drink of beer, whereupon he wipes his mouth with the
princess's handkerchief. He has come to the palace in the form of a
simpleton rather than a prince, because it is important for him to
know whether the princess will be true and faithful to her promise.
And if the first kiss was given by a prince, the responding kiss is
received by the simpleton. Thus not only Ivanushka, but also his
bride, enter a new world, where fairytale justice is seen to be done.
The tales about Ivanushka have immense historical depth. If we
could travel in a time-machine back into the Russian past, one of
our first encounters would be with a feudal peasant who, to use the
Russian expression, pridurivaetsja, that is to say, deliberately
passes himself off as a fool in the eyes of the gentry and the
authorities, while at the same time preserving jealously the values
Carried away from the kingdom of the Kusmans by
his ally the grey wolf who has kidnapped queen Helen
for him, Ivanushka flees through the immense Rus¬
sian forest, holding his beloved in his arms. The above
painting, 77ie Tsarevich Ivan on his Grey Wolf, is by
Victor M. Vasnetsov (1848-1926) who painted many
themes from Russian folklore and popular fiction. It is
now in the Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow.
Borne skywards by a little horse with a pair of humps
and long ears, Ivanushka gallops in headlong pursuit
of the Firebird which he must take to the Tsar.
Vladimir A. Milashevski drew this illustration for
Ershov's book The Little Humpbacked Horse.
31

In a story called The Frog Princess, Ivanushka must
marry whoever retrieves an arrow which he shoots in¬
to the distance. Poor Ivanushka! Left, he is seen at the
moment when he discovers that destiny has selected
a frog to be his spouse. However, the frog soon turns
into a beautiful girl, Vassilissa the Very Wise, and
although they experience many vicissitudes they
eventually live happily ever after. The illustration is by
Ivan Bilibin (1876-1942), a graphic artist and theatre
designer who was noted for his illustrations of Rus¬
sian folk-tales and songs. He created a style related to
Art Nouveau which influenced wood sculpture, em¬
broidery and popular imagery. Below, Ivanushka as
depicted by 8-year-old Liuda Rakitina of Syktyvkar, a
town in the north of the Soviet Union.
* *
and culture of the people. Further back in time we would briefly
meet the warrior on horseback and in armour, defending his land
from devastating invasion. Further back again, we would witness
the collapse of kinship-based society, where the youngest brother
was expected to remain with his parents until their death, as guar¬
dian of the hearth (the modern folklore specialist V. Anikin has
discussed this subject). Finally, we would find ourselves in the
heart of a society based on kinship, and the early days of homo sa¬
piens. If we are to believe V. Propp, the author of The Historical
Roots of Fairy-Tales, the initiatory experiences imposed by their
elders on adolescents were similar in nature to the training received
by modern cosmonauts and involved elements of hair-raising
adventure, the domination of fear and pain and the accomplish¬
ment of extremely difficult tasks. If fairy-tales indeed have their
roots in actually performed rituals, then we may discern a thread
which runs from our distant ancestors, who were virtually
powerless before the forces of nature and who created standards of
brotherhood and justice without which humanity would have been
unlikely to survive its infancy, far ahead into some splendid future
age, where men will no longer be powerless in the face of the
elements and where all people will live according to fairy-tale stan¬
dards of behaviour.
It is by no means a coincidence that the greatest secrets of nature
are repealed, as in a fairy-tale, only to the most exceptional in¬
dividuals, and often to those considered to be the most eccentric.
This is why the role of those who write for children is so impor¬
tant. For the sake of their people and of mankind in its entirety
they must present the child, at the earliest possible age, with the
"fabulous horse" of inspiration. B Vaientin Berestov
