UNESCO AM) THE IDEA OF CULTURAL POLICY
The years that have elapsed since the World Conference on Cultural Policies
organized by Unesco at Venice in 1970 have been a very interesting period of
increasing awareness in the cultural field.
At the theoretical level, some key concepts have emerged from the discus¬
sions and meetings held at the instigation of Unesco. Fundamental questions
have been asked about the role of culture in the modern world. Various
regional conferences have pursued in greater depth the forceful ideas first
enunciated at Venice, and have dealt both with problems specific to the regions
and with those that form part of the world cultural problem.
Culture defined solely according to aesthetic
criteria does not translate the reality of other
cultural forms. There is a unanimous feeling in
favour of a socio-anthropological definition of
culture. Culture should describe the sum total of the
existential, concrete characteristics of entire
peoples. It includes ways of life and production,
value systems, opinions and beliefs. Hence the im¬
possibility of applying a single, interchangeable
cultural policy. The dynamic aspect of this defini¬
tion is its recognition of cultural specificities.
Since culture is linked to the various aspects of
social life, any cultural policy should be defined in
terms of its interactions with policies for education,
science and technology, environment and com¬
munication. Hence the key idea of the cultural
aspect of development.
ASIACULT : Intergovernmental Conference on Cultural Policies in Asia
(Yogyakarta, 27 October-6 November 1973)
The main original feature of the Yogyakarta conference was that it put for¬
ward the idea of the cultural development of individuals and societies as a fac¬
tor for national identification and a means to socialprogress. It advocated the
search for original development models to hold the balance between material
and spiritual and between social and individual values and between the preser¬
vation of national cultures and the necessary assimilation of science and
technology. It encouraged the definition ofnational communications policies,
having in mind the potentialities and dangers of the mass media for cultural
development.
Tradition is not to be confused with a rejection of
scientific and technological progress. Access to
modernity should not take place beneath the form
of alienation and economic imperialism. Science
and technology should be controlled by the user
countries and developed in forms adapted to the
social and cultural characteristics corresponding to
the real needs of populations.
AFRICA CULT : Intergovernmental Conference on Cultural Policies in Africa
(Accra, 27 October-6 November 1975)
At the Accra conference, the idea ofcultural identity was highlighted as the
historical basis for any process ofendogenous development by societies and as
the quickest way to recognition of the diversity of cultures. Cultural policies
were defined in their organic links with educational, environmental and com¬
munications policies and policiesfor the revalidation of the national heritage.
While considering that African cultures must remain open to outside contribu¬
tions and receptive to the main creative trends of the modern world, the con¬
ference nevertheless advocated that the terms of international co-operation be
altered so as to foster intercultural dialogue on a basis offair reciprocity.
CULTURAL CONFERENCES
VENICE (24August-2 September 1970): Intergovernmental Conference on In¬
stitutional, Administrative and Financial Aspects of Cultural Policies.
At Venice, States became aware of their new responsibilities in the cultural
field and of the growing importance of cultural values in the life of nations.
Human rights came to include the right to culture. Governments found
themselves under an obligation to create conditions favourable to the exercise
ofthat right. The Venice conference widened the notion of culture to include
the way of life of the people, and began to regard cultural development as an
essential feature of the overall development of any society.
Education is the key concept in all problems
related to culture. Formal and informal education
must be rethought in the perspective of lifelong
education. It is above all necessary to study the en¬
vironment and the people for whom education is
being considered so as to avoid the adoption just as
they are of foreign models. Education should be
critical, creative and liberating, and thus narrow the
gap between popular and élite culture. More
democratization means more social justice.
It seems indispensable to develop a policy of
cultural action which would promote the
democratization of culture. Access to culture does
not imply the acceptance of a finished cultural pro¬
duct; the aim should be for the community to par¬
ticipate actively in cultural events.
EUROCULT : Intergovernmental Conference on Cultural Policies in Europe
(Helsinki, 19-28 June 1972)
The Helsinki conference considered the cultural ends of development and
dealt with the interaction between culture on the one hand and education, com¬
munication and environment on the other. It brought out some highly signifi¬
cant ¡inks between culture and social justice, between culture and youth and
between cultural activity and attempts at democratization. It paid special at¬
tention to artistic creativity and the status of the artist; to the increasing par¬
ticipation of the people in cultural life; to innovations stemming from the in¬
telligent use of the mass media; and to the safeguarding of the environment
and the improvement of the habitat.
The acceptance of cultural diversity within a com¬
munity and the reconciliation of cultural pluralism
with national unity constitute one of the major
challenges for cultural policies in the future.
AMERICACULT : Intergovernmental Conference on Cultural Policies in
Latin America and the Caribbean (Bogotá, 10-20 January 1978)
The Bogotá conference went more deeply into the problems of cultural
identity on the basis of the unusual experience of the region, where cultural
crossbreeding has produced syncretic cultures with a universal mission.
Cultural identity was also seen as correlated with respect for culturalpluralism
and the preservation of the heritage. The conference also stated that no
culturalpolicy worthy of the name waspossible without special attention to ar¬
tistic creativity, to the fostering of creative imagination in books andfilms, to
the training of cultural development staffs and to research in the field of
cultural policies.
Knowledge about human action on the environ¬
ment should be a part of children's education, and
one of the tasks of the authorities should be to train
specialists in cultural development and to make
them aware of the consequences of the choices they
formulate in fields which they may think are totally
distinct from culture.
Third Conference of Arab Ministers of Culture : Baghdad (2-5 November
1981) organized by ALECSO (Arab League Educational, Cultural and Scien¬
tific Organization)
Similarpreoccupations were considered at the Conference ofArab Ministers
of Culture convened in 1981 by ALECSO. The participants admittedly dealt
with questions specific to Arabic culture and to the culturalpolicies ofMember
12

States, but also tackled more general questions such as the specificity and
universality ofculture in the world, the right to culture and the cultural dimen¬
sion of development.
These cultural meetings, bridging the frontiers between Europe, Africa, the
Arab world, Asia and Oceania, Latin America and the Caribbean, naturally
gave regional, interregional and international cultural co-operation between
States its rightfulplace as one of theprimeprerequisitesfor the maintenance of
a fruitful climate of camaraderie, security and peace in the world.
All the Unesco conferences stress the need to con¬
sider the freedom of choice of creators and of
peoples as absolutes which cannot be transgressed,
seeing in them the means of placing man at the cen¬
tre of development.
Communication may be the vehicle of packaged
culture or it may transmit - endogenous cultural
values.
WORLD CULTURAL PROBLEMS: THE CONSTANTS
Thusfrom one conference to the next andfrom one cultural area to another
certain constants emerge in varying degrees of intensity which illustrate the
main topics of world cultural problems as they affect men 's hopes and dreams
at the time, viz. cultural identity, the cultural dimension of development,
cultural rights and the role of imagination and creativity.
The dynamic safeguard of cultural authenticity
implies the revaluation and promotion of minority
languages and their insertion in States' educational
and social systems, as well as the study and promo¬
tion of the oral tradition and folk arts.
OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE OF CULTURAL ACTION
Nowadays there is no country in the world without an urge for cultural ac¬
tivity, whatever the level and type of action taken by the government. Many
governments are pursuing culturalpolicies or programmes ofcultural activity.
The great majority of Member States of Unesco have a ministry or body in
charge ofcultural affairs, and also more or less substantial and diversified net¬
works of cultural institutions and socio-cultural centres. In some countries,
particularly those with a federal constitution, the deliberately limited central
structures are complemented by regional and local structures, semi-
administrative bodies including professionals and experts which act to foster
artistic creativity. There is a great deal ofparallel action, though it is not usual¬
ly integrated in an overall plan.
As regards the objectives, scope and protagonists of cultural action, three
main types of policy may be distinguished. The first, the most widespread,
stresses the development of the arts at professional level or the preservation of
the heritage, the role of the State and the big institutions going unchallenged.
The second, the most "advanced" ofpresent-day cultural policies, sets out to
link culture with education, communication and the environment. Govern¬
ment action is more directed towards the decentralization ofaction, decisions
and resources, and to getting minorities and the underprivileged to play a big¬
ger part in cultural life, particularly through cultural leadership. At the same
time, other administrations begin to take over cultural activities in their own
sectors, e.g. youth, education, equipment, health, information and tourism.
The third type of cultural policy, which so far exists only in the form of
forward-looking studies or very limited experiments, aims radically to remodel
all aspects of development and give them cultural ends, by taking human fac¬
tors into account. What is regarded as the essential feature is that peoples play
a part in creating their own culture, rather than merely having access to the
culture of the élite or to the products of mass culture.
OBSTACLES IN THE WAY OF CULTURAL ACTION
Obviously the great majority of existing situations fall short of the
theoretical level reached by key centres in the international community. The in¬
ternal reasons for this situation are no doubt economic (i.e. small budgets),
technical (i.e. lackoffacilities or specialized staffand insufficient research and
information) or psycho-sociological (i.e. conservatism, bureaucratic influence
or failure to appreciate present requirements for creation and participation).
But the real reason for the limitations encountered in most cases seems to be
more structural: the lack of a really integrated approach to cultural develop¬
ment and socio-economic development is the fundamental defect ofpresent-
day cultural policies, all too often devised and implemented without organic
links with policies which could inject a cultural dimension into all major
development projects. In fact nearly all culturalpolicies are in varying degrees
limited to the specifically culturalfield, and support the big institutions (main¬
ly in the capital cities), the preservation of the historical and artistic heritage,
professional creativity and distribution. All too few of them are defined in
termsofthe whole social spectrum, or incorporate in their thinking the real-life
experience, the aspirations and the dreams of the teeming masses.
International cultural co-operation should be
thought of in terms of equality and reciprocity, the
recognition of cultural diversity implying respect
for national independence and sovereignty.
MONDIACULT : World conference on cultural policies Mexico, 26 July-6
August 1982
Now that Mondiacult is to be convened in Mexico, new life for cultural
policies would take the form of energetic theoretical and practical action
calculated to mobilize the creative efforts of individuals and groups at ail levels
of society. Such a vital force could radically revitalize exchanges and specific
relations between the members of a given society and between thepeoples and
nations that make up the international community. In this new atmosphere,
economics andpolitics, the output ofgoods and services and the symbolic out¬
put of ideologies and the arts would all become ways ofachieving a cultural life
closely linked to daily life and the happiness andfulfilment of individuals and
social groups.
The portents of this transformation in the role ofculture in society call upon
people wherever they may be to make a qualitative change in their cultural
adventure, like the one they made when harnessing theforces ofnature. In this
way they will bring together the still all too scattered currents of world solidari¬
ty in a great world cultural project that will save from the nuclear apocalypse
the very roots of a new understanding worthy of each and every man.
Mondiacult may be this focal point, where those attending the intergovern¬
mental conference convened by Unesco will reach a new view of the world and
thus arrive at a decisive change in cultural relations between individuals and
between nations.
The heritage is not only the sum total of historic
monuments but the dynamic and living totality of
human creation.
From now on, culture can only be seen as apart ofa system ofrelationships:
a process ofgive and take is imperative for each national culture.
The idea is gaining ground that no headway can be made without a consen¬
sus. Unesco has become the promoter of this consensus, of which it intends to
be a focal point.
A Unesco recommendation, of overrriding im¬
portance, proposes to States a sociology of crea¬
tion, through a critical vision of social reality, ar¬
tistic creation being considered as the creation of
new values. The recommendation attempts to
reconcile creative freedom with the economic and
social security of the artist.
13
