Knots as
by Georges Ifrah
Fig. 1 - A Peruvian quipu.
Fig. 2 - The unit numbers one to
nine as represented in
the Inca quipu system.
THOUSANDS
HUNDREDS
TENS
UNITS
3000
600
40
3643
Fig. 3 - Representation of the
number 3,643 in the
Peruvian quipu system.
WHAT possible link could there be between a German miller
delivering flour to the village baker at the turn of the cen¬
tury and a Tibetan monk performing his prescribed ritual
today? The answer ¡s... a length of knotted cord or string. Both
monk and miller belong to the groups of people which, in different
parts of the world, from ancient times until the present day, have
used knotted plant fibres to help count objects, to measure the
passage of time, or to record numerical data.
The practice achieved a particularly sophisticated form in the Inca
civilization. The Incas, who were in all likelihood ignorant of writing,
devised a highly ingenious system which allowed them to depict all
the numerical operations they had to carry out in everyday life, gave
them access to accurate and up-to-date information about the
resources of their empire, and enabled them to keep a tangible
record of all the calculations involved. This system, known as quipu
(from the word in the Quechua language meaning "knot"), con¬
sisted of a length of string or cord, held horizontally, to which more
slender, different-coloured strings were attached, brought together
in several groups and joined at regular intervals by various kinds of
knots (fig. 1).
Quipus were nothing if not versatile. They were useful for
representing liturgical or chronological information, they served as
calendars, and they could be used for transmitting messages, since
the colours of the strings corresponded according to convention to
different objects or abstract ideas. But first and foremost they were
used for keeping accounts: the colour of the strings, the number
and relative position of the knots, the thickness and spacing of the
groups each had a precise numerical significance (figs. 2, 3 and 4).
They were carefully preserved when the results of computations
(carried out in this case according to a decimal system) had to be
recorded. In other words they constituted an extremely valuable
statistical tool in every area of the life of the empire, from military
surveys to the evaluation of crop-yields, from recording the number
of animals killed in hunting to census-taking, establishing statistics
of births and deaths, tax receipts, and surveys of human and
material resources.
The Incas had a highly organized administrative system. In every
. town, village and district officials named quipucamayocs ("keepers
of the knots") were responsible for making the quipus, interpreting
them at any given moment and providing the government with such
information as it desired. Each year they made an inventory of the
various products collected in the region or carried out a census of
the population, recording the results on the knotted cords. These
"registers" were then forwarded to the central government which
thus disposed of stocks of statistical information comparable to the
national archives of modern times.
The Inca quipu was so simple and so useful that it long continued
to be used in Bolivia and Ecuador. It seems that in the mid-
nineteenth century, notably on the high Peruvian plateaux, herds¬
men always used knotted cord to keep a record of the size of their
GEORGES IFRAH, of Morocco, is a specialist in the history of writing and
numeration. Formerly a professor of mathematics, he gave up teaching to
devote himself entirely to historical research. His comprehensive Histoire
Universelle des Chiffres (A Universal History of Numbers), Editions Seghers,
Paris, 1981, is the fruit of many years of study of museums and archives
throughout the world.
24

numbers
flocks and herds, with white strings being used for sheep and goats,
and green strings for cattle (fig. 5).
Even today the Indians of Bolivia and Peru use a similar system
which is known as the chlmpu and is a direct but more sophisticated
descendant of the quipu. A single string is used for the units (with
the user tying as many knots as he needs, up to nine); the tens are
indicated by knots on two adjacent strings; the hundreds by knots
on a group of three strings, and so on. Six knots, for example, on a
chimpu represent 6, 60, 600 or 6,000, depending on whether they
are tied on one, two, three of four cords at once (see fig. 6).
The knotted cord method of computation is not exclusive to the
Incas and the peoples of South America; it has been used in a varie¬
ty of times and places.
The Greek historian Herodotus (485-425 BC) tells how King Darius
I of Persia (522-486 BC) once entrusted his Greek allies with the task
of guarding a bridge of vital strategic importance. He gave them a
strap tied with sixty knots and ordered them to untie one knot each
day. "If I am not back by the time you have unfastened the last
knot," he told them, "go back to your ships and return home".
In second-century-AD Palestine, then under Roman domination,
the publicans (tax-collectors) kept their records using a long cable,
probably formed from several lengths of string. Each tax-payer was
given a receipt consisting of a length of cord knotted in a specific
way.
Similar systems of doing calculations connected with census-
taking, keeping accounts and archives seem to have been used in
ancient China when writing was in its infancy. Tradition has it that
the semi-legendary Emperor Shen Nong had a part in developing the
knotted cord system for accountancy and helped to promote its use.
This method is also mentioned in the l-Ching ("Book of Transforma¬
tions"), a classic work which may have been written in the first half
of the last millennium before Christ.
In the Far East this use of knotted cord has still not completely
disappeared. J. G. Février notes in his "History of Writing" that it is
still extant notably in the Riu-Kiu islands: "Workmen in certain
mountainous areas of Okinawa island use such a system of knotted
straw to record their days of work, note what money is due to them,
and so on. [...] In the town of Shuri pawnbrokers keep account of
their transactions by using a long rush or bark string divided into two
parts by another string which is tied to it halfway along. Knots on
the upper half denote the month in which the loan was granted;
knots in the lower part indicate the amount of the loan."
The same practice is still to be found in the Caroline Islands (near
Tahiti), in the Hawaii Islands, and in West Africa, notably among a
Nigerian tribe. Similar methods have also been observed among
North American Indians such as the Yakima (Washington State),
the Walapi and Havasupai (Arizona), and the Miwok and Maidu
(California).
Present-day examples of this use of knotted string and cord are
survivals of an ancient system, curiosities in a world in which the
positional decimal system has prevailed. Yet, with other phenomena
from the past, they bear witness to the universality of human in¬
telligence and recreate a step in the history of figures and numerical
systems which, with the history of writing, holds a central place in
the evolution of human thought.
658 89 258 273 38
E D C B A
Fig. 4 - Interpretation of a group of knotted strings in the Inca
quipu system representing the number 658. String E gives the
total of the four strings A, B, C, D. The drawing shows the first
group of strings of a Peruvian quipu preserved in the American
Museum of Natural History, New York.
. t , . <
> » + > >
u» » w m
Fig. 5 - How shepherds of the Peruvian altiplano used the quipu
to keep track of their sheep and cattle.
Group B (green strings)
B, = 203 bulls
B2 = 350 milking cows
B3 = 235 barren cows
B4 = total 788
Group A (white strings)
A, =254 sheep
A2 = 36 lambs
A3 = 300 goats
A4 = 40 kids
Aj = 244 ewes
As = total 874
5 KNOTS ON FOUR STRINGS -
4 KNOTS ON THREE STRINGS -
-* 5000
7 KNOTS ON TWO STRINGS
-»- 400
70
7 KNOTS ON ONE STRING
5477
Fig. 6 - Part of a chimpu, a more
recent version of the quipu,
used by the Indians of Peru and
Bolivia.
25
