5
RESEARCH
AND DEVELOPMENT
Twenty per cent of the world's
scientists and engineers were
engaged in military work during
the 1970s
ONE of the most conspicuous features
of the military scene since the
Second World War has been the
extraordinarily rapid rate of change in
weapons technology.
For the past thirty years, new and improv¬
ed weapons have emerged at an un¬
manageably rapid rate, compounding suspi¬
cions and uncertainties and creating in
States, particularly the major Powers, a
degree of preoccupation with military mat¬
ters that is probably unprecedented. All too
often technology has raced ahead of
strategy and tactics. Similarly, the tech¬
nological arms race has complicated the
process of political assessment and efforts
to control the race through negotiation.
In virtually all categories of major
weapons a completely new model comes
along every five to eight years, with an in¬
tervening period characterized by the con¬
tinuous refinement and modification of the
earlier model (or models). Moreover, the
range of types of weapons in which this pro¬
cess occurs has expanded continuously as
technological developments have made con¬
ceptually new weapons possible or permit¬
ted greater functional specialization. SIPRI
estimates of the research and development
input per unit of output in the military and
civilian sectors in the United States of
America, the United Kingdom and the
Federal Republic of Germnay, suggest that,
at present, the average military product is
some twenty times as research-intensive as
the average civil product.
These indications of the relative intensity
of the military research and development ef¬
fort are fully borne out by what is known or
can reasonably be surmised about the global
magnitude of this effort. Global expen¬
ditures on militan/ research and develop¬
ment in 1980 were of the approximate order
of $35,000 million or approximately one
quarter of the estimated $150,000 million ex¬
pended for all research and development.
Twenty years earlier, in 1960, global
military research and development
amounted to about $13,000 million but ac¬
counted for a significantly larger fraction of
all research and development. This can be
deduced from the fact that six coun¬
tries United States, the Soviet Union,
the Federal Republic of Germany, Japan,
France and the United Kingdom ac¬
counted for about 85 per cent of the world's
research and development, and in five of
these (all except the Soviet Union), it is
known that the military share in total
22
research and development was significantly
higher in 1960 than it is today.
Military research and development expen¬
diture is even more highly concentrated than
total research and development; just two
countries, the United States and the Soviet
Union, account for a similar share of military
research and development. Adding France
and Britain would push this fraction above
90 per cent.
Information on the number of scientists
and engineers in military research and
development is even more sketchy than the
financial data. The most recent survey of
global research and development suggest
that 2,279,000 scientists and engineers were
thus employed in 1973. The best known
estimate of the number engaged in military
research and development is the SIPRI
figure of 400,000 for the early 1970s. More
recently it has been suggested that over
500,000 scientists and engineers are engag¬
ed in military research and development. In
other words, approximately 20 per cent of
the world's qualified scientists and
engineers were engaged in military work
during the 1970s. As with expenditure, this
share would have been significantly higher
during the 1960s and perhaps even higher
still during the latter part of the 1950s.
It should be recalled that a 1972 United
Nations study. Disarmament and Develop¬
ment, gives the share of military research
and development as 40 per cent of expen¬
ditures ($25 thousand million out of $60
thousand million). As this figure, or even
higher figures, are widely quoted in the
public debate, it might be useful to stress
that the most recent estimates point to a
share of resources used for military research
and development of the order of 20 to 25
per cent as regards both manpower and
expenditure.
Even so the absolute magnitude of expen¬
ditures for military research and develop¬
ment is extremely large and it remains by far
the largest single objective of scientific in¬
quiry and technological development.
If a more accurate accounting were possi¬
ble, the figures presented above would
almost certainly appear conservative. For
example, much of the expenditure on space
activities in the United States and the Soviet
Union has direct or strongly indirect military
utility and is undoubtedly undertaken
primarily for this purpose. More than
$10,000 million is spent on "non-military"
space activities each year by these countries
and others.
It is important to view military research
and development with some perspective.
The stock of knowledge at any given point
in time is the direct result of the research
and development effort over the preceding
decades and, indirectly, of this effort over
the preceding centuries. It is likely that the
present stock of useful knowledge is much
less than it might have been had we not pur¬
sued the arms race so enthusiastically.
It is true that several technological
developments of major significance for
civilian life were brought to fruition at an
early date because of their perceived military
utility. This does not mean, of course, that
progress in these spheres would have been
slower in the absence of military research
and development. It is possible that without
the latter the requisite advances in the
economic and social spheres could have
been achieved more efficiently. An assess¬
ment of how far the development of the
stock of really useful knowledge has been
promoted or held back by the carrying-out
of military research and development would
require a special study, the conclusions of
which would rest more on hypotheses than
empirical evidence.
. It has been suggested that military
demands have been largely responsible for
the rapid increase in the resources devoted
to research and development generally so
that even the magnitude of the civilian ef¬
forts might be jeopardized by a process of
disarmament and the reduction of tensions.
This view might have some validity if the
economic and social state of the world was
robust and no significant future problems
could be identified, but it couid hardly be
said that there is now a shortage of possible
civilian projects on which defence R and D
scientists could be re-employed.
On a more positive note, it must be
acknowledged that the military pioneered
and perfected the systems approach on
research and development. This has im¬
parted a degree of predictability to
the accomplishment of scientific and
technological advances unknown before the
Second World War.
For these various reasons, we can state
with some confidence that the stock of
useful knowledge and technology in the
year 2000 will be immeasurably enlarged if
we succeed in diverting to civilian ends a
considerable fraction of the funds and man¬
power now programmed to work in the
military field.
