SCIENCE CITY
OF THE UKRAINE
by Boris Paton
BORIS EUGENIEVICH PATON, of the Ukrai¬
nian SSR, is president of the Ukrainian Academy
of Sciences and a member of the Academy of
Sciences of the USSR. A leading world figure in
thefield ofmetal welding, his many discoveries in
this area have earned him several awards, in¬
cluding the Lenin Prize.
SINCE the coming of socialism Kiev has
become one of the most important
cultural, scientific and industrial
centres of the USSR. In Kiev are located
nearly 70 per cent of the institutes and agen¬
cies of the prestigious Academy of Sciences
of the Ukrainian SSR, which, during the
sixty-odd years of its existence has carried
out an enormous amount of research in the
most diverse fields of technology and of the
natural and social sciences.

The Academy of Sciences has given birth
to a number of schools of scientific thought
whose work today is universally recognized.
These include D.A. Grave and his group
who carried out important research in
algebra and numerical theory; and teams
working on the theory of non-linear oscilla¬
tions, led by N.M. Krylov, and on elasticity,
under A.N. Dynnik.
Research conducted by K.D. Sinelnikov,
A.K. Valter, A.I. Leipunsky, G.D.
Latychev and others marked an important
step forward in the development of nuclear
physics. It was thanks to this research that
fission of the lithium nucleus was achieved
for the first time in the Soviet Union and
that the first particle accelerator was built.
In the earth sciences, investigations car¬
ried out by Ukrainian scientists have led to
the discovery of large deposits of oil, iron
ore, coal and other useful minerals.
An extremely important field for the na¬
tional economy is research on the techniques
of metal welding. The methods developed at
the Paton Institute of Electric Welding have
revolutionized industry and have rapidly
replaced the old technology of assembly by
riveting.
Today researchers from the Ukrainian
Academy of Sciences rank among the
world's top specialists in the development of
the theoretical principles of arc-weldjng.
Their work on processes such as electroslag
welding, carbon dioxide shielded welding,
electron-beam welding, plasma welding, ex¬
plosive welding, and underwater welding,
has led to fundamental changes in
metalwork technology.
In 1969 Ukrainian research scored a
major success and a world première when a
cutting and welding experiment was carried
out in space aboard the spaceship Soyuz-6
with the aid of the "Vulkan" equipment
developed by Academy of Sciences
specialists. The experiment marked the birth
of a new space technology that will have a
vital part of play in the conquest of the
cosmos.
Another major achievement of Ukrainian
science has been the development of a
general theory of isotope separation with
important applications in the manufacture
of industrial equipment used in heavy water
production and in the separation of
uranium isotopes. This was a basic starting-
point for the development of nuclear
energy, a power source of increasing impor¬
tance in the present energy crisis.
Finally, mention should be made of the
Academy of Sciences' Institute of
Cybernetics whose research workers have
clarified a number of major theoretical
problems in their field, and of the Institute
of Supra-resistant Materials where impor¬
tant work is being carried out in the field of
industrial technology, in particular on the
equipment required for the production of
artificial diamonds. Boris Paton
Svyatoslav I, grand prince of Kiev (945-972), and his family; from the Svyatoslav
Codex (Kiev, 1073). Svyatoslav was a great hero of early Russian history.

