Hue, a city in peril
The history of Viet Nam
Anew book by Mr. Le Thành Khôi,
a teacher at the Sorbonne and a
Unesco consultant, presents the
fullest portrait so far of the history of Viet
Nam from its origins to 1 858 (the date of
French intervention). Drawing on the best
Vietnamese, Chinese and European
sources, and taking account of the most
recent archaeological discoveries in Viet
Nam, the author traces the development
of Vietnamese civilization.
The earliest Vietnamese kingdom. Van
Lang, appeared during the Bronze Age,
some time in the seventh century BC. The
dispersion pattern of the famous decorated
drums of Dong-son reveals how its culture
spread through southern China and south¬
east Asia. It shared many characteristics
with other cultures of the region, including
slash and burn farming, irrigation, the use
of stone hoes and bronze ploughs,
totemism, tattooing and building on piles.
Viet Nam was invaded by the Han in the
second century BC, and for over a thou¬
sand years formed part of the Chinese em¬
pire which introduced iron and brought
Confucianism and Taoism (Buddhism
came from the south). But integration on¬
ly went so far. Thanks to a vigorous and
firmly established culture, to the economic
base offered by the Red River delta, to a
relatively numerous population and to the
solid structure of their village communities,
the Viet were able (and here, perhaps, they
are a unique case among the peoples south
of the Yangtze) to preserve their identity
and their language and finally, after many
vicissitudes, to recover their independence
in the twentieth century.
The construction of the Vietnamese na¬
tion followed a dual rhythm: resistance to
periodic invasions from the north, and the
"march to the south" of a farming people
which, pressing forward to conquer new
lands, clashed first with the Chams and
then with the Khmers. The monarchical
system, at first "patrimonial" and based
on the royal clan, became "bureaucratic"
in the fifteenth century with Confucianism
as the official doctrine and a corps of of¬
ficials recruited by civil service examina¬
tions of a literary nature.
But after a period of vigour Confucianism
lost its vitality. In the nineteenth century,
before foreign intervention, a combination
of intellectual rigidity, economic stagnation
and social tensions which resulted in
numerous peasant revolts, sounded the
death knell of the monarchy. In literature,
however, the eighteenth and early nine
teenth century saw the flowering of Viet¬
namese poetry. The author traces the
social significance of this poetry and
translates some fine examples of it.
Mr. Le Thành Khôi's work provides a
unique synthesis of the political history and
cultural development of Viet Nam. It is
richly documented and illustrated: there
are over a hundred illustrations of
prehistoric objects, Dong-son drums,
religious, civil and military architecture,
sculpture, painting, ceramics and calli¬
graphy. It is also an illuminating personal
contribution to historical debate on such
issues as the formation of Vietnamese na¬
tionality, the "feudal" or "Asiatic" nature
of the ancient system of production, and
the re-establishment of Vietnamese unity
in the eighteenth and nineteenth century.
It is an indispensable reference book not
only for specialists and teachers but forthe
general reader and all those who are in¬
terested in Viet Nam and want to under¬
stand in depth certain aspects of the situa¬
tion there today.
Histoire du Viet Nam des Origines à 1 858,
by Le Thành Khôi, Sudestasie, Paris, 1 982,
452 pages.
32

Once the capital of the Nguyen dynasty, the city of Hue, in Viet Nam,
stands on the north bank of the River of Perfumes, twelve kilometres
from the coast. Grouped within the "Imperial City" and the "Forbid¬
den Purple City", which constituted the heart of the royal capital, are
a number of early 19th-century buildings or remains of buildings of high
artistic and architectural interest. To this huge urban architectural com¬
plex must be added the seven royal tombs, situated a few kilometres
to the south of the city, with their temples, palaces and gardens. To¬
day this shrine of Vietnamese culture is in a serious state of deteriora¬
tion. In addition to the damage resulting from the terrible fire of 1947
and the fighting which took place there in 1968, the buildings are suf¬
fering from the encroachment of tropical vegetation and the ravages
of time. At the end of the war, in 1 975, the Government of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam began carrying out the most urgent provisional
protection measures. In November 1 981 , within the context of Unesco's
general aim of preserving the cultural heritage of mankind, Mr. Amadou-
Mahtar M'Bow, the Director-General of Unesco, launched an interna¬
tional appeal for the preservation and restoration of the city of Hue. The
initial stage of the long-term project adopted by the Unesco General Con¬
ference covers the restoration or reconstruction of fifteen monuments
and two tombs over the period 1981 to 1986. Photos show: (1) The
eastern entrance to the Imperial City; (2) The tomb of Minh Mang; (3)
The gardens surrounding the tomb of Minh Mang; (4) The Mien Lac Cac
pavilion of the Imperial City; (5) Interior of the Ta Vu, damaged by fire
in 1947; (6) The mandarin's esplanade at the tomb of Khal Dinh.
Photos Vorontzoff, Unesco
