Environment
and
the global underclass
40,000 preventable child deaths each day
by Erik Eckholm
The United Nations Conference
on the Human Environment, held in
Stockholm in 1972, provided a focal
point for the gathering environmen¬
tal concerns of the 1960s; it gave
birth to the United Nations Environ¬
ment Programme (UNEP) to act as
a catalyst and as "the environmen¬
tal conscience of the UN system".
Ten years later, in Nairobi, from 10
to 18 May, the Governing Council of
UNEP held a meeting to com¬
memorate Stockholm and to take
stock of the achievements of a
decade.
THE convergence of ideas about
environment and Third World
development over the last
decade must be reckoned a historic ad¬
vance for both fields. In the past those
concerned about the preservation of
nature and those concerned about
economic progress have often been at
loggerheads. Recently, many on both
sides have begun to realize that they
need the insights of each other if the
goals of either are to be met.
The world conservation movement
has for the most part focused on the
need to protect endangered animals
and to establish parks and preserves.
But an animal cannot be saved apart
from its habitat, and natural areas can¬
not last as fortress islands in seas of
hungry people. Where large numbers
lack a means to make a decent living,
some are sure to invade national parks
to grow food and cut wood. Desperate¬
ly poor people cannot afford to worry
much about what they see as useless
tigers.
Instead of dwelling on the threat to
the environment posed by develop¬
ment, many conservationists now
recognize the need for development as
a prerequisite of successful conserva¬
tion. But not just any sort of pell-mell,
lopsided development; the key is
economic progress that is ecologically
sustainable and satisfies the essential
needs of the underclass. Analysis of
Third World conservation problems
ERIK P. ECKHOLM is a specialist on environ¬
ment and development issues who has served as
a consultant to United Nations agencies, as a
U. S. government official and as a Senior Resear¬
cher with WorldWatch Institute in Washington,
D. C. This article is adapted from his new book
Down to Earth: Environment and Human Needs,
published by W.W. Norton in New York and
Pluto Press in London. His previous books.
Losing Ground and The Picture of Health, have
appeared in ten languages.
leads inescapably to concern for social
justice. Broader sharing of the fruits of
development is important not only
because it is morally right, but also
because it is crucial to the protection of
natural systems.
The deterioration of natural systems
in poor countries is at once a symptom
and a cause of the extreme misery in
which hundreds of millions live. The
struggle to preserve global environmen¬
tal quality is unavoidably intertwined
with the struggle to improve the lot of
the global underclass the landless
rural residents, the urban slum
dwellers, and the tribal minorities who
are the poorest of the world's poor.
Roughly half this underclass lives in the
three South Asian countries of India,
Bangladesh, and Pakistan. Large
numbers live elsewhere in Asia,
especially Indonesia, and in sub¬
sanaran Africa, with the remainder
scattered among countries in the
Middle East, Latin America, and the
Caribbean.
Struggling week by week to survive,
caught in endless cycles of hunger, il¬
literacy, exploitation, and disease, the
absolute poor have little time to worry
about global environmental trends. Yet
in many ways they are more deeply af¬
fected by environmental quality than
are the affluent. Most of the rural poor
live directly off the soils, forests,
waters, and wildlife whose deteriora¬
tion has become the object of so much
international concern. Many are forced
by circumstances beyond their control
to destroy the very resources from
which they must scrape their living. In
the cities, the poor live in filth and are
often the prime victims of industry's
pollution, too.
Undernutrition is chronic among the
underclass. In the mid-1970s, accor¬
ding to United Nations estimates, more
than 400 million people one-tenth of
27

^humanity consumed less than the
"minimum critical diet" below which
health may be endangered. The ill ef¬
fects of undernourishment are often
nearly invisible. Outside of famine
zones and refugee camps, overt starva¬
tion is uncommon. But chronic under¬
nutrition can mean chronic health pro¬
blems, a higher chance of death from
disease at any age, heightened odds of
mortality for mothers during childbirth
and for their babies, and a reduced
capacity for work. Routine diseases
such as diarrhoea and measles are,
among the undernourished, routine
killers.
Most of the world's absolute poor
live in rural areas, and most of them are
either landless labourers or people who
lack secure access to enough farmland
to support themselves at a decent level.
Landless labourers, sharecroppers,
and marginal farmers together con¬
stitute the majority of rural residents in
In preserving 'useless'
species, are conservationists
barking up the wrong tree?
most countries of Asia and Latin
America, and they are rising in number
in Africa, where land inadequacy has
only recently begun to emerge as a ma¬
jor problem. These people, the
dispossessed of the earth, have
generally been bypassed by economic
development and in some cases have
been harmed by it.
Lacking land or jobs in traditional far¬
ming areas, peasant farmers clear and
plant lands that should never be farm¬
ed. They move into rain forests,
destroying diverse ecosystems in what
often turn out to be futile attempts at
sustainable farming. Sometimes within
sight of huge, under-utilized
agricultural estates in valley floors,
desperate farmers in South and Central
America plough up mountain slopes so
steep that the topsoil washes away
within a year or two.
In semi-arid zones of Africa and Asia,
land-hungry farmers plant in low-
rainfall zones, which turn into dust
bowls when the inevitable drought
comes. Meanwhile, herders are squeez¬
ed into ever more restricted areas and
the problem of overgrazing is inten¬
sified. The emerging inadequacy of the
land base in relation to population and
technology is often partly concealed by
a steady decline in the soil-preserving
fallow period.
The rural landless have their counter¬
parts in the slums and shantytowns of
Third World cities. With the old slums
overflowing, huge numbers of people
become squatters on vacant land or
buy illegally subdivided plots and build
their own dwellingsanything from
tarpaper shanties to sturdy and livable
structures. The most disadvantaged
We, the people, are like a saucepan; all thefood is cooked in the saucepan, it suffers the torments of
the fire, but when thefood is ready, it is told: you cannot come to the table, you will make the cloth
dirty.
Jacques Roumain
(1907-1944)
Preparing the family meal, India. Photo © Claude Sauvageot, Paris.
28

people tend to wind up on dangerously
steep hillsides or in flood zones, where
natural hazards join overcrowding and
lack of sanitation to endanger health.
Because they live in illegal areas, squat¬
ters are seldom served by convenient
water connexions, let alone sewage-
disposal facilities or garbage collection.
In many cities they pay exorbitant rates
for water that is carted in by private
vendors, and thus end up paying more
per unit for this basic need than do the
rich. They are often victimized by
severe air pollution and water-borne
toxic chemicals the effluents of
others' affluence.
More than half the population of the
developing countries (excluding China)
Are the poor doomed to
destroy the environment that
sustains them?
lacks ready access to safe water sup¬
plies and waste disposal facilities. The
resultant poor sanitation combines with
undernutrition to take an awesome toll,
especially among the babies of the
underclass.
Altogether, according to the World
Health Organization, about seventeen
million infants and children under age
five died each year in the late 1970s. If
the excellent health conditions of Nor¬
thern Europe had prevailed throughout
the world, only two million such deaths
would have occurred. Hence fifteen
million deaths of babies and small
children more than forty thousand a
daycan be regarded as preventable.
All other global health problems pale
before this one. Yet because they are
so commonplace these forty thousand
daily scandals do not provoke the
global outrage they should.
Some planners and aid agencies
have at last begun to incorporate an
ecological perspective into develop¬
ment activities. But solving the in¬
terlocking crises of poverty and en¬
vironmental degradation depends as
much on politically contentious socio¬
economic reforms as on improved
planning.
More than anything else, the stone
wall of inopportunity facing the poorest
fifth of humankind ensures the continu¬
ing degradation of natural resources in
large parts of the world. In the absence
of national and international economic
reforms, efforts to protect wildlife and
forests, to manage watersheds and arid
lands, to clean up shantytowns and
waterways, cannot be fully successful.
Nor is population growth apt to slow
down quickly among people whose
children so frequently die. The
worldwide struggle to preserve a livable
environment must be part of the
broader struggle to create a more just
global society.
H Erik Eckholm
He who declares that he has the courage to withstand hunger has never experienced it.
The Book of Negro Wisdom
A canteen at Bihar, India. Photo © Claude Sauvageot, Paris.
29
