SWORDS
INTO PLOWSHARES
On the key issue of employment
virtually all possible alternatives
to military expenditure will result
in as many, if not more,
jobs being created
THE terms conversion and redeploy¬
ment describe the process of change
whereby real human and material
resources shift from the production of one
set of goods and services to the production
of another.
The specific concern here is the shift of
resources from the production of com¬
modities and services for military purposes
to goods and services that can contribute to
economic and social development. More
particularly, we are concerned with con¬
version and redeployment of the resources
involved in the production of commodities
used or consumed by the military and which
have little or no civilian utility.
A significant part of military demand is
directed at goods and services that are
essentially identical to those consumed in
the civilian sector. In this case, thé problem
is the relatively minor one of ensuring that
civilian demand fills the gap left by cutbacks
in military spending.
This is not the case with nuclear and
chemical weapons, combat aircraft,
missiles, warships, tanks and so on. The
resources involved in producing these items
are likely, in varying degrees, to be unsuited
for the production of civilian goods, so that
explicit consideration must be given to the
ways in which their capabilities can be
altered to permit* the smoothest possible
transition to the production of socially useful
goods and services.
Conversion and redeployment are not
associated exclusively with disarmament.
Any form of economic and social develop¬
ment represents a continuous process of
conversion. Particularly in modern industrial
economies, the factors of production must
respond continuously to the development of
new products and the phasing-out of old
ones and to the introduction of new produc¬
tion techniques. Indeed, the pace of
technological change and the extraordinary
mobility of capital in recent decades have led
most countries to undertake measures to
facilitate necessary changes in the structure
of industry and to adopt legislation to pro-
26
vide some protection for workers affected
by such changes.
The point to be stressed is that modern in¬
dustrial economies including, in particular,
the economies with the largest military
establishments, have a considerable inbuilt
capacity to convert resources from one ac¬
tivity to another. Furthermore, any process
of conversion and redeployment associated
with disarmament measures, if developed in
the context of even more far-reaching struc¬
tural adjustments and modifications of na¬
tional economies and of the international
economic system, could be productively in¬
tegrated into these wider changes.
Setting the problems of conversion in a
wider perspective, it is important to bear in
mind that the process of disarmament is
almost certain to be quite gradual. In other
words it is not at all realistic to portray the
conversion problem as involving, in a single
step, the need to replace $500 thousand
million of demand or absorb tens of millions
of persons into the civilian work-force.
In practical terms, the scale of the conver¬
sion problem stemming from disarmament
measures will be orders of magnitude
smaller than this at any given point in the
process. Indeed, it is far more likely that the
rate of disarmament agreed upon will lag
behind conversion capabilities or, to state
the matter less pessimistically, there should
be no difficulty in gearing the rate of disar¬
mament to the rate at which the resources
involved can move smoothly to alternative
activities.
Most general investigations of the conver¬
sion issue take as their starting-point the ex¬
traordinary success of demobilization
following the Second World War.
In the United States between 1945 and
1948, some ten million persons were releas¬
ed from the armed forces and the defence
budget declined by nearly $40 thousand
million. Similarly, defence-related employ¬
ment in industry fell from over twelve million
persons in 1945 to less than one million in
1946.
In the United Kingdom, seven million per¬
sons were demobilized within sixteen
months to the end of the war. In neither
country, however, did unemployment in the
immediate post-war years exceed 4 per cent.
The experience in the Soviet Union was
similarly positive.
It is true, of course, that the particular cir¬
cumstances prevailing at the end of the war
contributed enormously to the success of
the conversion effort. In the Soviet Union
and, to a lesser extent, the United Kingdom,
the rebuilding of war-damaged towns and
industries provided a major outlet for the
production capacities released by
demobilization. In the United States and
also in the United Kingdom, a surge in con¬
sumer demand produced by years of
relative deprivation and accumulated sav¬
ings a major role in sustaining ag¬
gregate demand.
From the industrial standpoint, another
important consideration is that for most
plants and factories the problem was that of
reconverting to the civilian products produc¬
ed before the war. While these conditions
undoubtedly facilitated post-war conver¬
sion, the fact remains that an enormous
economic adjustment was accomplished far
more smoothly than most experts had con¬
sidered possible. Of particular importance in
this regard is that the anticipation of major
problems led to detailed planning of the
measures needed to accomplish the transi- .
tion from war to peace. This process began
well before the end of the war and is con- .
sidered by some to have made a major con¬
tribution to the success of the conversion
process.
In the Soviet Union, the first post-war
economic plan appeared within six months
of the termination of hostilities. And in the
United States, the Government was ready
with an array of . remedies including
graduated demobilization, specific incen¬
tives for the mass production of consumer
durables, low interest rates to encourage
spending and generous adult education
programmes.

27

SWORDS INTO PLOWSHARES
! As regards the overall feasibility of con¬
verting resources from the production of
military goods to civilian goods, the ex¬
perience immediately following the Second
World War is clearly very encouraging.
Moreover, the manner in which the conver¬
sion was accomplished merits a more detail¬
ed reassessment than has been made to
date.
It does not follow, however, that States
with large armed forces and significant
military industries can afford to adopt a
sanguine attitude toward the conversion
problems that arms control and disarma¬
ment measures will raise. The characteristics
of the military sector have changed pro¬
foundly since 1945. Military technology, and
therefore military industry, have diverged
quite sharply from civilian technology and
industry. The major military powers have
significant human and material resources
more or less exclusively specialized in fulfill¬
ing military requirements and which have
never been deployed in the civilian field.
Bearing these considerations in mind, one
can attempt to list the characteristics of
defence industries from the standpoint of
the problems that they would encounter if
conversion to non-military production
became necessary. As regards labour, the
emphasis on quality and performance in
specialized branches of the military sector
has led to the acquisition of skills and, more
particularly, to the adoption of attitudes
toward design and production that would be
out of place in most commercial fields where
high production rates and increased efficien¬
cy compete with quality as goals. This ap¬
plies especially to the scientific and
engineering labour that constitute a large
fraction of the military industrial work-force.
The skills required of the management
personnel of military industrial enterprises
are also unique to this field. On the one
hand, few if any production activities in the
commercial field rival the military sector in
terms of the technical complexity of the pro¬
duct and the number of suppliers of parts
and components involved. The experience
that the prime military contractors have ac¬
cumulated in systems management is one of
the main reasons why Governments in the
major Western arms-producing countries
are so reluctant to see any of these concerns
go under. On the other hand, dealing with
the Government as a buyer is a unique
challenge in marketing, requires the adop¬
tion of special accounting procedures and
conforming in general with government
regulations.
Secondly, much of the capital equipment
used in some branches of defence produc¬
tion is highly specialized and lacks the flex¬
ibility for application to civilian output. In
sharp contrast to the Second World War,
when civilian industry undertook to produce
war material and then reconverted to pro¬
duction for the commercial market, the pre
sent situation is the product of a thirty-year
period during which military and civil
technologies evolved partly on separate and
divergent paths. A proportion of military in¬
dustrial production takes place in facilities
that are used exclusively for this purpose.
Apart from the fact that a massive and
sustained military R and D effort has yielded
military industrial capacities that operate on
a technological plateau considerably higher
than the bulk of civilian industry, extremely
demanding (or just different) military stan¬
dards and specifications and the desire to
have capacity available for mobilization also
contribute to the separation of military from
civilian industry. One of the more con¬
spicuous results of this is that the defence
industry tends to have much excess capacity
ranging, in the United States, from over 90
per cent in the munitions industry to bet¬
ween 30 per cent and 50 per cent in most
other branches.
Several other features of the defence in¬
dustry tend to make the companies or enter¬
prises involved apprehensive about disarma¬
ment measures and the prospect of having
to convert to civilian production. For
example, most defence-work is paid for on a
continuous basis providing a very favourable
cash-flow situation, particularly for finan¬
cially weak companies. Similarly, companies
accustomed to performing low-risk military
R and D will be understandably nervous at
the prospect of committing their own
resources to the development and produc¬
tion of commodities for the uncertain and
competitive civilian market.
These concerns will be amplified by the
fact that companies specializing in military
work will have legitimate fears regarding
their competitiveness in the civilian sphere
owing to large overhead costs because the
work-force is dominated by managerial,
scientific and engineering personnel and
because they lack skill or experience in the
marketing of civil products. Furthermore,
given the financial magnitude of military
contracts and the long periods involved in
development and production, the major
contractors will, at any given point, have a
substantial backlog of military work for both
national and foreign military forces to com¬
plicate the process of conversion to non-
military work.
Finally, there ¡s"me question of profit. The
evidence here is inconclusive: depending on
how the rate of profit is computed, whether
this is done for large or small defence con¬
tractors and for prime contractors or sub¬
contractors, it is possible to show that the
rate of profit in military industry is both high
and low compared to civilian industry.
On the other hand, once a military con¬
tract has been secured the rate of profit is at
least fairly certain owing to cost-plus pric¬
ing. Moreover, the magnitude of the profit
that can be earned on a single military con¬
tract is often very large indeed and this can
serve important corporate objectives even if
the rate of profit is relatively low. It can also
be mentioned that, at least in the United
States, foreign militan/ sales are significantly
more profitable than domestic sales.
It is clear that these various characteristics
will be present to varying degrees depending
on where military industry is located. Pro¬
fits, for example, are not a significant force
in the Soviet Union, motivating industrial
concerns to enter or to remain in the military
sector. Similarly, the managers of Soviet
military industrial enterprises will not be con¬
cerned at their lack of experience in
marketing civil productions, since this func¬
tion would be performed by the central plan¬
ning authorities. On the other hand, the
evidence suggests that, owing to the high
priority accorded to defence, managerial
personnel in the Soviet military industrial
sector are relatively insulated from the
foremost managerial problem in the rest of
the economy, namely, securing the supply
of needed personnel and materials.
As regards the retraining of labour, it is
often assumed that the workers engaged in
the development and production of modern
sophisticated weapon systems possess
uniquely specialized qualifications and skills.
In fact, the professional skills needed in this
field are linked in most cases with produc¬
tion techniques that are identical or com¬
parable with those for civil products. Some
reorientation and retraining may be required
for certain specialized occupations and
skills, particularly in respect of R and D
personnel.
Informed judgement in the Soviet Union
suggests that retraining for a period of up to
one year for scientists and up to two years
for certain engineers is needed for a suc¬
cessful transition to civilian work. An addi¬
tional problem is that a significant part of the
stock of knowledge possessed by scientists
and engineers in certain specialized
branches of the military sector is classified
and would be wasted unless restrictions on
its use were lifted.
The conversion of uniformed military per¬
sonnel is a separate problem, both quan¬
titatively and qualitatively. Since the global
figure for personnel in the armed forces is at
least twenty-five million, even agreement on
modest force-level reductions could involve
the demobilization of millions of persons.
Furthermore, since the civilian economy, to
a reasonable approximation, already pro¬
vides for the consumption needs of military
personnel, their demobilization will con¬
stitute an addition to the labour market.
Reference has been made above to the
wide variety and growing level of skills re¬
quired of military personnel. In broad terms,
this will clearly ease the transition to civilian
work, but the available evidence suggests
that significant problems can still be an¬
ticipated. In the late 1960s, it was estimated
that 80 per cent of the military jobs held by
enlisted men in the United States armed
forces corresponded to only about 10 per
cent of those held by male civilian workers.
This fact, of course, suggests that voca¬
tional and educational training prior to
28

demobilization will play a major role in eas¬
ing the transition. Similarly, it will obviously
be advantageous to ensure at least an ap¬
proximate correspondence between the
skills acquired before demobilization and
employment opportunities in the civilian
economy. And since the latter will be in¬
fluenced by the conversion strategies im¬
plemented in the military industrial sector, it
will be necessary to co-ordinate and in¬
tegrate the conversion measures adopted in
the various parts of the military sector.
Specialized capital equipment presents
less of a problem. Where such equipment is
owned by private concerns a variety of in¬
direct measures can be adopted to make it
attractive for them to divest themselves of
this equipment and by the State quite direct
measures can be used.
Since it is quite unrealistic, at least for an
extended interim period, to expect States to
totally demolish their military industrial
capabilities, it would be highly desirable to
reduce the gap between military and civilian
industrial requirements. If military and civil
production took place side by side at the
plant level, all dimensions of the conversion
problem would be minimized. To ac¬
complish this, it would be necessary to curb
the military appetite for performance and
technological excellence which, in itself,
would make an enormous contribution to
slowing down the arms race and facilitate
the achievement of arms control and disar¬
mament measures.
Primary responsibility for conversion, in
an overall sense, will inevitably fall on central
governments. This follows from the nature
of the relationship between the Government
and the military sector and is particularly
true with regard to initiating prepara¬
tions for a conversion process. The Govern¬
ment should take the lead, but the process
of acquiring detailed knowledge on the
nature and probable magnitude of the ad¬
justment problems and devising measures
,^M ^^
i l-v ^W^-.r-TJ r ""'
IjW- ^
r- pw<
A"
<m h^B
>. -.
i
>
I.J m m
"Modern industrial economies, including in particular the
economies with the largest military establishments, have a
considerable inbuilt capacity to convert resources from
one activity to another."
and arrangements to overcome them would
be a joint endeavour with industry, trade
unions and officials in the most military-
dependent regions and communities.
Governments in all countries can be
broadly confident at least over the medium
and long terms in their capacity to play a
major role in maintaining the general level of
economic activity in the event of significant
reductions in military expenditure. On the
key issue of employment, there is, as we
have seen, persuasive evidence that virtually
all possible alternatives to military expen¬
diture and production will result in at least as
many and, in most cases, more jobs being
created. In planned economies, of course,
the government has direct and comprehen¬
sive authority to accomplish this, and in
market economies there exists a diversified
arsenal of fiscal and monetary measures to
complement the market system.
In all cases, however, the Government
must carefully dovetail disarmament with
the time required to accomplish the conver¬
sion of the resources thus released so as not
to overtax adjustment capabilities. The basic
considerations determining the transition
period are identifying new markets, develop¬
ing new products, retooling to produce
them and retraining management and pro¬
duction workers.
In market economy countries, an addi¬
tional important consideration will be the
timing of compensatory fiscal and monetary
policies to ensure that the stimulating ef¬
fects coincide with military cutbacks. While
the mix of compensatory programmes is of
little consequence in the long run, it is very
important in the short run owing to the vary¬
ing time lags associated with different
measures. For example, increases in non-
military government spending will have
direct and immediate effects while the full
effects of a tax cut will not be felt for several
years.
It is a widely held belief that the oppor¬
tunity to apply science and technology more
directly and systematically to economic and
social problems is the most significant divi¬
dend that disarmament would bring. A na¬
tion's military, scientific and technical
resources comprise manpower (scientists,
engineers, technicians and technical
management), facilities and equipment, and
scientific and technical information. Each of
these components requires separate atten¬
tion for conversion purposes.
The formulation of a national science
policy that reflects economic and social
priorities both domestically and interna¬
tionally would be extremely useful in order
to give direction and focus to the conversion
effort. The specific requirements for adap¬
ting personnel in military R and D will vary
considerably among and within the different
categories of personnel involved. Determin¬
ing the probable requirements for retraining,
re-education and redeployment will require
detailed knowledge of the composition of
the military R and D community. Thought
must be given to how and where retraining
and re-education is to be done and who
would pay for it.
29

SWORDS INTO PLOWSHARES
As regards facilities and equipment, it
would be necessary to compile a detailed na¬
tional inventory as a basis on which to
assess its adaptability to civilian R and D.
Similarly, the stock of military, scientific and
technical information can be declassified
and systematically canvassed for possible
civilian applications. An important com¬
plementary measure would be to encourage
civilian industry to be more receptive to R
and D. This could boost productivity and
also generate a demand for management
personnel with knowledge and experience in
the effective use of R and D resources, that
is, the type of management personnel
employed in disproportionately large
numbers in the defence industry.
The ambition and the need to make
science and technology more responsive to
economic and social requirements will not
be realized in a straightforward fashion. It is
true that such sectors as civil aerospace,
research into alternative sources of energy,
further development of nuclear energy
technologies so as' to make them safer for
civilian use, or the design of remotely-
controlled underwater devices for the ex¬
traction of raw materials are similar to the
highly specialized technologies in some
areas of the armaments sector.
On the other hand, such issues as coping
with pollution, improving the effectiveness
and availability of education and increasing
agricultural productivity in the developing
countries are enormously different from and
far more complex than the technical
problems confronted in transporting a man
to the moon or delivering a nuclear war¬
head accurately to a target 8,000 kilometres
away.
It is perhaps no exaggeration to say that
we are still quite ignorant as to how to apply
R and D resources to such problems.
Developing new methods, techniques and
approaches for effectively applying scientific
and technical resources to the resolution of
economic and social problems will require a
great deal of thought and experiment.
The general approach to conversion
outlined with regard to military R and D can
also be applied to military industry. The first
order of business is to determine as ac¬
curately as possible which industries in
which locations depend to a significant
degree on military demand, the
characteristics of the work-force involved
and the type of plant and equipment used.
Where plant, equipment and man¬
power by implication, the pro¬
duct not unduly specialized for military
purposes, the Government can determine
whether general compensatory monetary
and fiscal policy, together with market
forces, will suffice to maintain demand and
employment or whether more specific
measures would be desirable. Input-output
models can be employed to anticipate the
extent to which the pattern of demand
associated with compensatory policies
might differ from that associated with
military outlays. Where the mismatch is
significant, more industry-specific measures
could be prepared for possible implementa¬
tion.
At the other extreme represented by the
munition plans and the prime military con¬
tractors in aerospace, electronics and ship¬
building problems are rather for¬
midable. The Government, in conjunction
with management and unions in the in¬
dustry, must determine what alternative
uses for these resources are feasible and
desirable, with the feasible alternatives
clearly more important in the short run.
Once these strategic judgements have been
"It is a widely held belief that the
opportunity to apply science and
technology more directly and
systematically to economic and social
problems is the most significant
dividend that disarmament would bring.
30

made, the requirements for retraining, re¬
education and redeployment can be gauged
and programmes developed to satisfy them.
Similarly, the data base and a broad strategy
for the alternative use of military industrial
resources are essential elements for deter¬
mining the nature, extent and duration of
specific measures tax concessions, invest¬
ment incentives and the like needed to ac¬
complish the transition.
At least in market economies, the State
would not have to concern itself with speci¬
fying alternative products in any detail or
determining how they will be manufactured.
Nor should it attempt to do so. Its role
should be to guide and facilitate conversion
and to alleviate the hardships imposed on
the manpower resources displaced in the
process.
Nevertheless, to perform this role effec¬
tively the State must be well informed of the
difficulties associated with developing and
producing a new product and the time re¬
quired to accomplish it. Similarly, it must be
prepared to eliminate any unreasonable bar¬
riers to entry to the civilian markets that the
former suppliers of military equipment hope
to penetrate. It should be stressed again,
however, that this central dimension of the
conversion issue the resources directly
employed in meeting the military demand for
specialized goods and services is not over¬
whelmingly large even in the most heavily
armed States. Moreover, a process of disar¬
mament will be gradual rather than abrupt
and this will further diminish the magnitude
of the problem at any particular time.
One question that will have to be con¬
sidered with particular care is whether the
prime military contractors can convert to
civilian production and still retain broadly
the same structure. It was pointed out
above that these concerns have developed
unique capabilities in scientific and systems
management, that their work-force is
markedly top heavy with scientists,
engineers and technical management per¬
sonnel and that their marketing skills are
oriented exclusively toward government
procurement.
Some analysts feel that conversion to
civilian production will probably require that
these large-scale units be broken up.
Others, however, while granting the need
to change habits and attitudes acquired in
the military environment, argue that many
important requirements in the civilian arena
closely resemble large military projects in
terms of scientific and technical input and
requirements for strong capabilities in
systems management. Examples here would
include new sources of energy, exploiting
the resources of the ocean, environmental
protection and new systems for major cities
in such areas as transportation and sanita¬
tion.
A particularly interesting aspect of con¬
version is that related to the resources now
devoted to the development and production
of chemical warfare agents. Efforts are now
being made to permit negotiations' to begin
on a convention that would prohibit the
development, production, deployment and
stockpiling of chemical weapons and the
secure destruction of such stockpiles.
A recent study by the Stockholm Interna¬
tional Peace Research Institute concluded
that conversion was technically feasible and
would involve little or no disturbance for the
work-force involved. On the one .hand, it is
considered technically feasible to break
down stockpiled chemical warfare agents in¬
to their base materials and intermediate pro¬
ducts and apply these to products useable
for civilian purposes. Moreover, this process
requires the same specially skilled scientific
and technical personnel as are needed for
the production of chemical warfare agents.
On the other hand, it is quite feasible to pro¬
duce commercial products such as
pesticides, plasticizers and fire retardants in
plants producing chemical warfare agents.
Ironically, the very ease of conversion is a
serious drawback in this case because it
would be relatively easy to rededicate the
facility to agent production. Unless there
were to be a breakthrough on the question
of on-site inspection, verification of com¬
pliance with a chemical warfare convention
would probably require that the facilities be
shut down and broken up.
Given the almost universal judgement
that, with appropriate preparation and plan¬
ning, the transitional problems associated
with conversion can be readily accom¬
modated and bearing in mind that disarma¬
ment will almost certainly be a selective and
gradual process, it should be apparent that
the industrialized countries, including, in
particular, the major military powers, do not
lack important civilian uses for the resources
now dedicated to the military.
31

32

SWORDS INTO PLOWSHARES
It will be recalled that the developing
countries still account for only about 16 per
cent of global military expenditure and that
this sum is heavily concentrated in a relative¬
ly small number of countries, particularly
those in the Middle East region. With a few
important exceptions, R and D for military
purposes ¡s_ negligible. The production and
assembly of major weapons is considerably
more widespread but, again, the scale of the
effort is significant in only a few countries.
By and large, the labour employed in the
militan/ sector will not be exclusively
specialized in military work, and technology
in military industry will not be so far remov¬
ed from civilian industrial technology. It is
true that industry in the developing coun¬
tries is generally narrowly based and less
dynamic than in developed countries so that
the inherent capacity for adjustment and
conversion is lower. On the whole,
however, the problems associated with con¬
version would seem to be relatively small in
all but a few developing countries and the
benefits from disarmament easier to realize.
The military expenditures of the develop¬
ing countries, which stood at some $73,000
million in 1980, are by no means inconse¬
quential. Moreover, the alternative uses to
which these resources might be applied are
particularly compelling so that, as in the in¬
dustrialized countries, governments will
have to consider very carefully how the op¬
portunities opened up by disarmament
measures can be exploited to alleviate the
burden of the most urgent economic and
social problems and to help set the economy
on a sounder and more independent
footing.
In many developing countries, substantial
disarmament would significantly ease
prevailing financial constraints on the im¬
plementation of development plans. The
reduction in the import of arms and spare
parts and of capital goods and intermediate
products for local military production would
release foreign exchange to alleviate bottle-
If the nations were to place "their
awareness of a shared future above
their short-term ambitions and
individual interests, the tremendous
scientific and technological potential
of the world could then be used more
often to serve peaceful ends, promote
the common welfare of mankind and
help to forge relations based on justice
and a sense of solidarity."
necks in the programmes for industrializa¬
tion and the expansion of agricultural pro¬
duction. The armed forces, the military
bureaucracy^and personnel in defence in¬
dustries would provide a pool from which to
reduce shortages of various types of skilled
labour and of managerial personnel.
Moreover, the diversion to the military of
able-bodied, educated and skilled man¬
power from schools, universities and
technical institutions could be minimized.
Reducing the incidence of hunger and
malnutrition will clearly be a priority claim
on the resources released by disarmament
measures both in the short term and the
longer term. Education and health are two
more areas which require vast resources
even to make basic services and amenities
available to all.
Under present conditions, many develop¬
ing countries are projected to become more
dependent on impoited food over the next
two decades. This is a serious hazard, both
because the global balance between supply
and demand could easily become delicate
and because the real cost of food will almost
certainly increase substantially so that major
food import requirements will constitute an
even heavier drain on foreign exchange
reserves and, indirectly, on the capacity to
sustain growth.
There are a variety of research and
development challenges in this field: the
development of high-yielding varieties of
staple food for the diverse soil and climatic
conditions found in developing countries,
pest control, methods of food storage and
processing suited to local conditions; water
management and irrigation technologies;
and tools and equipment that use local raw
materials, can be produced domestically
with low acquisition, operating and
maintenance costs.
Recent advances in molecular biology
hold particular promise for food-deficit
developing countries. It is now considered
possible to produce protein from bacteria
and algae far more quickly and at con¬
siderably less cost than from animal and
agricultural sources. It remains to translate
this knowledge into facilities and processes
suitable for application in developing coun¬
tries. A recent investigation concluded that
"... advances in enzyme engineering,
microbial genetics and fermentation
technology... point at new approaches to
the development of small-scale processes
that could form a logical take-off point for
industrialization."
Two other areas in which the needs of the
developing countries are very great and
which offer considerable potential for the
conversion of military R and D resources are
health and education. For a variety of
reasons, including, until recently, preparing
for the possible use of biological weapons in
warfare, the military in the industrialized
countries have paid a great deal of attention
to infectious diseases, food hygiene and the
management of water and waste under field
conditions. The knowledge acquired and the
preventive capabilities developed have
potentially great applications in improving
health conditions in developing countries.
It has also been suggested that military
capabilities in the biological sciences could
be readily applied to the fight against infec¬
tious diseases, particularly those in
childhood, with military skills in organization
and logistic planning providing essential
backup to ensure the systematic and effec¬
tive implementation of remedies. As men¬
tioned previously, modern communication
technologies and new media techniques of¬
fer great potential for making educational
facilities more generally available in develop¬
ing countries. The practical application of
these skills appears to be a fruitful alter¬
native use for the engineering and systems
management capabilities of the military sec¬
tor in the industrialized countries.
In any list of alternative uses for military
capabilities mention should also be made of
the vast quantities of resources needed to
alleviate suffering and to help in reconstruc¬
tion as a result of the more or less predic¬
table cycle of natural disasters. The world¬
wide refugee problem also calls for vast
quantities of resources if the refugees' basic
requirements for survival are to be met.
These are two areas in which the interna¬
tional community has shown intself in re¬
cent times to be willing to assume a collec¬
tive responsibility.
A structural transformation such as the
conversion to civilian activities of the
resources now employed for military pur¬
poses will be much easier to accomplish in a
dynamic economic environment.
The existence of broad agreement on
where the solution lies is a far cry from the
elaboration and implementation of a
strategy to achieve that solution. The
Declaration and the Programme of Action
for a New International Economic Order
adopted in 1974 and their subsequent
elaboration at the seventh special session of
the United Nations General Assembly and in
the International Development Strategy for
the Third United Nations Development
Decade form the most comprehensive plan
of action that exists at present.
The implementation of this strategy with
deliberate speed is a vast undertaking, with
commensurately massive requirements for
resources and far-reaching implications for
the structure and pattern of global economic
activity. When new economic and social
programmes requiring resources valued at
several hundreds of billions of dollars are at
stake, the resource constraints imposed by
the arms race become apparent. It is even
legitimate to wonder whether the adoption
of such a bold and enlightened perspective
is at all possible if international relations
continue to be dominated by an arms race
mentality.
33
