Over the centuries, the interplay of cultures between China and the West expressed itself in many, often surprising ways. Above, the
ruins of an extraordinary Sino-Rococo edifice in the Yuanmingyuan, a vast garden in the northwest suburbs of Beijing. It was designed
by the Italian Jesuit Giuseppe Castiglione (1 698-1 768) who was a painter and functionary at the Qing imperial court where he was known
as Lang Shi-ning. The white marble building is carved with European motifs but the tiled roof and other features were typically Chinese.



Chinese civilization
and the West
by Zhang Kai
IN the ancient world economic and
cultural contacts between Europe
and Asia reached their zenith during
the second century AD. At that time the
Silk Road and its western connexions, the
vital trade link between East and West,
stretched some 12,000 kilometres
across the known world from Xian to
Gades (modern Cadiz) on the Atlantic
Ocean. Along it, from East to West,
travelled Chinese silk, Arabian incense,
precious stones, muslin and spices from
India. In the other direction went glass,
copper, tin, lead, red coral, textiles, pot¬
tery and currency.
Caravans had been making the long
journey regularly from about 106 BC
following the epic explorations of Zhang
Qian, who had been sent by the Emperor
ZHANG KM is an assistant research fellow in
the Office of Relations between China and
Other Countries in the History Institute of the
Chinese Academy ofSocial Sciences. Heis the
author of a number of studies, notably on
themes connected with relations between
China and Latin America. He has translated
works of Latin American history into Chinese,
and is currently writing a history of Chinese
emigrants in America.
42
Wudi as ambassador to the ancient
Yuezhi people in Bactria. It was from
about this time that regular supplies of
silk began to flow to the West, and China
became known to Europeans as "Sérica"
(the land of silk). Virgil, the great Roman
epic poet, who was born in 70 BC, wrote
a poem in praise of silk which he imagined
as being combed from the leaves of trees.
While the camels were plodding heavy
laden along the Silk Road, a new marine
route was being developed. In about
100 BC a Greek ship's captain named
Hippalos discovered that use could be
made of the monsoon winds to make
rapid direct sea voyages from the Red Sea
to the Indian ports of Barbaricum,
Barygaza and Muziris, where Chinese
goods could be obtained from Indian
merchants.
The sea route was safer and more
economical and sea-borne trade between
East and West grew rapidly reaching un¬
precedented heights during the Tang
(61 8-906 AD), the Song (960-1 279 AD)
and the Yuan (1260-1368 AD)
dynasties. The seven missions to the
"Western Oceans" undertaken by the
famous admiral Zheng He, between
1405 and 1433 AD undoubtedly gave a
further fillip to Chinese sea-borne trade.
The period of the Tang dynasty also
saw the spectacular rise of Islam, the
great new power that was to affect
EastWest relations so profoundly. The
first Arab embassy to China took place in
651 BC and the conquest of Persia in
652 BC brought Arab domination to the
frontiers of Chinese influence. Arabs
began to play an extremely important role
as a medium of cultural and commercial
exchange between East and West. It was
through the Arabs that ancient Chinese
inventions such as the compass, paper-
making, printing and gunpowder were in¬
troduced to Europe.
Chinese porcelain predominated in
trade by the "Marine Silk Road." From
the Song dynasty onwards Chinese
porcelain was introduced throughout
south-east Asia, the Indian sub¬
continent, Arabia and the eastern coastal
regions of Africa, and from the sixteenth
century onwards it reached Europe and
even America.
Also during the sixteenth century
Chinese lacquerware began to reach
Europe in considerable quantity, its vivid

patterns and exquisite colourings arous¬
ing astonishment and admiration. By the
end of the seventeenth century French
craftsmen at the Gobelins factory in Paris
were producing imitations which were
known as ouvrage à la Chine which re¬
tained the characteristic elements of the
Chinese style.
Chinese painting, handicraft, sculpture
and architecture may all be said to have
made a decisive contribution to the
development of the eighteenth century
European style which came to be known
as rococo. The influence of Chinese ar¬
chitectural styles can be seen in a number
of imperial palaces and the
traditional Chinese arch-shaped roofs and
upturned eaves were often successfully
transferred.
Chinese-style garden layouts were also
highly popular in the West. With their ap¬
parently random arrangements of lakes,
mounds, artificial rocks, pavilions,
towers, winding paths, pagodas, they
broke away from the symmetrical,
stereotyped gardens of Europe. The
Chinese influence is still strongly evident
at Kew Gardens, near London, one of the
most famous gardens in England.
Another Chinese export which was to
have a profound influence on European,
especially English, social life was tea.
Originating in the China of antiquity, tea
cultivation and the tea-drinking habit
spread first to Japan and Korea and then
throughout Asia. By the seventeenth cen¬
tury tea, then considered a great luxury,
was being drunk in England and America.
Today in England tea is an indispensable
adjunct of daily life in all social classes and
the English now consume about a fifth of
the world's total tea production.
Material goods were not, however, the
only Chinese exports to travel the trade
routes. Unseen among the bales of silk,
crates of tea and porcelain came a wealth
of spiritual, philosophical, economic and
educational ideas whose impact on the
West was to be profound.
In the first half of the fourteenth cen¬
tury descriptions of their travels to China
by the merchant adventurer Marco Polo
(1254-1324) and the franciscan friar
Odoric of Pordenone (1 286-1 33 1 ) arous¬
ed European curiosity about the myste¬
rious "gigantic dragon of the East" of
which they spoke. But it was not until the
turn of the sixteenth century that a clear
picture of Chinese thought began to
emerge.
From the middle of the sixteenth cen¬
tury, missionaries were sent in suc¬
cessive groups to China from the Western
world. Some, like the Jesuit missionary
Matteo Ricci (1552-1610) adopted
Confucian-style clothes, learned the
Chinese language, studied the Chinese
classics and established close contact
with senior officials and the élite of socie-
ty, even gaining admittance to the im¬
perial court. Their deepening understan¬
ding of China and their admiration for its
highly developed civilization are reflected
in the reports they sent back to the
Vatican on politics, economy, culture and
art and daily life and customs in China.
In 1 585 the Historia de las Cosas más
Notables, Usos y Costumbres del gran
Reyno de la China (History of the Great
Empire of China), compiled by the
Spanish missionary Juan Gonzalez de
Mendoza (1540-1617), was published in
Rome. It was immediately translated in
several European languages and widely
circulated, arousing enormous interest in
things Chinese. During the eighteenth
century works concerning China pro¬
liferated. They included Edifying and
Curious Letters, published in thirty-four
volumes, a General History of China, in
thirteen volumes, and Memoirs on the
History, Sciences, Arts, etc. of the
Chinese, in sixteen volumes.
These publications raised European in¬
terest in China to fever pitch. Scholars im-
i0yr.«ir ksji
Completed in 1298, the
reminiscences of the great
Italian trader and traveler
Marco Polo brought to the
Western world unprece-
dentedly vivid and ac¬
curate first-hand descrip¬
tions of life in China. Marco
Polo's exciting travels are
the subject of a major new
TV film directed by
Giuliano Montaldo, of Ita¬
ly, with an international
team. In addition to many
Chinese actors, the star-
studded cast also includes
John Gielgud and Burt Lan¬
caster. Left Kublai Khan
leads the expeditionary
army in putting down
Nayan's armed rebellion.
Photo © China, Beijing
Uj j;
E ï
These ideograms (above, dong or east; below,
mlan or face) were inscribed on a Chinese stela
(a slab or pillar of stone used for com¬
memorative purposes) to indicate the direction
in which the monument faced. While travelling
in China on an archaeological mission, the
French poet and physician Victor Segalen
(1878-1919) was struck by these "monu¬
ments reduced to the form of a tall stone table
bearing an inscription". In his book Stèles
(1912), Segalen wrote: "This space riven by
points, penetrated by the nine firmaments,
who surrounds and contains it? Beyond the
confines is the Extreme, and then the Great
Void, and then what lies beyond?"
mersed themselves in the study of
Chinese philosophy, politics, economics,
pedagogics, state systems, military
ideology and strategy, literature, art,
garden landscaping and social customs.
In the field of philosophy, Confucianism
in particular captured the attention of Euro¬
pean philosophers. Confucius' teachings,
as contained in the Sishu (Four Books) and
the Wujing (Five Classics), had been
translated into Latin by Matteo Ricci and
the Jesuit missionary Niklaas Trigault.
Later, other works on Confucianism and
the Confucian school of idealist philosophy
of the Song dynasty were introduced to
Europe and Confucius came to be revered
as a learned prophet and a master of ethics
and political philosophy.
The principle of Li (propriety), con¬
sidered by the Confucian school of
idealist philosophy of the Song dynasty
as the supreme law, appealed greatly to
many European philosophers, especially
those with anti-religious tendencies.
Gottfried Leibniz, the eminent German
philosopher, was one of the first in Europe
to recognize the significance of Chinese
thought for Western culture. For some
time he devoted himself to the study of
Chinese philosophical ideology and he
had a wide interest in all things Chinese.
He maintained that if China could send
people to Europe to give guidance in "the p.
43

aims and practice of natural theology", it
would revitalize the decadent and corrupt
ethics of Europe. He also gave much time
to the establishment of a scientific socie¬
ty in Berlin to promote cultural exchanges
between Europe and China.
The French writer Voltaire, a leading
figure of the Age of Enlightenment, also
had a high respect for Chinese
philosophy. He maintained that the
Chinese people had all the virtues and
were in advance in many branches of
learning.
The great Russian writer and thinker
Leo Tolstoy found that he had many ideas
in common with the philosophy of Laozi
and at one time he even planned to
translate the Daode jing (The Supreme
Way of Life) into Russian.
During the eighteenth century, Chinese
influence was also felt in the field of
economics. François Quesnay, the
French economist who founded the
physiocratic school of economic thought
and who proclaimed that laissez-faire in
economics followed natural law and ad¬
vocated an economy based on
agriculture, drew heavily on Chinese ex¬
perience. In his book On China's
Autocracy, he wrote that the "natural
law" was the "legislative foundation of
mankind" and the "supreme norm of
human behaviour." He pointed out sor¬
rowfully that this law was neglected
everywhere except in China and declared
that the Chinese system of government
should become an example to be
emulated by all European countries. His
advocacy of Confucianism and Chinese
thought earned for him the sobriquet of
"the Confucius of Europe."
A number of European scholars of the
Age of Enlightenment considered the
educational system of feudal China to be
a model to be followed. The eighteenth
century German professor of theology
Christian Wolff greatly admired the grad¬
ed educational system in China in which
there were separate schools for children
and adults. He maintained that this
system coincided with the natural law of
the human spirit.
Schools in China not only taught their
students reading and writing skills, they
also gave them lessons in ethics and in¬
structed them in methods of acquiring
knowledge.
In military affairs the Chinese classic
Bing-fa (The Art of War), written by Sunzi
in the fourth century BC and a book with
which Napoleon Bonaparte was familiar,
had a considerable effect on the forma
tion of military ideology in Europe and on
the application of military strategy and
tactics in war.
In the literature and art of the West the
influence of Chinese civilization can
similarly be seen. Some experts maintain
that the well-known Western fairy tale
Cinderella is a variation of a legendary
story in You Yang Za Zu, written by Duan
Chengshi in the time of the Tang dynasty.
A Chinese classic play An Orphan of
Zhaos, was translated into English, Italian
and French. It was re-written by Voltaire
as a five-act play called The Chinese Or¬
phan, in which Confucian ethics were
described. Some scholars maintain that
the great Goethe's unfinished play
Elpenor was inspired by An Orphan of
Zhaos.
It should not, however, be forgotten
that the interplay between China and the
West was a two-way affair. While the in¬
fluence of the rich heritage of ancient
China was pervading the West, the ad¬
vanced science and technology of the
West and its philosophical and artistic
ideas were in turn being absorbed in
China, thus cementing the bonds of
friendship and understanding between
two of the great civilizations of the world.
Zhang Kai
