The changing
Chinese family
by Fei Xiaotong
THE family is the basic unit of
Chinese society. The changes
which are taking place in its
structure are an integral part of the far-
reaching social transformation that China
has experienced in the last thirty years.
When Western sociologists talk about
the family, they are usually referring to
what they call the nuclear family, con¬
sisting of husband, wife and children
the typical profile of the family in Western
societies. In China the notion of the family
is broader; it designates an extended
group which is based on the nuclear fami¬
ly and may include as a basic social unit
three or four generations living together
and even distant relations.
The small nuclear family of husband, wife and children is an increasingly common pattern
in China's cities.
Photo © Marc Riboud, Paris
In the past it was generally thought that
the great majority of Chinese families
were "big families" or "associated
families" grouping several generations.
This impression may have been due to the
influence of novels and plays, such as
Cao Xueqin's Dream of the Red Flag, Ba
Jin's Family and Cao Yu's The Storm,
which are set in this type of family.
It is true that in old China the rules of
"family piety and fraternal duty" acted as
a check on the disintegration of the family
and the independence of its members.
Feudal morality required that sons and
daughters should unconditionally obey
parents and brothers, and a family in
which five generations lived together
constituted a social ideal. But in reality
"big families" were far from being the
majority in China.
In my book Peasant Life in China,
published in 1938, I noted that the
average Chinese family then consisted of
from four to six members. The same fact
emerged from a study of a village near
Lake Tai, carried out at a forty-five-year
interval, in 1 936 and 1 981 . 1 also stress¬
ed in this study that the peasant
economy, then usually practised on a
small scale, was ill-adapted to the struc¬
ture of a big family. Although they were
influenced by traditional morality, the
peasants had to break up the family unit
for economic reasons such as the division
of the land into smallholdings, as well as
for internal family reasons. Thus a father
would often divide the family property
and live with his elder son. When the elder
son married and a new member joined the
family, a clash between mother-in-law
and daughter-in-law would often cause
the family to split up permanently.
Elderly peasants still remember the
times when many families were broken
up by poverty and discord. Before the
Liberation, even in the Suzhou-Hangzhou
region which was considered an "earthly
paradise", peasant families included
many widowers, widows, orphans, and
men and women abandoned by their
wives and sons, who lived in extreme
destitution.
Although the data are incomplete, it
seems clear that the number of
"associated families" was relatively
higher among the richer city-dwellers and
landed proprietors. This was because
financial resources were concentrated in
the hands of the head of the family, accor¬
ding to the customary practice of the
feudal and paternalistic landed proprietor
class. Among the working people of the
towns and cities, as among the peasants,
the proportion of nuclear families was
growing.
From a strictly sociological viewpoint,
four categories of family may be
distinguished:
1) Incomplete nuclear families from
which the husband or wife is absent, for
one reason or another or in which unmar¬
ried orphans live together. This type of
FEI XIAOTONG is president of the Chinese
Sociology Association and director of the In¬
stitute ofSociology of the Chinese A cademy of
Social Sciences.

Although its structure is
changing, the family is still
the basic social unit in
modern China. Help from
elderly parents or parents-in-
law enables the couple to
work outside the home.
Right, three generations of
the Tscheng family on a
commune near Shanghai.
Photo René Burri © Magnum, Paris
family is unstable and is considered
abnormal.
2) Nuclear families, or small families,
consisting of husband, wife and their un¬
married children.
3) Extended families consisting of the
nuclear family and its satellites, usually
the widowed father or mother, but
sometimes including distant kinsfolk and
even persons unrelated to the family.
4) "Associated families" or big
families consisting of two orthree nuclear
families. In most cases the associated
family consists of two overlapping
generations, but a variant exists in the
form of nuclear families created by
brothers and sisters living under the same
roof.
On the basis of this kind of classifica¬
tion, the situation of the village we in¬
vestigated in 1936 and 1981 is as
follows:
1936 1981
Incomplete families
Nuclear families
Extended families
Associated families
27.6 % 18.1 %
23.7 % 39 %
38.4% 21.6%
10.3% 21.3%
During these forty-five years, the
village underwent profound changes cor¬
responding to the transformation of a
feudal or semi-feudal society into a
socialist regime. The table above shows
that in 1981 nuclear families
predominated, accounting for nearly 40
per cent of the total, whereas the number
of extended families had dropped to little
more than 20 per cent. The number of in¬
complete families had also dropped while
the number of associated families had
doubled.
Several factors have modified the fami¬
ly structure. In a society in which the
means of production have become the
property of the community, the head of
the family no longer has the power to con
trol the distribution of wealth by virtue of
his exclusive possession of land and other
means of production, as he did under the
old patriarchal system. Work in common
in the production brigades, the balancing
out of incomes, affinities, and the hous¬
ing problem are enough to explain the in¬
crease in the percentage of "associated
families", often to the detriment of the
extended family.
But one of the major reasons for this
change is the big increase in the number
of elderly people. In the village studied,
there were ninety-four persons over the
age of sixty in 1936. In 1981 there were
195. Thus the improvement in health care
and living conditions has produced a
situation in which the elderly are far more
numerous than before .but often just as
dependent on their children, and have
contributed to the enlargement of the
nuclear family, even transforming it into a
big associated family. Today children are
legally obliged to support their parents
who can no longer work.
The standard of living of the village has
risen distinctly since before the war, part¬
ly due to the establishment of factories. It
is thus not surprising that the number of
nuclear families has risen. Nevertheless,
housing problems have not yet been en¬
tirely solved, and they play a major role in
the rise in the percentage of "big
families", even if the latter are not the
same as the patriarchal clans of former
times. Thus, although the percentage of
incomplete families decreased by a third
between 1936 and 1981, 78 out of 950
men in 1981 were single. Young men
looking for a wife, widowers or divorcees,
these single men found it very difficult to
marry, notably because of the housing
shortage. Some of them have joined ex¬
tended families and helped to transform
them into associated families.
In extended families or large associated
families, there are tensions quite different
from those caused by the aggressive
authoritarianism of the head of the clan.
These too are largely due to housing pro¬
blems. Almost half the families in the
village studied have tried to cushion the
impact of these difficulties by the practice
of fen zao, cooking apart: mother-in-law
and daughter-in-law live together but
cook separately.
Other tensions may arise from certain
changes in the status of women. Women
who work in the production brigades or in
the factories which have been set up in
the village are paid their wages directly.
Although they usually hand over their ear¬
nings to the head of the family, these
women now have a certain freedom as to
how they spend their money. Many
young village women deduct the cost of a
permanent wave from their earnings
before handing them over to the head of
the family, even if this practice is frowned
on by their elders. These are the Chinese
peasant woman's first steps towards
economic independence.
When this independence is more
strongly asserted, it may exacerbate con¬
flicts between the generations and pro¬
voke clashes. It sometimes happens, for
example, that the mother-in-law prefers
to live alone, aided by her son who makes
her a monthly allowance.
On the other hand, especially in the
towns, when the two members of the
basic couple work, the presence of the
parents-in-law, or at least that of the
mother-in-law, in the home is often
warmly welcomed for although many
kindergartens and creches have been set
up near the factories, society's needs in
this sphere are still far from being fully
met. By looking after the small children,
the parents-in-law allow the couple to
work outside the home. In this respect the
extended family, far from breaking up,
tightens its links and becomes a solid
nucleus.
41
