PINOCCHIO
THE EVERGREEN CENTENARIAN
by halo Calvino
STRANGE though it may seem, Pinocchio is a hundred years
old. Strange... for two reasons. On the one hand it is hard to
picture him as a centenarian, on the other it seems natural
that he should always have existed, and impossible to imagine a
world without him. However, bibliographical exactitude has it that
he was born on the same day as an Italian weekly entitled the Gior-
naleper i Bambini ("Children's Newspaper") edited by Fernando
Martini, the first issue of which appeared in Rome on 7 July 1881
and contained the opening episode of "The Story of a
Marionette", by Carlo Collodi.
Today, a hundred years later, Pinocchio is world famous. His
story has been told in many languages. He has displayed a talent
ITALO CALVINO, is a major 20th-century Italian novelist whose fiction
has been translated into many languages. His published works include: II
sentiero dei nidi di ragno (1947; Eng. trans. The Path to the Nest of
Spiders, 1957); Il barone rampante (1957; The Baron in the Trees, 1959);
and II visconte dimezzato (1952) and II caviliere inesistente (1959) which
both appeared in English in The Nonexistent Knight and the Cloven Vis¬
count (1962). He is also the author of a children's book, Historias de Mar-
cobaldo. His latest novel to be published in English is If on a Winter's Night
a Traveller.
for surviving intact changes of taste, fashion, linguistic expression
and habits. Never for a moment has he been forgotten or banished
to obscurity (and this in a field as subject to the wear-and-tear of
passing time as children's literature). He has won a vast and ever-
widening circle of unconditional admirers among authors and
critics of "adult" literature, and the number of works devoted to
"Pinocchiology" has swelled accordingly.
Is there anything in Pinocchio's progress to prevent us from hail¬
ing it as a triumphal one? Just this: although in the course of the
last century Pinocchio has achieved the status of a classic in our
literary history, it is that of a minor classic. Now the time has come
to affirm that Pinocchio should be considered as one of the great
books of Italian literature, which would without it be incomplete in
certain essential respects.
I shall cite three of these gaps. First of al], the picaresque novel is
a genre which does not exist in Italian literature (with the possible
exception of the Autobiography of Benvenuto Cellini and, of
course, a handful of tales from the Decameron). In Pinocchio, a
book of vagabondage and hunger, of seedy inns, hirelings and gib¬
bets, the atmosphere and rhythm of Italian picaresque are created
with such authority and vividness that one might think that it had
always existed and would continue to exist forever.
The fantastic, "black" strain of romanticism is also missing
from nineteenth-century Italian literature. Collodi is neither Hoff¬
mann nor Poe. But the little white house gleaming in the darkness,
with the girl at the window like a waxen image, crossing her arms
on her breast and saying: "Everyone is dead... I am waiting for the
Pinocchio the marionette, newly
fashioned from a piece of wood by Gep-
petto, starts to play its first pranks. Il¬
lustration by Attilio Mussino (see cap¬
tion p. 13).
Illustration from Le aventure dt Pinocchio © Bemporad Marzocco publishers, Florence

to carry me off" would certainly have appealed to Poe. And
Hoffmann would surely have relished the scene of the "Butter-
man" driving his carriage through the night, its wheels wrapped
with straw and rags, drawn by twelve pairs of young donkeys wear¬
ing tiny boots... Each scene is presented with such visual force that
it is unforgettable: black rabbits bearing a coffin, assassins hooded
in coal sacks, scuttling along on tiptoe...
We do not know what reading nourished Collodi's penchant for
such romantic imagery and the constant whirl of metamorphosis
(quite unlike that in the fairy tales of Perrault, which Collodi had
translated). I do not think he could have known the extraordinary
German story-tellers of the first half of the nineteenth century, but
it is not beyond the bounds of possibility that he may have read a
French writer of the same pedigree, the Charles Nodier of La Fée
aux Miettes.
This story of initiation, the hero of which is a young carpenter
protected by an omnipotent fairy who is at one and the same time a
down-at-heels dwarf and the stunningly beautiful Queen of Sheba,
has certain themes in common with Pinocchio, but it goes without
saying that Collodi's powers of invention are far richer, lighter and
more unpredictable.
Thirdly, Pinocchio is one of those rare prose works in which the
quality of the writing is so high that each word remains engraved
on the memory, as if it were poetry, a distinction which it shares in
nineteenth-century Italian literature only with Manzoni's / Pro-
messi Sposi and certain Dialogues of Leopardi. (This quality is
equally rare in other literatures, I believe; in France it does not ap¬
pear until Flaubert). In Pinocchio one might say that this effect is
due to a natural felicity of expression, to an instinctive refusal to let
through a dull, lifeless or abstract sentence, rather than any striv¬
ing for stylistic artifice. Above all, there is the dialogue: Pinocchio
marks the appearance in our literature of the novel entirely ar¬
ticulated around dialogue.
The secret of this book in which nothing seems contrived, in
which the plot unfolds by weekly instalments (with various inter¬
ruptions, one of which, the hanging of Pinocchio, is seemingly
definitive but how could the story possibly have ended there?)
lies in the inner needs of its rhythm, of its syntax of images and
metamorphoses which determine how the episodes follow each
other in a dynamic flow.
Hence the fertilizing power of Pinocchio, at least as I have ex¬
perienced it, for ever since I began to write I have looked on it as a
model for the narration of adventures. But I believe that its in¬
fluence, which all writers in Italian have felt, whether consciously
or (more often than not) unconsciously, ought to be studied, since
Pinocchio is the first book which they all come to after (if not
before) learning the alphabet.
Hence too, another characteristic of the book, the way in which
the reader is continually invited to participate by analysing and
commenting, by dismantling and reassemblingactivities which
are always useful as long as they are undertaken in a spirit of
respect for the text.
In 1980 a symposium was held in Pescia, Italy, on the symbolism
of Pinocchio. It provided a golden opportunity to confirm what
had long been common knowledgethat the little marionette takes
a mischievous delight in unchaining the demon of interpretation,
and that this demon has an irresistible propensity to take control of
those who wish to expound the text of Pinocchio.
The centrepiece of the symposium was Ecce Puer, an essay by
Gian Luca Pierotti on Christological symbolism in Pinocchio. The
idea of reading the story of this putative son of a carpenter as an
allegory on the life of Jesus is not new; it was put forward by Piero
Bargelini in a book which appeared in 1942. But Pierotti goes much
further than his predecessor. He refers not only to the canonical
Gospels but to the Apocrypha (in which the childhood of a tur¬
bulent or frankly delinquent Jesus plays a large part); to traditions
and legends (such as those relating to the symbolism of wood:
Joseph's staff, the rod of Jesse, the tree of Eden which becomes
the wood of the cross, the Christmas tree); to certain little-known
aspects of folklore (such as the sacred marionette performances
which were still held in Florence during Lent at the end of the last
century); to popular iconography (hand-painted images of the
Madonna, with the blue of her coat running over into her hair; the
slug as an emblem of virginity).
The inference is that each of the human and animal figures, like
each of the objects and situations in the story of Pinocchio, has a
pendant in the Gospels, and vice versa. There is even a circum¬
cision (when Pinocchio's nose is pecked by the woodpeckers), a
baptism (when the old man in the nightcap pours a bowl of water
12
over Pinocchio's head), and a Last Supper (at the Inn of the Red
Lobster). Herod is Fire-Eater the puppeteer; even Pinocchio's cap
made of bread has a eucharistie significance.
A more skilful display of prestidigitation it would be hard to im¬
agine. The profusion of unexpected correspondences which Pierot¬
ti plucks from his expositor's hat is astonishing, even if, in order to
construct a narrative scheme which corresponds to the story of
Christ, he is obliged to postulate that Pinocchio tells the Gospel
story three times over, different each time with various gaps and
unorthodox additionsand by continually modifying the rules of
the game. The main thing is that the whole operation is performed
with the humour and finesse (which Pierotti fortunately possesses)
necessary to resist the temptation to demonstrate that Collodi is
linked directly to the same vein of inspiration as the evangelists
(whether there were four of them or more), or that he is seeking to
tell an edifying story, or that he is the echo of a Gnostic tradition.
The only possible conclusion is that the imagination of a civiliza¬
tion is composed of a given number of characters which can be
organized in many ways but not in every way so that two suc¬
cessful stories are bound to have many points in common. This be¬
ing so, it is possible to try to make the same kind of rapprochement
with other figures, as other contributors to the symposium did with

varying degrees of success: between Pinocchio and Dante; between
Pinocchio and neo-Platonism; between Pinocchio and Tantrism;
and between the Lovely Maiden with Azure Hair and Isis. Natural¬
ly, psychoanalytical symbolism was also in evidence at the sym¬
posium, not only in the most obvious equivalences (the nose which
grows guiltily longer) but also in the conflict between nature and
culturethe opposition between maternal-vegetal nature and
culture as the super-ego embodied by the talking cricket, or as the
Jungian archetypes of the Senex-Puer conflict and the Great Con¬
ciliating Mother and the unconscious.
The great absentee in all this is Collodi himself. It is as if the
book had been born of itself, just as its hero was born of a piece of
wood, but without a Geppetto to hone it down. How did the idea
of writing Pinocchio come to him?... The rest of his output does^
In the illustrations which he produced for a 1911 edition of Carlo
Collodi's classic The Adventures of Pinocchio, Attilio Mussino
created a portrait of the famous wooden marionette which became
definitive. He was the first illustrator of Collodi's work to employ
colour, taking great care to use tones which reflected the spirit of
each chapter and illustrating each stage in the story according to a
technique which has affinities with that of the modern comic strip.
He also abandoned the more or less faithful realism of earlier il¬
lustrators and instead drew the characters in the story as
caricatures, archetypes of different social classes, professions and
offices. Whenever the Florence publishing house of Bemporad
published a new edition of The Adventures of Pinocchio, Mussino
was commissioned to do the illustrations, and over a period of
35 years he produced hundreds of Pinocchio drawings. To illustrate
Italo Calvino's article we have chosen 7 of Mussino's 1911 illustra¬
tions in a sequence which runs from page 11 to the top of page 14.
(1) "Pinocchio eats sugar, but refuses to take medicine. But when
he sees the undertakers coming for him, he drinks the medicine
and feels better. Afterwards he tells a lie and, in punishment, his
nose grows longer and longer." (2) Detail from "The Land of Toys."
(3) "After five months of play, Pinocchio wakes up one fine morn¬
ing and finds a great surprise awaiting him. Pinocchio's ears
become like those of a Donkey. In a little while he changes Into a
real Donkey and begins to bray." (4) "Pinocchio is thrown into the
sea, eaten by fishes, and becomes a Marionette once more. As he
swims to land, he is swallowed by the Terrible Shark." (5) "In the
Shark's body, Pinocchio began to walk toward the faint light which
glowed in the distance... He found a little table set for dinner and
lighted by a candle stuck in a glass bottle; and near the table sat a
little old man, white as snow, eating live fish."
Illustrations from Le aventure di Pinocchio © Bemporad Marzocco publishers, Florence
Texts from The Adventures of Pinocchio, translated by Carol Della Chiesa, Macmillan, New York 1963

not stand comparison with his masterpiece, not even the imitation
he produced in Pipi, la Scimiottino Color di Rosa (a kind of Pinoc¬
chio in reverse who refuses to become a man), although part of it
(that concerning the brigand Golasecca) is worthy of the best
passages of Pinocchio and deserves attention from all Pinocchio
fans.
But is it not the ultimate fate of all masterpieces, or many of
them at least, to transcend their author as if he were simply an in¬
termediary or an instrument, and to impose their own existence
and needs independently of him? Writing of Pinocchio, that most
paradoxical of Italian authors, Giorgio Manganelli, concludes that
its author did not exist (or at least that it is impossible to prove that
he existed) and affirms: "from a scientific viewpoint, the
hypothesis of the author's existence is superfluous".
And so it is quite right that we should have celebrated the
centenary of Pinocchio's birth in 198 1 , that we should be preparing
to celebrate next year his appearance in a book (1883), and that in
eight years time (the centenary of the death of Paolo Lorenzini* in
1890) we should return to the question of whether or not Carlo
Collodi ever actually existed.
* The real name of Carlo Collodi. Italo Calvino
In 1972 the French painter, cartoonist, novelist and film-maker
Roland Topor drew a series of highly symbolic, almost
nightmarish illustrations for Pinocchio in which he presented
a kind of psychoanalytical interpretation of the wooden
marionette. "I adore Pinocchio", Topor has said. "He is the on¬
ly literary figure who is of our time, modern, authentic."
"I wonder where the old Pinocchio of wood has hid¬
den himself?" "There he is", answered Geppetto.
And he pointed to a large marionette leaning against a
chair, head turned to one side, arms hanging limp and
legs twisted under him.
Pinocchio as drawn by an 11-year-old Italian boy,
Walter Pesaresi.
Drawing © Scuola Media Statale, Rome
14
Enrico Mazzanti, born in Florence in 1852,
was the first illustrator of The Adventures of
Pinocchio. Left, one of the 62 illustrations
Mazzanti drew when Collodi's work was
published in book form in 1883.
Illustration from Pinocchio e la sua immagine
© Bemporad Marzocco publishers, Florence
