On
Lao She
1899-1966
ONE of the major figures of twentieth-century
Chinese literature, Lao She (his real name
was Shu She-Yu) was born in humble cir¬
cumstances in Beijing in 1899.
When he was only two years old, his father, a soldier
in the Manchu army, was killed during the defence of
Beijing at the time of the Boxer uprising and from then
on his early life was one of great poverty. Despite this
handicap he worked his way up to become a teacher and
at the age of seventeen he was principal of an elemen¬
tary school.
In 1924, Lao She went to England where he earned
a living by teaching Mandarin Chinese and col¬
laborating in the translation of Chinese classics. He is
said to have been inspired to write his first novel by
reading the works of Charles Dickens to improve his
English.
By the time he returned to China, in 1930, his early
novels had established his reputation as a humorous
writer. He portrayed the comic side of the life of the
poor, a life he knew so well from personal experience;
but it was a humour that was always close to tears.
A prolific writer, he produced in rapid succession
three volumes of short stories and two novels: The Life
ofZhang Tian-Zi ( 1 934) and Xian-zi the Camel (1936),
better known under the title of its English translation as
Rickshaw Boy. These highly successful novels marked
a watershed in his writing; leaving his earlier in¬
dividualistic themes, he turned to a preoccupation with
the overall social environment.
During the Japanese war, Lao She turned to the
theatre and, as head of the National Writer's Anti-
Aggression Association, he wrote several patriotic pro¬
paganda plays of somewhat uneven quality. His best
known plays were written after the establishment of the
communist regime, including The Dragon Whisker
Drain (1951), which was about the construction of Bei¬
jing's new sewage system, and The Teahouse (1957)
which has been widely performed in Europe. During
the last twenty-seven years of his life Lao She wrote
some forty plays, operettas and musicals as well as a
number of historical and literary essays.
Lao She's death was as tragic as it was unexpected. In
August 1 966 he became one of the first victims of the long
period of disorders that ravaged China for some ten
years. He will be remembered as a man of the people who
made the people laugh, and through their laughter
understand the deeper meaning of the world around
them.
39
