The aftermath
of the
population explosion
By the year 2000, a world population
40per cent higher than today
On every contented, happy man 's doorstep there should be someone with a
hammer in his hand, who would keep reminding the happy man by his
knocking that there are unhappy people in the world, and that, however
happy he may be sooner or later life will show him its talons and misfortune
will befall him, in the form ofsickness, poverty or loss, and no one will see
him or hear him, just as today he neither hears nor sees others.
Anton Chekhov
(1860-1904)
La Cena (1941), by the Cuban artist René Portocarrero. Photo
© Almasy, Paris.
by Rafael M. Salas
30

i.' . r.1 --VW; ¡f",
A/en make a city, not its walls or its ships.
Thucydides
(460-399 BC)
City crowds. Photomontage © Richard Napier, Paris.
THE largest and most complete
memory bank on the past, pre¬
sent and future of the world's
population stands on the East River in
New York. Here the United Nations
Population Division stores and analyses
information on population size, growth
and movement from nearly every coun¬
try in the world. Year by year its records
show the way we have come and the
RAFAEL M. SALAS, of the Philippines, is an
Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations
and Executive Director of the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities, which he has
headed since it became operational in 1969. A
graduate of the universities of the Philippines and
Harvard, he has served as a Minister and oc¬
cupied other high-level posts in the Philippine
Government.
way we are likely to go. Out of the
figures of the past is constructed a pic¬
ture of the possible future.
If conditions had remained as they
were in the 1950s the picture of the
future would have shown birth rates
stable and death rates falling, as they
had been for some years. In these con¬
ditions the population of the world
would have increased very rapidly,
reaching 7,500 million by the year 2000
(it was 2,500 million in 1950). By far the
greatest part of the increase would
have come in the less developed coun¬
tries of the world.
As these possibilities, and others
even more daunting, became more
widely known during the 1950s, con
cern grew and the idea of the "popula¬
tion explosion" was born. It is at least
partly to this concern that the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities
owes its existence.
Death rates continued to fall in the
1960s that is to say as chances of sur¬
vival improved and expectation of life
became longer under the impact of bet¬
ter health care and understanding of
how the most common killer diseases
could be controlled. But birth rates also
began to fall in the 1960s, even though
conditions in most countries were ap¬
parently unfavourable. The pace of
decline was slow at first, but became
faster and faster until in the mid-1970s
it was twice what it had been a decade
before. ]
31

Source: WHO
^. By the end of the 1970s it was clear
that the gigantic numbers and
cancerous rates of growth which seem¬
ed likely only a few years before would
not after all afflict the earth. This year,
the UNFPA's State of World Popula¬
tion Report was able to say that the
population at the end of the century
would most likely be of the order of
6,100 million people 1,400 million, or
twenty per cent fewer than would have
been expected in projections based on
1950s data.
This is good news; but as the dust of
the population explosion settles, our
perception of the true position
becomes clearer. It now seems likely
that by the end of the century the earth
will be called upon to support a popula¬
tion forty per cent bigger than it is now.
This alone should renew a sense of
urgency in meeting the needs of this
and future additions to the world's
people.
Growth has not stopped, nor will it
stop finally until well into the century
after next, by which time there may be
10,500 million people on our planet. We
must find ways of accommodating the
needs of these vastly increased
numbers; and it should be remembered
what difficulties are found in meeting
the needs of even the present popu¬
lation of the world. Whatever the
capabilities of technology or the
theoretical carrying capacity of the
global ecosystem, the fact remains that
even today many millions of people are
denied the bare necessities of life. The
prospect of additional billions, ninety
per cent of them in the less developed
countries of the world, should reinforce
determination to supply their needs,
but also, in all humanity, to limit the
size of the addition.
There is much to learn from the ex¬
perience of the last two decades, dur¬
ing which world growth rates have
slowed from 1 .99 per cent in 1960-65 to
1.72 per cent in 1975-80.
First, during that time many govern¬
ments have turned away from an at¬
titude which declared the growth and
By the year 2000 there will be at least 150 million
disabled children under 15 years of age living in
developing countries.
32

spatial distribution of a country's
population to be irrelevant to develop¬
ment planning. About eighty per cent
of the population of the developing
world now live under governments
which consider the national level of fer¬
tility to be too high and would like to
reduce it; 110 out of 126 governments
in developing countries consider the
distribution of their populations to be
unacceptable to a greater or lesser
degree.
Second, the recognition by govern¬
ments that population growth and
movement have definite, sometimes
deleterious, effects on a country's
economy and social structure and con¬
versely that patterns of development
affect rates of growth and movement
has given rise to policies designed to
counter both causes and effects. In the
process of developing and implemen¬
ting these responses, the nature of the
linkages between population, natural
resources, the environment and
development has become clearer. Ex¬
perience and research have both shown
that population and, for example,
health care, education, the status cf
women and social development
generally are in a circular relationship.
Reinforcing one may have a positive ef¬
fect on the others, or perhaps it may be
necessary to strengthen several factors
before another will respond.
The World Fertility Survey is one of
the best examples of carefully struc¬
tured research work showing the com¬
plex interrelationships between one
aspect of population and other
variables. The Survey demonstrates the
truth of several assumptions that fer¬
tility goes down as status in society
goes up, for example and refines
some others. Employment for women
and low fertility have generally been
found to be linked, but the World Fer¬
tility Survey showed that women who
had worked at some time had fewer
children than those who had never
worked, and that the type of occupa¬
tion is important. Agricultural work ap¬
parently has little effect on fertility com¬
pared with blue-collar employment,
while white-collar and professional
women have the smallest families.
Literacy and level of education affect
not only the number of children a
woman has but their chances of sur¬
vival. Children of illiterate women in ^
Urban and rural population
Population in millions
500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
Source : WHO
Net additions to World Population at 25 year intervals
1900-2100
Source : UNFPA
33

Latin America, for example, have a risk
factor 3.5 times that of children whose
mothers have had ten or more years of
education. The probability of death bet¬
ween birth and the age of two declines
steadily as the mothers' level of educa¬
tion rises.
Research and experience in the 1970s
seem to show that the aim of reducing
both birth and death rates in developing
countries is best served by paying at¬
tention to the education and employ¬
ment of women, to access to health
and family planning services and to
changes in attitudes to family forma¬
tion.
The third important lesson to be
learnt from the experience of the 1960s
and 1970s is the need for effective
delivery of services. Reducing the
number of infant deaths requires the
Can the world adapt to an
aging population?
eradication or at least control of the im¬
portant killer diseases, which are mainly
contracted through polluted food and
water and poor sanitation. Medical ser¬
vices to treat disease may be of less im¬
portance than effective communication
about the importance of clean food and
water, the need for adequate sanita¬
tion, and the provision of each. This ap¬
plies to family planning as to any other
service; the level of awareness of con¬
traception, the World Fertility Survey
found, is considerably higher than the
level of practice. One reason is the lack
of services.
The fourth point is the size of the
allocation a country is willing to make
for population programmes. The pro¬
portion of national budgets devoted to
population has dramatically increased
as interest has grown. In Kenya, for ex¬
ample, government expenditure during
the period 1976-80 was about twelve
times the amount spent from 1971-75.
Lastly, international assistance for
population has doubled in real terms
since 1970 and forms perhaps a third of
the total resources spent on population
programmes in developing countries. It
is still, however, less than two per cent
of total international assistance.
Between them, these five points
cover the main developments in plann¬
ed approaches to population problems
and between them help to account for
the accelerating fertility decline which
has been seen over the past decade.
But global figures conceal wide
regional and national diversity. Most of
the decline in fertility is accounted for
by a handful of countries, mostly in
Asia, which contain between them
some two-thirds of the population of
the developing world. In many other
countries, notably in Africa, population
growth remains high and life expectan¬
cy low. For these countries the strain of
attempting to balance already scarce
resources against the needs of a rapidly
growing population is becoming con¬
siderable. In many of them the pro¬
blems are compounded by the difficulty
and cost of providing services to a scat¬
tered and diverse population when
even the basic medical, educational
and transport services are lacking.
For the future, the answer must be,
at least in part, more of the same. An
increase in resources devoted to
population, both internally and interna-
When living standards go up,
does fertility go down?
tionally, is essential if the momentum
created in the 1970s is to be maintain¬
ed. As programmes develop, they will
throw up more information on the
linkages between population and
development, showing the way to new
kinds of approach, but they will also
show up areas of ignorance or uncer¬
tainty where research is needed before
progress can be made. Above all we
will need better techniques for reaching
out to the community and gaining ac¬
ceptance and co-operation. One thing
which experience has taught us is that
CONTINUED PAGE 39
Source: WHO
Infant mortality
(per 1000 live births)
Developed
countries
Developing
countries
1975 22 109
2000 10 50

HUNGER, HEALTH, ENVIRONMENT
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 34
population programmes cannot be suc¬
cessfully run without the active par¬
ticipation of the people. The communi¬
ty can provide physical resources,
leadership and communication to sup¬
port the government programme.
In addition, new approaches will be
called for to meet problems as they
develop. What should our response be,
for example, to the staggering in¬
creases in urban population now in pro¬
gress and foreseen for the future?
Some possible answers were sug-



The aftermath
of the
population explosion
gested by the Conference on the Urban
Future held in Rome in 1980. The ques¬
tion of international as well as internal
migration will call for urgent attention
as people increasingly seek work far
from their homes. Also, as the propor¬
tion of elderly people in the population
increases far beyond what most
developing countries have been ac¬
customed to, social structures adapted
to their needs and abilities will be re¬
quired.
These questions and others like them
will occupy the attention of the interna¬
tional conference on population plann¬
ed for 1984. Ten years after the World
Population Conference in Bucharest, it
will be possible for the nations of the
world to sit together to assess their pro¬
gress and their problems and agree on a
common response. The story of their
success will be told by the figures in the
memory bank on the East River and
on the faces of millions of men and
women throughout the developing
world. Rafael M. Salas
Sleep, hungry people, may the gods offood watch over you,
And if words do not satisfy your hunger, may dreams assuage it.
Sleep on the bed of broken promises and the flow of words,
And may the shadowy handmaidens of reverie
Delight you with round loaves of bread shining like the moon.
Mohammed Al-Jawahiri
Lullaby of the Hungry
Corbeille de Pain (The Breadbasket, 1945) by Salvador Dali.
Photo Éditions Draeger © SPADEM 1982, Paris
39
