Poetry before
and
after Hiroshima
by Stephen Spender
T
OETS adore ruins," Auden wrote, and this is a war¬
ning to bear in mind when considering the attitude
of poets to war.
Historically they have been, to say the least, ambivalent
about it. War forms the subject ofmost epic poetry and ofmuch
poetic drama, including Shakespeare's historical plays, and
Troilus and Cressida. In Troilus and Cressida, it is true, the
Grecian warriors are depicted as half-wits, war as senseless
violence. But in the highly patriotic historical plays war is
patriotism incandescent, soldiers are, for the most part, man¬
ly and heroic.
In the past, indeed right up to the First World War, war has
had great appeal for poets. Vergil begins the Aeneid with the
words "Arma virumque cano" (I sing of arms and the man)
connecting arms with man, almost as though men become most
man in war. War in poetry is traditionally a kind of stripping
those who fight down to the essential man, like nudes in
painting.
The reason why poets have been so attracted by war is
because it provides experiences of actual living in which
people are reduced to the elemental conditions of their existing:
death; the sense of being at once isolated and belonging to a
community; the cause worth living and dying for,
camaraderie war provides a terrible testing in which, through
being made aware of their courage or cowardice men realize
some significant truth about the quality of their own physical
and spiritual nature which would never be revealed in years
of peace.
Poets , when they are being poets and not just like other men ,
see life in relation to these ultimate realities. However, most
people do not do so, except in times of crisis. They spend most
of their lives living from day to day, occupied on the treadmill
of work or being what is called "worldly", impervious to the
ultimate realities of human existence.
But war is a situation in which everyone, or nearly everyone,
is brought face to face with life and death. Thus it breaks down
the barriers between the poet and the public, poetry and the
routine of material Iiving:_barriers which mean that in times
of peace and material prosperity the poet may well be writing
about a world of whose existence the great majority of people
STEPHEN SPENDER is a noted English poet who first won recognition
in the 1 930s as one of a group of writers and poets including his friend
W.H. Auden. He is also the author of criticism, drama, fiction/transla¬
tions and an autobiography World Within World (195 1). His most recent
book is The Thirties and After: Poetry, Politics, People, published by Mac-
Millan, London in 1978.
are scarcely aware. But if, in times of war, a poet writes about
heroism, destruction, faith, the sacred cause, religious need,
camaraderie, people recognize their own condition in his
poems. War can indeed produce the sensation of life itself, as
Tolstoy in his epic War and Peace, shows in his description
of Prince Andrew lying wounded on the battlefield and con¬
templating his own death. War also has given peoples the sense
of sharing a common dream of their nationhood. The Aeneid
is about the dream ofRome shared by the soldiers and fighters
living and dying for it under the leadership of Aeneas, who is
the pattern of military and civic virtues.
Nevertheless, poets in the past whilst being very open to the
attraction of war as a kind of lived and shared poetic drama
have, in the long run, been repelled and disgusted by it. They
have seen that it leads to terrible human suffering, senseless
brutality, the breaking up of ties ofaffection between families
and friends, and the destruction of those maintained condi¬
tions of civilization which are the essential basis ofart. Civiliza¬
tion requires peace, and ultimately, war leads to barbarism.
The Iliad ends in dust and ashes. In Shakespeare's Henry VI
there is a terrible scene of civil war in which a father finds dead
on the battlefield the corpse of an enemy which, when he turns
it over, he discovers to be that of his own son: a scene perhaps
echoed by the greatest English poet of the First World War
Wilfred Owen in his poem Strange Meeting, where im¬
mediately after his death a soldier has a conversation with a
fellow soldier killed in battle at the same instant as he himself
was killed, who at the end of the poem says, "I am the enemy
you killed, my friend."
Historically I think then that poets have vacillated betweeen
praise for war, because it makes people conscious of finalities,
and revulsion at the brutality, rapine, waste, boredom, destruc¬
tion and corruption. In the First World War the poets passed
rapidly from the phase of seeing the war as an awakening from
the leaden materialist lethargy of the late nineteenth century,
with its values of scientific and industrial "progress", to the
phase of horror and disgust at the killing and destruction, and
the boredom.
In 1914, in Germany, Rilke, the least militarist of poets, saw
war as a great upsurge ofsacred life against the materialist cen¬
tury, just as in England Rupert Brooke saw it as a cleansing
from the moral decadence of the England of the early part of
the twentieth century. In the sonnets Brooke wrote at the out¬
break of the war he characterized the young Englishmen who
rushed to offer their lives to their country as "swimmers into
cleanness leaping".
20

But the immense scale of the destruction soon put an end
to this. By 1916 the two best English poets fighting in the
trenches Wilfred Owen and Siegfried Sassoon were writing
poems describing the horror, destruction and suffering pro¬
duced by the war and attacking the triumph of the hideous war
machine over the humanity of the soldiers fighting on the
Western front, the wickedness of the political leaders on both
sides who did nothing to stop the slaughter, the callous insen-
sitivity of old men and civilians at home who accepted com¬
placently the sacrifice of the lives of the young.
These poets divided the English into the heroic victims, who
were the soldiers at the front, and the scarcely conscious
civilians of the home base. They no longer cared whether the
victims were English, French or German soldiers. For them
the real enemies were not the German soldiers but the
militarists, politicians and arms manufacturers on both sides.
When Sassoon and Owen, and other officers like them, went
home on leave, they found that they hated their civilian fellow
Englishmen. They no longer felt that England was home. Home
was their fellow soldiers on the Western front. They had come
to hate war and knew themselves to be pacifists, yet more im¬
portant to them than their pacifism was that, so long as the
fighting continued, they should endure horrors with their fellow
soldiers.
In this one can see that, despite their detestation ofwar, the
poets did feel that the suffering resultant from it had made the
soldiers in the trenches, whether English, French or German,
superior to those who did not fight. Here was a remnant of
the feeling that war brings out human virtues in those who par¬
ticipate in it. To Wilfred Owen, every soldier was Christ.
This attitude of the English war poets became a kind ofpoetic
orthodoxy which lasted into the Second World War in which
many poets fought while hating war yet feeling that they should
share the camaraderie and agony of fellow soldiers. Anti-
fascismthe fact that they were fighting in defence of in¬
dividual freedom against Hitlerismperhaps qualified this at¬
titude, but not very much. The poetry of anti-fascism was not
written by combatant poets in the armies of the democracies
but by poets of the resistance, such as Aragon and Eluard, in
France.
Hiroshima entirely altered all this. From June 1945 onwards
there was no more soldier/pacifist poetry. War had become
totally dehumanized. The only poetry that could be written
about war now was about' the total inhumanity of the
technology which could destroy whole cities, countries, perhaps
the world as we know it. The anti-war poetry of today is that
of man almost helpless against the totally destructive powers
of his own inventing. It is written\vith certainty that there can
be no heroic, just, comradely phase of any future war. War
now means nothing but destruction. The threat of the extinct¬
ion of all civilized values, perhaps of the human race and all
.life on earth.
The poetry of poets who try to write about this situation
seems to be mainly of two kinds. Firstly, that of poets who make
metaphors of destruction, as does Jayne Cortez here in her
poem "Stockpiling":
The stockpiling offrozen trees
in the deepfreeze of the earth
the stockpiling of dead animals
in the exhaust pipes ofsupersonic rockets
the stockpiling of desiccated plants
...etc.
It is a magnificent effort to make poetry out of total in¬
humanity, the metaphors having the effect ofmaking the forces
of nuclear destruction accessible to the imagination. But when,
at the end of the poem, Cortez declares:
/ look at this stockpiling
at this rotting vegetation
and I make myself understand the target
that's why I say I'm into life
preservation of life now
revolutionary change now
it is not wholly convincing. The poet has been all too suc¬
cessful in inventing metaphors for the inhuman scientific pro¬
gress of destruction for us to feel that "being into life" has
much chance to save the world; and "revolutionary change"
seems almost pathetically vague. On the other hand, what alter¬
native to the technological inhumanity is there except brave
assertions of life and humanity? We find these in the beautifully
sensitive "Football Player" of Kazuko Shiraishi and in the
declarations of faith in humanity of Ferlinghetti :
. . . and I am awaiting
perpetually andforever
a renaissance of wonder
Anti-war poetry is not only against war. It states the predica¬
ment of life against destructive technology
21
