The nuclear threat, as manifest in the
deterrent theory, implies an ever more
determined search for a more effective
second strike capability, and the nor¬
mal defence-of-the-territory effort is
becoming more and more concerned
with the permanent preparation of a
country for a preventive war.
Marek Thee
Soldier. Photo United Nations, Nagata.

Development through
Demilitarization
by Richard Falk
WORLD economic, political, and cultural life in general is
entering a period of sustained crisis. Dominating the
current scene is a ferocious arms race between the
superpowers and an incredibly rapid process of military moderniza¬
tion that is global in scope, taking in countries of the most varied
backgrounds. An increasing militarization of political life, as well as
a growing popular revulsion against the danger of nuclear war are
among the immediate results. This preoccupation with the military
picture, including concern with the recurrence of actual warfare
throughout the Third World, makes it difficult in the 1980s to place
much creative emphasis at the international level on the develop¬
ment process.
RICHARD A. FALK, U.S. educator, has been Albert G. Milbank Pro¬
fessor of International Law and Practice at the University of Princeton
since 1965. Among his many published works are This Endangered Planet
(1971), A Study of Future Worlds (1975) and (as co-author) International
Law and World Order (1980).
This difficulty is reinforced by the general circumstance of
economic recession that has existed for the past several years and
is likely to persist at least until the mid-1980s. The impact of reces¬
sion has been felt in the West and its repercussions have been felt
in the East, North and South, in the form of reduced economic
growth, and for almost every country some form of monetary
disturbance, generally some combination of indebtedness and in¬
flation. The most painful burdens of this prolonged recession are
felt by the poor, the weakest economies in the South, and the
underclasses in the North. Even the richest market economies of
the North, with the exception of Japan, have been enduring high
levels of unemployment, totalling as of 1982, an incredible ag¬
gregate figure of almost 30,000,000.
How long the international and intranational poor will acquiesce
in bearing the brunt of cyclical adjustment costs is highly
uncertain.
What is not in doubt, however, is the impact of this economic^
41

Peace is not merely the absence of war, it is a virtue which is rooted in the strength of the soul, for obe¬
dience is the constant desire to do what must be done according to the common law of the City. A City, it
must be repeated, in which peace reigns solely through the inertia of its citizens, led like aflock ofsheep and
accustomed only to servitude, should be called a wilderness rather than a City.
Spinoza
(1632-1677)
Photomontage Tsunehisa Kimura © Pacific Press Service, Tokyo. ANA, Paris
crunch on the development picture. The earlier liberal impulse to
negotiate co-ordinated global economic reforms that shift
resources and trade advantages from North to South has definitely
been blunted, mainly by domestic pressures toward selfishness
that flow from the overall recession, and partly from the related
disillusionment that is affecting foreign economic assistance and
the role of such international financial institutions as the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
It is important to realize fully that this disillusionment generally
affects both donor countries of the North and recipient countries
of the South. Many donor countries, especially those under con¬
servative leadership, are becoming unconvinced that it is worth
"investing" their resources in the elimination of poverty or the pro¬
motion of international co-operation, alleging that corruption
among élites, unrestrained population growth, and political tur¬
bulence and radicalism in recipient countries nullifies any expected
benefits of capital transfer. The recipient governments, in con¬
trast, seem increasingly disturbed by the extent and character of
interference in their economic and political life that is demanded by
international financial institutions as part of the cost of receiving
either public or private capital assistance, and would generally
prefer trade concessions, including tariff relief, to further
dependency-creating infusions of capital.
In many cases, the debt trap facing Third World governments is
producing new forms of post-colonial dependency that interfere
with the full exercise of sovereign rights by precluding
autonomous modes of development at the national level. In addi¬
tion, externally conceived conditions of fiscal soundness are given
priority over the social and political goals of development, in¬
cluding the elemental well-being of the people. One major effect of
this externally imposed "austerity" is that wages and labour unions
are kept artificially repressed by the apparatus of State power,
which often requires interference with human rights and reliance
on organized terror to maintain order.
Furthermore, the modernizing side of the development process
has imposed on most Third World governments a heavy import
burden. To pay for these import costs, without producing even
worse situations of indebtedness and inflation, has led many Third
World governments to emphasize export-led growth.
This emphasis has been encouraged by the main centres of in-
42
ternational influence, including banks and multinational corpora¬
tions. But export-led growth has meant giving preferential treat¬
ment to investment and development projects in areas of produc¬
tion where export demand is strongest. In agriculture such
priorities have meant a push to replace traditional agriculture with
cash crops that bring a favourable price on the world market.
Often the local population suffers either by a reduction of domestic
food supplies or by the consolidation of land holdings in large-
scale agrobusiness ventures.
In industry, the adverse effects of export-led growth include an

additional incentive to keep wages repressed so as to enable lower
prices and higher profits for output and a receptivity to polluting
technologies as a means of attracting forms of foreign investment
that migrate overseas to escape burdensome regulation at home.
The net effects are to distort the development process in relation
to the satisfaction of basic human needs (that is, the elimination of
poverty) the attainment of rising living standards for the overall
population, and to make the domestic economy extremely
vulnerable to shifts in the pattern of international demand.
A further complicating factor in assessing the current develop¬
ment picture has been the unevenness of economic growth in the
Third World. The most obvious division has been between the oil-
surplus and oil-deficit countries, creating vastly different economic
circumstances from country to country. It should be noticed, of
course, that the apparently obvious advantage of being endowed
with abundant oil resources for export can work out as a mixed
blessing. The enormous capital placed at the disposal of the
government and the investing élite can induce mindless and
unstable modernization, including a top-heavy military establish¬
ment that is visibly dependent on foreign advisers and a pattern of
development that concentrates its material rewards on small sec¬
tors of the population.
Rapid growth may also induce disruptive patterns of rural-urban
migration that strain the facilities of the main cities while under¬
mining the self-sufficiency of the countryside. Inflation, pollution,
housing shortages, urban congestion, and the breakdown of
Where are the real
development decisions taken?
In a nuclear world, will the
poet's lamp ofclay sufficefor
his needs? Yes, ifman yet has
remembrance of clay. It is
enough for the poet to be the
conscience of his time.
Saint-John Perse
(1887-1975)
"The Poet Li Po Reciting a
Poem", by Leang Kai
(c.1140-c.1210). Executed in
less than 15 brushstrokes,
the work is typical of Zen
Buddhist art. Photo ©
Roger Viollet, Paris. Na¬
tional Museum of Japan,
Tokyo.
public transportation can make the life of ordinary people harder
while the country as a whole is experiencing high growth and un¬
precedented prosperity. Perhaps even worse, certain types of
rapid modernization cause cultural traumas of a severe sort,
displacing and threatening traditional values.
There are other basic forms of unevenness that produce greater
diversity of outlook on development issues. A few Third World
countries have managed to sustain economic growth over a suffi¬
cient period to be in a class by themselves, the so-called "new in-
dustrial countries". These "new Japans" are sufficiently modern
to make it no longer accurate, indeed, if it ever was, to think of the
Third World as a grouping of non-Western states that are generally
all at low levels of industrialization. Also, of course, there are im¬
portant distinctions between the developmental outlook of coun¬
tries integrated into the world capitalist economy and those largely
socialist societies that are neither havens for investment and
credit, nor participants in any major way in international trade. At
the same time, the uneven experience and capability of First World
economies in coping with the recession reflects a sharpening of
competition even among close allies, giving vent to protectionist
tendencies that threaten economic warfare that could be very
damaging to most countries in the Third World.
In short, there is no longer a consensus on development in either
North or South. Furthermore, the intensity of geopolitical rivalries
and the anguish of slow economic growth for most societies, has
moved the North-South dialogue to the margins of international
concern. The OPEC countries could still mount pressures, if so in¬
clined, but their interests seem generally so closely linked to the
main oil-importers and to anxieties about radical domestic
challenges, that their support for international economic reforms is
increasingly low-profile. .
Whether there is an enforcement authority or not, whether law is
statutory or not, peace will still only be secured if the International
Law is based on certain fundamental principles. Law which of¬
fends against basic human rights does not fulfil thepurpose of law
because it does not secure man's life in society.
Julius K. Nyerere
/...VA \\ví
>vV*r lv -4..É.
Wi
South African mine compounds enclosed by barbed wire
fences. Photo Abisag Tüllmann © International Defence
and Aid Fund for Southern Africa, London.
43

Such a global setting is obviously characterized by a growing
pluralism. Each government calculates its gains and benefits and
emphasizes sovereign rights. There is less confidence that interna¬
tional reforms are either feasible or important. The general neglect
of the Brandt Commission's generally enlightened recommenda¬
tions, the inconclusive and disappointing provisional outcome of
the law of the sea negotiations, the desultory spirit of the Cancun
Conference, and the heightening of East-West tensions among the
superpowers are all signs pointing in the same direction. The North
feels no pressures because the South fails to exert leverage, and is,
in any event, more ambivalent about what it has to gain.
All in all, the development picture has few bright spots. Growth
with equity requires an efficient national mobilization of capital and
a fairly large degree of autonomy in relation to the world economy.
International institutions can play supportive roles, offering selec¬
tive help by extending credits or loans. Yet, in essence, the self-
help character of the world political order, with its dynamic of
militarization, and the hierarchical character of the world economic
order, with its long phase of stagnancy, creates very little basis for
optimism. Instead, slow growth without equity is the near-term
prospect for the majority of peoples and countries of Asia, Africa,
and Latin America.
There are two positive paths open to restore hope in the
development process. First, popular movements might achieve
real control over their development choices, provided they can
prevail over the coalition of foreign and domestic élites that main¬
tain structures of privilege and exploitation. To prevail usually
Do cash crops grown for
export prevent poor countries
from feeding their poor?
means a struggle for democracy and human rights that amounts to
a national revolution. Secondly, significant political successes for
the grassroots, citizens anti-nuclear movement now surging in the
advanced industrial countries and beginning to challenge establish¬
ed leadership and economic priorities, and the demilitarization of


internal and international political life could free resources and
talent for a renewed emphasis on development and the elimination
of mass poverty.
The reversal of the nuclear arms race is unlikely to occur without
a wider assault upon war and militarism, which in turn, will en¬
courage emphasis on the causes of war, including economic
distress and disparities within and among states, as well as on in¬
stitutional substitutes for war (peacekeeping, dispute-settlement
under the auspices of the United Nations, regional organizations).
Demilitarization implies new conceptions of security, especially
a substitution of security for the people in place of security for the
State. Such an altered context for security would create a new
progressive emphasis on world development policy and processes,
as well as a devaluing of armaments. Security will then be
understood more in terms of a governing process supported by the
citizenry than by the size and quality of the military establishment.
The fate of development, then, is tied closely to prospects for
demilitarization. In the interim, a particular country will do well to
free itself, to the extent possible, from crippling structures of
dependency. A national governing process is not truly indepen¬
dent if it is subject to policies set by distant centres of decision,
whether these be foreign capitals, multinational corporate head¬
quarters, or the guidelines of international financial institutions.
Demilitarization, self-determination, human rights, and develop¬
ment are increasingly part of a seamless web of progressive na¬
tional aspiration.
Richard Falk
