An ABC of drugs
Natural and synthetic substances
under international control
The opium poppy [Papaver
somniferum L.)
This article has been extracted from a booklet The
United Nations and Drug Abuse Control produc¬
ed by the UN Division of Narcotic Drugs, Geneva
(United Nations, New York, 1977).
Natural and
synthetic opiates
Opium. Opium is the coagulated juice from
the unripe capsule of the poppy plant scien¬
tifically known as Papaver somniferum. It
can be grown in most areas of the world,
and in a number of countries it is cultivated
for its seeds or beautiful flowers rather than
for its opium content. The seeds, which
constitute a valuable oil-containing food, are
pressed for oil or used in cakes and pastry.
The poppy is an annual plant and most pro¬
bably originated in the Mediterranean region
and in the Middle East.
The earliest recorded knowledge of opium
is to be found in the Sumerian tablets.
Sumerians lived in Lower Mesopotamia
(modern Iraq) around 5000 BC. Later,
knowledge of the poppy's medicinal proper¬
ties was introduced to Persia and Egypt by
the Babylonians. The Greeks and Arabs also
used opium for medicinal purposes. The first
recorded instance of poppy cultivation in In¬
dia dates from the eleventh century, and
production and consumption of opium in
that country became extensive in the six¬
teenth century during Mongol rule.
Opium was probably introduced to China
by the Arabs in the ninth or tenth century.
The drug was also known in Europe in the
Middle Ages, and the famous physician
Paracelsus administered it to his patients.
Opium was medically a very important
drug, but the prominent place it held in
therapy has been taken over by certain of its
alkaloid (morphine and codeine), and syn¬
thetic opiates (pethidine and methadone).
Formerly a useful therapeutic agent, opium
has now become an important raw material
for the manufacture of morphine and co¬
deine.
As a pleasure-giving drug, opium was
originally eaten or taken as an infusion. The
smoking of opium is a comparatively recent
development, going back only a few hun¬
dred years.
The abuse of opium and its dérivâtes
(morphine and heroin) was the primary con¬
cern of the first international attempts to en¬
force control of narcotic drugs.
Morphine. Morphine is the main active
principle of opium. The average morphine
content of opium is about 10 per cent. Mor¬
phine is extracted either from opium or,
directly, from the poppy straw (the dried
capsules and the upper part of the stems of
the opium poppy after mowing). The use of
the poppy straw process eliminates the pro¬
duction of opium and greatly reduces all
risks of abuse and illicit traffic. This process
has expanded greatly and, in recent years,
about one third of the world's medical re¬
quirements for morphine has been manufac¬
tured from poppy straw.
Morphine was widely used for the relief of
short-term acute pain resulting from
surgery, fractures and burns and in the final
stages of terminal illnesses. Through the in¬
troduction of synthetic narcotics and other
analgesic drugs, the extent of use and the
therapeutic importance of morphine have
been considerably diminished (but it is still
considered to be the prototype of the nar¬
cotic drug).
Codeine and other morphine
derivatives. Codeine, an effective cough
suppressant, is one of the most commonly
and widely employed medicaments. Co¬
deine (methylmorphine) occurs in opium in
low concentration, but for the market is
manufactured principally by the conversion
of morphine. This explains the apparent
contradiction between the decrease in the
therapeutic use of morphine and the in¬
crease in its production:, more than 90 per
cent of the morphine produced by the phar¬
maceutical industry is converted into co¬
deine. It has properties which resemble
those of morphine but its analgesic effects
are milder.
Cases of codeine addiction are relatively
rare, as dependence develops only after
continued consumption of large quantities
over a considerable period of time.
Heroin. Heroin (diacetylmorphine) is deriv¬
ed from morphine by acetylation. On the
recommendation of the World Health
Organization and the Commission on Nar¬
cotic Drugs, it has been banned in most
countries, and its use in medicine has been
replaced by other, less dangerous v
analgesics. f
25

Heroin is perhaps the most addictive of all
known drugs. The intense euphoria produc¬
ed by the drug has made heroin the most
popular morphine derivative among addicts.
The quality of the drug available on the
black market relates to several illicit ac¬
tivities, and during the long process from
the clandestine laboratory to the smuggler
and from the smuggler to the street addict,
the original heroin is diluted so many times
that the white (or pink or brown) stuff in a
"bag" may not contain more than 3 to 5 per
cent heroin, in some countries. Adulteration
of heroin is the easiest way for traffickers to
increase their profit.
Synthetic opiates. The term "synthetic
opiates" or "synthetic narcotics" is general¬
ly applied to a number of addictive
substances which have come onto the
market since the discovery of pethidine by
German chemists some thirty years ago.
When first marketed, pethidine was claimed
to be devoid of addictive potential; ex¬
perience, however, has proved otherwise.
Addiction is slower to develop and is less
vicious than addiction to morphine, but this
potential does exist.
The mushrooming development of
various new synthetic drugs and their ap¬
pearance on the market, accompanied
sometimes by unproven claims that they do
not produce drug dependence, have led the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs to repeat
warnings to Governments to apply im¬
mediately provisional control measures to
these substances, pending the definite
evaluation of their effects by the World
Health Organization. The Commission has
taken the view that in such cases commer¬
cial interests must yield to overriding con¬
siderations of public health. In this connex¬
ion, it has also been stressed that, without
encroaching upon the freedom of the press,
a way should be sought to prohibit
misleading publicity and advertising of pro¬
perties of newly developed drugs.
26
A plant of the genus
cannabis
Cannabis
The products of the plant Cannabis sativa L.
have been used by millions of people as an
intoxicant over the last four or five thousand
years. It is used in various forms. People
smoke it, often combined with tobacco, or
mix its resin with drinks or in sweetmeats.
Such use is still tolerated in some countries.
There are few areas in the world where
cannabis cannot be grown successfully.
Depending on the soil, the climatic condi¬
tions and the degree of cultivation, this
weed-like plant may reach a height of from
one to twenty feet. The cannabis plant or
the crude drug derived from it and folk
preparations of cannabis are known under
hundreds of different names. The intox¬
icating constituents of the cannabis resin
(known as hashish) are found mainly in the
flowering tops, particularly of the female
plant. Cannabis resin was the most potent
form of cannabis, until recent years, when a
new cannabis product appeared on the illicit
market: liquid cannabis is a concentrate con¬
taining sometimes up to 60 per cent of THC
(tetrahydrocannabinol) and is more dang¬
erous than other forms of cannabis.
There are indications that the intoxicating
effects of cannabis depend largely on the
amount of THC present in the "cannabis"
used.
According to the Single Convention,
1961, the term "cannabis" means, "the
flowering or fruiting tops of the cannabis
plant (excluding the seeds and leaves when
not accompanied by the tops) from which
the resin has not been extracted, by
whatever name they may be designated"
but in common parlance the use of the term
"cannabis" can differ from this definition,
and the expressions "cannabis", "mari¬
juana" or "hashish" embrace a range of dif¬
ferent cannabis preparations.
Cannabis has become, from the medical
point of view, an obsolete remedy. It has
therefore been recommended that its use be
discontinued in medical practice, but it is
still used for the treatment of certain
ailments by local medical practitioners in
some countries in Asia.
In certain countries, the consumption of
cannabis has been a traditional custom for
centuries, particularly in regions where the
consumption of alcohol is prohibited.

A coca bush {Erythroxylon coca)
Coca leaf and cocaine
The coca bush is an evergreen shrub
Erythroxylon coca which grows in western
South America. The leaves have been chew¬
ed for centuries in some parts of South
America by highland peoples. The leaves are
also the raw material for the manufacture of
cocaine.
Since the habit of coca-leaf chewing is
conditioned by a number of unfavourable
social and economic factors, the solution of
the problem involves two fundamental and
parallel aspects; the need for improving the
living conditions of the population among
which coca-leaf chewing is a general habit
and the need for initiating simultaneously a
governmental policy to limit the cultivation
of the coca leaf, control its distribution and
eradicate the practice of chewing. The U.N.
Economic and Social Council has recom¬
mended that the countries affected by the
coca-leaf chewing habit be assisted in their
efforts to eradicate this practice.
Cocaine, a potent stimulant* drug, is the
principal alkaloid of the coca leaf and can be
extracted from coca leaves. It was first used
as a local anaesthetic a century ago, but its
therapeutic importance has diminished with
the introduction of other anaesthetic drugs.
In the case of abuse, the stimulant effect of
cocaine results in excitability, talkativeness
and a diminished feeling of fatigue. Cocaine
may produce euphoria and the sensation of
increased muscular strength. Stimulation is
followed by a period of depression. High
doses of cocaine lead to suspiciousness,
fear, hallucinations (characteristics of a
paranoid psychosis) and aggressive and
antisocial behaviour may occur. Effects of
cocaine aré similar to the effects produced
by amphetamines.
* Pharmacologically speaking cocaine is a stimulant
of the central nervous system, legally it is controlled
by the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.
Adopted in 1961, the United Nations Single Conven¬
tion on Narcotics came into force in 1964. It replac¬
ed nine existing treaties on international narcotics
control, extended control to the cultivation of
plants from which "natural" narcotic drugs (opium,
cannabis, coca leaves) are obtained, and simplified
the international control machinery. It was amend¬
ed in 1972 with the aim of further strengthening the
international drug control system.

LSD
Hallucinogens
The great civilizations offer numerous ex¬
amples of the use of substances producing
hallucinations. The ritual consumption of
hallucinogenic mushrooms in America, the
use of other intoxicating mushrooms by
sorcerers in Asia and the use of certain
plants for witchcraft in Europe are only a
few examples of the diversity of the "tradi¬
tional" hallucinogens, but recently the term
"hallucinogenic" has been more associated
with Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
(STP), (DMT) and other new substances.
Hallucinogens constitute a heterogeneous
class of substances, belonging to a wide
variety of chemical and pharmacological
groups. The propagation of their abuse and
its resultant 'effects have led to the interna¬
tional control of a number of hallucinogens.
The guiding principle of the Convention on
Psychotropic Substances, 1971, in the
selection of hallucinogenic substances to be
controlled is expressed in Article 2 of that
Convention. A substance should be subject
to control "if the World Health Organization
finds: that the substance has the capacity to
produce... central nervous system stimula¬
tion or depression, resulting in hallucina¬
tions or disturbances in motor function or
thinking or behaviour or perception or
mood... and that there is sufficient evidence
that the substance is being or is likely to be
abused so as to constitute a public health
and social problem."
LSD. Lsd (LSD-25, lysergide) is an abbrevia¬
tion of the German expression for lysergic
acid diethylamide Lysergsäure Diäthylamid).
LSD is a synthetic or, more precisely, a
semi-synthetic compound, since it is not
found as such in any natural material, but is
produced from lysergic acid, a natural
substance found in ergot of rye.
For a "psychedelic trip", 100-250 micro-
grammes (1 microgramme .= 0,000001 Gm)
of LSD are used in the form of a diluted
solution or mixed with other substances in
capsule form. Drops of the solution are
usually taken on a lump of sugar or on blot¬
ting paper.
27

Hallucinogenic mushrooms.. Peyote cactus.
, The ingestion of LSD produces changes
in mood, alteration in sense of time, distor¬
tion in visual and auditory perception,
depersonalization, derealization, auditory
and optical hallucinations.
The most common reactions during a trip
are as follows:
Panic reaction: this appears when the
"traveller" becomes aware that he cannot
control the effects of LSD; he cannot beat
them and tries in vain to end them.
Paranoid reaction: under the effect of
LSD, he has the impression that someone
wants to imprison him or "control his
mind".
Mescaline. Mescaline is the active principle
of the peyote cactus. The scientific name of
this cactus is Lophophora Wil/iamsii; its
popular name, peyote, appears to be of
Aztec origin. This small, fleshy, spineless
cactus grows wild on the Mexican plateau
and in the south-western part of the United
States in dry places, on cliffs or on rocky
slopes.
Peyote was used and revered as a
panacea, an amulet and a hallucinogen in
the mountainous regions of northern Mex¬
ico centuries before the European arrived, in
the 15th century. Peyote has long been
taken by the Huichol Indians, as a medicine,
to induce visions leading to prophetic ut¬
terances and, collectively to obtain the
desired state of trance for ritual activities.
(See Unesco Courier, February 1979.).
Mescaline is a less potent hallucinogen
than LSD, but its effects are very similar,
with personality disturbances and symp¬
toms similar to those of schizophrenia.
Psilocybine, psilocine. Psylocybine and
psilocine are the active principles of the
hallucinogenic mushroom Psilocybe mex¬
icana. This fungus is the most important of
the sacred mushrooms worshipped by the
Indians of Mexico, who have long used
"teonanacatl" (flesh of the gods) in Aztec
religious rites.
Due to the care used by the Indians in
withholding information, it was only a few
years ago that some of the sacred
mushrooms, including Psilocybe, could be
identified. The pharmacological study of
these compounds has confirmed the strong
hallucinogenic properties of the drug.
DMT, DET. DMT and DET are abbrevia¬
tions for dimethyltryptamine and
diethyltryptamine, respectively. Both pro¬
duce strong hallucinogenic effects. DMT is
also the active principle of a number of
South American snuffs, which are snuffed
into the nasal cavity.
Such central substances are used by the
Indians in religious ceremonies to produce
mystical states of mind which are said to
enable them to communicate with their
gods.
Psilocine and psilocybine are chemically
closely related to DMT.
STP. The letters "STP" (dimethoxy-
methamphetamine) designate a synthetic
compound produced in "underground"
laboratories. STP is chemically related to
mescaline and the amphetamines; its action
is of longer duration than that of LSD.
THC. THC designates tetrahydrocan¬
nabinol, one the active principles of can¬
nabis. THC is a very potent hallucinogenic
drug, with pharmacological effects showing
several similarities to those of LSD; these
are changes in mood, alteration in sense of
time, distortion in visual and auditory
perception, depersonalization, derealization,
auditory and optical modifications.
However, there are indications that the two
drugs probably act through different
biochemical mechanisms, and their effects
on brain function are somewhat different.
Amphetamine-type stimulants
and sedative-hypnotics.
Stimulants
The most important stimulants are the am¬
phetamines. The term "amphetamines" in¬
cludes synthetic amines which are similar in
many respects to the human body's hor¬
mone adrenalin. Amphetamines, like co¬
caine, suppress appetite, increase activity
and alertness and arouse the central nervous
system. These drugs were synthesized at
the beginning of the 20th century and used
therapeutically in the 1930s. Because of their
stimulating effects amphetamines were
widely used by soldiers, particularly pilots
during the Second World War. Am¬
phetamine, dexamphetamine, metham-
phetamine are the most common
substances of this group. Other substances
such as phenmetrazineand methylphenidate
have very similar pharmacological effets.
Stimulants are widely used and abused by
truck drivers on long trips, by students when
preparing for exams, and by athletes (dop¬
ing) in efforts to increase performance.
Widespread abuse of amphetamines has
occurred during the last thirty years in urban
areas of many countries. In some countries
the abuse reached epidemic proportions
which compelled the authorities to put these
substances under strict control.
The therapeutic value of such medicines is
rather limited, being confined, in practice, in
some countries to two types of cases in
which they are used: (i) as stimulants in
selected conditions and (ii) for the treatment
of obesity. Since these substances have a
strong suppressive effect on appetite this
action disappears after a few weeks as well
as their stimulating effect, unless the dose is
increased. In the opinion of some experts,
the prescription of amphetamines is justified
only for the treatment of narcolepsy (a very
rare illness).
In contrast with the limited medicinal use
of amphetamines, there is a large-scale illicit
traffic and abuse of these drugs in certain
countries.
Amphetamines, as medicine, are general¬
ly taken in the form of tablets and
capsules.The most harmful form of am¬
phetamine abuse is produced by the ad-
28

ministration of excessive doses of metham-
phetamine ("speed") intravenously. This
new phenomenon of injecting stimulants
may last several days and is characterized at
the end of the "run" by a state of hostility,
aggression and paranoia produced by the
continued administration intravenously of
massive doses of "speed". Heavy abusers of
stimulants are not able to work regularly
because of their drug dependence.
Amphetamines and other stimulants are
very often abused in combination or in alter¬
nation with other drugs such as barbiturates
or opiates. It is worth noting that STP
(dimethoxymethamphetamine) and MDA
(methylenedioxyamphetamine), two potent
hallucinogens, are chemically closely related
to the amphetamines.
Sedatives-hypnotics
Barbiturates. The most employed
sedatives-hypnotics belong to the group of
barbiturates. They have been used in
medicine for over half a century, and in a
number of countries they account for about
10 per cent of the medical prescriptions.
Barbiturates may be considered "safe" if
they are used under appropriate medical
supervision as hypnotics (sleeping pills) or
sedatives in small doses or in larger doses as
anaesthetics. Their therapeutic usefulness is
in marked contrast with that of the am¬
phetamines which is very limited. Regular
use of barbiturates produces profound
physical dependence.
In a number of countries, the use of bar¬
biturates is not subject to control. This has
serious consequences, such as the danger
of dependence; in addition, the uncontrolled
use of barbiturates may lead to combined
abuse that is, to the use of barbiturates in
conjunction with other substances. The
three most widespread and dangerous
associations are barbiturates when used in
combination with heroin, with alcohol or
with stimulants.
Minor tranquillizers. There are a large
number of medicaments known as minor
tranquillizers which are mainly prescribed for
patients suffering from an anxiety or ten¬
sion. Many of these substances are widely
used and abused. In many countries, the
production of, trade in and distribution of
these substances are not subject to effective
control (where there is any form of control)
and cases of addiction to minor tranquillizers
have been observed. Overdose fatalities due
to minor tranquillizers have been observed
but with less frequency than with the bar¬
biturates. Minor tranquillizers (such as
methaqualone, etc..) are often taken in
combination with other drugs to obtain
either longer lasting effects or enhance the
effects of other drugs.
Swallowed, sniffed, injected...
Many drugs are taken just by their be¬
ing swallowed. There is then a fairly long
interval between taking the drug and its
maximum impact on the brain, and learn¬
ing theory suggests that the time-interval
conditions will not be optimal for rapid
establishment of addiction, although
drugs taken in this manner can certainly
set up an addiction. Alcohol is a prime
example of a drug which is ingested; can¬
nabis may be swallowed in cakes or as an
infusion; opium may be eaten; and all
manner of synthetic substances are
taken in pill form. A rather more rapid
way of obtaining an effect from some
substances is to keep the drug in the
mouth pocketed against a cheek, and
hence the efficacity of tobacco or khat
chewing or coca taken in this manner.
For some drugs an even more effective
way of ensuring rapid absorption may be
to sniff or smoke the substance smok¬
ed tobacco, smoked opium, heroin taken
by "chasing the dragon", glue and
solvents which are inhaled, cocaine sniff¬
ing, smoked coca paste, and the can¬
nabis cigarette. The highly addictive
nature of cigarette smoking stems from
the fact that this rolled-up tube is a
brilliantly designed piece of technology
for getting nicotine very rapidly to the
brain each draw on the end of that
cigarette shoots another dose of nicotine
into the blood stream to reach the brain
within seconds.
But where technology really takes over
is with the availability of the needle and
the syringe, and drugs in injectable form.
Heroin derived from opium and injected
in this manner is going to be much more
rapidly addictive than the plant product
as traditionally smoked. However, the
major danger of this innovation is that
accidental over-dose becomes all too
easy, as do the possibilities of accidental¬
ly introducing contaminants or bacteria
into the blood stream. The traditional
opium smoker or opium eater did not
necessarily harm his health or shorten his
life. On the other hand the heroin injector
not only runs the risk of death by acute
over-dose, but of contracting infective
conditions as diverse as bacterial sep¬
ticaemia, tetanus, and malaria: average
life expectancy is shortened not directly
because of the heroin itself, but because
of the unsterile injection.
Griffith Edwards
29
