This miniature, from a 15th-century manuscript, illustrates the legend of the founding of Kiev
as recounted by Nestor in the Russian Primary Chronicle. "And three brothers there were, the
one named Kiy, the other Shchek and the third Khoriv, and their sister Lybed... And a town
they raised, named for the eldest of their brethren, and called it by the name of Kiev."
Photo © Naumka Dumka, Kiev



KIEV
1,500 years
of culture
by Pavlo Zagrebelnyi
Objects such as
coins, bracelets and
buckles uncovered
during excavation of
the hills of ancient
Kiev bear witness to
the early period of the
town's chequered ex¬
istence. Left, silver
buckle from the 6th
or 7th century.
at
I w
O <D
Û- o
THE earliest account of the history of
Kiev that has reached us is in the
Russian Primary Chronicle which
was written by Nestor, an eleventh-century
monk of the Monastery of the Caves in
Kiev. But although Nestor begins his report
of Kiev's history as the capital of the ancient
State of Rus in the year 862, he is also in¬
terested in the remote origins of Rus and in
the first princes of Kiev.
PAVLO ARKHIPOVICH ZAGREBELNYI, emi¬
nent Ukrainian writer, is first secretary of the
Union of Writers of the Ukrainian SSR. A winner
of the Shevchenko literary prize, he is the author
of many historical novels, short stories, plays,
film scripts and songs.
"How", he asks, "did the land of Rus
come to be, and who was it that in Kiev
began the first princedom?" He goes on to
narrate this folk-story: "And three brothers
there were, the one named Kiy, the other
Shchek, and the third Khoriv, and their
sister Lybed. Kiy made his seat on a hill
where there is now the Mount of Borichev,
and Shchek made his dwelling upon the hill
that is now called Shchekovitsa, and Khoriv
on a third hill that bears the name Khorivit-
sa. And a town they raised, named for the
eldest of their brethren, and called it by the
name of Kiev."
But indirect evidence of the existence of
Kiev may be found long before Nestor took
up its history. Zenob Glak, a seventh-
century Armenian historian, recounts the
legend of the building of Kiev. And in the
ninth century, Emperor Constantine Por-
phyrogenitus of Byzantium calls Kiev Sam-
batas, a name first mentioned in a Byzantine
inscription dated 559.
The Arab geographers of the ninth and
tenth centuries, Ibn Khurradadhbih and Al-
Masudi, the tenth-century Arab writer Ibn
Fadlan, Bishop Dietmar of Merseburg and
the eleventh-century Saxon chronicler
Adam of Bremen give descriptions of Kiev
which sometimes seem to exaggerate its size
and wealth. Dietmar of Merseburg, writing
in 1018, describes it as the capital of a
kingdom and as a major city containing 400
churches, eight markets and a countless
throng of citizens.
People have lived where Kiev now stands
ever since the times of the Scythians and the

4
: P» ero tkAjfd m* r( rtfh ipa rí-4 1 ma MrfMK- rtrtAfff/KFfíditii
Evidence of the love of music of the in¬
habitants of ancient Russia abounds in
manuscript illustrations, in frescoes and
wall-paintings in church and monastery,
and even in jewellery motifs. Above, Dance
of the Ancient Slavs, a miniature from a
15th-century manuscript.
Cimmerians, their mysterious predecessors.
The town of Gelon described by Herodotus
as the home of the Budinoi tribes who were
the Scythians' allies may have been ancient
Kiev, as is suggested by the occurrence of
the name Zhelan to designate a stream and
an eleventh-century suburb of Kiev.
Herodotus wrote that "the Budinoi are a
large and numerous tribe: they all have light
blue eyes and red hair. In their land is a
wooden town named Gelon. Each side of its
wall is thirty stages long. The wall is high
and entirely made of wood. Of wood, too,
are the houses and the shrines".
It is reported that the Persian Emperor
Darius, during his campaign against the
Scythians, entered their territory and that of
their allies the Budinoi and the Gelonoi, and
burnt down Gelon.
How tempting it is to believe that Gelon
really was ancient Kiev! If this were so, it
would add a thousand years to the age of
our city and we would today be celebrating
its 2,500th rather than its 1,500th anniver¬
sary. But although the Russian historian
The year 988 marked a turning-point in the
history of Russia, when Vladimir the Great,
son of Svyatoslav, prince of Novgorod,
grand prince of Kiev and sovereign of the
State of Kiev-Rus, was baptized in the
waters of the River Dnieper. The mass con¬
version to Christianity of the people of Kiev-
Rus which followed was to have an in¬
calculable impact on Slav culture.

During the reign of Yaroslav the Wise (1019-1054), son of
Vladimir the Great, Kiev grew in power and splendour.
Dominating the city from its central site and with its impressive
size, its architectural balance and the richness of its frescoes
and mosaics, the Cathedral of St. Sophia proclaimed to the
world the might of Kiev-Rus and its lasting attachment to Chris¬
tianity. Left, the central nave and the dome with the Virgin at
prayer. The later additions of the Baroque period in no way
detract from the purity of line of the original building.
Above, a gusli (zither) player
surrounded by pagan motifs
adorns this silver bracelet,
one of the finest existing ex¬
amples of the silversmith's art
from 12th-century Kiev.
Situated at the cross-roads of
the trade routes linking the
Baltic to the Caspian, Kiev
was at that time a prosperous
merchant city with flourishing
guilds whose craftsmen and
artists were the pride of an¬
cient Russia.
In Kiev-Rus the arts of dressmak¬
ing and embroidery were handed
down from mother to daughter.
Everyday clothes, festive
costumes, religious habits, some
of which we can still admire to¬
day, reveal unerring ornamental
skills and their embroideries in
silk, silver and gold display a
combination of good taste and
sobriety that at times recalls the
artistry of the ¡con. Left, this
piece of cloth, dating from the
11th or 12th century, is em¬
broidered with angels and saints.

Tatishchev and the Czech scholar Niederle
both subscribed to this hypothesis, we are
forced to admit, for lack of direct evidence
to support it, that it must remain in the
realm of supposition.
What is certain is that Kiev makes its ap¬
pearance on the historical scene as pre¬
eminently a Slav city, and that the Slav
tribal groups first played a part in history
around the fifth century AD. It is, then,
quite natural to date to this period the foun¬
dation of the great city on the Dnieper that
sprang up along the renowned trade route
"from the Varangians to the Greeks", link¬
ing the world of the Varangian plunderers of
the north with the then centre of the civiliz¬
ed world, Byzantium. (The term Varangians
designates not only the Scandinavian Vik¬
ings, as was traditionally thought, but also
the Slavonic tribes living along the southern
shores of the Baltic. Our earliest chronicle,
describing the crowning of the Varangian
Prince Oleg in Kiev, says: "And there were
with him Varangians and Slavs and others,
calling themselves Russians").
Ill-protected, Kiev presented an easy prey
to the first invader who might chance along.
And indeed this appears to have been the
town's fate, since apart from the story of its
founding by Kiy and the information that he
visited Constantinople and was received
with honour by its Emperor, no record
speaks of the strength or importance of Kiev
in the first two or three centuries of its
existence.
Then the Slavic warrior-princes Askold
and Dir, who were to threaten Byzantium
itself, appeared in Kiev. Like all Slavs, they
were too trusting, and fell victim to the wily
Norman warlord Oleg, who became master
In the mid-17th century, sporadic peasant
and Cossack uprisings in protest against
social hardships gradually spread and
developed into a full-scale war of liberation
and culminated, in 1654, in the reunification
of the Ukraine with Russia. Above, the
statue of the victorious insurgent leader
Bogdan Kmelnytsky, his arm pointing in the
direction of Moscow, in the main square of
Kiev which bears his name. In the
background, the cupolas of St. Sophia.
of Kiev and during his reign forced Byzan¬
tium to sign a trade treaty on terms
favourable to himself. The gates still stand
in Istanbul on which Oleg nailed his shield.
His successor Igor marched on Byzan¬
tium and its provinces, and his wife Olga
was lavishly received by the Emperor.
Svyatoslav, the son of Igor and Olga, whom
history remembers as a great defender of his
territory, routed the Khazars, kept Byzan¬
tium in constant dread and, although he had
little affection for Kiev and even dreamt of
moving the capital to the Danube, was the
first of the lords of Kiev to make the city a
byword.
Svyatoslav's son, Vladimir, was con¬
verted to Christianity and flung the doors of
Kiev-Rus open to all the treasures of world
culture. But it was Vladimir's son, Yaroslav
the Wise, who was the first of Kiev's
educator-princes. Yaroslav built up Kiev
and greatly enlarged it, prompting the
chronicler to enter under the year 1037:
"Yaroslav laid out a great town, and in that
town there is a Golden Gate; he likewise laid
out the Church of St. Sophia for the
Photo © N. Kozlovsky, Kiev
Metropolitan, and then the Church of the
Golden Gate for our Holy Lady of the An¬
nunciation, then the Monasteries of St.
George and of St. Irina." The Monastery of
the Caves was also founded during
Yaroslav's reign.
The first translators and transcribers of
religious books set to work in churches and
monasteries. Chronicles were opened,
schools were started and the first library was
established in the Cathedral of St. Sophia.
Crafts flourished, art schools sprang up,
and the capital of the State of Kiev-Rus
came to rival Constantinople itself, as was
indicated by Hilarión, the first Russian
Metropolitan installed by Yaroslav, who
wrote in his famous Sermon on Law and
Grace, "all manner of men and merchants
flocked thither, and all manner of goods
from all lands were found there".
Even though by the end of the eleventh
century Kiev was no longer the real capital
of the ancient State of Rus (in this far-flung
land there were some fifteen independent
princedoms each with its own capital) it still
remained the symbol of Russian unity, and
the heart of the land of Russia.
It was the focal point of political thought
(it was the birthplace of the first Russian
code of law, Yaroslav the Wise's "Russian
Law"), a centre of crafts and commerce,
economics and culture, ethics and religion.
The church then played a key role in preser¬
ving the unity of the Russian lands and Kiev
was the seat of the head of the Russian
Church, the Metropolitan. From Kiev came
the hierarchs for churches throughout the
land, and the Monastery of the Caves alone
supplied some fifty bishops during the
twelfth century. I
7

Modern Kiev is an impor¬
tant administrative, in¬
dustrial, scientific and
cultural centre with a
population of some two
and a half million. Since
the Second World War, the
city has been rebuilt and
has developed at an im¬
pressive rate. Priority has
been given to housing,
with dwellings for ten
thousand people being
built every year over the
past decade.
i> Kiev, not Novgorod, Chernigov, Vladimir
or Galich, was the envy of the independent
princes. Some tried to capture it, others to
weaken its influence, and yet others to
destroy it completely. But Kiev survived,
symbol of the integrity of old Russia, and
the best minds of the age recognized that
this was its role. Hence the appeals to de¬
fend the integrity of the homeland which oc¬
cur in the Russian Primary Chronicle, and
the eulogy of the Kievan Prince Svyatoslav
in the greatest epic poem of ancient Russia,
the Tale of the Host of Igor, in which
Svyatoslav calls on the princes in his "word
of gold" to defend the golden throne of
Kiev.
The name of Kiev resounded throughout
Europe, as Yaroslav's extensive dynastic
relations show. His daughter Anna he mar¬
ried to Henry I of France (see page 18),
Anastasia to King Andrew of Hungary, and
Elizabeth to King Harald Hardraade of
Norway, who was to die at the Battle of
Stamford Bridge. Yaroslav's son Vsevolod
married the daughter of the Emperor Con-
stantine Monomachus of Byzantium, his
son Izyaslav took the daughter of the King
of Poland as his wife, and his son
Svyatoslav married Countess Oda, descen¬
dant of a line of German princes.
Kiev's cultural achievements at that time
may be judged today through the Cathedral
of St. Sophia, which has survived almost in¬
tact, with its famous mosaics and frescoes.
The ruins of the Golden Gate have also been
preserved, but much has been swallowed up
by merciless time.
In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
after countless attacks and depredations by
the nomads and also by the independent
Russian princes, who were rightly rebuked
by the talented author of the Tale of the
Host of Igor for their hostility to Russian
unity Kiev slowly lost its importance as a
political, commercial and economic centre.
8
And yet it remained a great city. The immor¬
tal spirit of an entire people was alive in it.
Chronicles were written there, songs and
epic poems were composed and sung. It was
in Kiev that the Tale of the Host ofIgor was
written. Books were transcribed and sent all
over Russia. Goldsmiths made precious or¬
naments, artists and icon-painters adorned
the churches.
In the early thirteenth century, the hordes
of Chingiz-Khan swept in from the far ex¬
panses of Asia, and his grandson, Batu-
Khan, (known to Russians as Baty) advanc
ed westwards to subjugate Europe. For two
whole years, however, he manoeuvred
around Kiev, gathering his troops, sparing
his horses, sending out scouts and spies,
warily testing the ground.
When in late December 1240 Baty moved
against the walls of Kiev with his formidable
army, he was probably deterred not only by
the city ramparts (up to twelve metres high
and twenty thick) the walls of oak with
stone watchtowers, the triple belt of for¬
tifications (the city of Yaroslav, the city of
Vladimir, and at their heart, the palace of
In preparation for the celebra¬
tion of the 1,500th anniversary
of their city, the people of
Kiev have been restoring
monuments, studying ancient
chronicles and manuscripts
and generally reviving the
memory of the past. Right,
mannequins model costumes
of the past against the splen¬
did décor of the Cathedral of
St. Sophia.

Yaroslav) or the battle-hardened guard led
by the Governor appointed by the Grand
Duke Daniil Galitsky, Captain Dmitry. He
was deterred by the spirit of this mysterious
city, its enigmatic nature, its renown
throughout the land of Russia. To the
nomads, Kiev was, as it were, the key to
Europe, its wealth and its soul. To capture
Kiev was to take Europe. It meant imposing
a reign of terror, and Chingiz-Khan's com¬
manders were past masters at this.
Baty burnt and destroyed Kiev, blindly
avenged himself upon its defenders,
slaughtered and imprisoned its inhabitants.
The envoy of Pope Innocent IV, the Fran¬
ciscan monk Carpini, who passed through
the city in 1246, noted that it "has been vir¬
tually wiped out: there are hardly 200 homes
left in it, and those people are kept in the
deepest slavery".
But even in defeat Kiev was not im¬
poverished. The Cathedral of St. Sophia
and the Monastery of the Caves and the
Vydubetskii Monastery survived, damaged
but intact. Life continued in the surroun¬
ding areas, and some shades of its former
glory lived on in the city itself. And when,
years later, Kiev was taken by Grand Duke
Gediminas of Lithuania, it was not just a
name on a map but the historic centre for
the entire country.
A city may be destroyed but it will live on
as long as its spirit lasts. And the spirit of a
city is its people.
Where has the undying spirit of Kiev been
preserved? In its inaccessible ramparts, the
desperate courage of its defenders, the
greatness of its cathedrals, the thought of
the chroniclers, the knowledge spread far
and wide by the Mogila Academy (founded
in the sixteenth century), the free-ranging
intellect of our first philosopher,
Skovoroda, the- poetry of Shevchenko and
the talent of the poet of our era, Pavlo
Tychina.
We can trace the continuity and strength
of this spirit through the history of Kiev,
from the period of the princes to the times
of Bogdan Khmelnytsky's peasant wars of
liberation that culminated in the reunifica¬
tion of the Ukraine with Russia in 1654. We
can see its force in the bullet-riddled wall of
the "Arsenal" Factory in Kiev whose
workers rose up in 1918 to defend Soviet
power in the Ukrainian capital. In the
darkness of a November night in 1943 it in¬
spired the soldiers of the Soviet Army when
they stormed the Dnieper near Kiev to free
the ancient capital from the Fascists and
drive them from our land.
I would gladly speak of Kiev as it is today,
with its population of 2,500,000 people and
its 1 1 ,000,000 trees, a city of many factories,
and even more research institutes, including
the world-famous Paton Institute of Elec¬
trical Welding and the Cybernetics Institute.
I would like to evoke the city's streets, its
buildings, its people, ancient Kiev and baro¬
que Kiev, the dazzling gold of the cathedral
and the mighty concrete shapes of the new
developments.
The beauty and greatness of Kiev lie in the
fact that it is rooted in history. Here the cen¬
turies wander through the streets, and the
spirit of Slavdom lives in the ancient dales.
Pavlo Zagrebelnyi
During the early days of the Soviet space programme, Boris Paton, director of the Institute of
Electric Welding, at Kiev, was given the task of studying the problems of metal welding in
space. Laboratory experiments were devised and carried out under simulated space condi¬
tions (weightlessness, almost total vacuum, wide variation in temperature, etc.) to test the
reliability of the equipment to be used. The first welding operation actually performed in
space was effected on 16 October 1969, since when research has continued. Above, a
specialist at the Kiev Institute carrying out an experiment under simulated space conditions.

