Document Yury Aseev © Archaeological mstitude, Ukraine Academy of Sciences, Kiev

CENTURIES
IN STONE
by Yury Aseev
Model at top of page shows how the
wooden buildings of lower Kiev, today
known as the "Podol", must have
looked in the 12th century. Above,
detail of a 10th-century log building. In
the 12th and 13th centuries the lower
city was the artisans' district, largely
inhabited by potters, smiths and
tanners.
THROUGHOUT its fifteen centuries
of history, Kiev has been one of the
most important centres of building
and architecture in the eastern Slav world.
The city's early architectural history is
difficult to decipher from the fragmentary
24
YURY SERGEIEVICH ASEEV, of the Ukrai¬
nian SSR, is a specialist in the history and theory
of architecture and has been awarded the Ar¬
chitecture Prize of the Ukrainian SSR.

Photo © Ukrainian Society for Friendship
and Cultural Links Abroad, Kiev
The construction of the stone
"Golden Gate" as part of the
wooden fortifications of the up¬
per city in the 11th century open¬
ed a new phase in the city's
development. Above, the Golden
Gate today, and (right) a reconst¬
itution of its original appearance.
Reconstitution and drawing © S. Vissotsky, Kiev
Cupolas of the cathedral of St.
Sophia dominate the skyline in
the heart of Kiev. Since it was
built in the 11th century the
cathedral has undergone many
alterations, notably during the
Baroque period. Although Byzan¬
tine in style, some of its architec¬
tural features are distinctively
Kievan. It contains an outstand¬
ing collection of mosaics and
frescoes (see colour pages). Left,
St. Sophia as it is today. Above, a
reconstitution showing its
original appearance.
evidence of early medieval chronicles and
the results of architectural investigations.
From the sixth to the ninth centuries, Kiev
was the chief town of the Polyany, an
eastern Slav tribe. It was endowed with
strongholds on the hills of Starokievsk
("Old Kiev") and Zamok ("Fortress")
which protected the settlements between
them. Its growth and intensive construction
really began when it became the capital of
the ancient State of Kiev-Rus, which united
the eastern Slav tribes.
As Kiev-Rus gained in strength, powerful
fortifications were built. Wood was the
time-honoured building material, and the
people of Kiev were carpenters who had
from time immemorial acquired the skills of
working wood, together with a feeling for
the beauty of wooden architecture. The
chief method was frame construction.
The chronicles and folklore tell of the pic¬
turesque appearance of these wooden
buildings (photos 1 and 2) and some of the
draughtsmen of the early eleventh century,
such as Miloneg and Jdan Nikola, are
known by name. However, it only became
possible to really imagine what old Kiev
must have looked like when, amazingly, old
dwellings and streets were discovered ten
metres below ground. in the Podol district
during the construction of the Kiev Metro in
the 1970s.
In 1037, a year after Prince Yaroslav the
Wise had routed Russia's Pecheneg
assailants near Kiev, reuniting the entire
country under the city's rule, a new phase
opened in its development. That year, a new
hilltop site was laid out, the 72-hectare
"Yaroslav's Keep", ringed with great walls
of wood and earth with the stone^built
Golden Gate (photos 3 and 4). Its cen¬
trepiece was the Cathedral of St. Sophia,
built between 1037 and 1044 and set amid a
number of other churches, monasteries and
palaces (photos 5 and 6). This architecture
recalls that of many buildings in Byzantium,
but the galleries running around the
cathedral, the two towers set intd the west
façade and above all the domes, attest to the
originality of Kiev's architects. The original
form of the cathedral remains in all its '
grandeur beneath the accretions, especially
baroque, of later centuries. Some 3,000
square metres of eleventh-century frescoes
and 260 square metres of mosaics of in¬
estimable artistic value have been stripped
of later additions and restored.
In the 1 130s a new and typically medieval
architectural style appeared in Kiev. Instead
of the Byzantine courses of stone and brick
(opus mixtum) that were characteristic of
the tenth and eleventh centuries, architects
turned to brick alone. Churches became
more static in composition. The traditional
structure was retained, but Romanesque
features were incorporated such as half-
columns on façades, narrow windows, and
ornamental arcading. The Church of St.
Cyril is a good example of this medieval
style.
The reunification of the Ukraine with
Russia in 1654 was followed by a new phase
of construction in stone. Building began
again in upper Kiev, and groups of
monumental structures rose in the Pechersk
and Podol districts. Using their own tradi¬
tional compositional devices, and stimulated
25

by their contacts with Russian experts,
Ukrainian architects developed a vivid na¬
tional style known as Ukrainian or Cossack
Baroque. The church of St. Cyril, built by
Ivan Grigorovich Barsky (photo 7) and the
Uspiensky cathedral are notable examples of
the architecture of this period, while an in¬
teresting example of a late seventeenth- and
early eighteenth-century residence is Peter
the Great's house in the Podol (photo 10).
The eighteenth century is the period of the
Baroque style in Kievan architecture. One
striking example that still stands is the bell-
tower of the Monastery of the Caves
(1731-1744), designed by I.G. Shedel
(photo 9). The four-tiered belfry soars to a
height of 96.5 metres, and when it was built
was the highest in Russia. The tower, the
tiers of which are adorned with groups of
Tuscan, Ionic and Corinthian columns, is
the epitome of classical severity. The
monastery buildings, like other structures of
eighteenth-century Kiev, were largely the
work of the monastery architect Stepan
Kovnir, who used traditional Ukrainian
features in his designs and in the moulding
of his façades (photo 8). Another great ar¬
chitect of eighteenth-century Kiev was Bar-
tolommeo Rastrelli, a noted example of his
work being the church of St. Andrew.
The Classical period, which begins in the
late eighteenth century, is chiefly associated
with the work of Andrey Melensky. For
thirty years from 1799, Melensky directed
building operations in Kiev. Among those of
his works which are notable for their poetic
inspiration are the rotundas on the Tomb of
Askold (photo 11) and in the Florovsk
Monastery (1820), and his column com¬
memorating the return of the Magdeburg
Law to Kiev (1808). Besides Melensky, a
major role in Kievan architecture was played
by Vikenty Beretti, who built the University
of Kiev (1837-1843), a severe structure with
an eight-columned Ionic portico, dark-red
façade and black iron fittings (photo 12).
The early twentieth century saw major
stylistic changes in Kiev architecture.
Elements of eclecticism and Art Nouveau
appeared, the most original example of this
new trend being the house shown in
photo 14 in which the architect Vladislav
Gorodetsky gave free rein to his fondness
for animal motifs.
After the October Revolution rationalism
came to the fore in architecture. The Ukrai¬
nian Council of Ministers building
(photo 13), designed by Ivan Fomin and
Pavel Abrosimov, is particularly represen¬
tative of Kievan architecture in the 1930s.
Kiev suffered greatly during the Second
World War. The city centre was destroyed
by the Hitlerite invaders, along with some 40
per cent of the city's housing. In 1945 the
great avenue known as the Kreshchatik lay
in ruins, the university was burnt out, and
many major buildings had been destroyed.
The chief architectural problem in the post¬
war years was to redevelop the Kreshchatik .
and to restore the central districts nearby.
Since then Kiev has acquired many new
buildings, especially in the new districts.
Whether by building or by restoration work,
the architects who are developing modern
Kiev are vigilantly protecting the urban
fabric that the centuries have formed.
Yury Aseev
26
I
^B^~ «
ir ^ ^ m
%
ta
The church of St. Cyril (left) was
built around 1146 in upper Kiev.
Since extensively restored, it is
today a fine example of Ukrainian
baroque.
Photo © Ukrainian Society for Friendship
and Cultural Links Abroad, Kiev
The Lavra (as great monasteries
were usually called) of Pechersk
is a remarkable architectural
ensemble which took shape over
9 centuries. Above, engraving by
Averi Kozachovski (1728) shows
the monastery's Cathedral of the
Assumption (1073-1078) which
was destroyed during the Second
World War. The bell-tower (right)
built between 1731 and 1744, sur¬
vived and is in a good state of
preservation. The octagonal
structure is 95.5 metres high.
Photo © Aurora Publishers, Leningrad

An example of Ukrainian Baroque, this house was built for Peter the
Great at the end of the 17th century and rebuilt in the mid-18th.
Askold's grave, erected in 1809-1810 to a design by A.I. Melensky is
an example of the 19th-century classical style (although the upper
colonnade was added in 1936). Askold was a prince of Kiev who died
in combat in 882.
The university of Kiev (1837-1842) by V.l. Beretti. Late Classical style. The Ukraine SSR Council of Ministers building (1935-1938) was
designed by I.A. Fomin and P.V. Abrosimov.
Crowned with strange creatures, this Art Nouveau house (1901-1902)
was designed by the architect V.V. Gorodetsky.
Photos © Taras Chablovski, Kiev
27
