UNESCO AND THE CHARLES DARWIN FOUNDATION
IN 1935 the Government of Ecuador marked the centenary of
Darwin's visit to the Galapagos Islands by establishing a na¬
ture reserve on most of the uninhabited islands. Today the
"Galapagos Natural Park" covers 690,000 hectares, nine-tenths of
the total area of the archipelago. In 1937, Julian Huxley, later to be
Unesco's first Director-General, headed an international
"Galapagos Islands Committee", but the Committee's plans to
establish a research station in the archipelago were interrupted by
the Second World War. In 1957, the plan was revived and endorsed
by Unesco and, in 1959, the centenary year of the publication of
The Origin of Species, the Charles Darwin Foundation for the
Galapagos Islands was created in Brussels under the auspices of
Unesco and the International Union for the Conservation of
Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN). During the early 1960s, the
first buildings of the Charles Darwin Research Station were erected
near Puerto Ayora, on Santa Cruz island, with support from the
Government of Ecuador, Unesco, IUCN, the United Nations
Development Programme, and the Smithsonian Institution. The
Foundation has drawn up a "Master Plan for the Galapagos Na-
28
tional Park". In accordance with the Plan young tortoises are
reared at the station and released in their natural habitat when they
are 3 years old and can defend themselves against their enemies. Ig¬
uana are protected in the same way. Thousands of young fur seals
(formerly believed doomed to extinction) have been saved, and
measures have been taken to protect all the species from wild dogs
and goats. The Government of Ecuador has adopted the Plan's
recommendations for the limitation and control of tourism. No
more than 5,000 visitors (usually accommodated on board the ship
which brought them to the islands) are allowed, private visits are
prohibited, and fishing is controlled. Conducted tours are led by
trained guides along signposted footpaths. Feeding the animals is
prbhibited and each visitor is provided with a plastic bag for refuse
disposal. The Foundation plans to include marine areas in the Na¬
tional park and Unesco is contributing to the creation of a marine
laboratory which will also carry out geological studies. The
Galapagos National Park has been included in the World Heritage
List of cultural and natural properties of "outstanding universal
value".
