A problem in constant evolution
by Griffith Edwards and Awni Arif
IT is impossible to think about, or help¬
fully respond to, any aspect of drug-
taking without at every stage seeing
drug-taking (and our responses to drug-
taking), in a socio-cultural context. Man or
woman abstracted from society and culture
is a fantasy. This is not to deny the impor¬
tance of understanding individual dif¬
ferences in constitution, but the individual,
however constituted, can live, move, and
have his being only in a culturally and social¬
ly determined environment.
This is not the place for an extended essay
on futurology but it would be futile to sup¬
pose that those who are specially concerned
with drug problems could divorce them from
the world in which we are going to live, and
the future of that world background. Shifts
and growth in world resources, new poverty
or new wealth, are likely to have a fun¬
damental impact on drug problems and to
determine how much money will be invested
in drug programmes.
Beyond those external and material
aspects of the future, drug use (and
response to drug problems) will be pro¬
foundly affected by such factors as values;
the place accorded the individual in society,
in every sense; the value put on freedom and
rights to pleasure-seeking; the importance
and essential meaning given to health. A
concern with these types of question is
sometimes dismissed as Utopian, but it
might be argued that one of the changes we
are seeing is a rediscovery that these ques¬
tions are exactly those which we have a right
to ask. If we ignore them, we do so at our
peril, and among those perils may be an ac¬
celeration in misuse of drugs, or misuse of
treatment and preventive actions.
In a world experiencing upheaval and
breakdown in old structures and values,
much of the long-standing equilibrium bet¬
ween societies and their use of drugs will
break down too. In the immediate future the
world is likely to experience an intensifica¬
tion of drug-related harm.
There is already a tendency towards world
homogeneity in drug use. Cannabis, which
until recent decades was largely indigenous
AWNI ARIF, of Iraq, is Senior Medical Officer
with the Drug Dependence Programme of the
World Health Organization's Division of Mental
Health. He was formerly Director-General of the
Preventive Medicine Service of the Iraqi Ministry
of Health.
to the East, has now become well establish¬
ed in Western societies. Alcohol, which has
been so much the traditional drug of the
Western world, is now increasingly giving
rise to problems in countries of the East. The
misuse of psychotropics is rapidly becoming
la universal problem. But, parallel with this
growing homogeneity, a previous unitary
pattern of drug use is fragmenting in many
cultures into a variety of patterns: plural
societies give rise to plural drug problems.
If we take the definition of what counts as
a problem as being essentially socially and
culturally determined we may also expect to
see profound shifts in the processes of
definition. What counts as a problem now
may not attract the same definition in ten
years; or new definitions of the problem may
emerge over that period.
It is possible, for instance, that in recent
years we have tended unduly to emphasize
drug use itself or the state of dependence as
the essential problem, rather than defining
the problem more fundamentally in terms of
consequent damage. On the one hand,
some societies are moving towards a more
tolerant view of forms of drug use that are
not very harmful but at present disallowed;
on the other, cigarette smoking is increas¬
ingly being regarded as a problem in terms
of the damage it causes. At present, alcohol
use is not seen in most countries as a
problem in terms of its mere use; it is
alcoholism that attracts concern. A move¬
ment is u nder way, however, to define a cer¬
tain level of alcohol use as a problem for
societies, given the probable association
between national drinking levels and the
amount of alcohol-related damage.
Even where there are no large changes in
the definition of problems, there may be
alterations in the ordering of problem
priorities. For example, a trend may be
emerging towards according a higher priori¬
ty to socially accepted drugs such as alcohol
and tobacco or licitly prescribed drugs such
as the benzodiazepines, in relation to the
traditionally illicit drugs. The dichotomy bet¬
ween policies directed towards licit drugs,
on the one hand, and illicit substances, on
the other, may be breaking down.
It is evident that in many parts of the
world socio-medical help at the most basic
level is still lacking for people in trouble with
their drug-taking. In many countries, still,
people often languish in prison instead of
receiving constructive help. Alcoholics die
of delirium tremens for lack of the most sim¬
ple technical knowledge. Much-needed
facilities for drug detoxification are lacking.
Even the rudiments of rehabilitation are
often missing. It must be hoped therefore
that one trend for the immediate future will
be an energetic effort to ensure that these
needs are met and organizational problems
tackled.
But, at the same time, care must be taken
that the extension of facilities does not
mean the cruder extension of the medical
model, which conditions the individual to
learned helplessness and the community,to
surrendering its responsibilities. The helping
professions must not expect or be expected
to take responsibilities for all problems. A
response planned in terms of medical care
alone would be not only beyond the
economic resources of any country, but also
likely to be largely ineffective. What is need¬
ed rather is the further development of a
model that would see treatment as a part¬
nership between the individual, the com¬
munity and the helping professions, with the
helping professions in an assistant role.
Also, it seems likely that over the next
decade there will be increasing interest in
what were previously deemed to be the non-
specifics of treatment: set and expectation,
the role and self-definition given, the op¬
timism that is engendered, the goals that are
collaboratively defined, the sense of
autonomy that can be restored, and the
therapeutic relationship. The hope for the
future must be more in terms of understand¬
ing and developing those processes and less
an expectation of . wonderful new
technologies. There must, of course, be a
willingness to explore further the alliance
.between natural processes that foster and
reinforce recovery and active treatment.
With regard to prevention, the same basic
theme of the need for congruence between
society's response and the socio-cultural
context needs to be emphasized as the issue
that requires continuous awareness and
scrutiny; it must be hoped that this will
receive more attention than it has in the
past. In some areas, what may be seen is a
new balance of investment in overall pro¬
grammes, with prevention being given
higher priority. With regard to alcohol prob¬
lems, for instance, it seems likely that in
some countries there has been too much
emphasis on treatment, and that prevention k
has been neglected. f
33

y Another question, and a disturbing one, is
whether some of our present preventive ef¬
forts may be doomed to failure, whether ac¬
tion on substance problems may be diver¬
sionary activity to excuse our neglect of
more profound societal problems that breed
the misuse of substances. To take the exam¬
ple of the case study on drinking patterns in
Kenya, no one could seriously suppose that
Kenya's drinking problems are going to be
dealt with by an anti-alcoholism campaign
alone. This is not to preach despair or lend
support to neglect, but we have to be
careful lest society is evading responsibility
by focusing unduly and too superficially on
drug problems. We come back to daring to
be Utopian.
Having argued that the cruder application
of the medical model can sometimes carry
with it learned helplessness so far as the in¬
dividual's ability to help himself is concern¬
ed, one might then examine the parallel
argument as regards prevention. Could we
expect that communities themselves peo¬
ple in particular work-places or schools,
groups defined by some special shared
awareness such as women's groups would
take initiative for their own prevention
policies, rather than leave it to the State to
do so?
The sense of future that is being
developed here in terms of a need to be
aware of the relation between wider socio-
cultural changes and drug use and drug
problems, and in terms of changes in defini¬
tions of the drug problem and in treatment
and prevention, carries the implication of a
new research agenda. Without spelling the
matter out laboriously it can be said that all
the issues raised above are potential issues
for research. In practical terms, what one
might hope for is some movement away
from the dominance of a particular form of
epidemiological research on drugs, which,
although it has its place, has at times
become rather mechanistic and perseve-
rative, with the drug user treated as an ob¬
ject of study divorced from the study of the
culture and social institutions.
Whether international effort is mediated
through international organizations or by
any other process, what is clearly needed is
an increased willingness to take account
genuinely of experiences of countries other
than one's own. It must be hoped that in the
future there will be much more open ex¬
change of ideas than has sometimes been
seen, with no one dominant cultural view.
This is a vital consideration equally for treat¬
ment, preventive action (whether dealing
with demand or supply) and research.
To listen to other countries' experiences
one must, first, be given a chance to hear of
those experiences. An enormous amount is
being thought about, argued about, and ac¬
complished in many different countries, and
further ways of exchanging these ex¬
periences are badly needed. Much of
WHO's current drug programme is directed
to that end. It is to that endeavour that this
issue of the Unesco Courier also seeks in
some measure to contribute.
M Griffith Edwards and Awni Arif
NOSOTROS,
LOS ADOLESCENTES
mensaje audiovisual
Producción de los
alumnos Pares Guías
del Colegio Nacional
y Comercial de
Vicente López
Experiencia Piloto
Proyecto DINEMS - UNESCO - FNUFUID
1980
For teenagers, such feelings as loneliness, inability to communicate with others,
and lack of direction or purpose may increase the risk that they will become
dependent on drugs. The educational system can help students tackle these pro¬
blems by organizing in-school activities to break down barriers of communication
and to provide various kinds of help and guidance. Unesco and the United Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control are currently collaborating with the Argentine
education authorities in a pilot project along these lines. Photos show pupils at
the Vicente López national and commercial college, one of the schools where the
project is being carried out, taking part in group activities designed to foster a
community spirit. Top left, an "audiovisual message" was used by one group of
children to encourage their friends to express their feelings about adolescent life.
»»«
34
