HUCKLEBERRY FENN
AN EPIC OF SELF-DISCOVERY
by Malcolm Bradbury
r
IT has often been said that many of the
greatest American novels are really, in
the end, boys' books: James Fenimore
Cooper's Leatherstocking Tales, Herman
Melville's great sea-tale Moby Dick,
Stephen Crane's story of a young man in
war, The Red Badge of Courage, even
Ernest Hemingway's battle stories or J.D.
Salinger's painful but comic exploration of
adolescent crisis, The Catcher in the Rye.
Many American novels have been stories of
adventure rather than explorations of socie¬
ty, and this no doubt helps to bring them
closer to young people; so, too, does that
famous spirit of innocence that runs
through so much American writing.
However, few of these books are really
about the experience and the mythology of
childhood, its real dreams and anxieties. But
there is one that is; there is little doubt that,
of all the great American novels, none
comes closer to being truly a children's book
than Mark Twain's The Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn.
Yet Twain's story of two people, a white
boy and an adult black slave, floating
adventurously on a raft down North
America's central river, the Mississippi, to
get away from the tangles of adult society in
which they have become trapped, has long
been seen not just as a classic story for
children but as a fundamental human myth.
T.S Eliot once called Huck Finn "one of the
great permanent symbolic figures of fiction,
not unworthy to take a place with Ulysses,
Faust, Don Quixote, Don Juan, Hamlet and
other discoveries which man has made about
himself." Ernest Hemingway identified the
book as the true starting place of modern
American literature, the place from which
all other books begin.
Whether Mark Twain consciously
understood the potential of the story he was
telling is very doubtful. He began the book
as a sequel to an earlier children's story, The
Adventures of Tom Sawyer, and, as Huck
tells us in his own voice at the beginning,
"You don't know about me without you
have read a book by the name of The
Adventures of Tom Sawyer; but that ain't
no matter." Tom Sawyer is a fine children's
book, and is still widely read today. But
MALCOLM BRADBURY is professor of
American Studies at the University of East
Anglia, Norwich (UK). He is the author of many
books of criticism, including forthcoming studies
of Saul Bellow and The Modern American Novel.
He is also a novelist whose most recentpublished
work. The History Man, appeared in 1975. His
latest novel. Rates of Exchange, will be published
shortly.
"I guessed I wouldn't stay in one place, but just tramp right across the country,
mostly night-times, and hunt and fish to keep alive."
Huckleberry Finn is a great one, a work
both of lasting human weight and genuine
originality.
Ask a child what it is that makes this such
a remarkable children's book, and you will
probably be told that it is the book's
celebration of Huck Finn's freedom and in¬
dependence. Huck does not have to go to
school, or accept the rules of daily life; he
seems able to determine where he wants to
go and he chooses to act by his own stan¬
dards. Bored with "living in a house all the
time," tired of being "sivilized" by the
Widow Douglas, threatened by the return of
his brutal father, he takes to the river to
secure his own fortunes.
His adventures on the floating raft and
off it, on the riverbank, are spectacular,
somewhere between play and serious living;
he travels through the middle of his country
and discovers its places and spaces. His life
on the raft protects him, and gives him a
continuous means of escape; he moves with
nature and in nature's world. The river as a
moving and powerful force bears him on,
initiates him into endless new experience; he
begins a quest that might go on for ever. He
comes to enjoy and learn from the simple
things which are nonetheless the essentials
of life. And above all he tells his own story,
speaks always in his own voice, and judges
things in his own way.
Many readers have celebrated Huck's
spirit of freedom and his role as the natural
boy who is growing into the natural man,
and found in it a fundamental western and
American myth. It is the myth of the self-
created person growing up beyond the limits
of society in innocence and wonder. Out of
the world of nature come conscience and
understanding, nowhere more so than when
15

Huck realizes that his companion on the
raft, Nigger Jim, who will be returned to
slavery if he is recaptured, is entitled to
freedom too.
Yet Huck's story is not one of a total and
innocent freedom, rather of a painful grow¬
ing up: even his play moves into agonizing
discovery. Huck's adventures are often
flamboyant, but they involve not just comic
excitement but a struggle with the complex
society around him on the one hand, and his
own conscience and nature on the other. His
journey begins with the escape from the
brutality of his father, but also involves the
discovery of his father's mortality. And it
moves through dangers that are not just out¬
side Huck but within him, as he realizes the
complexity of his own conscience and also
realizes that, in wanting Nigger Jim's
freedom, he could go to Hell. If society is
often unkind, so is nature; and the river
itself is threat as well as promise.
Huckleberry Finn is a novel about the
river as a great but dangerous god, but it is
also a social river. It is America's main
artery, in the years when the book is set,
before the American Civil War. The very
direction of its flow is ironic, for the raft
floating downstream is drifting away from
the free states, where slavery was abolished,
to the slave states, where Nigger Jim is in
fact in greater danger.
Mark Twain realized this irony as he
wrote the book, and considered diverting his
raft up the Ohio River. But it is part of the
book's honesty, and its sense of growing
depth, that he did not. Bringing his story
closer to slavery, Twain took his theme of
freedom closer to complexity. The Adven¬
tures of Tom Sawyer was set in the lasting
playtime of childhood. This, its sequel, is a
book in which its simpler yet far deeper hero
begins to grow up. When Tom Sawyer ap¬
pears at the end of Huckleberry Finn, bring¬
ing childish adventures with him, we grow
Illustration of an episode
from The Adventures of
Tom Sawyer shows Tom
Sawyer, Huckleberry Finn
and Joe Harper during
their pirate expedition. "It
seemed glorious sport to
be feasting in that wild
free way in the virgin
forest of an unexplored
and uninhabited island, far
from the haunts of men,
and they said they never
would return to civiliza¬
tion. The climbing fire lit
up their faces and threw
its ruddy glare upon the
pillared tree trunks of their
forest temple, and upon
the varnished foliage and
festooning vines."
i^l*"
<É
\
^ ** * j ^k
pk . ^^^fc.
WEmák^
**** iWur
é*? ^p£-
"
Drawing Worth Brehm, from The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, Harper and Brothers, New York
The action of The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn centres on the river which Mark Twain described as the "great Mississippi, the
majestic, the magnificent Mississippi, rolling its mile-wide tide along, shining in the sun". This Currier and Ives print shows cotton being
loaded onto a steamboat of the kind Huck and the fugitive slave Jim might have seen as they floated downstream. Mark Twain's own
house in Hartford, Connecticut, was built to resemble a Mississippi steamboat.
16

impatient; Huck is now not a child at play,
but a complex character.
One reason why we feel this is that Huck
does tell the story in his own voice, and
through his own vision. To take this simple
and uneducated child from the American
frontier, the boy who wants to get away
from the house to smoke, and believes in
ghosts and simple superstitions, and
transform him into a voice of real ex¬
perience was Mark Twain's greatest fic¬
tional triumph. His originality was to give a
language built on vernacular and dialect, on
instinct and childhood judgement, a total
literary authority. It is a language that sets
itself against that of those in authority, the
language of those who are "sivilized" or ut¬
ter stable moral truths; it is a voice of play
and discovery.
We can feel Twain relaxing into it, not
just because it is comic, though the novel is
a classic of comedy, but because it has moral
dignity. It was a release of the child in Twain
himself, with all its sense of discovery, and
all its openness and vulnerability. The rela¬
tion of the child to the adult, the child ex¬
pectant and enquiring, the adult fixed in
social practices and impostures, is central to
the book. But it is the child's voice, unable
to take as truth the "blather" and social
pretension and hostility, that counts. "If I
never learnt nothing else out of Pap, I learnt
that the best way to get along with his kind
of people is to let them have their own
way," Huck says. But he has his own way
too, the voice of his own self-reliant
wisdom.
At the end of the novel, with Huck Finn's
complicated adventures down the river over,
and Nigger Jim set free, Huck's ideal of
escape and freedom is expressed again: "...I
reckon I got to light out for the territory
ahead of the rest, because Aunt Sally, she's
going to adopt me and sivilize me, and I
can't stand it. I been there before."
The territory is the frontier to the West,
where Tom Sawyer wants to "go for howl¬
ing adventures amongst the Indians," but it
is also another open space of nature in
which Huck's dream of flight and escape
might be again fulfilled. It has been rightly
thought a very American ending, celebrating
the free-standing ideal of the American
frontier, the dream of a good world beyond
society, "sivilization," and, indeed,
women, a place of new brotherhood. But
the flight is a familiar one in children's
books everywhere: the idea of a new world,
a fresh island, where old responsibilities
derived from the world of adults can be set
aside and a new life of self-sufficient adven¬
ture begun in nature is one of the lasting
myths of children's fiction. Huck's raft, like
Jim Hawkins' island, in Robert Louis
Stevenson's Treasure Island, is a place as
much of danger as of escape. No doubt
Huck's territory, if not too much spoiled by
Tom Sawyer's "howling adventures,"
would be the same.
For Huckleberry Finn is not a novel of
pure escape. It is a novel in which Huck flees
in order to discover to discover new places
and spaces, the workings of nature and
society, to discover himself, but above all to
discover what he "can't stand." Like
Holden Caulfield, in J.D. Salinger's The
Catcher in the Rye (a book that clearly owes
much to Huckleberry Finn), Huck protects
enough of childhood to keep his innocence
and seeks enough of adulthood to acquire
judgement. Huck "lights out for the ter¬
ritory," and Holden Caulfield plunges into
the big city world of New York to escape
from his preparatory school and discover
himself. Huck creates a child's Mississippi
River, Holden an adolescent's New York.
Both leave fixed places to discover changing
ones, and both end up not only reinter¬
preting the adult world but by finding a
language, a morally vigorous speech that
makes the novels which tell their stories
works not only of children's literature, but
of serious literature everywhere.
I Malcolm Bradbury
Old Man Dnieper
Photos right were taken during
the filming of a Soviet TV produc¬
tion of The Adventures of Tom
Sawyer which is astonishingly
faithful to the spirit and detail of
Mark Twain's novel. The three-
hour film, directed by Stanislav
Govorukhin, was shot on loca¬
tion with the banks of the
Dnieper taking the place of the
Mississippi valley. Above, after a
meal of fish Tom and Huck
stretch out in front of the fire and
Huck lights up his pipe. Below,
Tom and Huck watching a
steamer on the "Mississippi".
>
©
