AT THE
CROSS-ROADS
OF CULTURES
The writer
between two worlds
by Tahar Ben Jelloun
THE Third World intellectual must
live with a terrible fact: over 80 per
cent of people in the Third World
can neither read nor write. No magic wand
can be waved to alter their plight; it will be a
long, hard struggle which will call on men
and women with a real determination for
change. As for the poet, he is concerned by
the plight of the humiliated, whether he ex¬
periences humiliation at first hand or as an
observer. And to be excluded from reading
and writing is possibly the deepest wound
that material poverty and political cynicism
can inflict on a man.
Is it not a paradox to write in a continent
of illiterates? "No," says the Mexican
writer Carlos Fuentes, "it is not as paradox¬
ical as it may seem. Perhaps the writer
knows that he is working to keep alive a
relationship with a past which has rarely
found its political equivalent."
A literature in which many poor and
dominated peoples find a recognizable pic¬
ture of themselves has come from a single
fissure etched in the warm and human earth
of Latin America. The waifs and strays of
Bogotá are part of the same wound as the
urchins of Cairo and the shayatin ("little
devils") of Casablanca. A peasant
dispossessed of his land has the same dreams
whether he lives in north Africa or northeast
Brazil; the same imagination broken by in¬
justice, forbidden to express itself, thwarted
by a tragic fate.
Once he has resisted blandishments and
pressures, the writer born of this reality can¬
not accept that a dispossessed peasant
should be left to live what political and
military authorities call a reasonable life.
Whether he likes it or not, the writer will be
pursued unremittingly by this anonymous
crowd of urchins who have been deprived of
a childhood and who pour scorn on in¬
nocence, of men and women debarred from
a life of dignity and freedom.
Whether silent or muzzled, this crowd ap¬
peals to the writer, not in order to flatter
him but to make him listen. Who if not he
will report on this clamour of fury? This is a
fundamental reason why a writer should
write, even if he will not be read by the
crowd which cries out to him.
It is possible not to write, not to respond
to this pressing demand, not to hear the
silenced voice, to look elsewhere, to be
wrapped up in one's own trivial problems. It
is quite possible for the writer to turn down
this "mission". He may think that the fate
of the people from whence he came is no
concern of his. He may even aspire to
become a member of the dominant class.
But it does sometimes happen that the writer
feels concerned, and questions his writing to
LITERACY AND EDUCATION
Illiteracy is no longer the unhappy prerogative of the developing countries, as certain industrialized coun¬
tries are beginning to realize that they are sufferingfrom a relapse into illiteracy; but as we all know the map
of illiteracy coincides almost exactly with that ofpoverty and that in the 25 least-developed countries the
proportion of illiterates still exceeds 80per cent. Despite the prodigious efforts made by so many countries
of the Third World in the field of education, it is estimated that in 1980 there were still 322 million children
in the world between the ages of 6 and 17 not attending school, and a world total (excluding China and the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea) of 814 million illiterates.
Photo International Labour Office, J.P. Laffont © Sygma, Paris.

the point that he writes no more about this
reality. Fuentes comments on this: "To
abstain from writing would be to accept
defeat, and one need only walk through the
streets of Bogotá, Mexico City or Lima to
know that Latin America has drunk almost
to the dregs the cup of defeat."
"A continent of illiterates" has a greater
need of writers than a continent sated with
knowledge. Writing here is a refusal to ac¬
cept defeat. For Fuentes it also means bank¬
ing on liberty: "It means saying to yourself
in the intimacy of the act of writing that it is
imperative to keep alive the culture of the
past, without which we have neither a real
present nor an intelligible future; all this in
the knowledge that we shall not achieve con¬
crete results, we shall not change the world
by writing ten books or a thousand, and we
shall receive no reward."
And so we have this gamble on liberty and
on the future, for this continent will not
always be afflicted by the inevitability of il¬
literacy. Those who come later, perhaps the
children of this period, will be entitled to
call us to account. The writer will have to
declare his books or his silence.
Writing cannot be a soft option, for there
is so much want and deprivation in our
societies. The writer must be an all-purpose
figure. The real world cries out for his atten¬
tion. So many appeals call for a response.
He is needed in so many fields. He must
show ingenuity and patience, for he was
born among people who are sick of words.
He must listen and he must act to satisfy the
immediate need. This writer will be regarded
as a journalist, lawyer, go-between, trade
union spokesman, spokesman of a cause,
public writer, prophet of hard times, a man
involved in all his country's struggles, a
symbol, a myth, a social worker, and his
country's ambassador in the firmament of
letters... The list is never-ending.
LITERACY AND EDUCATION. It is to be hoped that by
adopting new structures, new admission procedures and new
methods such as teaching by correspondence, by radio or by
television, universities will open their doors wider to a new
range of students, many of whom will not have been able to
follow a normal academic career. It is to be hoped that they will
organize meetings or seminars to inform and instruct the dif¬
ferent social groups and wide sections of the population and
that they will also play an active role in literacy campaigns,
working side by side with the population, which will, more
often than not, be a rural population, in the national develop¬
ment effort.
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
Unesco are helping the Government of Ethiopia to establish a
functional literacy project for adults. Here a young boy is
teaching his father to read with the aid of a textbook prepared
and distributed under the project. Photo Garraud, Unesco.
Everything remains to be done in these
countries castigated by history, where
ideologies come up against a complex reality
which is more overwhelming and unex¬
pected than any fiction, in which imported
models crumble or remain unused, their
claims to universality intact. The writer is
expected to be permanently on call, open to
everything which shakes up and galvanizes
this poor soil pregnant with millions of
dreams, tales and images. He is not only re¬
quired to be a political militant making an
impact on society; he must also be a poet, a
creator, fertilized by this soil and by this
people.
The commitment of the artist implies
solving his country's problems at the same
time as creating a work of art. This still has
a meaning in countries which are con¬
fronted with life-and-death problems, not
intellectual fads. In this respect the Peruvian
writer Mario Vargal Llora has noted
something which is valid not only for Latin
America but for the Third World as a
whole. "Elsewhere, to be a writer means
primarily and often exclusively, assuming a
personal responsibility for a body of work
which, if artistically valid, will enrich the
culture of the country in which it is created.
In Peru and in other Latin American coun¬
tries, to be a writer means primarily, and
often exclusively, assuming a social respon¬
sibility." There is virtually no escape from
assuming the function. If you turn your
back on this imperative, if you retreat into
isolation, if you refuse to become involved
LITERACY AND EDUCATION. In the
developing countries that have recently
gained their independence, under the
lingering influence of systems inherited
from the colonial period, education still
often fails to some extent to match the real
situations and needs. In many of those
countries, the question of the language of
instruction is still unsettled, even in primary
school, and the use ofcurricula to maintain
and reinforce cultural identity is an acute
problem.
Young pupils in a Mexican school. Photo
© Marino Benzi.
18

in the life of the people, if you withdraw in¬
to selfish solitude, it is often taken as an
avowal by the writer that he is not commit¬
ted, so that he is accused because of his
silence and his remoteness of complicity
with the forces of oppression. Not to de¬
nounce injustice, to be silent, is unthinkable
for a writer mandated to speak out and write
by a continent of illiterates. Literature is ex¬
pected to be useful, operational and ver¬
satile in its functions, roles "and powers.
Literature takes its cue from science, just as
it makes inroads on ideology. It becomes an
activity in the service of truth.
If this conception of literary activity
relates to reality by making the writer a
repository of information with his eyes fixed
on the outside world, then it causes a major
misunderstanding. For the main thing is
forgotten, namely how to write, how to
create.
Should we then go far in the other direc¬
tion and regard literature as a pure stylistic
exercise or a lifeless tour de force? The
vogue for the French nouveau roman open¬
ed up several possibilities for the renewal of
academic writing, but it also stripped
literature of flesh and blood. When I read I
love to feel behind the words a stretch of
land, a breathing body, life going on
somewhere. In some novels, however, the
belated products of this fashion, the sterility
of the text corresponds to a social situation
in which land and body have perhaps ceased
to breathe.
There is a widespread misunderstanding
about where the writer's commitment lies.
To militate in a political party or organiza¬
tion is one thing; to write while taking part
in politics as well is another. The one does
not exclude the other. But it is rare that the
two combine in such a way as not to be
mutually harmful and do not create con¬
fusion and misunderstandings. One does
not have to be an artist to feel concerned by
what breaks and stifles the voice of a people.
This is a matter for concern of every citizen
who refuses submission and resignation. If
he also happens to be a writer, then so much
the better, for in principle he has the means,
however limited, to put up a better
resistance to barbarism and to participate
through his work as a writer in affirming his
people's culture, which is itself threatened
over a period of time with asphyxia, abduc¬
tion and death.
As for the writer who deliberately chooses
to live in exile, he leaves far behind him the
prevailing stagnation, the temptation to bit¬
terness and inactivity. He sets out alone,
neither adventurer nor hero but someone
who decides to set his eyes on other
horizons, at his own risk. Whatever he does
is bound to be wrong! If exile leads to
nothing, he is wrong. If exile brings him suc¬
cess, he is wrong. The child who leaves his
family connexions by the wayside is not
forgiven. He will not be pardoned for many
things, and whatever happens an effort will
be made to make him feel guilty, to make
him feel that he is a bit of a traitor, especial¬
ly if he succeeds in being a productive
creative artist. He will be blamed for having
it too easy. He will be the target of am¬
bivalent and often unchanging feelings,
nourished by a host of vague and obscure
ideas.
But voluntary exile, the need to go
elsewhere to encounter other realities and
other worlds, is preferable to marking time,
which is often the prelude to a slow death,
sterility, desiccation and self-absorption.
Others would say, "It's better to mark time
with your own people than to take refuge
abroad." And so the question should be
defined in political terms, not in affective
and moral terms.
Why have so many writers and artists
from our countries felt the need at one time
or another to leave their own country in
order to live and work, temporarily or per¬
manently, in another society? Why have
they been able to create elsewhere? Is it not
because in other countries they have found
conditions and structures propitious for
writing, painting, meeting other people, ex¬
changing ideas, in a word, for communica¬
tion? Have they not found elsewhere what is
most lacking in their own country: rivalry, a
critical spirit, freedom, the sense of dif¬
ference that stimulates creativity? Of
course, it may be countered, but why not
create these conditions, these basic struc¬
tures, in one's own country? True, it is a
priori easier to leave than to stay. For stay¬
ing is not an easy option; one must fight,
often alone, against oppression, against the
ugliness and weight of bureaucracy. The ar¬
tist must fight to avoid the snare held out by
those who want to entice him on to their side
and use him to their own ends. He must
struggle with himself, and resist all kinds of
temptations, discouragement, fatigue and
indifference. Mediocrity becomes dangerous
when it takes root, becomes accepted, and
spreads. It is contagious. The energy and the
instinct to react are lost.
So the writer should remain vigilant and
continue to believe in his creative powers.
He should barricade himself against the out¬
side world, confining himself to an almost
schizophrenic universe which may ultimate¬
ly be his only solution. He should take
refuge in an inner exile, withdraw from im¬
mediate reality, fight to survive and create
his own working environment. But all this
often means that he loses the power to use
words. Inner exile also means losing oneself
in social gossip, in drink, in oblivion, in a
slow decline into narcissism.
To be far away does not necessarily mean
to be absent. To go away is another way of
establishing links with one's land and peo¬
ple. This kind of exile may be fruitful, or at
any rate not systematically negative. It is not
the writer who lives in exile who should be
pilloried, but the political structure which
respects neither his difference nor his
freedom. Wherever it is produced, the work
of a writer or an artist returns in one way or
another to the land of its origin.
But when exile becomes a way of thinking
and of becoming ensnared in the toils of an
unhappy conscience, when it severs a man
from his deepest roots, when it becomes an
end in itself and submerges the individual in
a set of problems which ought not really to
concern him, then exile becomes alienation.
It returns to the mother country another
person, often a stranger who has lost the
capacity of wonder: a wreck apparently in
good health.
I Tahar Ben Jelloun

