Immortal clay
From neolithic times to today,
a panorama of Chinese ceramics
by Li Jixian
PERHAPS nowhere in the
world have pottery and por¬
celain assumed so much im¬
portance as in China. The influence of
Chinese ceramics in other world
regions has also been profound for in
the development of pottery glazes
and porcelain as in other fields China
can claim a long priority over the rest
of the world. Below, some of the key
stages and great achievements in the
history of Chinese ceramics, a tradi¬
tion which has surged back to life in
modern China.
Neolithic origins. The Yangshao
culture, so named after a site
discovered in 1 920, developed in the
Yellow River Valley during neolithic
times. Craftsmen of this culture pro¬
duced pottery painted with exquisite
geometric patterns and lively animal
motifs which, together with the black
pottery with etched designs of the
Hemudu culture of Zhejiang Pro¬
vince, reveal the outstanding
creativity of the ancient Chinese.
The earliest earthenware was
somewhat loose-textured and
porous, but. by late neolithic times the
Chinese had learned to use earth con¬
taining kaolin, or China clay, to make
wares which they fired at
temperatures as high as 1,000
degrees centigrade.
Next Chinese potters stumbled
upon the secret of glaze. When firing
pottery they may have noticed that
scattered alkaline ashes left glossy
LIJIXIAN is engaged on research in theArt In¬
stitute of the Academy of Chinese Arts. A
specialist in ancient Chinese ceramics, he has
written o ver a dozen s tudies on such themes as
the earthenware of the gijia culture and
porcelain in the reign of the emperor Kangxi.
36
specks on the wares, for they began
to leave ashes on the surface of semi¬
finished pottery before firing it. Glaze
smoothed the coarse surface of the
pottery, made it easier to wash, and
added greatly to its beauty. Thus
came into being the earliest kaolinic
porcelain, covered with a yellowish
lead glaze produced by high-
temperature firing. (Chemical
analysis has shown that the primitive
celadon wares of the Shang dynasty
of 3,000 years ago are basically iden¬
tical in composition to later
porcelain).
From the Eastern Han dynasty
(25-220 AD) to the Three Kingdoms
and the Southern and Northern
dynasties (221-581 AD). Potters
working during the Eastern Han
dynasty, especially those who pro¬
duced the celadon wares of the
southeast, further improved the firing
process, producing smoother sur¬
faces. Celadon ware is decorated
with glazes ranging from various
shades of green to blue and grey. The
colours are the result of a wash of li¬
quefied clay (slip) containing iron that
was put over the body before glazing.
The iron interacted with the glaze dur¬
ing firing and coloured it. The Three
Kingdoms Period and the Southern
and Northern dynasties witnessed
the rapid development of celadon
wares. Potters began to apply a thick
and even dark green wash to the body
before glazing.
The Tang dynasty (6 1 8-906) was a
great period in the development of
Chinese pottery. The two major pro¬
ducts were the white pottery of
Xingzhou (Hebei Province) and the
celadon wares of Yuezhou in Zhe¬
jiang Province. Famed for its refine-
Red pottery tripod jug dating from the 3rd or
early 2nd millennium BC.
Photo Erich Lessing © Magnum, Paris
Tang potters were unsurpassed at modelling
horses in a variety of spirited poses and pro¬
ducing highly expressive glazed or unglazed
figurines. Works shown here were unearthed
at Xi'an (Chang-an) China's ancient capital and
the starting point of the Silk Road.
Photos '5l China. Beijing

ment and whiteness, Xingzhou pot¬
tery was described by a contem¬
porary scholar, Lu Chu, as being "as
white as snow" or "as white as
silver". The transparent glaze of
Yuezhou ware won the admiration of
many poets, who praised its glossy
smoothness as "the emerald green of
a thousand peaks" and described its
transparency as "autumn water".
Finé clay and refined firing tech¬
niques gave the wares a mellifluous
sound when tapped, and ceramics
were in fact used as musical in¬
struments in ancient China, especial¬
ly during the Tang dynasty. The ex¬
cellent musician Guo Daoyuan pro¬
duced sweet sounds by tapping with
chopsticks on twelve teacups (six
from Xingzhou, six from Yuezhou)
filled with different volumes of water;
the sound was more pleasant than
that of musical instruments made of
bronze.
It was also during the Tang dynasty
that potters developed the world-
famous "three-colour" glazed pot¬
tery figurines. They created forms
and motifs that vividly illustrate the
life and culture of feudal society in
China.
The Song dynasty (960-1279)
marks a high point in the history of
Chinese pottery. Each of the five
famous wares for which this period is
This vase with two tubular handles is an
example of the exquisite guang ware
produced during the Song dynasty (height
10 cm).
Photo © Musée Cernuschi, Pans. Private collection, Paris
celebratedDing, Ru, Guang, Jun
and Ge was noted for its own
unique style. The exquisitely
beautiful Ding ware was noted for its
smooth, cream-coloured glaze, with
underglaze decorative designs made
by transfer printing, painting or
engraving in the paste. Ru ware was
covered with a thick glaze mixed with
powdered agate to produce a dark
green colour. The sturdy crystal
green Guang porcelain gave the im¬
pression of great age. The Jun pot¬
ters mixed a small quantity of copper
oxide into their glazes which after fir¬
ing became red or purple.
The origin of the unique crackled
surface of Ge ware is recorded in a
Chinese folk-tale which tells how
once upon a time two brothers of
Longquan county in Zhejiang pro¬
vince each opened a pottery
workshop. The goods produced by
the elder brother sold far and wide, to
the dismay of the younger brother
who could not sell his own wares.
One day when the elder brother was
about to open the door of his kiln, the
younger brother, spurred by envy and
hatred, splashed cold water on the
wares inside. The surface of the pot¬
tery cracked at once, and to his great
surprise the younger brother had
created a successful new product for
his elder whose kiln was from then on
known as the Ge (elder brother) kiln.
The Ming dynasty (1368-1644)
and the Qing dynasty (1644-1911)
were the golden age of painted white
pottery. Jingdezhen, perhaps the
Ming three-colour vase dating from the late
1 6th-century.
Photo Erich Lessing © Magnum, Paris
best-known factory in the history of
Chinese ceramics, became the
leading centre. Its basic product was
underglaze blue and white porcelain,
the emergence of which, together
with that of red porcelain, marked the
beginning of the painted pottery
period. Production of blue-and-white
underglaze porcelain became the
mainstay of the Chinese porcelain in¬
dustry and was exported all over the
world.
The development of famille rose
porcelain also opened up new
avenues of creativity. Famille rose is
the name given in nineteenth-century
France to enamelled porcelain in
which rose pink, made from gold
chloride, predominates. These pro¬
ducts brought great prosperity to
Jingdezhen.
Modern China. During the past thir¬
ty years several of the ancient kilns
have been restored and many new
porcelain factories established.
Jingdezhen now produces imita¬
tions of traditional colour-glazed
porcelain, among which jihong (crim¬
son) pottery is one of the most
precious. New glazes have also been
developed on the basis of traditional
wares. Kilns with a long tradition
such as the Longquan kiln of Zhe¬
jiang, the Cizhou kiln and Ding kilns of
Hebei, the Jun and Ru kilns of Henan
and the Jianyang kiln of Fujian have
succeeded in producing replicas of
the old wares which match the best
ancient porcelain.
37
