Controversial
Confucius
In China today, the ancient
philosopher's works
are a source of lively debate
by Pang Pu
The Master said, "When there is a preponderance of
native substance over acquired refinement, the result
will be churlishness. When there is a preponderance of
acquired refinement over native substance, the result
will be pedantry. Only a well-balanced admixture of
these two will result in gentlemanliness. "
The Master said : "That a man lives is because he is
straight. That a man who dupes others survives is
because he has been fortunate enough to be spared. "
Book 6
The Master said, "Inever enlighten anyone who has not
been driven to distraction by trying to understand a dif¬
ficulty or who has not got into afrenzy trying to put his
ideas into words. When I have pointed out one corner
ofa square to anyone and he does not come back with
the other three, I will not point it out to him a second
time. "
Book 7
There is little to choose between overshooting the mark
and falling short.
Book 11
The Master said, "To fail to speak to a man who is
capable of benefiting is to let a man go to waste. To
speak to a man who is incapable of benefiting is to let
one's words go to waste. "
Book 15
Extracts from Lun Yu (The Analects) by Confucius. Translated by
D.C. Lau. Penguin Books, 1979. © D.C. Lau
Confucius (c. 551 -c. 479 BC) is considered to be the
father of Chinese philosophy. He liked to say that he was
a direct descendant of the Song rulers of China, which in
his time was enmeshed in social and political strife. The
empire was divided into a large number of States govern¬
ed by nobles whose pastime was war and who oppressed
and exploited their subjects. Like Plato in later times, Con¬
fucius believed that he could preach to tyrants a certain
form of virtue, and travelled from court to court in an at¬
tempt to instil in local rulers his precepts of political morali¬
ty. His efforts met with little success, but after his death
his more lowly-born disciples, the most important of
whom was Mencius (Meng zi), set down his doctrines in
the Four Books and the Five Classics, and some of them
obtained prominent government positions. Gradually, a
body of high officials, the mandarinate, came into being,
notably during the Han dynasty and the Tang period.
These functionaries were recruited by competition in the
schools where the teaching was based on Confucian
texts, and found in the philosopher's work their perfect
ideological expression: the concept of the State which
they served allowed the political élite which they formed
to perpetuate itself. Although the privileges of the man¬
darins were based on learning, not hereditary right, the
Confucianism of the mandarinate bore the imprint of tradi¬
tionalism and conservatism. Its scholastic nature was an
obstacle to any reinvigoration of Chinese life, especially
during the nineteenth century. Consequently, Confucius
and his teachings were at first totally rejected in socialist
China. In recent years, however, deeper historical
analysis has set Confucius more firmly in his time and in¬
troduced different shades of emphasis into judgments
about him and his work. The article by Pang Pu on this
page outlines the main points at issue.
10
T
HE influence of Confucius during his lifetime and the
value of his teachings have been the centre of
vigorous controversy in China for several decades.
The philosopher lived towards the end of the so-called
Spring and Autumn period (722-480 BC) which was marked
by violent social upheavals. Some historians maintain that
this was the time when Chinese society based on slave-
ownership was transformed into a feudal society. If this was
so, then Confucius may have represented the interests of the
emerged landowner class in opposition to the entrenched
slaveholding class. His political role would in this case have
been positive and progressive.
However, many historians consider that this radical change
in Chinese society occurred somewhat later, during the Warr¬
ing States period (480-221 BC). In their opinion, Confucius
represented the interests of the declining slaveholding class
and consequently his political position was reactionary. As he
travelled from State to State, his principal objective was to
restore the old order based on slavery.
According to yet another school of thought, these pro¬
found social changes had taken place during the Western
Zhou dynasty, which ruled from the eleventh century to
722 BC. For those who hold this view, Confucius champion¬
ed the interests of the lower and middle strata of the
aristocracy and of the budding caste of high officials. What
Confucius wished to restore was not an order based on slavery
but the unity of an empire which, at the beginning of the Zhou
dynasty had broken up into powerful vassal States. The
unification advocated by Confucius would have speeded up
social development, so the argument runs.
Lastly, some Chinese historians believe that the feudal era
began at a much later date, during the period of the Wei
kingdom and the Jin dynasty (from 220 to 420 AD). Their
thesis is that until the time when the Wei, one of the States of
the Three Kingdoms, replaced the Han dynasty, productive
PANG PU is a journalist with the Chinese magazine Historical Studies.

Photo <Z Lauros Giraudon, Pans. Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
Scene from the life of Confucius and his disciples as depicted in an early 19th-century Chinese painting.
work throughout China was largely carried out by slaves. The
age of Confucius was simply a transitional period; the old
slaveholding system still existed, but productive work was
beginning to be done by people reduced to slavery by debt.
Seen in this light, Confucius should not be accused of seeking
to restore the institution of slavery for the simple reason that
slavery still existed. In spite of the conservative caste of his
thinking, Confucius was thus not an out-and-out reactionary.
Confucius' political thinking was built on the two concepts
of ren and //. Although opinions differ on the subject, ren
(which literally means "benevolence" or "humanity") is
generally taken to denote the principles by virtue of which
people can live in society or love each other mutually.
Some scholars argue that ren was meant to impose rules of
conduct on slave-owners threatened by frequent revolts by
their slaves. In this way Confucius was seeking to attenuate
the contradictions between the dominators and the
dominated, as well as those which arose within the ruling class
itself, thereby serving incidentally the interests of the oppress¬
ed. And since, according to the same scholars, no previous
theory had taken account of humanity in its entirety, the
teachings of Confucius should be considered as revolutionary
and the man himself as the greatest thinker of his age.
Other historians reject this thesis, maintaining that Con¬
fucius did not intend that slaves and other labourers should
be treated with "benevolence" and that Confucius was in no
way progressive.
Most specialists seem to adopt a position somewhere bet¬
ween these two extremes. If they stress that Confucius' theory
was fallacious and that it strengthened the hand of the ex¬
ploiting class, they also admit that it took account, in an un¬
precedented way, of the common people.
For Confucius, //' (which may be translated literally as
"ritual", "ceremony" or "rules of propriety and
politeness") was the keystone of the established order but
also designated standards of individual conduct. Some
believe that some of Confucius' teachings on the subject of li
were useful not only for his own time but also for later genera¬
tions, and that // was thus in a sense positive. Others consider,
however, that since they were intended to shore up the mori¬
bund slaveholding system, the tenets of conduct laid down by
Confucius were fundamentally bad.
It is more generally believed, however, that although Con¬
fucius felt nostalgia for a bygone age, and especially for the
heyday of the Western Zhou, he succeeded in tailoring his
philosophy to the new relationships between human beings
which had become established in the society of his time.
Confucius preached ' 'the mandate of heaven", was oppos¬
ed to reform of any kind, and respected spirits and divinities.
His thought is sometimes seen as no more than a corpus of
idealistic metaphysics. On the other hand, it is pointed out
that in Confucianism "heaven' ' is identified with nature, that
the philosopher himself was extremely sceptical about the ex¬
istence of spirits and the soul and that such thinking was ex¬
tremely audacious in comparison with that of his contem¬
poraries. He attached great importance to moral principles
and to individual initiative; he formulated rational ideas
which enriched the theory of knowledge; he was
convinced that history is a continuous, ongoing process. To
qualify his thinking as "metaphysical" is to compress its
meaning to an exaggerated degree.
Most scholars recognize Confucius' importance as an
educator. While some historians claim that private schools
for the lower orders existed before his time, the majority ac¬
cord him the distinction of being the first teacher to dispense
learning outside the official schools attached to the court. In
so doing, he took culture and education outside the
aristocratic circle of which they had hitherto been the
monopoly.
Where pedagogical theory was concerned, Confucius was
ahead of his time. He advocated an education accessible to
all, irrespective of social origins. His approach took account
of the different aptitudes of each pupil and foreshadowed the
Socratic method of bringing out ideas latent in the mind.
11
