- >
^"VMNift e


A new approach
to drug dependence
by Griffith Edwards
OVER the last decade or two "drug
education" has been much in
vogue as a way of meeting society's
worry about illicit drug taking by young peo¬
ple. But in the broadest sense, who
educates the educators? Put simply and
challengingly "Do you know what you are
talking about?"
The teacher standing there with chalk and
blackboard or the latest film strip at the
ready, is of course only a metaphor: what
we are really asking is whether laws and
government policies on addiction, treatment
programmes and prevention programmes,
our reactions to drug use and our own use
of drugs (alcohol and tobacco are drugs) are
based on informed understanding or on
frightened misconceptions.
Misconceptions, for instance, frequently
include ideas such as that alcohol is not a
drug, that drug taking is a problem that in¬
volves only young people, that one type of
explanation can explain all drug taking, that
a solution favoured in the West has the
answers for the East, that we can "cure"
societies', drug problems by ever more ac¬
tive customs and police action, that drug
use inevitably means lurid degradation, that
what is wrong is simply the drug, simply the
individual, or simply society out of balance.
Let us, as it were, put the chalk down for
a minute, and ask ourselves first of all what
meanings and explanations we are really giv¬
ing to this key word "addiction".
The word addiction by immediate reflex
will in most people's minds conjure up im¬
ages of something which is alien, unintelligi¬
ble, and perhaps carrying with it a whiff of
association with evil and enchantment. It is
a word which invites fear, perhaps con¬
tempt, and certainly a suspension of cool
analysis.
Today the nuances of meaning vary great¬
ly between languages, and any international
meeting on drug problems soon discovers
that it is involved in a tangle of linguistics.
There are languages where this word ad¬
diction has no precise translation, and other
languages where there is no concept
available which even remotely resembles
this key term.
We find ourselves again discovering that
words are not only our servants but also our
GRIFFITH EDWARDS, of the United Kingdom,
has been professor ofAddiction Behaviour at the
Institute of Psychiatry, University of London,
since 1979, and Honorary Director of the
Institute's Addiction Research Unit since 1970.
He is a member of the World Health
Organization's Expert Advisory Committee on
Drug Dependence. Among his many publications
are Drugs and Drug Dependence, of which he
was joint editor (1976) and Alcoholism (1977).
masters: vocabulary shapes the way we
think about things and (much more dang¬
erously), the way we think about people.
Some years ago, in 1969, the World
Health Organization promulgated the idea of
drug dependence as an alternative concept
to addiction. The new phrasing was certain¬
ly meant to be more than a mere synonym
for the older term. What was implied was
the need to recognize the fact that different
types of drug can produce very varying
types and degrees of reliance on their use,
whereas the word addiction all too easily
suggests an extreme and stereotyped pic¬
ture, resembling perhaps that produced by
heroin. Because of its brevity and its
penetration of our ordinary language the
word addiction is nevertheless still likely to
remain in circulation for a long time the
word addict comes more naturally than the
phrase drug dependent person.
But whether we designate compulsive
drug taking as bad habit, addiction, or
dependence, what is the essential nature of
the thing we are talking about? There are a
number of possible levels of explanation.
The laboratory scientist will be interested in
the neurochemistry and the influence of the
drug on the transmission of nervous im¬
pulses, and the mechanisms which underlie
tolerance and the withdrawal state. The
psychologist will focus on addiction as
learnt behaviour, the drug experience as re¬
inforcing and conditioning of drug taking
behaviour, or on the learning processes
which came about from the relief of
withdrawal symptoms by a further dose of
the drug. And meanwhile the sociologist will
seek to understand the social determinants
of drug taking, the peer group pressures,
and the nature of the environment which
proposes drug taking. Being an addict is, he
will argue, the assumption of a social role.
The anthropologist will point out the sym¬
bolic meaning of the drug and will see the
rituals and functions of drug taking as
rooted in the individual's culture.
Which explanation is to have pre¬
eminence? There is an invitation here to a
certain kind of chauvinism, with the pure
scientist believing that only his sort of
science can really put a finger on the ab¬
solute nature of addiction, and that truth
can be reduced to the ultimates of the
neuronal synapse: the social scientist may
equally be tempted to claim that the neuro¬
sciences are crass and only work at a level
which is absurdly remote from the social
reality of "being an addict" the electron
microscope no matter how high-powered
does not reveal the texture of the opium
smoker's hillside village, or the street cor¬
ners of the heroin addict's life. To put such
different perspectives into positions
of confrontation and rivalry is, however,
unproductive.
The challenge which is issued by the at¬
tempt to understand drug taking and drug
addiction goes wider though than the im¬
mediate question: it is the challenge to over¬
come a much more general habit in our
thinking which favours one-dimensional ex¬
planations. It is in fact quite impossible to
approach a whole understanding of why, for'
instance, the Andean peasant chews his
coca leaves unless we are at one and the
same time willing to make an effort to
understand the pharmacological properties
of cocaine, the psychological nature of the
drug experience, the working conditions of
that labourer, and the way that society
regards coca chewing.
What a challenge! But this is not a posi¬
tion to be arrived at simply for the sake of
abstract intellectual satisfaction, a sort of
show-off intellectual conjuring trick. On the
contrary, this is the needed basis for all man¬
ner of practical dealings. If we retreat to
one-dimensional vision we will inevitably
find ourselves trapped in ill-adapted policies
and responses.
Having insisted on this need for an
understanding which is balanced and in¬
tegrated, it can probably now be seen that
the worst errors of recent years have come
from a tendency to neglect the social and
cultural dimensions. A policy which at¬
tempts, for instance, to prevent urban
heroin addiction by heavy police penalties
for use or by lecturing school children on the
evils and dangers of this substance, while ig¬
noring the nature of life and the frustrations
of opportunity in a shattered ghetto where
being an addict gives comradeship, a sense
of shared purpose and enterprise and a
definition of self not otherwise easily
available, is to embark on a response which
is likely not only to be ineffective and costly
but also to be cruel.
Addiction certainly matters, but we
should also be much more attuned to think¬
ing in terms of the actual pattern of prob¬
lems which the individual or society is en¬
countering where drugs are con¬
cerned occurring singly or in
clusters, and affecting health in its physical,
psychological or social domains.
We started with the image of a speaker
about to give his talk and very politely we
asked him to pause a minute and define
what he was talking about. In this complex
area the business of understanding is never
completed, but will be much aided by
shared experience from many villages and
streets. The articles which follow have that
aim.
Griffith Edwards
11
