A pill for every ill
by Ruth Cooperstock
RUTH COOPERSTOCK is on the staff of the
Addiction Research Foundation, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
Increasingly the world expects a
pill for every ill. What is to be
done about patient expectations
and medical prescribing? Dr.
Cooperstock focusses on
benzodiazepines (the minor
tranquillizer group which includes
such well-known products as
valium and librium).
30

THE pharmaceutical industry is expand¬
ing worldwide at an annual rate of
over 10 per cent. The benzodia¬
zepines, introduced in the early 1960s with
chlordiazepoxide (Librium) and then
diazepam (Valium), were initially marketed
as anti-anxiety agents. Psychiatric disorders
and the emotional discomforts of everyday
life were to be eliminated. Gradually, as
more benzodiazepines came on to the
market (and there are now scores of this
class of drug) the indications for their use
expanded to include not only daytime seda¬
tion, but also night-time sedation, muscle
relaxation and anti-convulsant therapy. Ad¬
ditionally, a number of combination drugs
appeared which included a benzodiazepine.
These were recommended for a wide range
of psychosomatic disorders. Acceptance of
the benzodiazepines was remarkably quick.
Within less than fifteen years diazepam was
the largest-selling drug in the world.
It is increasingly clear that use of ben¬
zodiazepines is not randomly distributed in
populations. Women receive twice as many
prescriptions as men. The elderly and the
chronically ill are the major recipients in ad¬
dition to people in institutions. It is in these
groups that long-term use is most likely.
Because of their ready availability, these
drugs, combined with alcohol, are the most
commonly found in overdoses in Canada
and the USA. Additional studies of motor
impairment (especially likely to affect driving
skills) and of impairment of intellectual func¬
tioning, judgement and social skills are now
appearing. Thus, while there are clear short-
term benefits from these drugs, an array of
minor and major problems have been
created by their use. Other problems of a
more subtle nature relate to some of the
social and behavioural consequences of use,
and are only now being explored.
Because of the numbers of people using
benzodiazepines over long periods, and
because of the issue of limited efficacy and
potential damage, it becomes essential to at
tempt to understand the reasons for these
prescriptions. A simple explanation fre¬
quently heard is that patients demand them.
Research, however, has shown that physi¬
cians are more likely to assume that patients
want medication than are the patients
themselves to want any. Perhaps most im¬
portant in an understanding of current
prescribing patterns is the acceptance by the
medical profession of a biomedical view of
man. This philosophical view sees the locus
of all problems that appear in the physician's
office as being within the individual, hence
requiring biological solutions.
We might ask what has been done to
reorient the concern of both prescribers and
consumers to the long-term use of these
drugs. Psychotropics represent a special
case in that the media and consumer groups
seem to have generated as much concern
about consumption patterns and conse¬
quences of using them as have governments
and the medical profession.
A recent issue of the British Journal of the
Royal College of General Practitioners dealt
almost exclusively with prescribing in
general practice. The editorial pointed out
that the interests of the Government, which
pays for drugs, and of the pharmaceutical
manufacturers are in conflict and "thus
combine to bombard the 25,000 prescribers
with ever-increasing pressures to conform
to one policy or another". It went on to say
"Certainly the use of tranquillizers has been
questioned increasingly and it is possible
that a prescription for tranquillizers can be
regarded as something of a therapeutic
failure". Governments have been sensitized
to the need for intervention, not only
because of escalating costs but also by
tragedies such as that which followed the in¬
troduction of thalidomide.
Consumer organizations in a number of
countries publish magazines that carry ex¬
tensive information on health services, in¬
cluding drug information. By and large,
however, the consumer's voice has not been
heard in this respect. Only in recent years
have research studies been directed away
from the traditional "compliance" studies of
drug consumption (which ask why the pa¬
tient does not take his drugs as ordered by
the physician) to studies which start from
the consumers' perspective. These studies
ask users of health services what they
perceive the social and emotional conse¬
quences of using tranquillizers to be, and
enquire also about physical effects.
Consciousness-raising and self-help groups
have been proposed as alternatives to tran¬
quillizers. In large cities there are self-help
groups to aid individuals who want to break
their tranquillizer habit.
There are thus two divergent trends in
medical care in developed countries. The
first is acceptance of the biomedical model
and its implications, leading to chemical
solutions to social and personal problems,
and the second, the increased questioning
of traditional modes of medical care. The lat¬
ter can be seen in the rejection by many pa¬
tients of the conventional form of the
physician-patient relationship, and by the in¬
creased use of non-conventional medicine in
the form of acupuncture, herbal medicines,
and other methods of healing. The ben¬
zodiazepines, represent a symbolic focal
point for these two trends, thus raising im¬
portant issues for all countries.
31
