The why of the needle
The story of acupuncture and moxa
Text © Copyright. Reproduction prohibited
by Joseph Needham
JOSEPH NEEDHAM, world-famous British
historian of Chinese science, is director of the
East Asian History of Science Library at Cam¬
bridge. For more than forty years he has been
engaged on a monumental, multi-volume
history of Science and Civilization in China of
which he is the director and principal con¬
tributor. The present article has been taken
from his latest work Science in Traditional
China, published by the Chinese University
Press, Hong Kong, in 1981.
ACUPUNCTURE and moxa, as
everybody knows, are two
of the most ancient and
characteristic therapeutic tech¬
niques of Chinese medicine.
Acupuncture can be defined broadly
as the implantation of thin needles to
different depths at a great variety of
points on the surface of the human
body points gathered in connected
arrays according to a highly
systematized pattern with a com¬
plex and sophisticated, if still essen¬
tially medieval, physiological theory
behind it. The classical theory was
based on conceptions, still of great
interest today, of a continuous cir¬
culation of qi (the "primordial
breath") and Xue (blood) around the
body.
Moxa consists of the burning of
Artemisia tinder, ai, either in the
form of incense-like cones, whether
or not laid directly on the skin, or a
cigar-shaped stick held just above it.
The points chosen for application are
in general identical with those of the
acupuncture system. Depending
upon the degree of heat there can be

either a mild thermal stimulus, like a
fomentation, or alternatively a
powerful counter-irritant cautery.
Very broadly speaking, the acupunc¬
ture technique was from ancient
times onward thought most valuable
in acute diseases, while the moxa
was considered more appropriate in
chronic ones, and even for pro¬
phylactic purposes too.
Now, acupuncture as a method of
therapy, including sedation and
analgesia, involving the implantation
of needles, first developed during
the Zhou period, in the 1st millen¬
nium. Today the needles are very
thin, much thinner than the familiar
hypodermic needles. Implantation
into the body was made at different
places at precisely specified points
according to a charted scheme,
based on ancient physiological
ideas. The theory and the practice
were, one finds, well established
already, well systematized, in fact,
in the 2nd century BC, though much
development followed. The tech
nique remains in universal use in
China and in all Chinese communities
at the present day.
The classical view of the circula¬
tion of the qi was that it passed
through a network of channels round
and round the body. This was the
jingluo system, an arrangement of
what we call acu-tracts and acujunc-
tions, twelve main tracts, and eight
auxiliary tracts, the famous qijing ba
mo. Each of these tracts contains
anything from ten to fifty acu-points
(as we call them), the shu xue, at
which the needles are implanted or
over which the moxa is burnt. But
besides the jingluo system of acu-
tracts there is also the jing mo
system, which we translate as the
"tract-and-channel network sys¬
tem," involving not only the circula¬
tion of qi in the tracts but also the
circulation of blood in the blood
vessels. It is extremely interesting to
know that the idea of circulation ex¬
isted so clearly and so long before
the demonstration of the blood cir¬
culation by Sir William Harvey in his
De Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in
Animalibus of 1628.
The cardinal importance of the
system of acupuncture in the history
of Chinese medicine is not denied by
anyone, but its actual value in objec¬
tive terms remained until recently,
and to some extent still does remain,
the subject of great differences of
opinion. For example, you can find in
various countries in East Asia
modern-trained physicians, both
Chinese and Occidental, who are
sceptical about its value, but on the
whole in China they are rather few,
and the vast majority of medical men
there, according to our experience,
both modern-trained and traditional,
do believe in its capacity to cure, or
at least to alleviate, many
pathological conditions.
The whole subject took a rather
dramatic turn during the past fifteen
years on account of the successes
achieved in China in the application of
acupuncture for analgesia in major
surgery. Here there is no long and tor¬
tuous medical history to be followed
up, no periods of remission or acute
relapse, no chronic conditions with
uncertain responses, no psycho
somatic guesswork. Either the pa¬
tient feels intolerable pain from the
surgical intervention, or he does not,
and the effectiveness can be known
within the hour, or even sooner. More
than any other development, this
acupuncture analgesia (or anaes¬
thesia, as it has often been called
with undeniable but infelicitous logic)
has had the effect of obliging physi¬
cians and neurophysiologists in other
parts of the world to take Chinese
medicine seriously.
One view commonly expressed
(mainly by Westerners) is that
acupuncture has acted primarily by
suggestion, like many other things in
what they often call "fringe
medicine," and some do not hesitate
to equate surgical acupuncture
analgesia with hypno-anaesthesia.
It is quite clear that in terms of
neurophysiology the acupuncture
needles stimulate various receptors
at different depths, which send their
afferent impulses up the spinal cord
and into the brain. Perhaps they trig¬
ger events in the hypothalamus
which activate the pituitary gland and
lead to an increase of cortisone pro¬
duction by the suprarenal cortex, or
perhaps they stimulate the automatic
nervous system in such a way as to
lead to an increased output of anti¬
bodies from the reticuloendothelial
system. Both these effects would be
of great importance from the
therapeutic point of view, and in fact
they are among the leading theories
used at the present day to explain the
therapeutic effects of acupuncture.
In a way, it is easier to explain the
analgesic effect than the therapeutic
effect, but of course if cortisone pro¬
duction and the things allied with it
are really stirred up by acupuncture or
if antibody output is increased by it, it
would be easy to see that acupunc¬
ture therapy cou|d have been of enor¬
mous value, even in diseases such as
typhoid and cholera where we know
perfectly well the causative invading
organism. On the other hand, in
another situation, the needles may
monopolize afferent input junctions
in the thalamus, medulla, or spinal
cord, in such a way as to prevent all
pain impulses getting through to the
cortex regions of the brain, thereby
successfully inducing analgesia. iv
Implanting thin needles in the body at points indicated on ancient charts,
modern Chinese surgeons use acupuncture, China's time-honoured
technique for relieving pain, as a form of anaesthesia. Left, anaesthesia
being carried out by acupuncture at a Nanjing hospital.
Photo © Marc Riboud, Pans
47

k Furthermore, there is no question
that acupuncture analgesia is con¬
nected in some way, we do not yet
know exactly how, with the opioid
peptides of the brain. It was one of
the most exciting and fascinating
discoveries of the last five years, that
our own brains manufacture
substances known as enkephalins
and endorphins. Enkephalins and en¬
dorphins are very powerful
analgesics, and they are made in our
own brains, so here is another way in
which you can see how the acupunc¬
ture needles at the periphery could
stimulate neurons to fire off and
release these highly powerful
enkephalins or endorphins.
Something remains to be said
about the theoretical setting of
acupuncture and other Chinese tradi¬
tional methods, such as the medical
gymnastics which are so important in
China. Here I am talking about the
relative value placed in Chinese and
Western medicine respectively on aid
to the healing and protective power
of the body, on the one hand, as
against direct attacks on invading in¬
fluences, on the other. In both
Western medicine and Chinese
medicine these two concepts are to
be found. In the West, besides the
seemingly dominant idea of direct at¬
tack on the pathogen, we also have
the idea of the vis medicatrix naturae,
the natural healing power of the body
and the strengthening of resistance
to disease which comes right down
from the time of Hippocrates and
Galen.
In China, where the holistic ap¬
proach might have been thought to
dominate, there was also the idea of
combating external disease agents,
whether these were malign or sinister
pneumata, thex/'e qi, from outside, of
unknown nature, or distinct venoms
ortoxins left behind when insects had
been crawling over food. That was a
very old conception in China. So the
attack on external agents was cer¬
tainly present in Chinese medical
thought too. The other one, the vis
medicatrix naturae was surely largely
what the Taoists meant in China by
yang sheng, the nourishment of life
and the strengthening of it against
disease.
It is fairly clear that whatever the
acupuncture procedure does, it must
be along the lines of strengthening
the patient's resistance and not
directly fighting invading organisms
that is, not the characteristic "an¬
tiseptic" technique which has
naturally dominated in the West since
the origin of modern bacteriology. In
this connexion, it is a significant fact
that while Westerners are often
prepared to grant value to acupunc¬
ture in things like sciatica or lumbago,
for which modern Western medicine
can do very little anyway, Chinese
physicians have never been prepared
to limit either acupuncture or moxa to
such conditions; on the contrary they
have recommended it and practised it
in treating many diseases for which
we all now believe we know the
organisms (like typhoid and cholera),
and they have claimed at least remis¬
sions if not radical cures.
In addition, there was a third idea,
which sprang from the idea of
balance or krasis. The idea was as
much Chinese as it was Greek. It
viewed disease as essentially a
malfunction or imbalance, one or the
other component entity in the body
having unnaturally gained the lead
over the others. Since the develop¬
ment of modern endocrinology, this
conception has taken a new lease on
life, but it was present from the begin¬
ning in both civilizations. European
bloodletting and purging was a direct
if crude result of it, because it was
thought that "peccant humours"
had to be got rid of; but in China a
defective balance between Yin and
Yang, or deviant relationships bet¬
ween the Five Elements, were
generally diagnosed and altered in a
more subtle way. Acupuncture was
the first court of appeal here again.
We have little doubt that many in¬
terventions of that kind did return the
living human body with its nerves and
hormones to a more even keel,
though exactly how the medieval
physicians visualized the interplay of
the two great forces always remains
rather difficult for us to understand in
our time.
The universal reproach directed
against therapeutic acupuncture by
modern scientific medicine is the lack
of statistical evidence. The absence
of adequate clinical control ex¬
periments, the existence of the
i"
Moxa, or moxibustion, is another tradi¬
tional Chinese pain-relieving practice
that has since spread to other coun¬
tries. Small cones of dried leaves are
burned on specific points of the body,
as shown in the 18th-century docu¬
ment at right. The term moxa is derived
from the name of the wormwood plant
most frequently used, Artemisia moxa.
Photo © Editions Tchou, Paris
48
llitoruùrrutri leterum-JiitciUiitrv.

A doctor at Wuxi near
Nanjing applies a moxa
stick to a patient's
skin. Each stick burns
for four or five minutes.
Photo René Burn © Magnum,
Pans
placebo effect, and the relative pauci¬
ty of quantitative remission and
follow-up data in contemporary
China are hindrances, of course, but
let no one say that the Chinese were
unaware of the possibilities of spon¬
taneous recoveries and remissions.
There is a passage in the Zhou Li
which talks about the official physi¬
cians of the imperial government. The
Zhou Li is a treatise written in early
Han times about the kind of govern¬
ment bureaucratic organization
which ought to have existed in the
Zhou period, even if it never did. It
was a kind of system of the ideal
government organization. Speaking
of the YiShi, the chief medical officer
of the imperial government, it said:
"The Yi Shi is in charge of the whole
medical administration of the coun¬
try, and he collects all efficacious
drugs for the purpose of healing
diseases. All those suffering from ex¬
ternal maladies, whether of the head
or body, are treated separately by ap¬
propriate specialists. At the end of
the year he uses the records of each
physician to decide on his rank and
salary. Those who have cured 1 00 %
of their patients are graded in the first
class, those who have had 90 %
recoveries are in the second class,
those who have been 80 % suc¬
cessful are placed third, those who
have cured 70 % are considered
fourth class, and the lowest grade of
all contains those who could not cure
more than 60 %." Then the com¬
mentator in the 2nd century AD,
Zheng Kang-Cheng, has a fascinating
commentary in which he says that
"the reason why those who failed
with four out of ten patients were
placed in the lowest grade was
because half of the cases might well
have recovered anyway, even
without any treatment at all." This
text implies clearly the keeping of
clinical records, and the comment
seems to us an admirable example of
the scepticism and critical mentality
of the scholars of ancient China.
When one looks back, one sees
how great was the medical literature
concerning acupuncture and moxa
which grew up in China through the
centuries. Many matters of absorbing
interest arise as one looks through it.
For example, first of all there was the
deep conviction of Chinese scholars
and physicians about the circulation
of qi and blood in the body, determin¬
ing a rate of flow only sixty times
slower than that which modern
physiologists since Harvey have
recognized, and that with a priority of
about two thousand years. Then
there was the discovery of the
viscero-cutaneous reflexes, the con
nexions of many parts of the body's
surface with events occurring in the
internal organs. Then, too, there was
something I have not spoken of at all,
the appreciation of diurnal or circa-
dian rhythms, and longer biological
rhythms in man, and the develop¬
ment of an abstruse calculus on the
basis of this to determine when
acupuncture and moxa should best
be performed. Finally there was the
development of a very interesting
module system for locating acu¬
points in human bodies of different
sizes and proportions.
There have been a number of
misunderstandings in the West about
acupuncture and moxa. They have
nothing whatsoever to do with para¬
psychology, occult influences, or
psychic powers, and consequently
do not deserve the praises of those
who believe in such things. They do
not depend entirely on suggestion,
nor on hypnotic phenomena at all,
and they are not contradictory of
modern scientific medicine. Conse¬
quently they do not deserve the
odium theologicum of the medical
profession in the West. Acupuncture
with moxa is simply a system of
medical treatment which was already
two thousand years old when modern
science was born, and which has
developed in a civilization quite dif¬
ferent from that of Europe. Today the
explanations of its actions are being
sought in terms of modern physiology
and pathology. Great advances have
been made already in this direction
though the end is not yet in sight. It
looks as if the physiology and
biochemistry of the central and
automic nervous systems will be the
leading elements in our understand¬
ing, but many other systems,
biochemical, neurochemical, en¬
docrinological, and immunological
are sure to be involved.
Another problem of great interest is
the exact nature of the acu-points in
terms of histology and biophysics.
Since modern science did not spon¬
taneously grow up in Chinese culture,
acupuncture and moxa are tradi¬
tio Tally based upon a theoretical
system essentially medieval in
character, though very sophisticated
and subtle, indeed full of valuable in¬
sights and salutary lessons for
modern scientific medicine. Again,
the exact reinterpretation and refor¬
mulation of these theories, if such a
thing is possible, will be a difficult
matter for the future. However, we
think it likely that in the oecumenical
medicine of the coming years there
will be a definite place for acupunc¬
ture both in therapy and in analgesia.
Exactly how far this will be so, it is too
early tO Say. Neodham
49
