"The fundamental element in tales is the journey... Any means from the simplest to the most
extraordinary can be used... wax wings that are likely to melt if they fly too close to the sun or
the claws of Roc, the bird that carried Sinbad." The drawing is by the Iranian artist Ali Akbar
Sadeghi, winner of the Grand Prix of the Noma Concours for Children's Picture Book Illustra¬
tions 78, a competition organized by the Asian Cultural Centre for Unesco, Tokyo.
Drawing © Asian Cultural Centre for Unesco, Tokyo
IF one had to sum up in a few words the
message of tales, the quintessence of
legends and the lesson of adventure
stories, these words might be: a longing for
independence, intrepidity and generosity.
Tales tell of man's perplexity and watch¬
fulness and, in the last analysis, of his faith
in himself; or of the faith of each man in
himself and of mankind in what is human in
all men. Such faith is deeper and stronger
than the pursuit at all costs of a "happy
ending".
I am referring here to tales, legends, epic
poems and adventure novels, to all forms of
fiction in which action takes precedence over
passion, the exceptional over the humdrum
of everyday life, travel over immobility, in¬
itiation over routine, ethics over psychology,
and invention over literalness in description.
After all, many literary classifications are
academic rather than really pertinent. As
Lope de Vega wrote in La Filomena: "At a
time less wise than ours, but when men knew
more than we do, novels were called tales".
And so in this article I too shall refer to fic¬
tion as "tales" tales which express all the
dreams of childhood and the aspirations of
adolescence and which accompany us
throughout our lives.
I mentioned independence and intrepidity
in other words, the wish to go out into the
world, to break with the warm, routine tor¬
por of the home where the spirit is shaped
but where it can also become atrophied and
stifled. In tales, the motive force is the con¬
stant temptation of the outdoors. A tempta¬
tion which both attracts and repels,
FERNANDO SAVATER, is a young Spanish
writer and philosopher who is professor of Ethics
at the País Vasco University, San Sebastián. He
is the author of some 15 works of philosophy,
essays and a novel.



THE LANDSCAPE
OF THE TALE
by Fernando Savater
'I
fir*
y
?
©
"Tales tell of man's
perplexity and watch¬
fulness and, in the last
analysis, of his faith in
himself." Drawing by the
Argentine artist Eduardo
Ruiz, for the Venezuelan
story The Legend of
Maichak, from Tales and
Legends of Latin America.
The first volume of this
publication conceived
and produced by Unesco's
Regional Centre for Book
Development in Latin
America and the Carib¬
bean (CERLAL) is a com¬
pilation of tales and tradi¬
tions from Argentina,
Brazil, Colombia, Mexico,
Peru, Uruguay and
Venezuela specially
prepared for young
readers and illustrated by
Latin American artists.

fascinates and frightens. The hero of the tale
is forever "roaming the world" in order to
find out what is happening beyond the
mountains; sometimes he tries to discover
the nature of fear, for he dimly perceives that
the realm of fear lies on the borders of space
and that the distant horizon is always over¬
shadowed by a somewhat frightening halo;
but he knows, too, that to achieve its true
stature the human spirit must face those
frightening, far-distant reaches at least once
in a lifetime.
The home is not enough: if the young
adventurer never leaves home he will not ex¬
perience fear and acquire the knowledge
essential to his development, he will not even
experience nostalgia which, in a sense, he
needs even more. If he has no conception of
fear or of nostalgia, he will know nothing of
the human way of living in a home, for this
implies above all that one has returned.
The child lives in a home that he has not
yet conquered, governed by rules and regula¬
tions which, for him, are as immutable as the
"The young hero's astuteness and the infor¬
mation he possesses... do not serve so much
to show how reality operates as to stress the
hero's qualities and efflcacity." Still from a
film by Alexander Korda depicts Mowgli, the
hero of Rudyard Kipling's The Jungle Book.
laws of nature. He must leave home before
returning to it fully aware and sitting by a
fire lit from the embers he has brought back
from some distant volcano. Roaming the
world means running risks, accepting the
possibility that one may get lost, and giving
oneself the opportunity to go astray. Anyone
who has not got completely lost at least once
in his lifetime will live in his dwelling like a
piece of furniture, oblivious of the feats and
conquests that are needed to underpin the
peaceful structure of everyday life. But the
child feels this instinctively, and it is because
he loves the home that will one day be his,
because he has faith in the man he will
become, that one fine day he silently leaves
the family home at daybreak, a bundle on
his shoulder, bound for the distant horizon
and the as yet unknown realm of fear.
Each home is the result of an adventure,
but for the child it is someone else's adven¬
ture. He must rise against routine which ap¬
pears mechanical and apathetic. For no one
"For readers (or those who listen to
the tale) of the adventures of Little Red
Riding Hood... the word 'wood' is
more mysterious and threatening than
the 'forest' itself." Engraving of Little
Red Riding Hood and the wolf, by
Gustave Doré.
"...the sea which unites and separates, offering per¬
manent promise of far-off adventures... whether the
action takes place on its unruly waves or in its
depths..." In this still from John Huston's film Moby
Dick, the great white whale turns furiously on the
crew of Captain Ahab's whaler the Pequod.
can permanently change his life and the lives
of his descendants as required by the power¬
ful dream of the founder-hero: the serene
splendour won by audacity and valiant ef¬
fort, and the order obtained through guile
which no monster or catastrophe can
discourage, redeem him who achieves them,
but the repetition of the same deeds merely
subjugates their offspring. The moral is that
it is not enough to be an heir: every legacy
must be reconquered it must be lost before
it can be won back triumphantly. It is
respect for the efforts of parents that
develops into revolt against them: to become
self-sufficient, and even to rebel is to under¬
stand the sum of human effort needed to
achieve order and to realize that order is not
merely suffered or tolerated and that the
form it takes implies a certain freedom of
choice. Some tales tell of young heroes (the
protagonist is nearly always a representative
of the archetype of puer aeternus, an adoles¬
cent who has the child's carefree curiosity
and playfulness along with the father's
educational and social proclivities) who suc¬
ceed in reinventing new ways of organizing
the world or of warding off threats to existing
forms of organization.
As always the lesson they offer is am¬
biguous and two-sided: only those who break
with daily routine deserve to have a house,
only rebels who refuse to submit to anything
can say they have roamed the world, and it is
only in the regained peacefulness of routine
that they can fully appreciate the revelation
of fear.
The child sets out to roam the world; the
morning is fresh and new, the countryside is
coming to life, the sun has started on its
ascending course... in the distance are great
trees and blue mountains; the traveller closes
the door of his house behind him and begins
his journey. Landscapes are the very fabric
of tales, in the same way that "we are such
stuff as dreams are made on", according to
Shakespeare. For the fundamental element
in tales is the journey which removes the
hero from the' closed, secure atmosphere of
the family, exposing him to the unforeseen,
to adventure. Any means from the simplest
to the most extraordinary can be used to^

^achieve this goal. It is good and bracing to
walk, but even better to don Tom Thumb's
Seven-League Boots in order to escape the
Ogre who is pursuing him; a horse, a camel,
or even an elephant can be pressed into ser¬
vice, and the lucky children for whom Jules
Verne invented a two-year holiday did not
refuse to ride ostriches. And what about fly¬
ing? Here too, the possibilities are legion,
ranging from wax wings that are likely to
melt if they fly too close to the sun, or the
claws of Roc the bird that carried Sinbad, to
balloons, comets, magic broomsticks and
flying carpets, to the winged Pegasus on
which Perseus came to rescue Andromeda,
and the ultra-sophisticated spaceships of
contemporary science fiction. The same goes
for sea travel; anything that floats can serve
as a boat: the little princess's cockle-shell,
the little tin soldier's paper boat, or the cof¬
fin that enabled Ishmael to save his life after
the wreck of the Pequod brought about by
the anger of Moby Dick, not to mention the
possibility of crossing the sea on the back of
an obliging dolphin or clutching the shell of a
giant tortoise.
Even a simple fall is an acceptable means
of transport, as discovered by Alice when she
"The wood is the home of the
wolf and the Ogre's hunting
ground... a place of perdition
and destruction, of hostile
darkness and of brambles
whose thorns arrest the tired
traveller's progress." Engraving
by Gustave Doré for Tom
Thumb.
dashed into the rabbit-warren leading to
Wonderland, or by those characters frpm the
Thousand-and-One-Nights who walk where
they are not supposed to walk, or take a false
step and land in a cave full of treasure.
(Something similar happened to Kipling's
Mowgli when he landed inadvertently in a
cave full of amazing riches guarded over by a
big white cobra).
What is at stake here is to go far to achieve
as soon as possible the undomestic fulfilment
of the free-ranging landscape: this can apply
equally well to the relatively close but always
enigmatic Nature that I see in the distance
from my window, or to the fabulous land in¬
to which I am wafted by a tornado, or,
again, as in the Wizard of Oz, to a thirst for
exploration. As soon as the journey starts
nothing is as before, everything becomes ex- -
otic and anything can happen.
Each component of the landscape possess¬
es its own significance. This is no neutral or
"natural" setting in the positivist or anti-
magical sense given to the term by the
modern world; it is the most mysterious and
fantastic décor of all, for the scenery in
which the action is set is part and parcel of
that action. The protagonists find
themselves in either a hostile or a friendly
relationship with the elements of natural
spontaneity which surround them, and these
elements in turn behave towards them in a
specific way. The relationship between the
young hero and the landscape is not one of
indifference; on the contrary, it is a confron¬
tation at a high level as befits anyone who
has left home in search of distinction and
must prove himself capable of discerning the
forces that challenge his initiation and of ac¬
cepting their often dangerous scrutiny.
The hero must face the genius loci
wherever he goes, wrestle with him, defeat
him or convince him. A certain animistic
belief in Nature is essential if the tale is to be
successful; its impact is reduced when
organic chemistry or molecular biology are
substituted for the secret powers of the local
divinity. If only aspects of the physical and
chemical causality taught by modern science
come into play, then anyone can triumph in
any given situation, provided he possesses
the necessary knowledge; but what the tale
demands of its hero is action of a very dif¬
ferent kind which highlights every possible
victory to the utmost: only he who is in a
specific way, we are told, can know what
there is to know.
The young hero's astuteness and the infor¬
mation he possesses generally provided by
allies endowed with magical powers whose
support he has had to win do not serve so
much to show how reality operates as to
stress the hero's qualities and efficacity. Cer¬
tain contemporary writers tend to create
"natural", science-based values which run
counter to this typical nineteenth century ap¬
proach. It is no coincidence that the tremen¬
dous popularity of Tolkien's Lord of the
Rings the supreme example of a tale with
an entirely animistic and ethical landscape
should coincide with the rise of the ecology
movement and that it should be hippies and
other supporters of the protection of Nature
against industry who should have been the
first to enthuse over the Hobbits' extra¬
ordinary saga.
Each culture and each latitude attributes
a different value to the various elements that
make up the landscape according to whether
they represent for them routine or exoticism.
An anecdote told by Borges illustrates the
relativity of exoticism which is as
legitimate a way as any other of satisfying
our powers of imagination. A Japanese was
giving a rapturous description of a trip he
had made to Persia, and when Borges prais¬
ed the remarkable achievements of
Firdausi's and Omar Khayyam's homeland,
he said: "Yes, I finally realized what the
West is".
In the same way, our mythical perception
of the sea varies according to whether we live
in direct contact with it or in the hinterland.
Similarly, some people regard the lion as an
almost fabulous beast, while for others he is
simply a distinguished fellow-citizen. I
myself can only speak of the tales on which
my European childhood was nourished.
What stood out above all was the prestige of
the wood with its shadowy, ghostlike quali¬
ty. For readers (or those who listen to the
tale) of the adventures of Little Red Riding
Hood, Tom Thumb and Hansel and Gretel,
the word "wood" is more mysterious and
threatening than the "forest ' itself. The
wood is the home of the wolf and the Ogre's
hunting ground; there are no proper paths in
the wood or else they all lead to the man-
eating witch who is waiting in its midst; it is
a place of perdition and destruction, of
hostile darkness and of brambles whose
thorns arrest the tired traveller's progress;
salvation can only come from co-operation
with small animals (birds, squirrels, rabbits,
etc. ) who join in helping children lost in the
wood by guiding them to its edge and by
warning their parents. Apart from the wood,
which for the European represents the most
easily accessible form of exoticism and the
most credible type of adventure, other less
accessible wonders include: the desert
through which we roam with Beau Geste or
the little heroes of Sienkiewicz's tale; the
volcano which leads us to the centre of the
earth with Jules Verne's characters and
which is a source of destruction for the deca¬
dent Pompeii of Bulwer-Lytton; the cave
guarded by melancholy dragons or ingenious
goblins in which magicians and forgotten
kings hide their treasure; snow and ice, an
indispensable setting for polar adventures
that is so often present in Hans Christian
Andersen's incomparable tales (in particular
when the Snow Queen receives little Kay in
her ice palace); the island where Robinson
Crusoe finds a refuge, and its rivals, moun¬
tains, swamps and, above all, the sea. The
sea of Ulysses and Long John Silver, of the
little Mermaid and Moby Dick, Sinbad the
Sailor and Kipling's Captains Courageous, a
sea which unites and separates, offering a
permanent promise of far-off adventures
and of the greatest of all: adventure per se.
Whether the action takes place on its unruly
waves or in its depths into which the great
Alexander, known as Iskander by the Hin-
dustans he conquered, descended in a glass
bell, the sea remains the landscape par ex¬
cellence of adventure narrative.
Our spirit travels through tales and with
tales, it takes risks, makes commitments and
is born anew. Under the spell of the nar¬
rative the child and the adolescent feel that
the inevitable can be defied and everything is
possible. The strength of their character in
years to come and the choice which will
shape the course of their future lives either
towards passive submission or towards active
freedom depends to a large extent on the
training in generosity and courage that fan¬
tasy can provide.
H Fernando Savater
6
