A literature of combat
Self-portrait of a popular woman writer
by Ding Ling
Ding Ling, whose career spans more than half a century, is one of China's most popular authors. She is seen
here during a visit to a farm co-operative in 1955.
1am a Chinese writer, and for the first sixty years of my
life I lived, worked and wrote in the wake of the
Chinese people, by whose difficulties I have been
guided and inspired. In this way I came to know the world
and its contradictions, but at the cost of many trials and
tribulations. Today, at seventy-seven, one hope remainsto
be able to serve my fellow countrymen until I die.
I was born in 1904, at a time when the Manchu Empire
was in its death throes, into a family of notables, a breeding-
ground of mandarins such as described in those great classic
Chinese novels Dream of the Red Chamber, by Cao Xueqin,
and The Scholars, by Wu Jingzi.
My family was a replica in miniature of feudal society in
decline and its history was a chequered one. The branch of
the family to which my father belonged was impoverished
and going rapidly downhill, and when I was four years old
my father died completely ruined. My lonely childhood gave
me an insight into the miserable lot of the people in the
Chinese society of the beginning of the twentieth century
and opened my eyes to the selfish attitudes which governed
relationships between one man and another. I found com¬
fort in, and learned much from, reading the great Chinese
classic novels. European renaissance literature and foreign
literature of the nineteenth century was also grist to my mill.
And it was this reading that sowed in me the seed of my
vocation as a writer.
I had the good fortune to have an enlightened mother.
After my father's death she freed herself from the shackles
of the family, becoming a teacher to maintain her in¬
dependence. She had adopted Western democratic ideas and
nourished a vague hope of a socialist revolution. She often
told me stories of great historical figures, Chinese and
foreign, from both remote and recent times, who had
distinguished themselves by their heroism, generosity of
spirit and loyalty. These stories helped to dispel the melan¬
choly that had taken root in my young heart.
I was fourteen years old at the time of the events of May
1919 and my mother and I plunged into this current of
patriotic, reformist protest which was later to be known as
the May Fourth Movement. This experience was a revela¬
tion to me, shaking me out of the sheltered personal world
in which I had enclosed myself. Previously I had looked on
my studies as a means to earn a livelihood, to achieve per¬
sonal success and to restore my family to its former glories.
Suddenly I discovered new and nobler aims: to take part in
the struggle to lift the people out of their wretched state, to
break the centuries old feudal system and to free China
from its colonial status.
Leaving my provincial school at Changsa, in Hunan, I
went to Shanghai where I enrolled in the first school for girls
established by the Communist Party. There I met several
famous revolutionaries who taught me much and encourag-^
31

CHRONICLE OF CHANGE
"///////Mfinn
Landscape Topography Architecture
me in the path I was taking. The Chinese Communist
Party had only recently been founded and was still feeling
its way forward, seeking to elaborate a doctrine in which
would merge the Chinese revolutionary tendency and the
Marxism-Leninism the Party was propagating in China. I
was too inexperienced to play a useful part in the Party's
work and action. With my petty bourgeois illusions I was
eager to soar directly towards the extremes of liberty. But
everywhere I came up against the harsh realities of the day
and I soon sank back into a mood of deep depression.
I felt isolated and demoralized, but I was still young and
vital enough to feel the urge to cry out, to express myself.
The only outlet available to me was to pour out on paper my
feelings of revolt against the society of which I was a
prisoner. It seemed natural, then, for me to follow the ex¬
ample of Lu Xun, Mao Dun and my communist mentor Qu
Qiubai, who was to die later in a Guomindang gaol. Like
them I became a writer, not out of personal vanity or out
of a love of art for art's sake, but to defend my fellow coun¬
trymen and help them to achieve liberty. The same objec¬
tives motivated other writers, both my contemporaries and
those of the following generation, to engage in a literature
of combat, even though there were at the time, as there are
also today in our vast country, authors who were only con¬
cerned with literature as an art form.
After the failure of the 1 927 revolution and the massacre of
militants by the Guomindang, I felt obliged to reflect more
32
deeply on political matters. I had already acquired a certain
reputation in literary circles and could have mixed with the
uppercrust, found a good job and then climbed gradually up
the social ladder. Indeed, this was what some of my friends
chose to do. But this option was not for me. I hated the vanity
of this coterie and its obsession with celebrity and material ad¬
vantage, so I continued along what seemed to me to be the
right path.
During the 1930s, while the Guomindang reactionaries
were stepping up their ' 'white terror' ' , I became a member of
the China League of Left-wing Writers, in Shanghai, which
was headed by Lu Xun and directed by the Communist Party.
Subsequently, I joined the Chinese Communist Party since I
wanted to give myself up totally to the cause of the people, to
share their destiny, their cares and their sufferings, to live and
die with them. During the 1920s my female characters had
been petty bourgeois intellectuals in revolt; from the 1930s
onwards they were based on working women and peasants.
This the Guomindang government could not tolerate and a'
single article of this nature published at that time could lead
to imprisonment.
Then, just half a century ago, five members of the League,
including my husband Hu Yepin, and ten revolutionaries
were assassinated by the Guomindang police in the sinister
Longhua prison in Shanghai. Although the world has
witnessed many other horrors since then, it is hard to imagine
how young writers could have thus been so cruelly gunned

A Chinese strip cartoon shows how the ancient village of Banpo became the model brigade of Fenghuo.
v« x
Implements Domestic utensils Energy
down. In fact, mere possession of a book with a red cover was
considered ground for arrest. Many writers were summarily
executed in prison or on pieces of waste ground, with no
pretence at atrial. They are counted among the martyrs of the
revolution.
In 1933, I myself was arrested and imprisoned and only
escaped death thanks to an appeal made by the China League
for the Protection of Civil Rights, founded by Song Qinling,
the widow of Sun Yat-sen, Cai Yuanbei, the former rector of
the University of Beijing, the writer Lu Xun and others, and
the protests of well-known foreign authors such as Henri Bar¬
busse, Romain Rolland, Maksim Gorki and Paul Vaillant-
Couturier. All my books were banned and I became the object
of scurrilous political and personal attacks in the press.
About three years later, with the help of Lu Xun and the Par¬
ty, I was able to flee Nanjing, then the official capital, and set¬
tle in the communist base in northern Shanxi.
During the Sino-Japanese War, I followed the communist
eighth army to the front, working as a propagandist.
Thereafter I continued my literary work in Yenan, the focal
point of the struggle against the occupying forces. After the
war against the Japanese imperialists was won, the struggle
for liberation went on against the Guomindang forces. I also
took part in the agrarian reform which abolished the feudal
land system and redistributed the land. In the new China that
had just been established I was given the task of helping in the
reorganization of literary life. So absorbed was I in this task
that I almost forgot that I too was a writer. It was only when
this practical work was completed that I began once again to
be haunted by the characters buried deep within my soul. I
became eager to reveal their existence by writing them into my
novels, stories and essays.
When I write, I do not allow myself to become entangled
in problems of style or form or to impose on myself the strait-
jacket of any literary school whatever. Nor do I take into ac¬
count what the critics will say. Once my work is published, the
only thing that matters to me is what my readers think. My
pen follows the thread of my imagination and I stick to my
first impulses, not trying to refashion the characters I have
known and loved in my life and who become the heroes and
heroines of my books.
Today I am more than ever convinced that we, the Chinese
people, one thousand million individuals, united in a com¬
mon inspiration and led by the Communist Party, will suc¬
ceed in enriching our lives, liberating our thinking, living
democratically and working and learning together. In this
way, and only in this way, will our country be able to
contribute largely to human progress and world peace. In this
way too, Chinese literature, with its own special attributes,
will play its part in enriching the universal artistic heritage of
mankind.
Ding Ling
33
