Bharati,
poet and patriot
by K. Swaminathan
INDIA is celebrating this year the
centenary of Subramania Bharati
(1882-1921), whom Tamils regard
as a Mahakavi (Great Poet) and
Amarakavi (Immortal Poet), and whom
historians regard as one of the most
authentic voices of modern India pro¬
claiming the unity of the nation, its pas¬
sionate longing for freedom and the
human cry for universal brotherhood. In
his brief working life of two decades,
Bharati, as journalist, poet and patriot,
brought about a revolution in Tamil
literature and in the thinking of the Tamil
people. He combined profound
knowledge of and admiration for the
eternal elements in the ancient Tamil
tradition with a forward-looking accep¬
tance of the ideal of human unity. Thus
he brought Tamil prose and poetry into
close contact with contemporary reality
by using the language of common speech
in his songs and poems dealing with cur¬
rent topics like indentured labour, the
rape of Belgium, the great Russian
Revolution and the demand for national
integration and real Swaraj
(independence).
Subramania was born on December
11,1 882, in Ettayapuram in Tirunelveli
district of the then Madras Presidency.
His father Chinnaswami Iyer was in the
service of the local Zamindar or chief¬
tain. Subramanian's mother died when
he was an infant. The father wished his
first son to become an English-educated
officer or engineer. But the boy took
little interest in such "bread-winning"
studies and failed in the matriculation ex¬
amination at the end of his high school
course.
But even during school days he had
created a stir among students and
teachers by his spontaneous gift of ver¬
sification. At 1 5 , he was married to 7 year
old Chellammal. He was then provided
the sinecure job of reading daily
newspapers to the local chieftain. About
this time the title "Bharati" was confer¬
red on him by a gathering of poets at a
court function. Henceforth, literary
K. SWAMINATHAN, Indian educator and jour¬
nalist, has been since 1960 chief editor of the
"Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi", the
Government of India's project to publish a
multi-volume edition of Mahatma Gandhi's
writings and speeches.
Subramania Bharati
with his wife.
Photo © Information and Public
Relations Department, Govern¬
ment of Tamil Nadu, Madras.
circles knew him as Subramania Bharati
ór just "Bharati" (embodiment of
Saraswati, Goddess of learning).
This idyll in his home-town was short¬
lived. Within a year, his father passed
away, leaving the family in straitened cir¬
cumstances. Bharati moved to Varanasi
to be with his aunt there. The two years
he spent in Varanasi brought about a
great change in his outer personality and
inner vision; he gained a sound
knowledge of Sanskrit, Hindi and
English; passed with credit the Entrance
Examination of the Allahabad Univer¬
sity; and read and enjoyed the English
Romantic poets, especially Shelley.
In search ofa livelihood, Bharati went
back to Ettayapuram in 1901, where he
taught Tamil in a high school for a short
period. When Bharati was 22, he came
into contact with G.Subramania Iyer,
editor of a leading Tamil daily , Swadesa
Mithran, published from Madras. The
young man was invited to join the daily
as a sub-editor. His fluency and facility
as a translator enabled him to bring to
the Tamil public the inspired utterances
of Swami Vivekananda, Aurobindo
Ghose and Bal Gangadhar Tilak. Soon
the rebel in Bharati drew him into the
vortex of Indian politics. Hi's original ar¬
ticles in his inimitable style espousing
' 'extremism" were read widely. The next
and final step was the transformation of
Tamil poetry by Bharati's use of his;
unique lyrical power for the expression i
ofmodern ideas for rousing the pride and I
patriotism of the people.
30

Detail from a bronze sculpture representing the
9th-ceiitury Saivite poet and mystic Manik-
kavacakar and dating from about 950 AD. As
a Desifca, or supreme teacher, Manikkavacakar
is always portrayed holding in his left hand a
bundle of palm leaves on which are inscribed,
in Tamil, the first words of one of his poems
or, as here, the invocation pronounced before
the singing of hymns of the temple of Chidam¬
baram, a shrine held In high veneration in Tamil
Nadu. Some thousand years later, another
Tamil poet, Subramania Bharati was to write:
Ye foolish folk, who roam about
In search of myriad fancied gods.
Have ye not heard the myriad scriptures
Declare knowledge alone is God?
Photo R. Nagaswamy © Tamil Nadu State Archaeological
Department, Madras
The movement against the British rule
in India gained a new momentum with
the partition of Bengal in 1905 and
engulfed the whole country. The
"moderate" Swadesa Mithran could not
accommodate the fiery writings of
Bharati. So he left it to join a new Tamil
weekly India and threw in his lot with the
extremist elements in the Indian National
Congress which the British Government
were trying to put down by arrests and
imprisonment.
To avoid possible arrest, Bharati fled
to Pondicherry which was then a French
settlement in South India, and he con¬
tinued to edit from there the weekly In¬
dia. Then followed a period ofgrim trials
and tribulations under the constant
surveillance of the British and the French
police. But there was ample recompense
for these sufferings in his friendship with
Sri Aurobindo, V.V.S. Iyer,
Subramanya Siva and other patriots who
too had sought refuge in Pondicherry.
Though Bharati experienced moments of
depression, poetry continued to be ' 'the
anchor of his purest thoughts, thenurse,
the guide, the guardian of his heart, and
soul of all his moral being".
Bharati came out of his self-exile on
November 2, 1918, and was promptly ar¬
rested and kept in police custody for 24
days. However, on the intervention of
some eminent public workers, he was
conditionally released, and was soon
back in his native district, Tirunelveli. His
"extremism" had somewhat mellowed
by then and he soon gravitated towards
the teachings of Mahatma Gandhi . It was
at this juncture that his old paper
Swadesa Mithran welcomed him back to
Madras. He lived in Triplicane, a suburb
Right, 1 1th-century sculpture from
East Bengal representing Sarasvati
the Hindu goddess of learning and
the arts. In one of her personifica¬
tions she was given the name of
Bharati, a title which was confer¬
red on the great Tamil poet
Subramania by a group of his
fellow poets as a tribute to his
talent. From then on he was
known as Subramania Bharati, or
simply, Bharati.
Photo © Bulloz, Paris
of Madras city, free for a while from ab¬
ject poverty.
But soon came the end. In an attempt
to befriend the temple elephant at
Triplicane, he offered as usual a coconut
to the animal unaware that it was in rut.
Struck down by the mighty trunk and
thrown aside, he suffered grave injuries.
Though he was promptly rescued and
taken to hospital, he lay seriously ill for
a few days and passed away peacefully
onSeptember 12, 1921,attheageof39.
Bharati has left behind an impressive
and imperishable mass of poetry and
prose. Beside his widely popular patriotic
poems, special mention may be made of
his exquisite love-lyrics and nature-
poems, and his three masterpieces; Kuyil
Pattu (an allegorical narrative), Kannan
Pattu (lyrics in a variety of moods on
Lord Krishna) and Panchali Sapatham
(the Vow of Panchali, an epic fragment
from the Mahabharata filled with thrill¬
ing contemporary overtones).
31
