WHILE many traditions may be
falling by the wayside
throughout the world, in
China, the custom of the extended
family living together is still followed
and the elderly retain an important
familial role.
Three generations residing under
one roof is a usual occurrence. These
traditional ties have brought about a
mutual dependence among the dif¬
ferent age groups with the grand¬
parents playing an active part in the
family. Thus, the oldest generations in
households can look after the grand¬
children and help with chores accor¬
ding to their ability and, in turn, their
children will care for them.
Parents usually continue to live with
one of their children, after the latter
has married. All the children who
become wage-earners, however, will
give money, according to their
economic conditions, to their parents.
However, many old couples who earn
salaries or pensions won't accept this
monetary assistance.
Pensions and retirement ages, set by
the State Council (China's highest
governmental organ), are stipulated
for urban workers only. Payments
average from 60 to 90 per cent of the
working wage. Retirement ages for
male and female industrial workers are
60 and 50, respectively. For office
work, this minimum is raised five years
for women. If a person of retirement
age has a needed skill and is in good
health, however, he or she may
sometimes remain on the job.
Many retired persons still like to do
some useful work either at home or for
the community, such as volunteering
for neighbourhood activities, helping
children with their lessons or running
small day-care services.
One retired couple living in Beijing
has a story that can be heard
throughout China.
Song Fengzhi, 63, and her husband,
Ding Shuangyin, 69, have three sons, a
daughter and tour grandchildren. They
live with their eldest son and his wife.
YI SHUI, of the People's Republic of China, is
a writer on the staff of China Features, Beijing.


A family affair
How China cares for her aging millions
by Yi Shui
Their second son and his wife live with
the son's parents-in-law who have no
other children. The daughter married
an army officer and the couple live in
the husband's barracks. The youngest
son is single and lives with his parents.
The old couple have been living with
their eldest son and his wife for four¬
teen years. All get along well. The
daughter-in-law, Liu Muzhen, never
squabbles with her parents-in-law. She
knows that they had a difficult time
bringing up four children.
"My parents-in-law are growing
older and need the younger genera¬
tion's assistance and support. I have
the duty to pay reverence to them and
take care of them," Liu said.
Song grew up in feudal China and
had to serve her husband's parents as
a maid-servant. She wants better for
her family. "I suffered quite a lot
when I was a daughter-in-law in my
husband's family. I don't want my
miserable life repeated in my family. I
treat my daughter-in-law as my own
daughter and she serves me well,"
Song said.
The young couple try to give their
pay to their parents, but the old couple
refuse to take the money. "We have a
regular income. We don't need our
children's money. But they insist on
giving us some money or gifts regular¬
ly," Song said.
Song works in the neighbourhood
committee, a self-governing residents'
organization. Ding is a night guard at
the sewing workshop run by the com¬
mittee. The family spends every even¬
ing together and, on weekends or Sun¬
days, the rest of the clan comes to visit.
In other families, if the children live
in different cities, they would probably
visit their parents on traditional
festivals such as New Year's Day,
Spring Festival, May Day and National
1 . On Shanghai's waterfront, the Bund, an elderly man teaches a
teenager Tai chl chuan, the traditional Chinese morning gymnastic.
Photo Paolo Koch © Rapho, Paris
2. A Chinese villager hard at work in Xian commune.
Photo Martine Franck © Magnum, Paris.
O. Sexagenarians Song Fengzhi and her husband Ding Shuangyin
enjoying the company of their grandchildren.
Photo NCNA, Beijing
16

Right, an elderly retired worker in
the city of Kweilin.
Photo Eve Arnold © Magnum, Paris
^^^m
2
Day. Parents may also visit their
children who live in other parts of
China.
Peasants can continue doing farm-
work as long as they are able, as there
is no stipulated retirement age; nor is
there a pension plan for them. But
some of the wealthier communes began
direct payments last year for peasants
who had stopped working due to old
age. Under this new system, according
to the Ministry of Civil Affairs,
133,000 retired peasants living in com¬
munes near Shanghai received
payments from welfare funds.
Pensions vary from village to village
and are dependent on the living stan¬
dards of the area as well as the year's
harvest. Based on these two factors,
some communes give subsidies in the
form of food, fuel and winter clothes
to families who are supporting old peo¬
ple. The government hopes that this
pension system will change the ingrain¬
ed peasant attitude of having many
children so the parents will be taken
care of in their old age.
In the countryside, the unmarried
grown children usually hand in their
income to their parents who will even¬
tually build two- to three-room houses
for each son to live in after he marries.
These new dwellings are near the
parents' home. Daughters, according
to tradition, are expected to stay in
their husband's home after marriage.
In the one-child family, an old couple
with no son will let their daughter
bring home a son-in-law to live in their
house.
Elderly people with no children may
live in old-age homes. The State
allocates relief funds for running these
homes. City and country governments
run about 500 of these facilities and
7,500 are managed by communes and
the smaller production brigades.
Residents of these homes are
guaranteed food, clothing, medical
care, housing and, lastly, burial ser¬
vices. Many childless old people,
though, prefer depending on relatives
whose financial situation is better than
theirs.
17
