A WORLD OF JUSTICE
PEACE AND PROGRESS
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director General of Unesco
HE effort to build a world of justice, peace and progress for all
peoples is hindered by the proliferation of ever more
sophisticated means of mass destruction. The consequences
of this situation are alarming for two reasons. First, the threat
of an unprecedented hecatomb hangs over the entire world
and, as atomic radiation knows no frontiers, there is not a
single country or people today that is secure from the effects
of a major nuclear conflict.
Secondly, the vast human and material resources allocated to arms in¬
dustries and military research and development are thereby denied to those
who are engaged in the world struggle against the poverty which afflicts so
many people. The talents and energies of 500,000 engineers and research
workers are being used to perfect the technology of death and thousands of
millions of dollars are invested every year for that purpose. A mere fraction
of these intellectual, financial and technological means; if used judiciously,
would suffice to reverse the present trends and make it possible to start
reducing the gap between industrialized nations and developing nations, as
well as between privileged groups and underprivileged groups within each
nation. This might even alter the physiognomy of our planet.
The choice before us is therefore crystal clear. Either we carry on the arms
race with all its attendant injustices, and this perpetuates egoistic attitudes
and contributes, in its turn, to increasing the causes of conflict and the risk
of conflagration, or the nations of the world unite, placing their awareness
of a shared future above their short-term ambitions and individual interests.
The tremendous scientific and technological potential of the world could
then be used more often to serve peaceful ends, promote the common
welfare of mankind and help to forge relations based on justice and a sense
of solidarity.
It is with this end in view that Unesco, true to the mission of the United
Nations system, is expanding its activities in all spheres of intellectual effort.
Its Constitution proclaims that "since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in
the minds of men that the defences of peace must be constructed". The
Organization is accordingly doing all in its power to help to prepare the way
for disarmament in people's minds, to bring about a gradual change in men¬
tal attitudes so that more thought is given to the pursuit of peace.
