4
LAND
An estimated 500,000 square
kilometres used for military purposes
"Prevailing military trends suggest
that, in the aggregate, military demand
for land will continue to grow."
THE available data on the land area
used for military purposes is far too
sketchy to permit a reliable global
estimate to be made. What is almost certain,
and unsurprising, is that from the global
perspective the military use of land is quite
small, less than half of one per cent of the
total and perhaps as low as one third of one
per cent. Having said this, however, it does
not follow that the military use of land is
without consequence.
In absolute terms, the military sector still
occupies much land: countries with a land
area in the range of 0.3 to 0.5 per cent of the
world total include France, Morocco,
Paraguay, Sweden and Thailand. Moreover,
there are vast areas of land in the world that
are of no more interest to the military than to
other land-users. In other words, despite its
small relative demand, the military can and
often does compete directly with civilian
demands be they urban, industrial,
agricultural, recreational or based on en¬
vironmental concerns.
20
Military requirements for land have risen
steadily over the course of this century ow¬
ing to the increase in the size of standing
armed forces and, more particularly, the
rapid pace of technological advances in
weaponry. As armed forces became pro¬
gressively more mechanized and as the
range and speed of weapons increased, so
did the land area required for purposes of
training and manoeuvres.
For example, exercises involving a full ar¬
moured division are considered by the
United States Army to require an area of at
least 235 square kilometres with up to 664
square kilometres being desirable for max¬
imum benefit. Air Forces require much
larger areas still, owing to the high speed of
modern combat aircraft and the con¬
siderable range capabilities of air-to-surface
munitions.
Finally, of course, the areas used to test
nuclear weapons cannot be too large. One
could add here that, owing to considera¬
tions both of safety and security, military
land requirements usually tend to be deter¬
mined quite liberally.
Prevailing military trends suggest that, in
the aggregate, military demand for land will
continue to grow. Many countries in all
parts of the world are increasing the size of
their armed forces. Similarly, the number of
countries operating battle tanks, modern
combat aircraft and missiles of all varieties is
growing continuously. So too is the number
of countries setting out to manufacture and,
in some cases, to design and develop
modern weaponry.
All of these trends imply growing land re¬
quirements for training, maneuvres and
weapon-testing. Furthermore, as the ac¬
curacy of offensive weapons improves,
there is greater incentive to give deployed
weapons greater mobility, and to set aside
larger areas of land for them to manoeuvre
in. The deployment mode currently under
consideration in the United States for the
MX system involves an area of nearly 15,600
square kilometres. The Soviet Union already

has land-mobile intermediate-range nuclear
missile systems that presumably have com¬
parable designated areas that are off-limits
to civilians.
On the whole, the economic significance
of the diversion of land to military use is con¬
siderably higher than the fraction of the total
land used for this purpose might suggest.
The amount of land in the world is nearly
constant, but demand is growing relent¬
lessly on every front: croplands, grazing
lands, forests, urbanization and ground
transportation networks..
The amount of arable land in the world
has in fact been increased by some 15 per
cent over the past thirty years. It is
reasonable to assume, however, that this
has been accomplished to some extent at
the expense of grazing land and forests and,
to the degree that this is the case, it is not a
viable alternative in the long run. Moreover,
it is also the case that large areas of produc¬
tive land are lost each year for such reasons
as over-exploitation, desertification and
salination. The restoration of these areas is a
costly and time-consuming process.
In other words, the context in which the
military use of land must be considered is
one that recognizes that such use is totally
unproductive and that it is frequently com¬
petitive with intensifying demands from the
civilian sector. Perhaps the most disturbing
aspect of the military use of land for future
civilian use is that the land is seriously
degraded, often for an extended period. In
some cases, such as nuclear-weapon-test
areas particularly, of course, the areas
where atmospheric tests have been con¬
ducted land will be totally unfit for
civilian use for an indefinite period.
Moreover, the effects of atmospheric
nuclear tests cannot be contained within the
designated test area. Even with
underground testing, accidents and
miscalculations have occurred and have
resulted in adverse effects beyond the test
area. Training areas that see the large-scale
use of tracked armoured vehicles become
Photomontage © Peter Kennard
quite vulnerable to erosion through the
destruction of vegetation and loosening of
the topsoil. Artillery and bombing ranges are
transformed into a mosaic of craters that are
difficult to fill and remain unproductive for
years, even if this happens owing to the
absence of the fertile layer of topsoil. If the
craters remain, they impede the use of
agricultural machinery. Unexplored muni¬
tions constitute another long-term hazard.
Actual warfare, of course, results in all these
effects on a hugely magnified scale.
21
