Wifredo
Lam
1902-1982
1943 he completedhisfamouspainting The
Jungle (see the Unesco Courier, December
1981) in which the imagery and thesyncretic
cult myths of Cuba (African animism-
Spanish Catholicism) found expression
through European avant-gardeforms with
such imagination and explosiveforce that
it provoked an uproar when exhibited in
New York that same year.
Lam remained in Cuba until 1952, when
he returned to Paris which he was to make
his permanent home. He continued,
however, to makefrequent trips to his native
Cuba, especially after the 1959 revolution
ofwhich he had been afirm supporterfrom
the start.
By this time hispaintings hadearned him
a worldwide reputation and each new work
enhancedhisposition as one ofthe great ar¬
tists ofan awakening Third World and as
the voice of its oppressed and neglected
cultures. Through the magic ofhis imagina¬
tion the universe of the occult and the
mysterious took on colour and shape,
becoming aware of the fact of its own ex¬
istence. Referring to The Jungle, theFrench
writerAlain Jouffroy wrote that "it wasthe
first artistic revolutionary declaration ofa
Third World that already, it would seem,
perceived the need to place all cultures on
a common footing, and an augury of an
awakening to this need on a worldscale...
The Jungle affirmed that there were no in¬
superable incompatibilities between peoples
and that they are all intimately interlinked. "
Indeed, though Lam wasa Caribbean and
aman ofthe New World, he also belonged
to the Old World. The upsurge oftheAfro-
Cuban heritage in the works of Lam's
maturity occurredprecisely because the very
nature ofthe adventureoftwentieth-century
European art (we recall the discovery of
"primitive" African art by Matisse and
Picasso) had made it possible. Mestizo in
his origins, Lam was mestizo in his art, a
quality that brought to his works a
dynamism that kept it inperpetualferment
right to the end and imbued it with the rich
joyousness of the adventure of Caribbean
and modern art.
Wifredo Lam died thisyear in Paris under
a bright September sky.
Francisco Fernández-Santos
