It
m
~ AT«
Ü

An African cosmology
by Sulayman S. Nyang
AFRICA was, and still is, rich in cos-
mological ideas. Though the diver¬
sity of Africa's religious and cosmo-
logical heritage has until recently been little
known outside the continent, the intensive
researches of Africanists around the world,
and the growing global interest in Africa,
have now combined to draw attention to the
nature of Africa's spiritual gift to humanity.
Africa's traditional cosmology is diverse,
but beneath this diversity lies a core of
shared beliefs which spread across the con¬
tinent. In this cosmology, certain ideas have
always held sway over men's minds.
SULAYMAN S. NYANG, Gambian educator, is
currently associate professor of government and
public administration at the Center for African
Studies, Howard University, Washington, D.C.
He is author of a number of studies on African
political and philosophical issues, the most recent
being an essay on "Millennium in Traditional
African Thought". His book Christianity, Islam
and African Identity is to be published shortly.
"It is remarkable," writes the Kenyan
scholar Professor John Mbiti, "that in spite
of great distances separating the peoples of
one region from those of another, there are
sufficient elements of belief which make it
possible for us to discuss African concepts
of God as a unity and on a continental
scale."
This Divine Creator is usually pictured as
the Lord and Master of mankind. In the
numerous myths of African peoples, such as
those of the Yoruba, the Ashanti and the
Dogon, in the beginning God was very close
to mankind but later, as a result of man's
provocation, error or folly, withdrew and so.
man forfeited his privileges and the benefits
of being in close proximity to his Creator.
These mythological ideas help us to
understand the traditional African's defini¬
tion of selfhood vis-à-vis the Supreme
Being. From the work of students of African
religion it emerges that there is a close rela¬
tionship between man and the Supreme Be¬
ing. According to this view, man is more
than a spectator on the stage of life. Though
he is a creature who is circumscribed within
the parameters set by the spiritual ancestors
and the evil spirits, man still exercises his
own will on both the material and spiritual
worlds. If he is to function effectively in the
material world, he must learn to pursue his
human needs and personal interests without
antagonizing the spiritual forces above.
In traditional African cosmology man is
caught in a matrix of spiritual relationships.
He is bound by unbreakable ties to the
Supreme Being, who created the earth and
everything therein for man and his progeny.
These ties are unbreakable because man's
existence is ontologically dependent upon
his Creator.
Man also has to maintain a correct rela¬
tionship with the lesser entities within the
spiritual kingdom. His day-to-day activities
are not only designed to harmonize his rela¬
tionship with the divinities and the departed
ancestors, but they are also motivated by
the fear that bad relations with these
spiritual forces could endanger the life and
safety of his community.
This understanding of the triangular
matrix of relationships beween the individual
and his community, on the one hand, and
the spiritual kingdom, on the other, puts a
premium on good behaviour and obedience
to communal customs and practices. This
sense of obedience and harmony hinges on
27

man's realization that the universe is a
religious one, and that everything within it
dances to a cosmic music whose tunes and
rhythm echo the words of the spiritual
forces.
Life is a constant dialogue with the
sacred, and each passing moment demands
the utmost devotion to the spiritual forces
above, and to the words of religious com¬
munications issuing from their invisible lips.
It is because of this constant dialogue with
the spiritual world around him that the tradi¬
tional African man conceives himself as the
centrepiece of creation. John Mbiti captures
this aspect of traditional Africa's ontology
when he writes:
"... African' ontology is basically an-
thropocentric; man is at the very centre of
existence, and African peoples see
everything else in relation to this central
position of man. God is the explanation of
man's origin and sustenance; it is as if God
exists for the sake of man. The spirits are
ontologically in the mode between God and
man; they describe or explain the destiny of
man after physical life."
This African conception of the Man-God
relationship is radically different from beliefs
wherein man is generally looked on as an ab
ject sinner who must submit to God in order
to deserve His mercy in the hereafter.
Another important point is that traditional
African man sees the universe as a hierarchy
of vital forces, with man as the force which
links the inanimate objects to the world of
spiritual forces above him. This makes him
both a manipulator of spiritual power and a
target of such power. His view of man,
especially as characterized in Bantu
philosophy, has been described as vitalistic;
that is, it is based on the belief that life is a
vital unity and that the human being is only a
point on the cosmic circle of life. Another
African scholar, Vincent Mulago, writes:
A citizen
of three
worlds

"Traditional African man
sees himself as a citizen of
three different worlds at the
same time... He lives in the
world of concrete reality, the
world of social values and
the world of the ineffable
self-conscious. "
' m
i
x/ rß
f
i i¡y*U
!
i»¿i? W~$ér?^ \Mr.W
laW flS LaT¿ * WT Vtl'aMl
r
fuiil k*¡y rJJ^hr>^
*.
& 1 «W - fi fi ' '
p <* *¿ V'ifla
> f V-XJi
<
HF 1/ J
m
m . *

"Traditional African man
sees the universe as a
hierarchy of vital forces,
with man as the force which
links inanimate objects to
the world of spiritual forces
above him. "
In traditional African society
activities that .involved working
with matter and transforming it
often had a sacred or occult
character. As the "Master of
Fire" and possessor of the
secret of transmutations, the
smith was highly respected as
the repository of knowledge
handed down from generation
to generation and originating in
an initial revelation. More than
merely practical implements, the
tools of his craft were handled
with loving care and were often
objects of beauty, like this
finely-carved pair of bellows
from Gabon.
"The common factor which explains the
solidarity of clan or tribe is not all simple. It is
not the life of the senses, nor the life of
thought. Neither is it life in the multi¬
coloured diversity we find in newspapers or
in the modern novel. It is life as it has been
derived and received from the source of
'power', as it turns toward power, is seized
by it and seizes it. This life is not destroyed
by death, although death may subject it to a
change of condition."
This understanding of man, as described
by Mulago, is very much related to Father
Temples' formulations in his Bantu
Philosophy. In this widely quoted but con¬
troversial work, Father Temples claims that
the end of the whole range of African man's
activities is "to acquire life, strength or vital
force, to live strongly [...] to make life
stronger, or to assume that force shall re¬
main perpetually in one's posterity."
Mulago contends that "for the Bantu,
living is existence in community; it is par¬
ticipation in the sacred life (and all life is
sacred) of the ancestors; it is an extension of
the life of one's forefathers, and a prepara¬
tion for one's own life to be carried on in
one's descendants."
Mulago's statement is generally accepted
by specialists as a standard belief among
Africans. It is, however, worth pointing out
30
that he added to the understanding of the
Bantu view of man with this explanation:
"The Bantu view of life may be seen in
two ways: first, as a community of blood
(the main primary factor); and secondly, as a
community of property (the concomitant
factor which makes life possible)."
This view of man is a fairly adequate
assessment of what the majority of tradi¬
tional African religionists would accept. It
does not only show that the African believes
in the sacred perpetuation of the powers of
procreation in his line of descent, it also ar¬
ticulates the universal African belief that all
the non-human elements in nature (trees,
animals and inorganic beings) are the exten¬
sions and means of life of those to whom
they belong.
This conception of life is the basis of the
African fear of impotence among men and
barrenness among women. Such human
mishaps and existential woes are construed
by the traditional African as the severing of
the chain linking the living and the dead. In
the view of traditional African man, the link
between the ancestors and their present
successors on earth comes from the unity of
blood and the common life which flows in
the veins of all members of the community.
Janheinz Jahn has also attempted to
reconstruct Bantu philosophy in his in
teresting book Muntu. His contribution to
the understanding of the traditional African
view of life and of man's role in the process
of vital participation is the claim that one of
the touchstones of traditional African cul¬
ture is the "magic power of the word".
The truth of this is not widely disputed,
for the word is all powerful in Africa. Indeed,
the traditional African religionists not only
took the word seriously, they also saw
language both as the badge of man's
spiritual superiority over the non-human
elements in the universe, and as his shib¬
boleth at the spiritual gates of the Supreme
Being's invisible kingdom.
This view of the magical power of words
is evident in the many references by scholars
to the African's use of incantations in his
everyday life. The belief in the magical
power of words gave rise to specialization in
the execution of functions in many tradi¬
tional African societies. The caste system,
for example, emerged in certain societies in
Africa simply because the African people felt
that such a division of labour could bring
about a good relationship with the spiritual
world, and that human elements so chosen
for such functions could execute their
delicate and sensitive tasks without
endangering the lives of others in the
community.

Photo Claude Lefevre © Editions du Chêne, Paris
"In traditional African cosmology
man is caught in a matrix of
spiritual relationships... His day- to¬
day activities are not only designed
to harmonize his relationships with
the divinities and the departed
ancestors, but they are also
motivated by the fear that bad
relations with these spiritual forces
could endanger the life and safety
of his community. "
Ancestral
homes
The buildings erected by the Dogon
people of West Africa have a symbolic
link with their Creation story. In a
Dogon village, the most important
building is the meeting-place of the
elders, the Togu na (above). This is a
rectangular building the roof of which
is supported by eight main pillars
representing the ancestors: four men
and four women who were the
offspring of the first man and woman
created. Houses are built in the shape
of the human body (see diagram right),
the circular kitchen representing the
head, the two side rooms the arms, and
the vestibule the legs.
31

Amadou Hampate Ba, in commenting on
the nature of African arts, has argued that
the African conception of art will not be in¬
telligible to a person who is secularistic in his
understanding of reality, for such an art is
inspired by a world-view that is all-
embracing.
He further contends that in the old Africa,
"Every act and every gesture were con¬
sidered to bring into play the invisible forces
of life. According to the tradition of the
Bambara people of Mali, these forces are the
multiple aspects of SE, or Great Creative
Power, which is in itself an aspect of the
Supreme being known as Maa Ngala"
(Unesco Courier, February 1976).
In the traditional African ontological
system, the human being is given a definite
destiny. Man is viewed as a cosmic traveller
who is destined to cross the equator of
death. This boundary line between the living
and the departed is what gives meaning to
life itself, for, just like the equator, it serves
as a demarcation line between two in¬
separable portions of total. reality. Death is
"not the ultimate reality but life itself. At
death, the individual dissolves into collective
immortality of the living-dead, that is, pro¬
claims the great solidarity of life."
For the traditional African religionist,
death is the process and the condition by
which the physical body of man is disin¬
tegrated. It is also the fragmentation of the
unity of life: body and spirit. Thus "Death is
conceived of as a departure and not a com¬
plete annihilation of a person. He moves on
to join the company of the departed, and the
only major change is the decay of the
physical body, but the spirit moves on to
another state of existence."
Father Temples has pointed out that "the
dead live on in a diminished condition of life,
as lessened life forces, while retaining their
higher, strengthening father life force." In
other words the departed, by going through
the individualized agony of death, have
gained a deeper knowledge of the mystery
and the process of vital participation in the
universe.
This paradoxical understanding of death
has led many African peoples to explain
death as the result of four causes. The most
commonly cited is magic, sorcery and witch¬
craft. This cause is viewed by most Africans
as a very dangerous one, for victims of such
evil practices may turn out to be wandering
ghosts whose souls will not be at
rest.
The second is the curse. Many African
societies teach their new members that a
powerful curse brings immediate death to
the accursed. Such a fate is widely feared in
African traditional societies, and every
precaution is usually taken not to violate
taboos, customs and traditions.
The third is the living-dead. These
departed souls may be dissatisfied with the
lives and activities of their survivors on earth
and so decide to tell them to change their
ways by visiting them with calamities.
(There is little evidence that living-dead ac¬
tually cause death.)
The fourth is God. This category is not
rigid, however. The traditional African may
accept God as the ultimate cause of death,
but to satisfy his psychological and emo¬
tional needs, he would still insist on an in¬
termediate cause of death.
32
These four causes of death could affect
the destiny of man, which would remain un¬
fulfilled at the moment of death. It is this
fear of one's fate after death which drives
many an African into the arms of diviners
and magicians. These mediators between
fragile and vulnerable men and the spiritual
powers dispose of great knowledge in the
mystical arts and their ability to allay the
fears of their clients and to subdue real or
imagined targets, has contributed a great
deal to African social stability in the past..
These qualities have also guaranteed the
peaceful passage of man from the realm of
humanness to the world of spirits.
John Mbiti has pointed out that "the key
to our understanding of the basic religious
and philosophical concepts (of African on¬
tology) is the African concept of time." He
went on to argue that "according to tradi¬
tional African concepts, time is a two-
dimensional phenomenon, with a long past,
a present and virtually no future."
These remarks by Mbiti have given cur¬
rency to the view that, to the old Africa,
history consists of 'two parts, the Sasa and
Zamani. The former is composed of all the
events which in the Western or linear con¬
cept of time would be considered as the
future. This concept, in the writings of
Mbiti, is taken as that dimension which em¬
braces all events that are about to occur or
are in the process of occurring or have
recently occurred. It is also understood as
the most meaningful period for the in¬
dividual.
The latter, on the other hand, is described
by Mbiti as the macro-time which embraces
all the past events that link the beginning of
things to the present unfolding of events in
the universe. In his view, Zamani is more
than the past; it is, as he suggests, "the
graveyard of time". Zamani, therefore, is
not only the period of termination, but also
the period of myth.
Mbiti's conceptual scheme is a help in
understanding the particular nature of
African thought.
I should like to put forward an alternative.
In my view the key concept in traditional
African thought is the cosmic schizophrenic
tendencies of man. By this I mean that tradi¬
tional African man sees himself as a citizen
of three different worlds at the same time.
That is to say that he lives in (a) the world of
concrete reality, (b) the world of social
values, and (c) the world of the ineffable
self-conscious.
The first world is that of man, trees, stars
inanimate objects and phenomena. The se¬
cond is that of values governing the mental
and spiritual processes of man and his com¬
munity. The third is that of unreachable and
inexpressible spiritual powers.
When analysed carefully, the beliefs and
thought patterns of the traditional African
man could be fitted into the three major on¬
tological categories. The tendency of the
students of African religions to assert that
Africans do not worship one God is due to
tnis cosmic schizophrenic behaviour in man.
Traditional man places the High God, in
the world of the ineffable self-conscious.
Though he shuttles between this particular
world and the other two, his ontological
make-up seems to incline him more to the
realms of concrete reality and social values
respectively. This is to say that traditional
African man's view of history is different
from that of the ascetic religious traditions
of the East, where man renounces this ear¬
thly life and devotes his entire life and being
to the world of ineffable self-conscious.
The African view is also different from the
Western scientific view, which focuses
almost completely on the world of concrete
reality. The Western view, it should be add¬
ed, is based on the dynamics of matter; its
conception of time and history is bound to
be affected by the changing paradigms in
the scientific community of the West. As
long as Western man hankers after the
mysteries of matter, his concept of time will
be unilinear. In other words, the conception
of time of a human group is determined
more by the ontological focus of its
members (that is, which of the three worlds
they wish to choose) and less by an inherent
racial or geographical factor.
Contrary to Mbiti, I would argue that
African traditional man indeed has a sense
of the indefinite future, but that his on¬
tological focus has been, not on revolu¬
tionizing the physical landscape around him,
but on socializing the new members of
society to anticipate their successful acces¬
sion to fatherhood (which is a few years
hence) and to refresh their memory of past
events. This latter aspect of the African
response to the ontological challenge put a
premium on the retrieval facilities of the
mind and its memory.
I would conclude that the traditional
African man's concept of time is three-
dimensional. This is to say that he believes
in a past, a present and a future. Yet, in con¬
ceding this point, I need to add that the
matter does not end with the three-dimen¬
sionality of time. The nature of such a con¬
ception needs futher exploration.
First, it should be pointed out that the
concept of unilinearity of time, as developed
in Western history, is based on an illusion,
which is detectable so long as man chases
after the mirage of materiality. This illusion
becomes exposed the moment the ontologi¬
cal response of a society shifts its focus
from excessive love for materiality to ex¬
cessive love for the social values between
man and society.
I would argue that, whereas the Western
theory of historical unilinearity is inspired by
the matrix of causes and effects that
governs the worjd of concrete reality, the
African's conception of time is guided by his
excessive concern for communal harmony in
rituals, deeds and thoughts.
The idea of unilinearity of history is in¬
spired by, and based on, the intercourse
between the various elements in the hier¬
archy of ontological units in the universe.
These two visions of history and life are very
different indeed, and it would be a serious
mistake to absolutize the concept of
unilinearity as developed out of one ex¬
perience, and then try to impose it on the
rest of mankind.
Traditional African man sees himself as a
party to an ontological and cosmological
partnership and because of this understan¬
ding of his life on earth, he always sees har¬
mony as the best form of human expression.
To the traditional African man, life is chaotic
so long as man's links with God and others
in existence are shattered. Because of this
fear of breaking the ontological bonds, tradi¬
tional African man always prefers harmony
and social order.
M Sulayman S. Nyang
