
Barren soil
For technology transplants to ïake'
the ground must be carefully prepared
by Ali A. Mazrui
TECHNOLOGY transfer is a comprehensive term which
encompasses both short-term and longterm technolog¬
ical movements, from computers on lease to African
countries to the establishment of local institutes of tech¬
nology. What fits and what does not fit is subsumed under
"technology transfer".
In contrast, "technology transplant" borrows a metaphor
from biology to imply the need for receptivity in the host
body. Some compatibility is needed between the thing
"transplanted" (be it a heart or a seed) and the recipient.
Our first proposition in this assessment is that there has
ALI A. MAZRUI, of Kenya, is Research Professorat the University of Jos
in Nigeria, and Professor of Political Science and of Afro-American and
African Studies at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. He is the author
of A World Federation of Cultures: An African Perspective (1976), Africa's
International Relations (1977) and Political Values and the Educated Class
in Africa (1978).
been a considerable amount of technology transfer to the
Third World in the last thirty yearsbut very little
technology transplant. Especially in Africa very little of what
has been transferred has in fact been successfully
transplanted. Very little has taken roots. The question is:
Why?
We propose to argue (with special reference to Africa) that
while the normative climate is favourable to technology
transplant, the structural and sociological soil is still relative¬
ly barren. While indeed there is interest in, and enthusiasm
for, a technological culture, the actual sociological soil still
tends to reject what is being transplanted. Let us look at these
two parts of the argument more closely.
The climate of opinion in much of the Third World favours
moves towards "modernization", "industrialization", more
efficient "rural development" and faster modes of travel.
Apart from a few poets and philosophers, there are no major
57

movements opposed to industrialism and technology
change.
India loves and reveres the late Mahatma Gandhi, but even
those contemporary Indians who favour cottage industries
often tend to see them more as an additional developmental
strategy, rather than as an alternative to the big trusts like the
Tatas and the steel industries. The more militant economic
Gandhians (urging a return to economic simplicity) have so
far had little impact on policy or indeed on organized mass
opinion.
Africa and the West Indies have also produced from time
to time dedicated economic primitivists. The whole négritude
school in Africa and the West Indies has at times included
nostalgia for the economic simplicity of the African past. As
the poet and politician Aimé Césaire of Martinique once
brilliantly put it:
...Eia for those who invented nothing
For those who have never discovered...
For those who explored nothing...
Eia for joy
Eia for grief at the udders of reincarnated tears...
My Négritude is neither a tower nor a cathedral
It thrusts into. the red flesh of the soil...
(Return to my Native Land)
Césaire revelled in the non-technicalness of original
African cultures.
Africa's most distinguished champion of négritude is
Leopold Senghor. But although Senghor was President of
Senegal for more than twenty years, he did not embark on a
programme of revived simplicity. On the contrary, official
policy in Senegal under Senghor was in the direction of an ex¬
panding industrial and monetary sector.
What all this means is that the religion of industrialism is
not in danger in the* Third World. Even countries like Burma
and the People's Republic of China which turned their
backs for a while on the lure of Western technology have
more recently shown signs of renewed fascination with that
technology.
It is because of these considerations that the normative
climate for technology transplant appears, at least on first
estimate, favourable in most of the Third World. Parents are
eager to send their children to Western-type schools; govern¬
ments are eager to formulate five-year plans; there are
technical experts galore temporarily imported from outside.
With such a favourable climate, why is not the plant of
technology taking roots? Yes, why? This is what brings us
back to the metaphor of a barren soil. We see the soil in terms
No, we do not want to overtake anyone. We want to walk, day and
night, for all time, in the company of all men.
Frantz Fanon
(1925-1961)
Bringing in the rice harvest, Indonesia. Photo Georg Gerster
© Rapho, Paris.
of the sociology of the society in relation to its structural links
with the outside world. This soil is not congenial. A series of
contradictions are part of the explanation.
Firstly, are parts of the Third World experiencing cultural
Westernization without economic modernization? Is there a
transmission of Western consumption patterns without a
transmission of Western production techniques? Is there a
craze for Western technological gadgets without a pro¬
gramme of how to produce them locally?
Consumption patterns are a reflection of values, either new
or old. Production techniqifes would have been a reflection
of skills. The West has been more successful in popularizing
its values and tastes than in transplanting its skills. This im¬
balance has often been deliberate. Creating a taste for
Western goods without a local capability for producing them
was often more profitable for the West than exporting both
tastes and techniques.
Even in exporting capitalism as a system the West has been
more effective in exporting the profit motive than the en¬
trepreneurial skills. The profit motive is a desire for profit. It
is not necessarily to be skilled in securing it.
African businessmen may be eager enough to maximize
their returns. But many are more comfortable sitting on
Boards of Directors than trying out new trading techniques.
Risk-taking as an aspect of creative entrepreneurship is often
underdeveloped in the Third World. Easy money and safe in¬
vestment are preferred.
Is the West transmitting
its consumption patterns
rather than its production
techniques?
Even the Western puritanical principle of "make
money but do not spend it," is honoured in the breach.
Money is made but promptly spent ostentatiously. Re¬
investment in better equipment or more effective techniques
is seldom elevated to a priority. When new equipment is
bought it is the wrong equipment.
As for the Protestant principle of "industriousness" (or
the work ethic) as a moral principle, this is often more
characteristic of African peasants than of the African
bourgeoisie.
The latter have indeed been converted to the profit motive
in many parts of Africa, but even when they are Protestants
by religion they have not necessarily been converted to the
"Protestant ethic" in the classical economic sense that Max
Weber has reminded us about in his study, The Protestant
Ethic and the Spirit ofCapitalism. The profit motive is strong
in much of Africa, but entrepreneurship is still weak. This is
part of the barrenness of the sociological soil for effective
transplantation of relevant technology.

Time is the field ofhuman development.
Karl Marx
(1818-1883)
Villagers of the Mekong delta. Socialist Republic of Viet-
Nam. Photo Raymond Depardon © Magnum, Paris.
For I remember stopping by the way
To watch a Potter thumbing his wet Clay:
And with its all-obliterated Tongue
It murmuredGently, Brother, gently, pray!
Omar Khayyam
(1048-1122)
Throwing a pot. Photo Leo Pelissier © Rapho, Paris.
59

Even the educational systems in Africa are better at
transmitting Western values and tastes than Western skills
and techniques. The schools bequeathed by colonialism are
instruments of cultural re-orientation and not instruments of
economic transformation. In the classroom there is ac¬
culturation of the arts of conversation rather than the
transfer of techniques of production.
African universities are on the whole designed to produce
communicators rather than creators, masters of verbal and
literary "skills", rather than practitioners of the craft of in¬
novation. Colonialism preferred imitative communicators
to innovative creators. Colonial schools were designed
accordingly.
Scientism rather than the scientific spirit emerged out of
colonial educational structures. The ideology of "modern
scientism" rather than the principle of genuine scientificity
held sway on graduation day and beyond. Africans were
trained to be awed by science rather than to master it, to be
impressed by Western scientific achievements rather than to
cultivate their own scientific self-confidence. The ideology of
scientism made Africans not only awed by Western science
but helplessly dependent upon it psychologically. The stage
was set for long-term African technological dependency as
well.
These are some of the contradictions which have gone
towards making the post-colonial soil so inhospitable for ef¬
fective technology transplantation. The climate of opinion is
still in favour of technological development, but fundamental
changes are needed sociologically and structurally.
To carry the metaphor of the soil a stage further, fertilizers
are needed to help enrich the soil and enable the plant of new
technology to take roots. It is not enough to complain about
North-South abuses and the genuine excesses of transnational
corporations. It is not enough to focus on limitations of
copyright and patent, or excesses of exploitation, real as these
problems are. Sooner or later we have to confront the defi¬
ciencies of the host soil those caused by colonial distortions
and those caused by indigenous cultural divergences. What
may be at stake are factors which range from motivation pat¬
terns to educational systems, from a distorted Protestant
ethic to the imbalances of the world economy.
The quest for a New International Technological Order
must begin with the issue of fertilizers technological fer¬
tilizers to enrich the host soil in the Third World and make it
more receptive to the genuine transplantation of the skills of
production and the craft of innovation.
I Ali A. Mazrui

