By word of mouth
It is not often realized that the spoken word
is still the most widely used medium of communication
by Mohamed H. Abdulaziz
COMMUNICATION through language is one of the greatest gifts
bestowed on man. The civilizations of ancient times and of the
Middle Ages looked upon language as an object of great
mystery, even ofmagical power, able to create, cure or destroy. It provid¬
ed the basis for philosophical debate on right and wrong, truth and
falsehood, reality and deception, and was the source of the great debates
of the conventionalist and the rationalist schools of thought.
Language has also been the medium through which all human creative
talent has been expressed , preserved and transmitted throughout history.
All religious and ideological philosophies have relied heavily on the use of
language and its mystical power. There is also the issue of the relationship
between language and the cognitive process, language and culture and
language and the world view.
Again, throughout history, language has been used as a basis for
delimiting nation States and peoples and has been one of the main causes
of nationalism with its positive and negative aspects. In fact, without
language, it would be difficult to visualize the survival of human social
organization. '
Studies of oral communication, especially in the West, have until
recently usually been undertaken from an anthropological point ofview.
As late as the 1950s, oral traditions were viewed by scholars within the
framework of the concept of primitive pre-literate idealistic human
forms ofcommunication. The historical perspective ofsociety as open to
change was underplayed. A society such as that of the Masai of East
Africa was looked upon as having exotic social, economic, ideological
and religious organizations; it was indigenous and primitive. There was
no empirical approach that looked at the phenomena from the point of
view of the stimuli and responses of social change, affecting all human
societies, though perhaps differently, in different periods of history
based on observable and explainable conditions. It was not until the
late 1950s when the "modernization" approach came to the fore that
oral communication was viewed from a socio-psychological angle.
Among linguists oral language is now considered the basis of the data
for both theoretical thinking and descriptive methodology. The myth of
structurally superior and inferior languages, traditionally based on
literate tradition, has been completely exploded. In its place a new
outlook has come into being supported by linguists such as Noam Chom¬
sky and his followers. The view now prevalent among the linguists is that
' 'instead of the individual languages determining cognition, it is a univer-
MOHAMED HASSAN ABDULAZIZ, of Kenya, is Professor and Chair¬
man of the Department of Linguistics and African Languages at the
University of Nairobi.
There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and
none of them is without signification. Therefore if I know not the
meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaketh a bar¬
barian, and he that speaketh shall be a barbarian unto me.
I Corinthians, XIV, 10-11
Experts differ on the number of languages spoken in
Nigeria, their estimates ranging from 368 to 513; Hausa, Ibo
and Yoruba are the country's three majority languages.
Photo Peter Larsen, Unesco.
63

sal system of innate cognitive principles which, at the semantic level at
least, underlies and gives form to all human language"
This view ofmodern linguistics has sealed the supremacy of the spoken
language as a basis for all human communication. In fact, it is often not
realized that only a small proportion of communicated human inter¬
action, even in highly organized and industrialized societies, is in fact in
written form.
Among the pre-literate societies throughout history, oral communica¬
tion depended on social context. Oral behaviour was directly linked with
the reality of social situations. Such factors as the value of an individual
person's word, trust, reliability,,were heavily constrained by social sanc¬
tions. In oral civilizatons no written document was required to prove
ownership, to place responsibility, to define social obligation, or to ap¬
portion blame. The oral word was adequate since it was built, not on an
abstract system of non-verbal behaviour, but on communicational value
systems which could not be breached without far-reaching consequences
to the individual.
Of course, there have been abuses even in such oral cultures, but there
was no question of inadequacy ofcommunicative efficiencyor ofdivorc¬
ing communication from the contexts of human interaction. This is
shown by the use of oral communication with its heavy dependence on
personal references as opposed to the impersonal reference often
associated with modern documents.
The historical approach views oral tradition and folklore as universal
phenomena. In fact, the print medium itselfcame into being fairly recent¬
ly, in the fifteenth century, with the first printed materials in the form of
government gazettes. By the seventeenth century most of the printed
communication materials were of the "Advertiser" type, for example,
the Rotterdam and Manchester Advertisers. Of course, with the coming
ofcopying machines and printing the whole structure ofcommunication,
especially at the popular level, completely changed.
In Africa most communication is still oral, because over seventy-five
per cent of the people in most African countries live in traditional
societies as members of ethnic groups, clans or extended families, in
villages and homesteads. Most day to day transactions and interactions,
be they economic, social or inter-group are conducted orally. There is no
apparent inefficiency in such communication, unless interfered with by
written elements of modernization imposed from the urban areas where
centres of political power and administration are located. In fact,
throughout the continent of Africa, one sees a vast oral communication
network which is very efficient, in spite of the extensive and complex
multilingual reality in existence. Most information is still transmitted by
word of mouth.
Colonial rule in Africa has brought about a cultural and linguistic com¬
plexity with far-reaching psychological and sociological consequences.
In almostall African countries that have attained independence, there ex¬
ists unstable linguistic and cultural heterogeneity. In a small country like
Cameroon there are over a hundred ethnolinguistic communities. Tan¬
zania with twenty million people has over a hundred ethnolinguistic
groups or tribes. This should, on the face of it, raise an acute problem of
communication but, in fact, for centuries people from different ethno¬
linguistic backgrounds have been efficiently communicating using the
oral medium, the basis being a sharing of common understanding,
assumptions and presuppositions that are vital to an efficient com¬
munication system.
At another level, there is a diglossia situation in most countries where
the metropolitan European language, English, French, Portuguese,
Spanish or Afrikaans, fills the role of the official and national language.
The local indigenous languages then are often reduced to a purely conver¬
sational role, except, of course, in countries like Tanzania, Somalia and
Ethiopia where there are indigenous national/official languages, but
with a European language still playing an important role in higher educa¬
tion and other areas of communication. Nevertheless, in Africa, after
nearly a hundred years of westernization, most communication is still
oral in form, making a vital contribution to group solidarity and identity
and providing a basis for social, psychological and cultural life.
In some cases problems arise due to the existence of written codes of
law, often in a foreign language, and manifesting value systems alien to
the vast majority of the people. Injustices in the courts and the legal
system in general can and do easily occur, when a defendant is forced to
submit to a legal system he does not understand or appreciate. A situation
of privilege and discrimination with respect to social and economic rights
such as job opportunities and social mobility can also often arise, to the
detriment of the so-called illiterate people. Illiteracy then simply means
inability to express oneself in and understand the written word.
Oral communication in all societies, including the so-called developed
ones, is relatively more flexible since it is dependent on the human con¬
text. Many ugly situations leading to misunderstandings and even wars
could be defused if people met and exchanged views orally in a human
>
Our own monuments are oral traditions which
die along with the old men, conveyed by a
multitude of languages which often do not inter¬
communicate. Our traditional authorities no
longer have any responsibility or any means of
expression. Our institutions are undergoing the
aggressive irruption of modernity. We are in the
world a fragile people.
Alioune Diop
The late Wa Kamissoko, a famous Malian
griot (story-teller, musician, entertainer).
Photo © SCOA, Paris.

/ can still clearly remember the day
when a car was first driven on to my
father's estate. The labourers asked that
the hood should be opened and that the
hidden horse be taken out. This was not
all that long ago. Yet no one today con¬
siders an interplanetary rocket to be
that much ofa sensation any more. Men
sit at home, in slippers and dressing-
gowns, to watch the astronauts walking
about the moon and listen to their small
talk. The world was replaced by worlds,
and our small globe by the universe. We
have to change and revalue our view of
the world in accordance with this.
Albert Szent-Gyorgyi
The Orrery, painting by Joseph
Wright of Derby (an orrery is a
mechanical model of the solar
system). Photo © Derby Art
Gallery, UK.
context. Discrimination in education systems, even in the developed
countries, can often be traced back to linguistic barriers that recognize
only one variety ofwritten standard language, which often coincides with
the language of the educated élite of the middle and upper classes. High
failure rates among working-class schoolchildren have been found to be
due to a large extent to cultural and linguistic discontinuity between the
home and school. In Third World countries such discrimination,
especially where a foreign language is involved, can take on enormous
proportions.
In Third World countries, many people still rely on oral communica¬
tion as adult (and general) literacy campaigns have not had the impact
originally expected. Indeed, in many parts of the world people still
depend on oral tradition for day to day survival. Many family-
In an organization whose objectives relate to such matters as
education, science, and culture we must avoid systematic confron¬
tations... What we need most is a constant willingness to engage in
dialogue. ^
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Detail from Feeding the Hungry, from the series The Seven
Works of Mercy, by the Master of Alkmaar, 15th/16th cen¬
tury Dutch artist. Photo Dominique Roger, Unesco.
planning programmes have failed in Africa because this was not fully
understood by the authorities.
An example of this emerged from a door to door survey in a poor,
working-class section ofNairobi aimed at finding out the effectiveness of
a family-planning campaign. Free contraceptive pills and other aids had
been distributed. It was found that one lady continued to produce
children even though she and her husband had actually tried to practice
birth control. When interviewed, the lady said she normally took her pills
but when tired of doing so she would give them regularly to her husband
Can the oral tradition coexist
with the written word?
for a time, assuming that the result would be the same. On other occa¬
sions she would take a whole week's supply in two or three days. It was
then discovered that the packet containing the contraceptive pills had
been imported and that the instructions were in Swedish and English.
The 1960s and 1970s saw a great effort to promote functional literacy
as a tool for improving communication that was considered vital to
economic and social development. But the results have been disappoin¬
ting in many areas. The conflict seems to be one of culture and tradition
so far as the majority of the low income groups are concerned, and these,
ironically, happen to be the target population.
When the idea of functional literacy was introduced in Africa, it was
believed that it would serve as a panacea for underdevelopment in the
rural areas and would lead to higher productivity, especially higher food
production. Again, very little impact has been made. In some cases at¬
tempts to force people to join the world of Uterate society have been
deliberately frustrated.
It is a pity that only in this century have scholars and others realized the
importance of oral tradition as a source of knowledge of human history,
culture, belief systems and other facets of oral civilization. Even in the
Western world great artistic works must have been lost for ever because
the oral tradition was not considered worthy of preservation. In Africa
today, oral tradition forms an important source material for the inter¬
pretation ofhistory. Oral stories and folklore provide vital linguistic clues
to the state of the languages in a given area, their genetic classification and
the form of linguistic change they have undergone, thus enriching the
science of language.
Today, dances, rituals and other fruits of oral civilization are being
revived as objects of serious study and research, and for entertainment
purposes. Traditional medicine, for example, has been found to be of
great value and of intrinsic interest to modern medicine, both for physical
and for psychological and emotional therapy. There is now a worldwide
appreciation of the value of the oral civilization and its destruction can be
considered as nothing less than the deliberate spoliation of an ir¬
replaceable element of the great human heritage.
H Mohamed Abdulaziz
65
