How the family can help
Delegates from 43 countries, representing 159 Organizations concerned with aging
and old age, attended a Forum held in Vienna from 29March to 2April 1982, under
the auspices of the New York and Vienna Committees of Non Governmental
Organizations (NGO) and the International Centre ofSocial Gerontology. The aim
ofthe Forum was to prepare a report on theproblems ofaging and old age as a con¬
tribution to the United Nations World Assembly on Aging Held in Vienna from
26 July to 6 August 1982. An extract from the report is presented below.
THE family remains the best
guarantee of the material and
spiritual welfare of its older
members.
Relationships within the family
vary in form and meaning from one
society to another, according to the
cultural, social and economic
background, but they are still essen¬
tial for the intergenerational network
of assistance, communication and
services. These exchanges indeed
work both ways: personal contact
between children and the elderly are
for both a source of fulfilment, learn¬
ing and creativity. And the burden im¬
posed by the aging is offset by the
various forms of assistance in cash or
services that they frequently render
to their children and grandchildren.
Because of this reciprocity, it is
within the family that distinctions on
the grounds of chronological age are
blurred, that intergenerational con¬
flicts subside, whereas too strong
reliance on the State increases the
dependence of the aging on the
others.
The study of the changes in family
structures and practices mainly
characterized by a greater geographi¬
cal scattering of the family members
and the change in the status and role
of women make possible an adapta¬
tion of the function of community-
based mutual help networks and en¬
courage measures governments
should take in order to reinforce and
supplement the supporting role of the
family.
Teotihuacan clay mask
(300-600 AD, 28x22 cm)
representing Huehueteotl, the
Aztec god of fire and the
regenerative force.
Photo Mario Fantin © Musée de
l'Homme, Paris. Collection Dr. K.
Stavenhagen, Mexico
Assistance and unpaid care ser¬
vices given by the family to its elderly
members represent a substantial
share of the informal economy which
does not appear in the gross national
product. This informal economy will
undoubtedly be the only way of en¬
suring survival for the elderly in coun¬
tries without the resources to deve¬
lop an institutionalized assistance.
It is .therefore unanimously
recognized that the mutual respect
across generations, necessary to
family solidarity, is based on the
ethical and philosophical values of
the societies and cultures of the
world. This solidarity is strengthened
by a transfer of knowledge and skills
and by economic links. It cannot
however fully come into play, if the
family has not the means necessary
in order to meet basic priority needs.
Considering these principles, the
Non Governmental Organizations
recommend that:
A An old age policy be developed,
integrated in a three-generation fami¬
ly policy, and that in the continuity of
the family the older members be
taken into account on an equal
footing with the younger ones; that
the public authorities give in all fields
of life their support to the setting up
and development of relationships
between parents arid children.
B The family's capacity to sup¬
port older members, both within the
home and in the community be
strengthened:
through a realistic assessment of
the care a family can or cannot pro¬
vide for its older members;
by providing specific information to
families on programmes and services
available to help older persons retain
their autonomy and enhance their
well-being;
through such specific means as
home health care and help and
through providing moral and spiritual
assistance to the families with their
essential responsibilities;
offering to those who provide care
to older members of the family train¬
ing and guidance to assist effectively
persons with chronic conditions;
by offering to families providing
continuous and often demanding
care to an older member the possibili¬
ty of being relieved from time to time
of this burden through such program¬
mes as day hospitals and day care
centres, for respite and holidays;
by recognizing grandparents' legal
responsibilities and rights in the up¬
bringing and care of their grand¬
children;
by providing the elderly without a
family with the opportunity to be in¬
tegrated into a family environment.
C Housing be designed to accom¬
modate older family members
without unnecessarily restricting
their autonomy and planning com¬
munities that facilitate the older
family members' participation in the
neighbourhood and the community.
D The essential role that the fami¬
ly plays or should play should never
prevent the public authorities from
ensuring for the elderly the means for
a healthy and dignified life.
21
