2. BRIDGING THE GENERATION GAP
The general situation of the elderly throughout the world
was introduced by the American School, which had carried
out a survey on the following countries: United States of
America, Bangladesh, Japan, United Kingdom, France,
Iran, Canada, the Republic of Korea.
The initial conclusion was that the elderly are respected
much more in the non-industrialized countries, where they
live in contact with the other generations and where they often
exercise economic power and have great intellectual
influence.
In the industrialized countries the situation of the elderly is
very different in towns and in villages . In villages there are fre¬
quent and close contacts between different age groups, in the
same way as in traditional societies.
In the industrialized countries the problem of retirement
homes arises. In the Scandinavian countries some of them are
too "perfect", too well-planned, to the detriment of the
freedom of human contacts.
We visited elderly people in these homes and saw how very
lonely they are. Our visits were very much appreciated. It is
important that these contacts should continue and that the
elderly, for their part, should seek such contacts with the
young.
We have come to distinguish between two categories of
elderly people:
the very elderly, who are often disabled and living in
homes. They tend to be very lonely, and their main need is for
moral support;
the less elderly, who are still active, and who should get
young people to share in their activities. In this way young
people will also be able to prepare themselves for growing old.
26
In the mass media youth and beauty are often synonymous (right)
and the elderly either forgotten or portrayed as lonely and decrepit
has-beens. Women, if only because they usually outlive men, are
particularly susceptible targets of "ageist" myths. Movements such
as the Gray Panthers In the United States are doing all they can to
banish myths which distort the ¡mage of older women in the media.
Below, a 1 1 4-year-old man on Shima Island, Japan, delights in the antics
of his playful kitten. The companionship of domestic pets can often
alleviate the solitude of the elderly.

If there is an unsolved problem concerning elderly people,
it is because there are obstacles in the way of contacts between
the young and the old. Such obstacles are:
psychological:
exclusion by other generations, "you are old",
self-exclusion by the older generation, who feel rejected by
other people: "I am old".
sociological:
current attitudes are in favour of individualism and the
idea of "youth first and foremost";
the consumer society equates productivity with
usefulness, and non-productivity with uselessness;
in towns housing conditions and the anonymity of large
housing estates make communications difficult, and are an
obstacle to having the elderly live with their families. There
are no common meeting places. The family unit has split up.
Old people are afraid to go out or to invite young people into
their homes (the danger of being attacked by gangs, young
hooligans...)
emotional:
peopletalk of the generation gap: we believe that it is more
a question either of mutual fear, the fear that some elderly
people have ofbeing pitied, or else in some cases mutual indif¬
ference, a lack of interest which can lead to a lack of
understanding;
the elderly say that their contacts with the young cease
when the latter reach adolescence.
Given these obstacles to the reintegration of the elderly in
society there is a common desire to find solutions.
The first requirement is to become aware of the problem
and of the need for change: both in oneself and in others. We,
the young, can begin with small, everyday acts of kindness:
smiling, carrying parcels... We can also attempt to influence,
our parents, for we have noticed that our attitudes towards
the old often reflect our parents' attitudes towards them.
Secondly, we should attempt, by all the means at our
disposal (personally and through publicity, the mass media
and organized groups) to make the elderly understand that
their experience, their knowledge, their wisdom and their af¬
fection are useful to everybody; to make everybody unders¬
tand the importance of the involvement of the elderly in
society.
We must encourage the young and the old to meet one
another.
A series of experiments has been carried out: a French
secondary school has organized, with great success, an outing
of its students with old people; some lycée students have been
teaching English to an old lady who, in turn, has been
teaching them to knit; in Sweden, classes take old people out
and read the newspapers to them; in France, some young peo¬
ple have been restoring a mill with the advice of their elders
on the way old people used to work. Senior Citizens' Clubs
have been formed which tell young people stories, relate the
history of the different districts of a town, put on audio-visual
displays for young people and organize joint painting ac¬
tivities, and the elderly have come to realize that their views
have changed through their contact with young people.
Following these meetings between young and old people,
we have noted that:
joint activities are easier in small groups, in which it is
easier to communicate;
our relationships are often more fruitful with our grand¬
parents than with our parents who are "in too much of a
hurry"...;
all these experiences have brought benefits to both sides;
the contribution of the elderly is uniquely valuable:
besides teaching skills such as cooking and knitting, they talk
about their life and times, their travels, their former occupa¬
tions. They are real "living archives". They also represent
our roots, "the basis of our identity in a world constantly in
search of itself".
How can these contacts between the young and the elderly
be increased?
We need:
to put up notices to publicize Senior Citizens' Clubs in
schools, town-halls, libraries, professional associations; to
give wider publicity to Universités du Troisième Age, which
are open to all, whatever their cultural background, and
which provide an ideal meeting place;
to organize meetings through various associations of a
professional, cultural, artistic, sporting (yoga, gymnastics) or
humanitarian nature (aid, personal contacts); through
Unesco Clubs, students' unions, libraries, travel agencies.
The elderly would like to hold social events with young people
such as showing films, singing, dancing, reciting poems, put¬
ting on plays, painting together and making music. They told
us "we like enjoying ourselves with young people";
to let old people visit schools and let them take a hand in
our "workshops";
to participate jointly in local or regional life by carrying
out surveys on the environment or on the community's prob¬
lems, researching into a town's history, or collecting the
stories and legends of a particular region. The elderly con¬
sider that this could make us more aware of our
responsibilities;
to try to counteract the image of the elderly given by the
media, of State-aided pensioners, social casualties, the in¬
habitants of "old people's ghettos", and so on. To promote
new values within our consumer society, the sharing not only
of sorrows but also of joys;
The obstacles to such meetings are often of a practical
nature, such as differences in the pace of life and in physical
capabilities. The main thing is to create real motivation on
both sides; not only to increase our own personal contacts,
but also to stimulate other young people to do the same, and
to encourage the elderly themselves to make corresponding
efforts on their side.
Conclusion
Our role as young people in helping old people to become
integrated in society is to encourage contacts in all fields: ar¬
tistic, cultural, social and at the family, local and national
levels.
One of our number said that: "From the cradle to the
grave, we are all part of the same human society and no one
should be excluded from it".
Many commented that: "You often accidentally jostle
elderly people, or you just don't see them, or you forget them,
but that doesn't mean that they aren't respected".
Some students also commented in writing that: "The elder¬
ly ask for neither pity nor paternalism but what is theirs by
right: the right to take part in life, the right to love and hap¬
piness, and it is up to us, the young, to see that these rights
are respected".
We should like to conclude by quoting a remark which was
made by one elderly person about young people and which
moved us very much: "Nothing is owed to them, but
everything may be entrusted to them.
They can both give and receive".
27
