The global village
revisited
by Russell Neuman
IN the mid-1960s Canadian media analyst
Marshall McLuhan began to ponder
the notion of the global village the
people of the world's nations united by in¬
stantaneous inter-communication by tele¬
vision. As TV became available in every
chateau, hut, and tent, he speculated, the
world's nations would inevitably become
more aware of and sympathetic to each
other's cultures and beliefs. How could
bellicose heads of State sustain war fever
and xenophobia among their citizens in the
face of empathie ¡mages of adults and
children the human condition transmitted
by television drama flowing across na¬
tional boundaries? Perhaps also there is
something revealing and spontaneous
about this visual electronic medium which,
in contrast to print, does not lend itself as
well to the self-conscious prose or abstract
propaganda of the ideological journalist or
pamphleteer. It is a vision of new tech¬
nology and cultural harmony.
Today this imagery, although still an at¬
tractive and coherent scenario, strikes a
false chord. Those who struggle with the
harsh realities of economic development,
weary negotiators who face renewed
debates over the New World Information
Order are likely to represent a rather scep
tical audience for a latter-day McLuhan who
would point to new communications tech¬
nology as a panacea for world tensions.
Some have reacted to the technological
determinism of the global village notion by
concluding simply that McLuhan had it the
wrong way around. It is not television's
technology which determines its ideological
and cultural content, but the culture and
ideology which determines the character
and impact of the technology. One might
contrast, for example, the Soviet Union's
lengthy television documentaries cele¬
brating Lenin's life and philosophy and new
industrial development in the Urals with the
theatrical capitalism of such American game
shows as "Let's Make a Deal" and "The
Price Is Right".
Such a view leads quite naturally into the
logic of the New World Information Order.
The news and entertainment produced and
distributed by the dominant Western media,
so the logic goes, will inevitably reflect the
commercial interests and national biases of
their sources with continued insensitivity to
the unique needs and perspectives of Third
World audiences.
Given the disquieting legacy of the col¬
onial era, many in the Third World
understandably cast a sceptical eye on the
prospect of a new electronic colonialism.
But a simplistic model which equates all
new media with neo-colonialism will be no
more helpful in the design of workable inter¬
national communications policy than the
naive optimism of McLuhan's global village.
The North-South and East-West polariza¬
tion of opinion concerning such issues as
the New World Information Order may be a
familiar pattern in international circles but it
sparks special interest among communica¬
tions researchers. My thesis is this: The pro¬
ponents of an unrestricted free flow of
media entertainment and information across
national boundaries tend to reflect
McLuhan's style of technological deter¬
minism content, he was
prone to argue, is inherently neutral. The
spread of new technologies is inevitable.
Each new technology from radio through
television to direct broadcast satellites will
spontaneously determine its own cultural
character. In contrast, those who em¬
phasize cultural sovereignty issues tend to
focus exclusively on entertainment and
news as propaganda and reflect an extreme
scepticism about new communication
technologies an equally simplistic political
determinism.
INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION. Every country has
its share of communication outcasts or "have-nots" who only
seldom have any say in determining the content of information and
have virtually no opportunity of making their views or problems
known through the media. And so the gap widens between those
who are over-informed and those who are underinformed, while at
the same time the imbalance. between those who issue and those
who receive information grows more pronounced. Admittedly, at
the international level, the imbalance in theproduction andflow of
information and programmes affects primarily North-South rela¬
tions, but it is also to be found within each of the world 's major
regions and even within each country. The need to deliver the
developing countries from the state of dependence they are still in
as regards communication is now widely recognized: 80per cent of
the news distributed throughout the world comes from the in¬
dustrialized countries, and only 10 to 30 per cent concerns the
developing countries. To this imbalance must be added the unequal
distribution of books or radio and television programmes. The
perpetuation ofsuch disparities entails serious economic, political,
40
social and cultural consequences for the most deprived countries
and at the same time constitutes a major obstacle in the way of the
peoples getting to know each other and to the progress of interna¬
tional understanding. Countries with high capacitiesforproducing
and circulating information often tend to neglect other cultures or
are familiar only with their picturesque or anecdotal aspects; and
messages from the industrialized countries often feed back to the
developing countries a simplified, sometimes distorted or indeed
inaccurate image of themselves. Stereotyped and ethnocentric pat¬
terns are thus perpetuated and sometimes even reinforced, while a
sense of insecurity may give rise to restrictive or defensive measures
to guard against what is felt to be a threat to the more vulnerable
communities. The very same fears are becoming apparent in a
number of industrialized countries, aware that they too are using
predominantlyforeign programmes. A reduction of the disparities,
by developing the media of each country and especially of the
developing countries, would undoubtedly make for a freer and
more substantial flow of messages and contribute to the progress
of these countries and to wider international understanding.

Phoïo Andfoa Bruno, Turin
41

COMMUNICATION
AND CULTURE
It would not be enough to provide
equipment and materials and to
mobilize human and financial
resourcesunquestionably important
as that isfor all communication prob¬
lems to be solved, both within each
country and in relations between coun¬
tries. For the questions that arise also
concern the nature of social relations
and the quality of communication; they
consequently have social and cultural
implications at all levels, national,
regional and international.
The truth of the matter, as usual, lies
somewhere in between. The role of com¬
munications researchers, in studying how
audiences use and learn from the media, will
be to demonstrate that the appropriate
model is one of a continuing interaction of
technological and political forces rather
than a one-way determinism in either direc¬
tion. Such a perspective opens new com¬
mon ground.
The New World Information Order debate
as it stands now is troublesome. Each side
identifies a primary goal apparently incom¬
patible with the other. Western nations pro¬
claim the need to avoid censorship and to
protect the free flow and exchange of ideas
across national borders. Developing nations
and those which tend to import more
cultural products than they export proclaim
the need to protect cultural and political
sovereignty from the intrusion of Western
commercial news and entertainment media.
It might be argued, perhaps somewhat
cynically, that each side shares the same
premise and the same goal. The shared
premise is that in open market competition
between Western and regional or locally
produced materials the Western content will
tend to dominate. The goal each side shares
is to dominate the local media. The Western
media would do so, it is said, by means of
open-market competition and the local and
regional media by insulating the local media
through the use of cultural trade barriers,
tariffs, quotas, or perhaps censorships or
some sort.
Fostering cultural diversity is the common
goal. It finds resonance with the first article
of Unesco's Constitution the goal of col¬
laboration "in the work of advancing the
mutual knowledge and understanding of
peoples through all means of mass com¬
munication, and to that end, [Unesco shall]
recommend such international agreements
as may be necessary to promote the free
flow of ideas by word and image". Cultural
diversity is, however, not necessarily the
natural condition. It may indeed require nur¬
turing. It is here that some recent
technological developments offer special
promise.
The overwhelming and dominant
technological trend, of course, is the move¬
ment toward electronic communication.
Paper and film as storage devices and con-
Photomontage Tsunchisa Kimura © Pacific Press Service, Tokyo, ANA, Pans

Photo International Labour Office, J. P. Laffont © Sygma
COMMUNICATION
AND CULTURE
A crucial problem, how well known, is
that of the major role played by
transnational corporations in regard to
mass media and, more generally,
cultural industries, especially in thefield
of information, as well as that of the ex¬
port of technologies whose supposed
neutrality is disproved in every study
that has been made. In the face of these
problems there is a very evident need to
work out national and international
strategies.
duits for information are giving way to
magnetic tape and laser disc storage and
transmission via wire and the expanded
usable electromagnetic spectrum. The fami¬
ly elder as storyteller is replaced by the an¬
nouncer. The messenger boy and paper boy
seek other careers as information is elec¬
tronically delivered directly into the home in¬
formation terminal.
The printed page in the form of books,
magazines, and newspapers remains
economically viable but is diminished
somewhat by the prominence of broadcast
news and entertainment. The role of com¬
puters and high-speed data lines in
transporting text and data begins to blur the
distinction between print and video. In¬
creasingly a news story might pass from a
reporter's word processing terminal through
an editor's terminal to the news reader's
home screen without ever having taken
form as ink on paper.
Electronic communication is the central
historical trend, but a full sense of its im¬
plications requires special attention to three
characteristics of the technology which
have unique relevance for cultural diversity.
The first factor is lowered costs. Dramatical¬
ly increased economies of scale and efficien¬
cy in manufacture result from the develop¬
ment of transistors and microelectronic
chips. Printed circuit boards of inexpensive
silicon which can be stamped out almost
like pamphlets from a high-speed printing
press replace laboriously hand-assembled
component parts.
Optical cable offers to cut costs of
transmission by wire on an equally dramatic
scale. In 1920 a transatlantic phone call cost
eighteen dollars (US) for three minutes; by
1980 the cost had fallen to under two
dollars. The cost of overseas video trans¬
mission via satellite has dropped equiv-
alently. As the speed and storage capacity
of microcomputers grow and the price of
manufacture falls, some observers predict
that within the next decade it may prove to
be cheaper not only to send a letter but an
entire book via high speed data lines bet¬
ween two microcomputers.
Ultimately the cost of electronic transfer
and display is likely to fall below the cost of
postage alone, not even considering the
rising costs of printing and binding. Minia¬
turization and improved engineering have
reduced the cost of video cameras and
recorders. Professional quality colour video
recording and editing equipment is increas¬
ingly within the financial reach of local
schools and community groups while a
decade or so ago equivalent^ equipped
television studios were economically viable
only in major metropolitan areas.
The second factor of emerging electronic
technology is increased bandwidth. Band¬
width is a term adopted from electrical
engineering which has come to refer more
generally to numbers of channels and the
amount of information each can carry.
There are several related technical
developments here. The increased speed of
data communications mean that a great deal
more can be communicated in equivalent
time (and presumably stored for future
reference) leaving a channel free for others
to use. Refinements in "multiplexing"
technology mean that with the appropriate
equipment, two users of a cable or assigned
frequency can use that channel simul¬
taneously without loss of fidelity or ac¬
curacy. Finally, improved engineering
allows the use of higher and higher spec¬
trum frequencies especially for satellite
communication. In effect, the portion of the
electromagnetic spectrum available for
communication is increasing.
43

Improvements of coaxial and optical cable
and associated electronics make possible a
dramatic expansion of the number of
distinct video and audio signals that can be
brought into the home. For example, in the
1950s and 1960s most coaxial cable systems
carried a maximum of eight to twelve tele¬
vision signals. Now, with approximately fif¬
ty channels on a single cable, we are ap¬
proaching the practical limits of that
transmission technology.
The third element of electronic com¬
munications is the growth of interactivity.
Perhaps the most notable examples in this
case are the increasing significance of
microelectronics in videodisc, teletext and
videotex monitors which allow individual
audience members to edit, scan, replay and
generally control the speed and character of
video and text presentation. Interactive
videodiscs allow viewers to explore still pic¬
tures, graphics and motion video with the
same control they would exercise in con¬
sulting a dictionary or encyclopedia.
The attentive reader has no doubt already
anticipated the conclusion. Falling produc¬
tion and transmission, and display costs, in¬
creased available bandwidth and the
strengthened ability of the audience
member to review and select preferred con¬
tent leads to the concept of narrowcasting.
Narrowcasting, as contrasted with broad¬
casting, focusses attention on communica¬
tion to smaller, special-interest audiences.
The economies of scale, especially in com¬
mercially supported mass communications,
have traditionally been characterized by the
search for the largest possible au¬
diences pursuit of the common in¬
terest and mass appeal. But as new con¬
duits of information and entertainment
grow, demand is likely to expand as well,
and the changing economics is likely to per¬
mit specialized productions of text and
video which more fully reflect the cultural
diversity of their audiences.
Some sceptical observers of new com¬
munications technologies may simply see it
as the renewed dominance of American
popular culture . being reproduced on
Japanese electronics. Such a perspective is
likely to lead to renewed efforts to build bar¬
riers to transnational communications. But
such a posture neglects a special charac¬
teristic of technological development which
could work to the benefit of the Third World
and an increasingly two-way flow of cultural
communications. It might be identified as a
sequential theory of communications
development.
The underlying idea is simply that as
newer (and initially rather expensive)
technologies such as videodisc, teletext,
direct broadcast satellite and cable TV ex¬
pand first in the industrialized nations, de¬
mand for culturally diverse and specialized
programming is likely to outstrip the supply.
This may represent an opportunity for the
more entrepreneurial of nations further
down the development curve to concen¬
trate their efforts on producing and
marketing specialized materials.
It could prove to be the reverse of the
more traditional pattern in which as televi¬
sion and other media are introduced into
developing countries the sudden demand
for content leads to the mass importation of
American and European programming.
There are numerous cultural subcom-
44
munities in the US from Africa, Asia,
Europe, Latin America, and Scandinavia
which would welcome the opportunity to
renew closer ties with specialized news and
traditional culture from their homelands.
It may be true, generally, that in the world
of the twentieth century there is enough
mobility of peoples across cultural and na¬
tional boundaries to justify a quantum leap
in the transmission of specialized content to
the newly settled. As these cultural
materials spill over and are conveniently
available to their new and curious
neighbours, one might expect a lessening of
cultural differences and misunderstanding.
Perhaps this is the global village notion
reborn via cable television.
M Russell Neuman
