THE CULTURAL
COUNTERATTACK
by Maria do Céu Carmo Reis
UNITY
IN
DIVERSITY
...THE
WORLD
IN
MINIATURE
ALGERIA. "The young
bride"; material draped
round a bone framework;
the arms are made of pad¬
ded wood. Height 23 cm.
Photo J. Oster © Musée de l'Homme, Pans
VIETNAM. Hollowed out
gourd suggesting the
human form. Used during
propitiatory ceremonies.
Height 24 cm.
SENEGAL. Corn-cob doll
decorated with cowrie
shells, glass beads and
pieces of metal; carried by
young girls at harvest fes¬
tivals. Height 21.5 cm.
Photo Lemzaouda © /Musée de l'Homme, Pans Photo Lemzaouda © Musée de l'Homme, Paris
THE logic of the relations between
societies, whether they are con-
flictual or complementary, is
governed by the interests of the societies
concerned. When these encounters bet¬
ween societies are determined by the need
to dominate, resulting in social inequality,
exploitation, and war, the social practices
and ideological theories set forth and
ritualized by those in power assume a racist
character. The extent of the phenomenon
is determined by historical circumstances.
Thus the fact that colonial conquest and
occupation have been so widespread in
MARIA DO CEU CARMO REIS Angolan
sociologist, has worked at the Centre for
Angolan Studies, Algeria, and taught at the
Higher Institute of Social Service, Portugal.
She is at present preparing her Doctorate
under the guidance of professor Georges
Balandier at the School of Advanced Studies
in the Social Services, Paris.
28
modern times has given the ideology of
racism an overriding legitimacy, whilst
simultaneously creating the conditions for
its negation.
The earliest reactions against racism,
still only fragmentary and unilateral, occur
within the context of ethnological reflec¬
tions on other peoples who are viewed as
"exotic". Such attitudes were expressed by
the eighteenth-century French school of
political philosophy of which Montesquieu
and Diderot were leading figures, and in
which the foundations of a critical
ethnology can be perceived. At the end of
the nineteenth century and the beginning
of the twentieth, along with the first stirr¬
ings of nationalist movements came
demands from black peoples which found
their fullest expression in a profusion of
universalist movements of political
thought such as pan-Africanism and
cultural movements such as négritude. But
it was not until the end of the Second
World War that the struggle against racism
became universal both in theory and in
practice. This was due to the convergence
of a number of factors.
The self-proclaimed "civilized" West
was astonished by its own barbarity:
Nazism and Jewish genocide raised the
question of racism in deeper and wider
terms than before. The colonized peoples
considered the right to independence the
central factor of the historical process.
Soon Black Americans were claiming a na¬
tional identity on the basis of their ethno-
historical difference. As a result of this
dynamic process, social practices have
emerged, have achieved at certain times
and in certain places an organic unity bet¬
ween "the criticism of arms" and "the
arms of criticism", and have revealed the
full significance of the struggle against
racism.

TURKEY. Doll made of
material draped round a
wooden framework.
Height 33 cm.
JAPAN. "Anesa-
wanyngyo" (Elder Sister);
paper doll with painted
clay face; traditional hair¬
style. Height 17 cm.
SYRIA. Sheep's leg-bone
with face sculpted in light
relief emphasized with
black paint; Roman era.
MALI. Wax doll with
white beads for the eyes
and hair ornaments and a
cotton skirt. Height 13.5
cm.
Photo Lemzaouda © Musée de l'Homme, Pans Photo Lemzaouda © Musée de l'Homme, Pans Photo J Oster © Musée de l'Homme, Pans Photo Lemzaouda © Musée de l'Homme, Pans
BRAZIL. Terra-cotta
doll with body-painting.
The apron is made of
bark. Height 17.5 cm.
Photo Lemzaouda © Musée
de l'Homme, Pans
GREENLAND. Arm¬
less wooden figurine
with typical feminine
hair-style. Height 10.8
cm.
Photo Lemzaouda © Musée
de l'Homme, Pans
The West, which had just emerged from
a devastating war, was primarily concern¬
ed with the problems of social and
economic reconstruction and above all
with the problem of peace. One important
task that lay ahead was that of establishing
institutions which would enable culture,
science, education and the dialogue bet¬
ween nations to play their proper role in a
quest for world-wide coexistence which
would spring from the unity and
multiplicity of cultures. Organizations with
a universal mission such as Unesco were
created. Over the years Unesco has set
forth telling analyses of racism on the basis
of scientific propositions and in the name
of culture. These include the "Statement
on Race" (1950), the "Statement on the
Nature of Race and Race Differences"
(1951), the "Statement on Race and Racial
Prejudice" of 1967, and a Declaration on
Race and Racial Prejudice which was set
forth in 1978. Unesco thus provided tools
for the shaping of polices which could
bring this social evil to an end.
The dynamic of the struggle against
racism was not linear. Changes were in¬
deed taking place in Western societies, but
these societies first had to face the loss of
their vast colonial empires, then far-
reaching social movements (the alternative
culture in the United States, feminist
movements in different parts of the world)
which would raise in both theoretical and
practical terms the question of the complex
and hidden content of racism. The rejec¬
tion of all that is different (ethnic
minorities, women, the old, the young)
stimulated these movements to ask ques¬
tions about the role of culture and of cer¬
tain components of the social fabric which,
in a sense, structure the patterns of think¬
ing, the habits and the behaviour in which
social practices are rooted. These questions
have largely focused on socialization. As a
dynamic means of transmitting cultural
values, education has a prominent role in
this uninterrupted process whereby the in¬
dividual becomes a social being.
In all societies this transmission, far
from being an innocuous process, obeys a
logic according to which the social
mechanisms necessary for preserving the
status quo are reproduced. To examine the
question of education is to examine its
functions and goals, to analyse how it
functions, and to define how it meets its
objectives. It also means contributing to
the process whereby political action and
scientific reflection are brought closer
together. But in addition it means trying to
understand how the individual becomes an
actor in the racist drama not only in terms
of economic and social conditions but in
terms of the psychological and historical
conditions in which his ego is structured.
29

By widening the critical field of racism,
social movements have underscored the
fact that, within the boundaries of a single
nation, cultural unity is actually cultural
multiplicity and that consequently the pro¬
cesses whereby people identify with a
culture are neither homogeneous nor
monolithic. They have also stressed the
fact that in certain historical conditions
identity often conceals a desire to dominate
(as, for example, in the institutional
framework of the relations between men
and women). In these cases the logic of
protest highlights difference and makes it a
necessary element in new cultural forms.
In this context the struggle against racism
makes a specific demand: it takes the form
of the assertion of the right to be different.
National independence movements have
set the concept of culture against the con¬
cept of race. This approach has become a
fundamental element in resistance to col¬
onialism, taking a variety of forms
(political, economic, or armed) depending
on ' the interplay of historical cir¬
cumstances. Analysis of contemporary
texts and documents is illuminating. Thus
Amilcar Cabrai (1921-1973), leader of the'
African Party for the Independence of
Guinea and Cape Verde, analysed in these
terms the problem of cultural resistance in
a changing society which is becoming the
subject of its own history:
"A people which liberates itself from
foreign domination will only be really free
if, without complexes and without
underestimating the importance of the
positive contributions of the oppressor's
culture and of other cultures, it takes the
high road of its own culture which draws
sustenance from the living reality of its en¬
vironment and rejects harmful influences
and any kind of subjection to foreign
cultures. Therefore, it can be seen that if
imperialist domination has a vital need for
practices of cultural oppression, national
liberation is necessarily an act of culture."
In China, Mao Ze Dong defined the im¬
portance of the "cultural front" in this
passage on "fronts of combat":
"We are struggling for the liberation of
the Chinese people on many different
fronts; two of them are the front of the pen
and the front of the sword, in other words
the cultural front and the military front.
To vanquish the enemy, we must first of all
rely on the army which carries the gun. But
this army alone is insufficient; we also need
an army of culture, indispensable to unite
our ranks and to conquer the enemy."
In Algeria, the Congress of La Soum-
mam (1956), in embryonic and deliberately
reticent form, and the Tripoli Programme
(1962) more explicitly, both treated the
question of culture and the role of intellec¬
tuals in the framework of an Islamic
language and thought. The Tripoli Pro¬
gramme went so far as to define the new
culture which should be, it says, "national,
revolutionary and scientific".
Whatever turns these revolutions have
taken, it must be noted that these analyses
all share an acceptance of culture as a key
element in the liberation process which
30
transcends the different presuppositions
underlying them, the different battle¬
grounds from which they came, and any
possible contradictions between the goals
at which they aim. They also introduce a
new set of problems, those of cultural
identity.
Individuals, groups and societies are
producers of works and cultural values
through which they recognize themselves;
this gives them an awareness of belonging
to a culture and of attachment to it. The
link thus forged between the individual
and the group is expressed in language, in
what is held to be sacred, in techniques, in
In this way it is proved that beings con¬
sidered inferior from a racial point of view
are capable of making history, in other
words of thinking and acting on the real
world by transforming it; building new na¬
tions, creating new States, weaving new
social relationships, acting on the world
stage. This has been the practical response
to theories of race and racial inequality. It
is a response which shows that, in the con¬
text of the independence struggle, the com¬
bat against racism is waged through the af¬
firmation of the right to identity.
If in different times and places the strug¬
gle against racism enhances the recognition
All peoples of the world possess equal faculties for attaining the
highest level in intellectual, technical, social, economic, cultural and
political development.
The differences between the achievements of the different peoples are
entirely attributable to geographical, historical, political, economic,
social and cultural factors. Such differences can in fio case serve as a
pretext for any rank-ordered classification of nations or peoples.
Declaration on Race and Racial Prejudice, Unesco, Paris, 1978
social organization, in oral and written
traditions, etc. Each society communicates
with others through this set of cultural
characteristics which makes it unique.
Thus it is through the affirmation of a
cultural identity that the individual can
achieve a better understanding of the
denial of racism by the struggle for in¬
dependence. "The cultural formulation of
nationalism", in this struggle, is expressed
in the affirmation of a form of identity
which restores to the members of the socie¬
ty their role as producers of cultural works.
Their products will take many forms,
depending on the historical context. Here
are some of these forms: the mustering of
men for a parting of the ways which ap¬
peals to the historical memory but which
above all restructures the social arena (the
community dissolved by colonization
rebuilds itself in a different fashion) and
the political arena (the individual becomes
a citizen again and challenges the domi¬
nant power through the organization); the
emergence of a new intellectual whose
work contributes to an understanding of
the contradictions of history (through
political texts, speeches which incite to ac¬
tion, the theorization of revolutionary
practice, the implementation of revolu¬
tionary theories); the creation of new social
relationships in which individuals and
groups take creativity and sociability as the
yardstick of the effectiveness of political
action (the conjunction of human
capacities, desires and needs); and the
establishment of new networks of com¬
munication in which the language despised
by the colonizer again becomes the
favoured medium of social and political
intercourse.
of cultural identity and/or cultural dif¬
ference, and counts on different kinds of
political, social and institutional support, it
nevertheless always appeals to a single con¬
stant: culture and its paradigm, cultural
identity.
Consequently, to reflect on the meaning
of the struggle against racism is, on the one
hand, to note the upheavals it has caused
in patterns of thought, in symbols and
practices of social criticism, and on the
other to ask new questions.
Since each of these struggles is an un¬
folding truth, in a given time and a given
place, account must be taken of each
specific society. Every society always har¬
bours conflicts between hierarchies
because it is differentiated in its economic,
political and social structure. Furthermore,
it often expresses a political culture which
generates systems of power in which the
State dominates the social body, and in
which the civil society cannot assert itself
as a subject of creativity.
History teaches us that theory and prac¬
tice of whatever kind are not consumed in
the arena of a revolution, and that behind
each ruling unit and manipulated by it are
concealed symbols, codes and myths which
attribute to the individual (the leader) and
to the function a nature which is more than
human.
In this context it is impossible .to
dissociate the struggle against racism from
the combat for power and cultural
democracy. This means that in their think¬
ing and in their action individuals and
groups involved in change must challenge
"blind necessity".
Maria do Céu Carmo Reis
