MIXED
METAMORPHOSIS
by Roberto Fernández Retamar
ROBERTO FERNANDEZ RETAMAR,
Cuban poet and essayist, is a professor at
Havana University and directo/ of the
magazine Casa de las Americas. His essays
and anthologies of his poems have been
translated into a number of languages.
IN an article published in the August/
September 1977 issue of the Unesco
Courier, the great Brazilian novelist
Jorge Amado wrote :
"Brazil is a country of racial mix¬
ture. This is an obvious and incon¬
trovertible fact. The Brazilian experi¬
ment is of immense importance in the
search for a solution to the terrible
racial problem that afflicts the world.
For in Brazil the most diverse races
have constantly been mingled. What
Brazilian could honestly claim to be of
'pure' descent in a country where
Iberians, Slavs, Anglo-Saxons and
others have become inextricably mixed
with black and Amerindian peoples
and with Arabs, Jews and Japanese?"
These remarks are equally valid for
the Antilles (with the important addi¬
tion of the Chinese and Indian input)
whose societies developed upon the
framework of the plantation economy
and slave labour. In neither case is mix¬
ing primarily racial; it is above all a
cultural mixing which, going much
deeper than the linguistic pluralism in¬
troduced by the various colonial
powers, includes a lingua franca of
joyful music, convergent mythologies,
and a rhythm and a style of life spring¬
ing from many sources yet with a
character all its own. We Brazilians and
Antilleans, therefore, can and must
present ourselves to the world as ex¬
amples of the integration of mixed
cultures. This is what prompted the
Brazilian scholar Gilberto Freyre to
quip that in his country football was
"more 'Brazilianly' dionysian than
'Britishly' apollonian".
The rich, dramatic history of the
region from the time when, at the end
of the fifteenth century, the Europeans
began to arrive and make it, in the
words of the Dominican writer Juan
Bosch, "a frontier of empire", until to¬
day, has formed the substratum of this
mixing of the peoples who settled there
voluntarily or, more often, under
duress and in widely varying
conditions.
Can it be assumed, then, that
cultural syncretism, so widespread and
indeed so inevitable between us, will
result in the disappearance of racism?
It would be wonderful if we could
answer yes to this question, but we can¬
not. It has been said that, apart from
some very isolated communities such as
certain Inuit (Eskimo) groups in the ex¬
treme north and certain Amazonian In¬
dian tribes, there are no really "pure"
races or cultures in the western
hemisphere. In other words, here, as in
almost every part of the globe today,
intermingling of peoples is the norm;
yet racism has until now survived, in
some notorious cases at a level which is
an affront to human dignity.
The extremely dubious concept of
"race" emerged in the early days of
capitalism as a justification for the col¬
onial depredations without which, and
above all without the terrible scourge
of slavery, as the Trinidadian Eric
Williams has pointed out, capitalism as
we know it would not exist. The word
"race" itself, with the meaning it took
on at that time, did not exist in, any
language and, significantly, had to be
borrowed from zoological ter¬
minology. In its new meaning, cultural
differences, often enormous, were ig¬
nored and an artificial homogeneity
was proclaimed, which caused the
Cuban writer José Martí to declare ir¬
ritably that "there is no racial hatred
because there are no races", and the
Martinican Frantz Fanon to assert that
"the negro" was invented by the
colonizers.
Of course, there are somatic dif¬
ferences of genetic origin which
manifest themselves, either visibly or
not, in a predisposition of resistance to
31

certain diseases, etc. But that is all.
Race does not determine culture,
because it does not determine anything
fundamental. Cultures are created by
man irrespective of race, and if, as
sometimes happens, there is a relation¬
ship between them, what this relation¬
ship implies is that cultures modify
races and not the other way round.
According to the French anthropolo¬
gist, Claude Lévi-Strauss, "all cultures
leave their mark on the body". There is
daily proof of this. One need only walk
through the cities of a still lively
prestigious culture to see that women,
who are much more imaginative than
men in this as in many other matters,
have a habit of piercing their ears in
order to hang all kinds of objects from
them, of painting their lips, cheeks,
eyelashes and fingernails ("they paint
themselves in order to hide
themselves", said the French poet,
Paul Eluard), dress their hair in a varie¬
ty of shapes, remove the hair from
various parts of their bodies, etc. Of
course these cities may be New York,
Paris or London, and the culture in
question is Western culture a syn¬
cretic culture if ever there was one.
Facts of this kind show that one can be
of mixed culture quite apart from racial
integration. The process by which one
arrives at this give-and-take which is an
essential element of all cultural cross-
fertilizations has been felicitously
described by the Cuban writer Fernan¬
do Ortiz as transculturation.
If racial prejudice began as an alleg¬
ed justification for colonialism, then
the intermingling of races or cultures
alone will not put an end to it; what is
required is the eradication of its
original cause, namely, all forms of
colonialism, neo-colonialism, im¬
perialism, and oppression. As long as
one country "belongs" to another, as
long as some men exploit others, no
matter how intense the cross-breeding
or how entertaining the carnival in Rio
or Trinidad, the living humus of racial
prejudice will continue to reproduce
itself.
There are even certain dangers in the
idea that cultural cross-fertilization will
of itself cause racial prejudice to disap¬
pear. We should like to underline two
of these dangers. First of all, there is
the danger of creating, in one way or
another, the impression that, paradox¬
ically, race can be identified with
culture. This implies acceptance of the
theory that, apart from its relatively
unimportant biological condition, race
also has an historical incidence a
theory which prevailed from the days
of Gobineau to those of Hitler.
Secondly, to propose racial integra¬
tion as a solution for racial prejudice
belongs, in the final analysis, to the
realm of illusions like négritude. We
know that this term, whose success is
due to a famous poem written by Aimé
Césaire of Martinique, ended by
creating a new mystification. However,
before it was called by this name,
négritude had a number of undeniably
positive aspects, such as the exaltation
of the negro by men like the Jamaican
Marcus Garvey. It would therefore be
unfair to deny all that we owe to claims
of this kind, insofar as they imposed
respect and admiration for one of our
essential roots. But because of its
subsequent adulteration, the concept
finally lost authority. The vicissitudes
of what started as a noble purpose and
finally became a hostile weapon were
accurately recounted in a recent book,
Bonjour et Adieu à la Négritude, by the
Haitian poet René Depestre.
What really halts racial prejudice is
the frankly anticolonialist and anti-
oppressive attitude of men like the
Puerto Rican Ramón E. Betances, who
has made the great figures of Haiti's
history known to a wider public and is
an apostle of his country's in¬
dependence; Anténor Firmin of Haiti,
who in his work, De l'Egalité des Races
Humaines, published in 1885, declared
that "the anti-philosophical, pseudo-
scientific doctrine of racial inequality
rests exclusively on the idea of the ex¬
ploitation of man by man"; the Cuban
José Martí, whose struggle is well
known and who wrote in 1894 that
"man has no special rights because he
belongs to one race or another. Let us
speak of man, and already we speak of
all rights. Man is more than white,
more than mulatto, more than negro",
or Frantz Fanon of Martinique who
twenty years after his death, is still in
the vanguard of a struggle.
Integration, both racial and cultural,
is certainly an indispensable step on the
road to the eradication of racialism,
but it is not enough. We do not deny
the enormous importance of integra¬
tion. What we do deny is that it can be
regarded as a deus ex machina for
achieving this eradication. Decisive
steps towards putting an end to
racialism can be seen above all in events
such as the extraordinary Haitian
Revolution, which opened the way for
the independence of our America; or
the constitution of nations in the strug¬
gle for independence, as in the case of
Cuba and the Dominican Republic dur¬
ing the second half of the 19th century,
from which emerged leaders like
Gregorio Luperón and Antonio Maceo
who were senior citizens of their respec¬
tive countries and of the world before
they were white, negro or mulatto.
This vital aim has rarely been given
more beautiful expression than in the
immortal poem Madera de Ébano
("Ebony"), by the Haitian Jacques
Roumain:
Africa I have remembered you,
Africa, you are within me
like the splinter in the wound
like the protective fetish in the heart
of the village... However,
I only want to belong to your race
peasant workers of all lands.
It is in this spirit of fraternal struggle
that man (in the Antilles and
throughout the world) is moving for¬
ward towards unity without losing his
plurality, which we prefer to call his
richness and which will express itself in
the most varied colours, rhythms,
music and dreams. By force of habit,
the term "white" is applied in¬
discriminately to pale-skinned, blonde-
haired, clear-eyed Nordics and to olive-
skinned, black-haired, dark-eyed
Mediterranean men. A superior stage
will be reached when even the very
word "race" will be forgotten or
restored to its zoological origin, and
from one end of the world to the other,
as if it were the most natural thing, we
shall repeat the still arresting words of
José Martí: "Our fatherland is
humanity."
Roberto Fernández Retamar
The paradox of the human race is that its unity and its progress
are dependent upon the diversity of the individuals and groups of
which it is composed. The cord that binds all branches of mankind
together, our common humanity, is too strong to be broken yet
yielding enough to allow each group or culture the liberty to make
its own contribution to the universal edifice. Right, the central
pillar and framework of a house of the Djerma people of western
Niger.
32
Photo ©J F Schiarro, Sceaux, France

..
s
IV
