The great river
flows east
by Bai Hua
With a population of 10 million, Shanghai is China's commercial metropolis and one of the world's biggest seaports. Above, view
over the Su Chou river near the point where it meets the Huang-pu-Chiang, a tributary of the Yangtze.
/ live at the head
Of the Yangtze River,
You at its mouth
Far, far away.
I long to see you, but this cannot be
Though I miss you every day.
And every day we drink
Both from the same river.
THIS poem, written in the elev¬
enth century by a Chinese
poet called Li Zhiyi, brings
back to me many a childhood dream
full of tender feelings. I read it first
before I was six years old, and since
then the Yangtze, the Chang Jiang
(Long River) as the Chinese call it, has
flowed like a poem through my heart.
In my child's imagination the
Yangtze was like an embroidered silk
ribbon meandering between dark green
mountains. At the head of the river, so
the poem goes, lives a beautiful girl and
at its mouth a handsome young man.
Day and night each yearns for but can¬
not see the other, though they always
fetch water from the same river.
The Yangtze flows on towards the
east, carrying with it the girl's pas¬
sionate longings. In the ripples of the
river her lover can see the girl's slim
shadow, and in the splash of its waters
hear her gentle whispers. How did they
get to know each other? And why are
they now separated? Was there no
small boat that could bring them
together? These questions kept nagging
away at me, the puzzle of my childhood
and adolescent dreams.
In the summer of 1938, when I was
eight, my family moved to Wuhan, a ci¬
ty at the confluence of the Han Jiang
and the Yangtze which was formed
from the merger of three once separate
towns. Not until then did I see the great
river for the first time. She was longer
and wider then I had expected, with
many steamboats, junks and tiny I
35

fishing boats which, I feared, might be
swallowed up in her terrifying waves.
I became more worried about the
lovers of the poem, for the people
aboard the steamboat were so
ferocious that I felt sure that they
would refuse them a place aboard.
Alas, perhaps they would never meet
again!
What made things worse that sum¬
mer was the situation in Wuhan, where
agitation was spreading like wildfire.
At that time the iron heel of the invader
was trampling the Central Plains and
fierce aerial combats were going on
night and day over Wuhan. The patriot
composer Xian Xinghai was rousing
the people to fever pitch with his songs
of national salvation.
Thousands took to the streets and
built huge floating stages on the
Yangtze by mooring boats together.
There everyone was a singer and all had
tears in their eyes. Gradually the
seething crowds and the turbulent river
. merged into one torrent in my young
heart.
Almost half a century has passed
since then, but today I can still hear the
singing of the crowds feverish singing
that sounds like the raging waves and
raging waves that sound like feverish
singing. The memory always brings me
new strength; but it also raises another
question: in the long river of human
history, what role should one play? The
Yangtze River is no longer the em¬
broidered silk ribbon of my tender
childish dreams, but the symbol of a
great nation that has experienced
numerous sufferings and catastrophes.
Since the early 1950s, I have travelled
several times on horseback along the
Jinsha River, a stretch of the upper
reaches of the Yangtze. I have seen with
my own eyes the great length of the
river as well as the twists and bends and
powerful resistance she faces on her
course. Above all, I have witnessed the
river's great strength and bravery.
The Yangtze rises among the glaciers
of the Geladandong, the main peak of
the Tanggula Mountains in west China.
Here it is known as the Toutou River,
which can be thought of as the
Yangtze's infant name. Over the next
stretch it is called the Tongtian River,
and further on it becomes the Jinsha
River which rushes down the Qinghai-
Tibet plateau into Yunnan Province.
The Guadalquivir
O Guadalquivir!
At Cazorla your cradle,
At Sanlúcar your bier.
You were a bubbling of spring water
Under a green pine 's shade;
How fine your song, how full of
[laughter.
Brackish as you near the sea
Do your muddy waters,
Like me, dream of their beginnings?
Antonio Machado
Along the east side of the snow-clad
Baima Mountain (White Horse Moun¬
tain) the Jinsha rolls through a rocky,
barren canyon, the Ghost Canyon as
the local Tibetans call it. Of course, the
real creator of the canyon is not a ghost
but the mighty roaring torrent.
From Shigu (Stone Drum), a small
town in Yunnan, the Jinsha enters the
deep gorges of the Hengduan Moun
tains, and there the river is abruptly
forced to veer north-east, forming an
oddly-shaped loop known as the "First
Bend of the Yangtze River". After this
sharp turn the river has once again to
churn its way through a narrow,
sixteen-kilometre-long valley between
perpendicular cliffs and snowy moun¬
tains. This valley is called "Tiger's
Leap Canyon" and is less than thirty
metres wide at its narrowest point.
Legend has it that a fierce tiger can leap
across the canyon here.
The river flow here is fast and
furious and keeps up a constant rumble
like thunder. Every time I lead a horse
fearfully climbing the cliffs of Tiger's
Leap Canyon to the sound of its
deafening torrents I become lost in a
long reverie. I think this must be reac¬
tion to an obstacle, submission to a set¬
back that cannot be avoided. For the
strong, however, a setback is simply an
opportunity for self-assessment and for
building up strength for the next
advance.
Having backtracked northwards for
nearly a hundred kilometres, the Jinsha
abruptly forces its way south again for
more than two hundred kilometres
before it resumes its course towards the
east.
An ancient story of the local Naxi
people says that the Jinsha is the most
beautiful of the three sister rivers, the
Jinsha, the Nujiang and the Lancang,
that flow in the region of the Hengduan
Mountains. There a rude, unreasonable
and overbearing prince, the snow¬
capped Yulong (Jade Dragon) moun¬
tain, intends to stop the Jinsha from
passing through. But when Yulong is
asleep, the beautiful girl sneaks round
him and runs away laughing softly.
Not far from the city of Su-Zhou (Soochow), which Europeans
named "the Venice of China" because of its interlacing canals
and streets, a woman and her two daughters haul their boat
along the Grand Canal.
The Yangtze River near Wu-han, capital
of Hupeh province. The famous bridge,
built between 1955 and 1957, is 1,670
metres long.

It is no wonder that kind-hearted
people always try to imagine bright and
happy endings to alleviate the hard¬
ships of some of life's gloomy
experiences.
In the early 1950s, I once saw some
slaves in chains labouring on the moun¬
tain slopes at the place where the Jinsha
river turns south. At that time, people
of the Yi minority in the Xaioliang
Mountains were still living in a typical
slave society.
Even now, on the east bank of the
Jinsha and around Lake Lugu, about
ten thousand Mosuo people still
tenaciously maintain ancient, idyllic
forms of matrilinear society and ahshu
(friend) marriage, now rarely seen in
other parts of the world. What really
links a woman and a man is neither
worldly goods nor their own children,
but pure love. Both the elderly and the
children in a matrilinear society are
looked after by other members of their
family. Despite the fact that there are
usually quite a number of people in one
family, they all manage to live in
harmony.
The Magdalena
On the hard Magdalena,
long project of sea,
isles offeather and sand
crow in the sunlight (...)
Green-black and green-green,
the elastic, tense forest,
snakes and wanders in a dream,
moves and reflects
(...)
Ports with dark open arms
children with swollen bellies
and watchful eyes.
Hunger. Oil, cattle...
Nicolás Guillen
As we follow the course of the long,
long river we can see the heavy foot¬
prints in time of the Chinese people's
painful, slow advance.
When the river enters Sichuan Pro¬
vince, it becomes navigable. But even
today boatmen can still be seen hauling
boats up the river, as described in a
poem by Li Bai (Li Po), a great poet of
the Tang Dynasty:
"Struggling exhausted against
[contrary winds".
Those stone slabs lining the river,
once coarse and rugged, were polished
smooth by our forefathers' bare feet.
Although we are now able to make jet
planes, rockets, ships and tractors, we
still cannot afford to replace those
sweating boatmen or to abandon the
wooden hoes or the yoked-oxen plough
used by our ancestors before the Chris¬
tian era to cultivate vast farmlands.
The Yangtze the right breast of our
mother has nurtured with her milk
the fertile land that makes up more
than half the Chinese continent. From
time immemorial, many sages have
drunk of that sweet milk. Some two
thousand years ago, the poet Qu Yuan
walked the shores of a lake adjoining
the Yangtze while composing his
glorious poems; Li Bai and Du Fu,
great poets of the Tang Dynasty
(618-907 AD), each in turn wandered
along the river bank like lone gulls, giv¬
ing vent to their sorrows in chanting
and weeping. Li Bai finally fell into the
river when trying to catch the shadow
of the moon in its deep waters. Oh what
a beautiful, sad tomb he found for
himself!
The river sings her way through the
Three Gorges, and then an extensive
plain unfolds ahead. Here, suddenly,
the Yangtze calms down and her waters
flow quietly. The river grows wider,
stronger and more confident. She is
musing on the long course she has
taken, a course full of twists and
frustrations. She recalls how she has
built up her strength, absorbing waters
from hundreds of streams and rivers.
Now she flows steadily, mightily to the
sea, to the outside world, carrying with
her melted snow from the glaciers,
flowers from the grasslands on the
banks of the Tongtian River, golden
sand from the Jinsha River, beads of
sweat from the faces of the heaving
boatmen, the moonlight on Lake
Tongding, the lights of the fishing
boats on Lake Panyang and the
fragrance of rice from the Jianghan
Plain.
The bright blue East China Sea
warmly embraces the outflowing river,
swirling down and down. In the end,
the Yangtze becomes merged in the sea,
losing her individuality. No, she has
just changed. No, she has found
herself. No, no, she has fulfilled
herself. Now she is no longer the
Yangtze, but part of the sea which links
all the great rivers that have nurtured
the nations of the world: the Mississip¬
pi, the Amazon, the' Congo, the Nile,
the Danube, the Volga, the Ganges.
This is why I look upon my worries
and moments of depression as hap¬
piness. I am truly proud to "drink from
the same river", all my life, as millions
of my fellow countrymen.
The great river flows towards the
east, towards the sea. Every morning,
the wave there pushes the red, red sun
out of the surface of the bright blue sea.
Bai Hua
Photos (n Schulthess, Switzerland
The town of Fu Ling (population 40,000) stands on the confluence of the Yangtze and
the Wu Chiang. These great rivers are major trade routes for such regional products as
cereals, tung oil, lacquer and citrus fruits.
r
Â^ Or i
