Photo © Cliff Hawkins, New Zealand
Under full sail, the thoni "Maria Antoraj" leaves Bombay for the port of Veraval, Gujarat State.
30

PATTAMAR BATEL



The dhow: queen of the
Indian Ocean
by Cliff Hawkins
A thousand years before the birth ofMuhammad (570 AD),
Arab seamen were sailing the waters ofthe Gulf in a new type
of vessel, a broad-beamed shallow-draught, lateen-rigged
craft known to us today under the generic name of the dhow.
Taking advantage of the monsoon winds, the dhow, in all its
local variants, soon became the queen of the Indian Ocean.
THE dhow can justly claim to be the traditional craft of
the Indian Ocean. Precursors of the dhow are believ¬
ed to have plied their trade from the Gujarat ports of
Cambay and Ghogha to Persia (Iran) and Iraq between 2500
and 1500 BC. Long before the Portuguese arrived in the In¬
dian Ocean Arab dhows were trading through the Malabar
ports of Calicut, Cochin and Quilon with Malacca, China and
the Indies. Two great religions spread to present-day In¬
donesia and beyond as a result of Arab and Indian trade with
the East, the Muslims introducing the Islamic faith about the
twelfth century and the Hindus their religion even earlier.
During the twelfth century the Omanis settled in Zanzibar,
so that when Alfonso de Albuquerque sailed into the Indian
Ocean in 1 507 it was the Omani empire that the Portuguese
had to conquer. In the meantime the speedy dhow was play¬
ing its part in the thriving Arab slave trade, and the Gulf har¬
boured fleets of Omani dhows equipped for warfare.
India's Malabar Coast is the last stronghold of the old
style sailing dhows. Owing to the vagaries of the weather
their trade is seasonal, as it always has been; but between
the months of November and April the sea becomes alive
with white cotton sails dotting the horizon as though a
regatta were in progress.
CLIFFORD W. HAWKINS, ofNew Zealand, is an authority on dhows and
has written widely on maritime history and seafaring. In addition to The
Dhow (1980), his published works include Argosy of Sail: a Photographic
History (1981) and Praus of Indonesia (1982).
Only in recent times, with the introduction of diesel
power, have dhows become less reliant on the seasonal
monsoon changes for their voyaging, but even with engines
they are still compelled to cease operations during periods
when storms of great severity are liable to strike with little
or no warning. Indeed practically all the west coast ports of
India are closed to shipping during the south-west monsoon.
But no matter what the season the dhow world continues to
embrace, like a crescent moon, the Arabian Sea from the
Comoro Isles to East Africa, the Red Sea, South Arabia and
the Gulf, right down the Indian sub-continent, taking in
Lakshadweep (formely the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amin-
divi Islands), the Maldive and Andaman Islands.
In time one learns the difference between a pattamar and
a padao or batel, or whether a dhow comes from Kutch to
the north of Bombay or from Mangalore to the south. No
longer, unfortunately, does one have occasion to
distinguish between an Indian kotia and an Arabian baghla
since the last of the baghlas with their intricately carved
transoms disappeared from service some forty or more
years ago. Sadly too, very few of the older type of kotia with
carved transom remain. Replacing them is a strikingly smart
craft, very différent in character, but still called a kotia and,
in common with the earlier craft, carrying at its stemhead a
parrot-head image, looking inboard. This motif, looking out
ahead instead of inboard, is also carried by the padaos that
frequent the Bombay area, especially Mahim Bay where
they discharge gravel for the building industry under the
shadow of an old Mogul fort.
Sambuks and zarooks are the predominant types of dhow
in the Red Sea area, booms, jalbauts and shewès in the Gulf
and batels, battelas, as well as thonis, on India's west
coast. There are numerous motor dhows too, particularly of
the boom and dhangi type. And one must not forget all the
various individual local craft that appear like a page from the iv
SAMBUK ZAROOK
31

. past such as the East African jehazis and the odams of
Lakshadweep.
Until a few years ago the Maldives owned their own fleet
of lovely kotias as did Colombo. The seamen of
Lakshadweep continue to sail their odams, vessels that
have their planking fastened together with coconut fibre or
coir in the traditional manner. The only dhows seen in Sri
Lanka these days are the thonis from Tuticorin across the
Palk Strait and, of course, the numerous fishing
catamarans.
The hulls of craft built throughout the Indian Ocean area
traditionally had their timbers dowelled and sewn together
as iron fastenings were unknown until their introduction
from Europe in the tenth century. The method of sewing the
planks of a hull together with coconut fibre can still be
observed in the few remaining Omani bedans and in a
number of Indian batels and pattamars are well as the
Lakshadweep odams. The pattamars are remarkably com¬
modious craft and, being undecked, are capable of carrying
enormous loads of timber from the Malabar coast to Bom¬
bay. They rank among the largest dhows trading under sail
alone at the present time.
Dhows have long ceased to operate on India's eastern
seaboard where road transport has completely taken over.
The configuration of much of the west coast, though, dif¬
fers greatly from that of the east and the more difficult
Malabar country will no doubt help to preserve the dhow
trade there for many more years despite the bridging of
rivers. Bulk cargoes are more conveniently carried by dhow,
particularly silica sand, sent to Bombay for the manufacture
of glass, tiles and timber. Other cargoes vary from cement
to mangoes and coconuts.
Among the largest of all the Indian dhows that make long
coastal voyages are the thonis from Tuticorin. They evolved
from a barge that was introduced into the southern port
many years ago to convey cargo between ship and shore,
there being no deep-water berth at the time, ocean-going
vessels having to remain anchored out in the roadstead.
The hull is sharp at both ends with straight stem and
stern-posts only slightly angled. It is painted all over black
with a white ribband a little below the deckline and large
registration numbers at the bow and stern. An unusual
feature is that the yards and sails are arranged so that the
vessel can go about when changing from one tack to
another instead of "wearing ship" as other dhows do. A
number are three-masted and the mizzen always carries a
small European-type gaff sail.
A unique characteristic of the crew of a thoni is that its
members, almost without exception, are of the Roman
Catholic faith, and in the forecastle where they sleep, right
in the bows below deck, you will find a wick lamp always
burning before a Madonna. Here is visible evidence of a
religion introduced to India by the Portuguese in the seven¬
teenth century. The crews of most other Indian dhows are,
however, either Hindus or Muslims. A Hindu dhow master
is known as a tindel and his crewmen are khalasis. The
Muslim master is a nakhoda, by which name he is known in
all Arabian vessels. His crew go by various names according
to the area from which they come.
How different is the Arabian scene where it is rarely possi¬
ble to observe a dhow carrying a sail much larger than a
pocket handkerchief. Even so, the hull design of the Arabian
craft closely resembles that of the dhows that sailed over a
century ago, indicating that in Arabian waters modern
technology has gone hand in hand with traditional crafts¬
manship instead of altogether opposing it.
One comes across some fine examples of mariners' art in
the dhows. At one time it was seen in the intricate transom
carving of the Indian kotias and Arabian baghtas, but, with
the demise of both types of dhow, paintwork has become
more popular. The upper hull strakes of the newer kotias are
often brightly hued and the transom stern turned into a pic¬
ture gallery or ornamented with floral design work of excep¬
tional beauty. In Arabia, particularly with the zarooks and
sambuks, ornamentation is more of a geometric nature. It is
by such decor that a dhow's origin or ownership can be
determined that, the shape of the hull, and the crew who
man her.
Because a dhow as a sailing ship was, and still is, a thing
of great beauty, all the hard work associated with it is rarely
thought of. As a diversion from their lot the Arab dhowmen
resorted to music and when entering or leaving port they ex¬
pressed their pleasure in a noisy orchestration of drums and
conch shells the like of which is not to be heard today. But
crews still chant away whenever there is a tedious task at
hand, perhaps applying shahamu (a grease and lime mix¬
ture) to a hull to protect it from the teredo shipworm or call¬
ing for strength when some heavy hauling is required.
Maybe one day we shall see dhow regattas or perhaps
some nautical festival in an effort to preserve a maritime
past. This could be an extension to existing museum ac¬
tivities. What about it Mombasa, Kuwait or Doha?
Cliff Hawkins
DHANCI
32
Drawings *- Hawkins, Edita, Lausanne
