FINLAND
Women in the limelight
UNTIL quite recently, the ap¬
pearance of a woman on the
stage was considered a
strange and even suspect pheno¬
menon. Shakespeare's great female
roles were created to be played by
men. When women were finally able
to play them, the enthusiasm arising
from this innovation led to excesses:
scripts were loaded with purple
passages, casts were swollen with
supplementary female characters
and plays were on occasions padded
with new episodes and even given
dénouements other than those con¬
ceived by their authors.
Primitive theatrical tradition, based
on folklore, was also linked primarily
to the world of men, with allusions to
hunting and war, and was acted out
by men. There was one exception
the famous Finno-Ugrian wailers. For
a long time, they prefigured the
future actors of Finnish drama. The
wailer communicated powerful feel¬
ings of sadness and despair to the
rest of the gathering and, although
her frenetic lamentation was based
on a model handed down from
generation to generation, it was part¬
ly improvised and was therefore a
personal interpretation. In playing
her lyrical role, a professional wailer
could arouse in the gathering a wave
of collective emotion when faced
with the dead and death or during the
ritual of marriage.
It was during the seventeenth cen¬
tury that women started to appear on
stage in Europe. Many actresses
followed the example of the famous
German actress Caroline Neuberg.
At that time, a woman who wanted
to be an actress had to leave her
family, start by playing breech roles,
and then marry a partner or the direc¬
tor of the troupe.
In Scandinavia, the influence of
foreign theatre first made itself felt
through itinerant troupes. These
troupes had to fight against hunger
and poverty for the theatre was not
highly regarded, especially in
religious circles which set the
fashion by considering the theatre as
a source of depravation. In order to
survive in this unfavourable social
climate they had to display a great
1RMELI NIEM1, of Finland, is professor of
comparative literature and drama al the Univer¬
sity of Turku and a research professor of the
Academy of Finland. A Ihealre critic, she has
published several studies on Finnish and Euro¬
pean drama.
36
by Irmeli Niemi
deal of cohesiveness. They were fre¬
quently family concerns in which the
father, the mother and the children
worked together.
The rise of the nationalist move¬
ment in nineteenth-century Finland
sparked a passionate desire to create
a Finnish national theatre. Students
started putting on short plays for a
limited public. Aleksis Kivi
(1834-1872) began writing the first
plays in Finnish of real artistic value.
He was, however, opposed to having
female roles played by male students
and this caused serious problems.
Finally, a famous Swedish-born ac¬
tress, Charlotte Raa, who had not
really mastered the Finnish language
but who was inspired by a desire to
foster Finnish culture, undertook the
first major role in Finnish. The perfor¬
mance, given in 1870, gave the
necessary fillip to the Finnish theatre
which soon acquired the status of a
highly-valued art form actively prac¬
tised by all social groups. Referring
to Charlotte Raa's courageous initia¬
tive, Aleksis Kivi wrote that "lacking
men's fatuous self-satisfaction,
women usually accomplish what
they set out to do".
Before the turn of the century, in
all the Scandinavian countries, great
actresses had a remarkable influence
on the fortunes of the theatre and in¬
spired many young playwrights. Dur¬
ing the "naturalism" period, the
theatre helped to highlight many
social problems. The status allotted
to women by society became,
through the theatre, the subject of
general and occasionally heated
discussion. In this connexion, no
play has stirred as much passion as
Ibsen's A Doll's House. A hundred
years ago the character of Nora was
at the centre of the argument as to
whether it was possible for a woman
to make decisions about her own life,
her duties and her responsibilities.
At the end of the nineteenth cen¬
tury, following in Ibsen's footsteps,
Minna Canth, "the harsh Amazon of
literature" as she was called, wrote
plays depicting uncompromisingly
the wretched condition of working
women tormented by unfaithful,
drunken men. She also exposed the
hypocrisy of the rich and the engrain¬
ed, superficial ways of the bour¬
geoisie, although she subsequently
adopted a more conciliatory line,
recommending family solidarity and
mutual tolerance.
The scathing force of her works
was not appreciated by all. The
management of the theatre which
staged her revolutionary play
Children of a Harsh Destiny cut short
its run fearing that the author's ideas
would spark off agitation and revolt
among the people. In this play Canth
portrays various categories of
women mothers, wives and re¬
jected mistresses while the male
characters were good-for-nothings
modelled on Zola characters or
liberating heroes reminiscent of
Schiller's Brigands.
The agrarian matriarchy of Finnish
society, that peasant cultural tradi¬
tion dominated by strong women,
was portrayed in a remarkable man¬
ner in the plays of Hella Wuolijoki at
the beginning of this century. Her
series of five plays focusses on the
history of the country estate of
Niskavuori and lays bare the violent
moral and economic conflicts
smouldering under the apparent
serenity of country life. The
characters speak of life in Finland in
a universal and easily communicable
manner and Wuolijoki's plays have
been performed in several countries,
including the Soviet Union and the
United Kingdom.
Wuolijoki was also politically ac¬
tive and circumstances brought her
into contact with Bertold Brecht.
When the exiled German author and
his companions arrived in Finland she
welcomed them into her house. This
meeting led to a collaborative project
the outcome of which was Mr. Pun-
tila and his Hired Man Matti, her own
version of which Wuolijoki published
in Finnish.
Finnish women playwrights of to¬
day, like Eeva Liisa Manner in her
work Burnt Sienna Land, are often
concerned with the problems of
young girls. Pirkko Sáisio's works
depict the hidden face of the con¬
temporary welfare society. Accor¬
ding to Saisio, women do not suc¬
ceed in life because they are unable
to set themselves well-defined ob¬
jectives. But, for her, there is no
direct relation of cause and effect
between the unscrupulousness of
men and the weakness of women,
such as is portrayed in naturalistic
plays. Even while defending women,
Saisio also sees man as a victim of
circumstances; the faceless econo¬
mic forces that exert pressure within
society do not distinguish between
the sexes.
Although in Finland plays written
by women are still often produced by
men, they tend to arouse particular
interest in women directors who are
also often involved in producing new

interpretations of plays belonging to
the great European theatre tradition.
Shakespeare has always fascinat¬
ed women. During the 1 920s, for ex¬
ample, EIN Tompuri drew inspiration
from Sarah Bernhardt's work for her
production of Hamlet. And a few
years ago, at the Kom theatre in
Finland, the director Laura Jantti
transformed Shakespeare's The
Tempest presenting it as a power
struggle among women pro¬
tagonists. This interpretation was, in
fact, a criticism of extremist
feminism and aimed to demonstrate
that power corrupts regardless of
whether it is held by a woman or a
man. Laura Jantti added a
psychoanalytic and mythocritical
touch Prospero's island symbolized
both the subconscious and the total¬
ity of the world to which man is link¬
ed by his thoughts and by his acts.
The contribution to drama of
women who have gained renown in
recent years in various sectors of the
theatre has been more autonomous
than in the past and has been
courageously progressive. At the
same time, conflict has emerged bet¬
ween objectives and reality; there is
not always enough work for ac¬
tresses and programming policies do
not always allow women to expound
or to impose their point of view. This
has led to the creation of permanent
or temporary women's theatre
groups ranging from the militant
feminist informative theatre to the
one-person monologue theatre.
Laura Jantti's daring
feminist production of
Shakespeare's The Tem¬
pest, staged at the KOM
theatre, Helsinki. In Jant¬
ti's interpretation. The
Tempest is the chronicle
of a power struggle
among women.
Photo © KOM Theatre, Helsinki
Many actresses would like to play
more interesting roles than the Euro¬
pean theatre, often subject to purely
financial goals, is able to offer.
Unless strenuous personal and col¬
lective efforts are made the woman
in the theatre will continue to be an
office employee, a ticket vendor, a
make-up girl or a prompter, or, if she
is in the cast, merely a foil for the
male actor, restricted to the role of a
sex object.
Nevertheless, women's field of ac¬
tion in the theatre today is no longer
so restricted or so tied to certain
types of role as in the past; on the
contrary, it encompasses the whole
range of artistic expression that the
world of the theatre affords.
37
