The islands
of Cape Verde
by Elisa Andrade
18
SPREAD out like a crescent in the
Atlantic Ocean some 600 kilo¬
metres off the coasts of Mauri¬
tania and Senegal, the Cape Verde
Islands form two clusters named from
their position relative to the prevalent
north-east wind: the Windward
Islands, comprising Santa Antäo, Säo
Vicente, Santa Luzia, Säo Nicolau,
Sal and Boa Vista and the islets of
Branco and Razo, and the Leeward
Islands, consisting of Maio, Säo
Tiago, Fogo and Brava, and the three
Rombo islets.
The history of Cape Verde is rooted
in the history of Portuguese colonial
expansion. Many Portuguese
historians and chroniclers maintain
that the Islands were discovered bet¬
ween 1460<and 1462 in the course of
two successive voyages. Oral tradi¬
tion, supported by certain Portuguese
sources, has it that the Island of Säo
Tiago was inhabited by Wolofs, who
ended up there after civil wars on the
mainland, and the Island of Sal (Salt
Island) by Lebu, Serer and Felup
peoples, attracted there by its salt¬
pans. However, these settlers were
too few in number to resist the Por¬
tuguese penetration.
The difficulty of growing the cereals
to which the Portuguese were ac¬
customed on the poor soil and in the in¬
hospitable climate of the Islands,
coupled with Portugal's low population
level, acted as a brake on European
settlement of Cape Verde. In June
1466 therefore, to provide a further in¬
centive to settlement. King Alfonso of
Portugal (1432-1481) granted the set¬
tlers a Charter of Privileges. His brother
Fernando, to whom he had made a gift
of the Islands, was also granted
jurisdiction in civil and criminal affairs
over all the "Moors, Blacks and
Whites", whether freemen or slaves,
provided that they were Christians. At
the same time, the settlers were
granted, in perpetuity, the right to
trade and to deal in slaves throughout
the entire region from the River
Senegal to Sierra Leone, with the ex¬
ception of the Arguin Bay area, which
was a Crown monopoly.
ELISA ANDRADE, of Cape Verde, specializes
in socio-economics and planning for develop¬
ment. She completed herpost-graduate studies at
the University of Algiers and the African In¬
stitute ofEconomic Development and Planning,
Dakar. The author of a number of articles on
socio-economic problems, she is at present
preparing a doctorate in History and Civilization
at the University of Paris VII.
The Charter enabled the settlers to
organize the slave trade which was to
provide manpower both for the col¬
onial development of the Islands and
for export to the slave markets of Brazil
and the West Indies.
The distance from metropolitan Por¬
tugal, the difficulty of communication
between the Islands, and the virtually
complete absence of European women
immigrants, favoured a process of
racial intermingling which is now evi¬
dent in about ninety per cent of the
population.
Throughout its history, right up to
the eve of independence in 1 975, Cape
Verde was the hub of Portuguese ex¬
pansion in ail its varied forms. Thus,
after the abolition of slavery in 1876,
the export of contract labourers replac¬
ed that of slaves. And after the Con¬
ference of Berlin in 1885, which con¬
firmed the division of the African conti¬
nent between the Western European
colonial powers, officials of the col¬
onial administrative corps gradually
replaced the pioneer settlers, the slave
traders and the merchants.
Before the days of the steamship
and radio communications, islands
scattered along the continental coasts
played an essential role in the develop¬
ment of long-distance navigation and
trade. Owing to its geographical posi¬
tion, halfway between the African con¬
tinent, Europe and the Americas, and
on the route to the East, Cape Verde
was destined, from the beginning, to
become a cross-roads of commerce
and the slave trade and to be a water¬
ing and supply point for shipping. The
colonial development policy of Cape
Verde was, therefore, based on its
geo-political and strategic position.
By introducing slave labour into the
Islands, the settlers were able to create
a dual agricultural system, one produc¬
ing cereals, vegetables and fruit for in¬
ternal consumption, and the other pro¬
ducing cash crops for export, such as
cotton, sugar cane and wine.
Towards the middle of the sixteenth
century, slaves expert in the weaving
of pagnes (African loin-cloths) were
imported and their output, much in de¬
mand by slave traders, was used prin-
rVoa"y 'n barter for the acquisition of
slaves from the continent.
Horses, donkeys, goats, pigs, and
cows were introduced into the Islands
to provide fresh and salted meat and
hides for sale to visiting ships and,
later, for export.

ROUTES OF SLAVERY
Map shows routes of slave
ships which transported
their cargoes from the
west coast of Africa to the
Americas via the Island of
Säo Tiago, in the Cape
Verde archipelago.
Map © All Rights Reserved
The boundaries on this map do not imply
official endorsement or acceptance by
Unesco or the United Nations.
c?
Antilles
O
MAURITANIA
Santiago (Sâo Tiago)
LIBERIA
Säo Tiago was the main slave depot
from whence slaves were exported to
the Canaries, Portugal and Spain, and
later to the West Indies and Brazil.
Ships sailing the rivers of Guinea in
search of slaves were obliged to call in
at the Islands to pay the royal tax.
Cape Verde was also a virtually
obligatory port of call at which all long¬
distance shipping had to stop to take
on water and other provisions. In
1 497, Vasco de Gama's "armada", en
route for the East, dropped anchor at
Ribeira Grande (today Cidade Velha) to
take on supplies of water and food.
Three years later came Pedro Alvares
Cabrai, on his way to Brazil. And in
1 522, the Islands were visited by the
ships of Fernäo de Magalhäes
(Magellan) on their historic circum¬
navigation of the world.
From the middle of the sixteenth
century, French ships from Senegal,
Gorée and Benin called in to buy provi-
sions and slaves which they later sold
in their American colonies; English,
Dutch and Spanish ships, on their way
to India, also called in for supplies.
This was a period in which, with the
development of commerce, shipping
and the slave trade, the property-
owning classes of Cape Verde flourish¬
ed and grew rich. But this was soon to
be followed by the decline of slave-
based societies.
During the period of the enforced
union of Portugal with Spain
(1 580-1 640), the Spanish took advan¬
tage of the Portuguese colonial policy.
By deviating the slave trade towards
the West Indies they freed the slave
ships from the obligation to call in at
Säo Tiago to pay the royal tax, and the
Islands thus lost one of their main
sources of revenue.
Other measures and other historical
events had a crippling effect on the in¬
terests of the Cape Verde elite: they
were forbidden to deal in certain pro¬
ducts essential for the acquisition of
slaves, the slave-trading areas con¬
tracted, there were frequent attacks
by French and English pirates, the Por¬
tuguese empire was reduced, to the
area which today is Guinea-Bissau,
and trade was monopolized by the
great trading companies established
from 1 664 onwards; the total abolition
of slavery was to be the final blow.
Elisa Andrade
Left, salt is an important product on
the island of Sal, Cape Verde Islands.
19
_*	-3
