MALICE THROUGH
THE
LOOKING-GLASS
Greek migrant workers en route
for Venice where they will take
the train for a destination in the
Federal Republic of Germany.
According to a report by the
OECD (Organization for
Economic Co-operation and
Development) there were
4,629,779 migrants in the
Federal Republic of Germany in
1981, 900,906 in Switzerland,
and 4,223,928 in France.
Photo ILO, Geneva
by Thhar Ben Jelloun
NATURE has created differences;
society has turned them into in¬
equalities. A comprehensive ap¬
paratus of justification has been fashion¬
ed in the course of time and brandished
like a shield against the truth of nature
and culture. Its constant feature has been
and still is the evaluation of other people
according to their skin; the conclusion is
drawn from the skin, which clothes and
covers the human being, not that there is
a diversity of values but that there is a
hierarchy in the quality of beings. In
other words, an attempt is made to reach
their innermost being and degrade it with
a look if not to reject them outright.
Slavery has often functioned on this
negation. But if this domination of man
by man has been abolished in law (and
some States did not abolish slavery until
the 1960s!), feeling contempt for others
on the grounds that they belong to a cer¬
tain group or religion, the subjective
basis and foundation of racism, is still
very much a part of the mental land¬
scape. Thanks to the economic crisis, it is
even making increasing headway. It con¬
tinues and diversifies its operations. Thus
colonial dispossession succeeded the
slave trade, and today, long after in¬
dependence, it still continues "at
home", as Sartre said. Migration was a
corollary of colonial occupation of which
it is now the sequel, if not its ambiguous
and less manifest form.
In addition to the political and
economic problems raised by immigra¬
tion in Europe, there is the less visible but
cardinal cultural problem. It arises both
in the host society, which avoids it, and in
the immigrant community which does
TAHAR BEN JELLOUN, Moroccan writer
and journalist, has divided his time between
France and his native country since 1971.
Among his published works are: La Plus Haute
des Solitudes l'essaya 7977, Les Amandiers
Sont Morts de Leurs Blessures (poems), and
La Prière des Absents (1981) and L'Ecrivain
Public 1983 (novels).
not know how to express, preserve, and
above all transmit its culture to its
children.
Everyday racism, which militates on
behalf of hatred with words and
sometimes with weapons, is characteriz¬
ed by an attitude of systematic rejection
rooted not so much in irrational impulse
as in a profound uneasiness caused by the
presence of another person who cannot
be reduced to the condition of a mute,
resigned and invisible unit of labour.
Ultimately, this vision is paradoxical: the
other person is not seen, there is no desire
to see him, still less to look at him; and
yet it is accepted that he is there a
nuisance who bears the responsibility for
everything that goes wrong. Absent or
present, he will be suspect.
When racism is not an ideology, as in
South Africa or Nazi Germany, it is a
habit, a kind of blind tradition which
ranges from Jew to Black, from Asian to
Arab. It is behaviour which may be en¬
capsulated in a paradox: it is profoundly
skin-deep. It is deeply rooted in mental
attitudes, yet superficial where attempts
to justify it are concerned. The racist in¬
dividual is conditioned; he reacts to the
very presence of the foreign body, which
is immediately noticed because it is dif¬
ferent. But behind this physical reaction
a mass of more or less confused ideas,
images and stereotypes lurks in the un¬
conscious of the racist, ready to pour out
in order to justify the act of rejection.
In April 1981, Unesco held a meeting
in Athens at which scientists from dif¬
ferent disciplines and countries came to
"scientifically ruin" racism. An "Ap¬
peal to the peoples of the world and to all
individuals everywhere" was issued by
the participants. The Appeal affirms that
"the difference between the genetic
structures of two individuals belonging
to the same race can be far greater than
the differences between the average
genetic structures of two population
groups. This finding makes it impossible
to arrive at any objective and stable
Migrant workers wait in line at
the reception and housing cen¬
tre at the Cornavin railway sta¬
tion, Geneva. Recourse to
migrant workers is not a new
phenomenon. What is new,
however, is the scale on which
it occurs and the great number
of countries involved. There are
cases where newcomers in¬
tegrate into host countries
without too much difficulty,
but the arrival of immigrants
too often leads to a hardening
of prejudice and to actual
discrimination.
Photo ILO, Geneva
Even when there is legal
recognition of the immigrants'
equal economic, social, trade
union and political rights, in¬
cluding the right to vote, their
voice is generally not heard and
they are often the victims of
discrimination in housing and
education. Right, members of a
family of migrants in Marseilles,
France.
Photo A. Nogues © Sygma, Paris
22

definition of the different races... Those
engaged in scientific activity bear a major
responsibility for the social future of
their contemporaries. Where racism is
concerned, this responsibility involves
political and ethical choices."
Anti-racist vigilance should not
underestimate or ignore any sphere:
racism smoulders in the mind of the
aristocrat as well as in the habits of the
workman. Wherever it may be found, the
racism which feeds certain mentalities is,
fundamentally, a mirror that disturbs:
the Other person, the foreigner,
transmits back to the host society an im¬
age in which that society recognizes itself
but which it rejects because it is an image
which highlights its contradictions and
underscores its malaise and its
inadequacies.
Thus racism is primarily the expression
of one's own inadequacies which one
projects onto someone else who belongs
to a different category (class, race, na¬
tionality, age-group, social situation,
etc.). When fragments of images com¬
posed of the foreigner's everyday culture
(his language, his skin, his style of cook¬
ing, his music, and his religion) strike this
mirror, the person at the receiving end
feels dispossessed or at least threatened
as to his status and identity.
Hatred of others begins with self-
hatred. Racism, whether virulent or la¬
tent, is a procession of misfortune.
The second point concerns the com¬
munity which is the victim of exclusion.
There, the image of the self has been
devalued. It is ailing; it has been so far re¬
jected and dismantled that it is difficult
to live with, it is ill accepted.
A person who has been obliged to leave
his land and family in order to earn his
living and provide for the future of his
children is generally a fragile being. He
feels insecure, for he knows that he is not
fully accepted in terms of his own culture
and his own difference. The prevailing
hostility saps his confidence and leads
him to doubt the perception of his own
image. The working being is amputated
of his other, essential, cultural dimen¬
sion. For him exile is a form of mutila¬
tion, a violent experience which reduces
him to an economic mode of expression
and deprives him of the fundamental
values woven into his history and
civilization.
This disturbing experience causes the
immigrant to interiorize the gloomy,
troubled image transmitted to him by
racism. In this situation, how can he live
in terms of his own culture which has
been reduced to half- formed .bits and
pieces? It tends to become a desiccated
caricature of the culture from which it
springs, and this opens the door to
another form of fanaticism and in¬
tolerance. He retreats into himself and
cultivates a nostalgic, quasi-neurotic at¬
tachment to his original culture which
has not travelled well. He is faced with a
problem which he did not encounter in
his own country: the problem of roots.
This question of identity is brutally raised
by the children who are born in the land
of exile; this is a serious existential
problem for if it is not answered it may I
23

alienate these children from their
parents. They will be removed from their
families and will seek other landmarks,
elsewhere.
The children in turn reject the image of
the father who has been devalued, bat¬
tered by hostility and poverty. They
neither want to be like him nor to follow
the path he has taken. They also know
that they belong to the blocked genera¬
tion whose future is uncertain and whose
identity is troubled and confused. They
are victims of a twofold racism: that
which strikes the whole community and
that which closes the doors of life against
them because no one was expecting,them
and they fit into no one's plans. They are
absent from the land of their fathers
the mother who forgets her grand¬
children; they are unwelcome in the place
where they were born. These adolescents
do not know where to go nor what image
to create for themselves to escape from
poverty and exclusion. They improvise a
culture with whatever is at hand.
Although they are citizens of the host
country, they are scarcely accepted. The
identity card does not obliterate the face.
This clouding of the identity, this
dislocation of selfhood would be less
serious, or at any rate could be over¬
come, if other events and ways of think¬
ing were not becoming prevalent in the
Western world. In the 1980s denigration
of the Third World, its cultures and
religions, especially Islam, is in the air.
For some a hotchpotch of ideas and im¬
pressions takes the place of structured
thought: Arab, Muslim, African, etc. are
all shunted into the same siding of con¬
tempt. This racism immediately rejects,
without analys^ and without reason,
everything that originates from or bears
traces of this wretched, ill-developed and
above all ill-loved Third World.
The Argentine writer Jorge Luis
Borges wrote in Fictions: "I thought that
a man could perhaps be the enemy of
other men, of other moments of other
men, but not of a country; not of the
fireflies, the words, the gardens, the
streams and the sunsets." This is a
perverse and widespread form of
violence. It only takes a few TV images,
a few prejudices softened by laughter, a
few pseudo-scientific untruths uttered
with gravity and underwritten by well-
known people for this vision of the world
to become accepted and for racism to
become an unconscious, natural and
everyday practice.
At the end of his book Au Péril de la.
Science, the French geneticist Albert Jac¬
quard notes that "our society secretes
racism. Most often unconsciously we
make this poison which destroys our very
selves; we insist 'I am not a racist,
but...' "
A civilization which does not take a
hard look at Xhose of its mechanisms
which are left to the vicissitudes of
brutality is a waning civilization which in
the course of time mingles with the bar¬
barism of this poison it has allowed to
spread, either through lack of vigilance
or through arrogance and a feeling of
superiority.
"The other person, the foreigner, transmits back to the host society an
image in which that society recognizes itself but which it rejects
because it is an image which highlights its contradictions and
underscores its malaise and its inadequacies", writes Tahar Ben
Jelloun. But racism, like this distorting mirror in a Paris children's
playground, is not only a phenomenon which disturbs, it caricatures all
perception of what is foreign or simply different.
Photo Kay Lawson © Rapho, Paris
Tahar Ben Jelloun
24
