LiLOVA, Anna
The translation
explosion
A rapid growth is taking place in
translating at the present time, both in
terms of quantity and of quality. Infor¬
mation supplied by 61 countries in¬
dicates that during 1978 alone 57,158
books were translated. This pheno¬
menon is explained by the constantly
growing need of individuals and
peoples to communicate. It is now
realized that, irrespective of national,
social and linguistic differences, it is
only through cultural co-operation that
progress in science, literature or educa¬
tion can be achieved.
The extraordinary changes repre¬
sented by modern communication
techniques give men ever greater access
to cultures other than their own. In this
way, each of us can discover new
values, become aware of modes of
behaviour with which we were
previously unfamiliar and get to know
mankind in all its diversity. This
phenomenon, which has developed
particularly since the Second World
War, has considerably increased the
demands made on translators, because
29

it means that one must be in a position
to overcome the obstacles caused by a
multiplicity of languages.



The existence of many languages, as
symbolized by the Tower of Babel, has
often been deplored in the past. For
centuries, hope persisted that a new
lingua franca .would emerge which
would become the common language
of all mankind. Descartes pleaded for
the creation of a language that would
be as universal as mathematics and the
idea of creating an ideal language
occurred to many other philosophers,
logicians and mathematicians, such as
Leibniz, Carnap, Wittgenstein, Russell.
Up to the 1950s, more than four hun¬
dred so-called "universal" languages
had been invented.
These efforts enriched linguistics and
led to the currently popular idea of
translations by computer. But the
limits of human capacity and of the
capacity of the machine are known.
The flexibility of a language cannot be
confined within a formal framework, it
remains and will always remain in the
domain of human intelligence and sen¬
sitivity. No machine can convey the
"genius of a language" as a conscien¬
tious, experienced and gifted translator
can.
Some people still imagine that in¬
creasingly sophisticated computers will
be able to perfect a "working
language" which will be so simple and
efficient as to be accessible to all.
Sooner or later, perhaps, such an ar¬
tificial language will come into use. But
is it possible or desirable? Nowadays
linguistic groups assert their identity
through the right to express themselves
in their own languages because
languages are symbols of indepen¬
dence. There are 2,796 languages and
30
The problems of translation have been recognized since antiquity and were expressed by St.
Jerome (c. 340-420), the learned Father of the Roman Catholic Church who was the
translator ofthe Latin Bible, the Vulgate, from Hebrew and Greek originals. In this woodcut
by the German artist A ¡brecht Dürer (147I-I 528) St, Jerome is sho wn in his ceU accompanied
by a lion whose friendship he is said to have won by extracting a tiiorn from its paw.

THE THREE TsTEACHING, TRANSLATING, TRANSCRIBING
8,000 dialects in the world, but more
than two-thirds of the world's popula¬
tion speak 27 languages, while less than
one third speak the others, so that pro¬
fessional intercourse, which is
regulated by economic and political
needs, draws upon a limited number of
languages.
It may be asked whether such a
limitation is justified from a cultural
point of view. The new multilingual
African States, for example, are mak¬
ing efforts to assert themselves by
developing their national and written
languages. These languages, which
were suppressed or neglected in the
past, are now being improved. They are
being enriched through direct or in¬
direct contacts with other cultures, thus
opening the way for the development
of national literatures, sciences and
techniques. Translating has an impor¬
tant rôle in this process, and the re¬
quirements of the African continent in
translators and translations are
enormous.
Translating has special respon-
sibiHties to national cuUures of the
smaller peoples and to the less-widely
spoken languages. It has a twofold
function to disseminate these cultures
abroad through their irreplaceable
original identity, and to enrich and fer¬
tilize them through contributions from
elsewhere. Translated books preserve
and express these two functions, they
serve as a link between the particular
and the universal.
In the past, translations served as a
leaven. In the ninth century, the works
translated by the brothers Cyril and
Methodius, who invented the alphabet
of the Slavs, made possible the
development of national literatures
throughout the Slav-speaking nations
of Europe. Similarly, the flowering of
German prose was preceded by
Luther's translation of the Bible.



Translation has a multiplier effect on
the scientific, literary and aesthetic
potential of the contents of books.
In Unesco Member States taken as a
whole, an average 39 per cent of all
books published are translated. The
countries with the highest output of
translated works are (according to the
1982 Unesco Statistical Yearbook
figures relating to 1978): France 8,350
(figure for 1977 and 1978 combined).
Federal Republic of Germany 7,168,
USSR 7,023, Spain 5,543, Japan 2,307,
Denmark 2,014, Italy 1,738, United
Kingdom 1,494.
The fact that a number of countries,
especially developing countries, pro¬
duce fewer translations is largely due to
the high cost (authors' and translators'
royalties), to the lack of printing
facilities and high production costs
(printing and paper).
The International Federation of
Translators, which comprises 40
associations of scientific, technical and
literary translators and translation
theoreticians, is a non-governmental
organization attached to Unesco. Since
its establishment in 1953, it has been
under the direction of personalities
remarkable for their enthusiasm and
devotion to translation, including the
late Pierre-François Caillé who presid¬
ed over it for many years. The principal
aims of the Federation are to bring
together and organize translators'
associations throughout the world, to
defend the moral and legal rights of
translators, to further the circulation
of translated books and of the cultural
values of all peoples, and to assert the
prestige of the translator in the world
of today.
The numerous initiatives undertaken
by the Federation include the organiza¬
tion of world congresses, of national
and international meetings, round
tables and symposia, publication ofthe
review "Babel", the circulation and
implementation of the Recommenda¬
tion of Unesco Member States regar¬
ding the moral and legal rights of
translators and participation in the In¬
ternational Book Commission. That all
these initiatives have been possible is
largely thanks to the assistance of
Unesco. As Mr Amadou-Mahtar
M'Bow, Director-General of Unesco
has pointed out, "translators maintain
the ongoing dialogue between different
civilizations and have thus contributed
to the contacts and harmonious rela¬
tions between 
