A universe
of water
by Thiago de Mello
HIGH among the everlasting snows of the uppermost cor¬
dillera, a thin trickle of water suddenly bubbles forth and
starts to trace a hesitant line on the age-old surface of the
rock. This is where the Amazon is born and, with every instant that
passes, is born again and yet again. As it edges its way slowly
downwards like a twisting sliver of light, it spreads out and, cutting
deep into the greenery, devises a passage for itself and gathers
strength. Underground streams emerge and join the torrent flowing
down from the Andes. The wind buffets the brilliant white
underbelly of the clouds and rain tumbles from the sky. As the
streams come together, their combined flow moves ever onward
and splits into a myriad waterways irrigating the vast plain crossed
by the Equator.
This plain occupies one-twentieth of the land surface of the Earth
we live on. It forms a lush equatorial universe covering nine coun¬
tries of Latin America, almost half the territory of Brazil. Its
thousands of rivers and streams represent the world's largest
freshwater reserve and form an enchanted labyrinth which is con¬
stantly being reshaped as it spreads through the millions of square
kilometres of the green land mass.
Situated entirely within the humid tropics, this universe of water
is the great Amazon basin, with its dense and intoxicating forest
where, ever since the beginning of the Tertiary era, life forms spun
from the fabric of the plant world have continued to pulsate over
vast areas that have remained untouched and free from the en¬
croachment of man. With so many of its endless expanses untrod¬
den and its true nature unplumbed, Amazonia has yet to be
discovered.
Come with me General.
The weather is set fair
and the wind is up.
Gently we glide
as we row in the blackness
of the translucent stream,
taking care not to let
the prow of our craft
cast ripples
on the mirror of the light.
Come discover with me
the green sources of life.
This is the river which Vicente Pinzón saw for the first time in
1500, without realizing that he had left the Atlantic and had ven¬
tured into the mouth of a freshwater ocean, at what came to be
known as Santa Maria de la Mar Dulce. This was the Amazon
whose waters were to be furrowed by the keels of the first sailing-
ships, the Parana Guaço of the Indians living on its banks. The
river went by a variety of names:
the Freshwater Sea,
the River Orellana,
Marañan,
the Guinea of the
Arawaks,
Parançu dos Tupis,
Rio de las Amazonas,
the Great River of the
[Amazonas...
8
Or else, simply the Amazon, the river which stretches for more
than six thousand kilometres from the first trickle flowing down
from Lake Lauri, Lauricocha, among the summits of the Andes
and from Vilcanota, before coming to take shape in the turbulent
silt-laden waters of the Urubamba and then going on to join the "
Ucayali and swell the Solimoes as it winds through the Peruvian
forest. It is under that same name that it enters Brazil and settles
into its main stream bed, accompanied by the tree trunks torn from
its banks. This is the name it keeps until, in a strange and
mysterious region, it meets the jet black waters of the Rio Negro,
with which its own silt-charged flow is never destined to blend. Yet
it is here that it becomes the Amazon proper, the impulsive river
that goes on to carve out the deep straits of Breves before emptying
into the Atlantic and pushing back the waters of the ocean for enor¬
mous distances.
It is true that the ocean takes its revenge. It gathers its salt-laden
strength and comes back in force. Its powerful and deafening
rollers, several metres high, overwhelm the river, sweeping aside
everything in their path and sinking river craft, whatever their size.
The river never relaxes the law it imposes on man. This is the em¬
pire of water. Water that races off in angry eddies, water that tosses
obstacles aside, water that laps, water that uproots, water that calls
and beckons, water that tumbles over cataracts, water that plunges
into whirlpools, water that slowly recedes, water that suddenly
peaks in flood, river water that hardly seems to move at all, and
becomes dangerous when it harnesses the rising wind and lashes
out, water that lies motionless in the silence of the igapo (1).
Water occupying deeps of a hundred fathoms or more, where
huge blind piraibas (2) slowly navigate the silent abyss. Narrow ig-
arapés (3), like that of Pucu whose delightful meanders I know so
well, never dry up completely and leave their beds exposed, even
when the river is at its lowest. Shallow water, transparent or turgid,
where the rays scatter very early in the morning. Water at the mouth
of lakes or gushing out from springs. Still water: in the Lago
Marcelo, beyond the upper reaches of the Parana-mirin-de-Eva,
whenever the uirapururu sings, the entire forest falls silent, the
other birds stop singing, and the water itself is quiet, listening with
only a restless quiver from time to time.
Water straddled from bank to bank by tall grasses or covered by
undergrowth, with a thick bed of tangled vegetation as the only
path. Water bringing diseases; water infected with amoebic y
Right, the Amazon near the port of Tabatinga. Photo was taken
in the middle of April, the month when streams flowing Into the
left bank of the river reach their highest point as a result of
heavy rainfall in the northern part of the basin. The same
phenomenon occurs on the right bank in June.

"U^ ;
w t%miï i
., r
:* *,

>#i
^ parasites or blackwater fever. But also well-water: in the humid
heat of the forest, thin trickles of cool, thirst-quenching water never
run dry. Muddy water in rivers like the Solimoes, the Madeira, the
Jurua and the Purus; blue water like that of the Tocatins; green
water in the Tapajoz and Xingu. The black waters of the Rio An-
dira reflect all the colours of the rainbow.
/ have just journeyed up and down the Solimoes from where it
joins the Rio Negro, not far from Manaus, to the wedge-shaped
area in Amazonia where Brazil, Peru and Colombia meet. The twin
townships of Tabatinga in Brazil and Leticia in Colombia stand
side-by-side and look out across the river on the small and long-
suffering settlement ofRamon Castilla in Peru on the other bank,
which has already been devastated eleven times by the havoc
wrought by the river as it washed away all the fertile land. I spent
day after day travelling in a small craft with its engine amidships.
It was at the time of the year when the river was risingthe en-
chente, when the swollen river had burst its banks andflooded the
low-lying areas, uprooting trees and carrying away thepaltry dwell¬
ings. I spent hour after hour on the river without meeting a living
soul. Then, suddenly, a skein of white cranes flew past, outlined
against the transparent background of the evening, and immediate¬
ly thereafter, in a bend in the river along the bankside, Iperceived
a small canoe hollo wed out of the trunk ofthe itauba tree. Standing
in the prow was a caboclo (4) making signs with his oar, as if he
were calling for help. He was afinefigure ofa man, with a radiant
expression, but he was bowed down with grief, for one ofhisyoung
children had just died, carried off by fever, with no one to help.
The waters of the Amazon go through an endless cycle, starting
with the time known as the "first waters", when the river starts
showing signs of wanting to rise, followed by the full flood, the en-
chente, and then the falling flood, or vazante. It is this ebbing and
flowing of the river which governs and transforms the lives of peo¬
ple living in the Amazon basin from one season to the next.
Everywhere in Amazonia, not only deep in the forest or along the
water's edge but in settlements and urban centres, man feels the
beneficial or adverse impact of the rising and falling of the river,
in his home, in his food, in his daily labour.
The fluctuating pattern of the river is a constant in the decisions
people make in organizing their lives since it is also bound up with
economic cycles. If there is a sharp fall in river level, the harvest will
be plentiful, since the inundated low-lying areas will have been
made very fertile by the mineral salts and organic matter brought
down by the river. This is the season for fishing, and a good time
to plant. By contrast, heavy floods mean disaster and suffering: the
fish hide in stagnant pools that can only be reached through forest
trails, crops are destroyed, livestock have to be driven to higher
ground or herded quickly into the maromba, a kind of narrow
enclosure standing on stilts, where they are liable to attack by
sucuruji snakes; the lower parts of the houses remain under water,
and the snakes come and threaten the domestic animals.
Man is at the mercy of the river, but he does not lose heart. He
waits for the waters to recede and hopes to make the most of the
land enriched by flooding. The river dictates his behaviour and he
10
is always at the river's beck and call. If he fails to comply, he is
condemned.
/ come from that generous land
where the men born of its lushness
remain captive and forgotten.
And yet they are the brothers
of those resourceful and changeless elements:
water, wind and hope.
Come with me
and learn about the river and Us laws.
Come with me
and learn the science of the whirlpool.
Come and listen to the birds of the night
in the magical silence of the igapo,
draped in emerald stars.
Whereas in Genesis it was the countenance of God, today it is
hope that shines on the waters of my river. In spite of all the exac¬
tions: the destruction, the plundering of its wealth, the unbridled
deforestation, its fauna in jeopardy and, above all, the dire poverty
of its riverside populations, hope still exists in Amazonia. There is
no end to man's courage. But our main fear is that the forest is
starting to tire of being ill-treated to the extent it has been.
Rainfall is a regular feature of the virgin forest, not only during
the winter months when the rain falls in solid sheets for days
without ever letting up. Even in summer, which is supposed to be
the dry season, the rain never stops. All of a sudden, the large pot¬
bellied clouds lumber into motion, turn black and break up. The
cloudburst sweeps down and the Amazonian storm and wind blow
in gusts. Such downpours can occur in the early morning or in the
middle of the day or at night, when the darkness of the river cross¬
ing is streaked by lightning flashes illuminating the turbulent sur¬
face of the waves from one bank to the other.
Above left, a young Yagua
Indian from the left bank of
the Amazon. The Yagua and
other Indian peoples such as
the Jivaros and the Zaparos
belong to a group of in¬
digenous communities
which have remained more
or less independent
throughout their history.
Photo Jim Holland Rapho, Paris
The Rio Negro, one of the
major tributaries of the
Amazon, near the port of
Manaus. In some places the
dense tropical vegetation
makes navigation virtually
impossible.
Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris

It was from a storm of this kind on the Peruvian Solimoes that
the Indian Moron and his five-year old son, the caboclo Rios and
I myself once had a narrow escape. I had been spending the day in
a Yagua Indian village talking of one thing or another with a young
tuchaua, or witchdoctor, who knew a good deal about the datura
and other magical plants. Before nightfall, we set off in a canoe fit¬
ted with an outboard motor for Choriaco, a small riverside settle¬
ment, which we expected to reach in about two hours. It was during
the flood season.
We sailed up-river keeping close to the forest-lined bank and
were about halfway when the storm broke. From the stern, where
he was operating the motor, my Indian friend said quietly: "This
is going to be terrible". Close by him, in the bottom of the boat,
was his small son, all hunched up against the cold. I can still see
myself on the seat, turning round and noticing, before it became
completely dark, the brightness of his enormous eyes, intense with
fear. Up front, on a narrow seat, shirtless, was the caboclo Luis
Rios, a native of Choriaco.
We went headlong into the storm without saying a word, bound
together in our silence. As the speed of the current increased, the
canoe started shaking and reared up on the crest of the wave before
falling back with a crash. The rain was lashing against us from all
sides. The time soon came when we could see absolutely nothing
and were surrounded by darkness. The front of the boat was con¬
tinually banging against tree trunks and then suddenly there was a
thudding sound and the canoe looked as if it was about to capsize.
Moron tipped the motor towards him, so that the propeller was out
of the water', safe from the risk of damage. Our only help came
from the lightning flashes, which split the sky in two. In the fleeting
moment of illumination, we could see an enormous trunk, a whole
piece of a tree with its branches still green with leaves, bearing down
on us. Swiftly and silently, with a flick of the rudder, Moron moved
the canoe away from the obstacle.
It was so dark that I could not see my hand a few centimetres
away from my face, yet time and again I was certain that the Indian
Moron managed to see something of the river and its banks in the
midst of the pitch blackness. He was able to see or at least his ears
or all his other very keen senses told him that something was coming
towards the boat. For instance, he would suddenly bear to the left
and then straighten up the craft again by throttling back the motor,
while out of his half-open mouth there came a raucous cry, brief
but powerful which, as if by a miracle, could be heard above the
shrieking and howling of the storm. It was as if he were the kinsman
of the river.
The storm abated shortly before we reached Choriaco. I now feel
the time has come for me to recount two things that happened that
night. First, we had barely entered the approaches to the Parana of
Choriaco when we saw several canoes coming in our direction.
Their occupants were the men and women of the area. I shall never
forget them. They had been expecting usin the early hours of the
night but they had realized that, since we were late, we must have
been caught in the storm, and they had decided to set out and come
to our help. When they saw us, a great prolonged cry of joy went
up among them. Second, after the storm was over, the sky lit up
with starsall the starswhich, enormous, began to shine as they
floated free and unimpeded in the vast space of the Amazonian
night.
Thiago de Mello
(1) Igapo: the ¡ndian word for parts of the forest where the undergrowth
is submerged.
(2) Piraiba: large Amazonian freshwater fish.
(3) Igarapé: literally, the "path of the canoe". By extension, a small
tributary or a channel between two islands or two rivers.
(4) Caboclo: a Brazilian of mixed fndian and white parentage.
