Ir ATTANAYAK, Debiprasanna
India, a multilingual
sub-continent
According to the 1961 Census, there are
1,652 mother tongues in India. These
mother tongues are identity tokens, but
not necessarily languages. Depending on
how one counts, there are between 400
and 700 languages in India. There are
thirteen major modern languages listed
in the eighth schedule of the Indian Con¬
stitution besides Sanskrit, and English,
which is the associate official language of
the Republic.
These thirteen languages have a history
of at least one thousand years, Tamil
claiming antiquity as old as Sanskrit or
even older. Each of them, excepting Sin-
dhi, Urdu, Sanskrit and Hindi, is a domi¬
nant language in a State. Sindhi is a non-
State language spread "over different
parts of the country. Urdu is the official
language of Jammu and Kashmir States
and yet is spoken in almost all States of
India. Hindi is spoken in six States and
Union Territories as the mother tongue
and culture language and is spoken by the
largest number of people as their second
language. Sanskrit has been the mother
language of all languages of India ir¬
respective of family affiliation. All these
languages have their dialects, styles and
registers adding further complexity to the
scene.
The languages of India belong to four
language families, Indo-European, Dravi-
dian, Austric (a language grouping that
19

includes the Austro-Asiatic and
Austronesian language families) and
Sino-Tibetan. There are a large number
of languages yet to be classified and
scholars have suggested a fifth family.
However, both the influence of Sanskrit
and the cultural miscegenation of the last
3,000 years has made 


India a single
language, linguistic, socio-linguistic and
semantic area.
There are eight major script systems
and a host of minor ones in India. It is in¬
teresting that while the languages of In¬
dia belong to four or five language
families, all scripts except Roman and
Arabic belong to one script family. The
Indian language alphabet systems bor¬
rowed from Sanskrit are among the most
phonetic scripts in the world. Sanskrit
was permitted to be written in different
scripts in different parts of the country.
This to a certain extent explains the in¬
fluence Sanskrit exercised over different
Indian languages. In the new awareness
about literacy teaching, enthusiasts and
sectarians have been proposing new
scripts and expanding existing scripts.
But the general tendency among non-
literate languages acquiring literacy is to
adopt the script of the dominant
language of the region of their location.
Even now languages like Santhali and
Konkani are written in five and four
scripts respectively. As one language is
written in many scripts, many languages
are also written using Devanagari.
A close look at the demography of the
country makes it amply clear that not on¬
ly the Republic as a whole, but each con¬
stituent part of it is multilingual. Three
distinct linguistic profiles are discerned
even from a cursory look. There are
States where the dominant language is
spoken by between 85-95 per cent of the
population. There is a different group of
States where the dominant language is
spoken by between 45 and 65 per cent of
the population. The third group consists
of regions comprising States and Union
Territories where no language is spoken
by over 20 per cent of the population.
Each one poses a different set of educa¬
tional and cultural problems.
India's tribal population constitutes 7
per cent of its population. Although
many of the tribal languages have died or
surrendered their identity to other major
Indian languages, a vast number still per¬
sists. Except in the north-east of India
tribal languages are nowhere in the ma¬
jority. Even in north-east India, althoujgh
tribal languages are in the majority
because of the existence of a large
number of small ethno-linguistic groups,
there is no cohesiveness among them. As
a result English has been adopted as the
State language in some of these States.
Hindi is the official language and
English is the associate official language
of the Republic. However, Hindi has not
been able to resolve the internal con¬
tradiction between language and dialects
and the external contradiction arising out
of binary juxtaposition of Hindi with
English on the one hand and Hindi and
other regional languages on the other. In
spite of all promotional efforts, Hindi in
the popular mind is neither the language
of authority nor of convenience. Yet it is
20
defacto the linguafranca of the country.
English is spoken by approximately
2 per cent of the population. This
population though small in percentage is
larger in size than that of Australia.
There is a small group of Anglo-Indians
whose mother tongue is English. They
have been granted special constitutional
protection. English continues to be the
language of intellection, commerce and
above all is the key to jobs guaranteeing
rank, status and wealth in society.
English education has created an élite
class and has created a gap between the
élite and the masses. Whether in educa¬
tion, administration or mass com¬
munication, English dominates the field.
There is a growing demand for a realloca-
one goes in the ladder, the greater is the
demand for a lesser number of languages.
This militates against the grass-root
multilingualism in the country.
The policy of the Indian Government,
generally known as the "three language
formula", is a consensus born out of
pragmatism. This three language for¬
mula is a strategy and not a goal. It leaves
open the possibility of learning more
than the three required languages, the
regional State language, and the two of¬
ficial national languages, Hindi and
English. Thus, anyone who has a mother
tongue other than one of these three and
who wishes to pursue its study at school,
or anyone who wishes to study classical
im Jl f I nil r« I III iw I II I *.v ' y^' A' ' ' '
Photo © Institut de Civilisation Indienne, Pans.
The Ramayana, one of the great epic poems of India, was originally writ¬
ten in Sanskrit l)y the poet Valmlkl, about 300 BC, Above, an extractfrom
the Hindi version, known as the Ramcarilmanas (Sacred Lake of the Acts
of Rama), written in the 16th century by the poet Tulsldas and considered
to be the greatest achievement of medieval Hindi literature.
air^sùsssof (BsssriTis^sar ^ß(T^e ßmm(^^
j^a^Q^ér jpiss^srùu^ QuTeàrjpt (o^iresrpQsu,
Photo® L'Ecole Française d'ExtrèmeOnent. Pans
This extractfrom the Tamil version of the Ramayana, written by the 12th-
century Indian Tamil poet Kampan and known as the Iramavalaram
(Rama's Incarnation), speaks of Rama's love for Sita his wife-to-be.
Photo Í/ All Rights Reserved
Urdu, which belongs to the Indlc group of the Indo-European languages,
is spoken by some 26 million people In India and Pakistan. Although
structurally and historically spoken Urdu and Hindi derivefrom the same
base, the literary forms of the two languages have separated due to the in¬
fluence of Sanskrit on Hindi and of Persian and Arabic on Urdu. Urdu
is written from right to left. The alphabet, above, is in Arabic script with
Persian additions and extra letters to Indicate sounds specific to Urdu,
tion of domains of usage between English
and the newly emerging regional
languages. In the process, English is also
set against the Indian languages and an
artificial conflict of interest is created.
India is one of the rare countries that
have given a constitutional guarantee of
primary education through the mother
tongue. But this provision is respected
more in the breach than in the obser¬
vance. Only 58 languages are used as
school languages. The structure of the
education system is such that the higher
languages, such as Sanskrit or Arabic,
has to study four or five languages.
Many, oriented in the dominant
monolingual culture, consider multi¬
lingualism a burden and even go to the
extent of dubbing it the disease of the
poor. In developed countries of the
world, where dominant monolingualism
is the practice, systematic efforts to an¬
nihilate minority languages and cultures
have not only resulted in cultural im¬
poverishment but also a backlash of
revolt by small groups.

The Western mind, operating with a
linear and binary logic, sees opposition
between English and Hindi, English and
other Indian languages, Hindi and Urdu,
Hindi and other Indian languages, domi¬
nant and minority languages. The Indian
intellectuals trained in the ways of the
West also perceive their reality in the
above manner. This runs counter to the
inclusive spirit of Indian logic which
finds a specific role for each of the
elements in a multi-cultural set up. Thus
speaking one language at home and
another outside, one language to com¬
municate with the neighbouring State
and another for intercommunication in
the Union, one or more languages for in¬
ternational communication does not pose
any conflict in the common man's logic.
This is one of the reasons for the growing
estrangement between the masses and the
élite alienated from its own roots.
Many languages militate against the
approach of mass media in the same way
as small land holdings militate against
super farm technology. The reluctance to
use many mother tongues in education is
linked with the reluctance to share power
and economic resources with the people.
A multiplicity of languages, by drawing
attention to many small groups, demands
a more human approach to economic
planning. Thus more languages are a
greater defence of democracy. Therefore
many see in it a threat and inconvenience
to the centralized State.
The Indian experiment must succeed if
an interdependent international order is
to be built on the sound principles of
mutual respect and understanding. As in
other parts of the Third World, Indian
multilingualism and pluriculturalism are
under constant threat from those who
seek, both in theory and in practice, to
impose mono-models. Thus while the
Republic remains 


multilingual, subtle ef¬
forts are made to create pressures to
make the States dominant monolingual
regions. This is bound to fail. Multil¬
ingualism and pluriculturalism dictate
alternate modes of thinking and alternate
strategies of development. If human in¬
genuity fails to rise to this challenge, then
not only India and the Third World, but
all mankind will have to face chaos and
destruction.

