STENDHAL (1783-1842)
To the happy few
/
w_
i
>
'*rf
Portrait of Stendhal 11783-1842) by Henri Lehmann (1841).
by E W. J. Hemmings
F.W.J. HEMMINGS, of trie United Kingdom,
is Professor of French Literature in the Univer¬
sity of Leicester, England. His Stenâhal: a
study of his novels (Oxford, 1964) is one of
several books of his on nineteenth-century
French authors which include Zola, Dumas,
and Baudelaire.
MOST people who have read any
Stendhal at all will have read
Le Rouge et le Noir. This
novel was published as long ago as 1830,
but there are still arguments about what
Stendhal may have intended by his col¬
ourful title. Most probably, Red is meant
to stand for blood and cannon-fire, the
"red badge of courage", to borrow
Stephen Crane's phrase, in other words
the military life, and Black for the
clerical cloth, the Church.
The hero, Julien Sorel, is a young man
with ambitions who has to decide, at the
outset of his life, what career will be most
profitable for him to follow. He belongs
to a post-war generation; it is only from
old men, like the retired army surgeon
who is one of the few real friends of his
boyhood, that he learns of the
Napoleonic epic, when the French flag
was carried in triumph all over Europe;
but at the time the story opens the coun¬
try is at peace, Napoleon is in exile, and
11

France is' ruled by a reactionary govern¬
ment that favours the Church. So Julien
decides to conceal his admiration for
Napoleon, to enter the Church and to use
it as a ladder to make his way to the top.
In fact, Julien is never even ordained.
He begins as a private tutor to the sons of
a businessman in the town in south-east
France where he was born. Then he
enters the seminary at Besançon; but he
leaves this to become the confidential
secretary of a powerful nobleman in
Paris, though he continues to wear the
black suit which is "the uniform of my
century", as he says.
But before the end comes his
employer, the Marquis de la Mole, has
agreed to accept him as his son-in-law
and secures him a commission in the
©
Stendhal carried on a long and tender correspondence with his sister
Pauline. In this fragment of a letter to Pauline he sketched himself
galloping to a burning house near Brunswick.
Words are always a force which
one seeks outside oneself.
Stendhal
army. So there is a symbolic return of the
"red" before, in a rash and one might
think uncharacteristic act, Julien casts
away all he has achieved, is arrested for
attempted murder, tried and executed.
Julien Sorel conforms in many ways to
the stereotype of the romantic hero: he is
intelligent, brave, and handsome; but he
is different in his duplicity and hypocrisy,
necessary in order to keep secret his am¬
bitious dreams and pass himself off as a
humble servant of the Church. Only
women seem to sense in him the potential
greatness that he hides beneath a cloak of
mystery. Stendhal departed from the
normal practice among novelists of his
time by introducing two heroines, each of
whom in turn falls in love with the hero,
though they are as unlike one another as
they possibly could be; Madame de
Renal, the wife of his first employer, is
a gentle, maternal figure, whereas
Mathilde de la Mole, the Marquis's
daughter, is a haughty, unconventional
girl who admires Julien because he is so
different from the buzzing swarm of
empty-headed young aristocrats who are
suitors to her hand.
Le Rouge et le Noir was the first
masterpiece of the French novel to ap¬
pear in the nineteenth century, that cen¬
tury which saw the appearance of so
many masterpieces by such novelists as
Balzac, Flaubert, and Zola. Yet at first it
shocked most of its readers. They did not
know what to make of Julien, so admi¬
rable in many ways, yet so ruthless and
unscrupulous in others. He was the first
incarnation ever of a new phenomenon
the individual at war with society, bent
on dominating it by his own strength of
character. He desires neither money nor,
really, social position, but the simple
satisfaction of attaining each of his suc¬
cessive goals, quite regardless of the
moral implications of his methods.
His creator, the man called Henri
Beyle who adopted, no one knows why,
this Germanic pseudonym Stendhal for
his books, was quite unlike Julien in
these respects and indeed it is often
thought that Julien and the heroes of his
later novels were the creations of wish-
fulfilment, since they all possess the ad¬
vantages he knew himself to lack: good
looks, personal magnetism, will-power,
riches or rank, as the case might be.
Stendhal was already a man in his late
forties when he published Le Rouge et le
Noir, having been born in 1783 exactly
two hundred years ago though not into
a working-class family, as Julien was,
but as the only son of a fairly well-to-do
landowner in Grenoble. He had an
unhappy childhood, losing his mother,
whom he adored, at an early age, but in
1799, at the age of sixteen, he came to
Paris to enrol as a student in the Ecole
Polytechnique, for the subject he had
been best at in school was, oddly,
mathematics. Now 1799 was the year of
the coup d'état by which Napoleon
established himself as ruler of France.
Shortly afterwards, Beyle joined the
army and crossed the Alps to northern
Italy, recently conquered by Napoleon
after a brilliant campaign. Italy had an
immediate and electrifying effect on
Beyle: he fell in love with the country and
everything about it its art, its architec¬
ture, its music, and the countryside itself,
not to mention the women. This passion
for Italy lasted the rest of his life.
For the next fifteen years, as was the
case with so many young men in France
at the time, Beyle's career was bound up
with Napoleon's fortunes. He served for
a while in Brunswick, in the military ad¬
ministration of occupied Germany; he
undertook missions to Berlin and
Moscow, and he participated in the ill-
fated retreat of the Grande Armée in
1812. Whenever he could, he returned to
his beloved Italy and when, in 1814,
Napoleon was compelled to abdicate, he
decided to settle in Milan for the rest of
©
*
12
"I got on badly with my fellow pupils, I realize today that I was then an extremely ridiculous mixture
of arrogance and of need for love", Stendhal noted in his autobiographical novel Vie de Henry Brulard
(The Life of Henry Brulard). Above, a sketch by Louis-Joseph Jay (1 755-1836) of a group of students
at the Ecole Centrale of the Isère département. Stendhal is 7th from the right.

his life. He did not even return to France
during Napoleon's brief attempt, in
1815, to regain his throne, and so he was
never actually present at the battle of
Waterloo which is so vividly described in
his other great novel, La Chartreuse de
Parme.
Lombardy at this time was a client
state of Austria, and Beyle, who had
close friends among the Italian patriots
who were plotting for national in¬
dependence and unification, was even¬
tually declared persona non grata and
had to return to Paris. It was only then,
This book appeared at the end of the
year, after the revolution of July 1830
brought about a change of government.
Beyle, or Stendhal as we can now call
him, had friends in the new administra¬
tion, who found him a job as French con¬
sul in the little Italian seaport of
Civitavecchia, then in the Papal States.
He kept this situation, which at least gave
him enough to live on, for the rest of his
life, though he was dreadfully bored with
the dull, lonely existence he led in this
out-of-the-way port, and sorely missed
the lively café society of Milan and his
While travelling In Italy with George Sand in 1833, Alfred de Musset
met Stendhal who was then French consul at Civitavecchia. Above,
one of several sketches of Stendhal by Musset.
in the 1820s, that he turned to writing, to
supplement his tiny income as a half-pay
officer. He lent his weight to the efforts
of the young Romantics in France to
found a new, revolutionary style of
writing for the stage; he published a
defence of the Italian operatic composer
Rossini, two quite successful travel
books about Italy, a totally unsuccessful
maiden novel, Armance, and finally Le
Rouge et le Noir.
numerous friends in Paris. Only in 1836
was he able to return to France, having
been granted a short leave which he
managed to spin out for three years.
To while away the dreary hours of
idleness in Civitavecchia, he had started
on another novel, Lucien Leuwen, about
the adventures of a wealthy banker's son
in the army and the civil service. It was
never completed, as Stendhal apparently
lost interest and began writing La Vie de
Henry Brulard, an autobiography which
takes the story of his life down to his first
visit to Italy. Almost everything we know
about Stendhal's childhood and adoles¬
cence derives from this book. We learn
among other things that his favourite
reading as a boy was Don Quixote, and
that he imbibed from his great-aunt
Elisabeth the principles of what he called
espagnolisme, or Spanish honour, which
was the direct opposite of bourgeois
calculations of profit and loss. It implied
a sense of what was truly noble and a cor¬
responding horror of low-mindedness,
and kept a man from ever committing a
base or shabby act. Stendhal maintained
that espagnolisme had been a lodestar in
his life ever since.
At the end of his leave-period in France
Watch out; ifyou continue to be
sincere we are going to agree.
	Stendhal
Stendhal wrote, or rather dictated, his
second masterpiece, La Chartreuse de
Parme. Many readers prefer this book to
Le Rouge et le Noir, for it is less urgent
and less bitter, full of gaiety and yet
steeped in regretful melancholy. All the
characters are Italian which, considering
that the book is written, of course, in
French makes it almost unique, a kind of
Franco-Italian novel; just as Joseph Con¬
rad regarded England as his adopted
country, so for Stendhal Italy, the Italy
of the Po valley and the mountain lakes,
was the land he had given his heart to.
The scene switches between Milan, Par¬
ma, and Bologna, though towards the
beginning of the book there is a long se¬
quence set in France which culminates in
the description of the battle of Waterloo
already mentioned.
Fabrice, the young hero of Stendhal's
story, is a fanatic admirer of Napoleon,
and when he hears that the great man has
left the little island of Elba to which he
had been banished and is engaged on one
last gamble to recover his lost empire, he
decides, though only sixteen, to make his
way to Paris and offer his services to
Napoleon.
Fabrice is full of generous illusions,
and the first thing that happens to him is
that he is locked up on suspicion of being
. a spy. But he succeeds in making his way
to the front, and what he then witnesses
puzzles him as being totally unlike what
he had imagined a battle would be. The
confusion and the general unreality of
the scene is what Stendhal who had
been present at other battlefields, though
not at this one conveys above all else in
these marvellous pages; and the question
Fabrice is always asking: "Is this a real
battle?", has ironic implications when
one remembers that it was Waterloo,
more than any other clash of arms in the
last century, that decided the subsequent
course of history. Tolstoy in particular
admired this brilliant presentation of the
chaos of modern warfare and
13

it when describing the battle
of Borodino in War and Peace.
Apart from Fabrice, there are three
other main characters in the book, who
form a sort of loose association living
their lives according to different prin¬
ciples from the rest of humanity. They
see the power-struggle, in which everyone
else is engaged, as a game of chess or
whist, not to be taken too seriously; one
has to learn the rules of the game, but a
sensible person would never dream of
passing moral judgement on the rules.
This observation is made by Count
Mosca, the middle-aged prime minister
at Parma and an adept at court intrigue;
but political power and influence mean
nothing in themselves to Mosca, for
whom the only serious thing in life is his
love-affair with Gina Sanseverina. She is
undoubtedly Stendhal's outstanding
feminine creation: a woman of sudden
impulses, infinite charm, and complete
amorality. She is secretly in love with
LE IIOUGE
ET LE NOIR
CHRONIQl t I» HI V' SIKCI.K,
I'AUM. DESTENIWAL.
TOME I'lll NIHIL
PA BIS.
A. II. VAVAS.sr.UK. l.l BK AI RE, PALAIS ROYAL.
1831.
Stendhal's prophecy
that his works would
not be properly ap¬
preciated until a cen¬
tury after his death has
proved justified. Left,
frontispiece of an early
edition of Le Rouge et
Le Noir.
Photo © Edimedia, Pans
Fabrice, but, as her nephew, he regards
her with affection but without ardour. In
the second part of the book the cheerful
recklessness of Gina leads her to offend
the Prince; to revenge himself, he has
Fabrice imprisoned in the Farnese tower,
the State prison of Parma. This period of
captivity and danger turns out paradox¬
ically to be the happiest in Fabrice's life,
for it is then that he falls in love for the
first time; and the girl is none other than
the daughter of the prison governor,
Clélia Conti, who is persuaded by Gina
to smuggle in the rope ladder by which he
climbs down from his cell at the top of
the tower.
There is, however, no happy end to the
story. Fabrice escapes with Gina to
Switzerland, but she is driven to fury and
despair when she realizes that he loves
not her but Clélia. There is little hap¬
piness either for the two lovers, for Clélia
has to accept a man she does not love for
husband, and dies a few years later.
Fabrice, broken-hearted, follows her into
the grave, and only Mosca, the oldest of
them all, survives to preside nonchalantly
over the fortunes of Parma, preferring to
remain in power rather than that some
scoundrel should take his place. All in
all, it is a melancholy evocation of the
fine, careless rapture of youth, doomed
to be submerged in the rising tide of
maturity, with all its deceptions, dissen¬
sions, and disappointments.
Stendhal lived only three years after
the appearance of La Chartreuse de
Parme, long enough at least to read with
intense pleasure the magnificent review
that Balzac gave it. Few of his contem¬
poraries, however, shared Balzac's en¬
thusiasm, a circumstance which hardly
surprised Stendhal, who used to say he
would not be properly appreciated until a
century after his death. But he knew
and he was right in this that he would
always have a small number of devotees,
the minority he must have been thinking
of when he dedicated La Chartreuse de
Parme "to the happy few". Today,
throughout the world, the "happy few"
have become a great army for whom
nothing that Stendhal wrote is indif¬
ferent, for in everything we can hear the
echoes of that impertinent, ironical, and
yet enthusiastic voice which reaches us
unimpaired across the gulf of time.
F.W.J. Hemmings
With you this evening, I sing in Stendhal
the dazzling adversary of all dogmas
the enemy of thrones and altars
raised far from the burning feasts of the flesh.
I sing the secret Stendhal-land of each life
the musician of all our travels in Italy
in the age of the nuclear danger
and the endless dramas of the Third World
and of the whole world which beats with
the star of our childhood.
René Depestre
14
