Agreat deal of thought is being
given these days to the question
of the form education should
take in tomorrow's world. The great in¬
terest this question arouses is doubtless
due to the fact that, by its very nature,
education is more closely involved with
the future than most other fields of
human activity. Will the school as we
know it today be capable of preparing
our children for life in the 21st century
in face of the accelerated pace of
change and innovation predicted in
every field? Should not reform of the
educational system designed to meet
this new challenge be a priority objec¬
tive throughout the world? What pros¬
pects of evolution are open to educa¬
tional systems?
Opinions on this matter range from
extreme pessimism to excessive and un¬
justified optimism. There are those
who maintain that existing structures
are more resistant than is generally sup¬
posed and that things will have changed
little by the year 2000; others build their
hopes on forecasts of technocratic
solutions, some of which belong to the
realms of pure fantasy; some consider
that the educational systems of the dif¬
ferent countries will become more and
more similar in pattern whereas yet
others believe that they will become
more firmly rooted in national cultural
identities and that, as a result, their ob¬
jectives, principles, methods and
educational content will become more
and more differentiated.
The wide disparity between these
views as to the future of education
becomes more understandable if ac¬
count is taken of the often radical
divergences of opinion there have been
in the assessment of the past history of
education, including the period of most
recent years. For the history of educa¬
tion casts its shadow on the future. It
shows that, in most countries of the
world, the last two or three decades
have been a period of unprecedented
expansion. In the developing countries,
in which the overwhelming majority of
the world's population lives, national
BORIS F. KLUCHNIKOV, of the USSR, is in
charge of the research programmes of the
Higher School Institute of the USSR Ministry
of Higher and Secondary Technical Education.
He is a former director of Unesco's Division of
Educational Policy and Planning and before
that served as a Unesco consultant. He is the
author of a number of works on educational
planning and economics.
30

Some future prospects
by Boris Kluchnikov
Potential future grand masters of chess study the end game in a school at Kislovodsk in the Caucasus
foothills, near Pyatogorsk, USSR. Chess is becoming part of the regular curriculum for children from the age
of 6 in many Soviet schools.
education systems have been establish¬
ed for the first time in their history, and
the elimination of illiteracy and the
provision of primary education for all
have become officially recognized as
priority national objectives.
According to Unesco statistics, dur¬
ing the period 1960 to 1980 the number
of pupils and students in the developing
countries increased 2.4 times at the
primary level, 4.6 times at the secon¬
dary level and 6.3 times in higher
education. At the same time fun¬
damental qualitative changes occurred
which brought about what might be
described as the "decolonization" of
education. Pupils began to be taught in
their own languages and to study the
history, literature, geography and
general nature of their own countries.
In the socialist countries, over a _
relatively, short period of time, secon-
dary education became . generally
available and in the industrialized
countries of the West and in Japan
there has also been a rapid expansion in
education, especially in higher educa¬
tion of both long and short duration;
there- has also, however, been a con-,
siderablë increase in unemployment
among young people with specialist
qualifications.
The notion of the democratization of
education and of equal access and op¬
portunity for all, in the development
and application of which' Unesco has
played a considerable rôle, has spread,
to most countries of the world. Unesco
figures show that, in the hundred coun¬
tries, for which statistics are available,
annual expenditure on education in¬
creased, in real terms, from $115 thou¬
sand million in 1960 to $365 thousand
million in 1976, an average increase of
from 3.7 per cent to 5.7 -per cent of
Gross National Product.
At the same time, however, expen¬
diture on armaments reached the even
greater figure of $600 thousand million
and, in many countries, escalation of
the arms race has led to a reduction in
social expenditure, in particular on
education, . culture and scientific
research for peaceful purposes.
In many countries there is an
ominously growing tendency to push
education into the background; there is
now an evident lowering of political
will to maintain the rapid educational
expansion of the 1960s and 1970s. And
31

the belief is gaining ground that in the
Third World education may be a bot¬
tomless pit. This is the consequence of
the serious problems that have arisen in
the educational systems of many coun¬
tries which are seen to be divorced from
life and the real needs of the communi¬
ty, thus contributing to higher
unemployment particularly among
young people, to be incapable of
eliminating illiteracy, and to be ignor¬
ing the needs of women and girls, and
so on. The rapid emergence of notable
differences in the quality of education
can be clearly discerned and, in many
countries, two distinct forms of educa¬
tion are becoming institutionalized
one for the general public and one for
a socially-privileged élite, a high stan¬
dard of education for the town, a lower
quality for the country, with a similar
divide appearing between the deve¬
loped and the developing countries.
Besides, criticism of the objectives of
education and the rigidity of its struc¬
tures is largely justified, as are charges
that programmes are out of date and
that there are delays in using the fruits
of science and technology to improve
the efficiency of the educational pro¬
cess. All these obstacles to the positive
development of education have given
rise to a far-reaching international
debate on the crisis through which
education is passing.
Nevertheless, a close examination of
the difficulties and successes of educa¬
tion today casts serious doubts on the
reality of a world crisis in education. In
the light of analysis it is possible to af
firm that this crisis is not universal in
nature and that its manifestations are
limited to countries which arevgoing
through a period of overall crisis in
their development.
But in the others too, the successes of
recent decades provide no grounds for
unthinking optimism about the future,
even excluding the possibility of war or
a global catastrophe.
Statistical projections based on
Unesco studies give us some idea of the
future evolution of education and some
alarming trends are being revealed. The
rate of growth in the number of pupils
will probably decline during the 1980s
at all levels and for all kinds of educa¬
tion, and as a result the goal of univer¬
sal primary education for all by the
year 2000 will not be attained. As in the
past, illiteracy will continue to be con¬
centrated in the developing countries in
the countryside and among women. To
the detriment of the people, a growing
number of countries, including some
developing countries, are becoming in¬
volved in the arms race. Over the past
few years, within a whole group of
countries, a relative, and at times ab¬
solute, reduction has been seen in
educational expenditure, in particular
on primary schooling, the eradication
of illiteracy and the training of adults.
We believe that, contrary to what is
sometimes thought, there is no real
choice to be made between the demo¬
cratization of education, primary
education for all, the eradication of il¬
literacy and the concentration of
resources on improving the quality of
education and the training of cadres for
the economy.
Public expenditure on education is
diminishing in certain industrialized
countries. To the detriment of the
general school and of the quality of
education, there is a concentration on
forms of education of interest to the
large corporations and in particular to
the military complexes.
The revival of another alarming
tendency has become evident in recent
years. Neo-conservatives" among
educationists are attempting to make
use of the fact of the inequality of in¬
tellectual capacity to attack the notion
of the democratization of education.
For those who believe in "genetic
determinism" there "is no point in talk¬
ing of equality of opportunity and even
less of equality of achievement. It is
hardly necessary to point out how con¬
venient the notion of genetic deter¬
minism is for those who want to reduce
social expenditure in general and to
limit the financial responsibility of the
State for education.
There is considerable justification
for current criticism of the objectives
of education, of the rigidity of its struc¬
tures, its anachronistic programmes
and the delay in making use of scien¬
tific and technological advances to im¬
prove the efficacy of the process of ac¬
quiring knowledge. Use on a large scale
of new teaching methods, in particular
programmed teaching and informatics,
offers wide prospects for the per¬
sonalization of education. Of course,
everything depends on the way these
An open-air school in the
Cauca district, Colombia.
Photo © Cris Queiroz, Pans
32

"Morning came. Fire was still smouldering in Hiroshima. I entered the city. Many people were dead in the
fire prevention water tank, their bodies scorched black. I saw a dead woman, her standing body scorched
black, holding a child in her arms and still in a running position. Utterly incredible, but this was reality". This
drawing is by Yasuko Yamagata who was 17 years old when the first atomic bomb fell on Hiroshima on
the morning of 6 August 1945. It is taken from Hiroshima-Nagasaki, Pictures of the Atomic Bombings, a
book published in 1 981 by a committee of Japanese citizens, founded in 1 977, whose goal is the abolition
of all nuclear weapons so that the tragedies of Hiroshima and Nagasaki shall never be repeated. The book
records, in photographs and drawings and in the testimony of eye-witnesses, the full horror of the bombings
and their aftermath. Some of the drawings by the Hibakusha (survivors of the bombings) like Yasuko
Yamagata were made up to 30 years after the event, but they retain all the immediacy of a moment in time
etched indelibly on the memory.
Drawing Yasuko Yamagata © 1981, Committee for the Publication of the Book Hiroshima-Nagasaki
new techniques are used. Clearly no
machine will ever replace the teacher
whose task it is to shape the younger
generation's vision of the world.
The potentialities of these new edu¬
cational means relate less to reducing
the cost of education than to improving
its quality. They free the teacher from
the repetitive, routine aspects of his
work, allowing him to devote greater
attention to the personality of the pu¬
pil, bringing out his human qualities
and developing his power of logical
thought, teaching him the methodolo¬
gy of the acquisition of knowledge and
giving him an understanding of his rôle
in life, of his occupation and of his
obligations to society.
The world of work offers great possi¬
bilities for the rounding off and per¬
sonalization of the student's education.
In preparing the 11th Five Year Plan
(1981-1985), Soviet educationists put
forward a number of possible scenarios
for the development of the educational
system up to 1990. Particular attention
is paid to pre-school education and, in
one school model, whilst a structure of
teaching by disciplines is preserved, the
time allocated to practical work in the
laboratory and work-oriented instruc¬
tion is considerably increased.
New objectives were also proposed
for higher education, which is playing
an increasingly important rôle in Soviet
society. In the USSR today, some 12
million specialists, or one worker in 10,
have benefited from higher education.
Generalized higher education, with
universities at Moscow, Tashkent, Sa¬
markand and Baku for 1 50 thousand to
200 thousand students, can now be rea¬
listically envisaged. The problem is to
ensure that this mass education does
not lead to standardization and the
drowning of individual personality and
that personalized instruction is
introduced.
33

It is commonly accepted today that it
is no longer possible to have a once-
and-for-all period of study and that it is
vital to know how to renew a person's
educational acquisitions throughout
his entire life. The system of training
specialists must become sufficiently
flexible to cope with rapid re-training
to meet new requirements. The Plan
proposes this objective for the years to
come: "The method of planning the
training of specialists in higher educa¬
tional establishments must allow of a
rapid response to the imperatives of the
national economy". The complexity of
this objective can be gauged by the fact
that in the USSR some 500 special
fields of study appear each year (and
about the same number of old ones
disappear).
This approach, it would appear, can
only be given greater prominence in the
future, and this is why, from now on,
particular attention is to be given to
promising scientific developments such
as quantic electronics, microproces¬
sors, medicine, biology, genetics, the
energies of the future and the safe¬
guarding of the environment. At the
same time, a system of retraining for
specialists is being established which
between now and the year 2000 may be
instructing greater numbers than thé
system of initial training. The educa¬
tion of adults 'with their specific needs
will be closely associated with this
system.
This brief overview would not be
complete without a mention of the ex¬
perimental research on new models of
schools and higher educational estab¬
lishments now being carried out in the
national republics of the USSR and
which take into account local condi¬
tions and cultural differences. Com¬
parison of the experiences of the dif¬
ferent Soviet republics is of great im¬
portance to forecasting in the educatio¬
nal field, and this great undertaking
would be given new impetus if it could
be coupled with a vast effort of interna¬
tional CO-Operation. Boris Kluchnikov
0 p
ID
IB rn
Brazil remembers
a modern master
Brazil has launched a major project to
study and make more widely known the
life and work of the great modern painter
Candido Portinari (1903-1962), whose
estimated output of some 4,000 works
constitutes a vast visual synthesis of the
land and people of Brazil. The project
aims to locate and document all the ar¬
tist's work, create a Portinari data bank
and produce a wide range of publications
and audio-visual material. The ultimate
goal is the establishment of a Portinari
Foundation as a centre for cultural
research and investigation and a means
of promoting the work of contemporary
Brazilian artists.
Recent Unesco books
on education
The Education of Adults, A
world perspective. Co-published
with OISE Press who have ex¬
clusive sales rights in Canada. 2nd
revised edition, 1982. 280 pp.
(45 F)
The Economics of New
Educational Media, Vol. 3. Cost
and effectiveness overview and
synthesis, by Jean-Claude Eicher,
David Hawkridge, Emile McAny,
François Mariet, François Orivel.
(No. 1 in Unesco's "Educational
Methods and Techniques" series)
1982, 150 pp. (35 F)
Higher Education and the
New International Order, edited
by Bikas C. Sanyal. Contributions
by Malcolm Adiseshiah, Theodore
Schultz, Jan Tinbergen, Bogdan
Suchodolski, Rafael Salas, Edmun¬
do Fuenzalida, Samir Amin, Pablo
Latapi, Jean-Louis Reiffers,
Mohamed Moursi Ahmed,
Mohamed Hamdy El-Nashar. Co-
published with Frances Pinter
Publishers Ltd., who have ex¬
clusive sales rights in the UK for
hardbound copies only. 1 982, 242
pp. (100 F)
The Right to Education:
What Kind of Management? by
Daniel Haag. 1 982, 1 75 pp. (30 F)
School Buildings and Natural
Disasters, by D.J. Vickery. 1982
(25 F)
Terminology of Adult Educa¬
tion, by Colin Titmus. Trilingual:
English/French/Spanish. First
published 1979, reprinted 1981.
154 pp. (28 F)
Terminology of Technical
and Vocational Education, first
published 1978, reprinted 1982.
88 pp. (12 F)
Literacy and Illiteracy, by An¬
dré Lestage. 1982, 31 pp. (10 F)
A Systems Approach to
Teaching and Learning Pro¬
cedures. A guide for educators.
2nd edition revised and expanded.
1981, 203 pp. (40 F)
The UNESCO COURIER is published monthly.
Individual articles and photographs not copyrighted
may be reprinted providing the credit line reads
"Reprinted from the UNESCO COURIER", plus date
of issue, and three voucher copies are sent to the
editor. Signed articles reprinted must bear author's
name. Non-copyright photos will be supplied on re¬
quest. Unsolicited manuscripts cannot be returned
unless accompanied by an international reply
coupon covering postage. Signed articles express
the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the opinions of UNESCO or those of the
editors of the UNESCO COURIER. Photo captions
and headlines are written by the Unesco Courier
staff.
The Unesco Courier is produced in microform
(microfilm and/or microfiche) by: (1) University
Microfilms (Xerox). Ann Arbor, Michigan 48100,
U.S.A.; (2) N.C.R. Microcard Edition, Indian Head,
Inc., 111 West 40th Street, New York, U.S.A.; (3)
Bell and Howell Co., Old Mansfield Road, Wooster,
Ohio 44691, U.S.A.
3~4
Assistant Editor-in-chief: Olga Rodel
Managing Editor: Gillian Whitcomb,
Editors:
English: Howard Brabyn (Paris)
French: Alain Lévêque (Paris)
Spanish: Francisco Fernandez-Santos (Paris)
Russian: Nikolai Kuznetsov (Paris)
Arabic: Sayed Osman (Paris)
German: Werner Merkli (Berne)
Japanese: Kazuo Akao (Tokyo)
Italian: Mario Guidotti (Rome)
Hindi: Krishna Gopal (Delhi)
Tamil: M. Mohammed Mustafa (Madras)
Hebrew: Alexander Broîdo (Tel Aviv)
Persian: Mohammed Reza Berenji (Teheran)
Dutch: Paul Morren (Antwerp)
Portuguese: Benedicto Silva (Rio de Janeiro)
Turkish: Mefra llgazer (Istambul)
Urdu: Hakim Mohammed Said (Karachi)
Catalan: Joan Carreras i Marti (Barcelona)
Malaysian: Azizah Hamzah (Kuala Lumpur)
Korean: Kim U-Yearn (Seoul)
Swahili: Domino Rutayebesibwa
(Dar-es-Salam)
Braille: Frederick Potter (Paris)
Croato-Serb, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat, Slo¬
vene: Punisa Pavlovic (Belgrade)
Chinese: Shen Guofen (Pekin)
Bulgarian: Pavel Pissarev (Sofia)
Greek: Alchis Angelou
Assistant Editors:
English Edition: Roy Malkin
French Edition:
Spanish Edition: Jorge Enrique Adoum
Research: Christiane Boucher
Illustrations: Ariane Bailey
Layout and Design: Robert Jacquemin
Promotion: Fernando Ainsa
All correspondence should be addressed to the
Editor-in-Chief in Pans.
So
<=>
. o
¡<
ê ce
uj'V
go
1 1
°- w
$o
CE Q.
<DS
QO
<o
Oh
oo
CE I
CD Q.
