The challenge
of the chip
by Aleksandr F. Baryshev
Photo Michel Claude, Unesco
With its thousands of components, this microprocessor,
magnified 3.5 times in our photo, controls everything words,
pictures, graphics, colours, etc. that appears on the screen of
a modern computer terminal.
WITH electronic watches and
pocket calculators at one
end of the scale, and huge
computer complexes at the other, it
has become difficult for us to im¬
agine a world without semi-con¬
ductor devices of one kind
another. Indeed, we might suggest
that "micro-electronics" is having a
"macro-impact" on the social and
economic life of human beings, and
in two specific domains in particular.
In the first place, working condi¬
tions and the actual distribution of
jobs are undergoing profound
changes as a result of the process of
automation. This process began
some thirty years ago, but although
	
ALEKSANDR FEDOROVICH BARYSHEV is
a Soviet specialist in the application of compu¬
ter technology to control systems. A member
of the International Research Institute of Con¬
trol Sciences, heis the authorofa series ofstu¬
dies concerning automation, a field in which he
has also been responsible for a number of
innovations.
10
the problems involved have been
discussed throughout the interven¬
ing period, it is only during the last
few years that their importance and
urgency have been fully recognized,
with the appearance on the world
market of the microprocessor a
piece of electronic equipment which,
in fact as well as in theory, is capable
of taking the control of entire
manufacturing activities and of many
service industries out of human
hands. It is hard to conceive all the
social and economic implications of
this development.
Secondly, microprocessors have
proved to be by far the most efficient
instruments from the technological
and economic points of view alike
for handling the vast and rapidly in¬
creasing flow of information, whose
role in the affairs of the modern world
cannot be overestimated.
Before going further, let us recall
the basic characteristics of the
microprocessor itself, the most
precocious child of semiconductor
technology, whose own rapid
development has made it possible to
implant what are known as in¬
tegrated circuits on tiny (no greater
than 5x5 mm) slices of silicon, call¬
ed "chips". Depending on the densi¬
ty of the circuits, this process is
known as large-scale or very large-
scale integration (LSI and VLSI). At
first, these systems were used for
memorizing operations, and for cer¬
tain logical operations. Later, and as
a result of the increased sophistica¬
tion of the integrated circuits, it'
became possible to place on a single
silicon chip the means of carrying out
logical, memorizing and input/output
functions, and of relating these func¬
tions to each other.
This breakthrough led to the cre¬
ation, in 1971, of the first micro¬
processor, a piece of equipment
which carries out the functions of
one of the basic components of a
conventional computer the central

processing unit, or CPU. In other
words, the microprocessor is
capable of deciphering and executing
the instructions contained in a pro¬
gramme (which, in a computer, is
committed to its memory, the se¬
cond basic component), and of con¬
trolling the process of acceptance
and supply of information (the in¬
put/output component of a com¬
puter). Infinitely smaller than a con¬
ventional computer, and consuming
far less power, the microprocessor,
when it is connected to appropriate
external elements, actually becomes
a "microcomputer".
The development of micro¬
processors and microcomputers
alike is taking place at great speed. If
the past 30 years have seen the ap¬
pearance of only four successive
generations of computers, a fourth-
generation microprocessor made its
appearance only eight years after the
first. This means to say that, at the
present rate of progress, a new
generation is emerging every two
years, to become obsolete after a
period of three or four years.
Microprocessors and microcom¬
puters are playing a significant role in
the development of many different
branches of industry. According to
the Soviet scientist, Academician
Gury I. Marchuk, microelectronic
technology will; in the forseeable
future, have been applied in more
than 200,000 different devices and
systems in industry and in the home.
This is indeed a technological
revolution!
Specialists reckon that some 250
million units and systems incor¬
porating microprocessors were in
use throughout the world at the end
of 1980, and that between five and
ten thousand million will be in service
in the year 2000.
They are being more and more
widely used in many fields, notably in
medicine. Microprocessors enable
sophisticated methods of calculation
to be perfected, to make more ac¬
curate diagnoses of illnesses of the
cardiovascular system and brain ill¬
nesses, through such processes as
electrocardiography and tomo¬
graphy, and to check the patient's
psychophysiological characteristics.
They are also used for the continuous
supervision of patients during the
post-operatory period, and in the ap¬
plication of intensive therapy. In this
way they make it possible to take the
necessary measures and con¬
siderably facilitate the work of the
medical staff.
Microprocessors also play an im¬
portant role in the production of con¬
sumer goods, cars, games and toys,
apparatus in everyday use, house¬
hold computers, etc. The number of
machines of this kind, which stood at
80 million in 1980, could reach 200
million in 1984. The application of
microprocessors and microcom¬
puters is developing above all in the
leisure industry and in the automobile
industry.
The promise of the microprocessor
lies in the manner in which it com¬
bines low cost, size and power con¬
sumption with high information-
handling capacity and reliability.
Thus, for example the first
microprocessor, "lntel-8008", cost
$360, whereas an improved version,
which appeared two years later, cost
less than $30. Today far more
sophisticated microprocessors such
as "Intel 8080" and "Zilog 80" cost
between 4 and 5 dollars and this
trend towards reduced costs is
continuing.
The format of today's pocket
calculators is determined by the size
of the keyboard, and not by the
printed circuits they contain. Indeed,
the information-handling capacity of
such circuits is steadily increasing.
Between 1975 and 1978, the pack¬
ing density of a silicon chip measur¬
ing 1 mm2 grew in a ratio of
1 :80,000. If this trend is maintained,
a single chip may well be carrying up
to 109 electronic elements by the
mid-1990s, although this will de¬
pend on the solution of a great
number of outstanding problems. In
recent years, the reliability of
microprocessor circuits has increas¬
ed three to four times.
The appearance of micro¬
processors and microcomputers
forms part of the phenomenon
which, in many circles, is called the
"information revolution", defined by
the Canadian scientist T.R. Ide as a
combination of developments in
telecommunications on the one
hand, and in computer technology on
the other.
In essence, the computer is an "in¬
formation machine". Information ar¬
rives from the external environment
via its input mechanism; the machine
stores this information, processes it
according to a predetermined set of
rules, and then produces the results
via its output system. In other words,
the computer establishes a relation
between different facts, evaluates
analogies, and carries out other func-
tions;it interacts with, and helps to
change, its environment, thereby
revealing itself capable of replacing
human intervention in many intellec¬
tual processes.
At this point, we might pause to
consider the biological aspects of the
development of information. The
Swiss scientist, B. Fritsch, has sug¬
gested that the first great quan¬
titative jump forward in this process
occurred during the Stone Age,
when men began to assimilate a
greater amount of information direct¬
ly from their immediate surroundings
(than as a result of transmission from
generation to generation). The se¬
cond jump took place some 5,000
years ago, with the invention of dif¬
ferent forms of writing, which made
it possible to store information
elsewhere than in the human brain;
the invention of printing was merely
a qualitative refinement of this
breakthrough.
The creation of microprocessors
may be seen as the third spectacular
jump as far as the development of in¬
formation is concerned. Again for the
first time in history, it has become
possible to store not only informa¬
tion, but also intellect.
When we bear in mind that the first
of the above three stages covered a
period of a hundred million years, the
second several millennia and the
third only a matter of decades, we
realize that the entire process of in¬
formation development is ac¬
celerating at an almost unbelievable
rate.
The "information" content of
automation is becoming increasingly
11

^ apparent. In fact, automation is only
an efficient process when it is back¬
ed by an economic and well-orga¬
nized capacity to collect, conserve,
analyse and transmit information. All
control systems function on the
basis of information-handling in the
sequence: input processing out¬
put; the role of microprocessors in
such systems is to furnish the
capacity to process information in¬
puts and to devise control operations.
At the beginning of the 1 960s, the
famous Soviet mathematician,
Academician Victor M. Glukhov,
drew attention to the need to in¬
troduce automation into control pro¬
cedures. Under his direction, the first
project was drawn up for a network
of State computing centres which
would be established to reorganize,
without using paper as a medium,
the mechanisms of administrative
and economic management, from
plant to "Gosplan" level.
Later, from 1965 to 1970, the
Soviet Union carried out a pro¬
gramme of automatized manage¬
ment at plant level and in various
ministries. The experience thus ac¬
quired made it possible to define the
task of computing centres in the
State network: they would con¬
stitute the technical basis of a global
automatized system for collecting
and processing management and
planning information. This is an am¬
bitious programme which is taking
more than a decade.
12
Recent improvement in radio
telephony has been a major
life-saving factor, enabling
doctors and nurses to in¬
tervene during the crucial
early period after a serious ac¬
cident, a heart attack or other
emergency. Left, all the
emergency vehicles of the
ambulance service of the
Lithuanian SSR are equipped
with modern ultra-short wave
radio telephones.
Photo WHO, Geneva
But what of the information itself?
The current rate of growth of scien¬
tific and technical information is
estimated at 12.5 per cent per year.
In other words, we are faced with a
paradoxical situation in which men
are called upon to exercise tighter
and tighter management over the
economy, and where the number of
decisions they must take, based on
factual information, is increasing ex¬
ponentially from year to year.
It is in this context that
microprocessors and other types of
microelectronic equipment come in¬
to their own, as the basis for highly
cost-effective information systems.
For example, the total amount of in¬
formation required to enable a
university student to complete his
education may be expressed in 3.1
x 107 words, incorporating 1.64 x
108 signs; modern electronics
makes it possible to store all this in¬
formation in no more than the
volume of space occupied by a
packet of cigarettes.
Improved accessibility of informa¬
tion is not only changing the face of
education. The application of micro¬
electronics is transforming the pat¬
tern of job distribution not only
within individual enterprises, but in
entire branches of the manufacturing
and service industries. The propor¬
tion of research and development
(R & D) personnel in factories pro¬
ducing office and management
equipment has, for example, increas
ed significantly in recent years. Ac¬
cording to the Italian scientist Bruno
Lamborghini, the proportion of the
employees of one large Italian com¬
pany engaged in research rose from
5.6 per cent in 1 970 to 9 per cent in
1978; during the same period, the
proportion of production workers fell
from 45 per cent to 31 per cent.
Similar trends have been observed
in a number of Western European
countries. These changes call for a
radical modification of educational
systems. Rapid growth in the ap¬
plication of microelectronics, the
rate of renewal of techniques and
technologies and the increasing out¬
put of microelectronic products are
leading to a situation where it is
essential to relocate large numbers
of workers, and to train them for new
tasks.
In many fields of human activity, a
thorough renewal of knowledge and
skills is already required every five or
six years, and it is possible that this
period will be considerably reduced
in the future. Conditions are thus ripe
for lifelong education a concept
which Unesco has consistently
advocated and, in the opinion of
some specialists, for the incorpora¬
tion of basic instruction in informa¬
tion processing and microelectronic
technology in general education
programmes.
It is not surprising, therefore, that
many scientists and specialists
throughout the world believe that the
solution of the problems posed by
the widespread application of
microelectronics is closely related to
the issues of education, science and
culture. This view was clearly ad¬
vanced, for example, during the First
European Conference on the Socio-
Economic Problems and Potential of
the Application of Microelectronics
in the World of Work, held in the
Netherlands in September 1979 and
at the meeting of the Club of Rome,
in Austria, in February 1982.
Microelectronics opens up qualita¬
tively new possibilities for individual
development; but at the same time it
makes increased demands as far as
the numbers and skills of scientific
and technical personnel are concern¬
ed. The compulsory secondary
education provided in the Socialist
countries lays the necessary founda¬
tion for proceeding to a technical and
university education, and thus
seriously addresses the problem of
creating a completely new type of
worker one who has received
higher, specialized education.

In the Socialist countries, the
changes brought about by microelec¬
tronics in the world of work have a
generally positive character,
although the possibility that they
may exercise a negative influence on
certain groups of workers or on cer¬
tain situations cannot be excluded.
But, under conditions of full employ¬
ment, these negative aspects can be
countered by the reorientation and
re-education of the workers concern¬
ed, so that they may apply their
energies and knowledge more effec¬
tively in other fields of productive
activity.
Study of the social and economic
consequences of the spread of these
new technologies forms part of a co¬
operative programme adopted by the
Council for Mutual Economic
Assistance (Comecon), in July 1 982,
with a view to promoting the
development of microprocessors and
their'application in member countries
over a period extending up to 1990.
The programme lays emphasis on the
training and recycling of intermediate
and high-level technicians in this
field.
According to figures from the US
Bureau of Labor Statistics, automa¬
tion may, by the end of this century,
lead to a situation where no more
than 10 per cent of the country's
workforce are employed in manufac¬
turing industry. At present, in a
number of non-Socialist industrializ¬
ed countries, the figure ranges bet¬
ween 35 and 50 per cent.
The introduction of microelec¬
tronics poses special problems in the
developing countries. In so far as the
development of the appropriate tech¬
nology demands an impressive
amount of initial capital investment,
as well as a firmly established scien¬
tific and technical infrastructure, it is
particularly difficult for these coun¬
tries to carry out their own R&D ac¬
tivities in the fields of computers and
telecommunications.
Furthermore, the development of
information systems on an interna¬
tional basis has political, as well as
economic implications for the
developing countries. Their govern¬
ments cannot obtain control over in¬
formation emanating from locally-
implanted manufacturing or service
industries, because the archives and
data banks in which this information
is stored are concentrated, as a rule,
in the hands of transnational corpora¬
tions, which thereby retain control
over the information itself.
The economic implications of the
problem lie in the fact that informa¬
tion tends to flow towards centres
where it can be most effectively and
economically processed, which
means, once again, in the direction of
the transnational corporations.
As we said at the beginning of this
article, it is still difficult to present a
comprehensive picture of all the
social, economic, organizational,
scientific and technical problems
posed by the ever-widening applica¬
tion of microelectronics and by the
growth of microelectronic infor¬
mation-handling capacities. Never¬
theless, it is certainly not too early to
consider, with every justification for
doing so, that the development of
the microprocessor may well go
down in history as the world's fourth
industrial revolution.
I Aleksandr F. Baryshev
Photo B. Oumaikin © APN, Moscow
The robot workshop of the machine-tool factory at Krasnodar, on the
Kuban River, one of the principal robot producers of the Soviet Union.
13
