LEONHARD EULER (1707-1783)
A chñd of the sun
by Emile A. Fellmann
THE exact sciences have been so
misused in their technological
and ecological applications that
they have fallen into considerable
disrepute in recent years. But that
should not prevent us from paying
tribute, on the second centenary of his
death, to one who, in the general
history of civilization and scientific
humanism, ranks as one of science's
most eminent representatives.
Leonhard Euler was not only by far
the most productive mathematician in
history, but also one of the greatest
savants of all time. A cosmopolitan in
the truest sense, he spent his early
years in Basel (Switzerland), worked
for a total of more than thirty years in
St. Petersburg (now Leningrad), and
spent a quarter of a century in Berlin,
then the capital of Prussia. In terms of
popularity and fame, he ranks with
Galileo, Newton and Albert Einstein.
Euler's contemporaries and biogra¬
phers all agree that, as the astrologers
say, he was "a child of the sun", of a
gay and open nature, sociable and full
of humour. Sometimes he would lose
his temper, but never for long and he
would always end by laughing at his
own outbursts. There was, however,
one subject about which he would tol¬
erate no levity, and that was religion
and the Christian faith. His strictness in
matters of religious belief explains
many facts of his life such as, for in¬
stance, his relentless assaults on the
Leibniz theory of monads (taken over
by Wolff), or his violent attacks on
some of the encyclopedists and other
free-thinkers (in his theological work
Sauvegarder la Révélation Divine,
1747). Nevertheless, Euler's practical
tolerance was much greater and more
sincere than that of his royal master,
who used the word because it was
fashionable, but readily forgot it if its
practical application embarrassed him
in the least.
Euler was also extremely modest in
regard to scientific copyright. Unlike
most scientists of all time, he never
claimed any prior rights over his own
discoveries. Indeed in his generosity he
sometimes went so far as to make a
gift of new discoveries and ideas. He
never concealed anything in his works,
EMILE A. FELLMANN, of Switzerland, is a
specialist in the work of Leonhard Euler. He is
secretary of the Euler Commission of the
Society of Natural Sciences of the Swiss
Academy of Sciences and a member of the In¬
ternational Academy of the History of
Sciences, Paris.
8
Leonhard Euler (1707-1783)
was the most prolific mathema¬
tician in history and ranks with
such figures as Galileo, Newton
and Einstein as one of the great
scientists of all time. Above,
portrait of Euler executed in
1753 by Emanuel Handmann.
always put his cards on the table, and
gave the reader a fair chance of
discovering something new. What is
more, in many instances he would lead
him to the threshold of a new discovery
and, like a true teacher, let him have
the pleasure of achieving it. This is
why the study of Euler's works is a
unique experience, both entertaining
and fascinating.
However skilled a man may be in
making abstractions and in ob¬
taining general ideas, he could
make no progress without the aid
of languages, which is twofold,
first in the form of speech and se¬
cond in the form of writing.
Euler
The Euler phenomenon is essentially
due to three factors. In the first place,
he had a prodigious memory. Appa¬
rently whatever he heard, saw or read
was for ever engraved in his memory.
For instance, it is said that when he
was quite old he would still delight his
family and friends by faithfully reciting
in Latin any of the verses of Virgil's
Aeneid. Years after they were held, he
still knew by heart the reports of
academic meetings. And this is not to
speak of his memory for everything
concerning mathematics. Secondly,
this prodigious memory was combined
with rare powers of concentration.
Su' ounding noise and bustle scarcely
d¡Ff irbed the workings of his mind. To
qu-e his friend and colleague
Thiébault, "with a child on his knee
and a cat on his shoulder that is how
he wrote his immortal works". The
third key to the Euler mystery was
simply calm, untiring effort.
Euler is a unique phenomenon
because of his output alone. The list
prepared by Gustave Eneström and
published in 1910-1913 of works
printed up to that time comprises 866
items, and the great Swiss edition of
Euler's works, on which many experts
of various nationalities have been
working since the beginning of the pre¬
sent century, so far contains 70 quarto
volumes, to be followed by 14 vol¬
umes of "letters and manuscript".
In the volume of his output, Euler is
in no way inferior to such prolific cre¬
ators as Voltaire, Goethe, Leibniz or
Telemann. The following table, divided
into ten-year periods, gives an idea of
the number of works written by Euler
and ready for printing (not counting
some dozens of still undated items):
Period Works Period Works
1725-1734
1735-1744
1745-1754
35 1755-1764 7 70
50 1765-1774 745
750 1775-1785 270
Classified by subject, this represents
the following percentages:
Algebra, the theory of
numbers, analysis 	40 per cent
Mechanics, physics ... 28 per cent
Geometry and trigo¬
nometry 	 18 per cent
Astronomy 1 1 per cent
Shipbuilding science, ar¬
chitecture, artillery science 2 per cent
Philosophy, musical theory,
theology, etc	 1 per cent
This list does not include some
3,000 letters known to date, nor still
unpublished manuscripts.
The first formal conception of dif¬
ferential and integral calculus by Leib¬
niz and Newton made it possible to ex¬
plain and predict the course of natural

Above, the first page of a letter Euler wrote on 20 June 1 740 to his
former teacher in Basel, Johann Bernoulli who duly noted in top right
hand corner "Received 27 July 1740". Lines 5 to 8, which deal with
money matters, were tactfully crossed out by Bernoulli or his son.
Above, schematic depiction of the cosmos as
Euler saw it, from his work Theoria Motuum
Planetarum et Cometarum (1744). Applying
his great mathematical talents to the
movements of the heavenly bodies, Euler con¬
ceived of the solar system as one system
among many others which all obey the same
laws of gravity.
phenomena. For a number of re¬
searchers, foremost among whom
were the brothers James and John Ber¬
noulli of Basel, this opened up a vast,
new domain for conquest by the
human mind in the Age of Enlighten¬
ment. The first to embark on this
voyage of scientific discovery was
Leonhard Euler.
In the domain of pure mathematics,
he established at once a number of
new subjects for research, and deve¬
loped them methodically the theory
of numbers, the theory of functions,
the theory of infinite series, higher
algebra, and the calculus of variations.
The textbooks he wrote on these sub¬
jects are still as up-to-date as ever.
Thanks to his lively style and ex¬
emplary didactic powers, they can still
be read with profit and pleasure. Many
of the mathematical symbols used to¬
day were invented by Euler. Those
used in trigonometry have been kept
unaltered.
In the introduction to his Mechanics
in 1736, Euler outlined a vast pro¬
gramme for this branch of science. The
chief feature of this work, then veryiv

modern, was the consistent applica¬
tion of differential and integral calculus
to contemporary problems in mecha¬
nics. Application of the calculus of
variations to the theory of girder stress
led Euler to the formula of stress,
which we now know thanks to him and
without which modern engineering
would be inconceivable. In a special
application of a general theory, he also
discovered the optimum form of profile
for the rim of cogwheels (development
pitches). This was not applied in prac¬
tice until the 1 9th century, since when
it has become indispensable in the con¬
struction of machinery.
Euler's first major study in the field
of fluid mechanics was a comprehen¬
sive treatise on ships. Here he deals
with the general theory of the
equilibrium of floating bodies and an
innovation at that time studies the
problems of stability as well as the ef¬
fect of minor oscillations near the state
of equilibrium. Applying the general
theory to the particular case of a ship,
Euler founded a new science and had a
lasting influence on the development
Euler's work in astronomy covers a
wide spectrum. It includes determining
the trajectories of comets and planets
from only a small number of observa¬
tions, the solar parallax, and the theory
of refraction of atmospheric rays. His
most important treatises deal directly
or indirectly with celestial mechanics,
a branch of research founded by
Newton which engaged the greatest
attention of the leading mathemati¬
cians of that time. His theory concern¬
ing the moon, on which the astrono¬
mer Tobie Mayer of Göttingen based
his famous "Lunar Tables" in 1755,
enabled the longitude of a ship at sea
to be determined with a previously
unequalled precision. For a century,
these "Lunar Tables" of Euler and
Mayer were used in navigation at sea.
theology and ethics, and end with the
famous attempt to refute Berkeley's
absolute idealism and the ideas of
Hume. Euler's place in the history of
philosophy is still disputed, but his
more or less direct influence on Kant
cannot be denied.
Many treasures still remain to be
discovered in the works of Euler, but it
will be a long time before this pro¬
digious body of work is fully in print
and available to all. An adequate
biography of this, the most eminent of
Switzerland's expatriate sons, has still
to be written. Indeed such an enter¬
prise would be almost equivalent to
writing the entire history of mathema¬
tical science in the eighteenth century.
Emile A. Fellman
of maritime navigation and naval
engineering. In the history of technics,
Euler's experiments with Segner's
hydraulic engine and his resultant
theory of water turbines are we
known. About forty years ago, Jakob
Ackeret built a turbine exactly in accor¬
dance with Euler's directions and for¬
mulae, and found that it was more than
71 per cent efficient a remarkable
result considering that today, with the
most modern means and comparable
dimensions, turbines of this type are
scarcely more than 80 per cent
efficient.
Throughout his life, Euler was also
interested in optics. In this field too, he
is the author of the first textbooks in
the modern sense, and formulated a
general theory of the refracting lens
telescope. He played a considerable
rôle in the discovery of achromatic lens
systems (which do not distort colours).
Seven volumes of his Opera Omnia are
devoted to optics.
10
Euler's philosophical testament is
contained in his Lettres à une Princesse
d'Allemagne (Letters to a German
Princess) which, at her father's re¬
quest, he wrote between 1760 and
1 762 to the Margrave Sophie Charlotte
of Brandenburg. They were published
in three volumes from 1768 onwards
and became a bestseller. They were
even translated into many foreign
languages and for long constituted the
most widely circulated synopsis of
popular scientific and philosophical
culture. They embrace musical theory,
philosophy, physics, cosmology,
Title pages of some of Euler's
many works. Clockwise from far
left: Algebra, published in 1 770 by
the Academy of Sciences of St.
Petersburg and translated into
many languages; the Mechanica
(1736) in which Euler laid down
new criteria for the mathematical
treatment of physical phenomena;
the Dioptrica (1769), the first
modern textbook on optics; it con¬
tains a complete theory of the
telescope; the Methodus Invenien-
di Lineas Curvas, in which Euler
developed a new science, the
calculation of variations, which
still plays a major role in mathe¬
matics, physics and engineering.
Photos © Library of the University
of Basel, Switzerland
