IL Education for ail
IN spite of a decrease in the world illiteracy rate, the absolute
number of adult illiterates is still growing, notably because
of the population increase. There were 760 million il¬
literates in 1970, 814 million in 1980 and, if present trends con¬
tinue, there will be 900 million illiterates towards the end of the
century. Illiteracy can thus be regarded as a major challenge to
the international community.
But the democratization of education is not simply a matter
of quantity. The aim must be to ensure "equal opportunity for
all" by giving the "best opportunities to each".
The extension of education
One of Unesco's main priorities in its action over the next ten
years will be to foster the development and renewal of primary
education, coupled with literacy training for adults. This should
be intensified and closely associated with formal education,
which retains all its importance. However, there is often a need
for it to be better adapted to local requirements so as to avoid
any break with the rural world.
The aim will be at one and the same time to develop educa¬
tional facilities in the most deprived areas, to mobilize all
available resources, to stimulate the effective co-operation of
the whole community and to promote innovative approaches.
Special importance will be attached to the training of personnel
able to teach children, to run adult literacy programmes and to
promote innovative activities aimed at facilitating the entry of
young people who haye left school into the world of work.
The democratization of education
The second plank in the strategy will be to place the principles
of equity and justice at the very core of educational action. The
Organization will continue to fight against all forms of
discrimination in education and to assist in promoting measures
to enable the most disadvantaged social groups to exercise their
right to education.
The democratization of education appears to be inseparable
from lifelong education. This implies the broadening of educa¬
tional possibilities to be made available at every stage of life to
those who have not had access to the school and university
system and who wish to complete their education.
In the context of lifelong education, adult education takes on
a new importance as a means of achieving both personal fulfil¬
ment and vocational recycling. Special attention will be paid to
increasing adults' job mobility, in particular through co¬
operation between adult education bodies and workers' and
employers' organizations. Furthermore, one of the most impor¬
tant tasks of adult education is to prepare adults for the exercise
of their civic responsibilities and the management of communi¬
ty affairs, making use of the educative support of the means of
communication.
Not only does lifelong education imply educative activities
for the elderly, it also involves the development of pre-school
education which, among other things, enables compensation to
be made for certain socio-economic and socio-cultural
disadvantages.
The education of women
Girls and women are still in the minority in education in many
countries and the proportion of girls and women tends to
decrease progressively as the level of education rises.
One of the most urgent problems, however, is still that of il¬
literacy among women (in 1980 33.9 per cent of women aged
15 years and over were illiterate, as against 23.3 per cent of
men) which may have particularly harmful effects on the future
of the younger generations.
Here Unesco's activities, carried out on a broad inter¬
disciplinary basis, will draw on the social and human sciences
in order to demonstrate the economic, social or cultural factors
which, in different contexts, impede the access of girls and
women to, and their participation in, education. It will also aim
to highlight the effects, on education itself, of the relatively
large proportion of women in the teaching profession.
Unesco will co-operate with Member States in order to assist
them in framing policies to reduce the number of illiterate
women. Assistance will be provided for the improvement of na¬
tional educational and vocational guidance services as part of
the programme to promote equal access for girls and women to
scientific studies at all levels of technical and vocational
education.
The villagers of Ban Nong Pai in north¬
east Thailand voluntarily gave their
time to build this experimental child
care centre. The basic design was
prepared by Unesco but modified by
the villagers to make the best use of
locally available materials. UNICEF
helped with the purchase of materials
the villagers could not obtain
themselves.
Photo John Beynon, Unesco, ROEAP, Bangkok
11

Education in rural areas
In many countries, most people live in the rural areas. Here
the problem is to increase the number of schools and univer¬
sities established in rural areas and to improve the quality of
rural educational services. In rural zones, schools and univer¬
sities are often too distant from the homes of children and
young people, many schools do not offer a complete educa¬
tional cycle, many teachers have only meagre qualifications and
school buildings and materials are often inadequate. The task
is to ensure an improved contribution of education to the
In 1978, after the liberation struggle, 52 per cent of -the adult
population of Nicaragua was illiterate. In 1980, aided by Unesco
and the international community, the Nicaraguan Government
launched a national literacy campaign, mobilizing some 270,000
volunteers to form the People's Literacy Army. Within six months
more than 400,000 people had been taught to read and write and
the illiteracy rate had been reduced to 13 per cent. Above, a team
of literacy teachers in Nicaragua.
Unesco co-operates with UNRWA (the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East) in providing
educational services for Palestinian refugees in the Near East.
Right, lessons begin again in a school in Chatila camp, Lebanon,
after the massacres which horrified the world.
A remarkable effort has been made in the developing countries over
the past two decades to increase enrolment in school. At the
primary level, the enrolment ratio increased from 61 per cent in
1960 to 86 per cent in 1980. But soaring populations have com¬
pounded the difficulties. As the drawings, below, illustrate
graphically, to maintain an enrolment ratio of 86 per cent in the year
2000 the numbers actually enrolled would have to increase by
some 50 per cent, and by 75 per cent if a 100 per cent enrolment
ratio was to be achieved.
1980
Enrolment ratio
2000
Enrolment ratio
development of rural areas and to increase its relevance to the
needs of local populations, whilst avoiding any division bet¬
ween "urban education" and "rural education".
The handicapped, refugees, migrants
Unesco's aim will be to help certain groups to overcome the
obstacles which prevent them from exercising their right to
education to the full. Action will stress measures to detect and
prevent handicaps and will pay special attention to educating
the parents of disabled children, informing the public of the
problems raised for individuals and societies by the integration
of disabled persons and of the solutions that have been found
to these problems, and applying special educational methods
adapted to specific needs.
There are ten million refugees in the world, of whom five
million are in Africa. Unesco will continue to co-operate with
UNRWA on the education programme for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East. It will provide technical support for the HCR's
(United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees) educational
activities for refugees and will encourage the governments of
host countries to introduce special curricula for refugees into
their education system. Unesco's educational assistance to na¬
tional liberation movements will be expanded and focused
above all on making the right to education a reality.
A major problem is that of migrant workers and their
families. Action will be concerned with adapting second-
generation migrants to the living conditions of the host
country chiefly by helping them to obtain a command of the
language and preparing them to integrate subsequently in
their home countries. Special attention will be given to the
teaching of the mother tongue, and to the mutual recognition
of degrees and diplomas. Other activities will seek to provide
immigrant children with special instruction to keep them in
touch with the cultural values of their countries of origin.
Photo UNRWA
