The goddess
who came
down to earth
by Lokenath Bhattacharya
IT is to be acknowledged in all humility that writing about
Ganga, the Ganges as others call her, is an impossibility,
since much of the river exists more in the imagination of
the people who, verily, are her own
children, a repetition of the fallen
Vasus of the Mahabharata, than in
reality. A river is a she, in Sanskrit as
well as in French, and maybe in quite
a few other languages also. But
nowhere is a river she with such force
and presence as in the case of Ganga.
Ganga is the name of a
civilization in fact, many civiliza¬
tions. Epochs of history and
chronicles of cults and cultures lie
dormant in the layers of the soil wash¬
ed by the waters. Dreams and despair,
facts and fiction, creation and
devastation, all have been elements in
a process which has culminated in the
portrayal of her image. In the pan¬
theon of Hindu divinities, especially
as an object of popular worship, she
occupies a unique position. As the
scriptures describe it, her home is
among the stars, where the Path of
Vishnu lies, between Ursa Major and
the Pole Star. "Mother, you who are
born of Vishnu's footstep, repre¬
senting His force and honoured by
Him, protect us, and wash the sins we
commit from birth to death".
Like her elder spiritual sister
Sarasvati, the legendary river now lost
in the desert of time, Ganga too
becomes a "mother of the Vedas",
and is identified with the Word. She is
the pearl of poetry, "engaging herself in grammar, giving
pleasure to the ears".
And what hold she has on her devotees!
Three incidents come to my mind. I can't exactly recall if they
all happened during the same journey. But all were at Gangotri,
the real as well as legendary place not far from the first visible
source of the river of the ringing, singing name, the river that
is the mother, the goddess, the beloved, the flowing, scin¬
tillating life, the life-giving water, the waters of creation.
The first concerns a one-legged youth, ascetic-looking,
standing knee-deep in the icy water of the Bhagirathi, very near
the bend in front of the Gangotri temple. The month was Oc¬
tober, and the time about six o'clock in the morning. A frozen,
frost-bitten picture, not only because of thé shattering, ex¬
cruciating cold, but also because of a certain stillness and a
timelessness that surrounded the air. Yet the river was anything
but motionless, or soundless; its speed had its usual, perpetual
ferocity.
According to Hindu scriptures the Ganga (Gan¬
ges) the most holy river on earth, was created
when the goddess Ganga came down to earth
from heaven. In this 19th-century painting she
rides a saurian, holding a lotus and a pot of
Ganga water.
The man, though, was as immobile as a photograph. He was,
apparently, uttering his sun-prayer, maybe for fifteen or twenty
minutes which, to one or two scattered onlookers like us, seem¬
ed an eternity.
The greater surprise, however, still
awaited us, late in the evening, on the
same day. We saw him return to one
of the resting houses for the pilgrims
where he must have been staying and
were told that he was just back from
Gomukh, "the cow's mouth", known
to be the true source of Ganga, a
formidable-looking ice cave at an
altitude of over 4,000 metres and
twenty-three kilometres beyond the
town of Gangotri. That meant for him
forty-six kilometres going and com¬
ing, on a difficult, makeshift, moun¬
tain path which, at places as narrow
as sixty centimetres, must entirely
be trodden on foot. One-legged; forc¬
ed to use crutches, how could he
make it?
"Everything is possible when the
inspiration is Ganga-mayi (Mother
Ganga), a sannyasin [Hindu ascetic]
who has his cottage on the right bank
of the river flowing downwards at
Gangotri told us, referring to such ap¬
parently incredible events. The san¬
nyasin, who is the object of the second
incident I have in mind, was, as subse¬
quently we gathered from others,
originally a South Indian and had
once served as an engineer in a
government public works depart¬
ment. He had renounced the world, as he himself described, "to
pursue the course of Mother Ganga and realize her true form".
Moving for a considerable time from the plains towards the
source of the river he finally settled down near its icy origins
high in the Himalayas and now divides his twelve months of the
year between Gangotri and Gomukh.
My third incident also concerns a near cripple, a woman of
apparently modest means, about 80 years old, bent from the
waist like a right angle, because of her age, whom I found walk¬
ing, crawling almost, with her stick on the perilous path
somewhere midway between Gangotri and Gomukh, when I too
was alone on my way to Gomukh, my companions having
preceded me by perhaps a few hundred metres. The woman was
walking firmly though slowly, occasionally stopping for breath
and she was moving in the same direction as I was. Uttering the
habitual greeting "Ganga-mayi ki jai" (glory to Mother Ganga)
I tried to overtake her gently and carefully as the path was
uneven and narrow with a steep gorge oh the right pointing to
23

the Ganga which was flowing perhaps one hundred and fifty
metres below.
The river had a frozen look here and there with occasional
tracts of icy roof running to three hundred and fifty metres at
a stretch and covering the flow of the river which, beneath the
roof and before coming out in the open again, moved incessant¬
ly, singingly. The perpetual snowline was still a distance away
and we were in the region of scattered birch forests said to be
the favourite roaming ground for herds of musk-deer.
When I was about to overtake her, the woman suddenly turn¬
ed and asked me in her Hindi, "Son, is this the road to
Bhaironghat?". I told her that Bhaironghat lay in the opposite
direction and would mean for her four to five hours walk, that
the direction she was going would shortly take her to Chirbasa,
the last human habitation of two or three huts along the way,
before the path merged in the perpetual snow. With a touch of
despair in her eyes and voice which still rings in my ears, she
cried out, "Oh my God, what I have done? How am I going to
return now?" But she regained her composure immediately
after and, touching her forehead with folded hands, uttered,
"Ganga-mayi kijai. She has brought me here, she will take me
there".Then without a word more she turned and started to
walk in the opposite direction.
Few rivers anywhere in the world have been elevated to the
exalted position Ganga occupies in the vast hymn literature of
the Hindus. There is no rite or religious ceremony connected
with any important event of a Hindu's life be it birth, mar¬
riage or death which can be performed without use of her
water. She cleanses, purifies; sanctifies. When a Hindu, while
bathing, invokes the seven celestial streams from the solar orb
("Make your abode in this water, oh Ganga, oh Yamuna, oh
Godavari, oh Saravasti, oh Narmada, Sindhu, Kaveri"), he
gives preference to Ganga among all the other ones. Then he im¬
mediately proceeds to address her singly in a series of hymns
one of which says. "In heaven, firmament and earth, as teaches
us Vayu, the god of the wind, are thirty-five million holy places,
but all, mother, are comprised in you".
The legend which gives her the name of Tripathaga, "triple
flowing", meaning thereby that she runs in heaven, earth and
hell, and describes her descent to earth from heaven, has nar¬
rative details which explain well the awe the river inspires in the
visitors to her source region in the Himalayas. The prayers of
A flotilla of fishing boats at
Nimtita in West Bengal.
Photo Raghubir Singh © ANA, Pans
24
Near Sonepur, the con¬
fluence of the Ganga and
the Gandak, elephants are
bathed during a fair com¬
memorating a fight between
Gajendra (lord of elephants)
and a huge crocodile.
Elephants are associated
with rainfall and abundant
crops. In Hinduism the
elephant-headed god
Ganesh is a remover of
obstacles and a symbol of
prosperity.
Photo Raghubir Singh <c, ANA, Pans

Hardwar, where the Ganga
leaves the mountains and
enters the plains, is one of
the chief places of
pilgrimage for Hindus in In¬
dia. Multitudes attend great
bathing ceremonies,
especially the Kumbh Mela
which is celebrated at Hard-
war every 12 years. Left,
throng of pilgrims gather to
bathe at the Har-ki-Pairi ghat
where the footprint of
Vishnu, who could cross the
7 regions of the Hindu
universe in 7 steps, is im¬
printed on a stone.
Photo Raghubir Singh © ANA, Pans
the saint Bhagiratha, it is said in the legend, brought Ganga
down from heaven to purify the remains of the sixty thousand
sons of King Sagara who had been reduced to ashes by the in¬
furiated glance of the sage Kapila. Ganga, angry at being
brought down, could only be controlled by Siva who saved the
earth from the shock of her fall by catching her on his brow and
then checking her course with his matted locks.
The vision of the fury of the river interlocked in the tortuous
lanes and by-lanes of Himalayan rocks near Gangotri, with the
colour of the water as red as blood at places, reminds one of the
hymn starting with bhayanam bhayam bhishanam
bhishananam and saying, "You are the dread of the dreadful,
the terror of the terrible, the refuge of all creatures, the purifier
of all purifiers. Superior even to the supreme protector of all
protectors, you alone rule the high-placed ones".
Depending on her moods and the circumstances, she can be
a soothing, gushing, singing or terrorizing beauty.
The descent of Ganga is an elaborate myth which all through
the ages has inspired Indian artists and sculptors with a peren¬
nially challenging theme. The most dramatic representation of
it is, of course, on the well-known granite rock at the deserted
seaport town of Mamallapuram near Madras.
Not only the Mother, in which form she is so generally wor¬
shipped, Ganga, at times, can also become a most desired
woman of ravishing beauty. How can we forget the lovely
maiden of blazing splendour she was to King Santanu in the
Mahabharata when he saw her for the first time, prompting him
to address her with these words: "Whoever you may be, of
human origin or a goddess, or a daughter of a demon, or
belonging to the race of the Gandharvas or Apsaras, or the
Yakshas or Nagas, oh you of slender waist and celestial beauty,
I want you to be my wife".
In actual fact, originating in the Himalayas and emptying in¬
to the Bay of Bengal, the river covers a distance of 2,506
kilometres, which, we are told, makes it the fifteenth largest
among Asian rivers and the world's thirty-ninth largest river.
The tract of territory it passes through is one of the most fertile
and densely populated in the world. It has also been the cradle
of Hindusthan and Hindu civilization.
At places, especially in the West Bengal region, the course of
the river is sluggish and is often described as dead or dying. And
despite the traditional purity attached to the quality of its water,
in most areas of the Gangetic plain it is an increasingly and
dangerously polluted river. Even the great Akbar, the Moghul
emperor, as recorded by the sixteenth-century chronicler Abul
Fazl.used to call the river "the source of life", because of its
"water of immortality" which, both at home and on his travels,
he was accustomed to drink. Alas, those days of the purity of
its water are long past. But how many times must humanity ask
itself the question: what is more real in life, the reality, or im¬
agination? In the case of Ganga at least, the answer to that
question is: imagination.
In conclusion, here is one last picture of a last act of life. My
grandfather, a pious brahmin and scholar, was dying at the age
of 76. I was then about eight or nine years old. The scene was
our native town some thirty kilometres north of Calcutta.
Ganga flows by the town where, during the daily high tide, she
is one and a half kilometres wide. Following the custom, my
grandfather who had been ailing for quite some time was
brought near the bank of the river three days before, in fearful
expectation that he might expire at any moment.
He was lodged in a large, bare room made specially for the
purpose and attached to one of the bathing ghats (temple). The
whole family, along with him, had shifted to the room not only
to nurse him and be with him in his last moments but, equally
importantly, to take him, when the situation so warranted, hur¬
riedly to the river just before he expired.
But the last moment did not come. There was even talk of
taking him back to our ancestral home. As he was still very
conscious, the prospect of having to die without the touch of
the flowing Ganga made him suffer all the more. Agony was
writ large on his face.
And then all of a sudden it happened. Holding precarious¬
ly the still living body of grandfather, my father and two
uncles rushed down the steps of the bathing ghat and reached
the river. Soon the lower part of the body lay immersed in
the water while its upper part, kept above the water, was held
by my father who was also putting drops of Ganga water into
grandfather's mouth with the faint utterance "Om Ganga,
Om Ganga, Om Ganga".
The time might have been a few minutes past sunset. The
skyline on the other shore, with the silhouette of a tall tem¬
ple, looked a battleground pink with the blood of slain
heroes.
"Om Ganga, Om Ganga, Om Ganga".
Then the agony changed into ecstasy and the light went out
for ever. The face of the dead man, though battered due to
long illness, spoke of a sudden peace and a serenity which
were not of this world. Yes, I can still vividly see it.
Lokenath Bhattacharya
25
