THE
children!;
WAY
Drawing © Plantu, Paris |UWTv^
by Marcel Canetti
IN the certainty that they are powerless to change it, the
young people of today refuse to participate in a world
unsuited to their aspirations. Their horizons blocked, the
future heavy with menace, they are oriented towards
discouragement, to dropping out or to violence rather than
towards a zest for life. Adults react by withholding their con¬
fidence, a dynamic is created and the generation gap widens.
Such a structure is unacceptable in the present world situa¬
tion which cries out for collaboration between the generations.
It is to bring about this rapprochement, to encourage everyone
to contribute to the righting of the situation, that an associa¬
tion. The Children's Way, has been created.
Among the measures the association proposes are:
Adoption of a ten-point text demanding due respect for the
younger generation so that young people will not find
themselves unwittingly or un willingly dragged into a situation
from which there is no way out.
An end to the many conferences on disarmament which have
failed to prevent the world arsenal from increasing millions
of times in the last twenty-five years, and their replacement
by a change in tone in newspapers and television pro¬
grammes. To put out a fire water hoses must be directed to
the base and not to the top of the flames. At the base, at the
grass-roots, is to be found that state of mind which is, to a
large extent, the product of what each one of us reads and
hears.
Encouragement of entente and a halt to rivality in all those
domains where international competition is rampant so as to
avoid the discouragement ofpeoples who, each day, have to
face up to increasingly difficult situations.
Encouragement, beginning with those ofschool age, ofa new
understanding of the concept ofself-preservation. Our grow¬
ing interdependence means that it is no longer possiblefor an
individual or a country to build walls high enough to form
a shield against others. Good relations between men are no
longer a luxury, they have become a vital necessity.
A shift in priorities in schools towards greater motivation. A
passion or a high degree of interest in an activity seems to be
more important than a high level of knowledge. Such a
switch in priorities could have the effect ofmaking individual
interests coincide more closely with those of society.
MARCEL CANETTI, French engineer and former mathematics
, teacher, is the founder of The Children's Way association, the
headquarters of which are at Meudoh (France).
13
