The moving
highways
of history
by Eugenio Turri
IN the cosmogonies of the Ancient
World rivers were sacred elements
which represented the constant flux
of things in the sense understood by
Heraclitus. In ancient China they were
likened to the dragon, symbol of the
cyclical renewal of life. Generally speak¬
ing they were regarded as a source of fer¬
tility and life, linking the beginning to the
end, the principle to the whole, in an eter¬
nal and purifying cycle that is also the
cycle of the human soul.
In spatial and temporal terms, rivers
often exert a dual, contradictory in¬
fluence over man and his activities: they
both fertilize and destroy, attract and
repel, unite and divide. The forces they
engender are at once beneficial and
harmful. But ultimately, as events have
shown at different times and places, man
is always free to encourage one or the
other of these conflicting tendencies by
exploiting (or not) the great possibilities
which rivers hold for influencing the
course of history and organizing
geographical areas.
Ever since earliest times, man has been
drawn to rivers because they provided
water and enabled him to find his bear¬
ings. At the dawn of history, it was along
rivers that the very first farming com¬
munities began to subjugate the land and
harness nature. And it was the great
rivers of the Ancient World that saw the
blossoming of civilizations which chang¬
ed the course of historycivilizations
sometimes known as "river civiliza¬
tions" because rivers were the decisive
factor in their development, just as
revolutionary techniques for using other
natural elements were decisive in the
evolution of other civilizations such as
those of Neolithic times, the Bronze Age
and the Iron Age.
The great river civilizations, which
were economically dependent on ir¬
rigated crops and consisted of densely
populated, highly urbanized societies,
were located on alluvial plains along or
between major rivers. Thus the cradles of
the Chinese, Indian, Sumerian/Babylo-
The Orinoco
Its discharge is so vast that the rapids,
whirlpools and eddies which agitate its
eternal descent have blended in the unity
of a pulse which beats from the dry
season to the rains, with the same pauses
and paroxysms, since before man came
to be.
Alejo Carpentier
nian, and Egyptian civilizations were
respectively, the Yellow and Blue Rivers,
the Ganges, the Tigris and the Euphrates,
and the Nile. How did these rivers con¬
tribute to the growth of such
homogeneous and enduring forms of
human organization?
The French historian Lucien Febvre,
who formulated a "historical" and
"possibilist" theory of geography, at the
beginning of this century applied the no¬
tion of the "point d'appui" (literally,
"point of support") to define the natural
locations in which man settles. These
points d'appui included the alluvial plains
traversed by the great rivers, the moun¬
tains where they have their source, and
the coasts where they flow into the
sea in other words, the natural settings
which, whether easily habitable or not,
attracted man and encouraged him to
embark, with varying success, on his
historical destiny.
Strictly speaking, the great rivers
were the "points d'appui" of other
"points d'appui" the plains them¬
selves enabled man to perform
outstanding achievements and to em¬
bark on the conquest of nature. For if the
course of history depended solely on
rivers and not on mankind, it would be
impossible to explain civilizations such as
that of Europe, which became dominant
in completely different contexts. It is im¬
portant to understand exactly what
Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho, Pans
]t WW

historical and civilizing roles were per¬
formed by the great rivers, as well as the
limitations of the river civilizations.
The various stages of the development
of European civilization took place on the
banks of "small" rivers such as the
Tiber, the Rhine, the Seine, the Thames,
and the Danube; but in order to deter¬
mine the geographical factors which
enabled European civilization to develop
steadily, it is necessary to look to other
areas of communication than river basins
and notably to the seas, or "liquid
plains" as they have been called by
another modern French historian, Fer¬
nand Braudel. First and foremost of these
seas is the Mediterranean, where the
Europeans founded their earliest
cultures, built up a pattern of trade, and
began a process of expansion that even¬
tually took them from Mediterranean
shores to the Atlantic and the other
oceans.
It is easy to see where the river civiliza¬
tions differed from, say, European
The Indus
For this one boon I thank the heavens
¡still,
The view of Indus' stream from Mir
¡Kalán.
Khushâl Khân Khattak
civilization. The latter is essentially
maritime, coastal, thalassocratic, and
outward-looking. The river civilizations,
on the other hand, were land-based,
agricultural and in all respects dependent
on and conditioned by their "liquid road"
and its limitations. They never extended
their communications network beyond
the route traced by the river or beyond
the se3 into which it flowed. This ex¬
plains why they became fossilized and
were eventually superseded and over¬
whelmed by civilizations which were
more dynamic, more open to the outside
world, and not as in their case tied down
geographically to a river.
What is true of European civilization is
even more valid, although in a different
sense, for Arab-Islamic civilization
which, enriched by the historical ex¬
perience and legacy of the river civiliza¬
tions, developed along universalist lines.
It exploited the "solid" overland routes
which took its merchants and preachers
beyond the desert to the confines of the
then penetrable world the humid
equatorial forests.
The British historian Arnold Toynbee
explained history and the great waves of
civilization through a phenomenon which
he called "challenge". In his view man is
instinctively urged to construct
something new where natural conditions
are at their most hostile and put the
greatest hindrances in his way. It is by
responding to this challenge, which
forces him to marshal all his intellectual
resources, technical inventiveness and
organizational abilities that, according to
Toynbee, he becomes increasingly
resilient. He saw confirmation for his
theory notably in Chinese civilization,
which came into being not along the Blue
River, which because of the lie of the land
flows with relative regularity, but along
the dangerous Yellow River, which is
beneficial but impetuous (it is
represented by the dragon in Chinese
mythology) and far more difficult to tame
than the Blue River.
After much debate between Marxist
and non-Marxist historians, it has been
generally agreed that river civilizations
like that of Egypt should be classified as
socio-historical organizations linked to
the "Asiatic production method", so
called because its original and most
typical forms are found in the river
valleys of Asia (in China, India and In¬
dochina). The Asiatic production method
springs from the need to carry out major
hydraulic constructions such as dykes
and canals in order to regulate the flow of
the river and use its waters for irrigation.
Work on that scale had to be carried out
by the community as a whole and re¬
quired a considerable degree of organiza¬
tion. It had to be placed under the control
of a higher authority and governed by ap¬
propriate rules, such as those written
down in the great Code of Hammurabi in
Mesopotamia. According to this inter¬
pretation, river societies were
bureaucratic and despotic by.nature, and
obeyed the decisions of a sovereign who
The Dnepr
On a fine, calm day, the Dnepr is a
wonderful sight as its mighty watersflow
serenely and effortlessly between forests
and hills.
Nikolai Gogol
acted as a mediator between man and
nature (between man and the gods), and
who, in his capacity of enforcer of the
law of the waters was sometimes in the
early period of Chinese history given the
title of "Great Engineer".
But is it true that ancient Egypt ex¬
emplifies the Asiatic mode of produc¬
tion? Compared with the enormous ef¬
forts needed to harness the great rivers
of Asia, especially the Yellow River, the
task presented by the Nile was less for¬
midable. After all, greater sacrifices were
demanded of the Egyptians during the
construction of the tombs, pyramids and
other monuments raised to mark an eter¬
nity comparable to that of the river. But
such massive projects required the same
hierarchical organization of society.
A very different role was played by the
major rivers of Europe, a continent that
has always been politically and
hydrologically fragmented. It would
perhaps be to take a naively deterministic
view of history to argue that the divisions
Wagenia fishermen on the rapids of the Congo, near Boyoma Falls, Zaire.
^^^P^^S^kÊi
* -

which continue to be a feature of Euro¬
pean history were originally caused by
the absence of any truly great river, and
in any case Europe has always been
outward-looking and attracted by wider
horizons. But it is a historical fact that
rivers have never been a unifying factor
in Europe. The Rhine, which was an
artery in the spread of the Roman Empire
and of Christianity, and then in the rise of
capitalism and industrialization, has
always tended to divide rather than
unite, even if it now seems to be becom¬
ing the axis of a new European unity. The
same is true of the Danube, which flows
through a mosaic of nations which have
never been united and for which the
river has never been a factor of mutual
understanding.
The Volga is quite different; it is a great
river par excellence, and also a kind of
mother figure (mat) in the Russian mind.
It has always played a fundamental role
in Russian history.
changed more radically over the ages
than those of almost any other river.
But to some extent such changes are
the lot of all great rivers. After com¬
parable beginnings, they each develop in
a way that is strictly governed by the
history of the country they water.
Although this is perhaps less true of the
Nile, it certainly holds good for other
great rivers which entered the nexus of
modern communications in recent
times those that were exploited during
the colonial era, such as the Mississippi,
the Congo and the Amazon.
Until then, these rivers had been a life-
giving force for local civilizations and a
constant presence in the background,
but only in an enclosed, self-contained
context. As symbols of supernatural
forces that could not be controlled by
man, they became part of the mythology
of the societies that lived on their banks.
As such they were respected. Not only
did they act as communication routes,
remotest parts of the continent by boat.
The colonial powers fully exploited that
opportunity to tap the wealth of Africa
(Stanley drew attention to the river as an
ideal channel by which Europeans could
introduce "trade and Christianity" to
Africa). The situation has scarcely
changed today, and the river still has vast
potential as a source of development for
equatorial Africa as a whole.
The Amazon has had a similar fate. An
exceptional artery of navigation, it too
was used as a means of draining the
resources of the continent by the groups
of adventurers called bandeirantes and
by the brief incursion of the seringueiros,
which is commemorated in the midst of
the forest by the Europeanized Utopian
dream of Manaus, built on the plunder of
Amazonian wealth. The time has not yet
come for the Amazon, either, to play a
new role in the history of South America,
although the relationship between men
and river in the region is fundamentally
The Russian world stretched
eastwards across the Volga, enfolding
the world of the steppes, welding
together Europe and Asia, enriching Rus¬
sian culture with new elements and giv¬
ing it an extra dimension, an Asiatic or
Euro-Asiatic consciousness.
Like all great territorial landmarks, the
Volga is a psychological and emotional
point of reference for the Russian people.
And it is no accident that during World
War II their last but impregnable bastion
was on the Volga, at the decisive battle
of Stalingrad (now Volgograd). That
episode brought the river even closer to
the hearts of the people, whose love for
the wide open spaces is not only
reflected emotionally by the Volga but
also historically and culturally determin¬
ed by it, with the result that they have
always had a continental rather than a
maritime calling. The Volga is also a river
whose appearance and function have
they provided a source of food and
reassurance. Then, with the advent of
colonial expansion, they were used by
Europeans as routes by which to
penetrate unknown continents the only
practicable routes for groups of men ar¬
riving by sea. Thus the Mississippi, even
though it flows from north fo south and
the logical way to explore north America
was from east to west, was immediately
recognized as the most suitable route in¬
land because it provided direct access to
the heart of the continent and its riches.
It therefore quickly became a vital axis
for the conquest of the country.
The great equatorial rivers such as the
Congo and the Amazon were not used in
the same way. A natural barrier, the
Stanley Falls (now Boyoma Falls),
prevented ships coming from the sea
from sailing up the Congo. But above
these falls, the slow-moving, broad up¬
per Congo made it possible to reach the
different from that which existed in the
ancient river civilizations.
Once regarded as a source of fertility,
rivers have become resources to be ex¬
ploited, waterways. Once the leavening
agent of civilizations, they now play a
more modest role. They no longer
motivate the industrialized world, which
sees them in purely economic terms as
communication routes. And such are the
scale and nature of communications in
the modern world that even the biggest
rivers, even those which are most impor¬
tant for trade, have ceased to be vital
"points d'appui". Today the natural
order that once prevailed seems to be the
victim of an inexorable process of
disintegration. Even as myths, the great
rivers have had their day, though they
can still excite the passions of those who
live on their banks. To this extent they
have retained a human dimension.
Eugenio Turn

y
In ancient China rivers
were associated with
dragons, the symbol of the
cyclical renewal of life. Far
left, three dragons form
the motif of this stone¬
ware bowl dating from the
Sung dynasty (10th to
13th century).
Photo ' The Metropolitan Museum of
Art, New York. Rogers Fund.
Left, these models of
boats on the Nile in ancient
Egypt were found at Dayr
al-Bahri, near Thebes, in
the tomb of Meketer, a
minister of one of the last
kings of the Xlth dynasty
of the Middle Kingdom era
(2040-1710 BC).
Photo Hassia. Paris
The sacred Hindu city of
Varanasi is situated on the
left bank of the Ganga
(Ganges) in Uttar Pradesh
State, northern India. For
centuries pilgrims have
come to Varanasi in their
thousands to cleanse
themselves in the purify¬
ing waters of the sacred
river.
Photo Claude Sauvageot, Paris
