Where land
meets sea
TWO persons out of three today live in coastal regions, near the sea,
on the shores of continents or on islands. This situation, which is
the consequence of population growth and population movements
as well as of economic development, concerns regions with a delicate
balance, very often areas of ancient civilization whose prosperity was largely
based on shipping and maritime trade and also on the relatively high produc¬
tivity of the coastal environment.
The coastal environment is highly conducive to the establishment of human
settlements, both permanent and seasonal, urban and Industrial. Coastal
zones, In particular, are affected by the scale of seasonal tourism. One-third
of world tourism is thus concentrated on the coasts of the Mediterranean and
the result is that in some areas the whole coastline is a sort of continuous
built-up area.
The coastal environment is the product of the complementary effects of the
terrestrial and marine environments and constitutes a complex system mark¬
ed by the distinctive chemical properties of the waters and by a set of very
evolutive ecosystems and geomorphological entities such as beaches,
estuaries, lagoons, mangroves and coral reefs, environments which are all
vulnerable, and particularly exposed, to the effects of modern development.
Warnings are indeed being raised In one part of the world after another to
alert public opinion to the damage caused to these environments by degrada¬
tion and pollution.
It should be added that the Influence of the sea on the terrestrial environ¬
ment extends far beyond the coastline itself; the hinterland is, too, subjected
to strong economic and social pressures, often tending in contradictory
directions.
Only an interdisciplinary approach therefore makes It possible to under¬
stand the functioning of coastal environments. Coupled with data on the
physical, chemical and biological characteristics of those environments, the
social and human sciences provide a further basis for a more rational
management of coastal areas. No longer is it possible to disregard them or
simply consider them as being condemned to insalubrity and as a dump for
industrial waste; on the contrary, they have to be recognized as constituting
essential poles of development.
The countless islands of the world, especially those having an area of less
than 1 0,000 km2, are subject to the same pressures as continental coasts and
moreover are confronted by difficulties of a specific nature. Island
ecosystems are exceedingly vulnerable and the efforts made to increase pro¬
duction to meet development needs or respond to population pressure come
up against especially acute spatial limitations. In the light of the limited size
of islands and their isolation, the exploitation of local resources by the
islanders takes on particular Importance. In a large number of islands, ter¬
restrial resources, especially agricultural resources, are no longer adequate
to satisfy the needs of a growing population; the exploitation of coastal and
marine resources thereupon becomes an economic Imperative. This is a pro¬
blem of concern to all countries that are responsible for managing more or
less numerous groups of islands and of particular concern to island States.
Coastal wetlands and shallows, especially estuaries and
mangrove swamps, provide rich and abundant nutrients on
which an estimated two thirds of the world's fisheries depend.
Today, coastal wetlands in many parts of the world are being
degraded or destroyed by pollution and industrial development,
while some tropical regions mangroves are being cut down for
use as firewood. Below, mollusc-encrusted mangrove roots in a
mangrove swamp at Elinkine, Senegal. Research on mangroves
and other coastal marine ecosystems is promoted by Unesco's
Division of Marine Sciences through the Major Inter-Regional
Project on Research and Training leading to the Integrated
Management of Coastal Systems (COMAR). ,
Unesco's interdisciplinary research programme on the minor
islands of the Mediterranean is a research project on insular
ecosystems which offers a unique opportunity to study in
relatively controlled conditions the complete array of ecological,
economic and social factors which influence the relationship
between man and the biosphere. Launched by Unesco's Human
Settlements and Socio-cultural Environment Division, the pro¬
ject is being carried out in collaboration with the Man and the
Biosphere (MAB) National Committees of Greece, Italy, Malta
and Tunis. In its first phase the project concerns the islands of
Skiathos-Skopelos (Northern Sporades), Salina (Aeolian
Islands), Gozo (Malta) and the Kerkennah Islands (Tunisia),
above.
Furthermore, the island system and the conditions that define it lend
themselves to population/resources/environment/development interaction
studies with a view to obtaining precise information about the nature and ex¬
tent of the changes wrought by human activities in environmental manage¬
ment operations. It has thus been maintained that islands, where the incom¬
ings and outgoings of persons and products can be readily measured, con¬
stitute veritable laboratories for interdisciplinary studies. This distinctive
feature facilitates an integrated scientific approach to options concerning the
management and development of these ecosystems.
Unesco's Major Programme X (The Human Environment and Terrestrial
and Marine Resources) Includes a programme specifically devoted to the
Management of Coastal and Island Regions. The purpose of this programme
is to promote the integrated management of coastal zones and islands. It is
intended to foster international co-operation for the purpose of gaining a bet¬
ter understanding of the nature and functioning of coastal and island
systems; to further effective collaboration between specialists in terrestrial,
aquatic and marine environments and sociologists, economists and land-use
planners within the framework of concrete field projects; and to facilitate the
integration of scientific, socio-cultural and economic information for decision¬
making purposes.
In the various fields referred to, research programmes inevitably assume
an international dimension. In addition, in the field of the marine sciences,
particular requirements make themselves felt in respect of international co¬
operation, in view of the new order for the oceans as it emerges from the con¬
clusions of the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea.
Unesco's international scientific programmesthe International
Geological Correlation Programme (IGCP), the International Hydrological
Programme (IHP) and the Man and the Biosphere programme (MAB), and
those of the Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission (IOC)are thus
particularly well adapted to the nature of the tasks to be performed: these pro¬
grammes constitute a means of putting into effect a type of international co¬
operation which is shaped by the very nature of the fields of study and the pro¬
blems to be solved. They contribute to a better understanding of world or
regional phenomena, to the growth of knowledge about the natural resources
that are available at the national level, and to the strengthening of the
necessary scientific capabilities. They provide a means of exchanging
knowledge and encourage bilateral, subregional or regional co-operation,
with the result that the effort put into them undergoes a remarkable multiplier
effect. These programmes also require an interdisciplinary approach and
foster the establishment of working relations among research workers,
decision-makers and operational personnel with a view to the identification of
problems and the application of research findings.
45
