ACCUSED
TREASON TRIAL
DECEMBER
Throughout 1955 and 1956, the South African police conducted a series of raids on the offices and private homes of hundreds
of opponents of apartheid. Documents, letters, pamphlets, even pieces of clothing were seized in preparation for a show trial.
Then, early on the morning of 5 December 1 956, police descended on the homes of leaders of the Congress Alliance and arrested
them. One hundred and fifty-six people 104 Africans, 23 Whites, 21 Indians and 8 Coloureds were charged with high treason,
a capital offence in South Africa. Although the majority of the accused were soon released, almost every day for the next four
and a half years, thirty of them had to sit in court and listen to an endless recital of long documents, garbled versions of meetings
of the African National Congress and the fabrications of paid informers. The Treason Trial finally ended with the acquittal and
discharge of all the accused, a rare event in South Africa where such trials usually result in the imposition of the death penalty,
life sentences, or long periods of imprisonment. Above, a group photograph of all the accused. Nelson Mandela, the African Na¬
tional Congress leader, is in the third row from the front, eighth from the right. Mandela was re-arrested in 1962, condemned
to life imprisonment and has been incarcerated ever since.
14


THE
SHAMEFUL
RECORD
by Basil Davidson
THE history of apartheid is the record of a racism con¬
ceived and used by small white minorities in South
Africa in order to dominate a large black majority,
deprive this majority of its land, and maximize the exploita¬
tion of its labour for the benefit of the whites and their
foreign partners. As such, it is a record which begins very
soon after the arrival of the earliest Dutch settlers at the
Cape of Good Hope in 1652: almost from the first, these
settlers and all other settlers who followed them from
Holland, Britain, France or elsewhere, considered that they
had the right to dispossess the African inhabitants in any
way and to any degree that could be profitable and
convenient.
In no essentials, since those early years, has anything
changed in the relationship between "whites" and
"blacks" (the latter being taken to include Asians and Col¬
oured of a mixed origin) except the "language of legality"
and a vast increase of actual dispossession. Crude forms of
outright enslavement have developed, step by step, into the
sophisticated laws and regulations of a racism whose in¬
strumental force, for those who apply it and those who have
to suffer it, is in everyday reality no different from a legalized
servitude.
The squalid politics of an "inter-white" rivalry for the
fruits of this instrumental racism may often fill our
newspapers, as the Afrikaans-speaking minority plays out a
charade of parliamentary conflict with the English-speaking
minority; they remain, as in the past, only a mask for the
solid unity of interest and intention, between these two
white minorities, that joins them in exploitation of the black
majority.
There are other masks to be thrust aside. Apartheid is
sometimes portrayed, up and down the world, as an inven¬
tion of the Afrikaans-speaking minority or by its first
elected parliamentary majority of 1948 as a means of
realizing its own peculiar doctrine of Calvinist belief. But
that is to misrepresent the meaning of the system, or,
rather, to "theorize" that meaning in terms of a subjectivity
BASIL DAVIDSON, British writer and historian, is an authority on
African history and current affairs and is at present preparing a series
of eight one-hour programmes on African history for British and other
national television networks. His many books on Africa include Libera¬
tion of Guiñé (1969), with a preface by Amilcar Cabrai, and In the Eye
of the Storm: Angola's People (1972).
which certainly exists, but which covers an objective mean¬
ing of infinitely greater force. This objective meaning differs,
in truth, only in degree from any other form of colonial
racism, always the instrument of a mise en valeur, of "get¬
ting out the profits", whether in the British, French or any
other colonial system. Apartheid is colonial racism carried to
an extreme.
These may sound harsh conclusions, but they are what
the history of South Africa has to teach us.
Up to 1 899 the white politics of all the lands south of the
Limpopo river the lands that form modern South Africa-
were largely those of military power used to defeat black
resistance. Broadly, those politics were contained within
two areas of competition. As soon as the British were
established securely at the Cape of Good Hope, following
victory over the French fleet at Trafalgar in 1 805, they em¬
barked on a long series of what were euphemistically called
"frontier wars". Against continuous black resistance, not
always defeated, British forces pushed east and north¬
eastward from their little colony at the Cape, invading and
dispossessing one African community after another until
their final conquest of the Zulu kingdom in 1879.
The descendants of the Dutch settlers (enlarged by im¬
migration from Holland but still more by unadmitted unions
with black women) had meanwhile gone some way towards
forming themselves into a distinctive nation, the Afrikaner
volk, and by this time spoke a variant of Dutch which was
already beginning to be a distinctive language, Afrikaans.
They were far too weak in numbers and technology to tackle
strong African communities such as the Xhosa and the Zulu,
whose destruction as independent entities was left to the
British, but were strong enough to dispossess a wide range
of small African communities. These lived to the west of the
areas of British conquest, and were duly enclosed in the
Afrikaner (or Boer, a term simply meaning "farmer")
republics of the Orange Free State and the Transvaal.
By the 1 880s, accordingly, there were four white political
units: the two British colonies of the Cape and of Natal, and
the two Afrikaner republics in the north and west. All were
farming communities, each of them practically without the
beginnings of any industrial production, living in a typical
colonial fashion by exporting wool and other products of the
land in exchange for such manufactured imports as they
could afford. Diamonds had been discovered in quantity at^
15

Kimberley as early as 1 867, and in 1871 the British duly an¬
nexed these diamond fields which became, a little later, the
scene of a veritable "diamond rush", with a railway com¬
pleted from the Cape to Kimberley in 1885. But even this
new source of wealth could change little in the general pic¬
ture. What changed, everything, and soon with violent
drama, was the proving in 1 884-6 of the great goldfields of
the Witwatersrand in the Transvaal Republic.
These goldfields promised the wealth of Croesus to those
who could exploit them, but, being deep seams with a
relatively low gold content per ton of ore, they demanded an
intensive capitalization. For reasons imperialist and narrow¬
ly economic, major British interests now saw that they must
secure political control of a Transvaal governed by farmers
who had little or no interest in large-scale capitalist develop¬
ment. After many skirmishes there followed the Anglo-
Afrikaner war of 1899, provoked by the British and won by
the British, though at a sorry cost in lives, two years later.
This victory marked the beginning of modern South Africa.
Having won the war, the British .were quick to reassure
their Afrikaner opponents that systematic discrimination
against the black majority would be written into the founda¬
tion of the Union of South Africa (that is, the union of Cape
Colony, Natal, Transvaal, and the Orange Free State) which
followed in 1910. For thirty-eight years after that, the
English-speaking minority generally dominated the all-white
parliament of a now-independent Union, but invariably on
apartheid lines.
This new parliament lost no time in guaranteeing a
systematic racism. In 1 91 1 , a Native Labour Regulation Act
provided for the legalization much elaborated and tighten¬
ed up in later years of an all-embracing discrimination
against black wage-earners. In 1913 the parliament went
much further. It passed a Land Act which reserved some
ninety per cent of the total land surface of the Union for
white ownership, and reduced the area available for black
ownership to the remaining ten per cent (less at the beginn¬
ing, today about thirteen per cent). These small areas where
Africans could own land were named Native Reserves, and
rapidly became what they were intended to be: destitute
reservoirs of black labour for the "white areas". Within the
latter, some ninety per cent of the land surface, new laws
restricted black rights of residence, movement, employ¬
ment, and even leisure.
In 1923 came the Natives (Urban Areas) Act which was
to remain, with the Land Act of 1913, the foundation of all
white policy towards blacks, and so remains to this day.
Essentially, it was a weapon of physical segregation within
the "white areas"; and the policy which was held to justify
it was called "separate development". The effective mean¬
ing of this policy was defined by the African scholar Z.K.
Matthews in 1 944, when he described this Act of 1 923 as
providing for "the separation of black and white, not with
the idea of protecting each group in regard to its basic in¬
terests, but the separation of the groups in order to facilitate
the subordination of one group to the other the exploita¬
tion of one group by the other".
But an official and of course all-white government com¬
mission of 1 921 , two years before the Act became law, had
already put the matter more clearly. It laid down the basic
principle of white supremacy. This was that "the native [a
term invariably meaning the black or non-white inhabitant]
should only be allowed to enter urban areas, which are
essentially the white'man's creation, when he is willing to
enter and to minister to the needs of the white man, and he
should depart therefrom when he ceases so to minister".
What "minister" meant, very precisely, was that the black
man should work for the white man at whatever level of
wages, and under whatever conditions of work, that the
white man might concede. George Bernard Shaw, visiting
South Africa soon after, called that country a slave State;
and it is really quite hard to think that he was wrong.
This dispensation, ensuring cheap and captive black
labour in ninety per cent of the land surface, was further pro¬
tected by "pass laws" which required and require
today detailed police supervision of any black employment
or shift of residence, and much else besides, and, beyond
these "pass laws", by customs and regulations designed to
16
prevent or punish any black-white "commingling"
except, naturally, whenever convenient to whites, as in the
case of black nannies for white children, or black cooks for
white ladies.
Such was the system by which the parliament of South
Africa ruled the country so long as the English-speaking
minority retained control of the laws. In erecting it the
British had fully realized their aims in conquering the
Afrikaner republics: they had provided an "¡deal structure"
for the development of a specific capitalism fuelled by
British capital, which entered the country increasingly after
1920, and which ensured the English-speaking majority of
a uniquely high standard of living while, at the same time,
providing a uniquely high rate of profit for investors in
Britain.
CONTINUED PAGE 21
?tfc.i?
The face of hunger
/ counted ribs on his concertina chest
bones protruding as if chiselled
by a sculptor's hand offamine.
He looked with glazed pupils
seeing only a bun on some sky-high shelf.
The skin was pale and taut
like a glove on a doctor's hand.
His tongue darted in and out
like a chameleon 's
snatching a confetti offlies.
01 child,
your stomach is a den of lions -
roaring day and night.
Oswald Mbuyiseni Mtshali

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 16
In 1948 the JEnglish-speaking minority lost control of
parliament, and were never to regain it. That control passed
to the Purified Afrikaner National Party then led by Dr. D.F.
Malan; and "separate development" was followed by apar¬
theid. The complexities behind this change were many, but
a few central points may be useful.
The Afrikaners had remained, substantially, a farming
community for whom the burgeoning towns had long
become an object both of hatred and of envy: of understan¬
dable hatred in that large numbers of "poor whites" from
the rural and largely Afrikaner areas were driven into the
towns by their poverty, and there subjected to low wages,
bad conditions of work, and English-speaking contempt;
and of equally understandable envy in that the towns were
the manifest and rapidly growing sources of white wealth,
command of which was in English-speaking hands.
Meanwhile the Second World War had done much to ex¬
acerbate English-Afrikaner hostility. Nearly all the leaders of
the Purified National Party had openly hoped and worked for
a Nazi victory; and some of them had been gaoled for pro-
Nazi sabotage. Their electoral triumph of 1948 was
therefore accompanied by a determination to succeed
where Hitler had failed: and put an end, once and for all, to
English-speaking supremacy.
Yet the Second World War had another effect. It unleash¬
ed new currents of black liberation: or, at least, of black
hopes that the anti-racist nature developed by the War
might be made to have its influence here as well. And at that
time, even if the tides of black nationalism elsewhere had
still to reveal their strength, such hopes could seem by no
means unrealistic. Apartheid was therefore introduced,
after 1 948, as a means of reinforcing the discrimination of
earlier years.
The blacks were to be kept as subservient labour while
the long boom of the white economy, begun in the 1930s,
vastly enlarged during the Second World War, and prolong¬
ed thereafter, was further strengthened by methods of
State-capitalism which, at the same time, gave Afrikaner
businessmen and politicians their entrée to economic power
and personal wealth. And this was when, during the 1 950s,
the old dominance of British investment gave way to much
greater new investment from the USA, the Federal Republic
of Germany, France, and later Japan, and when South
Africa, from being a merely British investors' fief, became a
"honey-pot" of international dimensions.
The system in substance in no way changed because
apartheid followed "separate development". Apart from
cosmetic improvements to the face that the régime tries to
show a critical world, it has become clearer than ever that
racist discrimination has in fact evolved into an inseparable
feature of this particular form of capitalism. Well-
intentioned persons may still wish to believe that apartheid
will gradually "eliminate itself" as the economy continues
to expand, and as the demand for skilled black labour comes
increasingly into conflict with the "colour bars" of
discrimination. The history of this State has proved the
contrary.
With every fresh expansion of the white economy since
the 1 930s, the screws of discrimination have been tighten¬
ed further. The wage-payment level of "colour bars" has
been raised: these "bars" still remain potently in force. And
this, again, is the lesson of everything that has happened
during the 1970s and early 1980s: all too tragically, the
system has shown that it contains within itself no essential
self-correcting mechanism. Without its racism, it cannot
function.
The non-white communities African, Asian, and Col¬
oured by origin or definition had long hoped and worked
for peaceful change, and were influenced in this by the Gan-
dhian Congress tradition as well as by a belief that the sheer
injustice of the system even, in some respects, the sheer
absurdity of the system must eventually bring it to an end.
This hope of change by passive resistance, as noted above,
flourished after the victory of 1 945 over Nazi-Fascism, tan¬
tamount as this was, or was thought to be, to a victory over
racism everywhere.
Even the advent to power of the Afrikaner "Nationalists"
(of the Purified National Party) in 1 948 failed to quench this
optimism. It culminated early in the 1950s with a coun¬
trywide campaign of passive resistance to the pass laws
undertaken by all the non-white communities, with the
African National Congress in the van. But then all hope of
peaceful change died, and died violently.
Laws were at once passed by the "Nationalist" govern¬
ment to punish any such passive resistance by lashing with
whips, imprisonment, or both. Laws were passed to identify
any black protest, however peaceful or otherwise legal in
nature, with a "Communism" which was equated,
however ludicrously, with some kind of foreign-promoted
attempt to overturn the State. Laws were passed to give the
police a free hand in arrest, detention without trial, and
behaviour towards all "suspected persons"; and death in
prison of such persons has become almost a common
feature of the system.
Laws were passed to enlarge the provisions of the 1923
Act on physical segregation into a veritable juggernaut of
persecution: by the early 1980s, more than three million
black persons men, women and children had been
uprooted from their homes often the homes of their
remote ancestors and "re-settled" in areas designated for
"black residence". By no means rarely, such areas were or
are empty bush devoid of the least urban facility or means
of employment. Laws were passed to "elevate" the old
Native Reserves overcrowded, overgrazed, mere rural
slums into "Bantu Homelands", and to label these as "in¬
dependent States": another mockery of words which,
however, failed to fool even those who applied them.
With all this, South Africa appeared to have reached the
ultimate possible extension of the laws of discrimination
which had brought the Union of South Africa to birth in
1910. In this Republic of South Africa, all "safety valves"
were now sealed off, so that explosion had become the only
possible alternative to continued submission. And in 1980,
through its action-wing, Umkonto wa Sizwe, the African
National Congress of South Africa duly embarked on the
beginnings of a war of resistance.
It had taken long to mature. Only at the outset of the
1960s, despairing of any good result from non-violent
resistance and with all passive resisters facing severe
penalties or even death, had black leaders such as Nelson
Mandela and a handful of white sympathizers turned to a
campaign of sabotage; but this failed through intimidation
and betrayal. Mandela and his companions were sent to
prison for life; others took refuge abroad.
But into the silence that followed, onwards from 1970,
there came new pressures for change: effective organiza¬
tion by black workers in the manufacturing industries; a
renewal of anti-aparthe/d agitation by black students
segregated within "tribal colleges" (for Zulu, Sotho, Xhosa,
and so on); the rise of a movement of self-encouragement
named Black Consciousness (whose best-known
spokesman, Steve Biko, rapidly met his death in a white
prison); and finally, taking fire from the victories of black
liberation in Mozambique and Angola, the massive and
heroic "school strikes" of 1976 in Soweto and other black
towns.
All these initiatives have been met by the same repression
as before (save that some small concessions have been
made to black trade unionism, in the hope that these may
weaken or confuse black political understanding and
organization). Reckless police shooting into unarmed
crowds is now a common practice; and the number of
school students shot dead by the police during 1976 was
certainly not less than three hundred, and possibly many
more. Polite words to the outside world are accompanied,
by the régime, with a militarization of the State and an ever
greater ruthlessness towards all persons, of whatever com¬
munity, who may threaten effective protest.
By 1981 the South African régime was virtually at war
with Angola and Mozambique as well as in its colony of
Namibia, and was threatening invasive action against the
newly-independent republic of Zimbabwe. But this régime
was also at war, in everything save the name of war and its
formal declaration, within its own frontiers.
Today, that war continues.
Basil Davidson
21
