OoNFIANT, Raphael and
PRUDENT, Félix L.
Creole language of
the Caribbean
About 1615, French privateers gained a
foothold on a Caribbean rock to which
they gave the name of St. Christopher.
At that time, the archipelago "belong¬
ed" to the Spanish crown, but the rival
European powers decided to fight for a
share of the spoils. Thus the first
French to settle in the West Indies were
men of the sea, of the sword, and of lit¬
tle faith. Stealing a few slaves from the
Spaniards in the course of daring raids,
they managed to come to terms with the
Caribs who occupied the Windward
Islands. There followed settlements in
Guadeloupe and Martinique (1635),
Saint-Lucia and Grenada (1650),
Guiana (1660) and Tortuga which serv¬
ed as a bridgehead for the conquest of
Santo Domingo (1697). In all these
islands, a Creole language is still
spoken which, despite some regional
peculiarities, is of relatively homo¬
geneous structure.
The term Creole, which has a variety
of meanings in French, also varies con¬
siderably in meaning in English,
Spanish, Portuguese and Dutch.
Sometimes, it denotes the white descen¬
dant of the master, sometimes it
denotes on the contrary the black ele¬
ment of African origin, on occasions it
is used to denote the intermediate
stages of ethnic cross-breeding. Never¬
theless, a radical semantic frontier ex¬
tends from the bayous of Louisiana to
the border of Guiana.
Creole is always used in contrast to a
word or series of words indicating a
foreign, imported, immigrant element,
introduced into the Community will¬
ingly or by force without taking root.
Whether used adjectivally or as a noun,
it constantly signifies a symbolical
renaissance or final integration into a
new ecosystem. The Creole languages,
which too often, for the sake of conve¬
nience, are attached to a European
trunk, are always treated as hybrids,
mutants or breakaways which refuse to
acknowledge their alleged origins.
Putting the question of the genesis of
the Creole language in this way already
amounts to participating in the endless
discussion which is going on in this
field. We find that Creole is linked with
seventeenth century French coloniza¬
tion, that it spread very rapidly and
that it came into being in order to meet
the needs of a new kind of communica¬
tion between unequal partners.
In fact, more careful analysis would
reveal that negroes and whites must
have collaborated closely in creating
this new language and that before the
arrival of large numbers of black slaves
Creole was already the vernacular of all
the inhabitants of the archipelago, ir¬
respective of their ethnic origin.
Discovery of the fabulous value of
sugar for the plantation economies
(1685) and the withdrawal of white
contract workers thrust Creole into the
negro communities from the beginning
of the next century onwards, and it was
only then that Creole would be referred
to as a negro language. It should be
noted that even now the béké (white
West Indian settlers) still use Creole,
which they have never abandoned
completely.
We reject the dialect hypothesis (that
Creole is derived from French) or the
neo-African hypothesis (that Creole is
a re-creation of a pre-existing African
pidgin language) in favour of a mixed,
hybrid in a word, mulatto origin of
a system which admits a French source
for eighty per cent of its vocabulary but
certain aspects of whose morphology,
syntax and rhetoric recall, in the
opinion of other observers, West
African patterns. The socio-linguistic
function of Creole, more important
than its genetic or typological
classification, must be recognized. The
language of a rural community cut off
from the written word, official
statements or great technological in¬
ventions, it provides a basic system of
communication within relatively small
communities which are strongly im¬
pregnated with customs and traditions
which guarantee the survival of the ex¬
isting social order.
After the 1804 revolution, Haiti pro¬
vided a fertile soil for Creole. Having
violently rejected both slavery and col¬
onialism, the Haitians created a State
that was both isolated and free of
foreign tutelage, within which com¬
munications were difficult. With
educational facilities that are
ridiculously small in proportion to the
population's theoretical needs and
media reaching only a limited au¬
dience, the Republic of Haiti is basical¬
ly a Creole-speaking nation. In the
absence of exact language statistics,
researchers generally agree that about
80 per cent of the population speak
only Creole. Only the "élite", the
privileged 5 per cent who live in Port-
au-Prince and Pétionville and who
benefitted from full-time school atten¬
dance can at present claim to know
standard French.
The socio-linguistic situation is dif¬
ferent in the Lesser Antilles and
Guiana, which have remained French.
Since the abolition of slavery (1848)
and the campaigns for universal lay
education (beginning of the twentieth
century), French has gradually gained
ground. The growing numbers of tran¬
sistors, telephones and television sets,
of newspapers and magazines, the
large-scale post-war school attendance
programmes and the considerable in¬
crease in the movement of persons bet-

Above, a Creole version of the
famous maxim from George
Orwell's Animal Farm: "All
animals are equal but some are
more equal than others. " The il¬
lustration is taken from an adap¬
tation of Orwell's novel publish¬
ed In Mauritius under the title
Repibllk Zanimo.
ween the "home country" and the
"Overseas Departments" all these
have contributed to an undeniable
retreat 


of Creole in areas where it was
the accepted medium of conversation.
Creole is used less and less to discuss
the price of vegetables or for story¬
telling in the countryside, and political
and sports commentaries are increas¬
ingly given in French.
A similar phenomenon is taking
place in the West Indies, especially
Dominica and Saint Lucia, of which
France lost control in the nineteenth
century, but here it seems to be English
which is hastening the decline of Creole
and taking its place. Although in syn-
tax and vocabulary they are very close
to the languages of Guadeloupe and
Martinique, the varieties of Creole
spoken in the former British dominions
are rapidly becoming anglicized.
This problematic co-existence of a
popular, rural everyday language side
by side with another, official, written,
influential language has been studied
by North American experts in socio-
linguistics under the general descrip¬
tion of diglassia. But more solidly
founded investigations have recently
invalidated the idea of a harmonious
co-existence of two languages in our
communities. The West Indians and
the inhabitants of Guiana are not
perfectly bilingual speakers who
"choose" to express themselves either
in Creole or in the standard language
each time they have something to say.
On the contrary, a sort of third
language is gradually taking form, a
sort of mongrel Creole crossed with
French or English, a system which is to
all appearances extremely unstable
but which is recruiting enthusiastic
adherents in the field of the popular
song, literature and the mass circula¬
tion press and quite simply in daily in¬
tercourse amongst all members of the
community. This Frenchified Creole,
or Creolized French has recently been
baptized interlecte. According to some
researchers into this phenomenon,
Creole is merely continuing its "life-
cycle", is re-pidginizing itself with a
standard language because of the
socio-economic changes which have
taken place in recent years and should
eventually become merged into a broad
continuum with its mother tongue. In
their view, Creole will gradually disap¬
pear as it is re-absorbed by the symbolic
power of the standard language,
mastery of which is a permanent aim
for the underprivileged speakers of
Creole.
The indigenous school of socio-
Aux Mangos, an oil painting of a scene in Martinique executed by Paul Gauguin (184S-1903)
when he visited the island in 1887.
15

linguistics, however, maintains that the
death certificate of a language should
not be issued with undue haste. True,
when seen subjectively from a certain
viewpoint in Guiana and the West In¬
dies, Creole appears to be in poor
shape. The rural dwelling, in which it
was firmly rooted, has disappeared
from our landscape, and the younger
generation is strongly attracted by
vocabulary coming from elsewhere,
whether it be Parisian slang, Jamaican
forms of speech, American negro songs
or expressions from the campuses of
foreign universities.
But. amongst these young people
Creole also has a stabilizing rôle. It is a
factor of cultural identity and 


of con¬
tact with a history that is constantly be¬
ing questioned. Young Caribbeans are
discovering that, compared with the
obvious advantages of French in
school, at work, in international life,
Creole provides a form of cultural pro¬
tection. As a result, it is no longer ap¬
propriate to speak of Creole as a
language that is despised and belittled
by those who speak it. Opinion polls
show that the younger population
groups are strongly in favour of a stan¬
dardization of the "patois" and want
to see it taught in schools. Thus
pessimism is no longer necessarily
justified regarding the future of the
language.
Apart from this change of attitude,
there is a gradual increase in the output
of artistic works in Creole adapted to
the needs and tastes of the new market.
These include records and cassettes not
only of local origin but also from the
North American and European
diaspora, storybooks, collections of
proverbs, works of history and
philosophy, plays and films.
The last bastion of official resistance
is collapsing. The governments con¬
cerned seem to be moving towards a
recognition of the fact that Creole is the
language of their citizens. In Haiti,
thanks to a daring educational reform
introduced in 1979, Creole is now the
first language taught in primary
schools.
Although they have not gone quite so
far, the governments of Saint Lucia
and Dominica are introducing ar¬
rangements which will contribute to a
recognition of Creole as a fact of
linguistic and cultural life. In
Dominica, whose national motto is a
phrase in Creole, a Creole day has been
instituted. Cultural research groups are
officially supported and radio pro¬
grammes are broadcast both for those
who speak only Creole and for those
who wish to improve their knowledge
of the language.
Things have been moving more slow¬
ly in Guiana, Guadeloupe and Martin¬
ique. There is no shortage of man¬
power and printed matter, but the
authorities have been slow to act.
However, the latest instructions con-
16
cerning regional languages in France
lead us to hope that reforms may now
be introduced in teacher-training. Such
reforms are essential for the pro¬
gressive introduction of Creole into the
educational system both as a working
language and as a subject 
