Photo © All rights reserved
A collage of photos of actors appearing in various plays put on at the East West Theatre, New York.
SOMEONE wishing to find out
how the United States changed
over the past twenty years would
be wise to visit the nation's alternative
theatres. In 1963, for example, Black
playwrights had few outlets, although
Black Americans made up nearly 1 1
percent of the nation's population. To¬
day, nearly every major city has at least
one showcase for Black writers, who in
two decades have created an impressive
body of dramatic literature.
Other groups to whom the theatre
was virtually closed twenty years ago
have managed to plant their feet firmly
on the stage. Among them are Mexican
Americans, Asian Americans, Puerto
Ricans, feminists, and homosexuals,
and radical political groups that use the
theatre sometimes with extraordinary
inventiveness to call attention to their
views. Even handicapped minorities,
such as the deaf, have learned to make
the theatre's special language work for
them.
ERIC OATMAN is a US journalist, based in
New York, with a special interest in education
and the arts. He is the editor of Scholastic
Search, a magazine on A merican history, and has
published several works of fiction and non-
fiction.
by Eric Oatman
But the historical lessons of a
burgeoning advocacy theatre are not
the only ones that the nation's non¬
profit theatre has to offer. A good por¬
tion of today's alternative theatre
groups look inward, testing the ability
of new aesthetic structures to frame
and illuminate human experience.
Here, too, in the ways we see and feel,
there have been enormous changes, all
of which are being charted by ex¬
perimentalists clustered, for the most
part, in the cities of San Francisco and
New York.
Fittingly, it was a time of social and
intellectual upheaval that gave birth to
the alternative theatre. Those most
alienated from the dominant culture of
the 1960s hippies, political radicals,
anti-war and civil rights activists
vowed to reshape the nation's con¬
sciousness. Some chose theatre as their
weapon and trained themselves to use
it.
Simultaneously, among a handful of
theatre professionals in New York,
another alternative movement took
flight. Frustrated by the commercial
theatre's fear of risk, it began staging
offbeat plays in coffee houses such as
La Mama Experimental Theater Club
and Caffe Cino.
When the impulses to make the U.S.
over and revitalize its theatre merged,
powerful energies were released. One
group, Julian Beck and Judith
Malina's Living Theater, turned con¬
ventional notions of theatre upside
down. Their lengthy, plotless, cast-
developed productions shaped
theatrical styles that today's groups
continue to explore. They performed
political theatre, street theatre, and en¬
vironmental theatre, mingling per¬
formers and spectators while offering a
choice of activities to focus on.
Sometimes, the Living Theater's ex¬
periments even resembled those
chaotic, mixed-media "happenings"
that have resurfaced on the farthest
shores of the current alternative theatre
scene as performance art.
The sheer number of alternative
theatre groups today New York city
alone boasts well over 100 makes
most generalizations about them half-
truths. Still, today's alternative theatre
¿5 quieter than the one that exploded in¬
to the 1960s. For one thing, the
political issues that fuelled the move¬
ment in its earlier days are no longer on
everyone's agenda. For another thing,
the national economy, more fragile
now than it has been in forty years, has
made caution a byword among alter-
41

Members of the Negro Ensemble Com¬
pany in a production of Ray Aranha's
Sons and Fathers of Sons, at Theatre
Four, New York.
Photo © Bert Andrews, New York
native theatre people. Their survival
these days largely depends on an
evaporating pool of government and
corporate subsidies.
Locating funds has always been
toughest for minority groups, which is
why the Black theatre movement has
failed to grow deep roots inside Black
communities. Ten years ago, there may
have been more than 200 Black
theatres; today, less than half of them
survive, and to do so most have had to
find ways to lure white audiences.
The most visible Black theatre com¬
pany is New York's Negro Ensemble
Company (N.E.C.), which in seventeen
years has consistently proven its worth
as a training ground for Black theatre
people. In January, the N.E.C. closed
Charles Fuller's A Soldier's Play after
a 14-month run that garnered the
author the nation's top drama award,
the Pulitzer Prize.
The N.E.C. is one of the few Black
theatres that white critics visit regularly
(it is not in a Black community), and
for this reason many white theatregoers
rarely hear of the vital work being done
elsewhere. In New York alone, two
other institutions play commanding
roles. One, the Frank Silvera Writer's
Workshop, is in the Black ghetto of
Harlem, and the other, the New
Federal Theater, is in a racially-mixed
neighbourhood a good distance from
the commercial theatre district. The
Workshop has developed more than
1,000 plays by Black writers over the
past ten years, and Woodie King, Jr.,
who heads the New Federal, has been
nurturing Black plays since the
mid-1960s.
For the Black audiences, the move¬
ment's centre is wherever they are: at
Philadelphia's Freedom Theater,
Chicago's Kuumba Theater Work¬
shop, San Francisco's Lorraine
Hansberry Theater, Baltimore's Arena
Players, Atlanta's Just Us... The list
goes on and on.
Among other minority groups,
Asian Americans and Hispanic
Americans have been the most suc¬
cessful in carving out places for
themselves in the American theatre.
Asian Americans have set up com¬
panies in Los Angeles, San Francisco,
and New York to provide forums for
their playwrights and to present works
that reflect their audiences' unique ex¬
periences in the U.S.
Several theatre groups nourish the
cultural pride of Chícanos, people of
42
American Indian and Spanish extrac¬
tion. The best known of these groups is
El Teatro Campesino, which a young
actor named Luis Valdez founded in
1965 to aid a union that was organizing
farmworkers in California. Valdez
moved from writing actos skits to in¬
spire social actionto the more
spiritual mitos, which were dramatiza¬
tions of Mayan and Aztec myths. To¬
day, his group is experimenting with
corridos, staged ballads that chronicle
the lives of people on both sides of the
Mexican-U.S. border.
In political theatre, few groups have
been more tenacious than the San Fran¬
cisco Mime Troupe, which was formed
in 1959. In 1969 the group became a
collective and began using its robust,
outdoor performance styles to focus at¬
tention on social issues ranging from
sexism to, this past year, the U.S. role
in Central America.
Feminism has become a respectable
topic in the commercial theatre with
three plays sinking their teeth into it
this season in New York. Encouraged,
alternative groups continue to supply
fresh material. In San Francisco,
Lilith A Women's Theater just staged
a play on choices that revolutionary
women are faced with, and New York's
Women's Project unveiled a play about
two "abnormal" women: the
American suffragist, Susan B. An¬
thony, and Joan of Arc. The hardest-
hitting of the women's groups, the
Spiderwoman Theater Workshop,
weaves its members' personal stories
into bawdy explorations of women and
violence.
On first sight, Mill Valley, a sleepy
suburb of San Francisco, is an unlikely
place to begin an investigation of the
radical aesthetics of today's experimen-
Scene from Alan Flnneran's The Man in
the Nile at Night (1980) at the Soon 3
Theatre, New York.
Photo © All rights reserved

Ellen McElduff of the Mabou Mines group
in a production of Dead End Kids: A
History of Nuclear Power, by JoAnne
Akalaitis. Mabou Mines is one of the
most exciting experimental groups in the
United States today.
Photo © Carol Rosegg. New York
talists. But there, in a former post of¬
fice, Chris Hardman's Antenna Com¬
pany has created a play in which au¬
dience members are the only actors.
Hardman, a visual artist who moved
naturally from carnival funhouse
design to environmental theatre, equips
each spectator with a miniature tape
player and earphones and sends him,
alone, through a maze of seventeen set¬
tings. Following pre-recorded instruc¬
tions to sit, kneel, lie down, pick up
props, and so forth, the spectator
becomes the criminal hero of this walk¬
through theatre piece, which Hardman
calls Artery.
Another San Francisco group that
plugs into new technologies is Alan
Finneran's Soon 3. For more than a
decade, Finneran has been mixing
drama, sculpture, painting, and film to
create "performance landscapes"
places where actors (and machines)
perform tasks according to Finneran's
intuitive design. In 1981, he added
music and an organizing theme:
violence as an "illusionary product" of
California's movie industry.
Women are at the forefront of the
avant-garde in San Francisco. Bean
Finneran, Alan's wife, will travel this
spring with Red Rain, a visual theatre
piece about having and living with
children. In New York, Elizabeth
LeCompte's Wooster Group, housed
in a former truck garage, mounted the
first part of a visual and verbal collage,
LSD, in January and February this
year, then left for three months in the
Netherlands, where they will create a
fantasy musical, North Atlantic. In
LSD, characters are apt to deliver their
lines either in slow motion or so fast
that only the emotions behind them are
communicated.
Squat Theater, a Hungarian com¬
pany that has lived in New York since
1977, has been performing Mr. Deadd
Mrs. Free before the curtained window
of the group's ground-floor storefront.
When the curtains are raised, the
troupe operates on two stages at once:
one inside the building, the other on the
busy sidewalk outside, where passersby
become unwitting actors in this earthy
and surreal concoction.
More and more, groups today seem
to be working toward Richard
Wagner's nineteenth-century ideal of
Gesamtkunstwerk, a performance
which unites all art forms. Yet few
seem able to integrate the forms as well
as Mabou Mines, the seven-member
collaborative for which Lee Breuer and
CONTINUED PAGE 46

Alternative
theatre
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 43
JoAnne Akalaitis have written
memorable works. The group is now
putting together Bill Raymond's Cold
Harbor, a biographical study of
Ulysses S. Grant, an army general who
became U.S. President in 1869. The
work continues the study of short¬
sighted but world-shaking decisions
which Mabou Mines began with Aka-
laitis's Dead End Kids: A History of
Nuclear Power.
Another work scheduled to open this
spring in New York is Richard
Foreman's Egyptology, said to involve
American soldiers, World War II,
dreams, and contacts with exotic
cultures. Dreams is probably the key
word here. In his Ontological/Hysteric
theatre, Foreman eschewed conven¬
tional story lines in favour of elaborate
visual and aural presentations of
thought processes, usually his own.
The most ambitious avant-garde
project in the works ever is Robert
Wilson's extravaganza, 77ie Civil
Wars: A Tree is Best Measured When it
is Down. Wilson is the world's best-
known dramatic formalist, a former
painter and architect whose concern in
theatre, like Foreman's, is with struc¬
ture. His last large work, operatic in
scale, was the five-hour Einstein on the
Beach, which toured Europe in 1976.
The Civil Wars, nine hours on the
theme of the brotherhood of man,
should dwarf Einstein. Wilson will
create its many parts in seven countries
and bring them all together in June,
1984, at the Olympic Games in Los
Angeles, California.
Wilson is best known outside the
U.S., so it seems appropriate that most
of the funding for The Civil Wars will
come from abroad. Inside the U.S.,
where only about one percent of the
population patronizes any live theatre,
experimentalists tend to get overlooked
by all but a small band of critics and
followers. Eric Oatman
