BOROBUDUR
- ' -
^p.
¡
~:
^-^^ i
j-
»
i
Ntf
-V*
.-
* "***
>
3$.
* ,1 . * -
&
^
^
0
*{flB^K * * "v-'s
* N t 1
¡efe
:S5> i ^Elb^P
V,;
- 5
i fr*.k ;
.'
:ê >
1 *
If- . M ¿1
« 4 ^ _^^_
m w
«i
*' ' ^
* *
Photo £) A.J Bernet Kempers, Arnhem, The N etherlands
RICH IMAGERY OF BUDDHIST COSMOLOGY ¡s displayed on Borobudur's
1.460 narrative bas-reliefs which, taken together, cover 1,900 square
metres. Detail above shows an incident from the story of prince Sudhana
and the nymph Manohara. While searching for the nymph near the capital
of her father the king, Sudhana meets girls bringing water to bathe her. To
announce his presence he drops a ring into one of the water vessels.

Indonesia's Buddhist sanctuary -
a sermon in stone
by R. Soekmono
In the centre of the Indonesian island of
Java, on a fertile plain bordered by rugged
mountains and volcanoes, stands the
magnificent Buddhist sanctuary of Chandi
Borobudur. With its stone terraces rising
skywards, wave upon wave, with its profu¬
sion of unique stone reliefs and statues of
the Buddha, capped by a great central
stupa, Borobudur has been called "the
vastest, oldest, and most beautiful monu¬
ment in the southern hemisphere". But for
centuries after it was built over a thousand
years ago, Borobudur was abandoned and
forgotten. When it was rediscovered in the
nineteenth century it was ravaged with
decay, and although a number of repairs
and holding operations were carried out, it
seemed doomed to eventual collapse. In the
years after Indonesia became independent,
the new nation made thepreservation of this
tangible evidence of its glorious past a
priority objective. Today, through a unique
combination of multidisciplinary technical
skills, Indonesian pride, and international
co-operation channelled through Unesco's
international campaign for Borobudur, this
great work ofhuman genius has been saved
for posterity. The finishing touches have
now been put to a vast archaeological rescue
operation which has taken ten years and has
involved the stone-by-stone dismantlement
and reconstitution of the square lower ter¬
races of the colossal edifice. Here,
Dr. Soekmono, of Indonesia, the Director
of the Borobudur Restoration Project,
traces the history of the monument and of¬
fers an interpretation of its significance;
in a second article Dr. Soekmono and Dr.
C. Voûte, Unesco Co-ordinator of the
Borobudur project 1971-75, describe the
threats to Borobudur and show how at¬
tempts to save it have finally been crowned
with success.
R. SOEKMONO, Indonesian archaeologist and
ancient historian, is director of the Borobudur restora¬
tion project. Professor ofarchaeology at the University
ofIndonesia, ofwhich he is also executive secretary, he
has published several studies on Borobudur, notably
Chandi Borobudur, A Monument of Mankind pub¬
lished in 1976 by Unesco and Van Gorcum, Assen/Ams¬
terdam, The Netherlands.
MANY theories have been advanced about the origin of
Borobudur, perhaps the most poetic being one claiming
that it originally represented a lotus flower floating on
the surface of a lake which once covered the surrounding plain, the
mythical lotus from which the future Buddha will be born.
No written documents about the construction of the monument
survive, but inscriptions point to the conclusion that it was pro¬
bably founded around the year 800 AD during the Golden Age of
the powerful Sailendra dynasty of Central Java.
Nor do we know with certainty how long Borobudur was in ac¬
tive use, or when it ceased to function as a monument to glorify the
greatness of the Sailendra kings and, at the same time as.a centre
of Buddhist pilgrimage.
The general assumption is that the Chandis (the name given to
monuments dating back to the ancient period of Indonesian
history) fell into disuse when people were converted to Islam in the
fifteenth century. However, it is quite possible that the monuments
in Central Java were abandoned as early as the tenth century, when
historical importance shifted from there to East Java.
Whatever the truth may have been, it was not until 1814 that
Chandi Borobudur emerged, actually and figuratively, from its
dark past. Java was then under British rule, and the representative
of the British Government, Sir Stamford Raffles, took a keen in¬
terest in the island's history. In 1814, when he was informed of the
existence of a huge monument called Chandi Borobudur, he sent
a Dutch engineer named Cornelius to investigate.
Cornelius hired some 200 villagers to fell trees, burn down
bushes and dig away the earth and rubbish in which the monument
had long been buried. The activities of Raffles and Cornelius
stimulated interest in Borobudur, and a later Dutch administrator
arranged for further removal of the debris so that by 1835 the en¬
tire edifice was freed from its last disfiguring cover.
The monument that stood revealed is a colossal stepped pyramid
consisting of nine superimposed terraces and crowned by a huge
bell-shaped stupa. It was built around and on top of a flattened
hill, of andésite, a porous, bluish-grey volcanic rock which had
been taken from nearby rivers. Laid without mortar, the stones
had been made to grip by means of dovetails in the horizontal con¬
nexions, and indentations in the vertical joints. This system allows
a certain flexibility, so that the monument can withstand slight
movements without an immediate danger of collapse.
The structural design is complicated, but a main vertical division
into three parts base, body, and top is evident. The base forms
a square with sides measuring some 120 metres, the total area thus
being slightly less than one and a half hectares.
The four-metre-high walls of the base are supported by a
foothold resembling a huge plinth, 1.5 metres high and 3 metres
across. In 1885, the Chairman of the Yogyakarta Archaeological
Society made the sensational discovery that these walls encased a
series of 160 carved reliefs, which became known as the monu¬
ment's "hidden foot". (A photographic record of the reliefs was
made in 1890-91, after which the "foot" was again hidden with the
original stones, except for the southeast corner.).
Some scholars have suggested that these reliefs had been
deliberately covered to conceal them from the eyes of pilgrims.
However, the use of 12, 750 cubic metres of stone to make the en¬
casement, and the sacrifice of architectural elements and reliefs,
seem to indicate that the soundness of the monument was at stake.
As a considerable part of the gradually mounting foundations of
the stepped pyramid had to rest on loose filled earth, sliding pro¬
bably took place. In other words, the encasing wall was a retaining
embankment thrown up to prevent further sliding and to avoid
worse disaster.
9

Photo © Unesco-Institut Géographique National, Pans
Aerial photos, above and top of page, show the basic architec¬
tural features of Borobudur, a stepped pyramid consisting of
nine superimposed terraces and crowned by a huge bell-shaped
Stupa 35 metres above the ground. Cross-section, right,
shows how the vertical layout of the structure, divided into a
base, a central and an upper part, corresponds to the three
spheres of the Universe in the Buddhist cosmogony:
kamadhatu, the sphere of the Desires; rupadhatu, the sphere of
Forms; and arupadhatu, the sphere of Formlessness.
The body, or middle part of the monument, is composed
of five terraces which diminish in size with height. The first
of these terraces stands back some seven metres from the
sides of the base creating a broad platform right round the
monument. The other terraces retreat only two metres at
each stage, and balustrades at the outer sides convert the nar¬
row galleries into corridors.
The superstructure is in its turn clearly distinguished from
the terraces. It consists of three circular platforms, each of
which supports a row of bell-shaped stupas containing Bud¬
dhas half visible through perforated stonework. Surmoun¬
ting the rows of stupas, which are arranged in concentric
circles, the great central dome on top of the monument soars
into the sky to a height of nearly thirty-five metres above the
ground.
Access to the upper part of the monument is provided by
stairways in the middle of each side of the pyramid. The
stairs lead through a series of gates (most of which have been
lost) directly to the circular platforms, at the same time in¬
tersecting the corridors of the square terraces. The main en¬
trance is at the eastern side, as is clear from the start of the
narrative reliefs.
Chandi Borobudur is one of the most complex and in¬
tegrated religious symbols in the world; each of its levels has
a different kind of sculptural symbolism. It should be con¬
sidered, not as a temple, but as a place of pilgrimage, or a
school or university of a special type. The Buddhist student
is guided gradually along successive terraces and staircases to
the uppermost platform, experiencing physically as well as
spiritually the long and hard journey in search of the
Ultimate Truth.
Buddhism lays particular stress on the stages of mental
preparation to be undergone before attaining liberation from
all earthly bonds and the ultimate exclusion from being
reborn. The universe has three spheres. The lowest sphere is
kamadhatu or the Sphere of the Desires. At this stage man
is bound to his desires. The higher sphere is rupadhatu or the
Sphere of Forms, where man has abandoned his desires but
is still bound to name and form. The highest sphere is
arupadhatu, or the Sphere of Formlessness. In this sphere
there is no longer either name or form. Man is once and
forever freed from all bonds with the phenomenal world.
At Chandi Borobudur the Sphere of Desires is represented
by the base; the Sphere of Forms by the square terraces; and
the Sphere of Formlessness by the three circular platforms
and the great stupa.
The base is concealed from the visitor's sight today, but
the 160 reliefs and the short inscriptions carved over many of
the panels (apparently constituting instructions to the
sculptors indicating the scene to be carved) depict the work¬
ings of morality on earth.
Drawing Unesco
KAMADHATU
10

Blameworthy activities, from gossip to murder, with their
corresponding purgatorial punishments, and praiseworthy
activities like charity and pilgrimages to sanctuaries, and
their subsequent rewards, are both shown. The pains of hell
and the pleasures of heaven, and scenes of daily life are
represented in a full panorama of samsara, the endless cycle
of birth and death, the chain of all those forms of delusional
existence from which Buddhism brings release.
In contrast to the openness of the earthly life in the Sphere
of Desires, the path leading to ultimate salvation requires a
narrowing of bodily sight and concentration of the mind.
The narrow galleries of the Sphere of Forms help the faithful
to achieve this. At first sight they are bewildering. The walls
and facing balustrades are packed with reliefs. No less than
1,300 panels of narrative reliefs for a total length of 2,500
metres, and a further 1,212 decorative reliefs, flank the cor
ridors. The biography of the Lord Buddha, from his descent
from heaven until his enlightenment, is depicted on the main
wall of the first gallery. The reliefs which cover the walls of
the second, third and fourth galleries tell the story of the
tireless wanderings of Sudhana in search of the Highest'
Wisdom and the Ultimate Truth.
The narrative reliefs on the walls read from right to left,
those on the balustrades from left to right. This was done for
the purposes of the pradaksina, the ritual circumambulation
which the pilgrim makes, moving in a clockwise direction
and keeping the sanctury to his right. The narrative starts at
the left and ends at the right of the eastern stairway, confirm¬
ing that this stairway is the real entrance to the monument.
The perseverance of the principal figures of the Sphere of
Forms and their tireless efforts to reach the Ultimate Goal
despite their involvement with the extreme richness and
CONTINUED PAGE 15
fe a&îfgp jMS^ ft S f & Ai.
^S^R?i
-<%
-if
*"
- - .
r*"* "J V
**'
"WM*
&t»< **
mí«-
«ff iâr
Borobudur' s
hidden foot
The base of Borobudur, usually call¬
ed "the hidden foot", is concealed
from view by a heavy stone encase¬
ment which was probably built to
prevent the still-uncompleted monu¬
ment from collapsing through sub¬
sidence. Adorning it is a remarkable
series of 1 60 reliefs which were only
discovered in 1885, over ten cen¬
turies after they were created. The
hidden foot was then exposed and
its masterpieces photographed
before being covered up again, ex¬
cept for the southeast corner. The
panels, which are outstanding for
their enthralling panorama of scenes
from everyday life, illustrate the
workings of Karma, the Law of
Cause and Effect. Scenes are shown
which may lead to a future incarna¬
tion characterized by "a short life",
"a long life", "much pain", "little
pain", "ugliness", "gracefulness"
and so on. Since the pious visitor to
Borobudur should walk around the
sanctuary in a clockwise direction in
accordance with the rite of
pradaksina, the initial deed is usually
depicted on the right side of the
panel, the good or bad result on the
left. Left above, a two-part scene
divided by the tree at centre il¬
lustrates wicked deeds that lead to
the torments of hell: people throw¬
ing fish and turtles into a cauldron
are themselves cooked over a fire
(right of central tree), and a mother-
slayer plunges headfirst into hell
(left). Left centre, refusal to give
alms leads to poverty. Left below,
the exposed hidden foot at the
southeast corner of Borobudur.
11

^5ï
rtÄ/y^.
«r''
¿Mf
â *-ä
A
SSS5
J
fi$g&£] The life of the
Lord Buddha
Photos on this page show 5
of a set of 120 Borobudur
reliefs which portray
episodes in the life of the
historic Buddha, Siddartha
Gautama, according to a
sacred scripture called the
Lalitavistara. The relief
showing the birth of the
Buddha as prince Siddartha,
son of King Suddhodana and
Queen Maya of Kapilavastu
Swl (in present-day Nepal) is
preceded by panels depic¬
ting various preparations
made to welcome the final
incarnation of the Bodhisatt-
| va (the Buddha-to-be). Top
photo, two goddesses have
flown on clouds to behold
the future mother of the
Bodhisattva in her pavilion
surrounded by attendants
and soldiers.
The Bodhisattva grows up
and marries, and after the
wedding ceremony he is
visited by gods who convey
their congratulations but
also recall the holy task
awaiting him. King Sud¬
dhodana fears to lose the
son who is intended to suc¬
ceed him and builds three
palaces for him. They are
specially guarded to prevent
any attempt by the prince to
escape. Second photo: the
Bodhisattva is sitting in the
middle of the sleeping
women of the court.
One night he leaves the
palace grounds to start a
new life. Third photo: after
passing through many coun¬
tries he says farewell to his
groom and his beloved horse
and cuts off his hair.
After many wanderings, the
Bodhisattva finds five fellow
disciples who agree to join
him in his search for salva-
' tion. In fourth photo, he sits
""\x meditating, left, among
rocks, trees and peacocks
¡ on the Gaya mountain. To
the right are the five
* **V disciples.
Having resisted the
allurements of Mara the Evil
One, the Bodhisattva attains
the Highest Wisdom,
becoming Buddha, "the
, Enlightened One". Bottom
j photo: the gods persuade
! the compassionate Buddha
to reveal his doctrine and
give his special attention to
¡ the suffering world.
Photos Luc Joubert-L/nesco Courier. From
Description de Borobudur 1 920 by
N.J. Krom and Th. van Erp
\
wyt

THE GREAT VEHICLE
In the sense that there was no god to be worshipped, Buddhism was not
originally a religion. It was rather a doctrine explaining how to achieve the
ultimate release from all sufferings. Underlying the doctrine is the conviction
that life is misery. Since the phenomenal world is not real, life in all its aspects
is illusion. Life is both a continuation ofearlier lives and a preparation for the
next one, a station in the endless cycle ofbeing born and reborn. Theform and
circumstances of each station are determined by their predecessors.
The determining factor is the karma, the balance of good and bad acts. A
positive balance will secure a better next life and a life that continues to improve
will culminate in a rebirth in heaven. This however does not break the cycle of
birth and rebirth, since a celestial being is also a temporary manifestation. The
ultimate goal is therefore to avoid any form of rebirth.
In the further development of Buddhism, the attainment of nirvana, ab¬
solute non-existence, ceased to be the ultimate goal. To be consistent with the
Buddha's example, it was the salvation of others that should be striven for
rather than one's own. The figure of the Bodhisattva, one whose nature was
enlightenment, replaced the image of nirvana. This school, which became
established in Indonesia, /sca/VeÉ/Mahayana or The Great Vehicle. Its principle
is to pursue salvation for the many, and the ideal of the Mahayana Buddhist
is to become a Bodhisattva. R.s.
SERMONS IN STONE unfold
before the eyes of visitors who
wend their way around the ter¬
races of Borobudur. Photo shows,
above, an episode from the
Lalitavistara, the biography of the
historical Buddha from his descent
from the Tushita heaven to his first
sermon in the' Deer Park near
Varanasi. The Bodhisattva (the
Buddha-to-be) is seen bathing in
the Nairanjana river. Below, a ship
on the open sea, part of a series of
reliefs depicting the earlier lives of
the Buddha before his last incarna¬
tion in the world of human beings.
Photos © A J Bernet Kempers, Arnhem,
The Netherlands
13

Tilgrim's
Progress
of Buddhism'
Winding round the second,
third and fourth terraces of
Borobudur are 460 panels,
many of them life-size,
which illustrate the tireless
search for Enlightenment
of the merchant's son
Sudhana. They are mostly
inspired by the Gan-
davyuha, a sacred text
sometimes referred to in
the West as "The Pilgrim's
Progress of Buddhism".
Sudhana's spiritual quest
leads him to an astonishing
variety of spiritual guides
I ranging from monks and
businessmen to a sea cap¬
tain and night-goddesses.
(1) Sudhana pays homage
' to a woman, putting five
parts of his body on the
ground. (2) He visits the
Great Bodhisattva Man-
[ jusri and requests his
teaching. Manjusri is the
figure at centre; Sudhana
is to the viewer's left. The
concluding reliefs in the
series are based on
another sacred text, the
Bhadracari. In one of the
most remarkable scenes
(3) the Bodhisattva
Samantabhadra appears
no less than three times.
First he is seen standing on
the ground (right), then on
a lotus cushion in mid-air
(centre) and finally flying in
the upper sky. The scene is
thought to illustrate the
passage, "Up to the end of
the sky, and until all... kar¬
mas and worldly passions
have ceased, my vows will
know no end."
Photos Luc Joubert-Unesco Courier
taken from Description de Borobudur
1920 by N.J. Krom and Th van Erp

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1 1
beauty of forms, provide a model for the pilgrim as he
perambulates the successive stages.
In striking contrast to the square terraces of the Sphere of
Forms the circular platforms representing the Sphere of
Formlessness are plain: no carvings, no ornaments, no
embellishments. The only break in the monotonous plain¬
ness is offered by the row of stupas that encircle the great
central dome.
The complete openness of the arupadhatu, and the
magnificent view from it, symbolize the endless widening of
his spiritual horizon that the pilgrim can achieve by con¬
sistently following the devout conduct in life of the Lord
Buddha. Having absorbed the spirit of the arupadhatu, he
knows the delight of becoming wiser, if not enlightened, and
the ordinary visitor finds that his own weary journey is richly
rewarded.
The exceptional design of Chandi Borobudur has led to
much speculation about why it was built; the identification
of the monument with the cosmic mountain is only one of
many interpretations by which scholars have sought to reveal
its mysteries in the over 500 learned studies that have been
devoted to Borobudur.
The most satisfactory explanation of the symbolic mean¬
ing of the monument has been found by Dr. J.G. de
Casparis, who has made a minute analysis of a number of
eighth and ninth-century inscriptions. In one of them dating
from 842 AD he recognized the compound word
Bhumisambha-rabhudara which he recognized as the
original name of Chandi Borobudur.
This complicated word serves both to explain the
significance of the mountain and to name its founders as
well. As a technical term in Mahayana Buddhism (see box
page 13) the compound means: "The mountain of the ac¬
cumulation of virtue on the ten stages of the Bodhisattva".
A Bodhisattva is one who, like the historical Buddha
Gautama, has set out to attain Enlightenment. The term may
also be interpreted in architectural terms as "The mountain
which is terraced in successive stages" or in a more general
sense as the "King(s) of the accumulation of earth", i.e. the
Sailendra dynasty (saila indra = king of the mountains).
Such ambiguity in a technical term is quite common in the
Sailendra charters, as de Casparis has convincingly shown.
In the prehistoric cultures of Indonesia, a stepped pyramid
is the symbol of the abode of the ancestors in the mountains
and hence it can be plausibly argued that ancestor worship
played a significant part in the designing of the monument.
Consequently, the symbolical meaning of Chandi
Borobudur has a twofold origin, in Mahayana Buddhism
and in ancestor worship. In this context de Casparis inter¬
preted the great stupa as the tenth storey of the monument.
The ten mounting terraces of the structure correspond to the
ten successive stages the Bodhisattva must achieve before at¬
taining Buddhahood; they also correspond to the Sailendra
kings who had until then ruled the kingdom.
It is well known that kings identified themselves with their
divine patrons: Hindu kings with Siva or Visnu, and Bud¬
dhist kings with Bodhisattvas. The liberation from the cycle
of birth and death constitutes the final goal in Hinduism (just
as it was in the early evolution of Buddhism) but to the
Mahayana Buddhist it is the start of the Path to be followed
by the Bodhisattva. A Sailendra king had to do his utmost
to pave the way for the attainment of Buddhahood. He had
to accumulate as much virtue as possible during his reign. He
also had to glorify his predecessors, and one of the most
meritorious ways of doing this was to erect monuments
dedicated both to his patron and to his forefathers.
In terms of ancestor worship, a predecessor is assumed to
have reached a higher stage of perfection than a successor.
The most remote forefather, the founder of the dynasty, is
assumed to have attained the ultimate perfection. And the
other ancestors are ranked successively by order of seniority.
This was apparently the underlying idea of the founder of
Chandi Borobudur when he decided to create a monument
that differed radically from the traditional design. His dar¬
ing break with tradition was meant to demonstrate the high
esteem in which he held the forefather whom he identified
with the Buddha; and a stepped pyramid with a stupa on top
was a most appropriate symbol for depicjing the virtue the
dynasty had accumulated along the Path of the Bodhisattva.
Chandi Borobudur can only be understood by fusing Bud¬
dhism and ancestor worship.
R. Soekmono
Borobudur is exceptionally rich in stone statues depicting
Dhyani (transcendental) Buddhas seated cross-legged on
lotus cushions and facing outwards. At first sight they all
seem alike but they differ, especially as to the position of
the hands (mudra). Right, a Dhyani Buddha in the Abhaya
mudra symbolizing the reassurance to refrain from fear.
Photo taken from Description de Borobudur 1920 by N J Krom and Th van Erp
