Photo © Tran Van Khe, Paris



The 'paddy-field'
puppets of Vietnam
THE villagers have gathered on the banks of the
village pond. The air is filled with the sound of
gongs, drums, and folk instruments. On one side
of the pond a brick construction (it might equally well be
of planks or bamboo) has been erected. A bamboo screen
reaches from the roof to the surface of the water. The
rhythm of the drum-beats rises to a frenzy. Pushing aside
the curtain, a wooden puppet the size of a small child ap¬
pears on the water. It is Teu, the compère of the show.
He begins to speak...
Thus begins a water puppet show in a village on the
Red River delta in northern Vietnam. This very ancient
art, in a region of rice-fields where water is everywhere,
is now being rediscovered. Its themes are inspired by
village events, popular myths and legends, and the
familiar figures of life in the delta, such as the angler
shown in the photo above.
How does it all work? "The puppeteers are concealed
behind the bamboo curtain", explains the Vietnamese
specialist Tran Van Khe. "Their hands and feet are in the
water. Only their silhouettes are visible". Some puppets
are simply placed at the end of long bamboo poles.
Others are manipulated by an ingenious mechanism of
stakes and strings beneath the muddy water. The pup¬
pets may be highly complex; in some cases they are ar¬
ticulated and can perform several movements
simultaneously. Thanks to the ingenious manipulation
system surprise effects can be obtained which draw
cries of applause from the audience: banners suddenly
emerge from the water, completely dry, and flap in the
wind; soldiers in red or blue uniforms parade and turn
right or left according to their colour; a girl astride a fish
crosses the pond to offer betel leaves to the audience.
Unesco's International Fund for the Promotion of
Culture is helping the Socialist Republic of Vietnam to
restore this extraordinary and unique art to its former
glory. Other activities connected with the theatre which
are also receiving support from the Fund include: the
creation of the Centro de Investigación y Creación
Teatral del Ateneo in Caracas; the Centre Mandapa in
Paris, which is concerned with the study and promotion
of the Asian dramatic arts; the Aty-Ne'e theatre group in
Paraguay (for the creation of an itinerant theatre
workshop); a film on the "Elche Mystery" in Spain; and
a book on the Chikwakwa popular theatre in Zambia.
35
