Robinson Crusoe
goes to school
Six pioneers of modern education
by Hermann Rohrs
JEAN-JACQUES Rousseau and
Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi are the
two founding fathers of a revolu¬
tion in the methods and principles of
teaching. In spite of many differences,
there seem to have been marked
similarities between the personalities of
these two Swiss thinkers, as well as a
strong affinity in the salient features of
their thought. The reason for this is that
both men drew much of their inspiration
from the philosophers of Antiquity,
especially from the Platonic idea of
education as thecornerstone of the State
and the Stoic morality of Seneca and
Cicero. This affinity can also be partly
explained in terms of the strong influence
of Rousseau's thought on the young
Pestalozzi.
The influence of Rousseau (1712-1778)
on Pestalozzi (1746-1827) can be said to
have begun in 1763 when Pestalozzi, one
of a circle of young students who belong¬
ed to the "Patriotic Leagues" in
Switzerland, took part in debates on
ideas of social reform. Rousseau's Emile
had just appeared, and this book in
which its author sets out to show how
society can be reformed through educa¬
tion was the cause of impassioned
debate. Evoking this period in his
Schwanengesang ("Swan Song") of
1826, Pestalozzi would write: "This is
why, when Emile appeared, this dream-
book, utterly remote from practical con¬
cerns, aroused the enthusiasm of my
dreaming soul which was equally remote
from them."
The experience of these two great
figures in the history of education can be
summed up in a few simple words: it is
through education that man's human
potential is fulfilled in a given social con¬
text. Hence education can only succeed if
it is directed towards the reform of socie¬
ty. Both Rousseau and Pestalozzi are
thus convinced that, because of the op¬
portunity for renewal it offers, education
can make a greater contribution than a
revolution to social progress.
HERMANN ROHRS, of the Federal
Republic of Germany, is head of the depart¬
ment of education at the University of
Heidelberg and director of its research centre
into comparative education, of which he is the
founder. The most recent of his many books
on the theory and principles of education is
Die Reformpàdagogik des Auslands ("Peda¬
gogical Reform Abroad", 1983).
The pedagogical theories of the Swiss educational reformer Johann
Heinrich Pestalozzi (1 746-1 827) are based on his conviction that man
himself is responsible for his moral and intellectual state and that his
duty towards the community is a harmonious extension of his duty
towards himself. Pestalozzi was also one of the first proponents of the
concept of lifelong education.
Published in 1761, Emile is the great
classic of pedagogical Utopia. Reflecting
on the origin and the consequences of the
social contract in his two Discourses,
Rousseau had glimpsed the possibility of
reforming society through education.
His aim was not so much to bring about
a "return to nature" as to find a formula
which would make it possible to base
social progress on the virtues of natural
man.
For Rousseau, the ideal conditions in
which to learn how to live are those of
Robinson Crusoe on his island: facing up
to the thousand and one problems of
everyday life is an experience which
brings a rich harvest of discoveries. Only
a state of want, experienced existentially,
permits a spontaneous acquisition of
knowledge. Rousseau thus seeks to in¬
troduce a Robinson Crusoe situation into
the child's daily life, so as to create the
natural condition for the challenge of
learning which he must face on his own.
This basic idea of transposing the
situation of Robinson Crusoe into the
child's universe and into the school has
revolutionized pedagogy. It is an idea
20

which recurs in the work of Pestalozzi,
Dewey, Montessori, Makarenko and
Freinet.
The crowning notion of Pestalozzis
educational theories is that of moral
autonomy, which man acquires as, in
confrontation with the universe and its
contingencies, he comes to define his own
laws and apply them while respecting the
demands of the community.
Rousseau and Pestalozzi were the first
thinkers to assert that education is not a
phenomenon limited in space or time, but
a process lasting a lifetime through which
man becomes aware of himself and then
of his possibilities within his universe.
Following Rousseau and Pestalozzi, the
leading Western educational reformer is
John Dewey (1859-1952), who had
exhaustively studied the philosophy of
Kant before he came to Rousseau.
Dewey's major contribution, what might
be called his "Copernican revolution",
was to relate education directly to the
necessities of life. He developed the con¬
cept of the school as an "embryonic com¬
munity", a reflection of his ideas on the
interaction between the school and life
and the priority that should be given to
civic education. The school should be seen
as the place where the social virtues may
be acquired. The more fully it performs
this function, the better it prepares young
people for life in the wider community:
The more fully it accepts this virtually per¬
manent task by developing the critical
sense, the more substantial is its contri¬
bution to the renewal of social and com¬
munity structures.
Any change in the pedagogical institu¬
tion requires a new approach to the role
of the teacher. An attempt to promote an
exchange between the real world and the
child means that the teacher can no
longer confine himself to the narrowly
defined role of transmitter of knowledge. I
Published in 1761, £m;7e, by Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778), is the great classic of
pedagogical Utopia. Although Rousseau wanted children to grow and develop naturally, his aim
was not so much a question of a "return to nature" as to find an educational formula which
would make it possible to base social progress on the virtues of natural man. Above, "Nature
laid out all its splendours before our eyes" reads the caption to this illustration for Emile, by
Moreau le Jeune (1741-1814).
21

assistant Helen Parkhurst, a pupil of
Dewey.
Montessori's main contribution lies in
her application to pedagogy of the fun¬
damental principles of the experimental
sciences; her objective was to provide the
discipline of teaching with a scientific
basis. This explains her concern for
rigorous planning both of teaching situa¬
tions and of teaching materials, and for
maximum precision in the observation of
results. She abolished the role of the
educator as a remote and objective
observer, and replaced it with the child's
spontaneous creativity and boundless
love. Hence there is a certain duality in
her work, in the sense that many of her
reflections and writings recall the
philosophical meditations of a Pestalozzi
rather than the clinical descriptions of a
medical doctor. This duality often gives
her writing a visionary force, but it does
not always shield it from a certain
ambiguity.
Anton Semyonovich Makarenko
(1888-1939) showed himself more revolu¬
tionary than all his predecessors in
developing an uncompromisingly
political theory of education, the goal of
which was to encourage the emergence of
a new human being, the Soviet citizen.
His theoretical writings were directly in¬
spired by his experience in work colonies,
and were a step-by-step exposition of an
already existing practice from which they
cannot be divorced. Rather like Pestaloz-
Instead he must try to act as a mediator
who asks questions and explores their im¬
plications, and who does not fail to ques¬
tion himself. This approach is strongly
reminiscent of the Socratic dialogue, and
there can be no doubt that Dewey, who
knew his Plato, always had in mind this
pedagogical model which is centred on
the idea that it is necessary to learn how
to learn and that man's destiny is to carry
on a lifelong dialogue with his
environment.
None of the great educational
reformers created a system which achiev¬
ed more success than that of Maria
Montessori (1870-1952). After observing
the behaviour of retarded children with
whom she worked as a doctor, she made
the decisive discovery, which was to
revolutionize the education of young
children, that there is a distinctive world
of childhood and that the child's
development obeys specific laws. This
discovery was to bear fruit in the
"children's houses" (Case dei bambini)
which she started in the San Lorenzo
slum district of Rome. The teaching was
centred on the needs and interests of the
children, and devised so as to take them
through the different stages of their
development which can be discerned
after careful study behind the apparent
spontaneity of their behaviour.
It is not easy to see to what extent
Montessori was influenced by Rousseau
and his theories on the natural develop¬
ment of the child, as opposed to muddled
and inexpedient dirigisme by adults.
Nevertheless, there are many echoes of
Rousseau in the passages of her work
which describe the confusion of the child
lost in an adult world in which he is not
at home and which condemns him to an
uncertain future. There is certainly no
doubt that she was influenced by such
thinkers as Dewey, the Swiss educator
Adolphe Fernere (1879-1960), and the
Belgian Ovide Decroly (1871-1932). Most
apparent are her affinities with Decroly,
also a doctor, who founded his "School
for life through life" in Brussels in 1907,
the same year in which Montessori began
her work with the "children's houses".
But above all, during a visit to the United
States in 1912, she became acquainted
with the main principles of Dewey's
pedagogical theories; her knowledge of
these was deepened by contact with her
22
Like the ancient Greeks, Jean-Jacques Rousseau believed that "necessity is the
mother of all the arts". For him, the ideal conditions in which to learn how to live were
those experienced by Daniel Defoe's hero Robinson Crusoe on his desert island. Only
by experiencing a state of want could a child achieve spontaneous acquisition of
knowledge. Above, an illustration for one of the earliest editions of Robinson Crusoe.

zi before him, Makarenko gathered
around him a number of children made
homeless by war and succeeded in
welding them into a community with its
own rules and discipline. A decisive stage
in his work came when the community
moved into an abandoned farm and
became the "Gorky colony" after the
writer whose life-story' deeply impressed
Makarenko.
The exemplary nature of tasks and
duties is of decisive importance in the
education of young people who have
been abandoned, but life in such a
disciplined environment is prey to a cer¬
tain monotony. Makarenko sought to
avoid this danger in his pedagogical
system, above all by what he called
"perspectives". He unhesitatingly
agreed to create an establishment for
children and adolescents in the
monastery of Kurjash near Kharkov,
where 280 orphans were installed in
derelict buildings surrounded by waste
land. After the Gorky colony had
unanimously agreed to take on this new
mission there began what Makarenko
would later refer to as the "conquest of
Kurjash" (in his The Road to Life, an
Epic of Education - Putevka v zhizu,
pedagogicheskaya poema).
The pedagogical ideas of the French
educator Célestin Freinet (1896-1966) are
no less rooted in concrete realities than
those of Makarenko, but their
The American philosopher and
educational reformer John
Dewey (1859-1952) saw the
school as an "embryonic com¬
munity". There the young
could acquire the social vir¬
tues and develop a critical
sense that would enable them
later to contribute to the
renewal of social and com¬
munity structures.
The Italian psychiatrist and educator
Maria Montessori (1870-1952) is
credited with being the first to
perceive that a child's development
obeys specific laws. The teaching
system that bears her name em¬
phasizes development of the child's
creative potential and self-
confidence.
The French educator Célestin
Freinet (1896-19661, founder of the
"new school" movement in France,
based his pedagogical methods on
allowing pupils freedom of expres¬
sion and motivating them through
the "active method". He believed
strongly in the educational potential
of the school printing press.
In the early 1920s, the Soviet social worker and educational theorist Anton Se-
myonovich Makarenko (1888-1939) established the Gorky Colony, a settlement in
which he gathered together children left orphaned and homeless in the aftermath of
war. His book The Road to Life, an Epic of Education tells how he welded them into a
community with its own self imposed rules and discipline. Above Makarenko is seen
at the centre rear of the group wearing a cap. Seated in the foreground is the writer
Maksim Gorky (1868-1936) after whom the colony was named.
pedagogical range and ambitions are far
more limited.
Freinet's starting point was an analysis
of the frustrations which he himself ex¬
perienced as a primary school teacher.
He attributed a decisive role to the school
printing press, the educational potential
of which he had appreciated at Ovide
Decroly's school in Rue de l'Hermitage
in Brussels. This "school for life through
life", made such an impression on
Freinet that he took as the slogan for his
own pedagogical concepts "The school
for life through work." This formula
neatly sums up both the practice and
theoretical meaning of Freinet's work,
which he set forth in two major works,
The Printing Press at School (1927) and
The Education of Work (1949). A
meeting with Adolphe Fernere, who had
developed a version of the school of work
in his book L'Ecole Active, enabled
Freinet to develop his ideas by relating
them more closely to methods of educa¬
tion through work.
In Freinet's work the printing press has
a central role, both as an instrument for
achieving progress through work and as a
means of communication. The pupils use
the school printing press to produce work
such as articles, reports or newsletters
which are not only educational activities
but exercises in communication with
others. They can also use the press to
print newspapers or letters to their
parents or to the community at large, or
to exchange information with other
schools as part of "interschool cor¬
respondence". Schoolwork thus loses its
rigidly didactic nature and becomes an
existential activity.
Freinet devised his own teaching
materials and opened the way for pupils,
in almost all subjects, whether in¬
dividually or in groups, to master their
own work programmes. The teaching
materials are produced on the school
printing press or at the central printing
works of the "Institut coopératif de
l'école moderne" in Cannes. The pupil's
autonomy as he confronts his respon¬
sibilities in a school life in direct contact
with life in the outside world is also
reflected in the unconventional nature of
relations between teachers and pupils and
in the group's active participation in the
conception and realization of its work,
Hermann Rohrs
23
