Ardjuna, a hero of the Mahabharata, one of the great epic poems of Hinduism, as he appears in the Kathakali dance-drama. The
Kathakali theatre, which originated in Kerala, south-west India, in the 17th century, is part of the Indian theatrical tradition in which
poetry, music and dance are interlinked. The characters are easily identified by their stylized costumes, make-up, and gestures.



INDIA
The gift of the gods
by Suresh Awasthi
KATHAKALI, the world-fa¬
mous classical dance theatre of
Kerala in southern India, is the
product of a theatrical tradition in
which drama is the gift of gods, an art
in whose creation all the deities of the
great Hindu Trinity Brahma, Vishnu
and Shiva are involved. Drama was
divine in origin, and when it descended
from heaven to earth and was practised
by men it became an offering to the
SURESH AWASTHI, Indian theatre scholar
and teacher, is a former director of the Tradi¬
tional Academy of Music, Dance and Drama in
New Delhi, and a visiting professor at New York
University. He is currently visiting research pro¬
fessor at the Institutefor the Study of Languages
and Cultures ofAsia and Africa, Tokyo Univer¬
sity of Foreign Studies.
30
gods. The outstanding Sanskrit poet
and dramatist Kalidasa (4th century
AD?) rightly described theatrical per¬
formance as Chakshu-Yajna "visual
sacrifice".
In Hindu religious thought God is
engaged in an eternal play. Play is the
modality in which He displays His
presence in the world, assuming human
form to restore order and righteousness
at critical junctures in human affairs.
His worldly deeds in His incarnation
are called lila sports, illusion. Just as
God becomes incarnate and acts as a
player (lilikara) in this world, men im¬
personate and play gods. Kathakali
theatre reflects this vision of life in
which the divine and the human are
constantly mixed.
Kathakali is also representative of a
tradition in which theatre is an arena of
confrontation between gods and
demons, the forces of good and evil.
Through the kaleidoscope of some fifty
plays in the current Kathakali reper¬
toire, we get glimpses of stirring scenes
of challenge and encounter, and of
fierce fighting, killing and .dying.
Kathakali theatre is a ritual glorifica¬
tion of the eternal theme of conflict
between sat and asat, good and evil.
In its aesthetics and performing
techniques, Kathakali belongs to a
theatrical tradition which emphasizes
the values of stylization, imagination
and poetry. To give the fullest
autonomy to the actor and his art, the

dramatic text is recited by two reciters.
Thus liberated from the tyranny of the
word, the Kathakali actor has
cultivated and developed other aspects
of acting, namely bodily movements
accompanied by symbolic hand-
gestures, make-up and costume, and
the expression of psychic states. This is
consonant with the Indian dramatic
tradition whereby acting is conceived
as having four aspects: vachika (ver¬
bal), angika (bodily movements),
aharya (costume and make-up), and
sattvika (psychic states).
Kathakali has evolved a unique
system of training to prepare the actor
to deal with this relationship between
the performer and the text. Elaborate
eye-exercises and the learning of sym¬
bolic hand-gestures known as mudras
are the two special features of the train¬
ing system. Movements of the eyeballs,
eyelids and eyebrows enliven facial ex¬
pressions and accentuate hand-
gestures. With twenty-four basic hand-
gestures used in various permutations,
a whole sign language has been evolved
to interpret the dramatic text.
Gesture does not duplicate the func¬
tion of the word; it enables the actor to
heighten its emotional impact. The
choreographic structure of Kathakali
closely follows the recited text; it is in¬
terdependent with and fully integrated
into the verbal structure.
Kathakali is a unique example of a
fully evolved and integrated form of
drama which has taken elements from
a variety of sources such as earlier
classical forms like Kuttiyattam (the
oldest classical form of drama for the
presentation of Sanskrit plays) and
Krishnattam, ritual performances, and
Kalari, the martial art of the region. It
also borrowed from certain simpler
forms of recitation and story-telling.
Recitation remains the basis even in its
fully evolved form, and performance is
in essence a dramatization of the
recited text. Most of the time there are
only two or three characters present in
the performance area, telling and
listening to a story, reflecting and
recapitulating.
The history of written Kathakali
plays goes back only to the early seven
teenth century. These plays deal with
the two great Hindu epics, the
Ramayana and the Mahabharata, and
the Bhagavata Purana, the sacred book
of the Krishna legend. Indian theatrical
tradition prefers the use of familiar
thematic material, and Indian theatre
derives its mystical power from the
sharing of myth between the per¬
formers and the spectators. Perfor¬
mances dealing with the Rama and
Krishna legends are not merely a thea-
tricalization of the myth, they are also
a restoration of the myth. It was
natural that these performances should
have originated in the temple, the place
of the meeting and marriage of heaven
and earth.
The thematic material of known and
shared myth also determined the
aesthetics, performing techniques and
conventions of Kathakali. It facilitated
the development of the art of the actor,
and of a scheme of stylization covering
every aspect of the performance. The
elaborate system of make-up with sym¬
bolic . colours and intricate designs
specifying character-types, gorgeous
costumes and huge headgear, as well as
the codified body movements and sym¬
bolic hand-gestures, are all part of the
scheme of stylization. The scheme thus
provides for multi-channel communi¬
cation; each channel has its own
autonomy, but the aesthetic scheme
provides for links.
A traditional Kathakali performance
in a temple courtyard is a spectacle to
delight the gods. A three-foot-high
brass lamp at front stage centre dimly
lights the small performance area,
which is at ground level. The audience
sits in darkness, and the whole at¬
mosphere is filled with a sense of
mystery and awe. The lamp serves as
the focal point, the actor treating its
wick as the god of fire through which
the offerings of his hand-gestures are
made to the audience.
A half-curtain held by two stage
hands is the only prop and the only
piece of scenery. Skilful manipulation
of the half-curtain intensifies the spec¬
tators' expectancy as they strain to
catch a glimpse of the actor, giving his
entrance the force of revelation and
making his exit mysterious. Similarly,
in certain temples the vision of the deity
is given to the worshippers only after a
ritual removal of a curtain. In
Kathakali, the half-curtain also solves
the problem of time and space in a non-
realistic, metaphysical way. The cur¬
tain stands for a lapse of time, any
length of time. It connects different
time sequences divine and human
time, mythical and historical time
and different spaces, linking even
divine and human spaces. Thus, in a
sense, time and space are made to
vanish.
Forms such as Kathakali, which deal
with legendary material and use an¬
cient, codified performing techniques,
are the product of cultures which mix
the mythical and the historical, the
religious and the secular, the tradi¬
tional and the modern.
It was because of their inherent
power that Kathakali and other tradi¬
tional forms of Indian drama readily
responded to efforts for their
rehabilitation and rejuvenation in the
1930s when the first wave of cultural
renaissance enlivened the traditional
theatre arts which were languishing
under foreign rule. The second wave,
which began after independence in
1947, has not only fully restored their
artistic power and glory, but encourag¬
ed some extremely exciting experimen¬
tal work by bringing about a lively in¬
teraction with the contemporary
theatre.
The noted playwright K.N. Pan-
nikar, of Kerala, with the semi-trained
Kathakali actors of his group
Sopanam, has staged a most successful
production of the world classic
Shakuntala by Kalidasa, as well as
some other Sanskrit plays revealing the
theatrical power of the classics for the
first time. Creatively using the elements
of Yakshagana, the traditional theatre
of his region, Karnataka, B.V. Karanth
in 1980 put on a fascinating production
of Macbeth which made Shakespeare
relevant for contemporary Indian au¬
diences. Ratan Thiyam, of Manipur,
using elements from the traditional
ritual theatre of his region, has evolved
in his own plays dealing with social pro¬
blems a style which has unusual power.
The work of these and some other
young directors is the result of their
search for roots and part of a larger
phenomenon of cultural decoloniza¬
tion. Traditional theatre, with its stag¬
gering variety and vitality, is playing a
meaningful role in this crucial moment
in the history of modern Indian
theatre.
Left, scene from a performance by a
Kathakali troupe at the Theatre of Na¬
tions festival in Paris. Lighting is provided
by a lamp placed at the front of the stage.
The only prop is a curtain which is used
to symbolize the passage of time and to
dramatize the actor's entrances and
exits.
3 i
