The Phoenicians,
master mariners
of antiquity
by Mhamed Fantar
THE Phoenicians were a people of
ancient times who belonged to the
north-west Semitic family and
whose exact origins are a matter of
controversy.
Phoenicia covered an area correspon¬
ding to modern Lebanon plus certain
parts of present-day Syria and Israel. The
Phoenicians seem to have settled there
about 3000 BC.
Archaeologists have linked the Phoeni¬
cian world to the civilization of Canaan
(the name given in the Bible to Palestine
before the arrival of the Hebrews). This
ethnic substratum seems to have been
enriched and transformed by both ethnic
and cultural contributions due to inva¬
sions in about 1200 BC by the so-called
"people of the sea".
The persistence amongst the Phoeni¬
cians of the feeling that they belonged to
the land of Canaan has been cited in sup¬
port of this hypothesis. Indeed it is hard
to see to what other cultural stream the
Canaan of the Torah can be attributed.
Moreover, the "Punies" of the fifth cen¬
tury AD, to which Saint Augustine of
Hippo refers, also claimed to be
Canaanites.
There is also the linguistic argument
according to which the Greek word
phoinikes, from which "Phoenician" is
derived, is merely a translation of
"Canaan", both names recalling the pur¬
ple dye which was a typical product of
Phoenicia.
At all events, a new dominant factor
emerged with the Phoenicians the
sea to which they deliberately turned.
Whether it was the Mediterranean, the
Red Sea or elsewhere, it was the sea that
determined the destiny of the
Phoenicians.
They lived on the coast between the
Gulf of Issus to the north and Mount
Carmel to the south. Sidon, Tyre, Byblos
and Arwad were amongst their
prestigious City-States, each with its own
institutions, religion, ways and customs.
Phoenician maritime supremacy ap¬
pears to have begun at the same time as
the Iron Age (about 1200 BC). This
hypothesis seems to be supported by
Graeco-Latin writings, Scripture, and
MHAMED FANTAR, of Tunisia, is director of
the Tunisian National Institute of Archaeology
and Art and professor of archaeology at the
University of Tunis. A specialist in Phoenician
archaeology and epigraphy, he has published
numerous books andstudies on Carthage and the
Phoenicians including Carthage, la Prestigieuse
Cité d'Elissa.
archaeological data. If ancient
historiography is to be believed, Utica,
Lixus in North Africa and Gadès in Spain
originated between the end of the second
millennium and the tenth century BC, in
other words, at a time when ancient
Greece was coming into existence, and
Phoenician sailors brought to the Greeks
of the islands much of what they may
have needed in the way of material
culture and new ideas.
It would be very useful to have an in
ventory of all the documentary evidence
regarding these contacts which the
Phoenicians maintained with the Greeks
from an early stage of their maritime
supremacy, but unfortunately, because
of the "phoenicophobia" which prevail¬
ed during the nineteenth and first half of
the present century, this evidence has
been played down. Nevertheless there is
nothing to prevent our having recourse to
these documents and objectively putting
them to good use in the interests of
historical accuracy.

Numerous classical documents, dating
from various periods, testify to the
maritime greatness of the Phoenicians.
Apart from the allusions to them in
Homer's Odyssey, there is the account by
Herodotus of the voyage which the
Phoenician fleet made on the instructions
of the Pharaoh Nechao II of Egypt (who
died in 594 BC). It sailed along the east
coast of Africa, rounded the Cape of
Good Hope and passed northwards
through the Atlantic Ocean to reach the
Mediterranean and return to Egypt. This
outstanding exploit is considered to be
one of the best proofs of Phoenician
mastery of the seas.
Their ships braved Scylla and Charyb-
dis in the Straits of Messina, and plough¬
ed their way through the open sea to
reach the southern coast of the Iberian
peninsula, where contemporary
historians place the kingdom of Tarshish
or Tartessos (in present-day Andalusia).
Here is the lament that Ezekiel addressed
to Tyre:
O thou that art situate at the entry of
the sea, which art a merchant of the peo¬
ple for many isles... O Tyrus, thou hast
said, I am ofperfect beauty.
Thy borders are in the midst of the
seas, thy builders have perfected thy
beauty.
They have made all thy ship boards offir
of Senir; they have taken cedars from
Lebanon to make masts for thee.
Of the oaks of Bashan have they made
thine oars... thy benches of ivory,
brought out of the isles of Chittim.
Fine linen with broidered work from
Egypt was that which thou spreadest
forth to be thy sail; blue andpurple from
the isles of Elishah was that which
covered thee.
The inhabitants ofZidon andArvad were
thy mariners; thy wise men, O Tyrus,
that were in thee, were thy pilots.
... all the ships of the sea with their
mariners were in thee to occupy thy
merchandise.
... and thou wast replenished and made
very glorious in the midst of the seas.
(Ezekiel chapter 27)
Nothing could express more eloquently
than these beautiful verses the maritime
power of the Phoenicians at the time
when Tyre, a sovereign State, was foun¬
ding colonies on the faraway coasts of
unknown lands.
In addition to documentary evidence,
there are archaeological facts. The dag¬
ger of Byblos has often been mentioned
and reproduced in illustrations. The
engravings which it bears tell of a
memorable event the return from the
land of Ophir (no doubt a market in
Southern Arabia where payments were
made in gold), a region rich in precious
metals and exotic products, to which
Phoenician vessels travelled. The king of
Byblos himself went down to the harbour
to welcome back the fearless travellers.
A silver patera (a typically Phoenician
product) found at Prenesta (now
Palestrina) in Italy bears a series of im¬
ages, also engraved, depicting a princely
hunt in which the imaginary appears to
surpass historical fact. The prince is be¬
ing attacked by a gorilla or chimpanzee.
Possibly this recalls the journeys which
took the Phoenicians to the heart of
equatorial Africa.
To meet their commercial needs and
ensure good conditions for their trading
activities, these adventurers established
warehouses and, later, colonies, as far
away as the shores of the Atlantic, with
the very clear intention of occupying the
territory, appropriating it and settling on
it in short, of acquiring new
homelands, without however expelling
the aboriginal inhabitants. Amongst the
best known of these settlements were
Carthage (near present-day Tunis),
Hadrumetum (near Sousse), Leptis
Minor (present-day Lamtah) in Tunisia,
Lixus (near Larache) in Morocco, Gadès
(present-day Cadiz) in Spain, Nora in
Sardinia, Panorme (Palermo) and Motya
in Sicily. This expansion and these

These three specimens of Punic art illustrate some of
the extraneous influences on Phoenician culture.
Above left, head of a terracotta figurine which, like
others unearthed in the same 6th-century-BC tomb at
Carthage, was probably a talisman. The discovery of
these statuettes at Carthage brought further proof of
the close and enduring relations between Cyprus,
where they seem to have originated, and the Phoeni¬
cian world. Small perfume bottle (height 9 cm), left,
like other objects discovered in Punic cemeteries,
seems to indicate by virtue of its style that although
the Carthaginians adopted neither the religion nor the
customs of the Nile valley, they knew of and set store
by Egyptian magic and funerary practices. It is now in
the Bardo National Museum, Tunis. Above, 3-cm-high
ivory figurine reveals Italiote influence on Punic art
(Carthage Museum).
seafaring exploits would not have been
possible without elaborate technical sup¬
port, whether in the form of the advances
achieved in shipbuilding, especially in the
use of the keel, ribs and nails, or of the
ability to navigate by reading the stars.
Phoenician expansion also seems to
have been favoured by the situation
prevailing in the Mediterranean, in so far
6
as no capable adversary or rival power
existed there. The Greek presence did not
yet count on the eve of this expansion. It
was not until the end of the ninth century
and the first half of the eighth century BC
that Greece joined in the great Mediterra¬
nean adventure and Greek colonies were
established in the Western Mediterra¬
nean. The city of Carthage appears to
have been founded partly to control and
contain this increasingly troublesome
Greek presence.
Carthage was founded by the Phoeni¬
cians about 825-819 BC to serve both as
a military base and a great trading centre.
It gradually asserted itself as the capital
of the Phoenician cities in the western
Mediterranean, with responsibility for

their defence and the protection of their
interests. From that time onwards, the
Phoenicians were no longer spoken of in
this part of the ancient world. Thanks to
the presence of Carthage, to the spread of
its influence in every domain, to its open
approach to the native populations and
to the ethnic and cultural contacts which
this implied, there emerged what are
often vaguely referred to as the Punies
a new, predominantly indigenous, ethnic
group and a new, predominantly Phoeni¬
cian culture.
The apparent Punic unity often con¬
cealed specific peculiarities. However,
like the Phoenicians, the Punies of Africa
continued to be mainly turned towards
the sea, although this did not mean that
they gave up the benefits of the land and
the products of the large farms of the
African hinterland. The name of Car¬
thage is for ever linked with the seafaring
exploits of Himilco (who sailed as far as
the British Isles) and Hanno (who reach¬
ed the West African coast), as well as
with Mago's treatise on agronomy.
The establishment of the link between
the two Mediterranean basins must be
credited to Carthage and the Phoeni¬
cians. In this way the western Mediterra¬
nean was integrated into the political,
economic and cultural universe of the
historical East. Neolithic Africa learnt to
write by adopting the Phoenician
language and alphabet (from which the
Aramaic and Greek alphabets were deriv¬
ed) without omitting to create its own
system of writing (what we call Libyan).
Another result of this Phoenician and
Carthaginian expansion was the pro¬
found change which took place in the
political geography of the western
Mediterranean. Benefiting from the ex¬
periences of the Phoenicians, the Greeks
themselves also founded colonies in
southern Italy, Sicily, Gaul and even in
Spain. This competition became a danger
for the Phoenicians, who until then had
been undisputed masters of these distant
regions. From then on, they had to take
account of the Greek presence.
But they also had other indigenous
rivals. These were the Africans whose
kingdoms seem to have been largely the
product of their contact with the Phoeni¬
cians and with the culture which the latter
brought in the form of' goods and
dialogue. It was the Phoenicians who in¬
troduced the concept of State, Kingdom
or City-State to North Africa. The
western Mediterranean was then to
become the scene of many conflicts. One
has only to recall the wars between
Carthage and the Greeks in Sicily and
Corsica, or those between Rome and
Carthage, which are referred to by
Roman historians as "the Punic Wars".
But what is really important is the con¬
tribution of the Phoenicians and Car¬
thage in the economic and socio-cultural
domains.
Amongst the many gifts made by this
civilization to the Western Mediterra¬
nean and especially to Africa, special
mention must be made of the creation of
urban centres and town-planning. Most
of the so-called Punic or Roman towns
generally bear names of Libyan origin.
This supports the hypothesis of a Libyan
foundation subsequently enriched by
Phoenician and Carthaginian contribu¬
tions thanks to which many localities,
such as Kerkouane at Cape Bon in
Tunisia, were able to grow until they at¬
tained the city stage.
The Phoenicians and Carthage sowed
in the western Mediterranean the seed of
the Semitic East, whose saplings pros¬
pered especially well in the lands of the
Maghreb. Mediterranean civilization can
justly claim that "what I am I truly owe
to many hands, but also to Carthage and
the Phoenicians".
Mhamed Fantar
Tunisian farmers at Dougga tend their livestock in a setting dominated by Roman ruins. Dougga, known in
antiquity as Thugga, was founded by the Phoenicians and became an important city during Roman times.
