A Unesco Fellowship holder from Guinea visits an Associated School in the Federal Republic of Germany.



Education for international
understanding
Unesco's Associated Schools Project
ASSOCIATED Schools do not constitute a separate
category of educational establishments, set
apart from the mainstream of education in their
respective countries. From its beginnings in 1953,
Unesco's Associated Schools Project has been designed
for integration into existing structures, just as its basic
theme education for international understanding is in¬
tended for incorporation in existing curricula and not as
an additional syllabus or subject for insertion into a con¬
venient gap in the timetable.
Associated Schools are, quite simply, educational
establishments in Unesco's Member States at the
primary, secondary, vocational and teacher-training
levels of education which agree that teaching for tomor¬
row's world must involve teaching the basic principles of
international understanding and co-operation for peace,
the neglect or refusal of which may well deprive the
world of its tomorrow, and which assume the respon¬
sibilities of providing such teaching, both on their own
and in collaboration with other partners in the Project.
Over the years, the Associated Schools Project has
greatly expanded. In 1953, there were 33 participating
schools in 1 5 Member States; today there are some
1,600 participating institutions in 81 Member States
throughout the world at primary, secondary and teacher-
training levels.
The National Commissions for Unesco are generally
responsible for the selection of participating schools and
institutions, and for the transmission of applications to
the Unesco Secretariat.
To the greatest extent possible, Associated Schools
are left to devise and implement their own activities, but
they are expected to concentrate on four basic topics:
world problems and the role of the United Nations system
in solving them; human rights; other countries and
cultures; and man and the environment.
Over the years, the point of focus has shifted from the
institutions themselves, i.e. their history, structure,
functions, machinery, etc., to the world problems they
are called upon to solve. Thus, although the contents of
the teaching remain basically the same, the point of
departure is different. A world problem such as hunger,
,the arms race, development, etc., is studied by the
students. Once they have become sensitive to the prob¬
lem and understand some of its implications they search
for possible solutions.' *
9

The boundaries on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by Unesco or the United Nations



Countries Participating in the Associated Schools Project
As of I June 1983 there were Associated Schools in
the following Member States of Unesco:
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burma
Burundi
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cyprus
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
Ethiopia
Finland
France
German Democratic Republic
Germany, Federal Republic of
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
10
Photo Satyan, Unicef
Source: Associated Schools
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Korea, Republic of
Malaysia
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Nepal
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Philippines
Poland
Romania
Saint Lucia
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Switzerland
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
United Kingdom
United Republic of Cameroon
United States of America
Uruguay
Yugoslavia
Zambia

^ The value as a means of stimulating interest and im¬
parting knowledge of organizing days or weeks
devoted to specific organizations and their activities (e.g.
Human Rights Day, United Nations Day, World Health
Day, International Literacy Day, etc.) remains un¬
contested and can be accompanied by a problem ap¬
proach, in which students are led from an awareness of
and involvement in social, cultural and economic issues
which are of direct concern to themselves and their com¬
munities, to an understanding of the broader interna¬
tional implications of these issues.
The study of human rights has always occupied a key
position in the experiments of the Associated Schools
Project, since it is clear that á grasp of the principles in¬
volved is a prerequisite to international understanding.
Teaching is based on two complementary approaches.
The first which may be termed "historical" deals with
the evolution of the concept of human rights throughout
the ages in different societies, and their contemporary
significance; the second approach is "comparative",
and is concerned with social relationships at all levels
from the local to the global where human rights are an
important issue (the rights of women, individual and na¬
tional self-determination, racial or other forms of
discrimination, the status of minorities, problems of im¬
migrant workers, employment and unemployment, the
citizen and the law, etc.)
Respect for human rights should be perceived as a
reality rather than an ¡deal, and should be reflected in the
organization and conduct of school life, in classroom
methods and procedures, and in relations between
students and teachers as well as between the teachers
themselves.
Outside the classroom and in the direct contact with
the realities of their community an essential element of
the activity of Associated Schools students have ample
opportunities of learning from personal experience and of
bridging the gap between awareness of problems and ac¬
tion designed to alleviate or solve them.
Comprehension of other countries and cultures, which
is simply a paraphrase of "international understanding",
essentially implies recognition of their right to be dif¬
ferent. But recognition of this right is not always con¬
comitant with the will to co-operate.
Experiments conducted during the early years of the
Associated Schools Project showed that it was not
enough to create a passive tolerance of differences by
showing how other countries and cultures were different
from those of the students concerned; active interest
depended on objective explanations of why such dif¬
ferences existed, and thus of their social, economic and
cultural particularities. Moreover, the study of world prob¬
lems involves the study of the countries where those
problems are most keenly felt, and of the specific cir¬
cumstances of environment and history which make
each country different from its neighbours.
In recent years, the Associated Schools Project has
begun a series of experiments in which teachers and in
some cases even students in a given country select
another country as a subject of study, investigate its
social and development problems in their own
classrooms and then travel to that country to see for
themselves how the problems are being solved.
Awareness of the universal implications of immediate,
local issues can lead to a thorough analysis of the social,
economic, ecological and other problems which all con¬
verge on the environment crisis, and place on-the-spot in¬
itiatives in the broader context of the struggle to preserve
or restore the fragile balance of the earth's resources a
balance which affects not only the relations between the
different elements of the biosphere but also the relations
between the industrialized countries and the countries of
the Third World.
Investigation, for example, of a local case of pollution
can lead to an investigation of its social and economic
Y FAMIL
,-tjMM OfwttiMÙK {VoçMMMr &»
n7- -
The first in a new series published by the Asian Cultural Centre for Unesco, Tokyo, My Village, My Fami¬
ly, My Asia, a 64-page book lavishly illustrated in colour, describes for the young reader a typical day
in the life of a village family in each of 1 5 Asian countries. Above, in the Kashan region of Iran, Rahim
sets out for school while his father heads for a day's work in the fields.
11

causes (patterns of production and consumption) and to
the study of preventive or remedial measures (local, na¬
tional or international legislation, community
awareness).
Exchange of correspondence and materials between
Associated Schools (reports, surveys, maps,
photographs, slides, tape-recordings, etc.) might permit
comparison between methods of adaptation to different
social, economic or natural conditions, and lead to reflec¬
tion on the nature of the ideal human settlement.
But how are the special activities designed and im¬
plemented? As already pointed out, "Education for Inter¬
national Co-operation and Peace" should not be con¬
sidered as a separate subject for insertion in the
timetable. Experience has shown that this education can
be effectively provided within the framework of existing
courses and without overloading or disrupting the cur¬
riculum. What is frequently required, however, is some
measure of reassessment of the programme as a whole,
and its realignment in accordance with the principles of
It might be pointed out that the fundamental assump¬
tion of this experiment is that awareness of international
problems cannot be realized by cognitive elements alone
but supposes a socio-affective dimension, based on a
better understanding of oneself and one's immediate en¬
vironment as a prerequisite to a better understanding and
appreciation of other people and other countries.
The number of special activities that may be con¬
ducted in the context of the Associated Schools Project
and within the framework of its four main topics is vir¬
tually limitless, and depends almost entirely on the en¬
thusiasm and ingenuity of the participants. The following
examples may give some idea of the range of possible
activities.
Classroom activities
Projects intended to develop a better knowledge and
appreciation of other countries benefit from cor¬
respondence and exchanges with schools abroad.
Left, the cover of a Unesco
booklet. Children Helping Children,
which contains the 20 best poems
from a world poetry contest for
children under the age of 14, held
in 1980 and sponsored by Unesco
and the Radio Corporation of
America. Almost a million children
from 57 countries took part in the
competition and the 20 best
poems were selected by an inter¬
national jury of poets, writers and
musicians. The first prize went to a
13-year-old Filipino girl, Odina
E. Batnag, for her poem "I am but
a small voice". All the poems are
reproduced in their original
language and are accompanied by
translations in English and French.
Photo Unesco '
international education as referred to in the Unesco
Recommendation on education for international
understanding, co-operation and peace and education
relating to human rights and fundamental freedoms.
What is essential is that the topics for study should be
selected by agreement between teachers and pupils, and
that the specjal activities should be designed co¬
operatively, with the participation of all concerned, in¬
cluding parents and members of the local community
when extramural projects are envisaged.
Courses in history, geography and social studies cer¬
tainly lend themselves more readily to this type of educa¬
tion, and have most frequently provided the framework
for special activities. But foreign languages, civics, cur¬
rent events, natural sciences, art and music have also
made their contribution in many programmes.
Education for international understanding is closely
related to the formation of attitudes. Hence the eff icacity
of experience-centred teaching, particularly with
younger classes.
12
Teachers and pupils engaged in special projects have
found that visits from persons belonging by birth or
association to a country chosen for study, experts
engaged in work or technical assistance and staff
members of United Nations agencies can make an in¬
valuable contribution to their programme.
Essay and drawing contests have been successful in
encouraging students to reflect more deeply on specific
world problems or concerns.
Simulation games and exercises in perception and
communication can be helpful in establishing stronger in¬
tellectual and psychological foundations for international
understanding.
Audio-visual projections of films, slides, video-tapes,
etc., produced by Unesco, the United Nations, Member
States or schools and followed by discussions are useful
in making young people more aware of the work and role
of the United Nations systc.i.
The preparation of exhibitions and displays is useful in
marking the culmination of special projects.

Extracurricular activities
The organization of model assemblies of United Na¬
tions bodies has been an effective way to give students
better insight on how international conferences and
debates are conducted.
Unesco clubs, and art, music and drama circles have
provided excellent opportunities for cultural activities
and community-oriented activities.
Participation in fund-raising campaigns such as the
Unesco Co-operative Action Programme/Associated
Schools Guatemala Project (to provide educational
equipment and materials for schools) can further interna¬
tional co-operation and learning about other countries
and people.
Exchange programmes of teachers and/or students
between schools in different cities or countries can serve
as a positive framework within which to promote educa¬
tion for international understanding.
Successful visits have been made to the headquarters
and regional and national offices and project sites of in¬
ternational organizations by school teachers and
students.
Since international understanding begins at home,
students might wish to conduct surveys and interviews
in their community in order to learn more about their im¬
mediate environment as well as to carry out development
projects for improving their surroundings.
In view of the increasing number of schools in Unesco
Member States taking part in the Project and the
numerous reports of activities submitted by schools to
the Secretariat, the actual record of the Associated
Schools Project during its first twenty-five years is
positive, revealing as it does a community of views re¬
garding such education, and clearly indicating the
multitude of teachers and students who are convinced
that it is necessary, if not vital, and who are willing to
devote themselves to its attainment.

