Carved out of elkbone, this
helmeted head of a warrior (c. 1 0th
century) was found at Sigtuna,
Sweden.
Photo Soren Hallgren © ATA, Stockholm
Viking expansion was made possi¬
ble by the development in 8th-
century Scandinavia of strong,
swift sailing ships whose construc¬
tion and shallow draught enabled
them to land on sloping beaches
and manwuvre in waters unsuitable
to most European vessels of that
time. Well-preserved Viking
longship, right, was found in a
burial mound at Gokstad on Oslo
Fjord in 1 880 and is now in the Vik¬
ing Ship Museum, Oslo. It is 23
metres long and 5.25 metres'wide
amidships, but even when fully
laden would only have drawn 1
metre of water. Its keel consists of
a single timber 17 metres long. A
replica of the Gokstad Ship crossed
the Atlantic in 1893.
Photo Tom Schneiders © Rapho, Paris
10



The Viking saga
by Magnus Magnusson

Coins struck by the Vikings attest to their receptiveness to the cultures with
which they came into contact. Above, 1 0th-century silver pennies from the
Viking kingdom of York. Left, coin inscribed "Anlaf Cununc" (King Olaf) is
decorated with a raven, traditionally associated with Odin. Right, penny
with the name of St. Peter shows a sword and also Thor's hammer, a symbol
as potent to a Viking as a cross to a Christian.
THE term "Viking" has come to mean anyone who hap¬
pened to be a Scandinavian in the Middle Ages, whether
he was a seaman, a farmer, a merchant, a poet, an ex¬
plorer, a warrior, a craftsman, a settler or a pirate. And the
term "Viking Age" has been applied by historians somewhat
indiscriminately, it must be saidto cover three centuries of
dynamic Scandinavian expansion that took place from around
800 AD onwards.
It has become popularly associated with an age of terror and
unbridled piracy, when Norse freebooters came swarming out
of their northern homelands in their lean and predatory
longships, to burn and rape and pillage their way across civiliz¬
ed Europe. They have always been portrayed as merciless bar¬
barians, heedless of their own lives or of the lives of others, in¬
tent only on destruction. They were anti-Christ personified;
their emblems were Thor's terrible Hammer and Odin's sinister
Ravens, symbolizing the violence and black-hearted evil of their
pagan gods.
This deep-rooted popular prejudice about the Vikings can be
traced back directly to the lurid sensationalism of ecclesiastical
MAGNUS MAGNLSSON, Icelandic-born author and journalist, is well-
known in the UK as a TV and radio broadcaster specializing in archaeology
and history. He wrote and presented in 1980 a major TV series on the Vik¬
ings which has been shown in many countries and has appeared in book
form as Vikings! (BBC Publications with Bodley Head). Among his many
other published works are the award-winning Introducing Archaeology
(1972), Viking Expansion Westwards (1973), and Iceland (1979).
writers who were the occasional victims of smash-and-grab
Viking raids. In a turbulent age, when piracy and casual raiding
were a commonplace of everyday life all over Europe the Vik¬
ings happened to be more successful at it than most other peo¬
ple; and they paid the price for it by getting an extremely bad
reputation.
But, curiously enough, no one knows for certain what the
word "Viking" actually means! It may be related to the Old
Norse word vik, meaning "bay" or "creek", suggesting that a
Viking was someone who lurked with his ship in a hidden bay.
Some think it may come from the Old Norse verb vikja, meaning
"to turn aside", so that a Viking was someone who made
detours on his voyage presumably to go raiding. A third
school of scholarly opinion looks for a derivation in the Anglo-
Saxon word wie, itself borrowed from the Latin vicus, meaning
a fortified camp or trading-post, so that "Viking" might mean
a raider or a trader, or both!
But not every Scandinavian was a professional warrior or Vik¬
ing; and not every Viking was a pirate. Modern scholarship is
now beginning to highlight the constructive, rather than the
destructive, impact of the Viking Age. Spectacular ar¬
chaeological excavations like Coppergate in York, which un¬
earthed a whole street from the Viking Age, are revealing the
ordinary Viking man-in-the-street as a diligent and skilled
artisan the Viking as man, not the Viking as myth.
If the origin of the word "Viking" is obscure, so too are the
motive causes of the so-called Viking Age itself. There is no iv
To relieve the tedium of the long nor¬
thern winters, the Vikings played
various board games, including dice
games and a game similar to chess.
Pieces were made of bone, amber or
glass. Left, 10th-century wooden
Viking gaming board from Ireland.
Photo © National Museum of Ireland, Dublin
11

single, simple reason why the Scandinavians should suddenly
have burst upon the European scene late in the eighth century
(in the history books, at least it probably wasn't as sudden as
it has been made to appear). All major historical shifts have
complex roots. We know that in the seventh century, the Scan¬
dinavians began developing new sources of iron, which had
several consequences: improved iron production made for bet¬
ter weapons, and better farm implements; better farm im¬
plements led to agricultural improvements, which led in turn to
better nutrition and a correspondingly lower mortality rate
amongst infants. There is evidence about this time that land
that had formerly been thought unsuitable for farming was be¬
ing vigorously cleared of forest and scrub to make new farms
for new generations of vigorous, well-nourished younger sons
who wanted a place in the sun for themselves.
So an acute shortage of land was probably a major factor,
which led to considerable settlement overseas; there is
evidence of peaceful co-habitation between the Picts of nor¬
thern Scotland and Norwegian emigrant farmers long before
the outbreak of the Viking Age.
But there were other consequences, too. With its surplus iron
production, Scandinavia had a new and much-prized product to
sell to its neighbours; and the traders had sharp, well-tempered
weapons with which to defend themselves from pirates that
swarmed in the Baltic and along the shores of northern con¬
tinental Europe. But in order to trade effectively, the Scandina¬
vians needed good ships. They came in all shapes and sizes,
from small six-oared boats for coastal waters to the enormous
"dragon-ships" of royalty. In between came a versatile variety
of cutters, ferries, pinnaces, plump-bellied cargo-boats, ocean¬
going ships and galleys.
But the pride of the fleet, the ship that has become the univer¬
sal symbol of the Viking Age, was the lordly longship, un¬
disputed master of the northern seas. These ships were the out¬
come of centuries of technological innovation and evolution
which have been charted by chance archaeological discoveries,
from flat-bottomed punts to the splendour and sophistication of
the single-masted, square-sailed longships. Without the ships,
the Viking Age would never have happened at all.
The Viking Age was not a concerted effort at empire-
building. The Vikings were never a single, homogeneous people
imbued with the same aims and ambitions. The three countries
of the Scandinavian peninsula, as they are now defined by
political geography, were not really nations at all in the modern
sense of the term. Norway, for instance, was a scatter of in¬
habited areas under independent tribal chieftains along the
western seaboard; even the name Norway (Norvegur) simply
meant "North Way" not so much a nation as a trade-route.
And the three countries had distinct if sometimes overlapping
"spheres of influence" the Swedes in the Baltic and Russia,
the Danes on the Continent and in England, and the Norwegians
in Scotland and Ireland and the North Atlantic islands.
The first recorded Viking raid took place in the year 793, with
a seaborne assault by prowling Norwegian marauders on the
Holy Island of Lindisfarne, just off the north-eastern shoulder of
England. But long before that, the Swedes had been busy in the
Baltic, growing rich on trade. At the outset of the Viking Age,
Swedish entrepreneurs started to penetrate the hinterland of
Russia (they called it "Greater Sweden") in pursuit of the rich
fur trade and the exotic markets of Arabia and the Far East.
Swedish pioneers made their way through Russia by way of the
major rivers like the Volga and the Dnieper, dragging their ships
in exhausting overland portages on the way to the Caspian Sea
and the Black Sea.
By the ninth' century they had reached the capital of the
greatest power in the western world, the successor to Rome
the Byzantine Empire centred on Constantinople. There, Viking
mercenaries formed the elite bodyguard of the Byzantine
emperors, the feared and famous Varangian Guard, a kind of
Scandinavian Foreign Legion. But the Swedes never conquered
Russia, as such; they contented themselves with taking control
of existing trading posts and creating new ones to protect the
trade-routes, but within two or three generations they had
become totally assimilated and Slavicized.
12
While the Swedes looked east, the Danes looked south-west
along the northern coasts of Europe and towards England.
Danish warriors were soon hammering at the cities of the
crumbling Carolingian empire after the death of Charlemagne in
814 AD: Hamburg, Dorestad, Rouen, Paris, Nantes, Bordeaux
all river-cities, notice. The Viking longships, with their excep¬
tionally shallow draught, could go much further up-river than
<
t-
<
©
In the Viking age silver jewellery such as this
delicately worked pair of ear-rings found in
Sweden was imported into Scandinavia
from the territory of the western Slavs,
south of the Baltic.
had been thought possible before, and the effect was rathei like
that of dropping paratroops behind the enemy lines.
To start with, the Danish Vikings acted as pirates with official
or unofficial royal backing. Later on, Danish designs on Europe,
and especially England, became openly territorial; the flag
followed the trade, just as trade had followed the piracy. But
here, too, the Danes, just like the Swedes, became assimilated
whenever they settled. In the year 91 1, one marauding army
accepted by treaty huge tracts of land in Northern France in
what is now called Normandy "Northmandy", the land of the
Northmen; 1 50 years later, the descendants of these Norse-
Frenchmen would conquer all England under William the Con¬
queror. Before then, but only briefly, under King Knut (Canute)
in the eleventh century, there was a united Scandinavian em¬
pire of the North Sea, comprising England, Denmark and Nor¬
way; but it quickly fell apart.
Norwegian adventurers joined Danish Vikings in subjugating
the whole of northern England (the Danelaw, as it was called)
before settling there as farmers and traders, where they
developed great mercantile cities like York. They also took over
much of mainland Scotland, the Hebrides, and the Northern
Isles of Shetland and the Orkneys. In Ireland they played a lusty
part in the endless internecine squabbles of rival Irish clans, and
founded Ireland's first trading posts: Waterford, Wexford,
Wicklow, Limerick and, most especially, Dublin. They were in¬
satiable explorers in search of new trade opportunities to ex¬
ploit, new lands to settle, new horizons to cross. They
discovered Spitzbergen and Jan Mayen Island; they discovered
and colonized the Faroes, far out in the heaving Atlantic; they
discovered and colonized Iceland, where they established
Europe's first Parliamentary republic a new nation that is still
regarded as the oldest democracy in Europe, and which has left
us the most enduring cultural monument of the Viking Age, the
Icelandic Sagas.
From Iceland, they discovered and settled Greenland. And it
was from Greenland, round about the millennial year of 1000,
that the Vikings launched their last and most ambitious expedi¬
tions of all, the discovery and attempted settlement of the

Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris
Air view of the Viking cemetery at Lindholm Hoje, northern Jutland. Low boat-shaped mounds and
stone settings in different forms mark the graves.
eastern seaboard of North America: "Vinland", the land of wild
grapes, as it was called in the two Icelandic Sagas that record
the first undisputed European discovery of the New World.
The discovery of North America, and the abortive attempts
at colonization which were thwarted by the indigenous Red In¬
dians, used to be considered mere legend; but now archaeology
has unearthed authenticated evidence of a Viking settlement at
L'Anse aux Meadows, in northern Newfoundland. All other
alleged Viking "finds", like the runic Kensington Stone, have
long since been exposed as forgeries or hoaxes, or merely
wishful thinking.
The impact of the Vikings was ultimately less lasting than
might have been expected. Why was that? They had all the
necessary energy, they had their own administrative systems
of justice and royal authority, .they had become converted to
Christianity, they had their own coinage, they seemed to have
everything. They had criss-crossed half the world in their open
boats and vastly extended its known horizons. They had gone
everywhere there was to go, and beyond. They had dared
everything there was to dare. They had given Europe a new
trading vigour, vigorous new art-forms, vigorous new settlers.
But they had neither the manpower nor the staying-power,
neither the reserves of wealth nor the political experience,
neither the cohesion at home nor the confidence abroad, to
master effectively the older, richer, more stable States they
tried to overrun. Instead, being rootless men of the sea, they
put their roots down where they landed, and then blended into
the landscape. Somehow or other, the dynamic simply petered
out.
But they left in the annals of history, a heritage of heroic
endeavour and courage, a legacy of robust audacity, that has
won the grudging admiration even of those who would other¬
wise deplore their incidental depredations.
Magnus Magnusson
Left, timber richly carved with interlaced fighting animals is a struc¬
tural detail from the 12th-century Stave Church at Urnes in western
Norway. It was incorporated into the Church from an even earlier
building. A remarkable example of the art and architecture of northern
Europe at the end of the Viking period. Urnes Church is today inscrib¬
ed on Unesco's World Heritage List of cultural and natural properties
of outstanding universal value.
13
