III. Communication
in the service of man
COMMUNICATION is increasingly tending to become a
complex system of signalling and conditioning that
strengthens the power of the major organizations both
public and private, national and international. These organiza¬
tions have far greater opportunities to exert their influence and
to take action than do individuals and groups who possess only
piecemeal information. This is a source of considerable cultural
power, which, it may be anticipated, might even eventually ex¬
ercise control over both the political and the economic forces.
The consequences may be all the more serious for the freedom
of individuals and the life of societies, and for the relationships
between them, in that information and the media by which it is
transmitted through public, private and/or commercial bodies
can be manipulated in a number of ways. Information can be
used to perpetuate preconceived ideas, to reinforce ignorance
and contempt even intolerance for others, just as it can be a
fertile source of mutual understanding and respect.
Obviously, it is not Unesco's business to dictate to the media
what they are to transmit, but it is entitled to stimulate and en¬
courage the use of the media to promote development in educa¬
tion, science and culture.
Studies on communication
In view of the speed of technological change, continuing
research is called for into the socio-cultural, economic and
juridical aspects of communication, as well as its future. This
research will be carried out in accordance with three guidelines.
The first (Development of research) aims to strengthen na¬
tional and regional institutions, facilitate the dissemination of
results, improve the methodology of studies and make them
more comparable, and increase facilities for the training, fur¬
ther training and exchange of researchers. Studies will also be
undertaken on the nature and characteristics of the "informa¬
tion society" which is gradually emerging, and of its political,
economic and social implications.
The second consists of investigating in depth the idea of the
right to communicate, for both the individual and the com¬
munity, and its various components (the right to be informed,
the right to inform, the right to privacy, the right of access to
administrative documents); promoting free access to informa¬
tion sources and participation by the public in decision-making
concerning communication; studying the operation of
mechanisms for the production and dissemination of messages.
The third is designed to contribute towards preparing and im¬
proving planning and programming methods which can be ap¬
plied to the development of communication, taking into ac¬
count the diversity of cultural environments and socio¬
economic systems.
Free and balanced information
Freedom of information includes the freedom of individuals
and groups to organize the collection, flow and dissemination
of news, ideas and programmes, and to participate therein as
well as freedom of access to all means of communication and
all the various official and unofficial sources of news and pro¬
grammes. The exercise of this freedom still encounters
numerous obstacles of all sorts throughout the world
political, legal, economic, financial and technical including all
forms of censorship and self-censorship which hinder the en¬
dogenous and pluralist production of books, newspapers, news
and programmes, curb their free flow and restrict the growth
and diversification of exchanges.
However, freedom implies a heavy responsibility on the part
of communicators, be these individuals or public or private cor¬
porate bodies. All those involved in communication and
information journalists, press agencies, book, newspaper and
magazine publishers, mass media proprietors, manufacturers
of audio-visual materials, radio and television organizations
have a duty of truthfulness, accuracy and fairmindedness
towards the community. The special situation enjoyed by com¬
municators calls for professional integrity and a conscientious
and ethical approach to one's work, which also guarantee the
protection of individuals and the public. The mass media could
make an important contribution in scrutinizing all actions
which might lead to abuses of power.
The communication media are incomparable instruments for
achieving respect for both individual and collective human
rights. The media can defend principles and bring to light viola¬
tions, as impartially as possible, wherever they occur.
Three programmes of action are envisaged for a free flow and
a wider and better balanced dissemination of information.
The first sets out to identify and gain a fuller understanding
of the nature of the obstacles to the international flow and to
suggest the means of reducing or overcoming them, particularly
by studying professional practices in the book industry, the
press, news broadcasting services, radio and television
organizations, and the cinema industry, etc.
The second concerns the public and private mechanisms for
the exchange of books, news and programmes at national,
regional and world levels. It is designed to stimulate the creation
and building-up of public or private press agencies, to improve
the efficiency of systems for the gathering and distribution of
news, as well as that of regional news exchange networks, and
to foster the local production of books, newspapers, radio and
television programmes and films, particularly in developing
countries, in order to reduce the existing disparities in the
capacity to produce, process and disseminate information.
A third thrust is designed to encourage the contribution of the
media to ensuring mutual respect, international understanding
and peace, and to the solution of major world problems on the
part of those in charge of communication by means of action
designed to develop awareness among those who influence
public opinion.
The development of communication
Political determination is indispensable to enable every form
of communication to play its full role at national, regional and
world levels, ranging from traditional interpersonal forms to
the most modern examples, and to strengthen endogenous
capability, particularly in the developing countries, and, at the
same time, promote their self-reliance so that the disparities
that exist between the different countries and regions in this do¬
main will be gradually eliminated.
Seven action programmes:
The first provides for co-operation with States and organiza¬
tions responsible for communication in formulating national
communication development policies in respect of the
infrastructures equipment and personnel to be set up and
training activities for such staff.
The second covers co-operation with States and organizations
responsible for communication in the choice and acquisition of
equipment corresponding to the needs of the population and the
different media in each country or region; and in seeking
technologies in keeping with the conditions obtaining in these
countries, and in the local development and production of the
corresponding equipment.
The third (Training and further training of communication
specialists and technicians) provides for co-operation with
Member States, other organizations in the United Nations
system and international governmental and non-governmental
organizations of world or regional scope, with a view to
strengthening at national, regional and world levels the
13

The world and the media
The huge disparities that exist at international level in the production and circulation
of messages and programmes is today a recognized fact. In 1978, the developing
countries, representing 70 per cent of the world's population, commanded only a
small fraction of the media of communication: 22 per cent of book titles published,
17 per cent of total newspaper circulation, 9 per cent of newsprint consumption,
27 per cent of radio transmitters, 1 8 per cent of radio receivers, 5 per cent of televi¬
sion transmitters and 12 per cent of television receivers. The figures in terms of
number of inhabitants were the following:
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES
Newspapers 36 copies per 1 ,000 inhabitants 321 copies per 1,000 inhabitants
Paper 1.2 kg per inhabitant 18.2 kg per inhabitant
Book titles 37 per million inhabitants 450 per million inhabitants
Cinema seats 1 1 per 1 ,000 inhabitants 63 per 1 .000 inhabitants
Radio sets 89 per 1 ,000 inhabitants 762 per 1 ,000 inhabitants
TV sets 24 per 1 ,000 Inhabitants 322 per 1 ,000 inhabitants
Far from diminishing, these disparities, which also affect certain industrialized coun¬
tries, have on the contrary been constantly increasing as technology has developed.
Disparities between rural and urban areas are also particularly marked throughout
the world.
..
Above, woman worker in a printing plant pro¬
ducing literacy teaching materials in Addis
Ababa (Ethiopia).
Photo D. Roger, Unesco
structures and methods of initial preparation, general training
and further professional training of communication personnel
at all levels (managers, directors and producers of film, radio
and television programmes, editors and journalists working for
the press, press agencies and broadcasting, publishers,
booksellers, graphic artists and personnel connected with book
manufacturing, engineers and technicians working for the
various media, maintenance personnel, archivists, documen-
talists, printers, etc.), bearing in mind the requirements created
by the increasing specialization entailed by technical progress
and the need to increase the proportion of women among com¬
munication personnel.
The fourth seeks to establish or strengthen endogenous
capacity for the production of printed materials, news and pro¬
grammes in all media, in order: to increase the self-reliance of'
the developing countries in this domain by encouraging the im¬
plantation of local cultural and communication industries; to
facilitate the establishment of appropriate structures for
lifelong education and distance education, which are essential in
ensuring the general provision of primary education and the
eradication of illiteracy; to contribute to the dissemination of
culture, the assertion of cultural identity and to cultural
development in general; and to use communication resources
for the popularization or science.
The fifth (Action to promote books and reading) consists in
promoting books and encouraging reading in all societies.
Special attention will be given to works which may be of use for
literacy and post-literacy work. A further aim is to encourage
the international dissemination of books, emphasis being plac¬
ed on their circulation within and between developing regions
and on their flow from such regions to the industrialized
countries.
14
Left, young pupils in a primary school
established by Unesco near Kabul (Afgha¬
nistan). Unesco's Medium-Term Plan provides
for a programme to promote books and en¬
courage reading in all societies. Special atten¬
tion will be given to material which may be us¬
ed in literacy and post-literacy teaching.
Photo H. Fehl, Unesco
The sixth (Action to promote the cinema and the audio-visual
media) seeks- to promote the development of the cinema,
photography and television in each country, in particular for
the purposes of formal and non-formal education, conservation
of the cultural, physical and non-physical heritage, mutual
knowledge of cultures, artistic creation and the popularization
of science. The action involved, which will consist in encourag¬
ing the manufacture of sound and image recording media, the
training of producers, the production of films and programmes,
and the development of the photographic heritage, will further
aim to encourage the preservation and conservation of
photographs, films and other audio-visual media, particularly
those of special cultural and historical significance.
The seventh (Education of Users) seeks to encourage the
drawing up, experimentation and implementation of pro¬
grammes providing education in communication designed to
foster an independent approach in the acquisition of informa¬
tion and knowledge, to develop a critical mind and to
familiarize the various categories of users, especially young peo¬
ple, with the ways in which the means of communication are
organized and used.
Developed along these lines, this major programme seems to
constitute the conceptual framework which should make it
possible to lay the foundations and to seek those principles on
which, in accordance with an evolutive principle, a new world
information and communication order could gradually be
brought into being, an order such as would ensure that all-
individuals, groups and nationsmight engage in free,
reciprocal and balanced communication.
