Ocean watch
EVERY so often a tragic accident
occurs to remind the world that
inadvertently or deliberately man
is dumping significant quantities of
potentially harmful substances into the
oceans. The situation which probably
received the widest publicity was the
catastrophe which began in Minamata
Bay, Japan, in the 1950s when methyl
mercury chloride was released into the
scientists sponsored by Unesco and other
United Nations Specialized Agencies
drew a sharp distinction between what is
happening in the open ocean, on the one
hand, and in coastal areas and enclosed
seas, on the other.
"In the open sea", they noted, "we
have not detected significant effects on
the ecosystem. Trends have indeed been
observed of the concentrations of several
Map c IOC. Uñateo
During the four-year period 1975-1978, mariners and marine scientists made over
85,000 visual observations of oil slicks and other floating pollutants over much of the
world ocean, as part of a Pilot Project on Marine Pollution (Petroleum) Monitoring (MAP-
MOPP) sponsored by Unesco's Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission (IOC)
and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). The map above shows the loca¬
tions at which visible oil slicks were present at the time of observation.
bay from a chemical plant. Consumed in
seafood by the local people, the mercury
caused a disease of the central nervous
system which claimed lives and left many
permanently afflicted. More recently, in
March 1978, the supertanker Amoco
Cadiz made headline news when it ran
aground off the French coast. Major pol¬
lution of beaches and coastal waters was
the result of this navigational error.
Although such incidents are localized
in their impact, they inevitably prompt
people to ask the wider question is man
polluting the oceans to a dangerous and
perhaps irrevocable degree, and thus des¬
troying one of his last great natural
resources?
In a recent attempt to assess the health
of the marine environment, a group of
contaminants, some up, some down, but
these are not reflected in environmental
deterioration.
"On the other hand, effects can be
seen in semi-enclosed seas, shelf seas and
coastal zones. Semi-enclosed seas, like
the Gulf of Mexico, the Mediterranean
Sea, the North Sea and the Baltic, receive
substantial contamination. . .Ina number
of local 'hot spots', the ecosystem
balance has been disturbed. In one area
of the North Sea (the Waddensee), and in
the Baltic, pollution has been implicated
in reducing the populations of some
marine mammals."
Coastal waters are under pressure
because of the continued growth of
human settlements along the coast, the
increase in coastal recreation, and the
concentration of industrial development
in coastal areas. They are vitally impor¬
tant to man because it is in them (and to
a much smaller extent in the upwelling
areas of the oceans) that the vast bulk of
marine fishery resources are located.
Today, since the highest concentrations
of metals, synthetic compounds such as
DDT, petroleum hydrocarbons, suspen¬
ded solids and litter are found in these
waters, coastal fisheries are particularly
exposed to the effects of pollution. In
some cases "fisheries have been stopped
in limited areas, sometimes leading to
suspicion among consumers that fish
caught elsewhere in adjacent areas may
be contaminated, thus causing problems
for the marketing of fish from whole
regions".
The scientists, whose report has appea¬
red as "The Review of the Health of the
Oceans" (GESAMP Reports and Stu¬
dies, N° 15), were members of a working
group set up by the Joint Group of
Experts on the Scientific Aspects of
Marine Pollution (GESAMP), an ad¬
visory body of specialists which provides
scientific advice to its sponsoring organi¬
zations (1), including Unesco, and to its
Intergovernmental Océanographie Com¬
mission (IOC).
Through the IOC, Unesco has for
some years played a leading role within
the United Nations system in focusing
attention on the scientific problems of
marine pollution, especially as it affects
the world ocean, and today the IOC
through its Marine Pollution Monitoring
(MARPOLMON) system, as part of its
"Global Investigation of Pollution in the
Marine Environment" (GIPME) is,
through a network of regional and global
activities, laying the basis for obtaining
the data required to keep the health of the
oceans under continuing review.
Defining pollution as "the introduc¬
tion by man, directly or indirectly, of
substances or energy into the marine
environment resulting in such deleterious
effects as harm to living resources,
hazards to human health, hindrance to
marine activities including fishing,
impairing of quality for use of sea-water,
and reduction of amenities", the
GESAMP specialists examined the
effects of five groups of potential con¬
taminants: sewage; certain synthetic
substances such as halogenated hydro¬
carbons (e.g., DDT and polychlorinated
biphenylsPCBs); petroleum; trace
metals which, though naturally present in »
43

sea-water in minute .quantities, have
significant adverse effects on organisms,
when they exceed their natural level of
concentration; and radionuclides or
nuclear wastes.
Suclrsubstances reach the oceans in a
variety of ways, ranging from dumping
and spillage to discharge from factories
or cities. They may be borne either direct¬
ly or indirectly via rivers, which have
been described as "the prime mover of
materials from the continents to the
oceans", or transported through the at¬
mosphere and washed in by rain. Many
materials enter the oceans through
natural processes; geological weathering
and volcanic activity, for instance, are
important natural sources of the trace
metals that are injected into the marine
environment. All the natural elements
are found in the ocean, and many of
them, such as copper, when they occur at
natural levels, are nutrients for marine
flora and fauna. The challenge facing en¬
vironmental scientists is to determine at
what level these concentrations become
toxic, in other words to establish when
the limits of the ocean's tolerance are be¬
ing reached.
Sewage. The GESAMP report
flashes a warning signal where sewage is
concerned, It notes that "the use of the
coastal zone for sewage disposal is
worldwide and the input is increasing",
but "problem areas are local rather than
global, and coastal rather than oceanic.
Sewage does present a direct risk of infec¬
tions to humans on some beaches,
especially during recreational seasons.
Discharge on or near shellfish beds
presents a greater risk to human health
through the consumption of con¬
taminated seafood."
The halogenated hydrocarbons, in¬
cluding polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs). Here the picture is somewhat
different. These compounds reach the
oceans primarily in the form of vapour
and, partly because of their world-wide
transport by wind and ocean systems, can
be detected at considerable distances
from their sources. DDT, which has
received wide attention because of the
ecological damage it has caused, such as
reproductive failure in birds due to egg
shell thinning, toxicity and reproductive
failure in fish and some marine mam¬
mals, is now virtually ubiquitous in the
marine environment; it is found in
plankton in every ocean from the Arctic
to the Antarctic. It has been used
primarily in agriculture as a biocide for
the protection of cotton crops and as an
anti-malarial agent. It is estimated that
between 1971 and 1981 over 500,000 tons
of DDT were used in anti-malaria pro¬
grammes. Today, several countries have
placed restrictions on its use because of
its adverse effects on non-target organ¬
isms. The PCBs have a wide variety of
uses ranging from dielectrics for trans¬
formers to the manufacture of paints and
printing inks.
On the subject of PCBs, the GESAMP
report notes that "There is no confirmed
record of human illness having been
caused by consumption of marine
organisms due to their content of PCBs,
although "PCBs residues in some marine
organisms exceed the level set by some
national authorities to safeguard human
health." As for DDT, "its residues are
not likely to place man at risk, but fear of
contamination from this and other
sources could damage the marketability
of seafood."
Petroleum. It has been estimated
that over six million metric tons of
petroleum hydrocarbons are injected an¬
nually into the world's oceans, and in the
last decade several spills and oil-well
blow-outs have occurred, discharging
large amounts of oil that have con¬
taminated the sea. Certain fractions of
crude oil are highly toxic to marine
organisms. All the same, there is an in¬
creasing body of knowledge to indicate
that not only is the open ocean not in
danger of becoming a wasteland because
of oil infections, it is actually
assimilating what is being injected
reasonably well. Once again, this is not
the case with coastal areas and semi-
enclosed seas, where spills from tankers
and offshore drilling represent only a
small part of the total input of fossil-fuel
hydrocarbons, and sewage, industrial ef¬
fluents, river and urban run-off and at¬
mospheric rainout and fallout have been
identified as the significant sources.
Discussing the effects of environmen¬
tal damage from oil, the GESAMP
report notes that "oil spill effects on
pelagic communities are rarely drastic,
and recovery is usually a question of
weeks or months. Impact on intertidal
and subtidal communities may be severe,
with recovery taking years or decades,
particularly in shoreline communities
where oil penetrates the sediments; and
oil on beaches can seriously affect their
amenity as recreational areas. Birds are
particularly at risk, but there is no
evidence that oil alone can threaten
species survival."
However, the situation may change in
the future, since "the extension of oil ex¬
ploration into extremely hostile areas
may give rise to major spills... and pro¬
duction is expected to increase in cold
areas where oil degrades more slowly".
Metals. Recent advance in analytical
techniques for monitoring metals have in
many cases resulted in a downward
reassessment of the levels of metals in
seawater in the open oceans. In inland
waters, on the other hand, pollution by
metals has been observed as a conse¬
quence of river, industrial and domestic
sewage discharge or of direct dumping.
The one exception to this pattern appears
to be lead which, like DDT, is carried to
the open oceans through the atmosphere
after being used as an anti-knock agent in
internal combustion engine fuel.
Increased concentrations of lead have
been observed in some open ocean areas.
Radionuclides. Since the very incep¬
tion of atomic energy exploitation, it has
been recognized that radionuclides, if
released indiscriminately into the en¬
vironment, can pose severe threats to
human health as well as have detrimental
effects on the environment. Man began
injecting nuclear material into the oceans
in the mid-1940s, a process which grew in
importance over the next two decades,
primarily as a result of the atmospheric
testing of nuclear devices. Since the
cessation of such testing by all but two
countries, concern has shifted to the
potentially adverse impact of effluents
from nuclear reactors on the coastal en¬
vironment. In addition, there is always
the possibility of a massive release of
nuclear material as the result of an acci¬
dent. Various international instruments
and guidelines for the disposal of
radioactive wastes into the oceans exist,
and in the opinion of the GESAMP
specialists no public health problem
should arise if these regulations are
followed.
The study of the ways in which man is
altering the chemistry of the oceans is still
in its infancy. The measurement of some
pollutants, such as radioactivity, is
relatively straightforward. Some other
potentially toxic substances occur in such
low concentrations that it is often dif¬
ficult to obtain reliable analyses. Only a
few years ago it was estimated that less
than a dozen laboratories throughout the
world were capable of measuring DDT or
petroleum components in seawater.
Surveillance of the health of the oceans
is clearly beyond the scope and resources
of a single nation or a single group of na¬
tions. In developing its Global Investiga¬
tion of Pollution in the Marine Environ¬
ment and the Marine Pollution Monitor¬
ing System (MARPOLMON), the IOC is
collaborating with the leading United
Nations Specialized Agencies and other
relevant regional and international orga¬
nizations. The overriding purpose of its
work is to see that the global monitoring
of the signals that foretell impending
damage to the marine environment will
be carried out using standardized meth¬
ods of analysis so that data produced by
scientists from the different world re¬
gions can be made comparable. This calls
for extensive training for analysts and
continual intercalibration exercises the
first steps in the global vigilance on which
the health of the oceans depends and
for an active programme of mutual assis¬
tance with a view to creating the required
marine research capabilities, particularly
in the developing countries.
(I) The International Maritime Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, Unesco, the United Nations, the World
Meteorological Organization, the World Health
Organization, the International Atomic Energy
Agency, and the United Nations Environment
Programme.
