ETHNOCIDE
For the past few years, increasing concern has been ex¬
pressed at various international forums over the problem of
the loss of cultural identity. This complex process, which
has historical, social, political and economic roots, has been
termed "ethnocide".
Ethnocide means that an ethnic group is denied the right
to enjoy, develop and transmit its own culture and its own
language, whether collectively or individually. This involves
an extreme form of massive violation of human rights and,
in particular, the right of ethnic groups to respect for their
cultural identity and the right of all individuals and peoples
to be different, to consider themselves as different and to be
regarded as such, a right recognized in the Declaration on
Race and Racial Prejudice adopted by the Unesco General
Conference in 1978.
We publish below the conclusions of a meeting of experts
on the study of ethno-development and ethnocide in Africa,
convened by Unesco and held in Ouagadougou, Upper
Volta, from 31 January to 4 February 1983.
AFRICA is becoming increasingly
aware of the danger of rapid
extinction facing cultures and
collective identity throughout the con¬
tinent, a danger that is particularly
acute in the case of certain peoples.
This danger, in the broadest sense,
consists in a general encroachment
upon the common African substratum.
In southern Africa, this onslaught is
of particularly menacing proportions as
a result of apartheid and the establish¬
ment of Bantustans; the concept of
ethnic groups is used to paralyse,
divide and destroy the personality and
basic structures of an entire people.
In addition, some peoples, most of
them nomadic herdsmen or hunters
and gatherers, are being subjected to
an insidious process that seeks to deny
their cultural identity and ultimately
their existence as peoples.
These various forms of aggression
should be analysed in terms of
ethnocide, and an in-depth study of
their causes and consequences is
needed.
Although most African societies
tolerated pluralism, certain outside in¬
fluences have contributed to the in¬
troduction of practices of economic
domination and cultural alienation
which continue to this day.
One of these influences was the
slave-trade, especially the trans¬
atlantic slave-trade, which resulted in
the decline of certain peoples or the
permanent vitiation of their structures.
Colonialism developed throughout
virtually the entire continent of Africa
an integral, generalized system of
ethnocide which struck at every
aspect of Africans' daily lives.
Political and legal structures, for ex¬
ample, were superimposed on the ex¬
isting structures, shattering Africans'
traditional organization in order to sub¬
ject them more completely to outside
interests.
Economic organization and the
social and human fabric of life, towns
and countryside alike, were thus
redirected in response to external
factors.
These various processes were ac¬
companied by far-reaching changes in
value systems, patterns of thought
and of transmission of knowledge
which give the full measure of colonial
ethnocide.
These phenomena subsist in various
political, legal, economic, social and
cultural forms.
The maintenance of certain political
and administrative structures, the per¬
sistence of mimesis, and the introduc¬
tion of institutions and ideologies that
are inappropriate to the African situa¬
tion have hampered the African
peoples in assuming control of their
lives in any meaningful sense.
Imported systems of law, displacing
customary law, have seriously disturb¬
ed human, economic and social
relationships.
Economic relations, for example,
both within communities and with the
outside world, have generally been
based exclusively on the profit motive,
and have thus been destructive of the
former social cohesiveness and
solidarity.
Education has borrowed extensively
from foreign models, thereby helping
to reproduce those models and spread
their effects around, in a way that is
totally at variance with traditional
education.
Modernization based exclusively on
Western science and technology has
eclipsed and discredited the African
scientific and technological heritage,
especially in the areas in which it is par¬
ticularly rich, such as art, agriculture,
housing, medicine and pharmacology.
The universalist pretensions of this
approach also rule out any utilization of
the extensive knowledge of the
peoples concerned about the en¬
vironments in which they live.
In an effort to resist this ongoing
ethnocide, the international communi¬
ty has adopted legal instruments and
structures which time has shown to be
inadequate to deal with the
seriousness of certain situations.

The magic of the artist lies in his ability to invest the specificities of his own culture with a quality
of universality. In so doing he not only proclaims the unique character of his own culture but also of¬
fers people of other cultures the means of comprehending it more fully. Above, painting by the con¬
temporary Congolese artist Cyrille Bokotaki.
Photo Michel Claude, Unesco
Similarly, within the various coun¬
tries, legislative measures have not
always yielded the hoped-for results.
It is thus essential to address the
issue of the protection of human rights
at both the international and national
levels with a view to checking the
violation of the rights and cultural iden¬
tities of peoples and securing more ef¬
fective protection for minorities.
In order for this effort to be fully
meaningful, it should be incorporated
into comprehensive political,
economic, social and cultural
strategies.
The restitution of certain powers to
communities at the grassroots level, in
order inter alia to enable them to
organize themselves and manage their
own environments, is the primary pre¬
condition.
In economic and social matters,
those communities should also be
allowed the possibility to develop their
own blueprints for society integrating,
among other things, production and
consumption processes while fitting
harmoniously into the national and
inter-African context.
In this connexion, mixed
technologies with inputs from African
creativity, both traditional and contem¬
porary, have an important role to play.
The use of African languages should
be encouraged, especially within the
framework of an appropriate educa¬
tional system to be designed in close
liaison with the productive sectors.
Similarly, renewed recognition of the
validity of traditional medicine and
pharmacology would not only improve
the general level of health but would
facilitate the reintegration of com¬
munities into their own cultures.
These efforts and these prospects
for organic development should enable
African communities and peoples,
while resisting ethnocidal processes,
to participate in and contribute to
human progress in general and also to
preserve their own values and
aspirations.
The African and international in¬
tellectual and scientific community is
invited to give priority to research and
studies that might contribute to those
aims for the future.
Political and administrative leaders,
international institutions, worldwide
and regional, and non-governmental
organizations are urged to facilitate, in
so far as possible, such strategies and
projects as might help to release the
creative genius of the African peoples.
For all practical social purposes "race" is not so much a biological
phenomenon as a social myth. The myth of ' 'race ' ' has created an enor¬
mous amount of human and social damage. In recent years it has taken
a heavy toll in human lives and caused untold suffering. It still prevents
the normal development of millions of human beings and deprives
civilization of the effective co-operation ofproductive minds.
Statement on Race, Unesco, Paris, July 1950
10
