'W
Traditional adobe dwelling, northern Togo.



The seeds
of wiath
What future
for Africa's silent majority?
by Jean-Marc Ela
Village near Mbout. southern Mauritania.
E know that we are pea¬
sants; we know that birds
don't all fly at the same
height. We don't want to be like the rich
people in the city. We want a better life and
a better living."
To assess the full significance of this
remark made by an old man of Piala, a
remote village in the vast Sahel, it must be
remembered that in spite of headlong and
anarchic urban growth, often with alarming
consequences, Africa is still overwhelming¬
ly a continent of peasants. The latter con¬
stitute an entire people which the informa¬
tion media, generally monopolized by rul¬
ing parties, scarcely discuss except when
forced to do so by natural catastrophes or
international pressures.
What do people in the big cities actually
know about the living conditions, dif¬
ficulties and aspirations of the millions of
Africans who are reduced to impotent
silence? In an Africa where the big capital
cities are a raging sickness, are the peasants
a fringe population destined to find at the
end of their migration to the city a life of
unemployment and poverty in the pro¬
liferating shanty-towns? Are the peasants
of Africa a marginalized peopleor are
they on the march?
It is true that the situation differs from
country to country, in accordance with dif¬
ferences in climate, levels of development,
and political régime. However, one obser¬
vation must be made: it is not certain that
the conditions of African peasants have
been improved by the advent of new States.
For many men and women, perhaps the
situation is worse than before. The suns of
independence do not shine for the people of
the bushsuch is the mute message which
is constantly repeated in different regions
and which comes from down below, from
villages where the peasants feel that they are
living as veritable pariahs on their own
land.
The malaise of the peasantry is striking in
countries where development is concen¬
trated in a single big city. The metropolis
with its ultra-modern quarters is the centre
of power and money, while the frustrations
of the poor turn into bitterness since the
development of an élite rests on the over-
exploitation of the work of the peasant. It
is not hard to imagine the social upheavals
caused by the irruption of capital into rural
areas in countries which appear to investors
as a fiscal paradise. Many peasants,
depressed into "absolute poverty" are
forced to work as labourers in the rice- fields
or on the cotton or sugar plantations. Many
have been dispossessed of their land when
major agro-industrial projects were put into
operation.
A visitor may be surprised by the state of
deprivation in African villages which have
been subjected for generations to the single-
crop cultivation of cocoa, coffee, cotton, or
JEAN-MARC ELA, of Cameroon, is a Roman
Catholic priest and teacher and is responsiblefor
a "Schools Without Walls" project and a literacy
teaching experiment among the peasants of nor¬
thern Cameroon. He is a member of the Interna¬
tional Conference on the Sociology of Religions
and has taken part in a number ofsymposia and
seminars in Africa and throughout the world. He
is the author of Le Cri de l'Homme Africain
(1980) and L'Afrique des Villages (1982).

tea. While exports increase, the peasants
sink more deeply into poverty and famine.
An article in the magazine Dialogue points
out that the peasants in Rwanda are the vic¬
tims of a form of exploitation resulting
from the industrialized cultivation of ex¬
port crops. Tea appears as a crop with
ruinous consequences falling mainly on the
"villagers."
There is no need here to go deeply into
the question of the dictatorship of ground¬
nuts in Senegal or of cotton in Chad. What
is claimed to be the "modernization" of
agriculture is tantamount to a systematic
disparagement of peasant systems of farm¬
ing, and leads to a kind of structured in¬
coherence which encourages the cultivation
of export crops to the detriment of food
crops, thus aggravating the inequalities bet¬
ween the industrialized countries and
Africa.
As Philippe Hugon has noted, "the
growing inequality in income distribution
shows up as an impoverishment of the rural
masses (...). A privileged group enjoys an
income more than a hundred times greater
than that of the rural masses (...). The pea¬
sant has an annual income which remains
constant, while he finances State expen¬
diture to a greater and greater extent.
Change is leading to a pauperization of the
rural mass."
A group of young Cameroonians who
camped among the peasants in the Yoko
area, some 100 kilometres from the capital,
had some interesting things to say about
their experiences. What struck them first
were the bottlenecks and breakdowns of a
dependent agriculture which is incapable of
meeting the needs of a balanced diet and
providing hygienic living conditions. "I
asked what they grew. They said that their
main crops used to be manioc, cucumbers,
groundnuts and maize, and that 'you can't
eat cacao and coffee'." Another student
noted, "They go off to the fields very early
and only return in the evening."
"Sometimes the peasants go to work
without having eaten. We never had
breakfast all the time we were in the village.
Like the peasants we were hungry when we
went off to work in the morning." This
allusion to severe hunger accurately reflects
the conditions of the peasants in these areas
where, furthermore, the health situation is
deplorable.
A revelation to people who know nothing
about life in the bush, the difficulties of sur¬
viving in stricken regions gave rise to the
following comments from the city students:
"This experience gave me an opportunity to
discover the facts," said one. Another
noted, "We are discovering the hidden
peoples who are not mentioned in the
schoolbooks." This aspersion cast at school
learning also goes for the information
media in general, as well as high-sounding
and delusory lists of achievements: "At last
we are finding out together the true facts
about the country which are concealed
behind speeches and the lies of the mass
media."
This Africa of villages exposed to the
perverse effects of models of development
which lead nowhere is Africa in all its
authenticity. Among the urban élites, what
Albert Tévoédjéré has denounced as the
"madness of mimetism" has bred needs
and desires linked to a Western-style way of
life. These needs must be paid for, which
means currency, which means taxes, the
proceeds of which benefit a rich men's club.
By becoming part of the monetary system,
the peasants set out on the road to pro¬
letarizaron, and a small privileged group
reaps the benefits. At a time when the rich
nations are constantly tugging at the rope
which is ' strangling Africa, the black
peasants may be the real forgotten ones of
the earth, their future a challenge to all who
seek a more equitable and more human
world.
After the disenchantment of the decades
of independence, many peasants tend to
believe that changes in their lives will not
necessarily come from above. The future is
being explored in experimentation with
development alternatives, starting with ac¬
tion in which the groups themselves become
the architects of change in their own en¬
vironment. We have been able to measure
the importance of these factors among the
peasants of north Cameroon, in a region
where the problems of land, water, and
millet exist in acute form.
For populations in search of land to pro¬
vide them with a living, the delusions of
rural organization appear when peasants
cannot be sure of keeping fields they rent on
a yearly basis from the traditional village
notables. How can you think of using new
farming methods if at any moment you may
find yourself dispossessed of your land by
officials who, when embarking on the
"Green Revolution", have a tendency to
confiscate land where cultivation is possi¬
ble? Encouraging the peasants to act begins
by motivating them to break out of
deadlocked situations. In regions threaten¬
ed by food shortages the first stage in the
process may be taking stock of the land
problems which condition the integration
of young people into the rural environment,
the health of the people, the education of
children, the equilibrium of the family, and
nutrition problems.
Such a project calls for an exchange of
views between those involved in the dif¬
ferent sectors of the development process
Photo © Yvette Vincent Alleaume, Pans
Dogon millet store, near the cliffs of Bandiagara, Mali.
>4J
m
S
0
1 9
f>riSfat
z
h -ai
W Î
/hiJc*
J
iJ
mm
- - -
1
]
*v
./

Grain storage basket in a village near Banfora, Upper Volta.
who often work in isolation, each keeping
to his own special field, without taking ac¬
count of the solidarity which is necessary.
Since there is no point in learning how to be
a better farmer if you have no land or if you
have no control over what you produce, it
is vitally important to encourage the
peasants to state their fundamental
problems, work out solutions to them, and
decide what action to take. For peasants left
to languish in ignorance by an elitist school
system, the experience of learning to read
and write according to an approach which
is based on the African oral tradition and
which encourages the learner to become
more aware of the world around him pro¬
vides tools of thought and a means of
emerging from captivity. Thus it is possible
to achieve literacy by assuming responsibili¬
ty for family, health or nutrition problems.
At the same time, learning to read makes it
possible to cope with the cotton markets
where illiterate peasants are cheated by
weighers and buyers.
The goal of these operations is to further
the kind of development in which the millet
granary, which conflicts with an exterioriz¬
ed model of agriculture leading to starva¬
tion and the marginalization of the peasant
world, again becomes part of family life. In
villages where cotton is king, to concentrate
farmers' attention on the millet granary is
to meet a basic need "food first". The
point is not only to make sure that they do
not die of starvation, but also to resist the
speculation of which the peasants are vic¬
tims during transitional periods when food
products, bought at low prices at harvest
time, are sold back to them at high prices by
dishonest dealers.
African peasant women sometimes work
until immediately before giving birth to
their children, and the overwhelming
demands on their time only leave them few
opportunities for rest and leisure. Any ar¬
rangement which enables them to speak out
about the problems of village life finds a
place in a global project for the transforma¬
tion of living conditions.
It is essential that women should be able
to express their opinions about the use of
crops and money, just as they are necessari¬
ly concerned by the invasion of capital into
rural life caused by the development of ex¬
port crops which aggravate food problems
in a region in which most children suffer
from malnutrition.
Consequently the women, who bear the
responsibility for the health of the children,
are asked to give their opinions on the ques¬
tion of the land where cotton drives out
millet. All the social forces in the village
should take part in a coherent alternative
development project. And so efforts are
concentrated on the young schoolchildren.
Through meetings where ideas are aired
and exchanged, the schoolchildren gradual¬
ly learn to become "the eyes of the village"
and to act in defence of the peasants. "Get¬
ting people to understand the use of
hygiene", "advising mothers to feed their
children well", "diversifying the diet",
"teaching people how to obtain drinking
water", "informing parents about the
country's problems", "shielding the
peasants on the cotton markets" these are
some of the responsibilities discovered by
young people when they reflect on the
solidarity between pupils and peasants.
The "school without walls" project, with
which 1 am concerned, reflects this desire to
re-examine the content of teaching in the
light of village questions in which the child
may be a factor of change. In spite of such
institutional constraints as timetables and
examinations, the aim is to throw open the
school to village families and communities
so that the teachers themselves, after being
initiated to social and economic conditions,
can stimulate awareness of their
environment.
The awakening of the village should be
rethought and should be focused on school
problems, for as a peasant at Tokombéré
told me, " a village without a school is a
village of slaves." We are faced with the
problem of a genuine peasant movement
which needs a certain number of tools to
free itself from the constraints which hinder
its progress. How can the power which the
"professionals" of development tend to
confiscate be returned to the villages?
Of course difficulties abound in this
shoulder-to-shoulder struggle at the side of
the proletarianized rural people. The
sacralization of customary or adminis¬
trative powers may paralyze all innovations
in villages where the power of the "chief"
acts as a brake on endogenous develop¬
ment. What can be done when the tradi¬
tional authorities demand taxes between
crops, thus forcing hungry people to go into
debt or to sell their meagre food reserves?
In an Africa which is gagged, how can an
alternative form of development be pro-
Fetishes placed near a mud-built granary. Upper Volta.
10

moted in a situation in which "rural
development" continues to embody the
harsh and unacknowledged reality of
peasant over-exploitation to the profit of
certain private interests.
Today methods are no longer exactly the
same, and the balance of power has chang¬
ed appearance. Forms of peasant resistance
in colonialized Africa brought to light a
community dynamic unsuspected in a conti¬
nent subjected for centuries to violent
exploitation.
Throughout the continent, groups of
people are forming at grassroots level. They
are the focus of a kind of "revolution
without tom-toms" which is mirrored in
peasant struggles and which is conditioning
the transformation of conditions of health
and human settlements, the organization of
agricultural production, the promotion of
women, nutrition and the management of
community affairs, relations between
young and oldin short, the defence of the
rights of the peasants.
If the circle of development in
dependence which leads to the development
o/dependence is to be broken, the peasants'
creative powers must be returned to them
by making the village community the
matrix of a new society. The village associa¬
tion appears to be an indispensable institu¬
tion in this context, as long as it is borne in
mind that the African tradition is not im¬
mune to contradictions and conflicting in¬
terests. Experience shows that many rural
groups have ceased to exist as a result of
their inner contradictions. To consider a
return to what is called the pre-colonial
community spirit as a miracle solution may
be to nurture dangerous illusions, not only
by dissimulating the inequalities and con¬
flicts which are inherent in any social situa¬
tion but by masking various forms of
domination and confiscation of power to
the profit of a privileged minority.
There is nothing automatic about the for¬
ward march of peasant communities. There
must be a constant process of research and
reflection on the condition of local com¬
munities, whose interests are not necessarily
those of the regional, national or interna¬
tional environment. To contest in practical
terms the adoption of the Western model of
development is to confront the central
authorities and the forces of money.
Through the struggles of the peasants and
their capacity to organize themselves, a new
way of existing in the world is being sought
along these lines.
As long as the peasants of Africa are
silent, humanity will be the less reduced
by an essential part of itself. Change is
necessary and it must come as a result of
small steps towards liberation. We have all
set out on a long road towards the eradica¬
tion of poverty and the emergence of an
African man liberated from renewed forms
of colonial exploitation. The words of an
old African sage, Amadou Hampaté Ba,
come irresistibly to mind: "Don't believe
for a moment," he said, "that the task is
too great and that our efforts are derisory.
There is no such thing as useless effort. In
the beginning, the baobab seed is no bigger
than a coffee grain. And yet from it grows
a sturdy and majestic tree whose shade is
beneficial to everyone."
Jean-Marc Ela

