'The sea
is our life'
by Gaba Broberg
Gaba Broberg is a Greenland Eskimo.
When questioned about his future, this is
what he said:
Greenland is our world, the world
where the Inuits live. Inuit means the
people of the Far North or, simply, men.
Ourpeople 's history is lost in the mists of
time. We probably came from Mongolia
because we look very like Asians. Our
ancestors crossed Mongolia, Siberia,
Alaska and Arctic Canada by sledge as
far as Greenland. Later, in the tenth cen¬
tury, the Vikings arrived in the fjords of
southern Greenland, probably on a sum¬
mer's day since they named our country
"Groenland", which means "green
country".
Our history does not go very far back,
but we are a bigfamily. Our language has
the same roots as the other languages of
the Arctic. We have the same traditions,
the same kind offaces and the word "In¬
uit", by which we are all known, bears
witness to our original unity.
For Inuits, the sea is life. The land is a
place apart the elsewhere. The sea (im-
okh) with its whales, seals and fish,
brings us food, clothing, material to
build our boats and to make our artefacts
sculpted from walrus teeth and stones
polished by the sea. The sea is our daily
bread. Even the children know this. To
live as a fisherman means to live together
and, above all, to share. It means to live
with one'sfamily, with thefamilies ofthe
village. The sea means living as a com¬
munity. Our lives are conditioned by the
sea. We all live along the coasts. The sea
has developed in us a culture that is in
harmony with nature.
The sea is the surface on which we
move and travel. There are fishing and
hunting expeditions, andjourneys to col¬
lect supplies whenever the fishing and
hunting have been good and we go to
fetch the meat we have stocked up. There
are also journeys to visit relations. There
are no roads between the towns.
Nowadays there are planes, but we still
use boats. In the past, we used kayaks.
Nowadays the kayak is used only for
hunting. It is operated by a single man. It
is and symbolizes the man 'sjob. Another
boat, called the umiak, is reserved for
women. The umiak is like a house which
carries the women, the children and the
old folk. All the women from the village
gather together on the boat.
Building a boat is a community task.
Everyone joins in. This is still the case in
northern and eastern Greenland.
Although the climate is harsh, it
mustn't be thought that the country is
uninhabitable, even if we cannot get
away every year for a holiday in the
Canaries or Mexico. The sun is not
everything. Ours is a land ofcold, ice and
a special kind of light. The dark season
lasts from the end of November until the
10th of January. During that period, we
never see the sun, but there are four or
five hours of light. In the past, we fished
even during this period. Nowadays, dur¬
ing the sunless season, many of the men,
especially the young ones, go to town in
search of work. But the people in the
villages are happier than the townsfolk.
In the villages, the people are always
together, like a big family, sharing
everything, meat and everything else.
Nobody abandons anybody. But this
balance is in danger of disappearing, of
being replaced by "everyone for
himself". In the past, everyone bore the
darkness of the long winter months

because he knew that there were others
too. Now destruction is setting in. People
still share in the small towns and villages,
but this has become impossible in the big
towns. Those who work in the towns,
who don 'tfish or hunt and are obliged to
buy their meat, those people no longer
share.
Nevertheless, the Inuits have a kindly
vision of thefuture, for the group feeling
is part of the cultural and biological
history of the Inuits and of their percep¬
tion of the world. The Inuit will always
keep his roots, his language and its
dialects because of the affective links that
bind him to his family.
My father, for instance, when he
returnedfrom hunting with a lot ofmeat,
distributed it first of all to those families
where there was no man in the house,
then to the old and then to his own fami¬
ly, always keeping a good piece for his
friends. This custom is common to all In¬
uits, whether they come from Siberia,
Alaska, Greenland or Canada.
When you speak ofpoverty, you near¬
ly always mention money. In this sense, it
is true that we are poor, but we are very
rich in human kindness.
We have been ecologists since time
began. It is nature that counts and we
reckon with nature. We are not afraid of
civilization, it can bring good and bad.
For instance, pollution was unknown
here a few years ago. Now it comes by sea
with the enormous freighters carrying
minerals which are constantly passing up
and down our coasts. Our hunters and
fishermen have had to change their
habits. Animals are abandoning our
region, the fish are moving away, our
food is disappearing. But there is still not
too much pollution. The problems are of
another kind.
The people from outside the
whites are both good and bad. Former¬
ly, it was they who decided everything,
but that is finished now. The time has
come when equality has become a right.
This equality has always been part of the
daily life of the Inuits, but nowadays
political activities in favour of equality
are modelled on European habits. The
young people have adopted a revolu¬
tionary, sometimes very aggressive
outlook and this is bad. One cannot act in
that way with a brother, be he good or
bad, who has grown up amongst the Inuit
people. One cannot suddenly say to him
"clear out, it's finished". That's not the
Inuit way ofdoing things. On the 1st May
1979, Denmark granted semi-autonomy
to Greenland, but our country is still
under Danish protection.
If I were to express a wish, I would say
first of all that I would like to remain
myself, to continue to be an Inuit with
my own language and traditions.
Without these, I am no longer anything,
I am just anybody. I don 't want anyone
to come and destroy me, as has happened
in some other countries. I fear those who
want to devour my culture. There are on
ly 45,000 Inuits in the world, perhaps
that is why I don 't want to be eaten up
and why I must survive both in body and
spirit.
In the past, Inuits had time to create.
They sculpted, and it was very well done.
Now, as in other countries, it is less well
done. Formerly, the objects we made had
a religious significance, now that is lost.
For instance, there were sculptures of
Tupilak, a protective spirit of the Inuits.
Now Tupilaks are mass-produced. He is
still there, but he no longer has any in¬
fluence. However, it's better than
nothing. In any case, we must absolutely
continue to make Tupilaks.
Formerly the Inuits sang to the rhythm
of a drum. Now, except in the North and
East of Greenland, young people use the
electric guitar, but the older people still
write poems which the young set to
music. Progress must be accepted like the
daylight.
As yet there is no tourism. When it
comes, it will certainly change the coun¬
try, but for the worse. The Inuits will
have no thought but for making money.
If we want to remain Inuit, we must re¬
main men. Humanity is not to be
bartered for money. Our vocation is to
live as a group and to share. Ofcourse we
cannot go back to our traditional life of
hunting and fishing for shrimps in a
kayak, but I hope our children will con¬
tinue to have affection, a certain human
kindness, and the feeling that we are still
a big family.
