The
new Law
of the Sea
by Maria Eduarda Gonçalves
ONE of the key events on the international scene in 1982
was the adoption of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea. It is no coincidence that this should
have taken place at a time of mounting interest in the oceans,
when the rarity of raw materials on land and the search for new
resources have pushed individual States and the international
community at large to turn their attention to the sea.
The Conference at which the Convention was drawn up was
held in response to this preoccupation. It was the outcome of
a combination of factors, such as technological progress (which
today makes it possible to explore marine resources which were
unknown a few decades ago) and political changes (the achieve¬
ment of independence by many countries) which have been
reflected in the desire of the developing countries to dispose of
a legal framework that would encourage a more equitable
distribution of opportunities for the exploration and use of the
oceans and their resources, and of access to the inherent
economic and social benefits.
The new legal framework replaces the traditional principle of
the freedom of the seas. Theoretically, the seas were open to use
by any State, but in practice only a small number of maritime
powers possessed the material, financial and human resources
to navigate, fish, and even make war on one another.
The freedom of the seas was based on a set of foundations
which were both political the international society emanating
from the maritime expansion which had followed the great geo¬
graphical discoveries and scientific it was thought that the
immensity of the oceans and the volume of their resources (held
to be inexhaustible) were such that all kinds of uses could be
made of them without seriously jeopardizing their conservation.
But when the basic facts of the situation were changed, the
developing countries began to call for greater justice in the shar¬
ing of maritime areas and greater equity in relations between
States. The Convention proposes to achieve these objectives
through the attribution of sovereignty rights over different
zones. This attribution has two main forms.
On the one hand, it is recognized that coastal States enjoy ter¬
ritorial sovereignty over "territorial seas" up to twelve nautical
miles in breadth, and functional and practical sovereignty in
200-mile "exclusive economic zones" and on the continental
shelf, the extent of which is dependent on the geological struc¬
ture of the area concerned. In addition to sovereign rights for
purposes of research, exploration, management and conserva¬
tion of renewable and non-renewable resources in these zones,
the coastal States will enjoy jurisdiction where marine scientific
research and protection of the marine environment against
pollution are concerned.
CONTINUED PAGE 42
MARIA EDUARDA GONCALVES, of Portugal, is a professor at the
Universidad Nueva, Lisbon, and a member of the Portuguese National
Council for Scientific and Technological Research. She was a member of
the Portuguese delegation to the third U.N. Conference on the Law of the
Sea, a subject on which she has published many articles and studies.
40

THE NEW LAW OF THE SEA
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 40
On the other hand, seabed mineral resources located outside
the limits of the national jurisdiction are declared to be "the
common heritage of mankind", to be managed by the "Inter¬
national Seabed Authority", an organization to be created
along new and innovative lines which will hold sovereign rights
over the ' 'Area' ' in the name of and in the interest of humanity.
The powers of the Authority include those of organizing, direc¬
ting and controlling exploration. The Authority will have a sub¬
sidiary, the "Enterprise", which will be directly concerned with
exploration for and exploitation of minerals. It will also be
responsible for distributing the fruits of such activities in accor¬
dance with equitable criteria, especially taking into considera¬
tion the interests and needs of developing countries.
Although the failings of the previous régime of almost total
freedom have been recognized, the international community is
not yet mentally prepared to accept a centralized system of in¬
ternational management for the oceans on a global scale.
However, the régime for the Area [the seabed and ocean floor
and subsoil thereof beyond the limits of national jurisdiction]
constitutes an important, even revolutionary, step in this direc¬
tion, in spite of the fact that exploration activities carried out
by States and by public and private enterprises are allowed,
under contract to the Authority, parallel to those carried out by
the Enterprise.
Hence the ocean appears to be compartmentalized, whereas
it could be claimed that a unitary juridical system would be bet¬
ter suited to the natural continuity of the marine environment.
In reply it might be argued that the obligations of the coastal
States towards other States and the international community
are written into the régime of zones under national jurisdiction
and that, in a sense, these obligations offset the exclusivist
tendencies of the system.
For example, the coastal State has a duty to respect freedom
of navigation in its exclusive economic zone and is obliged both
to co-operate with other States in whose waters the same species
migrate as those which enter its own zone of jurisdiction, and
to prevent, reduce, and control pollution which may have ef¬
fects beyond the limits of this zone. A coastal State also has the
obligation to concede the exploitation of those resources in its
exclusive economic zone which it cannot fully harvest itself, to
other, disadvantaged States which are either landlocked, or,
because of special geographical characteristics, lack important
coastal zones, or whose nationals have habitually fished in the
zone in question.
But the attribution of rights is not enough. Conditions must
also be created in which States, especially the least developed
States, can effectively exercise their rights and fulfil their
responsibilities. Accordingly, it is necessary for these countries
to have access to scientific knowledge and to possess
technologies for the rational administration and conservation
of resources. This in turn presupposes the endogenous scientific
and technological development that will enable them to par¬
ticipate in scientific research on equal terms. This preoccupa¬
tion is apparent in the Convention when it prescribes duties
relating to co-operation in the exchange of information and
data, to training of personnel, and to participation in scientific
programmes.
Thus international co-operation is presented as a necessary
complement to the new rights. Paradoxical though it may seem,
the division of the oceans strengthens the need for collaboration
between States. The importance attached to the role of the com¬
petent international organizations, notably the Specialized
Agencies of the United Nations, should be seen in this context,
as a framework for dialogue and rapprochement between
States, and for the promotion of action to improve the in¬
frastructures of developing countries, especially in the marine
sciences and their applications.
The international community today has at its disposal a con¬
vention for the oceans which is global in its range and universal
in its vocation. It should not be thought that achievement of
final agreement of the text was an easy matter. It took five years
non-stop work, prolonged debates, and the development of in¬
novative negotiating techniques in which the Conference broke
new ground.
The finalization of the Convention was only possible as a
result of compromises that often gave rise to vague and am¬
biguous formulations. Consequently, there was a strong feeling
that the régime which it established should be completed by a
system of organs and procedures by which it could be inter¬
preted and applied in the event of dispute. Provisions were
made to this effect.
The Convention provides for the creation of a Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea in which the representation of the principal
legal systems of the world and equitable geographical distribu¬
tion shall be assured. Members of the Tribunal will, of course,
be persons of recognized competence in matters relating to the
law of the sea.
As noted above, the Convention declared its vocation to be
universal. Nevertheless, a number of States (including the USA
and the Federal Republic of Germany, but also Turkey and
Venezuela) have not signed it and show little intention of ratify¬
ing it or of acceding to it in the near future.
The reason for this is that the industrialized States find it hard
to accept the obligations that would be incumbent on them if
they were to accede to the Convention, especially insofar as the
seabed régime is concerned, and specifically those relating to
production limits and the transfer of technology to the Authori¬
ty. Their greatest fear is that the solution that has been found,
based on the principle of "the common heritage of mankind",
constitutes a precedent which may be used in the future as a
source of inspiration for régimes applicable to other spheres of
international relations such as outer space and the Antarctic.
There are legitimate grounds for fearing that non-
participation in the Convention, especially on the part of in¬
dustrialized countries, may call into question the very effec¬
tiveness of the system whenever it appeals to those countries to
provide the Authority with the capital and technologies it needs
for the exploration of the mineral resources of the seabed.
Nevertheless, in spite of the compromises and the am¬
biguities, the Convention sets the objectives, defines the prin¬
ciples, and establishes the operating rules of a system of
distribution of power and relations between States on which a
new order of the oceans may be constructed. It differs from
previous trends in that it presents a model and programmes of
action that call into question values and principles rooted in
liberalism in favour of greater democracy and participation in
the international community.
Maria Eduarda Gonçalves
42
