^ANGHI, Vladimir
Mikhailovich
The story of
an alphabet
It was the second spring of the war in
the old Nivkh village of Chaivo. Old
Mamzin, the oldest member of our
Nivkh people which was dying out, was
afraid that he would suddenly go away
to Mly-vo, the land of the departed.
And so he decided to initiate me, a
Photo Anatoly Shiiakov © Photokhrontka Tass. Moscow
Nivkh children study a reading primer in their own language. The
Nivkh language Is spoken by some 4,000 people on the island of
Sakhalin and along the estuary of the river Amur. The first Nivkh
primer, using a modified Cyrillic alphabet, was published by author
Vladimir Sanghl, himself of Nivkh origin, and G. Otalna in 1981,
whippersnapper of seven years of age,
into the ways of men, hunting at sea.
But before I was judged fit to step into
the boat with the tough, unsmiling
hunters, I had to take part several times
in the feeding ceremony of the yzgns,
the guardian spirits of the places where
we were to hunt.
From a canvas bag the old man took
a pinch of tea, a pinch of tobacco, some
dried lily bulbs and a small piece of
sugar. Addressing the mysterious jzg«,
he said, "Here we are! We have come
to see you. We are poor and have
nothing." Unable to take my eyes off
his hand, swallowing my saliva, I
listened to the old man with one ear. It
was a long time since we had had sugar
on our table. "We would have liked to
give you more," old Mamzin went on,
"but there isn't any. Have pity on us.
Make everything go well for us.
Amen!" And with a sweeping gesture
he cast the offerings beneath a thick
bush of twisted alder or low cedar.
On the rare sunny days, when wind
and tide bore ice-floes towards the
shore, the old men sailed out to sea in
boats hewn out of poplar trunks. On
the shore, I controlled myself as best I
could; neither running about nor acting
childishly in case the lord of the sea
might think that my pranks were the
result of too easy a life and would
refuse to provide the hunters with a
quarry.
In the evening after a real feast, with
a good reassuring fire crackling away,
the old men would recount the
marvellous myths and legends of the
Nivkh, while I who was lucky enough
to hear them dreamed of the day when
I would be able to write so that I could
record these stories for the enjoyment
of hundreds and thousands of other
children.
In byegone days the Nivkh had their
own form of writing, but later they lost
it. Legend has it that the guilty one was
a Nivkh who had been made responsi¬
ble for guarding the written signs. The
man did not look after the document
properly, and it was drenched with
rain. When good weather returned, the
21

man spread out the pages in the sun.
But the wind rose and blew away the
leaves inscribed with Nivkh writing.
Ever since then, according to the
legend, the Nivkh have lived without
writing.
In 1930 the Soviet State created in
Leningrad an Institute of the Peoples



of the North for the education of the
twenty-six peoples who lived in the vast
Arctic and sub-Arctic lands stretching
from the Kola peninsula in the west to
Chukotka, Kamchatka and northern
Sakhalin in the east. These peoples are
bound by a common historical destiny
and identical natural and economic
conditions (they practise reindeer rais¬
ing, dog rearing, hunting, and live
from sea mammal and fishing in¬
dustries). They had no writing of their
own.
left to develop Nivkh as a written
language.
Over twenty years ago I began to
write my first poems and stories in my
mother tongue. However my first
book, Nivkh Legends (1961) was
published in Russian translation. When
it appeared, Constantin A. Fedin, the
great Soviet writer in Russian, wrote
me a letter in which he said: "So a
Nivkh writer, a poet of the Nivkhs, has
arisen, and it is up to him to reveal to
all other peoples the heart and soul of
his own." Such words have a binding
force, and I continued to write poetry
and prose.
I was glad that I had spent three years
studying written Nivkh in Leningrad,
at the preparatory section of the
Herzen Institute's Faculty of the
Peoples of the North. Actually, the
In June 1979 an important event
took place in the life of my people: a
new, more accurate and more complete
Nivkh alphabet was adopted. Each
sound of the Nivkh language is now
noted according to principles which
have been organized in a coherent
system.
But it is one thing to create an
alphabet; it is another to introduce a
people to reading. And so, with the
Nivkh specialist Calina A. Otaina, I
began to write a primer and a teaching
course in the basics of Nivkh writing.
The course was published in 1980 and
the primer in 1981. Now Nivkh
children can learn their language with
textbooks.
Adults and children of school age
can thus learn their own language. But
what about the toddlers? Now we had
It took Vladimir
Sanghi five years to
perfect the Nivkh
alphabet, right, ft is
based on the 33-letter
Russian Cyrillic
alphabet with addi¬
tional letters to accom¬
modate sounds in the
Nivkh language which
have no equivalent in
Russian,
Photo <D Educational Publishsrs,
Leningrad
ABB TyX F Ç Ä E E aC 3
K"'
H H K K' K ^; Jl ]yrH g o
nn'p^c T T'yyoxx
:ç IÍ ^ mm t Bi B 9 H) fl
' ^ äti 0 ^ M 4 M. ^ ^ #
Russian scholars helped the
Chukches, the Evenki, the Nentsy, the
Eskimos, the Khantes and other
peoples of the North to develop their
own forms of writing. The first Eskimo
primer, which appeared in the Soviet
Union at the beginning of the 1930s, is
still used today in Eskimo schools in
North America.
Latin characters were initially used
for the alphabets of the peoples of the
North. Then, shortly before World
War II, at the request of the peoples
themselves, work began on transcrib¬
ing them into Cyrillic characters. But
war broke out before the work could be
completed.
The war ended in victory, but the
Nivkhs who had studied at the Institute
of the Peoples of the North did not
return from the battlefield. No one was
22
notation system used there was terribly
ponderous and far from perfect. There
are over forty sounds in Nivkh whereas
the Russian alphabet has only thirty-
three letters. Consequently two and
sometimes three letters which were
often fundamentally incompatible had
to be used to denote those sounds of the
Nivkh language which have no
equivalent in Russian. It was a very
clumsy transcription to handle and
was, in fact, only used in the Institute.
It had not spread to the Nivkh people.
As an adult and the author of several
books, I set myself the goal of creating
a Nivkh alphabet as comprehensive as
those of the other peoples of our multi¬
lingual country and of bringing writing
to our people. It took about five years
to create a new alphabet.
to create a course and a method for
teaching pre-school-age children their
mother tongue. This is a very special
kind of work which called for a great
deal of time and energy; but now it is
finished, and in autumn 1982 it was ap¬
proved at Sakhalin. The task which re¬
mains is to produce a series of text¬
books like those which have been used
for over ten years by many other nor¬
thern peoples. In addition to a
language textbook, the series will con¬
sist of a bilingual dictionary, a manual
for teachers, a reader in the vernacular
language, and an anthology of work by
national writers as well as translations
of the great classics of Russian, Soviet
and world literature. I am currently
preparing translations into Nivkh of
stories by Pushkin and Andersen as
well as Tolstoy's tales for children.

The existence of Nivkh as a written
language opens up to my people the
fabulous treasures 


of a time-honoured
popular oral tradition and gives them
access to world culture in their own
language. I have sometimes heard it
said that the language of a people
which has very recently emerged from a
patriarchal state is bound to be in¬
capable of expressing the feelings of
our contemporaries and the complex¬
ities of their vision of society and the
world. I do not think this is so. A real
writer can use any language to describe
the present-day life of his people in all
its complexity.
One remarkable result of the cre¬
ation of a written Nivkh language has
been that many gifted Nivkhs are now
turning to creative writing. Young
Nivkhs are also being drawn to the
study of literature, and several of them
are currently students at higher educa¬
tion institutions in Leningrad and
Moscow. Nivkhs who have won doc¬
torates will soon hold teaching posts at
institutes of education at Leningrad
and Juzno-Sachalinsk. The teaching of
Nivkh is also being introduced into col¬
leges of education.
After the Nivkhs (4,400 persons), the
Saami (1,900), the Koriaks (7,500) and
the Dolgans (4,900) have begun to
transcribe their languages and have
already published their first readers.
The Evens (12,000) and the Mansi
(7,700) are working along the same
lines.
The modern world has no right to
neglect any language, whoever it may
belong to and whatever the level of its
development. The neglect and disap¬
pearance of a non-written language
constitute a loss for human culture as a
whole.
The Soviet author Chingiz Aitmatov
is right when he says, "Everyone
should have his point of junction with
the earth." The homeland is the
spiritual culture of all our brother
peoples, but its starting point is your
yurt\ your yaranga', your aaul', the
river of your childhood. It is there that
a man's personality is formed. When
the Kirghiz writer Aitmatov wrote his
story called "Pied dog running by the
waterside", 1 believe that he
understood and felt this Nivkh tale
from within because, although he
thinks on a planetary scale, he is still
deeply attached to Cheker, the
kichlait*, where he was born, beside
the rushing waters of the Kurkureou.
'Yurt: A light, circular movable tent consisting
of skins or felt stretched over a lattice
framework, used by the Kirghiz and other Cen¬
tral Asian peoples.
' Yaranga: a kind of yurt used in the northeastern
regions of Siberia.
'Aoul: a village in the Caucasus or central Asia.
'Kichlak: a village of central Asia.
