CHINA
The symbolic language
of Beijing Opera
BEIJING Opera, the unique
dramatic form which is part of
China's great cultural herit¬
age, is today not only popular in China;
it has won for itself a special place on
the international stage.
In Beijing Opera, the plot, charac¬
ters, events and setting are all described
solely through the acting and singing of
the performers, a unique feature which
makes the form more comprehensive
than operetta, dance drama or spoken
drama. This ingenious .combination
consists of singing, acting, recitation,
using skill in martial arts, musical ac¬
companiment and stage design, in
order to symbolically reflect rather
than imitate real life. The personality,
the inner feelings, the development of
the plot and the general atmosphere of
the performance are all expressed
through established and precise codes.
All drama attempts to reflect real
life. As a result of different creative
resources, different national charac¬
teristics, aesthetic judgments, cultures
and traditions, a variety of dramatic
forms has arisen. In general, contem¬
porary drama has evolved from three
different conceptual approaches, that
of Stanislavsky which advocates the
presentation of reality, that of the great
Chinese actor Mei Lanfang which ad¬
vocates conveying the essence of real¬
ity, and that of Brecht which integrates
a Stanislavskian "realistic presenta¬
tion" with Mei Lanfang's "symbolic
presentation".
The Stanislavsky method takes "im¬
itation" as a guiding principle and can
be traced back to ancient Greece, to
Aristotle and the then-prevalent theory
that "art imitates nature". The seven¬
teenth century produced the dramatic
concept of "constructing a plot set in a
fixed place and within one complete
day" and the nineteenth century saw
the emergence of Ibsen's works of
modern drama, all of which inherited
much from classical dramatic forms.
They treated drama as an imitation of
LU TIAN is a member of the Chinese
Dramatists' Association, a permanent member
of the council of the Chinese Stage Art Society,
and vice-director of its Department of Theory
and Research. He is the author of The Art of
Long .Tao (small-part players in Beijing Opera)
and The Painted Faces of Kunqu (a local opéra
form which originated in southern China).
38
by Lu Tian
life or a faithful representation of real
life with a "fourth wall" * to create an
illusion of reality. According to Mei
Lanfang and to the theory of Beijing
Opera, however, no such "fourth
wall" exists. This is a fundamental dif¬
ference between Beijing Opera and
other types of theatre. Mei Lanfang's
dramatic theory is that of non-
illusionism, quite different from that
which advocates the presentation of
reality.
The basic aesthetic of Beijing Opera
is a theory of "symbolic style", not of
"imitation". The beauty of the perfor¬
mance is not found in a simulation of
the original appearance or the repro¬
duction of real life. It does not seek
superficial similarities but instead uses
its symbolic methods to convey a sort
of essence or intrinsic spirit of real life.
It is a formalization of real life, a code
of highly condensed actions intended
to produce concrete and exact images
in the audience's imagination.
During the performance, players and
audience together carry out the artistic
process, since without the active par¬
ticipation of the audience's imagina¬
tion the art form would not succeed.
For instance, on a stage without props,
special movements by the performers
can signify such actions as opening or
closing a door, riding in a carriage or
on a horse, or rowing a boat. As Mei
Lanfang once said, "The performer is
in possession of all the necessary
props".
In The Crossroad, for example, two
performers use stylized movements to
show two men fighting in the dark.
Under a bright spotlight, the acting of
the performers draws the audience into
this drama taking place on a dark
night. A performer walking in a circle
indicates a long journey from point A
to point B. If the performer raises his
sleeves to cover his face and then sings
a solo, delivers a soliloquy or a bei gong
(aside), it indicates that he is in a dif¬
ferent location from others who,
though on the same stage, are not
supposed to hear him.
In literary terms, the scripts belong
more to the category of "open theatre"
than to the Ibsen-type "closed
theatre". Some are written in the first
person, but in the majority third-
person narrative is used to describe the
characters and develop the plot. In
Wronged Su San, for instance, the
wronged courtesan Su San is escorted
to the provincial capital to stand trial.
While on her way to the capital she
sings: "Su San has left Hongdong
county and is on the way...", thus
describing the setting. Highly flexible,
Beijing Opera is thus not restricted by
time and space, and performances can
suggest "broad expanses of water with
fish swimming about or vast open
plains with birds flying in the sky".
In order to accommodate this "open
theatre" type of script and resolve the
inherent contradiction between inter¬
pretation and consistency of perfor¬
mance, a set of dramatic conventions
has been derived from life, stylized and
standardized artistic expressions which
create both aural and visual images
through music and dance.
Traditionally, roles in Beijing Opera
are classified into sheng (male roles),
dan (female roles), jing (the "painted
face" male roles, most of which have
special personalities or features), and
chou (the clowns). Each of these has its
own set of stage movements and styles
of expression. The long tao role can be
performed by one actor who represents
a number of attendants or soldiers.
Four soldiers and four generals on
either side of the stage symbolize an ar¬
my several thousand strong. Qi ba is a
type of dance which symbolizes a
general full of energy before an expedi¬
tion; zhou bian indicates walking at
night; tang ma riding in the field, etc.
All these conventions are of course
unlike real life, but as Goethe said:
"Once the artist grasps the object, that
object will no longer belong to
nature." Beijing Opera, through this
standardization or codification of life
creates a highly distinctive form of ex¬
pression, an image which is acceptable
to and acknowledged by the audience.
There are two categories of symbolic
convention: one type is métonymie and
adheres strictly to an established pat¬
tern of movement; for instance, the ac¬
tor may dance carrying an oar to repre¬
sent rowing a boat and the audience
will automatically understand even
* The "fourth wall is a concept of the
naturalistic theatre, according to which the pro¬
scenium arch represents the fourth wall of the
room in which the action of the play takes place,
lemoved for the benefit of the audience but
without any of the performers taking cognizance
of the fact.

The horn-like feathers this character from Meeting
of Heroes is holding in his mouth signify anger and
determination. The dragon design on his costume,
in this performance by the Beijing Opera, indicates
that he is an intellectual.
Photo Fred Mayer © Magnum, Paris
Chen Miao Chang, a Taoist nun, has boarded a
fishing boat in pursuit of her lover. Pan Bizheng, a
young scholar, in this performance of Autumn
River by the Sichuan Opera, whose acting style is
patterned on that of the Beijing Opera.
Photo © Chinese edition of the Unesco Courier
39

though there is no boat on stage. The
second type is totally without any stage
props. In a scene in Song Jiang Slays
Yan Poxi, for instance, Song Jiang
goes upstairs to meet his mistress Yan.
On the stage there is no prop to repre¬
sent the stairs and the actor stands in
the centre of the stage swinging his
"rippling sleeves" and holding up the
hem of his robe to simulate the move¬
ment of climbing stairs.
The powerful, rhythmic music of
Beijing Opera also has conventions
which are understood by the audience.
The musical modes consist mainly of er
huang, to express a melancholic mood,
contemplation, recollection or yearn¬
ing, or of xi pi, to express excitement
and liveliness. The percussion in¬
struments play their traditional roles: si
ji tou (four beats on a gong) is generally
used when the actor first comes on
stage, or is about to exit, or is perform¬
ing without words; luan chui (confused
beats of gong and cymbals) expresses
confusion, defeat or the tense at¬
mosphere of battle, but with additional
drum beats it can also express the
sound effects of a conflagration or a
storm. In addition there are symbolic
sound effects such as flowing water (in¬
dicated by beating a small gong), the
watchman's clapper, or wind, rain and
snow, as well as the roaring of tigers,
the neighing of horses and the singing
of birds. They are not intended to be
realistic reproductions of the actual
sounds.
Stage design is also executed through
the use of particular conventions which
combine visual images with conceptual
images. Clouds, water, wind and fire,
for instance, are all natural
phenomena. On the Beijing Opera
stage they are represented either by
boards painted with moving clouds, or
flags painted with flowing water or
rustling wind or burning fire. By carry¬
ing these boards and flags the per¬
formers are able to suggest various
changes in natural phenomena.
Characterization is also ruled by
conventions. It is interesting to study
the "painted face" (a special type of
make-up) in Beijing Opera, because no
precedent in daily life can be traced.
The different colours of the "painted
faces" represent different per¬
sonalities, red for loyalty, white for
treachery, black for courage, yellow
for cruelty, blue for staunchness, and
so on. The audience can easily
recognize the character by his make¬
up.
The costumes are fundamentally a
synthesis of ancient costumes develop¬
ed for the aesthetic requirements of the
performance. The basic feature is an
ample, exaggerated shape which suits
the roles by conveying strong dramatic
effects, different from ballet costumes
which show the beauty of the human
body. A clown has a hanging beard
with its lower tuft dropping downward
over his chest; lao sheng (aged and
bearded male characters) wear a jade
belt loosely over the ceremonial robe;
wu sheng (military male characters)
have long sashes which hang at the
front of the actor's waist.
To sum up, Beijing Opera perfor¬
mances, scripts, music and stagecraft
are all fundamentally unrealistic. The
symbolism of the performance, with its
various conventions and devices, is in¬
terpreted and understood by the au¬
dience. The ordinary actions of real life
are "distilled" and transformed into
drama on the stage of Beijing Opera.
Lu Tian
Scene from The Story of Liwa, a traditional Chinese opera performed here by the Chong Qing Opera Company.
Photo Ariane Bailey, Unesco
