Doubts, fears and hopes
by Jean Ping
AS a result of the stupendous
achievements of modern science
and technology, instruments
of communication have become so
sophisticated that no part of the world
is today isolated; our planet is thus
neither more nor less than a "global
village".
However, this great human victory is
also a two-edged sword. Used construc¬
tively, it serves to transmit knowledge,
fight illiteracy, encourage respect for
human rights and the rights of peoples,
consolidate national unity, foster inter¬
national understanding, and promote
economic and socio-cultural develop¬
ment.
But it can also be used, along quite
different lines, to subjugate man, to in¬
cite to war or racism, to restrict the
liberty and sovereignty of peoples, to
encourage cultural alienation, and to
propagate "disinformation".
A growing number of Third World
countries are interested in the immense
possibilities opened up by the
technological explosion in communica¬
tion. Whoever disposes of technology
disposes of communication and thus,
also, of power.
However, a small number of in¬
dustrialized countries and transna¬
tional corporations possess a virtual
monopoly of these high technologies
(electronics, informatics, telematics,
satellites, etc.). It is actually in this field
that the gap between developed and
developing countries is widening the
most seriously, and may have the most
grievous consequences.
The first of these consequences con¬
cerns the technological dependence
which is exemplified notably by the
"structural grip" of the North, and the
transnational' control over research
and development, the sale of patents
and licences, the delivery of equipment
and software, the provision of spare
parts and maintenance services, or the
operation of artificial satellites.
The second has to do with "absorp¬
tion capacity". The speed of technical
progress very often exceeds the capaci¬
ty of developing countries to absorb
and master such highly specialized
technology, which can only be of
benefit to them if a minimum of condi-
JEAN PING is a Gabonese economist and his
country's ambassador to Unesco. He is presi¬
dent of the African Group at Unesco and chair¬
man of the working committee on information
and communication at Unesco of the "Group
of 77".
8
tions favourable to its assimilation
already exist (specialists, qualified per¬
sonnel, training and research centres).
Unfortunately, certain technological
choices are imposed by the transna¬
tional corporations with reference to
their own interests (profits, marketing
strategy, dumping) and not the real
needs and local conditions of the
receiving countries.
Another major consequence is that
the tensions between modernity and
tradition usually reveal themselves in
the downgrading, the marginalization
and even the disappearence of certain
traditional modes of interpersonal
communication; this unequal impact
may even lead to ethnocide. Almost in¬
variably the result is an impoverish¬
ment of the cultural heritage of
humanity and an increase in the feeling
of isolation on" the part of individuals
with, on the one hand, a majority of
"receivers" forced into a passive role
as listeners, and on the other, an active
minority of "transmitters".
It is only one step from a
technological grip to an economic grip,
a step which it is all the easier to make
since communication has become a key
economic resource in international ex¬
changes. It has been calculated, for ex¬
ample, that one European country will
draw 85 per cent of its foreign earnings
from the sale of information in one
form or another (patents, licences,
royalties, technical know-how, etc.)
But the situation is very different in
the Third World, since the interna¬
tional division of labour inherited from
the colonial situation has "specialized"
our countries in the production and ex¬
port of raw materials and the import of
services and manufactured goods.
The communications industry is in¬
creasingly characterized by excessive
oligolopolistic concentration and a
growing transnationalization, as the
Dutch specialist Cees Hamelink
pointed out when he wrote that "75 per
cent of the current market in com¬
munications is controlled by some
80 transnational corporations", all of
them belonging to the industrialized
world. This is an indication of the ex¬
tent to which communication, as a ma¬
jor economic resource, is unequally
distributed in the world.
These inequalities naturally play a
part in- increasing the economic
dependence and accentuating the im¬
balances to which the developing world
is subject: excessive indebtedness,
chronic built-in balance of payments
deficits, deteriorating terms of trade,
imported inflation; in short, the
development of under-development.
Thus it could not be more clearly ap¬
parent that the New International In¬
formation and Communication Order
is an indispensable precondition for the
establishment of a new, more just and
more equitable international economic
order.
There is no need to stress the increas¬
ingly close links between communica¬
tion and culture. But, if it is now
recognized that the mass media in con¬
temporary societies are privileged in¬
struments of cultural diffusion and im¬
portant centres of artistic creation, it is
nonetheless true that they also
engender "perverse effects" which pre¬
sent serious threats and real dangers for
the cultures of many peoples.
This is due notably to the fact that
the developing countries attach too
high a priority to infrastructure
("hardware") in comparison with the
content of the message and everything
covered by the notion of software.
Once the equipment is installed, there
usually ensues a veritable invasion of
imported programmes which reflect
foreign cultural models, with attendant
risks of the erosion of endogenous
values and cultural alienation.
This is the case with cinema and
television through which these im¬
ported models go down into the street
and contribute to the moral disintegra¬
tion of traditional societies.
The same goes for the transnational
cultural industries which propagate in
our countries the uniformizing and
homogenizing model of what Francis
Balle has called a new "standardized,
average, mildly euphoric culture,
against a background of commonplace
ideas, produced according to an in¬
dustrial technique". Likewise the great
organs of information which usually
convey a deformed and incomplete im¬
age of the developing countries, giving
prominence to the sensational and the
scandalous.
This makes it possible to understand
why the international community can¬
not be indifferent to the problem of the
content of messages. What, for exam¬
ple, will be beamed tomorrow across
national frontiers by direct satellite
television? What language? What
culture? What politics? Such questions
fuel the anxieties, the fears, the frustra¬
tions, but also the hopes, of the
developing world.
