The outline of Africa serves as a
backdrop for the Togolese actor and
dramatist S. Kokou Allouwassio.
Photo © All Rights Reserved


AFRICA
The changing scene
by Ange-Séverin Malanda
AFRICAN theatre is a pheno¬
menon which long sowed con¬
fusion and perplexity in the
minds of those who observed it. In¬
stead of questioning the premises
which underlay their vision of African
forms of theatre, such observers
jumped to the conclusion that these
forms merely indicated the existence of
a "pre-theatre" in Africa. In other
words, they were voicing a preference
for the norms of European theatre at
a given stage in its history.
Some aspects of the festivals and
other ceremonies of traditional Africa
were undoubtedly theatrical. These
festivals, often held to mark specific
occasions, had religious undertones
ANGE-SEVERIN MALANDA is a Congolese
poet who has studied at the Institut d'Etudes
Théâtrales in Paris.
and their social and economic repercus¬
sions were countless. In fact the dif¬
ficulty of defining African theatre in
precise terms arose from the fact that
the moments of "drama" were part of
such an immense canvas of experience.
Any attempt to make a brief survey
of African theatre today is bound to
face difficulties because of all the acts
and gestures, all the salient events,
which are dramatized in it. However,
let us try to review some of the most
significant experiments in African
theatre, bearing in mind that we are
confronted by a phenomenon which
has, in a sense, neither centre nor
periphery. It exists on a continental
scale, since theatre troupes travel wide¬
ly and learn from and influence each
other. As a result of the generally
prevailing production conditions, ex¬
periments tend to be similar in nature,
and as African theatre people today
map out new perspectives, they find
themselves grappling with more or less
the same problems.
The William Ponty training college
in Senegal at the end of the 1930s is
considered by many to be the seedplot
of today's African theatre. But this is a
restrictive, narrowly chronological
judgment; the same claim could be
made, for instance, of the Collège
Saint-Joseph in the Belgian Congo
during colonial times. Contemporary
African theatre has been nurtured by
several schools through which certain
models of European theatre have made
inroads in Africa.
Essentially, theatre is an event which
is never repeated, since each perfor¬
mance is an original, ephemeral version
which is different from, though akin
12

to, previous performances. Traditional
performances took this strictly into ac¬
count and were a measure of all its
possibilities. The irruption of the writ¬
ten text into African theatre struck a
blow at this conception of drama.
As I have noted, the schools were the
initial medium through which many
classics of the European theatre came
to Africa. The churches were the other
channel through which elements of
European theatre came to be somewhat
rapidly engrafted onto African theatre.
The most striking example of this
phenomenon is undoubtedly the kan-
tata, as practised in such West African
countries as Togo and Ghana. These
dramatizations of passages from the
Bible, associated with references
adapted to the African social and
cultural context were at first performed
in the churches and then went on to win
a fresh audience outside.
African theatre is based on a dual
tradition. It is increasingly tending to
absorb elements originating from
Western forms, while also drawing on
local or regional traditions. It
thus renews itself using traditional
myths, stories, songs, masks and cos¬
tumes, and absorbing various other
influences.
Photos © National Museum of Malt
Koteba is a traditional form of theatre in Mali where, during the dry
season, farmers and villagers turn into actors, singers and musicians.
Koteba plays either recount events from village life or dramatize rela¬
tions between villagers and the authorities. Above, a scene from The
Arrival of the Commandant. The show always begins with a "proces¬
sion", top, in which the actors slowly walk on stage singing to per¬
suade the spirits to leave the stage to human beings. Photos show ac¬
tors of the National Theatre of Mali, directed by Aguibou Dembele.
"Theatre is really on the move in
West Africa," says Alain Ricard. "It
uses local languages, it is not always
written, and often it is not written at
all. Written drama, frequently in Euro¬
pean languages, is in a paradoxical
situation. Drama written in a European
language is often used to train
schoolchildren to use that language. As
a result it loses its theatrical nature and
becomes a stylistic classroom
exercise."
Despite the influence of the classics
of European theatre and the growing
number of locally written plays, the
relationship between the African
theatre and written drama is an am¬
bivalent one. The comparison made by
the Togolese Senouvo Agbota Zinsou
between the concert party and the corn-
media dell'arte is not without validity.
The commedia dell'arte appeared in
Italy after breaking away from the
commedia sostenuta (a form connected
to written drama). The concert party,
like the commedia dell'arte, is based on
improvisation and on the actor's cor¬
poral and verbal dexterity: there is no
text to dictate what he should act. In
the concert party, which is nevertheless
derived from the kantata, there is no set
text to govern the pace of the acting or
the performance. The dramatic effect
is thus not dictated by the written word.
Below, Shakespeare African-style. A
scene from the Théâtre Sénégalais
production of Macbeth at the Theatre of
Nations, Paris.
Photo © Nicolas Treatt, Paris

Languages other than those used in
most of the repertory of written drama
(English, French) are now taking the
stage. Another kind of dramatic
rhetoric is being shaped from new raw
material. Bernt Lindfors' comment
that "forms of oral expression have a
greater impact than the written word in
Kenya" can be applied to Africa as a
whole.
The relationship between the African
theatre and the written text is one of
knot-like ambiguity. It expresses all the
issues involved in the transformation of
a heritage and lies at the heart of the
work done in recent years by such
groups as the Roccado-Zoulou Theatre
directed by Sony Labou Tansi in the
Congo, by Koteba theatre as directed
by Souleymane Koly in the Ivory
Coast, by the Mwondo Theatre of
Zaire, and the many Yoruba theatre
groups of Nigeria. The bold ex-
independently of a written text, instead
of theatre as we know it in the West,
bound to and limited by the text." This
comment also explains, incidentally,
why people dared to insinuate for so
long that African theatre did not
exist failing to acknowledge that the
emergence of the "Gutenberg galaxy"
was related to the importance attached
to the written text in the dominant con¬
ception of European theatre. A glimpse
of Souleymane Koly at work is enough
to see how far away he stands from this
approach. As he has explained, he puts
on plays in which there is "little textual
matter, a lot of corporal expression,
dancing, music and singing." The play
sometimes becomes musical comedy.
African theatre today can be
distinguished from traditional theatre
in a number of ways. What the French
historian Marcel Détienne has called a
Theatre created a show based on the
mythology associated with twins. They
transformed, mimed and sang these
myths, drawing on a variety of ethnic
traditions.
Above all, urbanization has changed
the material conditions in which shows
are produced and reach their audience.
Very few theatres are open on a perma¬
nent basis. Shows are often staged on
improvised stages (in bars, schools, on
trestles, etc.). The fact that theatres ex¬
ist, regardless of their numbers, re¬
quires dramatists to devise a new kind
of practice. Even the itinerant troupes
of Nigeria, which seem to be becoming
professionalized (their tours follow
regular circuits) are facing increasingly
acute production problems. Whereas
the triumph of the director in Europe
dates from the nineteenth century, in
Africa his reign has yet to begin. Out¬
side the "institutional" stage (such as
The Troupe du Roccado-
Zoulou of Brazzaville (Peo¬
ple's Republic of the Congo),
directed by Sony Labou Tan-
si, has won a reputation in re¬
cent years for taking themes
from everyday life and
presenting them in a style in
which the country's cultural
identity is expressed through
speech and gesture. Photo
shows a scene from Ils sont
là ! ("They are there!"), a
stage adaptation of seven
stories published under the
title Tribaliques.
perimental work done at the Kamirithu
cultural centre in Limuru (Kenya) in
1977 with their production in Kikuyu
of Ngaahika Ndeenda is part of the
same phenomenon.
The work produced in the early years
of modern African theatre was charac¬
terized by frantic and sterile imitation
of European theatre. Paradoxically,
new perspectives were then emerging in
the West through the discovery of non-
European drama. Paul Claudel was
studying Japanese theatre, Antonin
Artaud Balinese theatre, and Bertold
Brecht Chinese theatre.
In 1935, Artaud noted in Le Théâtre
et son Double that "the revelation of
Balinese theatre" had been for him an
opportunity "to give a physical and
non-verbal dimension to the theatre, in
which drama is contained within
everything that can happen on stage,
14
veritable "process of laicization" has
boosted the transformation of tradi¬
tional theatre. Theatre in the past was
marked by the imprint of sacred
rituals. The birth of contemporary
drama took place at a time when the
sacred aspects of certain traditional
forms of dramatic expression were
becoming less prominent.
New social and historical deter¬
minants, including those caused by the
intensive urbanization process which
has been taking place in Africa in the
last few decades, have shaped
theatrical activities, which are now cen¬
tred primarily in the cities, their impact
being felt only sporadically in the rural
areas. In the mid-1970s, Catharsis, a
group from Lubumbashi, scoured the
country observing and collating traces
and vestiges of traditional theatre prac¬
tices. In 1976, members of the Mwondo
that of the Daniel Sorano Theatre in
Senegal) suitable solutions to produc¬
tion and stagecraft problems are hard
to find. Here the African theatre is han¬
dicapped by its material poverty.
As far as audience reaction is con¬
cerned, the forms of drama which com¬
mand the most faithful public are those
which are produced in local languages,
by such troupes as those which perform
Kotéba in Mali and Nigeria's Yoruba
theatre. These are the forms which en¬
courage audience participation open-
air theatre being particularly successful
in this respect.
Urbanization has thus not stifled the
emergence of new forms of drama in
Africa. Through these new forms, a
new aesthetics is today being created.
African theatre is a theatre of experi¬
mentation.
Ange-Séverin Malanda
