A village
called Nanpur
by Prafulla Mohanti
THE name of my village is Nanpur. It
is one of India's 500,000 villages
and stands on the bank of the river
Birupa in the Cuttack district of Orissa. It
PRAFULLA MOHANTI was born and brought
up in Nanpur, the Indian village he describes in
this article. He won a scholarship to study archi¬
tecture in Bombay andfrom there went to England
in 1960 to work as an architect. He is now a pain¬
ter and writer. His paintings have been shown in
many parts of the world, including Europe, the
US and Japan, as well as India. He is the author
of My Village, My Life, a portrait of his village
which has been translated into Japanese, Nor¬
wegian and Danish. His film, My Village, My
Life, was shown on BBC TV during the 1982 Fes¬
tival of India in the UK.
Photo © Claude Sauvageot, Paris
is part of a group of villages with a central
market place at Balichandrapur, three
kilometres away, where there is now a
bank, a police station and a post office. The
village is connected by road with Cuttack,
48 kilometres south-west, the commercial
centre of the State.
Nanpur has a population of about 3,000
living in six settlements separated by mango
groves and paddy fields. Each settlement is
inhabited by one particular caste. Caste is
the most important feature. It defines a per¬
son's place in the village and the work he is
expected to do. One is born into a caste and
it cannot be changed.
Rice is the main crop in this traditional Indian village of the Punjab. In foreground, one
of the humped brahman or Zebu cattle which are common in this region. They are con¬
sidered sacred by the Hindus.
11

iV Traditionally there are four castes-
Brahmins, the priests; Kshatriyas, the war¬
riors; Vaishyas, the businessmen; and
Sudras, the servant caste. But over the years
there have been many sub-castes relating
to professions. There are Brahmins,
Karans the administrators farmers, bar¬
bers, astrologers and Harijans, formerly
called Untouchables. The villagers are
mainly farmers and craftsmen. Each craft is
the property of a particular caste and
together they form the village community.
The villagers of Nanpur are Hindus.
They are religious. They believe in God and
his many incarnations. For them He is
everywhere, in a man, in a tree, in a stone.
According to Arjun Satpathi, the village
Brahmin, God is light and energy, like the
electric current. To him there is no dif¬
ference between the gods of the Hindus,
Muslims and Christians. Only the names
are different.
Every village has a local deity. In Nanpur
it is a piece of stone in the shape of a shiva
Ungarn. He is called Mahlia Buddha. He sits
under the ancient varuna tree protecting the
village. Kanhai Barik, the village barber, is
the attendant to the deity. Kanhai, before
starting his daily work, washes the deity,
decorates it with vermilion and flowers and
offers food given by the villagers. Clay
animals are presented. It is believed that the
deity rides them during the night and goes
from place to place guarding the village.
Mahlia Buddha was donated to the village
by the barber's great-great-great-
grandmother, so only his family has the
right to attend to the deity. In the old days
Mahlia Buddha had a special power to cure
smallpox and cholera. Now, although
modern medicines have brought the
epidemics under control, the power of the
deity has not diminished. People believe in
him and worship him for everything, even
for modern medicines to be effective.
Religious festivals provide entertain¬
ment. There is one almost every month. The
most enjoyable is the Spring festival of Holi
when people throw coloured powder and
water on each other as an expression of
love. As the cuckoo sings, hidden among
the mango blossoms, the villagers carry
Gopinath (Krishna) in a palanquin around
the village accompanied by musicians.
There is no television, but some villagers
have radios. Listening to film music is
popular. Snake charmers, acrobats, pup¬
peteers and wandering singers come visiting
during the dry season. A wave of excite¬
ment goes through the children when they
arrive.
Every villager has a jatak (horoscope)
which is also the birth certificate inscribed
on a palm leaf by Dharani Naik, the village
astrologer. He is consulted for
everythingif the planets are favourable
and the auspicious days for starting a
journey. There is a saying in Oriya, "Tues¬
day night, Wednesday morning, wherever
you go you receive good luck".
People believe in karma (fate) and the
12
cycle of rebirth. This helps them to accept
their situation. Padan is the only dwarf in
the village and is popular, despite his
disability. He is twenty-seven and runs a tea
stall in the market place. He recently mar¬
ried another dwarf from a distant village.
Padan believes he is a dwarf in this life
because of his actions in a previous
incarnation.
The houses are built of mud walls and
thatched roofs with a central courtyard
which is private and provides shelter from
the sun. Every house has an altar with a
tulashi plant (sacred basil). This herb is so
valuable for its medicinal properties that it
is worshipped as a goddess.
The villagers decorate the walls and
floors of their houses with rice paste for
festivals and ceremonies. The lotus is the
main symbol. At the harvest festival it is
painted with stylized footprints to welcome
Lakshmi, the Goddess of Wealth.
Marriages are arranged by parents and
the bride and bridegroom must belong to
the same caste. The horoscopes are shown
to the astrologer, who draws diagrams and
forecasts their compatibility. The girl's
father has to give a dowry, although it is
forbidden by law. The bride must be a
virgin.
The role of a woman in Nanpur is that of
a mother. A house is not a home without a
child. People live in joint families and fami¬
ly life is strong. She has the responsibility of
managing the household. If she does it well
.and brings prosperity, she is compared with
Lakshmi, but if she destroys its unity she is
compared to Kali, the Goddess of Destruc¬
tion. But her duty is not complete until she
has produced a son, essential for the family
to continue.
The women in Nanpur worship Satyapir,
a Hindu-Muslim god, to bless them with
sons. "Satya" is the Hindu part meaning
"truth", and "pir" in Islam means "pro¬
phet". It was a deliberate attempt to bring
the two communities together through
religion. There is a large Muslim settlement
three kilometres from Nanpur and in a
village on the other side of the river a single
Muslim family lives surrounded by
Brahmins. In spite of Hindu-Muslim ten-
These village girls
are among the
thousands of pil¬
grims who flock
from the surround¬
ing countryside to
the annual religious
fair at Pushkar, a
town, lake and pil¬
grimage centre in
India's Rajasthan
State. The princi¬
pal temple and lake
are dedicated to
the god Brahma.
Photo © Claude Sauvageot.
Paris

sions in other parts of India, the at¬
mosphere around the village has remained
peaceful.
A woman without a husband has no place
in the village. Widows are not allowed to re¬
marry. They lead very austere lives. When
their husbands die they break their glass
bangles and stop wearing the vermilion spot
on their foreheads. The attitude of the other
women makes them feel isolated. They are
not invited to take part in auspicious
ceremonies as it is considered they may
bring bad luck.
There is a great respect for education.
Children start going to school at the age of
four. This begins at the chatshali, the
nursery school, which is run by a villager on
his verandah. I remember my first day. I
took a plate containing rice, a coconut and
money and presented it to the teacher. He
blessed me by gently stroking my out¬
stretched hands with his cane. Then he took
my hand and with a piece of clay chalk
helped me to draw three circles on the mud
floor. They are Brahma, Vishnu and
Maheswar, the Hindu Trinity. Brahma, the
Creator, Vishnu the Preserver and
Maheswar, the Destroyer. The Oriya script
is round and practising these circles helps to
develop good handwriting. The children are
told stories to form their character to be
kind, noble and hospitable.
In my childhood there was no primary
school in Nanpur and I walked to the ad¬
joining village of Kusupur, over a mile
away. Now the villagers have built one
themselves without any government help.
The market plac
The school starts with a prayei acknowledg¬
ing the presence of God in nature. The
children sing, "Why should I be afraid of
telling the truth? Even if I have to die, I
must tell the truth. O God, please teach me
this. I need nothing else."
The villagers also built a high school at
Kusupur and the children took part in the
Curved contours of a grain silo dwarf nearby buildings in Bihar State, India, near the
border With Nepal. Photo © Claude Sauvageot. Pans
e in Nanpur.
construction of the building. A private col¬
lege has started in Balichandrapur.
The aim of education is to get an office
job, to work as a clerk sitting comfortably
under a fan. The system goes back to the
days of the British Raj. There is no
guidance for the choice of a career and there
is no social welfare scheme in India. Several
highly-educated young men sit at home do¬
ing nothing and become a burden to their
families.
The dignity of labour is not understood.
The educated feel it is inferior to do manual
work. A typical example is Rabi Jena, the
young son of a Harijan. His father has no
land and worked hard as a tenant farmer to
educate him. But he was unable to pass his
matriculation exam. He was desperately in
search of a job and a friend offered him one
at an officers' club in the steel town of
Rourkela. He worked as an attendant and
at times was required to clean dishes and
serve tea. He refused and left as he con¬
sidered it beneath his dignity. He is looking
for another job but there is mass unemploy¬
ment everywhere.
The staple food for the villagers is rice.
The poor eat it with spinach and the better-
off with dal, vegetables and fish, caught in
the local rivers and ponds. Occasionally
goat meat is eaten but it is a luxury. Eating
beef is unthinkable for a Hindu as cattle are
considered sacred. The cow is called "cow
mother" because the children drink her
milk, and the bull is holy because Lord
Shiva rides on him. Only oxen are used for
ploughing the fields and pulling carts.
The main crop is paddy (rice). It is
planted in June, just before the monsoon
and takes four months to grow. It is
harvested in November. A successful crop
13

brings happiness to the village.
There is no hospital in the village and the
nearest health centre is four miles away.
There is no ambulance service and patients
have to be carried there, whatever their con¬
dition. The consultation is free, but the
villagers have to buy their own medicines,
which are expensive. People complain that
they have to spend half a day to get only a
piece of paper, the prescription.
Young doctors are reluctant to work in
the villages because there is no money. But
Basant Jena is an exception. He is from
Cuttack, the nearest town. One had to walk
20 kilometres to the railway station and
there were two rivers to cross by boat. With
only two trains a day, if you missed one
there was a wait of twelve hours for the
next. But in 1968 a motor road cut across
the village to carry iron ore to the port of
Paradip, 96 kilometres away. For the first
time travel was made easy and the village
was connected with the outside world. But
the road has brought noise and pollution. I
am amazed how the villagers have got used
to it. When I was a child there was no noise
apart from the barking of a dog or the
I wanted to be a doctor to help the village
but could not get into medical school. By
chance I won a scholarship to study ar¬
chitecture in Bombay. That changed my
life.
The village has also changed. Electricity
has come. Epidemics are under control, but
there is no proper water supply or sanita¬
tion. Education has helped to break down
caste barriers. The member of parliament
for my village is a Harijan. Family sizes
have increased but food production has not
kept pace with it. Floods, droughts and
cyclones occur every year, causing suffering
Lotus symbol with styliz¬
ed foot-prints. At harvest
time the villagers of Nan¬
pur in eastern India paint
such designs to welcome
Lakshmi, the Goddess of
Wealth.
Drawing © Prafulla Mohanti,
Nanpur, India
Ujêê
Nanpur and after qualifying as a doctor
opened a surgery at Balichandrapur. He is
overwhelmed with the problems. He treats
hundreds of patients daily but feels
helpless. The illnesses are caused by pover¬
ty, which cannot be cured by medicines.
Many villagers turn to the quacks, who
combine modern medicines with
homeopathy and herbal remedies. Anyone
with a little knowledge can practise as a doc¬
tor and modern drugs are freely available
without prescription.
In my childhood the village was totally
isolated. It took one whole day to reach
14
howling of a jackal at night. The only other
noise was produced by the rhythmic
pounding of rice. That worried me when I
was preparing for my matriculation exams.
I told my mother and the pounding of the
rice stopped in my part of the village so that
I could concentrate on my studies.
Out of my twenty childhood friends, two
died of cholera, one died of typhoid, three
were disfigured by smallpox, five girls got
married and left the village, six boys went to
towns to find work. Only three stayed in the
village; one is unemployed and the other
two work as farmers.
and malnutrition. This year all three have
occurred in succession and the people who
were able to smile only last year have turned
into skeletons.
But in spite of poverty and suffering
there is a strong desire to survive and the
villagers have a natural dignity. Although
they feel a part of nature they know they
have no control over it. Acceptance brings
contentment.
Once I leave the village I want to go back
to it, its love, beauty and simplicity. Often
I wonder what will happen to it.
Prafulla Mohanti
