Communication
in the
service of man
INFORMATION has become a key
resource. The industrial society
whose hallmark has for long
been man's power over things and
over nature also seems to be on the
way to becoming what some have
called the information society,
characterized by an enormous in¬
crease in man's power to extend,
store and order his knowledge, to
produce information and disseminate
it instantaneously, and the capacity to
create organizations that encompass
all aspects of life in society. Informa¬
tion has always been a fundamental
element in human organization and
the cohesion of societies, and the in¬
formation revolution has far-reaching
consequences, in the more or less
long term, for social organization.
The close relationship between
communication and all types of
power, the importance of com¬
munication as a source of wealth, at
national and at world level, together
with the influence that it exerts on
the various societies and on inter¬
national relations, go a long way
towards explaining the scope and in¬
tensity of the debate on the subject.
At national level, the division of
responsibilities between the public
and private sectors, the place allot¬
ted to the press, broadcasting and
the cinema, the status of journalists
and other professional com¬
municators, the influence that they
exert in different ways and, in par-
This text has been extracted from "Communi¬
cation in the Service of Man", Major Pro¬
gramme III of Unesco's Medium-Term Plan
(1984-1989).
ticular, the impact of certain televised
and cinematographic messages and
publications, particularly on the
minds of inexperienced young peo¬
ple, are the subject of continual
discussion in many countries. The
same problems recur at international
level.
Modern telecommunication tech¬
nology enables those with access
thereto to broadcast messages which
can be received instantaneously
throughout the world. Thanks to
communications satellites, this is
already true of radio, and will soon be
so for television. However, the
electromagnetic spectrum still re¬
mains very unequally distributed,
and few countries have the means of
developing or even benefiting from
the appropriate technologies.
The impact that the messages
transmitted by this means can have
on mutual understanding between
peoples and between nations and on
the maintenance of peace is
undeniable. Clearly, then, the inter¬
national community cannot ignore
the problem of the content of these
messages, which are potentially of
the gravest significance for the
future development of peoples and
indeed of all mankind. This is why
mankind has always attached import¬
ance to the role that .the media play,
or can potentially play, in eliminating
prejudice and helping to bring about a
world where mutual understanding
will hasten the coming of peace and
the advent of societies that are more
just, more respectful of human
rights, and more concerned to do
away with ignorance, disease,
hunger and poverty.
The development of the cultural
and the communications industries
may encourage a dialogue serving to
promote better understanding bet¬
ween peoples and their cultures, but
it may also lead to serious forms of
cultural alienation if these industries
remain concentrated solely in certain
areas of the world, if the products
and the messages which they create
are typical only of certain cultures
and if the flow of these is a one-way
flow only. Clearly, it is vital that the
capacity to produce and disseminate
such products and messages should
be shared more fairly. It would seem
that a better balance should be
struck between those who produce
and export cultural products and pro¬
grammes and those who generally
have no choice but to receive them.
The problems generated by com¬
munication in the service of man are
closely linked to the rapid develop¬
ment of technologies for collecting,
storing, reproducing and disseminat¬
ing signs and images. The introduc¬
tion of information technology and
certain news transmission and dis¬
tribution techniques, the new sys¬
tems of reproduction, printing,
sound and audio-visual recording
and, above all, the wide dissemina¬
tion of some of these techniques
among the public are transforming
the industrial structures of com¬
munication and affecting all those in¬
volved therein; cable and satellite
transmission holds out new pros¬
pects, but also entails major changes
in the respective roles of the different
participants in the communication
process.

An instrument so versatile that its applications seem almost limitless, the computer is at the heart of the communications
revolution. In addition to developing telecommunications facilities, computers are today used by creative artists to com¬
pose and perform music, draw pictures, make designs (like the cover of this issue, detail above) and even write poems.
The rate at which technological
transformations are occurring in the
communication and information field
is so rapid that a continuous process
of catching up has become
necessary, making forward planning
and decision-taking increasingly dif¬
ficult, particularly in the case of
countries with limited resources.
While such transformations affect
first and foremost the production of
software and the manufacture of
equipment serving to transcribe and
record the messages, they have a
particular bearing on the processes
by which information and messages
are stored, transmitted and received.
Although the race to achieve
miniaturization, increased output
and a reduction in cost prices may
foster an increase in productivity, it
nevertheless makes for an ever more
rapid rate of obsolescence. The oldest
means of communication, such as
books and newspapers, are no longer
immune to such upheavals, which
may have very serious repercussions
for them. The transformations affec¬
ting the various aspects and forms
of communication manufacturing
methods, transmission and reception
processes and techniques can in¬
fluence not only the future of the
various media, but also, and more
radically, that of the written and
printed word. The formulation and
implementation of communication
and information policies matching
the requirements of the different
countries accordingly requires a per¬
manent command of scientific and
technological knowledge as well as
of economic and industrial practices.
Foremost of the prospects opened
up by the technological development
and increased potential of com¬
munication is its growing role as an
instrument of education and culture.
With the added value conferred upon
it as a medium of education, com¬
munication creates an international
environment that complements if not
competes with schooling, and
deprives the educational system of
the monopoly it has long held over
education, while itself becoming a
subject to be taught and studied. A
reciprocal relationship is thus emerg¬
ing between communication and
education, one that is undoubtedly
destined to develop, and that it is
vital to make both positive and fruit¬
ful, particularly within the context of
education conceived as a lifelong
enterprise and hence based on the
link between formal and non-formal
schooling, and designed to provide
everyone, throughout their lives,
with the chance to bring their
knowledge and know-how up to date
and to acquire new skills.
In the same way, a growing in¬
terdependence is emerging between
5

and culture. In
modern society, the communication
media are pre-eminent instruments
for the dissemination of culture, but
nevertheless pose serious threats to
the cultural identity of many peoples.
Increased access by the widest
possible public to the various media
of culture can be extensively
fostered by the mass communication
media, in particular through mass
production processes and tech¬
niques. The emergence of industrial
structures in the field of culture can,
of course, stimulate creativity and
facilitate the dissemination of
culture; at the same time, however,
it may give rise to serious problems
and real dangers for a whole range of
cultures.
The very etymology of the word
"media" indicates that they are
instruments for linking and, hence,
for bringing men closer together. But
in increasing the number of those
receiving the same message, the
media have often deprived in¬
dividuals of certain opportunities for
interpersonal communication, and
have thereby even created a gulf bet¬
ween them. They have thus in¬
troduced an imbalance into the
dialogue within societies, creating in¬
equalities between a minority engag¬
ed in transmitting messages and the
majority who are "on the receiving
end". Readers, listeners and viewers
are often mere passive receivers.
In many countries, machinery has
been set up to secure wider par¬
ticipation by the public in programm¬
ing and programme production, as
well as in media management. This
democratization of communication
takes various forms, according to the
circumstances. The development of
decentralized media can serve to
foster greater participation, in par¬
ticular in the field of rural com¬
munication and rural development,
and may enable underprivileged sec¬
tors of the public to receive more
abundant information emanating
from a wider range of sources and
better suited to their particular re¬
quirements; it may at the same time
offer them the chance to be not
merely passive receivers, and to
make their concerns and points of
view known.
The media lie at the heart of
various problems dealt with in
Unesco (literary and artistic creation,
protection of copyright and disse¬
mination of a wide range of works).
Making, as they do, extensive use of
intellectual and artistic works the
media provide intellectually creative
people and different types of artist
with enormous opportunities for
work and self-expression. They sti¬
mulate creativity as well as raising
the problem of the protection of
authors and the dissemination of
their works. In this respect, it seems
desirable to find a balance between
overprotection which might be
detrimental to the dissemination of
works of use to a wide public and
the abuses which might, conversely,
harm the artists.
Communication and information
have become major economic forces
of our time alike at national and inter¬
national levels. Representing as they
do an ever larger proportion of the
gross national product of the in¬
dustrialized countries, they con¬
stitute a dynamic sector that offers
considerable growth prospects and
hence new job opportunities. In a
single major industrialized country, it
has been calculated that in 1 982 the
communications market as a whole
already amounted to 21.3 thousand
million dollars, and that this market
should total 103.1 thousand million
dollars in 1990, that is, an increase
of 490 per cent in eight years. Com¬
munication is becoming the key ac¬
tivity in the most highly industrialized
countries, where already more than
half the working population is direct¬
ly or indirectly engaged in producing,
processing and distributing informa¬
tion. Communication and informa¬
tion have thus become the advanced
sector of the growing economy.
However, the situation is by no
means the same in all countries. The
huge disparities that exist at interna¬
tional level in the production and cir¬
culation of messages and pro¬
grammes is today a recognized fact.
In 1978, the developing countries,
representing 70 per cent of the
world's population, commanded on¬
ly a small fraction of the media of
Right, as part of a Unesco project in Mali, a group of men and
women who had neither used video equipment nor had even
seen television before were successfully trained to make
their own video programmes for use in support of the coun¬
try's Women's Literacy Programme.
Photo Jay Savulich (
6
1 Martha Stuart Communications, New York

communication: 22 per cent of book
titles published, 17 per cent of total
newspaper circulation, 9 per cent of
newsprint consumption, 27 per cent
of radio transmitters, 18 per cent of
radio receivers, 5 per cent of televi¬
sion transmitters and 12 per cent of
television receivers.
Far from diminishing, these dis¬
parities, which also affect certain in¬
dustrialized countries, have on the
contrary been constantly increasing
as technology has developed. Dis
parities between rural and urban areas
are also particularly marked throughout
the world.
Communication and information
may be regarded as the nervous
system of contemporary societies;
they play an essential role in
economic and social development,
and the present disparities in
capacities for communicating and
acceding to information serving to
promote progress, in particular scien¬
tific and technical information,
reflect the very serious inequalities
existing in the world between dif¬
ferent nations. In order to vanquish
poverty, to combat illiteracy, to in¬
crease their educational potential, to
master science and modern tech¬
nology, and to ensure the full flower¬
ing and enrichment of their own
cultures, the countries of the Third
World need to increase their capa¬
cities to create, disseminate, receive,
store and utilize information in ever
greater quantities.
7
