Memoirs
of Europe's
mainstream
by Friedrich Heer
its length. The flumen Danubius of the
Romans (who called its lower reaches the
Ister), it had previously been the river of
the Celts, as indicated by its name which
recalls that of a Celtic god.
The Donau of the Germans and the
Austrians, the Dunaj of the Slovaks, the
Duna of the Hungarians, the Dunav of
the Serbo-Croats, the Dunarea of the
Romanians, this sombre mother would
offer peoples a journey a journey to life
and trade, a journey to war and death.
With its abundantJjish it gave sustenance
to the fishermen who settled on its banks.
Some years ago traces of an ancient
culture were found on the shores of the
Danube in Bulgaria. Strange sculptures
depicted gods emerging from the river.
Gods of eternal life or gods of death?
Let us briefly follow the course of the
Danube from its birth in the mountains
until it is engulfed by the sea for, like life
itself, it is born, grows, and hastens to its
dissolution.
»>*;
=*
V

It is in the Black Forest, at Donaue-
schingen, an attractive town still unspoilt
by industrialization, that the river is first
called by its name. Here the Brigach, the
Breg and another stream unite. Not yet
laden with history and ships, it flows
smoothly and slowly, a small river that
will grow into a great one.
At Ulm the Danube becomes
navigable. For centuries, from the Mid¬
dle Ages onwards, flat-bottomed,
shallow-draught boats known as "Ulm
boxes" plied between Ulm and Vienna.
The Ulm Münster, one of the loveliest
German gothic towers, which still
delights the traveller's eye, is an opus
Francigenum, for it was the French who
created Gothic and introduced it to
Europe. At Ulm, too, there are echoes of
Descartes. It was here that the French
philosopher, who served as an officer in
the Imperial army, dreamed the great
dream of Reason, clear, alert and intran¬
sigent, which would earn him a place in
the history of universal thought.
Now the Danube threads its way
through rocks towards Sigmaringen. The
fortress of Sigmaringen is still inhabited
by descendants of the Hohenzollern-
Sigmaringen whose ancestors set out
from Nuremberg, riding as far as
Brandenburg, and Prussia where they
Above right, the
Danube at Budapest.
View of the left bank of
the river showing the
dome of the Parliament
building and the town
of Pest. In the
background, behind the
second bridge, can be
seen Margaret Island.
Photo © Almasy, Pans
The plant and animal
life of the Danube delta,
a large area of which
was designated as a
nature reserve in 1962,
is unique in Europe. The
many varieties of birds
to be found there in¬
clude Europe's larg¬
est concentration of
white pelicans (Pele-
canus onocrotalus).
Photo Cordier © Pitch, Paris
became masters of a State which now no
longer exists.
The first great city through which the
Danube flows is Regensburg a city of
great beauty (especially its centre). In the
Middle Ages it was already a town of im¬
portance whose missionaries and mer¬
chants found their way to eastern
Europe. It is a city of old churches,
venerable patrician houses, old inns that
serve fine food and wines. Here in its up¬
per course the Danube is swollen by
tributaries bringing melted snows from
the Alps the Hier, then the Isar, the
Bavarian river that flows through
Munich.
Then comes Passau, today on the
border between the Federal Republic of
Germany and Austria. Here, in the
"town of fat priests", in the sumptuous
chapter-house of the cathedral, the son
of the customs officer Alois Hitler receiv¬
ed his first youthful impressions. His
name is marked indelibly on the
memories of those who survived the great
massacre he unleashed on Europe.
No, the Danube is not harmless, just as
the great current of European history is
not harmless. For centuries a deadly
whirlpool caused by the wrecks of
countless ships which sank after running
on to a treacherous reef brought terror to
the stretch of the river between Linz and
Passau. A stream of death, a journey to
death, a journey to the dark east.
The medieval German epic The Song
of the Niebelung, which was written near
the Danube, evokes journeys in the dawn
of Latin western Europe, and sings of the
fatal journey to Etzel-Attila, king of the
Huns, the husband of Siegfried's widow
Kriemhild. She leads her people to death,
the monstrous revenge of a monstrous
woman. Because the churchman who ac¬
companies them on their journey down
the Danube foretells the fate which
awaits them, Hagen, Siegfried's
murderer, casts him in the river. Thus he
suffers the fate of a Cassandra, here
dressed in ecclesiastical robes, on the eve
of the Middle Ages during which pagan
survivals fused with a touch of Chris¬
tianity, a Christianity of the sword,
Christianity as it was understood by the
men and women of those times. Like the
Spanish poem El Cid and the French
Chanson de Roland, the Song of the
Niebelung was also destined to awaken a
national consciousness.
The Mekong
In the clear blue waters
The mirror image of the coconut palms
From the sea the steady susurration
Of waves that rock
Like the hammock of my infant days
Giang Nam
After Linz, the Danube flows through
the Wachau, its most romantic stretch. In
this land of ancient culture, it passes by
ruined castles and sunny slopes covered
by vineyards. It flows by Willendorf, site
of the discovery of the "Willendorf
Venus", a prehistoric statuette of a
mother-goddess venerated for thousands
of years throughout Europe and even
further east. Strindberg once stayed in
this district, and long before him, at the
time of the Crusades, Richard the
Lionheart was held prisoner in a castle
near Krems, a town once bigger than
Vienna, which still jealously guards its
old centre. On his, way back from the
Crusade, Richard was seized at
Schwechat, outside Vienna, and placed
in the custody of the Austrian Duke of
Babenberg. The bard Blondel sang the
praises of his master Richard Cceur-de-
Lion, the king of England who spoke
17

barely a word of English. That a valiant
knight, a subject of dispute between
Crusaders (when have there not been
disputes, quarrels and wars between our
fathers and our ancestors?) should be
taken prisoner on his return from the
Crusade, then constituted a European af¬
fair of state, a "scandal".
The Duke of Babenberg handed over
the King of England to the Emperor
against payment of a heavy ransom. It
would have been better for Richard had
he remained in the Wachau, drinking
good wine and enjoying the Danube sun.
English lords offered considerable sums
to the Emperor to obtain their king's
release.
The Zambezi
The quivering waters of the Zambezi
[river
Will bear on a silvery blanket your name
Leading it to the echoing of the sea.
Mazisi Kunene
Now, for the first time, the Danube
traverses open country. This is Moravia,
often a battle ground until Napoleonic
times. It was here, close to the Danube
and to Vienna, that the House of Austria
was born on a battlefield. It was also in
a castle near the Danube and Vienna that
Charles, the last Habsburg Emperor,
ended his days as Regent.
Vienna, the Vindobona of the
Romans, lay on the limes or fortified
frontier of the Roman Empire which
linked the Rhine and the Danube. The
limes separated Roman Europe from the
Europe of the Others, the "barbarians",
the peoples who finally struck deep into
the declining Empire, crossing the
Danube and driving their way to Byzan¬
tium, Constantinople, the golden city of
the Eastern Roman Empire. And to
Rome. Migrations of peoples have con¬
tinued into our own times, into the age of
the two world wars, which were initially
and essentially fratricidal European civil
wars.
Vienna does not lie on the blue Danube
of Johann Strauss. Here, the river is dark
and most often grey. It is much more at¬
tractive at Budapest, where it links the
two towns of Buda and Pest. Now it
becomes a t frontier between
Czechoslovakia, Austria, and Hungary,
between Yugoslavia and Romania, bet¬
ween Romania and the Soviet Union. It
becomes the great river of Eastern
Europe, enriched by many tributaries
the Tisza, the Sava, the Morava, the Jiu,
the Olt, the Dambovitsa, the Siret, the
Pruth and enters the Black Sea through
its delta, an island-studded aquatic
jungle.
As I look at the Danube from Vienna,
I see Soviet cargo ships sailing upstream
one after the other, many of which were
built at Linz or Klosterneuburg, near the
city. All of a sudden, there appears a
hovercraft coming from Budapest. It
provides the most rapid means of
transport between the two cities. Then
comes a cargo ship from Yugoslavia
from Belgrade, the "white city" that was
the scene of battles down the centuries,
against the Turks, the Hungarians, the
Germans, the Austrians, even during two
world wars.
Much blood has flowed down the
Danube, but today the river flows
peacefully through Western and Eastern
Europe, a link, a living bridge, between
the two fragments of our continent. As I
write these lines, tourists wave to me in
friendship from the deck of their ship
bound for the Black Sea.
Friedrich Heer
View of the Sulina channel, the only one of the three channels into which the Danube
splits at its delta that is navigable. Owing to the large quantity of silt deposited by the
River, the delta is extending seawards at a rate of some 30 metres annually.
18
