Computers and literacy
in traditional languages
by Robert W. Lawler in collaboration with
Mamadou Niang and Moussa Gning
As computers become increasingly common and less expensive in the in¬
dustrialized nations, many more countries are entering the computer revolu¬
tion. This is a time ofdecision for a major issue: will uniformity or pluralism
be served by the technology of intelligent machines?
Computing machines are a malleable technology. Will that technology be
shaped to serve different human values with reason and sensitivity? Will it be
adapted so that it can be assimilated by the various, different cultures of the
world? Or will we see intelligent machines applied without the guidance of
human values? Will the technology be "transferred" from the industrialized
nations with more haste than understanding?
If one favours pluralism more than uniformity, it is important to ask how
the promise of the computer revolution can be shaped to fit various cultures
in a fashion congenial to the uniqueness of each. The transfer of ideas is more
important than the transfer ofmachines. We explore the adaptation of a com¬
puter application idea by describing in detail work I did with my daughter in
the United States and how colleaguesfrom Senegal are trying to make use of it.
MICROCOMPUTERS are pouring into homes and
schools in the industrialized countries and will
soon be flooding the world. It is hardly too soon
to wonder what effects computers are likely to have on our
children. Will computers change the way children learn? Will
computers change the sorts of people children become? I
believe the answers may well be yes, and although it is too
early for conclusive proof, I can offer here a story that sup¬
ports my belief.
I have worked in the computer industry for sixteen years,
and when my children were born I became interested in the
potential impact of early computer experiences on children's
learning. Several years ago, in collaboration with a computer
language project at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, I began an intensive study of how daily access
to a computer influenced the way my two older children
then aged six and eightlearned the basics of arithmetic. By
the time their younger sister Peggy turned three, a microcom¬
puter had become standard equipment in our household, and
I began to develop several programs to give Peggy access to
the machine. Playing with these programs in her own way
and on her own initiative over the following months, Peggy
began to do something that looks very much like the beginn¬
ings of reading and writing.
What is it really like to bring a microcomputer in your
home and let your three-year-old play with it? The answer
depends on who you are, your knowledge and values. The
ROBERT LAWLER, of the USA, is acognitive psychologist and engi¬
neer at the Centre Mondial Informatique et Ressources Humaines (World
Centre for Computation and Human Development), Paris.
MAMADOU NIANG and MOUSSA GNING, of Senegal, are teachers
at the experimental school of the Ecole Normale Supérieure, Dakar.
This article draws widely on material previously published in the Boston
Review.
18
computer entered my home and my family life because it is
a part of my work. It was my pleasure to write some simple
programs for my daughter's entertainment and edification.
My interests in children and computers led me to gather a
great deal of information about what Peggy knew before her
first encounter with the computer and afterwards. Between
her ages of three years three months and three years ten
months, Peggy began to read and write. The following
sketch of how this happened is based on my own observation
of only one child's learning; it is fair to say, however, that
I have an enormous amount of detailed information about
what this particular child knew and how that knowledge
Peggy adding a truck.

changed over a long period of time. I believe this sketch will
be of general interest because Peggy's story provides some
advance information about how computer experience may
affect our children.
In the USA children typically learn to read around the age
of six. Most learn to read at school. A few teach themselves
to read earlier. Peggy, at the age of three, even living in a
bookish family, did not know how to read in any substantial
sense before her computer experience. Her knowledge of let¬
ters at three years, three months was quite specific and
limited. She recognized only a few letters as distinct symbols
with any meaning. For example, she knew that "P" was the
first letter of her name. She also recognized "G" as the
"mummy letter" because her mother's name is Gretchen.
What was Peggy's knowledge of spelling like? One inci¬
dent gave me some inkling. My oldest daughter was learning
a bit of French: one day Peggy claimed that she knew how
to "spell French^ and continued, "un, deux, trois, quatre,
Peggy adding a house.
cinq." At another time her spelling of "French" was "woof
boogie jig." Peggy saw the process of spelling as decompos¬
ing a meaningful word into a string of essentially mean¬
ingless symbols and had not yet learned any of the standard
spellings of words.
Peggy's ability and willingness to identify a string of sym¬
bols as a particular word came from a very specific beginn¬
ing. After receiving a gift book from her older sister (who
then wrote Peggy Lawler on the flyleaf), Peggy interpreted
all small clusters of alphabetic symbols as "Peggy Lawler."
At a later point in time, as a consequence of being often read
to, she became able to recognize a single, two letter word,
"by", which appeared on the title page of every book we
read to her. There is no reason to believe she had any idea
of what "by" might mean in that context. Her knowledge of
reading as a process for interpreting graphic material is best
seen in her common observation that she read Pictures and
I read Words. From her remark, we can infer she would
"read" by inventing a story based on her best speculation
about the pictures' meaning. She assumed that I was doing
"There it is.
the same with words. Not a bad assumption, but completely
empty of any information about how written words signify
as they do.
Contrast now her knowledge seven months later. Her
knowledge of letters is essentially complete, in that she
discriminates the 26 letters of the alphabet and can name
them. Her knowledge of words, in the sense of interpreting
them one at a time, is significantly greater. She reads more
than 20 words, most with complete dependability. But
unlike children who have learned to read and write by con¬
ventional means, she sees the spelling of words as stepwise
directions for keying a name into the computer. Although
her general idea of what book reading is may not have chang¬
ed, she has a different and powerful idea of what reading
single words means that derives directly from her experience
with my computer programs. Peggy's introduction to com¬
puters did not relate directly to "reading" in terms of con¬
tent, but her desire to control the machine led her into keying
on the computer her first "written" word. Having helped
load programs by pushing buttons on a cassette tape
recorder, one day on her own Peggy typed "LO" on the ter¬
minal then came seeking direction as to what letter came
next. A few days later, she typed the "load" command while
the rest of the family was busy elsewhere.
I call the computer environments created by the programs
I have written "microworlds" , following the terminology us¬
ed by Seymour Papert, the man chiefly responsible for the
development of the "LOGO" computer language, in his
book Mindstorms*. The initial microworlds were one for
moving coloured blocks around on the video display screen
and another (made for her older sister but taken over by
Peggy) which created designs by moving a coloured cursor.
While her sister used this drawing program to make designs,
Peggy's first drawing was a large box which she immediate¬
ly converted into a letter "P" by adding the stem. Letters in¬
trigued Peggy. They were a source of power she didn't
understand.
* Mindstorms : Children, Computers and Powerful Ideas, by Seymour
Papert. Basic Books, New York, 1980.
19

A few days later, Peggy keyed the letter "A" and explain¬
ed to me that "A is for apple." Her comment suggested a
way we could on the computer make a new kind of pre-
readers' ABC book. A child's book of ABC's typically offers
a collection of engaging pictures displayed in alphabetic
order with a large, printed letter associated with each picture.
The child looks at the pictures and is informed "A is for ap¬
ple." The relationship of letters to pictures is exactly the op¬
posite in the ABC microworld. The letter is the "key" for ac¬
cessing the picture. That is, keying the letter "D" produces
a picture of a dog.- Instead of responding to a statement such
as "See the doggie. D is for dog," Peggy was able to try any
letter on the keyboard, first, to see what it got her, and later,
if the picture interested her, to inquire what was the letter's
name. She was in control of her own learning. She could
learn WHAT she wanted, WHEN she wanted to, and could
ask for advice or information when SHE decided she
WANTED it. The ABC microworld was tailor-made for
Peggy. The shapes were selected and created on the computer
by Peggy's older sister and brother, aged ten and twelve. As
a consequence of playing with the ABC microworld and
with another to which we now turnPeggy developed a
stable and congenial familiarity with the letters of the
alphabet.
More complex and interesting than the ABC microworld,
the BEACH microworld provides a backdrop for action.
Waves and a beach in the foreground, with grass above, rise
to a road, more grass, and clouds at the top. Against that
backdrop, Peggy could create a small picture of an object by
specifying a procedure name, then manipulate the picture
with commanding procedures. Peggy typically began con¬
structing a scene with the word SUN. A yellow circle would
appear in the waves. She would raise it to the sky by keying
the word UP repeatedly, change its colour or set it in motion
with another word, and go on to other objects. She could,
for example, make a CAR image appear by keying that
word, change its location with commands UP, DOWN,
MOVE, and specify its heading and velocity with TURN,
SLOW, FAST, FASTER, and HALT.
These microworlds were created using Logo, an easily
comprehensible computer language which permits you to
assign meaning to any string of letters by writing simple pro¬
cedures. Logo's procedure definition was especially valuable
in customizing the BEACH world. When Peggy first used
BEACH, she was unhappy with the speed of the objects and
asked, "How can I make them zoom, Daddy?" Nothing was
easier than to create a new Logo word, ZOOM, which set the
velocity of the object with a single primitive command. In a
further instance, Peggy's older sister made a horse-and-rider
design and wrote a PONY procedure to create an object with
a horse-and-rider design and set it in motion. After watching
her sister edit that shape design, Peggy imitated the specific
commands to create her own new shape. (She could not well
control the design and ended with a collection of perpen¬
dicular lines. Asked what it was, she first replied "A pony,"
then later, "Something important.") It is very likely that
primary grade children could create their own designs and
would copy and alter procedures to expand or personalize
the vocabulary of BEACH-like microworlds.
As a direct consequence of playing with the BEACH
world, Peggy learned to "read" approximately twenty
words. Initially, she keyed names and commands, copying
them letter by letter from a set of cards. Soon, her favourite
words were keyed from memory. Less familiar words she
could locate by searching through the pile of cards. When her
mood was exploratory, she would try unfamiliar words if she
encountered them, by chance. Now, when shown those
wordson the original cards or printed otherwheres she
recognizes the pattern of letters and associates it with the ap¬
propriate vocal expression. Further, the words are mean¬
ingful to her. She knows what they represent, either objects
or actions.
20
Computer
microworlds
Above, the "beach microworld" created by
Robert Lawler for his daughter Peggy and (right)
the "village microworld" created by Mamadou
Niang, Moussa Gning and Robert Lawler for the
pupils of the Experimental School of the Ecole
Normale Supérieure, Dakar, Senegal (bottom
right). The microworlds are computer en¬
vironments which children quickly learn to
manipulate and to which they can add images of
their own creation. Computers are adaptable
tools, but it is vital that the software devised for
them be shaped to take into account differing
human values and needs. In the particular case
of the Senegalese village microworld the soft¬
ware has been adapted to embrace Wolof , one
of the traditional languages of Senegal. The
meanings of the Wolof words that appear In the
photos are:/anf = sun; fas = horse; doxal= walk
or go; awyong= aeroplane; nit= person;
asamaan = 'm the sky; weneeku = turn; and,
yeeg = up.
Photos @ Robert Lawier, Parts
Robert Mohl, Paris

In the past, words for reading have always been an
alphabetic symbol for an idea to be evoked in the mind. For
Peggy, words are that but something else as wella set of
directions for specifying how to key a computer command.
What is strikingly different in this new word-concept, as con¬
trasted with quasi-phonetic decoding, is that the child and
computer together decode a letter string from a printed word
to a procedure which the computer executes and whose
significance the child can appreciate. Finally, because the
computer can interpret specific words the child does not yet
know, she can learn from the computer through her self-
directed explorations and experiments.
The basic lesson I draw from this story is NOT merely
about "motivation"although Peggy did enjoy playing
with these microworlds and learned from doing so. There is
a more revolutionary aspect, one paradoxical as well. This
new technology can make possible a more "natural" absorp¬
tion of knowledge. The character of words experienced as ex¬
ecutable procedure names brought Peggy into a new rela¬
tionship with language, one different from what has been
characteristic of learning to read in the past.
Learning to read from print is necessarily a passive process
for the child. Words on the page stand for other people's
meanings. Until children start to write, they can't use written
words for their own purposes. Microcomputers put reading
and writing together from the start. A word that Peggy can
read is also one she can use to produce on the computer ef¬
fects that interest her. For Peggy, learning the alphabetic
language has become more like every infant's learning of the
vocal language. Speaking is powerful for the infant, even for
one who commands but a few words, when a responsive per¬
son listens. Likewise, the production of alphabetic
symbols even one letter and one word at a time can
become powerful for the young child when computer micro-
worlds provide a patient, responsive intelligence to interpret
them.
Since speech is natural to man in all the various cultures
of our world, it is reasonable to ask whether the most general
and powerful elements in Peggy's experience with writing
can be adapted for use in cultures other than the one to which
she is native. If computer technology could make learning to
read and write more like learning to speak and understand,
it would be capable of changing profoundly the intellectual
character of the world in which we all live.
The essential power available through the Logo computer
language is that a word, any string of symbols, can be given
a function. For example, the word "SUN" can cause the ex¬
ecution of a computer procedure which produces a graphic
image representing the sun. Because both the spelling of a
word and the meaning given to it are assigned through
writing a procedure, the words of computer microworlds are
independent of the "natural" language of the programmer.
For example, the same procedure which creates the "SUN"
could be given the name "SOLEIL" (French) or "JANT"
(Wolof)- Although computer, words may be language-
independent, anything made for use by people is culturally
bound. Only people who share the same cultural experiences
can know which objects and actions within a culture will be
congenial to the children and will relate to the kind of homely
experience which is close to their hearts and will continue to
engage them in learning and loving learning.
The people who should determine what computer ex¬
periences are offered to children should be the children
themselves, their parents or their teachers or others who
are close to the children and share their experiences
hopefully, sensitive, caring instructors with a progressive
commitment to what is best for the children they love. Com¬
puters and their languages should be accessible to such peo¬
ple, easy for them to use as a casual, creative medium. If they
are not so, the children of the world will not be properly
served.
21

One lucky day, Peggy and I showed her BEACH
microworld to two such men, Mamadou Niang and Moussa
Gning. These gentlemen, Senegalese teachers who had come
the New York Logo Center for an introduction to computers
and the Logo programming language, were engaged by these
microworlds I had made for my daughter. . They told me
that the Senegalese people are much concerned with the issue
of literacy and hoped that computers could make learning
the written word more congenial to the children of their na¬
tion. Their colleague and technical adviser, Mme Sylla
Fatimata, later explained the importance computers could
have to their children in this way.
The children of Senegal typically live in a personal, warm
family setting until they are of school age. At home, they live
and grow in the culture of their traditional languages, such
as Wolof. At school age, they go off to a cold and impersonal
place where all the language and all the lessons are French.
Some children survive and thrive there, but many are ter¬
rified and refuse to learn. For them, learning in school means
alienation from the people they love, and they reject that
alienation even though they are encouraged to adopt it.
French is the dominant language through which the
Senegalese deal with the exterior world. It is the language of
opportunity within the government and commerce. Further,
it is the language which has dominated the schools and con¬
tinues to do so. The Senegalese intend to protect and advance
their traditional languages by turning the tide of modern
technology to their own use, specifically by developing
literacy in Wolof among their children. Although Wolof has
been written in an extended Roman alphabet for more
than a hundred years, only during the last decade has the
transcription of the language become standardized
throughout the country. Consequently, and ironically, many
learned people of their land, literate in French and even
Arabic, are illiterate in their traditional language, the
language they use in their homes and in conversation with
their African colleagues at work.
Wanting to change this situation, the Senegalese believe
they might better create programs for computer use in Wolof
than in French or in the language of whoever makes the
machines, and they have good reasons. Because there exists
now no rigid "curriculum" for computer education in
French, and because they have not invested years in teacher
training in French language computer instruction, they im¬
agine correctly that this new technology has a revolutionary
potential which can be used to support their traditional
language and culture if they but seize the opportunity.
With others of the Senegal Microcomputer Project,
Mamadou Niang and Moussa Gning came to extend their in¬
troduction to Logo in Parisat the World Center for Com¬
putation and Human Development. Because there is no bet¬
ter way to learn how to use a computer language than to use
it for some significant purpose, I offered Mamadou this
challenge, "You imagine some such microworld for the
children of Senegal, and I will help you make it; let's work
together to make something your young students will love."
Mamadou noted that, of course, there are beaches in Senegal
and the great city of Dakar, but that since an objective of
their work was to appeal to all the children of Senegal, it
would be more appropriate to think of images of the coun¬
tryside. He proposed a village backdrop, with some small
buildings and a well. To enliven such a scene, one would need
people and the animals of the country life, perhaps a cat,
horses, cows and so on. We agreed to make only a few ob¬
jects, and thereby leave for the children the pleasure of crea¬
tion; we would let them decide what they wanted in their
worldand provide the tools for them to make it.
Since we come from cultures so much apart, it is ap¬
propriate to comment on our way of working together. We
laboured to share ideas. Our working tongue, our lingua
franca, was French: after all, in Paris tout le monde parle
22
français. Mamadou and Moussa spoke French much better
than I did. I was grateful that they would tolerate my poor
French so that we could work together. The computer we us¬
ed was an English language Logo computer. When they suc¬
ceeded in helping me understand their objectives, I would
propose and demonstrate programming capabilities and
techniques to embody what Mamadou wanted in the
microworld. In a kind of "pidgin" language, French,
English, computerese, they began to program with my
guidance a little scene, some designs of objects to fit in that
scene, and some computer procedures to control their ap¬
pearance and actions.
When we had created a scene with a number of French
language procedure names-^when we had the conceptual ob¬
jects of this world more or less under controlwe began to
discuss using Wolof. This is where Moussa played a most
significant role. As the leading primary-grade pedagogue for
Wolof instruction in Senegal, he was able with confidence to
assign definitive spellings to the procedure names we used to
create and manipulate the objects of our village microworld.
(Sometimes this involved consultation with the others of the
Senegalese delegation, including the linguist, Pathé Diagne.)
Because the Logo language permits any string of
"keyable" symbols to be the name of a procedure, we were
able to convert French-named procedures such as
"SOLEIL" and "MARCHE" to their Wolof equivalents,
"JANT" and "DOXAL" (the "X" is pronounced as in
Spanish). Thus we arrived at the assembly of procedures and
designs capable of producing the village microworld,
"XEW". (The sound of the name "XEW", meaning
"scene", begins with the Spanish "X" and rhymes with the
Photo © Robert Mohl, Pans
English "HOW".)
If the village microworld seems bare and crude, there is
good reason. It was not made to impress programmers or
civil servants. It is less a product than a project with a few
examples of what is possible. This world is one to be created
by the children of Senegal. Why should I tell them what they
want? Why should even their teachers tell them what
creatures and people to put in the worlds of their
imaginations?
It was Mamadou who best expressed the right way of view¬
ing the village microworld. When I said that the design of
"FAS" was incredible, looked ever so little like a horse, he
replied, "I'm sure the children will make a better one."
After their introduction to Logothrough the adaptation

of ideas for their country my colleagues have returned to
Senegal to begin a pilot project with children in the ex¬
perimental classes of the Ecole Normale Supérieure. The
first of the ideas that have been important in progress to this
point was the adoption of Logo as their preferred computer
language. Choosing Logo was important because Logo per¬
mits the definition of new computer procedures and because
the language is both powerful and accessible. The second is
the commitment to congeniality, to adapting ideas to max¬
imize their applicability in terms of their own culture. This
is the dimension where accessibility of the programming
language to amateurs is important. Parents, teachers, and
older children may know best what children will accept and
love to learn.
The progress of the project in Senegal depends on
understanding and extending studies now underway at the
Ecole Normale Supérieure in Dakar. It also depends on the
availability of suitable computer equipment. Their brave ex¬
periment could be one of the most important in the world;
it deserves watching and support.
Robert Lawler, Mamadou Niang and Moussa Gning
The SenegalMicrocomputer Project is supported by the World Cen¬
trefor Computation and Human Development, Paris. The partici¬
pation of Senegal was at the inspiration of Leopold Senghor and
progresses with the continuing support of Jacques Diouf, Minister
ofScience and Technology, and Professors Bouna Gaye andMoha-
madou Diallo ofthe Ecole Normale Supérieure. The Logoprogram¬
ming language was developed by Seymour Papert and colleagues at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and around the world.
23
