V. Education, training
and society
EDUCATION has its specific characteristics and its own
requirements. It is not, however, independent of society '
as a whole which in large part determines its nature. But
education itself is by no means passive; to a great extent it con¬
ditions the evolution and hence the future of society. It is
becoming more and more receptive towards the contemporary
world and is increasingly orientated towards the solution of
practical problems. Education alone cannot offer a solution to
all problems, but it can supply the knowledge needed to under¬
stand and solve them and arouse the attitudes and will that lead
to action and results. Education can thus contribute to the solu¬
tion of the major problems facing mankind, such as peace,
human rights, development and the environment. Furthermore,
special importance should be attached to the relationship bet¬
ween education and certain other aspects of social activity.
Education and culture
The function and content of education bear a direct relation
to culture. In many countries, and particularly in those which
have recently gained independence, the assertion of cultural
identity is clearly an essential means of civic training and a
powerful factor in national cohesion. Education can help to
restore a country's cultural heritage to its rightful place in all the
wealth of its forms of expression, to bring out the distinctive
characteristics of each culture. But education must do more: it
must ensure the emergence of a modern humanism which
couples certain traditional values with a number of new values
that carry within them the seeds of progress. Concern to
strengthen cultural identity coupled with concern for efficien¬
cy of teaching has in recent years produced in many countries,
in particular those which have recently gained independence, a
tendency to use the mother tongues or national languages as
languages of instruction. Unesco will encourage this trend.
The mass media a "parallel school"?
During the last few years the mass communication media
have had a growing impact on adults, as they have on children
to the point where people speak of the "parallel school", a
source of possible divergence from the educational institution.
The question that arises is whether education can turn to good
account the increasing flow of information and messages emit¬
ted by society and at the same time help to counter, where
necessary, the negative influences they may have on outlook
and behaviour among teenagers. It might henceforth be one of
the essential functions of educational institutions to help young
people to bring their critical faculty to bear in selecting and sor¬
ting the messages spread abroad by the communication media.
Teaching of science and technology
Unesco will aim to make the teaching of science and
technology the general practice at all levels and in all types of
education and to promote the popularization of science, par¬
ticularly in the developing countries.
A special effort will be made to expand and improve the
teaching of science and technology at the primary and secon¬
dary levels and in out-of-school education by laying greater em¬
phasis on the understanding of scientific concepts, observation,
experiment and guidance towards the solution of practical
problems. The content of this science and technology teaching
should be in keeping with the latest advances in scientific
research and technological innovation and take into account the
characteristics of the local environment.
Education and the world of work
In recent years the concern to bring education closer to life
has led many educators to emphasize the need to strengthen
liaison between education and the world of work. A series of ac¬
tivities is envisaged to encourage the introduction of productive
or socially useful work into the educational process, because of
its pedagogical, ethical and social value; bringing educational
policies and employment policies into line with each other; the
development and improvement of technical and vocational
training. These activities will tend to modify young people's at¬
titudes towards work, to develop vocational guidance, to pro¬
mote better working links between general education, technical
education and the world of work and to eliminate the age-old
rift between manual and intellectual work.
Physical education and sport
The practice of physical education and sport is not
guaranteed everywhere as a fundamental right for all. The con¬
ditions of modern life, however, and increasing urbanization
and mechanization mean that physical activities are essential to
the development of a complete personality and to the preserva¬
tion of health. In many countries, more than half the popula¬
tion currently practise no sport and 80 per cent of children in
developing countries receive no physical education at all. The
Properly used, modern developments
in communication technology hold im¬
mense promise in the field of educa¬
tion. The "parallel school" of educa¬
tional programmes broadcast on radio
and television can reach the remotest
village and hamlet, ending centuries of
educational deprivation. Right, even
the inhabitants of this underground
dwelling at Matmata, Tunisia, can
benefit from the "television
explosion".
Photo © André Stevens, Winksele, Belgium
16
~* *

activities envisaged will contribute to the training of personnel,
the provision of the necessary equipment and the development
of sport for all, as well as the strengthening of co-operation bet¬
ween Member States, non-governmental organizations and
youth movements.
Higher education, training and research
The very great disparities in access to education, especially
higher education, and the inequalities in the development of
education that exist between countries and within one and the
same country are reflected in uneven access to knowledge and
inequalities in the possession of potential to create knowledge.
A score of industrialized countries share more than 90 per cent
of the world's scientists; the rest are distributed among some
130 countries. Without sound higher education no modern
State can hope to train its managerial personnel or play its part
in the international research effort. The role played by higher
education in development has been more and more clearly
perceived and this explains the interest Member States attach to
its expansion and improvement, as well as international co¬
operation in this field.
The activities envisaged are aimed at improving the contribu¬
tion of higher education to the advancement of society, par¬
ticularly by the expansion and reorientation of training courses
and by adopting interdisciplinary approaches to research and
training. The research and training tasks of higher education
with a view to improving the education system as a whole will
be emphasized.
Furthermore, higher education is considered to be a key ele¬
ment in the whole national training and research system in the
perspective of a long-term action to encourage, step by step, the
harmonization and then the integration of training and research
activities.
Above, an adult literacy class in Senegal where instruc¬
tion is given in six of the country's national languages.
During the colonial era millions of children and adults
were handicapped by receiving all their instruction in an
alien language. Today, educators throughout the world
are becoming increasingly aware that the use of mother
tongues or national languages as the language of instruc¬
tion results both in more effective teaching and in a
strengthening of cultural identity and national cohesion.
Photo Unesco - BREDA, Dakar

