A golden treasury
of manuscripts
Á,
0\ " rr
TpaMOTHbid TBOft ¿lour oóywb HerpanoTHbix!
""- 	
Published in Tashkent, in 1920, at the start of a literacy cam¬
paign, this poster bears the message, in Uzbek and Russian: "It
is the duty of those who are educated to teach the illiterate to
read and write".
by Muzaffar Khayrullaev
IN the history of the East, central
Asia and its citiesBukhara,
Samarkand, Khiva, Tashkent,
Urgench and Termez are renowned as
centres of an ancient civilization.
The region, which in Antiquity lay on
the Silk Road and was in the Middle Ages
MUZAFFAR KHAYRULLAEV is director of
the Abu Rayhan al-Biruni Institute of Oriental
Studies, Tashkent. He is a corresponding member
ofthe Academy ofSciences ofthe Uzbek SSR and
the author of many scientific publications.
one of the most highly developed and"
prosperous parts of the Arab caliphate,
was for centuries involved in exchanges
with other peoples. Among the great
achievements of the culture that was born
of this process are architectural
monuments, works of popular crafts¬
manship, and also a heritage of il¬
luminated manuscripts.
In Uzbekistan many of these
manuscripts have been preserved, either
in city libraries or in private hands. The
State provides for the restoration and
conservation of the documents, which
27

are gradually being concentrated in the
Institute of Manuscripts of the Academy
of Sciences. However, the richest collec¬
tion is that of the Abu Rayhan al-Biruni
Institute of Oriental Studies.
At present the Institute's manuscript
holdings amount to more than 18,000
volumes containing over 40,000 works,
as well as a considerable collection of
deeds and official documents evoking the
grandeur and decline of the feudal States
of central Asia.
The manuscripts cover a period of
almost a thousand years from the mid-
tenth to the early twentieth centuries and
an area ranging from the Near East to
northern India, Iran, the Arab countries
and the Maghreb.
For the most part, the texts are in
languages which were common in the
Muslim East during the Middle Ages:
Arabic, Persian and various Turkic
languages. Urdu and Pushtu are also
represented.
Thematically, the manuscripts encom¬
pass virtually all the domains of medieval
written culture the natural and exact
sciences, the humanities (history, poetics
and philology), literature, music, ar¬
chitecture and philosophy. Some are
devoted to Islamic themes: the Qur'an,
the Qur'anic sciences, the hadith,
jurisprudence, Sufism, and other cur¬
rents of Islamic thought. Others are con¬
cerned with various crafts, with
agriculture, commerce, and with subjects
related to construction. There are many
dictionaries, encyclopaedias, glossaries
and other works of reference.
Some of the manuscripts are unique,
either because copies are to be found
nowhere else in the world's archives,
because they constitute the most com¬
plete example of a given text, because no
earlier version exists, or because as works
of art they have no equal.
One outstanding example in the
Museum of the Peoples of Uzbekistan is
the seventh-century Qur'an of Uthman,
transcribed on parchment. A unique
specimen of the treatise on chemistry by
ar-Rhazes (ninth-tenth centuries)
discovered in the Institute of Oriental
Studies is a valuable source of knowledge
concerning research in the natural
sciences in the medieval East.
The Institute also contains several
works by the great Ibn Sina (Avicenna,
tenth-eleventh centuries), notably several
pages from his Canon of Medicine, the
oldest of which dates from the thirteenth
century. There are many works by Al-
Biruni (tenth-eleventh centuries) the most
precious being a copy of his en¬
cyclopaedic work "The Book of
Understanding of the Elements of
Astrology" which deals with matters
related to astronomy, mathematics,
geodesy and other subjects. The
manuscript dates from the thirteenth cen¬
tury and is considered to be one of the
oldest transcriptions of this text.
A unique seventeenth-century volume
entitled "Collected Writings of Wise
Men" contains 107 treatises by the great
thinkers and scholars of Antiquity and
the Middle Ages: Aristotle, Plato and
Galen among the Greeks; Al-Kindi, Ibn
28
Rushd (Averroes) and Ibn Badzh among
the Arabs; Farabi and Ibn Sina from cen¬
tral Asia; Bakhmaniar from Azerbaijan;
and many others. These documents
create a complex picture of the intellec¬
tual inquiry and philosophical systems of
the great minds of the past. The
manuscript was written in Damascus,
doubtless by an amateur of philosophy
who devoted much of his time to collec¬
ting philosophical works.
In the Middle Ages literature and
especially poetry constituted the most
widespread and popular form of express¬
ing spiritual and emotional experience.
They were also, especially in the hands of
the great masters of verbal expression, a
means of transmitting popular wisdom,
ding musician who introduced many in¬
novations into Indian music and is con¬
sidered to have invented the sitar. He
wrote on many subjects but he was most
famous of all in India for the songs which
he wrote in the Hindi vernacular. The
copy in the Institute's possession is par¬
ticularly valuable because three of the
five poems were transcribed by the great
poet Hafiz (fourteenth century).
Another of the Institute's treasures is
an album containing original letters by
fifteenth-century scholars, poets and
writers compiled for the Uzbek poet and
statesman Ali Shir Navoi. It includes let¬
ters by the famous Abd al Rahman
Djami. These letters deal with the social,
economic and cultural life of Khorassan
Letter written by the
15th-century poet
Abd al-Rahman
Djami to the Uzbek
poet and statesman
Ali Shir Navoi. Djami
authenticated his
letter by signing
each sheet in the top
right hand corner.
r^ítiMe*
'JÓlrjl J.-tu,-
*>. s,
* * >, >-j
J** %
-77-
JE-»*
X, : >a~
~*-jJ>y¡,
"in
u j'j > .-»
ft
^i
¿te -i^í"
'
-~^^-t¿ -y »i
*Vr- . " *"" -
*- -
"
the historical experience, and reflection
on the meaning of existence.
The poetry of the medieval East is
represented in the Institute's archives by
the works of great artists of central Asia,
India, Iran, Afghanistan, Azerbaijan,
and the Arab countries. Examples in¬
clude a fourteenth-century copy of a
peom by Yusuf Balassagun entitled
"Knowledge, bringer of happiness".
The archives also contain a unique ex¬
ample of the Khamsah ("Pentology") by
the great fourteenth-century Indian poet
Amir Khusru. In the words of Jawaharlal
Nehru, Khusru was an outstanding poet
who wrote mainly in Persian but was also
a master of Sanskrit. He was an outstan-
and central Asia in the fifteenth century
and constitute an invaluable document
for the study of the history of the empire
of the Timurids.
Works by medieval historians are well
represented in the Institute's holdings.
They include a twenty-volume universal
history by Ibn al-Assiri and a history of
the ancient and medieval world by Ibn
Muhammad al-Djuwayni (thirteenth cen¬
tury). The pearl of the collection is an
early (fourteenth century) copy of a text
by Rashidaddin ibn Imadovla, who was
famous throughout the East. There are
also Uzbek translations of historical
works in Arabic and Persian, from the
seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries.

Examination time at the Miri-Arab
madrasah (Muslim school) at
Bokhara, Uzbekistan. The curriculum
of a madrasah is traditionally centred
on the Qur'an but, in addition to
Islamic theology and law, grammar,
literature, mathematics and some¬
times medicine are studied.
Below, one page from a manuscript
copy of The Book of Understanding of
the Elements of Astrology, an en¬
cyclopaedic work by the great scholar
and scientist Al-Biruni (973-1048)
which deals with subjects such as
astronomy, mathematics and geodesy.
Dating from the 13th century, this
manuscript is believed to be one of the
oldest existing transcriptions of Al-
Biruni's text.
Photo © V Seleznev, Moscow
Some of these manuscripts are
veritable works of art. Their pages are
embellished with brightly coloured orien¬
tal designs and illuminated with gold
paint, and the texts are executed in ex¬
quisite calligraphy. Works by the great
poets Firdusi, Nizami, Saadi, Navoi,
Amir Khusru, Hafiz and Dzhami are
decorated with miniatures of exceptional
artistic quality.
All these manuscripts, which relate to
different periods in the history of the
peoples of a vast region, constitute an
irreplaceable source of information
concerning the social, economic and
spiritual life of the peoples of the Near
and Middle East, of central Asia, India,
Afghanistan, Pakistan, and eastern
China.
Before the October Revolution of
1917, the department of Eastern
Manuscripts of the Tashkent Public
Library, whose archives formed the basis
of the collection now conserved by the
Al-Biruni Institute, possessed no more
than a few hundred works. Today the In¬
stitute's holdings are growing every year
thanks to subventions from the
Government.
There is also an active programme for
the exchange of microfilms with other
manuscript archives throughout the
world. The Institute already possesses
more than 3,000 microfilms. Each year it
receives hundreds of requests for
photocopies of rare texts from the United
States, the Federal Republic of Germany,
Afghanistan, the Arab countries, India,
Czechoslovakia, the United Kingdom,
and other countries. Research students
from many countries come to work at the
Institute.
In recent decades, the orientalists of
Uzbekistan have done much to place the
study of manuscripts on a more
systematic footing. Ten volumes of
manuscripts have already been published
and three more are in preparation. There
is also an ongoing programme for the
publication of catalogues of works by in¬
dividual thinkers and poets. Manuscripts
belonging to the Al-Biruni Institute also
formed the basis for the publication in
Russian and Uzbek for the first time of
Avicenna's Canon of Medicine, in six
volumes; a six-volume selection of works
by Al-Biruni; a multi-volume edition of
the works of the great Uzbek poet Ali
Shir Navoi; works by Farabi, the
"Aristotle of the East"; as well as works
by Zahir ud-din Babur, and the tenth-
eleventh century historians Narshakhi
and Baikhaki, and other writers.
Preparations are currently being made
to celebrate the 1,200th anniversary of
the birth of the great scholar Mukhamm-
ed ibn Moussa al-Khorezmi, whose name
is linked with the invention of algebra
and the logarithm. Plans have been made
for the first-ever edition, in Russian and
Uzbek, of his major works on
mathematics, astronomy and geography.
The work of the Institute of Oriental
Studies on the rich cultural heritage of
the peoples of the East has been recogniz¬
ed by the award of the first International
Avicenna Prize. The study and publica¬
tion of the works of the great humanists
of the East, the propagation of their
noble ideals, the strengthening of scien¬
tific contacts and the exchange of
manuscript material make an important
contribution to international cultural and
scientific co-operation and hence to
friendship between peoples.
Muzaffar Khayrullaev
29
