'MATUSHKA
by Leonid Likhodeev
Right, bridge over the Volga
at Ulyanovsk (formerly Sim¬
birsk). A large industrial cen¬
tre at the confluence of the
Volga and the Sviyaga, the
city was re-named in honour
of its most famous native
son, Vladimir llyich Ulyanov
(Lenin).
Photo Zeyons © Rapho, Paris
EVERY river starts at a source, but not every source gives
birth to a great river. There are few mysteries in this
, world more fascinating than the mystery of birth, of
that enchanting moment when nothingness gives place to life.
So it is with the birth of a river from a bubbling spring. If the
Russians call springs "keys", it is because they open on to
highways.
This frozen little spring emerges from the earth in the Valdai
forests. It babbles amongst the dead leaves that serve as its
swaddling clothes, and branches bend protectively over its
cradle. Slowly but surely the little stream forces its way out of
the brushwood. Here a great highway, 3,690 kilometres long,
emerges from the depths of the centuries; here begins a mighty
river the Volga.
Winding its way through field and meadow, it borrows the
colours of their wild spring flowers and draws sustenance from
the living force of its tributaries. Grown to full maturity, it car¬
ries other rivers along with it, ever fuller, ever broader, impa¬
tient to reach the sea. It is the most celebrated river in Russia.
In the dark night of pagan times, man attributed souls to
32
rivers, creating them in his own image and likeness. Rivers were
wise men, rivers were muses, rivers were warriors, knights,
tillers of the soil. But the Volga has always been Matushka, a
mother gentle yet severe, fearsome in anger yet tender in com¬
passion. She has always been a mother because she teaches what
is good. She rewards the brave and consoles the weak, and her
heart is always with those who set forth to seek their fortune.
We Russians become acquainted with the Volga so early in
life that when we reach adulthood we are surprised to find we
have known her so long. From our earliest years her songs have
rocked us to sleep. Her songs are sad because those who in¬
vented them were sons of toil who hauled behind them the
endless chain of daily labour. But there are other songs in which
freedom unfolds its wings. No other river in the world has
become so closely identified with valour and the spirit of un¬
trammelled freedom.
Rivers have memories, and the Volga's memory is vast and
deep. She remembers the thud of the axe as the first isbas (log
huts) were built, and the soft slap of mortar trowelled on to
brick. She remembers the exploits of Yaroslav the Wise and the

odd behaviour of his ineffectual successors. She remembers the
ferocious hordes of Batu Khan, the grandson of Chingiz Khan,
and the avenging sword of Dmitry Donskoy. She remembers the
noble appeals of a citizen of Novgorod, Kuzma Minin of the
withered arm, and the daring raids of the Cossack rebel Stenka
Razin. She remembers the Volga boatmen, their route marked
by the rough-hewn crosses on their countless graves along her
banks. She remembers too the battle that decided the destiny of
our peoples.
The Tiber
Those graceful groves that shade the plain,
Where Tiber rolls majestic to the main,
And flattens, as he runs, the fair campagne.
Ovid
The battle took place here, on the banks of the Volga whose
waters now break against the granite quays of a new city, risen
from the ashes of Stalingrad. The Volga was both an obstacle
and a way forward, frontier and defence. Her waters ablaze
with oil, she seethed and foamed in anger, and wept real tears
for her children. Today's children cannot imagine what it was
like, and heaven forbid that they should ever see such combats.
The powerful river pursues her ancient course through new
"seas", the large reservoirs that form the majestic "Volga
Stairway". For a long time there existed on the Volga a short
cut via the "Samara Bend". This involved travelling
downstream as far as Perevelok, where boats were transported
overland on rollers to the River Ussa, by following whose
course the boats could rejoin the Volga. This itinerary was call¬
ed "the Zhiguli Roundabout". It was already in use by brigands
who lay in wait in the Zhiguli foothills for the rich merchants'
caravans. Nowadays the Ussa flows directly into the Sea of
Kuybyshev and tourists and yachtsmen sail its waters. This once
romantic stretch of the Volga has become the river's most in¬
dustrialized area. Three sister towns have grown up on the
banks of the Sea of KuybyshevTogliatti, Komsomolosk and
Zhigulevsk three towns built by young men who remember, as
if it were yesterday, the day work began on their construction.
In former times, the Volga towns were so distributed that
those with masculine names lay on the right bank and those with
feminine names on the left. On the right lay Yaroslav, Nijni
Novgorod (now Gorky), Saratov, Simbirsk (now Ulyanovsk).
On the left were Kostroma, Kazan, Samara (now Kuybyshev)
and Astrakhan. Few Russian towns suffered so much under
Engineers at work in the generator room of the V.l. Lenin
hydroelectric power station are dwarfed by the plant's massive
generators which have a capacity of over two million kilowatts.
Situated at the "Samara Bend", the V.l. Lenin power station
produces about a quarter of the more than forty thousand
million kilowatt hours of energy supplied each year to the
Soviet national grid by hydroelectric installations on the Volga.
enemy attack and few were so seriously damaged. Nevertheless,
although history has dealt harshly with them, these towns have
preserved many unique examples of ancient Russian
architecture.
In these works of architectural art men reproduced the
features of their natural surroundings pyramid roofs that
echoed the pointed silhouette of the fir tree, tracery that recall¬
ed the shadows cast by the birch and decorated with birds and
flowers the setting of their daily lives. It is not by chance that
the popular art of the craftsman was born in the most beautiful
regions of the Volga, and that the objects which emerged from
the hands of these craftsmen bear witness to the extraordinary
charm of this area.
The waters of the Volga now majestically past mountain and
forest, field and meadow, between banks that recall men dear
to our hearts. It was here on the Volga, in former Simbirsk, that
Vladimir Ilyich Lenin was born. From the Volga came many
The right bank of the Volga, just below Kuybyshev.
Photos Eugene Kassin and Marc Redkm © Progress Publishers, Moscow

Russian writers, musicians and savants whose names are known
the world over, as well as people of every kind, rich men poor
of spirit, and poor men with generous hearts. The petty
bourgeoisie is full of ignominy and tramples on human dignity.
But sometimes great men emerge from its murky depths to de¬
nounce them without pity.
Such a one was the great Soviet writer Maksim Gorky. He
came from a modest home in Post Office Street at Nijni
Novgorod, and he has made it immortal. He travelled the Volga
as a workman wanders down the high street, but he travelled as
a philosopher who searches for the meaning of life. The Volga
was his cross, his joy, his university, the school which places the
pen at the service of the conscience.
Time broods over the Volga, and#tirelessly the Volga pursues
her seaward course. The Akh'tuba, the Volga's main
distributary, makes a sharp bend towards the east and
The Seine
O shepherd Eiffel Tower, your flock of bridges bleats this
[morning
Guillaume Apollinaire
thousands of tributaries, canals and deviations fan out into the
steppes. Peaceful landing stages punctuate the river banks.
Camel caravans cross the sands beside the Caspian and an
odour of wormwood comes from the pastures in the endless
steppes. Everything here depends on the Volga, the hopes of
those who till the soil and raise the cattle. Her waters nourish
the splendid grain, ripened by the sun, that flows in golden
showers into the holds of her barges, alongside the brilliant
white salt from the Basunchak mines: it is with the bread and
salt of welcome that the Volga receives her guests.
Between the Volga and the Akhtuba lie green flood lands, as
unexpected here as an oasis in the desert. This land is fertile and
rich in harvests. If you look at this region and the Volga delta
on the map, you will see that the contours are those of the legen¬
dary horn of plenty turned, as it were, towards the Caspian. To
reach the sea you must descend the river beyond Astrakhan,
passing the island where the flags of the fish factories flap in the
wind, the fishing-grounds and the dense jungle which occupies
the lower part of the nature reserve formed by the delta.
The Astrakhan reserve is a scientific centre of world-wide im¬
portance for ornithological studies. Everything there looks
rather strange, like the illustrations in school books depicting a
universe long since disappeared. Saiga antelopes bound across
the salty expanses, hundreds of varieties of water-birds flap
their wings amongst the reeds, white and black swans sail by,
proudly stretching their necks, brightly-coloured pheasants
hide in the thickets, white herons pick their way on telescopic
legs, and pelicans who have survived from the depths of
geological antiquity make their nests on enormous rafts that
they themselves have assembled from reed and sedge stalks and
willow branches. Seen from afar, their nests look like strange
flowers with motionless white and rose-coloured petals.
In June, when dawn breaks above the tall reeds, the cool
nelumbo lotus unfolds its petals on the motionless surface of a
tranquil cove. The morning breeze gently rocks the pink and
purple flowers above dull green leaves. The Volga delta is the
most northerly point where this legendary flower can be found.
Here, nature's peace is never broken by the noise of engines; on¬
ly the occasional dip of an oar betrays the presence of a man
hidden away with his microscope and test-tube. The law of the
reserve is'never to disturb nature.
Seen from the air, the Volga delta looks like a blue-veined
hand deformed by toil. To be sure that it really does flow into
the Caspian, you only have to look at the map.
Still, it is better to follow the river, to emerge on. the vast ex¬
panse of the Caspian, once known as the Sea of Khvalynsk, and
see that the entire route is a hive of activity, as far as the eye can
see and beyond. Here at its mouth, just when she joins the sea,
it is as if the Volga is musing on the Titanic tasks accomplished.
On her way to the sea she has turned hundreds of turbines,
transported hundeds of thousands of craft of every sort, carried
thousands of tons of goods. She has watered fields and bathed
meadows, and has united the far-off waters of the Baltic with
those of the Mediterranean and the Atlantic.
Leonid Likhodeev
& v
"Jwâfll mlyf^^^^j^^^^
¡S'fJI
5^^
c?
MM
p^^- StAT**
..¡>* -
'
-- ^ . "ri \^99B^I
^
The birthplace of Europe's greatest river. The building in the
background marks the spot at which the Volga first springs
from the earth in the Valdai Hills northwest of Moscow, near
the village of Volgo-Verkhovye.
Photos Eugene Kassin and Marc Redkln Progress Publishers, Moscow
Navigable over the greater part of its length, the Volga and its
tributaries form a vital commercial network carrying some two-
thirds of all Soviet inland freight, with timber accounting for 25
per cent of the total. Above, a member of the crew of the Volga
riverboat "Spartak ".
