THE
HISTORICAL
ROOTS
by Mikhail Vasilyevkh Kriukov
THROUGHOUT the period of history preceding the
division of society into classes, men had no idea
of the possible innate differences, determined by
nature herself, between ethnic groups. In a society in
which social inequality and oppression were unknown,
conditions did not favour the growth of ideas of ethnic in¬
equality. Besides, primitive man was incapable of imagin¬
ing the cultural and racial differences that exist within the
human race. His "ethnic horizon" was too narrow,
limited as it was to a few neighbouring groups who, more
often than not, displayed similar economic and cultural
patterns and were not notably different in their an¬
thropological appearance.
The main ethnic groups were formed when tribes
merged. They appeared in the last stage of the evolution
of prehistoric society. It was then that for the first time
men's horizons began to extend beyond their former or-
bis terrarum. Their self-awareness was influenced by the
existence outside "their" group of many others who
were foreign and in most cases differed in language, in
their cultural and other peculiarities.
Nevertheless, at this stage of man's history, the pre¬
dominant criterion in the confrontation between "them"
MIKHAIL VASILYEVICH KRIUKOV, Soviet ethnographer, is a staff
member of the Ethnographical Institute of the Academy of Science of
the USSR. He has published many scientific studies including The An¬
cient Chinese Language and The Chinese Kinship System. The article
published here has been extracted from his contribution to a collective
work, Races and Society published in Moscow in 1982.
6
and "us" was the tribal, not the cultural, one. Provided
it recognized the paramount unity of "our" group, any
tribe could join it and vice-versa. Moreover, at this period
all "foreign" groups taken together were not regarded as
a coherent entity, fundamentally opposed to "us".
The emergence of the first class societies, based on
slavery and the exploitation of slave labour, led to a
notable change in the ethnic awareness of peoples and in
their vision of the world. Slavery by its very nature is con¬
ducive to the transposition of the idea of social inequality
to relations between peoples, and for the first time in
human history, society found itself divided into opposing
groups. Henceforth, people of unusual physical ap¬
pearance and strange culture whom one constantly met
face to face during expeditions of conquest were con¬
sidered as de facto or potential slaves, that is to say, as
inferior beings. Ancient Egyptian wall-paintings and
reliefs often depict foreigners whose appearance differs
from that of the other inhabitants of the Nile valley and
whose postures or positions reflect their status of sub¬
jection, with limited rights.
This contrast introduced by the Egyptians between
themselves, the chosen ones of the gods, and all other
peoples, was directly reflected in their habit of referring
to their neighbours as "barbarians".
Herodotus says that "the Egyptians call all those who
do not speak their language 'barbarians' ". This may
have been true, but it is not impossible that the father of

history was attributing to the Egyptians something which
was, in fact, of Greek origin.
In Greek, the word "barbarian" originally meant "he
who speaks an incomprehensible language". The ap¬
pearance of new meanings for the word (barbarian in the
sense of "rough", "bestial", "uncouth", etc.) is con¬
nected with the idea which emerged of fundamental dif¬
ferences between the Greeks and other peoples.
In the fifth century BC, it was already becoming very
common for the Greeks to regard the "barbarians " as in¬
ferior beings. Euripides for example asserted that här
terem from that worn in the Middle Empire, their
customs, food and drink are different, they speak an in¬
comprehensible language... Consequently a wise
government treats barbarians as wild animals".
The Confucians believed that the territory on which the
Chinese lived was at the centre of the Celestial Empire,
a fact which corresponded to a quite definite arrange¬
ment of the heavenly bodies. These determined the
cosmic forces of "yin" and "yang" which, in turn, gave
birth to the qualities and characteristics of human nature.
In the treatise Discussion about Salt and Iron, dating
13,
This "exotic" tree whose fruit turns
into birds and fish is an illustration
from a botanical treatise published in
France in 1605. The author, who in¬
tended to write a serious scientific
study, mistakenly believed far¬
fetched travellers' tales from distant
countries. Perceptions of peoples
from distant lands have often been
glibly distorted by ethnocentrism,
from which no people in history
seems to have been exempt. In many
geographical works, in the West and
elsewhere, the "foreigner" is
presented as a peculiar, inferior,
scarcely human creature.
Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Pans
barians were incapable of understanding the meaning of
justice "because their intelligence is inferior to that of the
Greeks". This concept achieved its most sophisticated
form in the philosophical system of Aristotle.
As the ideologist of a State founded on slavery, Aristo¬
tle regarded inequality in social rights as a constituent
law of the human being. He assumed man to have two
parts, the divine and the animal. Depending on whichever
of these predominated in him, a man was destined by
nature either to command or to obey.
Contrasting those whose vocation was to rule and
think to the slaves who were there to carry out orders and
to work, Aristotle at the same time assimilated the con¬
cepts of "slave" and "barbarian". He declared that
"barbarians are accustomed to thinking as little as possi¬
ble because they are in a permanent state of servitude".
For the Greek philosopher, the difference between bar¬
barians and Greeks lay in the fact that "from birth the
barbarians are of a more servile nature than the Greeks".
Quite consistently with his own ideas, Aristotle recom¬
mended his disciple Alexander of Macedón to care for the
Greeks as close relations and to treat barbarians like
animals or plants.
This attitude to the question of the "barbarians" had
its equivalent in the ideas which prevailed in ancient
China. In the first century AD, the Han historian Ban Gu
wrote: "the barbarians wear their hair loose and fold their
coats on the left side. They have human faces, and
hearts like those of wild animals. Their costume is dif-
from the first century BC, we read: "In the border pro¬
vinces men live in mountains and gorges, the cosmic
forces in these places are in a state of disharmony, the
land cracks because of the cold and a terrible wind
sweeps across the salt deserts. There, sand and stone
follow each other. The land remains untilled". In another
text the Celestial Empire is described as being "at the
centre of Heaven and Earth, where the cosmic forces are
in complete harmony. The sun and the moon pass to the
South and the Polar Star appears in the North. Because
of the harmonious breathing of the land, everything here
is more true". Hence, the inhabitants of the Celestial Em¬
pire and the "barbarians of the world's four regions"
have "characteristics which it is impossible to change".
An equally egocentric theory of the oikumene (the in¬
habited world) was, as we know, current amongst the
Greeks. They imagined the inhabited world to be like a
circle at whose centre, "half way between the rising and
the setting of the sun", lay Greece. Delphi, which was
situated in the centre of Greece, was "the world's navel".
The idea that "our" people occupied the centre of the
inhabited world and that the surrounding peoples were
inevitably inferior in some way was also widely held
amongst Persians.
According to Herodotus, "the Persians esteem their
immediate neighbours the most highly, then come the
people who live farther away, and so on. Their esteem for
other peoples is a function of distance, the peoples for
whom they have the lowest esteem being those who live
7

the farthest away from them". This attitude to the
classification of ethnic groups implies that somewhere
far away, on the outskirts of the oikumene, people may
resemble animals not only internally but in their outer ap¬
pearance or indeed may differ from normal human beings
because of a peculiar arrangement of the various parts of
the body.
The conviction that distant lands were inhabited by be¬
ings who did not look quite human was shared by the
authors of a number of geographical works in ancient
China. But the introduction of Buddhism changed the
idea which the Chinese had of the rest of the world. In the
minds of Buddha's disciples, the idea of Chinese racial
supremacy was toned down in favour of the idea of a
common religion. Since the religious capital of Buddhism
was very far from the frontiers of China, the scale of
values applied to evaluation of the overall picture of the
inhabited world was, as it were, revised.
The episode reported by the Chinese pilgrim Fa-xian in
his account of his travels in India in 412-425 is quite il¬
luminating. When asked where he came from, Fa-xian
replied that he came "from the land of the Han". This
In his City of God, Saint Augustine (354-430)
categorically rejects the theory that the monsters who
were believed to inhabit the limits of the earth were
descended from Noah's sons: "Either the stories about
these monsters are pure invention or, if they do exist,
they are not men. If they are really men, then they are
descended from Adam". With Saint Augustine the idea
of the unity of the human race is based upon acceptance
of biblical teaching concerning the creation of man.
As a matter of fact, medieval European writers admit¬
ted only one fundamental difference between men-
there were the Christians and, confronting them, the
pagans. It should not, however, be thought that the reign
of religious ideology necessarily meant that the peoples
of Christendom considered themselves to be fully equal
amongst each other.
It is rightly said of the Renaissance that it was the
period when man discovered Humanity. Interest in the
Greco-Roman scientific heritage led to the spread of
many of the ideas expressed by ancient writers. The
ethnic horizon of Europeans was also considerably en¬
larged by the great geographical discoveries. It became
The external slave trade from
Africa south of the Sahara bet¬
ween the 15th and the 19th cen¬
turies involved, according to some
experts, the export of not less than
19 million people. Whatever the
exact figure of the population loss
suffered by Africa as a result of the
slave trade may be it can give only
a pale idea of the consequences of
this haemorrhage on the cultural
and economic development of the
country. Left, iron mask, collar and
manacles used to prevent slaves
escaping.
Photo © Edimedia, Pans
statement astonished the Buddhist monks who exclaim¬
ed: "How have people from such a distant land been able
to come as far as here?" Thus the Middle Empire was
situated on the outskirts of the Buddhist world. And it
was not by chance that Fa-xien did not use this term to
designate China. For him, the Middle Empire was India.
One of the factors which most influenced the ethnic
awareness of the European peoples in the Early Middle
Ages was the spread of Christianity. The position of or¬
thodox Christian doctrine regarding differentiation bet¬
ween races and cultures is based on two postulates the
fact that the human race is descended from Adam, and
the idea that degeneration was a result of original sin.
The banishment of Adam and Eve from the Garden of
Eden and Abel's murder were followed by the wander¬
ings of Cain, who left his parents in order to found a fami¬
ly of his own. But Adam's younger son continued his
father's line. One of the representatives of this line was
Noah. He fathered three sons who, after the Flood,
founded three separate branches of the human race.
From Ham were descended the peoples of Egypt,
Ethiopia and Canaan; from Japheth: the Cimmerians, the
peoples of Magog, the lonians and others; from Shem the
Elamites, Assyrians, Lydians, Hebrews and others. The
peoples who participated in the building of the Tower of
Babel were already so different from each other that they
were unable to understand each other. At this point in the
history of the human race, changes also appeared in the
physical types which became less and less like the ¡deal
type, who was Adam.
8
evident that the differences between human groups
were infinitely greater than was hitherto supposed.
The origin of the American Indians, of which not the
slightest mention could be found in Holy Scripture, prov¬
ed to be a particularly difficult question. The desire to
reconcile Old Testament teaching and new ethnographic
information led to the elaboration of a large number of
theories according to which the American Indians were
a branch of one or other of the European peoples Greek,
Roman, Carthaginian or even Welsh. This solution to the
problem was officially sanctioned by Pope Julius II, who
proclaimed in a Bull of 1512 that American Indians, like
the rest of mankind, were descended from Adam.
The opinion advanced by the French scholar Isaac de
la Peyrère (1594-1676) was radically different. In his
treatise, Praeadamitiae, which was published in 1655
and created quite a stir, he cast doubts on the explana¬
tion of the origin of all the peoples of the world derived
from the Old Testament version of man's origin. He did
not question the accuracy of the biblical story, but main¬
tained that it reflected events which related only to a
limited area. If this point of view were accepted, Adam
could be regarded as the ancestor of the Jews, but the
American Indians, for example, must have had their own
Adam. Thus, the creation of man was not a single,
isolated act. Several different places existed on the earth
where man appeared. This idea finally gave rise to anti-
scientific theories of all kinds which transformed racial
differentiation into an absolute.
Mikhail Vasilyevich Kriukhov
