Uncommon
heritage
by Lotfallah Soliman
IT is not by chance that, in order to
ensure their supremacy, the Great
Powers are engaged simultaneous¬
ly in an arms race and a memory race.
Victory will no longer go only to the
power who possesses the most
sophisticated weapons, but also to the
one which will provide itself with the
most extensive memory. Memory as an
instrument of power is a fairly recent
discovery, but it has long been known
that memory generates the will to power.
The Nile is born in lands whose
memory rests only on tradition, and it ex-

pires in a land whose memory is
monumental. No more was needed for
Egypt to claim mastery of the Nile, in¬
deed to become the Nile. But it was not
entirely her fault. All the great kings of
Egypt, from Ramses to Mohammed Ali,
tried to pass the barrier of the upper
cataract, but the force of the current
always drove them back from Africa to
the sea.
It was only in the second half of the
nineteenth century that the region of the
great lakes was finally discovered, and it
was not until the 1930s that all the
sources of the Nile were identified.
Meanwhile, there was nothing for it but
to live with the Egyptian memory and the
myths it created, and admit that the only
The Euphrates
In dream I saw the Euphrates
Winding its somnolent way, .
Splash of water-rat, wide-curving
[mud-flats
Spangled with arborescent spider's webs
Eugenio Móntale
Nile without a descriptive name is that
which flows from the sixth cataract,
north of Khartoum and Omdurman, but
counting against the current. Further
upstream, the Nile is given an adjective:
the White Nile, the Blue Nile, the Nile of
the Mountains, the Nile of the Gazelles,
the Nile of the Giraffes. The Nile is the
only great river in the world the descrip¬
tion of whose course starts with the
mouth and whose cataracts are
numbered from downstream upstream,
as if to show that, although the flower
and the ear of corn may well be at the tip
of the stem, they are nonetheless the final
ends of all existence.
The Nile is also the only great river to
flow from South to North. Having
entered Asia in pursuit of the Hyksos,
Thutmose I, founder of the New Empire,
halted at Carchemish (now Jerablus). He
had just reached the utmost limits of the
logical world. Was he not confronted
with a river the Euphrates on which
he would have to row against the current
in order to go northwards? He was con¬
tent to cross it, to erect a stele in memory
of his crossing and to turn back, not
forgetting to baptize the river "the sea
whose water flows in reverse".
From earliest antiquity until as recent¬
ly as the late Middle Ages, it was impossi-
Pigeons watch from their
monumental dovecote
"pyramid" in the Nile Valley as
the caravan passes'.*' Perhaps
the first type of bird tamed by
man, the domestic pigeon has
been an important source of
food in Egypt since ancient
times.
ble for any Egyptian, whether he be king,
priest, warrior, geographer, scribe,
craftsman or simple peasant, to imagine
that it was his world that was different.
The Cosmos, like the Nile, could only be
Egyptian.
For centuries, at every summer solstice
the Pharaoh himself, surrounded by the
high dignitaries of his kingdom, would
proceed in state to the river to cast therein
a rolled papyrus. The papyrus contained,
not an offering, but an order to the river
to rise. Did this symbolize the inability of
the priests and wise men of that time to
explain the phenomenon of a river in
spate, a spate regularly repeated and eter¬
nally renewable? No doubt, but it also
symbolized the man-god's will to reign
sovereign over the god Nile.
This symbolism summarizes to perfec¬
tion the sometimes ambiguous relation¬
ship which existed for centuries until
modern times between the men of the
"Nile without an adjective" and the river
that emerges from nothing. "Egypt is a
gift of the Nile". That may have been
true for Herodotus and those coming
after him who would think it clever to
quote him, but not for the Egyptians
whom he stripped of their sovereignty. If
the aphorism were true, if they were no
more than the recipients of a gift, albeit
the tears of Isis, the sister and spouse of
Osiris and the mother of Horus, by what
right could Egypt and the Egyptians
assert their will to power and immortali¬
ty? Since the gods are mortal, only man
bears eternity within him and it is for him
and him alone to command and for the
gods to bow to his will. Between the order
to rise issued by a Pharaoh to the god
Nile, and the Great Dam which tames
this god, there is a continuity which con¬
fers legitimacy on both Menés and Nasser
and makes twenty centuries of foreign
domination a passing incident. "Eternity
is Egyptian", said André Malraux.
This "Egyptianization" of the Nile
was not devoid of excess bordering on
racism before its time. All the great kings
of Egypt dreamed of conquering the
lands of the Upper Nile and even
Abyssinia. But the stele of Semna, which
dates from four thousand years ago,
from the Xllth dynasty, forbade "for
ever" the "negroes" to pass through Heh
when going down to Thebes. And when a
king from the Upper Nile, whose civiliza¬
tion and principal god Amon were, after
all, borrowed from Egypt, tried to set
The Saint Lawrence
Oh childhood that five-leafed hand
Stretched athwart my country
I will run up again on the wave of your
¡wrist
The dim towns watching over cradles
and already your face whole as a sea.
Gatien Lapointe
himself up at Thebes, the riposte was to
be terrible.
Nevertheless, the silt carried by the
Nile is "negro", and' all Egyptian or
rather Nilotic mythology was to bear
the mark of this négritude. The first idol
of the Egyptians has a woman's head on
the body of a hippopotamus. The judge
of the dead is both lion and crocodile. No
other religion has animalized heaven to
the same degree, and the entire bestiary
of the Egyptian pantheon is of equatorial ,
origin. In the absence of written records,
one can only state that the recently
discovered Upper Nile and the Lower
Nile whose history is older, certainly liv¬
ed under the same religion. It is in the
30
Photo Silvester © Rapho, Pans

Cairo Museum that one can see the
African gods Hathor and Apis in statue
form.
Presumptuous or not, Egypt, already
the memory of the Nile, has become the
Nile, and none outside her is the Nile,
and wherever she is involved the Nile
must be present. Some years ago, when
there was no longer any mystery about its
source or the mechanism of its floods, a
Tunisian friend was asked by the taxi-
driver who picked him up at Cairo air¬
port whether they had the Nile in Tunisia.
In the popular mind, identifications had
become superimposed to such a degree
as to be merged into each other. My
friend spoke Arabic. Tunisia was
therefore an Arab country; and since the
Nile, already an Egyptian river, had
become an Arab river, there could no
longer be an Arab country without the
Nile! But the illusion was not new.
Already in the eleventh century the Arab
geographer Al-Idrisi had drawn a map
showing a branch of the Nile that flowed
into the Atlantic after crossing the whole
of North Africa.
Starting from this consciousness, both
mythical and overweening, Egypt saw
herself as the principal, if not the only
regulator of the Nile. She was to reject
every proposal to raise the levels of the
African lakes preferring the creation of a
huge artificial lake between the first and
second cataracts, that is to say, mainly on
her own territory.
The Egypt of the myths died with the
construction of the Great Dam. For the
first time in their history, the Egyptians
are alone, without gods and with no pro¬
spect of miracles. At last! So much the
worse! It is for men to forge their own
destiny.
Lotfallah Soliman
Almost all the population of Egypt is concentrated in villages, towns
and cities on a narrow ribbon of land bordering the Nile. Above, air
view of central Cairo looking downstream shows the islands of Ar
Rawdah (foreground) and az-Zamalik. With a population of over 6
million Cairo is Africa's largest city.
