The office of the future
Photo Greg Davis © Sygma, Paris. Taken from an
album of photographs on Communication, compiled
by the Unesco Photographic Unit, to be published
shortly by Unesco.


Japan hooks up
for the 21st century
THE establishment of a nationwide,
error free, high-speed information
network during the early years of
the 21st century is the objective of the Nip¬
pon Telegraph and Telephone Public Cor¬
poration (NTT) of Japan. In a paper
presented at a symposium organized by
IDATE (Institut pour le Développement et
l'Aménagement des Télécommunications et
de l'Economie) and held at Montpellier,
France, in October 1982, Masatoshi Murata
of the commercial bureau of the NTT
described this ambitious project which will
make full use of recent advances in digital
telephone, optical fibre, computer and
satellite communication technology.
The basic technology for this revolu¬
tionary Information Network System, as it
is to be called, already exists, although its
integration into a homogeneous system will
raise complex technical problems. But what
advantages does it offer to ordinary men
and women and what effect will it have on
their personal lives and on the society in
which they live ?
Masatoshi Murata painted the following
picture of life with the system:
In the home
Daughter holds a three-way telephone
conversation with two of her friends.
Mother makes a long-distance call while
keeping an eye on the displayed call charge.
Father sends invitations to a dinner party
using the facsimile service.
Son scans a list of part-time jobs
available.
Daughter plays a computer game.
Father consults the bus time-table.
Mother consults the price list of her local
store and places an order.
In the department store
Salesgirls compile and send out price lists
16
and details of special offers and receive
orders from home terminals.
At school
A teacher sends a list of questions to
students at home and receives answers from
them.
At the local government office
A clerk despatches facsimile copies of
driving licences and other documents
directly to applicants' homes.
A public relations officer sends a publica¬
tion simultaneously to a number of com¬
munity leaders.
Documents are passed by facsimile bet¬
ween the headquarters and branch offices.
Discussions in the municipal assembly are
telecast to television receivers in community
centres.
Lectures and discussions are held in a
community centre and are telecast to televi¬
sion receivers in other community centres.

Municipal government information, in¬
cluding lists of government-sponsored
meetings, welfare services, application pro¬
cedures, etc., is instantly available to the
public.
At the office
A comprehensive office work station is
installed beside the manager's desk. It in¬
corporates a facsimile machine and a word
processor to enable him to send or receive
various forms of documents instantaneous¬
ly. It can also be used as a data storage ter¬
minal to gain access to the management
control and inventory control system.
Video teleconference calls are used as a
substitute for physical travel.
Terminals are used to give computer-
assisted education to employees.
Some employees work at home rather
than at their office.
Offices are relocated to rural areas and
are connected to headquarters via com¬
munications lines.
This by no means exhaustive list of the
possibilities the system offers (the possible
uses of the system for banking procedures,
for example, are immense) gives some idea
of the social transformation that introduc¬
tion of the system would involve.
Some of the advantages of the system can
be seen immediately. More workers could
work at home or at small offices near their
homes equipped with office automation ter¬
minals, thus avoiding the daily misery of
commuting. Much of the drudgery of work
would be eliminated, leaving more time for
really creative employment. A whole new
world would be opened up for physically
handicapped people and those who, for one
reason or another, are housebound. All
citizens would be better informed about,
and thus be able to take fuller advantage of,
local events, government services and
locally-available leisure-time activities.
There might, however, also be a number
of adverse effects. A society that became
over-dependent on such a closely-knit, all-
pervasive system might be very vulnerable
to technical failure; with a great number of
terminals linked to an integrated system
personal privacy and corporate security
might be put at risk; over-centralization of
information might result in over-
centralization of power; and, finally, if
home terminals were not sufficiently "user
friendly", some sections of the population
might, paradoxically, find even greater dif¬
ficulty in obtaining access to information.
The NTT is well aware of these dangers.
A model system is to be put into operation
towards the end of 1984 which will serve
some 10,000 subscribers in the Musashino
and Mitaka area, a suburb west of Tokyo.
It will also accommodate a limited number
of subscribers in the Tokyo metropolitan
area who will thus be able to communicate
with the inhabitants of Musashino and
Mitaka. The model system will serve not on¬
ly to test the technical feasibility of each ele¬
ment of the network and to verify construc¬
tion and maintenance techniques, but also
to provide a first hand guide to the overall
impact of the system on individuals and on
society as a whole.

