Ghana's university of
science and technology
by Frank Obed Kwami
WHENthe University ofScience and Technology (UST)
at Kumasi, Ghana, was established in 1961, the Act of
Incorporation specified that the objectives the
University should follow in its academic pursuits should be of
relevance to the needs and aspirations of Ghanaians. This ap¬
parently axiomatic statement reflects a very real difficulty which
faced many establishments ofhigher education in countries emerg¬
ing from the colonial past and which the history of the UST
illustrates.
The UST is the successor to the Kumasi College of Technology
which was founded in 1952 and which was recognized by London
University, in the United Kingdom, as a college providing training
in engineering leading to the London University B.Sc. degree.
Even after Ghana achieved independence (in 1957) and after the
newly established UST was in a position to award its own degrees,
examinations were conducted by external examinersfrom the U.K.
to ensure standards equivalent to those of British universities on
which formal recognition of the UST engineering degree by British
professional institutions depended.
It was soon clear that as long as this arrangement continued the
necessary flexibility in the adaptation of curricula and syllabuses
to reflect national development needs could not exist. Further¬
more, while the majority of the teaching staffand heads ofdepart¬
ments were expatriates, there persisted a residual feeling that a
shifting of educational objectives to reflect these needs was
synonymous with falling standards.
In 1969, the University Council set up a Committee to evaluate
the University's past record and to identify areas in which the
University could make significant future contributions to the
economic, industrial and social development and advancement of
the country. One of the recommendations made by the Committee
was the establishment ofa technology Consultancy Centre, a novel
FRANK OBED KWAMI, of Ghana, is head of the mechanical
engineering department, dean of the faculty of engineering, and
acting vice-chancellor of the University of Science and Technology,
Kumasi, Ghana. He has undertaken a number of missions for the
Government of Ghana, for Unesco and other U.N. agencies.
form of University institution for technology transfer, whose mis¬
sion is to collaborate with all departments of the University, to
keep the outside community informed of their resources and ex¬
pertise and to help them to develop technologies of use to the na¬
tion as a whole. In addition, the Centre receives requestsfor advice
on problems from the outside community which it channels back
to the department of the University concerned.
During 1972 and 1973, the Faculty of Engineering initiated a
thorough review of its curricula and methods so as to make them
more relevant to the country's development needs. Students follow
a four-year degree programme. During their second semester
students receive practical training in the Faculty's workshops and
laboratories where they are introduced to mechanical and electrical
workshop practice, production activities, civil engineering con¬
struction work andfield work in surveying. During vacations they
attend training courses at carefully selected industrial enterprises
under close supervision of the teaching staff. Field trips to in¬
dustrial organizations and engineering sites are organized regularly
for each class.
A striking innovation is the setting up ofproduction units within
the departments of the Faculty. These are virtually mini-enterprises
in which products developed in the departments are produced on
a semi-commercial basis. The units provide students with training
in such fields as work study, production control and management
and familiarize them with all the processes of engineering
manufacturing from production to the marketing stage.
The final year of the degree course is devoted to work on major
projects which are carefully screened by a panel of teachers ac¬
cording to criteria which take into account their local relevance and
engineering content.
In making this review and adaptation of its curricula and
methods the prime objective of the Faculty of Engineering was to
match its education and training programmes to the needs of na¬
tional development without loss of academic standards. In 1983,
with established Departments in civil, mechanical, electrical and
electronic, geodetic and chemical engineering, with a student body
ofover 800, and a seventy-strong teaching and research staff 90per
cent of whom are Ghanaian, the Faculty believes that it has suc¬
cessfully achieved this goal.
28
