WXï+
fe \
Eà *

The media
in the classroom
by Michel Souchon
THE world is experiencing an
information and communication
explosion of such magnitude that
it is already being predicted that the post-
industrial society will be a "communica¬
tion society". Alongside the established
media (radio, cinema, over-the-air televi¬
sion), complementing them and widening
their scope, we now have sound and vi¬
sion recording and reproducing devices
MICHEL SOUCHON, of France, is head of
the study group on communication systems at
France's National Institute of Audiovisual
Communication. He has been a Unesco con¬
sultant on several occasions, and is the author
of several works on the sociology of the
media, including Trois Semaines de Télévi¬
sion, Une Comparaison Internationale
("Three Weeks of Television, an Interna¬
tional Comparison").
More human in scale and more flexible
than centralized radio and television
systems, since they lend themselves to
direct intervention by both students and
teachers (slowing down a lesson, repeti¬
tion of certain passages, the recording of
local events), audio-visual materials such
as tape-recorders, video-recorders and
cassettes hold great promise as a means
of meeting rapidly increasing educational
demands throughout the world. Above
left, members of a women's literacy
class at DaoudaboUgou, Mali, record
their feelings about their new-found
reading and writing skills. Left, villagers
at Kabala, Mali, watch a videotape about
the women's co-operative they have
recently organized in their village to im¬
prove agricultural production.
(tape recorders, video recorders, video
disc players), direct broadcast satellites,
cable television and the whole range of
equipment and services that have come to
be known as telematics.
What changes will these new
technologies bring? Direct broadcasting
by satellite will enable countries not yet
equipped with television systems to avoid
the heavy cost of installing ground net¬
works. It will also mean an increase in
transborder flow of programmes and the
possibility of receiving broadcasts from
other countries. Television signals from
satellites will be received through special
individual aerials or through collective
antennae serving cable networks.
Cable television services will have the
advantage that, unlike over-the-air
television transmissions, they will not be
limited by frequency overcrowding and
will therefore be able to offer the viewer
a much larger range of programmes.
When optical fibres, which are now
beginning to replace coaxial cables, come
into more general use, it will be possible
to establish "interacting" systems, that is
systems through which the viewing au¬
dience will be able to enter into a dialogue
with the broadcasters and thus par¬
ticipate actively in programmes.
The television set will thus no longer be
merely a means of viewing a limited
range of programmes; it will become the
central core of an array of equipment and
services that is becoming known collec¬
tively as "peritelevision". It will be
possible to record programmes for view¬
ing at a time convenient to the viewer, to
watch programmes pre-recorded on
video cassettes and video discs, and to
view films taken by the viewer himself
with his personal video camera. It will
also be possible to call up on the tele¬
vision screen information supplied from
data banks through the telephone
networks.
This prodigious leap forward in the
field of mass communications, the
multiplication of channels and suppor¬
ting equipment, once again gives rise to
great hopes for education. It is as though
there were a sort of "pre-ordained" con¬
vergence between the possibilities offered
by these new technologies and the enor¬
mous growth in educational demand.
The mass media have the capacity to
meet the demands of the rapidly rising
numbers of those requiring education.
They can disseminate an educational pro¬
gramme to millions of people, they can
call on the services of the finest specialists
available on any of the disciplines it may
be thought necessary to incorporate into
educational syllabuses, they have access
to data banks that are always kept up to
date, and they can produce, stock,
classify and distribute audiovisual pro¬
ducts geared to the needs of both teachers
and students. Even the problems raised
by the economic inequalities in the world
seem capable of resolution; for although
the production of radio and television
programmes for schools may at first
sight appear costly, the number of
students reached means that the cost per
student is extremely low. Finally, the
flexibility of the new media and the in¬
teractive . capacity of the more
sophisticated systems meet the objections
that have been raised concerning the
rigidity and constraints of the traditional
mass media.
Nevertheless, it is advisable to guard
against excessive optimism. To begin
with, the new technologies are not
developing at the same pace everywhere.
Whereas in California, for example, with
cable and satellite television, there are
some fifty television channels available
to viewers and the per capita ownership
of video cameras and video recorders is
one of the highest in the world, many
African countries have no television at
all, or if they do it serves only the capital
city and an area of about thirty
kilometres in radius around it.
To the problem of the uneven distri¬
bution of equipment must be added the
disparities to be found in programme
production capacity. Few countries
possess film and television production in¬
dustries capable of supplying the interna¬
tional market. The elaboration of soft¬
ware for computer-assisted teaching, the
production of audiovisual educational
programmes and the establishment of
textual or audiovisual data banks all re¬
quire heavy investment which only rich
countries are able to afford.
International exchanges (the buying,
selling and co-production of films and
programmes) will develop, but the in-^
31

Although at first sight costly to produce, educational television programmes, which can reach millions of viewers, have an extremely
low cost-per-student ratio. Their added visual impact, evident on the faces of these Panamanian schoolchildren, makes educational
television broadcasting an invaluable teacher's aid.
As microcomputers become more compact and less expensive they are
gradually invading the classrooms of the world. Children are strongly
motivated by the instant response they can obtain from the computer
and the dialogue they can establish with it, but it is essential to ensure
that the educational software devised for use in schools is shaped to
take into account differing .human values and needs. Above, children at
work with computers in a school in the Azerbaijan SSR.
32
equalities will remain with all the risks
that this implies. The primary influence
of foreign productions on national pro¬
ducers, on whom are imposed models of
international commercial success, is pro¬
bably just as important as the secondary
influence these productions will have on
viewers by their portrayal implicit in
fictional works and more explicit in news
and documentaries of certain stereo¬
types, models, norms and values.
This inequality of communication
resources may well actually widen the gap
between nations. Resources are seldom
available where educational needs are
greatest. A number of factors may fur¬
ther increase these inequalities: the abun¬
dant means available in the affluent
countries will tend further to improve the
education of the affluent; in the poorer
countries, the continuing poverty of the
mass media and the inertia of their
organizational structures tends to add to
the built-in rigidity of what is still a one¬
way technology; the newer media, at least
in theory, are more information
oriented, more geared to the transmis¬
sion of knowledge, whereas the older
media (cinema, radio and television),
which for some time to come, will pro¬
bably be the only media accessible to the
developing countries where educational
needs are greatest, are much more
oriented towards entertainment.
It might be wise to pause at this point
and consider the two major trends in
modern pedagogy. The first is the trend
towards rationalization, which stresses
the technical aspects of teaching (goal-
oriented learning, programmed teaching,
etc.). The second emphasizes the need to
take into account the personal motiva-

tion of the pupil (non-directive
pedagogy, the freedom to learn, etc.).
Both these tendencies reject intensive use
of the mass media to saturate entire
regions with educational programmes,
much as vast areas of agricultural land
are sprayed with crop fertilizer.
The rationalist tendency insists on
strict adaptation of pedagogical means to
precise objectives and on the imperative
need to verify the results of the teaching
process at every stage. If we examine
both the older and the newer media to
find which of them best meet these
demands we find ourselves obliged to
eliminate traditional radio and television
in favour of more flexible technologies
(records or sound cassettes, video discs or
video cassettes, interactive teletext
systems, etc.) which allow direct in¬
tervention in the classroom itself
slowing down or speeding up the pace of
a lesson or interrupting it so as to be able
to repeat certain passages.
Non-directive pedagogy insists that, in
education, only those things that the per¬
sonal interest of the student incites him to
discover for himself are properly
assimilated. To aid the student in this ap¬
proach he must be given the material
from which to draw his own conclusions.
The role of the teacher here is to en¬
courage the emergence of latent ability
rather than to be a fount of knowledge
which he dispenses in a manner which he
alone decides. This approach requires
primarily that use be made of audiovisual
archives (slide shows, with sound tracks,
films, sound cassettes and records, video
cassettes and video discs) that can be con¬
sulted at documentation centres.
Whatever the approach adopted, the
preference in the educational field goes to
the new and up-and-coming media which
offer greater flexibility, including the
possibility of on-the-spot consultation of
sources and more personalized use, in
other words, media that are likely to
spread only slowly to the developing
countries or to underprivileged areas and
sectors in the industrialized countries.
All this suggests a somewhat pessimis¬
tic outlook for the future relations bet¬
ween teaching and the media, or, to be
more precise, for the future of those rela¬
tions in the least favoured countries.
However, results of experiments in a less
intensive, more selective use of the media
give grounds for a measure of optimism.
In Latin America, for example, radio
schools have played an important part in
literacy and "conscientization" cam¬
paigns, as have mobile cinemas in India.
Such experiments have shown that
messages transmitted by the media can be
effective if they are adapted for use on a
more human scale.
It seems clear that technology is evolv¬
ing along two distinct lines, one leading
to the use of massive means of diffusion
(satellites that cover entire continents),
the other to more decentralized local
systems of distribution and the use of
individual means of recording or stock
ing audiovisual material.
If these two approaches are regarded
as being antagonistic, two irreconcilable
audiovisual worlds will emerge. But it is
still possible to hope that they will be seen
as being complementary to each other,
together providing more flexible services
than are offered by the rigid mass media
of today. These flexible services would
certainly be of great educational value.
Education satellites are a case in point.
Used to disseminate complete educa¬
tional programmes, designed and
packaged by cumbersome, distant in¬
stitutions, they would certainly prove to
be ineffective. This would not be the
case, however, if they were to be used as
"carriers" relaying short extracts that
could be received, stocked and made
available to teachers who could then use
them as they saw fit to illustrate their
lessons or for demonstration purposes.
When we consider 'the more negative
aspects of the media (their predominant¬
ly entertainment role, the inequality of
communication resources, the inertia of
old habits), we see a future in which the
schools and the media are cast as com¬
petitors and rivals, having only an obli¬
que contact and influence on each other.
The hope for a less bleak future lies,
perhaps, in experiments in more decen¬
tralized use of the mass means of com¬
munication leading to a more
tive collaboration between the schools
and the media.
Michel Souchon
School is the gateway to the future, and schooldays a time when everything still seems possible. Tomorrow's hopes and today's
realities are symbolized in this photo of an open-air classroom in a Third World country where the first pupils to arrive wait pensively
for the day's lessons to begin.
1
if *
1
^B
2Ä
\»
