The peopling
of the Americas
by Wigberto Jiménez Moreno
WHILE it is accepted that the
earliest inhabitants of Ame¬
rica came across the Bering
Straits, controversy surrounds the
hypotheses advanced by the French
ethnologist Paul Rivet (1876-1958) who
postulated that peoples from Australia
crossed Antarctica and reached southern
Chile and Patagonia 6,000 years before
the Christian era, and that Melanesians
and Polynesians reached the Pacific
coast of north and south America.
It has been suggested that transatlantic
as well as transpacific contacts existed in
pre-Columbian times. There are those
who maintain that Phoenicians or Car¬
thaginians, or other groups from the
Near East, the Mediterranean and even
Africa reached the coasts of the Gulf of
Mexico, the Caribbean, or the Atlantic
coast of Brazil.
WIGBERTO JIMENEZ MORENO, ofMexico,
is a professor at the Mexican National School of
Anthropology and History. A member of the
Mexican Academy ofHistory, he is the author of
a number ofarticles studies and books on history
and anthropology, including A History of Mex¬
ico, written in collaboration with José Mirande
and M. T. Fernandez.
Doubt has been cast on the existence of
many of these supposed pre-Columbian
transoceanic voyages. As for Paul
Rivet's hypotheses on Australian and
Melano-Polynesian migrations, they
were initially greeted with scepticism,
especially the former, but the existence of
a limited and late Polynesian influence
has finally come to be accepted.
It also seems that a "counter-
equatorial" maritime influence was exer¬
cised from Mindanao, the Moluccas and
New Guinea, through Micronesia and
Melanesia, then via the Marshall and
Gilbert Islands, as far as Nicaragua and
the Gulf of Fonseca. In 1952, after the
Kon Tiki expedition, Thor Heyerdahl
championed the opposing thesis accor¬
ding to which influences were transmit¬
ted from the Ecuadorian and Peruvian
coasts to Polynesia, principally Easter
Island. Perhaps it would be possible to
find a Polynesian origin for American
man (from Malaysia, the Philippines, In¬
donesia and Melanesia) in the later ar¬
rival of a pre-Inca élite, for there are un¬
doubted cultural analogies between
Panama, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru
on the one hand, and Easter Island on the
other.
There is also the hypothesis of a
Japanese incursion, which supposedly
explains the appearance on the coast of
Ecuador, 5,000 years ago, of the pottery
of the Valdivia culture. However, the
alleged arrival of ship-wrecked sailors or
of an organized expedition from Japan
comes up against many objections,
notably because the Japanese Jomon
ware, comparable to that of Valdivia,
does not appear until half a millennium
later. All the same, the most cautious and
authoritative archaeologists declare that
this still remains the most plausible
hypothesis.
It is possible that some 3,000 years ago
cultural influences were propagated by
land along the Pacific and Caribbean lit¬
toral of Colombia from Valdivia to Puer¬
to Hormiga (see map). The same in¬
fluences could then have spread by sea,
first from east to west off the northern
coast of Panama, then from south to
north along the east coast of Costa Rica,
Nicaragua and part of Honduras,
perhaps continuing through the Yucatan
Channel and the Straits of Florida. In
this way they might have reached the
Atlantic coast of what is now Florida,
where at a place called Orange a form of
pottery appeared 2,000 years before the
Christian era which was extraordinarily
Map of the peopling
of the Americas ac¬
cording to the most
widely accepted
theories. It shows the
arrival of Asian
peoples from across
the Bering Strait in
North America, of
Melanesians and
Polynesians on the
coasts of North and
South America from
across the Pacific,
and of peoples from
Australia in southern
Chile and Patagonia
after having crossed
the Antarctic.
Map © J. A. Busto
38

similar to that of Machalilla on the
Ecuadorian coast which dates from the
same period and which followed the pot¬
tery of Valdivia.
In his comparative study on the earliest
cultures of the Americas, Dr. J. A. Ford
distinguishes several waves of peoples
which came by sea and settled on the
Pacific coast between Acapulco (Mexico)
and the Gulf of Paita-Sechura (northern
Peru). He also points out the existence of
coastal settlements between Puerto Hor¬
miga and Orange, and on Stallings Island
at the mouth of the Savannah river.
The US anthropologist Michael Coe
has pointed out the similarities between
the pottery of Las Conchas I and II (800
to 200 BC) from La Victoria, near the
Guatemalan port of Ocos, and that of
Chorrera (1800 to 1500 BC) in Ecuador's
Rio Guayas basin. Similarly, it is during
the first half of the last millennium of the
pre-Christian era (1000 to 500 BC) with
the flowering of Tlatilco in the valley of
Mexico, that important analogies appear
between the Tlatilco culture and that of
Chavin. Coe points to the existence of
contacts between Peru and La Victoria
during this period and even during the
preceding 500 years, suggesting that La
Victoria might have been a port of call
between a Mexican port and another port
in Ecuador or Peru (not forgetting
Tumaco in southern Colombia). Thus
the cultural influences of central and An-
dine America which are perceptible in the
pottery may have been transmitted by sea
in both directions.
How were these Pacific voyages under¬
taken? Several writers have insisted that
sail-powered rafts were the most com¬
mon means of transport throughout the
Pacific, as they were along the coasts of
Ecuador and northern Peru, that they
were still being used during the colonial
period and in the Gulf of Guayaquil at
the beginning of the nineteenth century.
Rafts were used all over the Pacific, and
the ones which bore the greatest
resemblance to the rafts which sailed
along the American coast and which
usually had a triangular sail, were the
rafts used in Polynesia and the Fiji
Islands. After the Kon-Tiki expedition it
became clear that pre-Columbian craft
were capable of making long voyages,
and Thor Heyerdahl himself showed that
pre-Columbian indigenous peoples, set¬
ting sail from the coast of Ecuador, had
landed on the Galapagos Islands. But
long boats, sometimes known as
piraguas, were also used in America,
principally for coastal navigation; they
were speedy and could carry up to seven¬
ty persons. They are already mentioned
in a document of 1525 which says that in
pre-Hispanic times such canoes, prob¬
ably from the coast of southern Colom¬
bia, Ecuador and northern Peru, sailed
as far as the mouth of the Rio Balsas to
the ancient Toltec city of Zacatula.
The maritime links between these
regions, as well as links with Nicaragua,
Costa Rica and Azuero in Panama, have
been pointed out. It is because of such
Sailing rafts at Puerto Viejo
(present-day Portoviejo),
Manabi Province, Ecuador,
from Storia dil Mondo
Nuevo (History of the New
World), by Benzoni, which
dates from 1572.
Drawing © All rights reserved
Map of the oldest Andean and Meso-American cultures according to an
"historical reconstruction" in J.A. Ford's study Formative Cultures in the
Americas (1969).
links between Andine and central
America that the art of copper
metallurgy must have been brought from
Peru to Zacatula, although not directly,
around 750-800 AD.
It should also be remembered that the
Spaniards who embarked on voyages
across the Pacific soon began to use the
Mexican ports of Navidad (near
Chihuatlan, on the borders of
Chihuatlan State and Jalisco State) and
Zihuatanejo, perhaps because these ports
had already enjoyed a certain importance
in pre-Columbian times. The importance
of Acapulco, further south, may go back
even further, and it is in the nearby town
of Puerto Marqués that Mexico's most
ancient pottery (2000 BC) has been
discovered, which must have been
brought by sea. Ancient pottery dating
from 1700 BC must also have reached
Ocos and La Victoria by sea; it has strong
affinities with the pottery of Ecuador's
Guayas basin. Finally, between Ocos and
La Victoria is Salina Cruz, the ancient
port where Cortes built ships and from
which exploration of the Gulf of Mexico
began. Near Salina Cruz live the Huave
Indians who claim that they came from
the south by sea, giving rise to the
possibility that there may be an affinity
between their language and that of the
Yungas of the northern coast of Peru,
where the Chimu empire and culture
flourished. Finally, certain decorative
motifs found on polychrome Mixtee
ceramics are similar to motifs of Andine
origin, from which it can be conjectured
that influences from across the sea
penetrated into Mexico up the Atoyac
river which rises in the Oaxaca valley.
We have deliberately refrained from
mentioning the theses regarding Chinese
influences, some very old, others dating
from the Han period, on the pottery and
decorative motifs of Teotihuacan and El
Tajin, or of Hindu and Buddhist in¬
fluences in Maya art; these theses have
been definitively refuted.
Wigberto Jiménez Moreno
39
