Preparation for working life is an essential function of education systems and a major element in lifelong education.
Just as important as its practical value is the contribution it can make to social and cultural development. This
opening up of education to the practical realities of the contemporary world is far from being a feature of all educa¬
tion systems. Under its major programme on Education, Training and Society, Unesco is giving active support to
efforts being made to strengthen the links between education and the world of work. Above, pupils at work in
the welding workshop of a technical training school north of Beirut, Lebanon.



Learning for a lifetime
A challenge modern societies
cannot afford to ignore
by Ettore Gelpi
LIFELONG education has been
a constant of the history of
mankind, but there is a ten¬
dency to think of the history of educa¬
tion in terms of formal pedagogy and
the written word. Yet the history of
education, which in reality is the
history of lifelong education, is a totali¬
ty of actions, policies, theories, Uto¬
pian visions and rival educational pro¬
jects and is the record of profound con¬
tradictions between these different
elements.
Today, lifelong education is faced
with a number of obstacles. Reform of
educational structures is often blocked
by social and juridical resistance.
Opening up the school to the communi¬
ty and introducing productive work in¬
to the curriculum, giving legal status to
the transition period between school
and work, making the work experience
itself an educational experience, all this
seems to present difficulties for the
educational and productive systems.
ETTORE GELPI is in charge of Unesco's ac¬
tivities in the field of lifelong education. He is
vice-president of the committee on the
sociology of education of the World Sociology
Association and the author of Stona
dell'Educazione (Milan, 19671, A Future for
Lifelong Education /Manchester University
Press, 1979) and Institutions et Luttes
Éducatives (Pans, 1982).
Examples of the constraints imposed
by the productive system include the in¬
ternational division of labour (very un¬
just for certain countries), the
fragmentation of the labour market,
inequalities in the training provided by
businesses of differing size and type,
and the rigid social divisions of the
place of work.
Other constraints affect the educa
tional system and act as a brake on the
extension of lifelong education a
standstill in the resources allocated to
education, inadequacy of the initial
and further training of teaching staff
with regard to creative and productive
activities, and difficulty in recruiting
non-teaching educators (scientists,
technicians and qualified tradesmen
and agricultural workers).

Legal obstacles to the reform of
educational systems are also far from
being minor ones. Laws and regula¬
tions continue to confine education
within a given space and, to some ex¬
tent, to a given age bracket and to
militate against making education
available anywhere and at any age. The
process of making the necessary provi¬
sions (scholarships, evaluation criteria,
sabbatical leave, alternation between
periods of study and of work) to render
the right to education throughout life
effective for all is slow. Furthermore,
as the educational span grows longer
and claims to the right to adult educa¬
tion grow stronger, psychological,
social and cultural resistance is
encountered.
This resistance to the democratiza¬
tion of educational systems manifests
.itself in the creation of parallel educa-
' and the planning of lifelong education
of placing it in an overall social and
cultural context rather than treating it
in isolation.
In some countries, social policies are
linked with educational policies
relating to certain periods of life or cer¬
tain categories of workers (the
establishment of crèches, education for
the unemployed, for migrant workers
and the elderly). The public response to
these measures is mixed; on the one
hand these educational services are
considered useful, but, on the other,
there is a feeling that the real problems
(the status of women, lack of jobs, the
marginalization of immigrant workers,
the loneliness of the elderly) remain
unresolved.
Positive factors working in favour of
new educational policies and activities
Physical education and sport are being practiced by an ever-gowing number of men and
women. Much remains to be done, however, especially in the organization of school
systems, to achieve a harmonious balance between bodily and mental activity. While
80 to 85 per cent of children in developed countries now receive physical education at
school, it is estimated that in the developing countries 80 per cent of children do.not.
The correction of this imbalance is one of the aims of Unesco's programme for Promo¬
tion of Physical Education and Sport.
tional structures alongside the public
educational institutions and the in¬
troduction of "innovations" in assess¬
ment criteria which in effect represent
no more than the re-introduction of
selection in a barely disguised form.
Hence the importance in policy-making
are, however, to be found both within
and outside the educational system.
New social relationships and an in¬
creasing extension of the time devoted
to education give rise, at all stages of
life, to new educational and cultural
demands which are associated with a
Painting, literature, dance, music, the theatre, the cinema are all forms of expression
which must take their place in the education of children and adults. Encouragement of
creativity, both among individuals and groups, is essential to their involvement in
cultural life. Within the framework of its programme on Creation and Creativity, Unesco
is developing methods of sensitizing and educating the public in relation to the arts.
Left, in a school in Niger.
desire to participate in the running of
society, with the enjoyment of the
aesthetic heritage, in short, with a
refusal to be left on the sidelines of
social and cultural life. The continuing
ferment and change in the fields of in¬
formation and communication are also
playing a part in stimulating and in¬
creasing this demand.
Creation, research, production (and
not simply the transmission of
knowledge) can provide an answer to
the alienation of the nature of the ac¬
tivities, in particular the educational
activities, of non-working time. It is
often difficult, however, to establish
proper communication between the
world of creation and research and that
of institutionalized education, even
though this is becoming more and more
necessary.
It is probable, therefore, that the
educational centres of the future will
evolve in two different but not oppos¬
ing directions. On the one hand there
will be the need to improve techniques
for the transmission of knowledge
(programmed learning, audio-visual
systems, documentation, etc.), and on
the other hand research, creation and
production will become, or rather will
become again, the key elements of
education.
This notion of a convergence bet¬
ween cultural creativity and education
has great attraction for children,
adolescents and adults; the theatre,
dance, music, the cinema seem likely to
achieve pride of place in lifelong educa¬
tion, though this will not be easy. The
degree of liberty accorded to creative
members of society, especially those
associated with educational activities,
the boldness or the conformity they
display, will be reflected in the evolu¬
tion of education.
Scientific research is a special form
of creative activity; it is also a domain
in which, owing to lack of proper com¬
munication with researchers, institu¬
tional education often seems to lose its
way. A lot is said about research at
schools and universities, but this is only
a pale copy of scientific and
technological research, both as regards
method and content. Unfortunately,
research centres are often even more in¬
accessible to the young than are centres
of production.
It is no easy task to construct and
breathe life into centres of education in
which various forms of creation, pro¬
duction and research can take their
place; yet the popularity of circus
schools in several countries as a means
of providing general as well as profes¬
sional training is but one example of
the attraction of a form of education in
which different forms of appren¬
ticeship are combined.
Between the acquisition of know¬
ledge and the full flowering of aptitude
for creation, research and production
there is a long road to travel. And for
this goal to be attained, many places of
5

learning and many different periods of
learning time are essential, coupled
with a new relationship between
general and professional training.
The fragmentation of the
space/time/age elements of education
will result in the withering away of old
educational structures and the birth of
new ones. Whether there is to be an ar¬
ticulation, a dialectic between the dif¬
ferent educational structures (formal
and out-of-school, initial and continu¬
ing, professional and general, institu¬
tional or self-instruction) or a further
compartmentalization will depend on
the depth and quality of participation
of the people in the running of society.
Self-instruction, the oldest form of
education known to man, is also evolv¬
ing rapidly. Advances in communica¬
tion systems applied to the educational
field, the often uncontrollable prob¬
lems of urbanization, the increasing
cost of .transportation, the weak
linkage between training structures and
professional activity, migration bet¬
ween town and country and from one
country to another, the increase in non-
working time (leisure, unemployment,
underemployment, retirement) are all
encouraging the development of new
forms of self-instruction.
Self-instruction and education for all
and by all mean that every individual,
institution or association (trade union,
political, cultural, social) not only has
access to education but can also play an
educative role.
Education and self-instruction, in¬
dividual and collective, in educational
institutions, in social and community
life, at the place of work, all these dif¬
ferent elements of educational
space/time provide, perhaps, a clearer
idea of the concept of lifelong
education.
In the world of tomorrow will
lifelong education provide an adequate
response to the growing demand for
education from individuals and peoples
caught up in the reality of the con¬
tradictions of everyday life? Teaching
people how to live with these contradic¬
tions is perhaps the principal task of
education today. Education of an
"ideal" man, education which is but
adaptation, or education limited to
strictly professional ends will no longer
satisfy the individual, the community
or the countries of the world called
upon, often at very short notice, to face
up to radical changes affecting
economic, social and cultural life.
Who will be responsible for initiating
policies and activities to further
lifelong education? Individuals, the
creative members of society, social and
cultural organizations, professional
educators, all will have a part to play,
whether in educational institutions, at
the place of work, in the social life of
the community, or in the field of
leisure. Everyone, whether professional
educator or not, will have to contribute

to the preparation of policies, legisla¬
tion, planning renewal, the administra¬
tion and the evaluation of education.
Furthermore, it will be for those prin¬
cipally involved in the educational pro¬
cess, whether children, adolescents or
adults, to define the objectives, the
philosophy and the values of educa¬
tion. Those involved in the educational
process, from the school to lifelong
education, arc becoming more and
more numerous and. present a challenge
which existing educational and produc¬
tive systems have often been reluctant
to take up.
Lifelong education means making
full use of a society's human resources.
It is an education which meets in¬
dividual and collective aspirations and
needs and whose end is action. It is in
the search for this full use of human
resources that education stands reveal¬
ed as the sensitive nerve point of rela¬
tions between the social classes, bet¬
ween "central" and "peripheral"
countries and between individuals
fighting for individual and collective
human rights and the forces of
repression.
Ettore Gelpi
Games play an important educative role in
childhood, helping to develop personality and to
build up manual dexterity, a sense of logic and
creative ability. They are both a means of expres¬
sion and an apprenticeship for life. Above, a study
in concentration in a school in the German
Democratic Republic.
Photo © Thomas Billhardt. Berlin, German Democratic Republic
Refugees form one of largest of the world's educationally disadvantaged
groups. There are 10 million refugees in the world of whom 5 million are
in Africa. Under its programme for Promotion of the Right to Education of
Particular Groups, Unesco aims to make the general public aware of the
special problems of refugees and to develop the educational possibilities
open to them. Above, a young refugee in Malaysia.
Photo J. Isaac. Unicef
It's never too late to learn! The extension of non-working time (leisure,
retirement, unemployment) offers increasing opportunities for self-
instruction. Left, knowledge in stacks in a street of the old city of Tunis.
Photo Dominique Roger, Unesco
