The kolkhoz
of Chtcherbani
by Yevgeny Novikov
DECADE after decade, century
after century, drought has struck
the steppelands on the shores of the
Black Sea with inexorable regularity. And
although the chernozem, the rich black
earth of this region in which the ancient
village of Chtcherbani is situated, is capable
of producing abundant harvests, four years
out of ten the vital element of water is lack¬
ing. In other words, this is an area typical of
the regions of "risk agriculture" in which
the Soviet Union produces three-quarters of
the cereals it needs.
The village of Chtcherbani is older than
most towns in the Soviet Union. Two and a
half centuries ago, the Cossacks responsible
for the defence of Russia's southern
borders established their winter quarters
there. Between campaigns the Cossacks
YEVGENY VLADIMIROVICH NOVIKOV is a
Soviet journalist specializing in questions related
to agricultural and agro-industrial development
and social development in rural areas. He has
published many articles and essays on these sub¬
jects in the Soviet press and elsewhere.
returned to Chtcherbani there to live the or¬
dinary life of peacetime, living in their own
houses with their families, tilling the land
and raising sheep. In the middle of the last
century some 1 ,600 people lived at Chtcher¬
bani, approximately the same number as
today.
The present-day inhabitants of Chtcher¬
bani are organized in a kolkhoz, one of the
co-operative agricultural enterprises
operated by peasants typical of Soviet
agriculture, which, with the sovkhozy, the
large State-operated farming units, produce
ninety per cent of the agricultural output of
the Soviet Union.
In conformity with the regulations, any
inhabitant of the village aged 16 or over
who is willing to contribute his labour can
become a member of the kolkhoz. The
kolkhoz has a permanent allocation of
10,000 hectares of land and is run by a
chairman and a committee elected for a
period of three years.
For the past twenty-five years, the
general assembly of the kolkhoz has
regularly re-elected Nikolai Riabochapka as
Right, a peasant family
in the Lithuanian SSR at
work on the family plot
on which they grow
forage for their
livestock. Some 40 per
cent of the cost of
building their comfor¬
table, traditional style
house (in background)
was borne by the
kolkhoz of which they
are members. Over the
past 15 years, housing
equivalent to a surface
area of 500 million
square metres has been
built in the rural areas of
the USSR.
Photo M Nachinkin ©Sower Union
magazine, Moscow
18
Photo © Soviet Union magazine, Moscow
chairman. Well-built, with greying hair and
a superb Cossack moustache, Nikolai
Riabochapka strikes one as an energetic,
outgoing man.
"The kolkhoz has 6,500 hectares of
arable land of which a third can be ir¬
rigated", Riabochapka explained. "Each
year it produces 6,000 to 10,000 tons of
cereals, 9,000 to 12,000 tons of vegetables,
700 to 850 tons of sunflower seeds, nearly
1 ,200 tons of meat, over 3,000 tons of milk,
30 tons of wool and more than 1,500,000
eggs. The greater part of this production is
sold to the State and earns for the kolkhoz
a gross revenue of 5 million roubles (at the '
official rate, one rouble equals $1.40).
"Our dealings with the State are based on
the national Five-Year-Plan", he added.
"In determining our annual and our five-
year production we start by negotiating
with local officers of the Plan the type and
quantity of products we shall be able to sell
them. On the basis of this production
forecast, the kolkhoz is allotted credits and
can buy agricultural machinery, fuel, fer-

Above, this aerial view of a Soviet kolkhoz gives an idea of the extent of its lands, a factor which favours the use of large scale
agricultural machinery. Today, the Soviet Union has a striking record in agriculture ranking among the world's top five producers
for twenty-five different food products. This is an impressive achievement when it is remembered that, during the Second World
War, occupying forces ravaged the land and slaughtered 60 million head of cattle. The Second World War cost the USSR more than
30 per cent of its national wealth 1710 towns and more than 70,000 hamlets and villages were partially or totally destroyed and
tens of thousands of kolkhozy and sovkhozy were devastated.
tilizers and other industrial products."
In theory the kolkhoz is independent, but
its economic interests are so closely linked
with those of the State that each is depen¬
dent on the other, a situation which, accor¬
ding to Riabochapka, is on the whole
favourable to the members of the kolkhoz.
For example, they have a guaranteed
market for their products at a purchase
price which makes it possible for them to
make, a profit.
During the period 1976 to 1980, the pur¬
chase price fixed for cereals was such that
on two occasions the kolkhoz made a profit
of over 100 per cent; only in the bad year of
1980 did the profit drop to 60 per cent.
Sunflower seeds have proved to be a suc¬
cessful crop and members of the kolkhoz
have also done well with their sales of
vegetables, although in recent years milk
and meat production have resulted in a
deficit. The overall profitability of the
kolkhoz varies, but, even in the worst years
of drought, it has never fallen below 12 per
cent.
Improvement is expected in the return on
stock-farming since the State has raised the
purchase price of milk and meat
throughout the country with effect from
January 1983. Each year the State puts
aside about 16,000 million roubles for the
improvement of purchase prices and for the
subsidies paid to the less profitable produc¬
tion units. A feature of the Soviet economy
is that purchase prices are not reduced in
good years and this stimulates the sale of
surplus production which is fixed in pro¬
portion to average output over the previous
five years.
According to Nikolai Riabochapka, the
agreements negotiated with the State have a
stabilizing influence on the production
policy of the kolkhoz which cannot be
changed abruptly from year to year. But to
fulfil its commitments, the kolkhoz is free
to make use of the means at its disposal as
it thinks fit.
In Tsarist Russia, vast areas of the finest
land belonged to the great landowners, to
members of the imperial family, to
speculators and to non-working landlords;
these between them owned 150 million hec¬
tares. A further 80 million hectares belong¬
ed to the kulaks, or wealthy peasants, who
represented a sixth of all landowners. This
left only 135 million hectares for more than
20 million poor peasant households.
Generally speaking, the ordinary pea¬
sant's plot of land was insufficient to ensure
his family's subsistence. In years of normal
harvest about half the peasants of Russia
had insufficient wheat to last them through
to the next harvest. They suffered from
hunger in their millions, whilst the land¬
owners and the kulaks sold their wheat
abroad. At that time Russia was the world's
largest exporter of grain.
After 1917, a decree of the young Soviet
State abolished the right of private owner¬
ship of land, the properties of the imperial
family and other landowners were con¬
fiscated and their exploitation was en¬
trusted to those who were willing to work
them themselves, all hired labour being
forbidden.
19

Nevertheless, the peasants still experienc¬
ed considerable difficulty in getting the best
from the land. Bearing in mind that each
family produced as many as ten or more dif¬
ferent types of crop, it is easy to imagine
how small a plot of land was devoted to
each crop. The only way out of this situa¬
tion seemed to be the introduction of collec¬
tive agriculture by the creation of a system
of co-operative production.
The first kolkhoz was formed at Chtcher¬
bani in 1924 and consisted of eleven poor
families out of a total of over 300 in the
village. Although the authorities provided
credit, seeds and technical assistance and
organized centres for agricultural
machinery and tractors, it took five years to
overcome the peasants' mistrust of co¬
operative ventures. By 1929, the poor
peasants of Chtcherbani had organized six
kolkhozy, each of which managed 1,500
hectares of land. Within a year they sold to
the State 14.7 tons of wheat, an achieve¬
ment which was recognized as a con¬
siderable success.
After the setback of the enormous
damage suffered during the Second World
War, the Soviet economy resumed its rapid
growth. Statistics show that at the beginn-
ing of the century three-quarters of the
working population of Russia were
employed in agriculture. Today the propor¬
tion of agricultural workers is four times
lower, while gross agricultural production
is four times greater.
Average annual production of cereals
rose from 72.5 million tons in 1909-1913 to
205 million tons in the latter half of the
1970s. Since then production has risen to
0.8 tons per head of population, but this is
still insufficient. It is estimated that a pro¬
duction of one ton per head of population
is needed to meet normal cereal re¬
quirements and to ensure adequate supplies
of stock-feed concentrates.
Since the founding of the Soviet Union,
production in other major agricultural sec¬
tors has also increased production of milk
and meat has at least trebled, production of
vegetables has increased five times, of eggs
six times and of cotton fifteen times. Today
the USSR is the world's leading producer of
wheat, sugar beet, sunflower seed, cotton,
flax, potatoes, milk and butter.
The rate of growth in production of
foodstuffs has consistently been greater
than the rate of growth in population,
which has increased by 35 million since
1965; but this in turn has been outstripped
by the growth in individual incomes as a
result of which it has been necessary to im¬
port some agricultural products to meet the
subsequent increase in demand. A new food
programme has now been established aimed
at achieving an effective balance between
supply and demand and satisfying the needs
of the population.
Agricultural productivity in the Soviet
Union is often assessed in comparison with
that of other countries with advanced
agricultural economies, but it is too often
forgotten that Soviet agricultural workers
have to contend with unfavourable natural
and climatic conditions.
20
In the USSR, nearly 60 per cent of
agricultural land and 58 per cent of arable
land is situated in areas liable to drought or
semi-drought conditions; 40 per cent of the
arable land receives less than 400 mm of
rain a year. Less than 1.1. per cent of
agricultural land is located in areas
benefiting from optimum growing
conditions.
Each peasant household supplements its
income by cultivating its own individual
plot of land which may be as big as half a
hectare. At Chtcherbani, for example, the
581 households all cultivate their family
plots which produce enough fruit and
vegetables to meet their own needs and pro¬
vide a surplus for sale at the local market.
The kolkhoz also offers each household, at
virtually cost price, chickens, pigs and fat¬
tening cattle which they are encouraged to
raise on their individual plots. Feed and
veterinary care and advice are also
provided.
The Chtcherbani kolkhoz includes about
a hundred specialists such as agronomists,
stock-breeding experts and mechanical
engineers. At the beginning of the century,
the only educated people in a Russian
village were the priest, the landowner, the
health officer, the teacher and the land
surveyor. A good three-quarters of the
peasants could neither read nor write.
In 1890, a primary school was opened at
Chtcherbani, but, as a representative of the
local authorities declared: "In such a
poverty-stricken village the indigence of the
people is such that they cannot send their
children to school for the simple reason that
they haven't the wherewithal to clothe
them." Today, two-thirds of the working
population of the village have a complete or
partial secondary or higher education. One
family in three has its own library and the
village's two public libraries contain some
18,000 books.
In one of these books an extract from a
document dating back a hundred years
catches the eye. "The inhabitants of the
region have reached such a degree of pover¬
ty that immediate aid is essential. And this
aid should be an outright gift, since a loan
would only add to their already huge debts
which they will never be able to repay..."
The value of this document is that it acts as
a kind of benchmark for the villagers, a
criterion by which to évalue and appreciate
the changes that are apparent in their lives
today.
H Yevgeny Novikov
In most kolkhozy, the Cultural Centre, with its artists' studios, cinema and
concert halls, its libraries and its clubrooms, is the focus of intense social
and cultural activity. The spread of ownership of television sets and other
audio-visual equipment has not reduced the frequency of peasant family
visits to theatres and museums. Below, Cotton-picking in Armenia (1 931 ),
by the Soviet artist Paul Kuznetsov.
