World
Communications
Year
COMMUNICATIONS and development are in¬
separable. Effective communications services
are vital to the rational management of
economic activities in the complex world of today.
Without adequate communications infrastructures the
developing countries cannot hope to achieve any real
measure of self-sufficiency, they will be denied access
to the store of knowledge accumulated in the world's
data banks, development strategies will have little
chance of achieving lasting success and the grand
design of establishing a new international economic
order will be seriously compromised.
It was in recognition of "the fundamental impor¬
tance ofcommunications infrastructures as an essential
element in the economic and social development of all
countries" that, in proclaiming 1983 World Com¬
munications Year, the General Assembly of the United
Nations deliberately added the sub-title Development
of Communications Infrastructures.
The purpose of the World Communications Year is
thus to increase the scope and effectiveness of com¬
munications as a force for economic, cultural and
social development.
Two difficulties immediately come to mind. Firstly,
the cost of establishing viable communications in¬
frastructures appears, at first glance, to be alarmingly
high given the present state of the world economy. It is
vital therefore to recognize the multiplier effect ofcom¬
munications which have become the keystone of the
economic edifice.
Secondly, the very rapid rate of advance in com¬
munications technologies and the bewilderingly wide
variety ofsystems available, not all of which are com¬
patible with each other, makes selection of the type of
technology to be adopted extremely difficult.
Government leaders and decision-makers are thus
faced with choices which are difficult to reconcile. Only
through a concerted effort of planning and co¬
ordination at both the international and the national
level will viable solutions be found.
The activities to be undertaken during World Com¬
munications Year are therefore designed to achieve the
following objectives:
to focus attention on the need to develop national
communications infrastructures An view of their
primary importance in the overall development
process;
to ensure proper co-ordination in the establishment
of these infrastructures so that all sectors ofa country 's
economy can make a balanced, complementary con¬
tribution to its total socio-economic development;
to inform planners, decision-makers and the public
about the opportunities offered by the new techniques
and systems available so that they will be able to make
rational and informed choices;
to mobilize national and international resources for
the intensive development of communications in¬
frastructures, particularly in the poorest regions;
to make proposals for the elaboration of a global
communications policy within the context of national
and international development strategies.
Richard E. Butler
Secretary-General of the International
Telecommunications Union and Co-ordinator
of the World Communications Year
Official emblem of World
Communications Year,
1983.
