Waters
of life
by Henri Lopes
Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris
The Wagenia people, who live on the banks of the Congo near Boyoma Falls, are expert
and daring fishermen. In the rapids they build ingenious wooden scaffolding structures
from which are suspended man cone-shaped fish traps.
t~ r

I have travelled so much that on occa¬
sion I have forgotten the map traced
out by glow-worms, the village
dance, and even the way of tightening the
throat muscles to articulate, the men, the
hand, the fire, the drop, the salt and that
which burns, on the path from the thighs
to the pectorals. But when, in some place
or other on this earth, deprived of flam¬
boyant trees and the odour of mangoes,
my heart guided my footsteps aimlessly
along beaches, questioning the
fascinating mystery of the abyss, it was
always to you that my thoughts returned.
For do nof envy the ocean.
Do you know the River, just up-stream
of M'Foa and Kinshasa? When the boat
leaves the port and obliquely fends the
fantasia of foam, its smoke still holds in
long suspension the dream of the
dreamer who follows it from the quays.
It will have disappeared from view before
it reaches Nsélé.
If you have never made the pilgrimage
to Loango, do not hold out the begging
Comparatively little of the vast hydroelectric potential of the Congo basinestimated
to be in the region of 130,000,000 kilowatts- has so far been harnessed. Above, the
hydroelectric dam at Inga, about 40 kilometres upstream from Matadi, was completed
in 1972 with an installed capacity of 300,000 kilowatts. The Inga dam represents only
the first phase of a grandiose scheme which, if completed, would make this site the
largest hydroelectric complex in the world, with a potential capacity of 30,000,000
kilowatts.
bowl, go up to the plateau at the level of
Malébo Pool.
You who hunt or fish by night, what¬
ever your patience, whatever the art of
him who weaves your fish traps and nets,
there's no point in trying, no trick will
surprise the manatees the elders told us of
when they taught us about life and about
the country.
The river has been emptied. The
caymans (or crocodiles, I have never real¬
ly known which) have fled too. If you still
insist on dreaming and on crossing a
stretch or two of the spirit kingdom, then
open Ngando*, by the elder Lomani-
Tchibamba, the first who wanted to set
down the song of the mothers to their
sons, the first to say:
"Beware! Don't go to the river. Go
straight to school... We have enough
water in our well; I will fill you the big
pool and you can amuse yourself as you
like... Beware, my child, not to the
river."
He will also tell you about Ngando
eating the child.
He will tell you about Ngando the
magnanimous returning his prey.
Ah! Do not say, with a sophisticated
scholar's smile, that this is the world of
tales, as beautiful as the unreason of
styles, but a world which the present age
has swept away. The outboard motor-
boat fends the liquid and my heart
breaks. Look at these men of water and
nets on M'Bamou Island. And listen to
them too. Above all listen to them when
the tom-tom throbs to sing the bride and
groom, to calm the river's pain, or simply
to drive away the mosquitoes. Only
yesterday a young man from the city
came and, sneering, bathed there. All the
arts of the swimming pool at his
fingertips.
He went straight to the bottom.
Yes, right before our eyes. Thus light¬
ning puts a stop to all who are oblivious
of the oath to the spirits.
Why do you not learn the wisdom of
silence and humility? By listening to the
leaves of night, they could tell of the
adventure that bends Congo.
As for those boats of yours...
Nodules of noise and grease...
The fish have lost their flesh. Nothing
but bones, bones, bones!
Pass by, tenacious islets. No one will
know the secret of the water hyacinths.
Neither the source nor the sky. But where
are the canoers with the athletes' voices
and the ships with wheels, glow-worms of
strange dreams which answered our
boyish greetings with the lash of the in¬
sults of that time? Oh, you we wished to
adore! Even my song of awakening goes
astray, caught up in your gluey toils.
There must be a return to the water, to
wet the feet there, for the washing of the
hands, the face and the mouth. For garg¬
ling too, sometimes, so that you can cry
until you can cry no more.
These waters gave life.
And like Nzambé, the Father, they
took it away, in a sovereign game.
Always by surprise. Such is the rule,
without explanation. Traveller deprived
of muscled breasts, beware the eyes of
our waters. Beware the beauty who
glistens as she looks at a sky the colour of
a rascally lover. In an overweening desire
13

Photo Almasy, Paris
Pile dwellings in the Congo delta.
The Congo waterway system comprises a navigable network totalling
some 1 3,500 kilometres. It carries over two million tons of freight an¬
nually despite the many obstructions which hamper passage, not
least of which is the proliferation of aquatic vegetation, such as these
water hyacinths.
to caress her, a team of canoers smashes
like an egg against the rock. They roll,
rush and sink in the elements. The
faithful women in mourning, on the
banks of Kin and M'Foa, still hold their
breath, seeking to decode in the howling
of the tornado the songs of those who
rush towards Djoué. Thus, like the
hours, until the malanga** of joy.
You would need to go far, far across
the seas, impossible now to say how far,
beneath a like fiery sky, go to the
Amazon, to find such speed, such surg¬
ing. Power of light or of carcass,
whatever you wish, what matter the
geographer's figures. It can be sensed.
They came from the summit of the sea.
They asked for your papers and we
declared Nzadi, Nzadi the River,
naturally.
Zaire repeated their clumsy throats
and they wrote it down on their sea-
route.
But we do not give in, in spite of the
seasons and the centuries. The brothers,
over there, only remember two cradles:
the other is Guinea. "Si no tienes de Con¬
go, tienes de Carabali"*** chorus the
Mambi neighbours.
Congo, then, baptismal fonts
notwithstanding.
Diogo Cao died believing that you led
to the kingdom of Préster John. We
knew better, for once! This meander led
only to the court of the Makoko, that one
to the court of Mani Kongo.
Who has only one name, when all's
said and done? There is the name given at
birth. The name given at circumcision.
That which is won in combat. That of the
enemy. That of the time of the white
beard.
And so it is with you: Oyez for
Lukuga, oyez for Ruzizi, oyez for
Luapulu, oyez for Luvua, oyez for
Lualaba, oyez for the mystery of the
heavenly host. And that's only part of the
magic. Lake Kivu and Lake Moéro too.
Where does the lazy water end, the
alphabet of your course? A weakling, at
first you do not yet dare run. Who will
recognize the tea-coloured youth who
rushes headlong, horns foremost,
towards Lukoléla, after his marriage
with the river of the Sangos? Then,
dignified and powerful, His Majesty pur¬
sues his course to the Djoué. And here is
the inferno where the water can be heard
seething, whirling in the dance of the
demented, hurled in burning spray above
the rocks, stirred up by an unmanageable
fire down there beneath the crust.
Paralysed and delighted, the indifferent
traveller suddenly wants to question the
heavens.
Then, Mai-Ndombé, San Antonio, the
mouth and the horizon. Weary, your soul
at peace, you will stretch yourself out for
ever like a combatant, his task ac¬
complished, in the salt of dissolution.
Congo.
Henri Lopes
* Literally Crocodile.
* * A kind offuneral wake.
*** "Ifyou're not Congo, you're Carabali"
