Pacific adventure
by Peter Gathercole
OUTSIDERS often see the Pacific
world as little more than images
of tropical beauty; cloudy peaks,
sea, sunsets, palm trees and endless
beaches. The reality is otherwise.
First, consider the size. The Pacific
Ocean covers one third of our planet, and
inevitably it is a world of islands aside,
that is, from Australia, the world's
smallest continent, which lies somewhat
apart in the southwest. There are perhaps
25,000 islandsranging from New
Guinea, the world's largest, to the merest
speck of an atoll of which about 1,500
are inhabited.
PETER GATHERCOLE, British an¬
thropologist, is Dean of Darwin College, Cam¬
bridge. He has taught at Otago University,
Dunedin, New Zealand, as well as at the Univer¬
sities of Oxford and Cambridge, and is the
author ofsome 50 studies on the archaeology and
anthropology of the Pacific region.
Second, it is a world of people, five
million of whom live between the
Tropics. They inhabit a surprisingly
diverse range of environments. Both
atolls and high volcanic islands festoon
the Central Basin, although they are
fewer and more isolated towards its
eastern edge. Arcs of mountain chains,
geologically and environmentally more
varied, lie to the west, fronting Asia, and
extending as far south as New Zealand.
So the Pacific consists of more than
"desert islands" or volcanic outcrops. It
is also lofty mountains, bleak extinct
craters, dense and humid rain forests,
and in New Zealand majestic stands
of kauri pine and totara. Indeed, in that
more temperate land is every variety of
landscape.
The people themselves are equally
varied and diverse in origin. When, after
the Ice Age, Australia and New Guinea
were still joined, hunters came from
southeast Asia, about 40,000 years ago,
some of whom probably reached even the
smaller islands immediately east of New
Guinea. Among their descendants are to¬
day's Australian aborigines, whose
culture is the most continuous in human
history. The rest of the south Pacific was
settled much later, however, by people
whom anthropologists call Austrone-
sians, because they spoke related
languages from which most of the
present-day languages of the area are
derived. The Austronesians were the
world's greatest colonizers, spreading
eventually as far westward as
Madagascar, eastward to Easter Island,
northward to Hawaii, and as far south as
New Zealand.
They peopled the Pacific, including the
islands east of New Guinea, today called
Melanesia, the scatter of islands (mostly
atolls) to the north, known as
Micronesia, and the entire central Pacific
Above, sketch of a Tongan, double hulled, ocean-going tongiaki, with in the rigth foreground a small fishing canoe and in the
background visiting European ships lying at anchor in the harbour of Amsterdam Island, now Tongatapu, Tonga, as seen by the Dutch
explorer Abel Tasman in 1643. Later, the English explorer Captain Cook (1728-1779) described and encounter with a huge tongiaki
carrying 150 warriors and sailors "sailing three knots to our two and sailing us out of sight to windward before nightfall".
33

triangle of Polynesia, including Samoa,
Tonga, Tahiti, Hawaii, Easter Island and
New Zealand. Of this remarkable pro¬
gression of discovery, archaeology is to¬
day the main witness. Settlement was well
under way by 2000 BC, and was com¬
pleted before the end of the first millen¬
nium of our era.
Polynesians were skilled ocean-going
navigators, as the extent of their voyages
across the empty reaches of the Pacific
shows. Their sixty-foot, double canoes
were built essentially of wooden planks
lashed to frames with coconut fibre and
caulked with breadfruit gum. Under mat
sails they could cover 1 00 to 1 50 miles per
day. They were also masters of the art of
preserving food and could travel up to
5,000 miles on a single voyage. Naviga¬
tion techniques were probably similar to
those found in Micronesia, and these
must have been used to settle the far-
flung islands of the "Polynesian
Triangle".
It is remarkable that Micronesian
canoe captains still navigate over hun¬
dreds of miles of ocean by traditional
means. They use stars, especially when in
zenith, as destination guides ("Star com¬
passes"), also bird flight-paths, changing
water colours (green betrays the presence
of a reef) and swell patterns which give an
island's bearings.
The Tongan ocean-going double canoe
(tongiaki) was probably typical of the
large canoes of Western Polynesia.
Remarkably seaworthy, it attracted the
admiration of such European explorers
as Tasman (1643) and Cook (1773, 1774,
1777). One canoe seen by Tasman had a
hearth in use on its deck.
The sea is many things; a highway and
a source of danger, but above all a source
of food. The Pacific has the richest range
of marine fauna in the world and, not
surprisingly, Pacific islanders are fine
fishermen, using line, net or trap for a
catch that can extend to shark, turtle and
occasionally whale. Atoll inhabitants
often take at least half their food needs
from the sea: from lagoons, reefs or the
open ocean.
Building a canoe on Satawal Island (one of the Caroline Islands), Micronesia.
A SWELL WAY TO NAVIGATE.
When main ocean swells en¬
counter an obstacle, such as an
island, they rebound creating new
swell patterns which indicate the
bearings of the obstacle. With
years of training and experience
behing them, Polynesian sailors
can detect these changing swell
patterns from the slap of waves on
the hulls of their craft. Meeting the
reflected swell from an island at an
angle, they have only to steer into
the swell to head straight for the
unseen landfall.
Diagram © Courtesy of the National Geographic
Society, Washington, D. C

Polynesian ceremonial canoe paddle
(61.5 cm) representing the human face
reduced to its essentials; used to beat
time during ceremonial singing or danc¬
ing or twirled by the dancers in rapid, in¬
tricate movements.
Guide the handle of my steering paddle,
My paddle Kautu-ki-te-rangi.
The handle heaves high Into the sky.
The endlessly receding sky.
The endlessly approaching sky.
The sky wherein resides the heavenly force.
Maori Sea Chant
Photo © Musée de l'Homme, Pans
The naturalist Joseph Banks, a
member of the British explorer Captain
Cook's first expedition to the Pacific
Ocean, which reached Tahiti in 1769,
gave the following description of Tahi-
tian fishing methods:
"In every expedient for taking fish they
are vastly ingenious. Their Seines, netts
for fish to mesh themselves in etc are ex¬
actly like ours: they strike fish with har¬
poons made of Cane and pointed with
hard wood in a more dextrous manner
than we can do with ours that are headed
with iron, for we who fasten lines to ours
need only lodge them in the fish to secure
it, while they... throwing theirs quite
from them must either mortaly wound
the fish or loose him. Their hooks... [are]
of two sorts, first that... which is used for
towing. . . The shank is made of mother of
Pearl the most glossy that can be got...
for making all manner of woven objects,
quite apart from the food value of the
fruit.
The ancestors brought a number of
plants vital for existence, including
breadfruit, cassava, taro and yam.
Ultimately these plants were joined by
the sweet potato, arriving from the
Americas by a means still not known.
Cooked in the earth oven, often with pig
meat, they form the basis even of feasts,
for the people have always associated
eating with some forms of ceremonial.
Techniques for preserving taro, bread¬
fruit, fish and meat for some time have
always existed. Indeed, it was the ex¬
istence of these techniques that enabled
the Austronesians to survive voyages
lasting as long as two months and provid¬
ed the key to the great Pacific adventure.
Peter Gathercole
Polynesian fish hooks drawn by
Joseph Banks, a member of Cap¬
tain Cook's first expedition to the
Pacific.
[there] is a tuft of white dogs or hogs hair
which serves may be to imitate the tail of
a fish. These hooks require no bait... the
people who go out with them having
found by the flights of birds which con¬
stantly attend shoals of Bonitos where
they are, Paddle their Canoes as swift as
they can across them and seldom fail to
take some. This Indian invention seems
far to exceed any thing of the kind which
I have seen among Europeans...
"The other sort of hooks which they
have are made likewise of mother of
Pearl or some hard shell, and as they can
not make them bearded as our hooks they
supply that fault by making the points
turn much inwards... they have them of
all sizes and catch with them all kinds of
fish very sucessfully I beleive".
But for many islanders the land is a far
greater resource. Even the attenuated
flora of atolls includes the ubiquitous
coconut palm and pandanus, whose
leaves, as well as those of the sugar cane
and of the sago palm are invaluable for
house thatching. The leaves are also used
Vessels of the Island of Otaha:
unsigned wash-drawing, made
in 1769 during Captain Cook's
first voyage to the Pacific,
shows Society Islanders fishing
from rafts and double-hulled
and outrigger canoes.
Photo © All rights reserved
35
