Photo © Raghavendra Rao, Madras



Tamil
women
at the
crossroads
by C. S. Lakshmi
IN the Tamil epics women are de¬
picted as formidable personalities
with superior moral power, capable
of such extraordinary feats as burning
down an entire city to avenge the death of
a husband. This image persisted until the
dawn of the twentieth century, by which
time Tamil women were becoming aware
that it contrasted starkly with the realities
of their inferior status and were athirst
for knowledge and formal education. A
number of distinguished men supported
the cause of women's education, but con¬
troversy arose about the kind of educa¬
tion that should be provided and about
the medium of instruction. Since women
were considered as "do-gooders" it was
widely felt that education should prepare
them for service in such careers as
teaching and, later, medicine.
C. S. LAKSHMI is a specialist in women's
studies who is currently working on an illustra¬
ted social history of women in Tamil Nadu in
the twentieth century.
36

While the early women teachers who
taught girls in their homes in the second
half of the nineteenth century had mostly
been Christians, in the early twentieth
century it was Hindu widows who met
the need for a body of committed
teachers. Hindu widows were not allow¬
ed to remarry and there were large
numbers of them because of the prevail¬
ing system of child marriage. (Little girls
aged two or three often found themselves
widows, condemned to a life of
drudgery. Brahmin widows were' also
tonsured when they came of age, and
thus became physical outcasts as well.)
The fate of many of these widows
began to change through the pioneering
work of a courageous young woman
named Subbalakshmi, fondly known as
Sister Subbalakshmi, who grew up
among widows and was for many years
haunted by a childhood memory of atten¬
ding a wedding where she had seen a
three-year-old girl being teased because
she was a widow. Sister Subbalakshmi
was herself widowed at the age of eleven
and was only able to pursue her studies
because she was encouraged to do so by
her liberal-minded father. She trained to
be a teacher and then opened a home for
widows and began to train them as
teachers too.
Women's education gave rise to many
jokes about women who neglected their
homes while their husbands struggled
with the children, and about women who
could not cook without referring to a.
book of recipes. New fashions in clothes
were also made fun of in cartoons and
jokes which expressed the anxieties and
fears of a generation of people con¬
fronted by a changing world.
It was but a short step from education
for "service" to activities in favour of
reform. In the early twentieth century
two Englishwomen, Annie Besant.and
Margaret Cousins, were active in the
social and political life of southern India.
In 1917 Annie Besant founded the
Women's Indian Association, and the
All India Women's Conference was in¬
augurated by Margaret Cousins in 1926.
These movements fought for such major
reforms as the raising of the age of con¬
sent for marriage, the franchise, and the
abolition of the Devadasi system. [The
Devadasi belonged to a caste of women
dedicated to the service of the patron
gods of the great temples]. Many upper-
class Indian women were inspired to call
for social reform by the two
Englishwomen, who were demanding
that the Vedic past should be revived.
Women also began to be increasingly
active in writing and the other arts. Not
only did members of the Devadasi com¬
munity, who were traditionally artists,
appear on stage and screen; women such
as Kalanidhi, Rukmini Devi and D.K.
Pattammal, who belonged to com¬
munities which traditionally did not
practise the performing arts, now became
prominent in dance and music. With the
launching of Jegan Mohini, edited by
Vai. Mu. Kodainayaki Ammal, and
Chinthamani, edited by Sister Balam-
mal, women's magazines run by women
came into vogue and began to stimulate
debate and discussions on women's
issues.
As the nation-wide agitation for in¬
dependence gathered momentum,
women were inspired by Gandhi to enter
the political arena. They picketed shops
selling imported cloth, spoke on party
platforms, travelled to spread Gandhi's
ideas, wrote articles on the need for a new
role for women, and became active in
literacy programmes. p.
Dressed in her finest
clothes and garlanded
with flowers, this Tamil
girl is the focus of atten¬
tion as she undergoes
the ceremony of satanku
to mark her arrival at the
age of puberty. A relative
places a red mark,
known as a pottu, on her
forehead both as a bless¬
ing and to ward off the
evil eye.
Photo © Marie-Louise Reiniche, Paris
Photo © All rights reserved
Sister Subbalakshmi, one of the pioneers of
education for Tamil women and leader of the
struggle to rescue widows from their miserable
status as work drudges and social outcasts.
37

TAMIL WOMEN AT THE CROSSROADS
In 1947 the Women's Welfare Depart¬
ment was started and set itself "the dif¬
ficult and comprehensive task of
assisting women in rediscovering
themselves". Since the 1950s the world of
Tamil women seems to have expanded to
encompass fields from which they were
previously excluded. The working
woman has become a familiar figure in
the towns and cities. Women's associa¬
tions have proliferated. The literacy rate
among Tamil women is comparatively
high.
In spite of these changes, however, the
roles formerly performed by women have
neither disappeared nor been transform¬
ed. Although it may be camouflaged in
various ways, the traditional image of the
chaste woman and the devoted mother is
still reflected in modern Tamil literature,
in the media, and in customs. Most
female characters in stories have an overt
and a hidden face. The overt face is seem¬
ingly "modern", but at some point in the
story the character proves that modernity
has not destroyed her hidden, more
beautiful, traditional face. Gruesome
punishments are often meted out to those
who stray from this cast-iron mould: fire
and water are considered purifying
elements and have often been used as
devices for the physical destruction of an
"impure" character. When physical
destruction is eschewed, social degrada¬
tion, ostracism and neglect provide alter¬
natives which in some cases may seem
less merciful.
The media image of women, shaped by
commercialization, is very close to that
found in literature. In the media the
traditional and modern images are often
termed "good" and "bad", and more
often than not the "good" prevails over
the "bad". Commercial values have also
affected family relationships, including
the institution of marriage, with women
being considered as saleable or non-
saleable commodities. The dowry has
assumed oppressive importance; instead
of being liberated, the woman who works
in an office has been transformed into a
dowry-earning individual.
The gulf between the urban and rural
woman has widened. In the early part of
the century the rural woman was con¬
sidered a romantic figure, morally
courageous and physically beautiful. She
sang soft lullabies and traditional love-
songs in her unsophisticated rustic voice.
Much has happened to change this idyllic
image, and it is today realized that the
rural woman belongs to an anonymous,
faceless mass enmeshed in the reality of
the struggle for a better existence.
For the Tamil woman today there are
many grounds for apprehension but
there are also grounds for hope. She
stands at a cross-roads, and the very fact
that she is aware of this is one hopeful
sign. There are others. Most of the
women's magazines that project the im¬
age of the homely woman will sometimes
devote space to discussion of a law affec¬
ting women, women's psychological pro¬
blems, or the way in which women's lives
have been ruined by distorted values.
Although coverage of such topics may be
surrounded by masses of recipes and ar¬
ticles on embroidery and dressmaking, it
nevertheless makes a dent, albeit a small
one, in a structure built on hearth and
home. From time to time a woman with
a questioning mind is also portrayed in
the media, but even though such por¬
trayals are diluted because of commercial
considerations they have still not been ac¬
cepted without comment.
The earlier phases of "rediscovery"
were directed into mother and child care
projects. They were geared to traditional
needs and were an extension of earlier
charitable activities. Today organiza¬
tions such as the Women's Democratic
Front and the Penn Urimai Iyakkam
(Women's Rights Movement) are bent on
transforming the image of women and
working towards more meaningful forms
of "rediscovery". Most women,
however, are still looking at the sky but
have not yet decided to fly. Their wings
are not clipped, and the time is not far off
when they will use them.
CS. Lakshmi
