Egypt's national film archive
by Khaled Osman
UNLIKE most developing countries,
Egypt has a very old film heritage.
The Lumière brothers organized
film shows in cafés in Cairo and Alexandria
as long ago as 1896, and shortly afterwards
films began to be made in Egypt, at first by
foreigners (mainly French, Italian and Ger¬
man film-makers) and then, from 1927 on,
by Egyptians.
This heritage, almost a century old, is a
mine of information for the film historian
to whom it reveals traces of a conception of
cinema which has to a large extent been in¬
herited by modern Egyptian film-makers,
and also for the general historian seeking to
reconstitute a historical period.
In Egypt the problem of preserving films
was for many years neglected by the
authorities who did not appreciate the in¬
terest films could hold for future
generations
If many old films have been preserved or
rediscovered in spite of the absence of pro¬
visions for mandatory deposit in the past, it
is due to private initiatives which were
praiseworthy but imperfect and necessarily
incomplete.
A special role in the field of preservation
was played by Misr Studios, which were
founded in 1935 by the great Egyptian
economic and industrial pioneer Talaat
Harb. When the Studios were created,
storage facilities were built for the preserva¬
tion of both newsreel films (which began to
KHALED OSMAN, of Egypt, is a graduate of
the Ecole des Hautes Etudes Commerciales in
Paris, and holds a law degree from the univer¬
sity of Paris. He is engaged on research into
the Egyptian cinema.
be made on a regular basis in 1925) and
feature films.
But such concern was extremely rare at
that time, when films were considered
primarily as products for short-term use, as
revealed in this anecdote. When the great
actress Fatma Roshdi was about to release
"Under the Sky of Egypt", her previous
film "Catastrophe over the Pyramids" ap¬
peared, was panned by the critics and booed
by the public. So as to maintain her status
as a star by preventing the second film
(which was in the same vein as the first)
from being shown to the public, Fatma
Roshdi, who was also the film's producer,
simply decided to destroy all existing copies
of it. Such losses are irreparable, and the
only information we have about these
vanished films is to be found in the many
fascinating art magazines published at that
time.
The initiative taken by Misr Studios was
extremely laudable, and it was a heavy blow
for Egypt when a fire caused by the
negligence of a janitor ravaged part of the
Studios in July 1950, notably affecting the
archive premises.
A growing awareness of the problem of
film preservation in the mid-1950s led to the
creation of the Egyptian Film Archive by
the Office of Arts. In the same year Egypt
participated for the first time (as an
observer) in the work of the International
Federation of Film Archives (FIAF).
But the odds seemed to be stacked against
the Egyptian Archive, for in August 1958
another fire, in this case caused by the spon¬
taneous combustion of nitrate film,
destroyed part of the collection which had
been patiently assembled .from gifts of
Egyptian and foreign films and from films
seized by the Customs.
After the fire the Archive continued to be
supplied in this way, with the addition of a
more important source in 1968 when the
Ministry of Culture was persuaded to
establish a mandatory deposit obligation.
The tide now began tó turn, although
some restrictive practices continued to ex¬
ist. The 1968 decree was not backed up by
sufficiently dissuasive sanctions; the
authorities banked on the hope, which
proved vain, that private producers would
co-operate with them, following the exam¬
ple of the Egyptian General Cinema
Organization, a public body. In 1971 the
Organization ceased its production ac¬
tivities because of an enormous chronic
deficit. However, a step forward had been
taken the year before when Egypt joined
FIAF.
But piecemeal measures were no longer
tolerable; legislation was needed. Such
legislation now exists in the shape of Law
no. 35 of 1975, which requires producers
and distributors jointly to deposit at the
Film Archive (now known as the National
Archives) a 35 mm copy made at their own
expense of any film produced for public
showing in Egypt or elsewhere.
Initial application problems have been
overcome, and today the law has given the
Archives a new lease of life; the practice of
mandatory deposit is satisfactorily carried
out since copies are subject to quality
control.
Nevertheless, the situation is still fragile;
certain producers and distributors would
like, on grounds of lack of film, to replace
the mandatory deposit requirement by pay¬
ment of a guarantee.
But this is not of central importance.
Today the path to be followed has been
signposted, and the importance of the
preservation of films is fully recognized.
Directly or indirectly, Egypt's film heritage
bears witness to the country's tormented
history in this century, with its joy and pain,
its defeats and victories, its fears and hopes.
Fortunately, the major part of it has been
saved.
Famine scene from Lashin (1937). Directed
by Fritz Kramp (dialogue by Ahmad Rami)
Lashin was a milestone in the development
of the Egyptian cinema, showing on the
screen for the first time the struggles and
sufferings of the Egyptian poor. Public
screening of Lashin was at first prohibited,
but the film later became a tremendous
popular success. Today only a few stills
from this key work survive.
