Four artists
in chiaroscuro
by Edouard Glissant
MATTA
MATTA is an artist who escapes the controversy between
abstract and figurative art, slipping out of the debating
chamber and dissolving like a wraith in the bluish haze
with which so many of his greatest works are suffused. And if what
he paints has not the immediacy of the real, neither is it a sketch-
plan or a diagram of something that exists. I would go so far as to
say that Matta is forever painting the pulsation of life.
Depth in Matta's painting is achieved by a projection forward in
front of the canvas of pictural space, a proscenium which saw his
first attempts to render visible the convulsion of modern thought:
the disintegration of old systems of logic, the vertiginous flights of
Eros, resistance against tyrannies, the unshackling of the "Savage
Mind".
Is it possible to "paint", not states of mind, but the very func¬
tioning of the mind or, going still further, that fabulous gamble the
"complete man" , reconciled with all forms of humanity, finding in
them his own being and fulfilment?
Matta's painting shows us that it can be done. What we find in
them is the movement that fuels our most personal upsoarings and
consolidates the roots we share most widely with others. Planes that
combine or resist each other on the canvas, spirals of discovery, ex¬
plosions of revealed incompatibilities, condensation into new stars
of our most intense convictions here matter joins company with
and follows the dynamism of the spirit. Matta does not paint
"things", he illuminates trajectories.
This is an artist who forever seeks to find out and demonstrate
"how things work". Not merely, like an architect reflecting on his
work, how it is constructed, but how it really functions. Can we,
for example, gauge or even begin to comprehend the vast ferment
of cultures reacting and interacting with each other today? We have
no guide or blueprint to judge by; but does this mean that we should
renounce all attempts to read the Book of Destiny? Matta's paint¬
ings raise questions such as these and show us that there is no
halting the spectacle of life.
This is thoroughly modern painting, aloof from conventional
quarrels, investigative, always in movement; we know that it has its
origins in the ancient wisdom of the Andes, but already it is explor¬
ing unknown regions that humanity is projecting on the forefront
of the proscenium stage of history.
SEGUI
THE art of Antonio Seguí has affinities with the art of prose,
the obstinacy and ruggedness of which Seguí adopts to
probe reality and bring out its raw qualities.
It has often been said that colonial Baroque resulted from a
superabundance of being. The artist took pleasure, a mischievous
pleasure perhaps, in showing that he was capable of rendering to
excess what he was expected to express: catholicity, civilization,
flamboyant rhetoric.
In the case of Seguí, we are without any doubt in the presence of
another kind of Baroque, which does not strive towards the
overelaboration of being but tracks it down behind its masquerades
and gesticulations. The aim is to discover our true nature, or what
is left of it, perhaps, when it is divested of the shabby finery impos¬
ed upon it. Paradoxically, it is the shabby finery that Seguí shows
us, so that we can guess at what is hidden beneath.
In all the different stages of Segui's painting, stages which follow
each other with mounting speed, we find the forms of this Baroque,
constantly renewed. Rickety towns, overrun towns, prostrate
passers-by, leering catastrophes, smashed dolls, clothes for
scarecrows, but also the emotion diffused by the light of a street-
lamp, the warm colour of a single tree, the word of a rainbow, the
sun of a man's step. In other words, the everyday, which pares
away our pretensions or alienations and reassures or consoles us at
the same time.
CONTINUED PAGE 27

Four artists in chiaroscuro (continued)
The unexpected thing is thus that in Segui's work the obstinacy,
and ruggedness are full of an unfailing charm. This prose is also
poetry which navigates in the depths. Seguí paints that which
perverts our nature and makes us strangers to our truth, but also
everything that carries us away, secretly nourished by an inner sun,
in the tango of tenderness.
LAM
THE art of Wifredo Lam involves a double objective: to seek
out and bring into relief the forms secreted by a very
concrete reality, that of his native island, and at the same
time to draw attention to the cultural predicament in which we find
ourselves today and which demands a contribution from each one
of us.
Lam's first concern was to fill the canvas; its poetry lies not in
the tree but in the profusion of vegetation, verticals surging from
the memory, exploding into an island-space-filling jungle. African
forms are revived, not through cliché-clouded eyes, but in all their
vital inner mobility triangles wide-eyed with astonishment form¬
ing lozenge-shaped bucklers, burgeoning ears of moon-horned
grain; and those anatomical anthologies obduracy of feet round
which the soil seems to lap like water, the Sumerian slant of the
torso inclined towards a divinity to impart a secret.
The mocking reply of the oppressed. How heartening it was, at
the turn of the 1940s, on the fringe of the drama of the Second
World War, to discover thus that nothing had been lost of the an¬
cient splendour. Delicate breadth of this assembly, within the same
space-time as Aimé Césaire, Nicolás Guillen and Langston Hughes.
The people of the Antilles had retained not only the memory of the
word, they bore within them the lightning flash of the brush-stroke,
the ochreous eminence of so many landscapes recombined.
Lam's work viewed as a whole brings together everything that the
artist has amassed, all the elements, the forms, the majestic out¬
pourings, of his island and of his remembrance, and spreads their
directing influence to everything from design to the fiesta, to en¬
counter with others. The canvas becomes less saturated. The facts
of the Caribbean reality, the revalued ways of the Black African
universe fan out in all directions to reach fulfilment, achieving con¬
summation in the vast unforeseen of the interacting world.
Lam, heaven's alchemist, preserves in his work our earthy
memories. It is his offering that every breeze that blows, no matter
whence it comes, loves to stir with its caress.
GAMARRA
IN José Gamarra's paintings animal and plant life are never
far from the source of their perpetually renewed beginning:
the fathomless waters of eternal genesis. The Forest here
unfolds from the mysterious liquid (pond, river or seashore) from
which arise, at any moment, primordial creatures and the promise
of the future. Gamarra's Forest is no illusion; it is the land of
dreams, with its astonishingly sharply defined contours, where
tropical flowers carve out their outlines against the dark blue mass
of the sky, where the new man, escaping the relentless eye of the
hunter, prepares his festivals..
This South American space-time capsule is so living, so organic
that we cannot distinguish that which was from that which is or will
be, or the forest from the plantation, the blood of the beast from
the blood of the land, the spurt of water from the cascade of oil,
the primeval bird from the helicopter.
No known artistic artifice could portray such complexity; neither
naive realism nor the sham distortions of the avant-garde whose
time scale has no foothold here. What forms and relationships
could be imagined that could meet this challenge?
Gamarra's art does more than merely offer a reply to this ques¬
tion. It defines a place where natural representation unites with the
symbolism of form, where caricature is inscribed in the living flesh
of the landscape, where the clairvoyance of myth is punctuated with
mocking laughter, and where humanity, that is to say living and
suffering beings, hide and in so doing reveal themselves.
Thus artistic tension is at one with a living experience which is
more than merely passively undergone. We are enticed to recom¬
mence a voyage of exploration more perilous than that of the seeker
of gold. Our task is to reassemble so many obscured and suppressed
stories of this America and to embed them in the tranquil per¬
manence of forms adapted to their rebirth.
27
