J^w
Ariadne's thread
by Manuel Pereira
THE flowering of science in the
last century has accustomed us
to identify science fiction with
what is most modern, newfangled and
futuristic in imaginative literature.
When we speak of science fiction we
almost invariably have in mind writers
such as Verne, Wells or Bradbury.
But is science fiction really of such
recent origin? If we look at the creative
works of the pre-scientific era, we shall
find that the roots of what we
nowadays call science fiction are to be
found in myths, folklore, cabalistic
writings, alchemy, and architecture
and plastic art of magico-religious
inspiration.
The devices and situations most fre¬
quently encountered in science fiction
can be traced back to this poetical
heritage. The earliest antecedent of
computers, for instance, was the
Delphic Oracle, which could divine and
foretell everything concerning the gods
and man. The time machine is merely a
modern version of metempsychosis,
which enabled the souls of the ancients
to transmigrate from one body to
another and consequently from one
epoch to another. As for the invisible
man, the Chinese alchemist Pao
Pu'Tsu wrote that "if someone rubs his
body with cypress juice he will become
invisible", while his European counter-
Above, this representation of a masked
figure is typical of the neolithic rock
paintings ofSefar, in the Tassili-n-Ajjer
region of the Sahara, which have been
included in Unesco's WorldHeritage List
of Cultural and Natural Properties of
outstanding universal value. It bears a
curious resemblance to many of the
illustrations of "Martians" to be found
in the science fiction magazines of the
1920s.
17

Above, neolithic rock painting from
Tasslll-n-Ajjer, In the Sahara. "Perhaps
we shall neverknow the full truth about
these Tasslli paintings. But there they
are transmitting something baffling and
mysterious, especially the most esote¬
ric scene, depleting what look like wings
floating above the heads ofmen, resem¬
bling an old-fashioned fan or the rotor
blades of a helicopter. "
* parts believed they would disappear if
they squeezed the Philosopher's Stone
in their hands. The principle of the
robot is nothing more than the
"mechanization" of the alchemist's
homunculus and the Golem of the
cabalists.
AH the interplanetary fauna which
nowadays forms part of the stock in
trade of science fiction is derived from
the mythological monsters, bestiaries
and demonology of the Middle Ages.
The creatures who pass through
Bosch's Garden of Earthly Delights
could have been taken straight out of
some war of the galaxies, and many
other fabulous beings still look down
on us from the walls of Gothic
cathedrals.
And what about the laser beams
which turn up so frequently in
futuristic literature? All the religions
were peopled with gods who cast rays
and angels with flaming swords.
Homer speaks of "Apollo, he who
wounds from afar". When Cortez ask¬
ed the Aztecs where they got their
knives, they pointed to the sky because,
as Mircea Eliade says, the blacksmiths
of ancient times employed "sacraliz-
ed" meteoric iron.
Everything that is powerful and
warlike comes from on high, whether it
be Zeus, the Indo-European God of
Thunder, or the Shango of the
Yorubaswho has been culturally
transferred to Brazil and the Carib¬
bean. The Book of Exodus tells how
"Mount Sinai was altogether on
smoke, because the Lord descended
upon it in fire". In the Vedas we also
find Indra casting lightning-flashes
with one of his four arms.
"They arose in the midst of the
light", we read in the Popol Vuh of the
Quiche Indians of Guatemala, "the
Sun fell to one of them and the Moon
to the other. Then the firmament was
filled with light... the four hundred
youths who were killed by Zipacna also
arose and were transformed into
stars..."
Of all the mysteries surrounding our
ancestors, the most undecipherable
were in the heavens. The best, if not all,
efforts of science fiction are directed
towards this aerial ocean which has
been given metaphorical form in every
culture. Thus science fiction becomes,
as it were, a counter-mythology, a
cosmogony of the future divested of
religious significance.
Man's oldest dream to fly derives
from this cosmic curiosity, and "fly" is
the dominant verb in futuristic
literature. Possibly because of
nostalgia for the winged deities, many
Yoga-fakir legends speak of people ris¬
ing in the air, and the alchemist Yo-Tsi-
Yuan claimed that by eating pine-
kernels he could rise above the ground.
Of all mythologies, the one which
best expresses this longing to fly is the
fable of the Cretan hero Icarus, the
first "cosmonaut", who flew with
wings made for him by his father
Daedalus.
Daedalus is the prototype of the syn¬
thesis between artist and scientist be¬
queathed to us by classical antiquity.
This legendary figure was sculptor, ar¬
chitect, painter and inventor. Accor¬
ding to mythologists he infused life and
movement into his statues (another
préfiguration of the robot) but he also
produced inventions in the field
of navigation. His engineering
Above, model of a helical-screw flying
machine designedby Leonardo da Vinci.
It is said that it was this design that In¬
spired Igor Sikorsky to develop the
modern helicopter.
achievements include the labyrinth
which enclosed the Minotaur (another
creature worthy of science fiction), the
thermal baths at Selianthus, the for¬
tifications of the city of Camikos, a
canal in the river Alaban, the temple of
Apollo at Cumae and the foundations
of the temple of Aphrodite on Mount
Eryx.
It was not until the Renaissance that
a living Daedalus appeared upon the
scene. Leonardo da Vinci, I'uomo
universale, was the perfect heir to the
humanist ideal of reconciling science
and the arts.
Painter, sculptor, architect, military
engineer, physicist, writer, Leonardo
also devoted himself to stratigraphy,
autopsy, anatomy, and the technical
designing of cities and machines. He
studied the fossil shells of the Appen-
nines and prided himself on his skill as
a lute-player. Careful observation of
the flight of birds led him to design the
very thing invented by Daedalus.
Three centuries were to pass before
the appearance of another Daedalus.
This time it would be a writer, an artist
of vast scientific knowledge: Jules
Verne, whose visions would have been
impossible without the accumulated
achievements of the imagination exten¬
ding from Daedalus to Leonardo a
veritable Ariadne's thread leading, as it
were, through a labyrinth to a kind of
archaeology of science fiction.
But there are other, perhaps more
far-fetched, labyrinths, and since we
are dealing with science fiction there
can be no disrespect. I am thinking of
the Maya pyramids which, according
to archaeologists, were built as
astronomical observatories.
18

Not long ago, when workers of the
Electricity Company in Mexico City
were digging up a street in order to in¬
stall a transformer, they came upon a
rock covered with reliefs. Thus was
discovered the Great Temple, which
constitutes an entire treatise on astral
symbolism, an allegorical narration by
the Aztecs offering an explanation of
the formation of the cosmos and pro¬
jecting man to the stars. Science fiction
in stone?
But the greatest flight of speculation
was launched in the Sahara in the
mid-1950s with the discovery of the
Tassili n'Ajjer rock paintings, dating
from about the Neolithic period. A
procession of really startling images is
depicted on the walls of caves.
Although some experts think they
represent ritual masks or head-dresses,
what is certain is that several of the
figures look like divers or astronauts.
Perhaps we shall never know the full
truth about these Tassili paintings. But
there they are, transmitting something
baffling and mysterious, especially the
most esoteric scene, depicting what
look like wings floating above the
heads of men, resembling an old-
fashioned fan or the rotor blades of a
helicopter. Indeed, these helicoidal ob¬
jects seem to be driven in circular
movement around an axis. In both
cases the axes are discs, and an irides¬
cent halo or reverberation can be clear¬
ly distinguished around them.
Here we can no longer speak of head¬
dresses or masks or hats. What, then, is
the meaning of these two artefacts?
The most widely advanced hypothesis
is that they are ships from another
planet which visited the region in the
remote past. I am inclined to imagine
that it is a wishful design for some kind
of flying machine. Another Tassili
painting shows wheeled cars drawn by
horses, and another depicts perfectly-
drawn insects in full flight. If the ends
of the blades of the two artefacts are
studied carefully, it will be seen that
their texture is similar to that of a but¬
terfly's wings. Why not assume that a
Daedalus could also have lived in this
cave?
From the flight of Icarus to the
sphere of Phileas Fogg and the projec¬
tile that travels from the Earth to the
moon, via the wall-paintings of Tassili,
the flying broomstick of the medieval
witch and the wings designed by
Leonardo, science and poetry combin¬
ed have traced an impressive trajec¬
tory, ending in the spaceship of today.
MANUEL PEREIRA is a Cuban novelist and
journalist whose novels El Comandante
Veneno and El Ruso have been translated into
several languages. His reports on Nicaragua
have been published under the title Cro-Nica.
He is currently a member of Cuba 's Permanent
Delegation to Unesco, and is working on a
novel set in Old Havana.
19
