KRUSHNA
the farmer
by Prafulla Mohanti
KRUSHNA Jena is my childhood
friend. We went to school together
but he left his studies when he was
twelve to help his father with farming. He
belongs to the community of farmers in my
village of Nanpur in eastern India where the
main crop is paddy rice.
Krushna lives in a mud house with a
thatched roof. He is married with five
children, three sons and two daughters. His
father died five years ago and his seventy-
five-year-old mother lives with him.
Krushna is about fifty but looks older. I
remember he had a beautiful complexion.
But now his skin is dark and withered, the
result of working in the sun and the rain.
"Rice farming is a hard task. To work
with soil you have to become soil", he says.
Krushna learned to farm by watching his
father. He is considered a good farmer, and
some villagers ask him to cultivate their
land for them. Traditionally the Brahmins
and those belonging to high castes are not
expected to do manual work. Now the
educated feel that working in the fields is
degrading. So their land is cultivated by
tenant farmers who get fifty per cent of the
produce.
Krushna has almost one and a quarter
hectares of his own land but the plots are all
scattered. Some are three kilometres away
from his house. He also works as a tenant
farmer for several families. The govern¬
ment has a plan for land consolidation and
distribution to enable the farmers to have
their land in one area. But the task is dif¬
ficult as not all the land is irrigated. The
plots near the canal are the most valuable.
Krushna starts ploughing his fields from
the middle of April, which is the beginning
of summer and the new year. The date is
fixed by the village astrologer. The
ploughing is done by bullocks using a
wooden plough made by the village
carpenter. There are no tractors; even if
they were available it would be difficult to
use them because the plots are so small.
"For rice farming a bullock plough is the
best", Krushna says.
Ploughing is an art which his father
taught him when he was ten. But in the sum¬
mer it gets so hot that the land cracks and
ploughing becomes difficult. Some showers
are needed to moisten the land.
A regular supply of water is essential for
rice farming but too much rain can damage
the crop. There is a network of rivers but no
proper irrigation. During the monsoon,
which starts in July and continues till Oc-
Below left, rice paste wall designs in
the Indian village of Nanpur feature
elephants, peacocks and lotus motifs.
(See also colour photo page 12). Below
right, Mahlia Buddha, the village deity
ofNanpur, with his attendant. The deity
is decorated with vermilion paste and a
crown of flowers.
tober, the rivers overflow. If the floodwater
stays for a week it is good for the paddy,
because it leaves a fertile silt which kills the
weeds and stimulates the growth. But when
the floodwater stays longer the paddy is
totally destroyed.
"My old mother is constantly praying to
the gods for the right amount of rain to fall
at the right time."
By the middle of June the land has been
prepared for cultivation. The farmers sow
the seeds and pray for the rain to fall. They
rest for three days, observing the popular
festival of Raja. No work is done and the
villagers eat and play. Raja was originally a
peasant festival to celebrate the wetting of
Mother Earth by the first raindrops of the
monsoon. It symbolizes menstruation and
fertility. It is a particularly enjoyable time
for the unmarried girls. For three days they
live together in one room, singing folk
songs and playing on swings. They wear
new saris and decorate their faces with
sandalwood paste and their hair with
sweet-scented tropical flowers.
Every day Krushna gets up before dawn,
washes his face and feeds his cattle with
straw, husks and rice water, which his wife
regularly stores in an earthen pot. She
sweeps the yards and prepares breakfast for
him and the family. Krushna's breakfast
consists of a bowl of watered rice with chut-
nies and raw onions. He has a patch of land
at the back of his house where he grows
chillies and vegetables. Some days his
14

mother makes rice cakes for the whole
family.
"We eat rice at every meal. In my
childhood we did not eat any chapatis
(unleavened, pancake-shaped bread) made
of wheat flour. We only had puris (fried
wheat cake) for feasts or festivals. But now
wheat is cheaper than rice and many
villagers have started eating it for their
evening meals. At midday we eat boiled
rice, dal (lentils) and vegetables. After
feeding the family my wife puts whatever
rice is left over in water and stores it in an
earthen pot. It is left to ferment and is very
popular during the summer. It is called
pakhala bhata and is delicious when mixed
with yoghurt and lemon juice and eaten
with dried fish and fried spinach."
After breakfast Krushna goes to his
fields. Sidhia Malik the Harijan helps him.
Sidhia has no land of his own and works as
a tenant farmer. Until recently even the plot
on which his house stands belonged to a
high caste villager. Now the government
has passed laws relating to land reform
which gives the ownership of the land to
Sidhia. He worked hard, saved some money
and bought two bullocks. But one died sud¬
denly last year. He has not been able to buy
another and borrows Krushna's animals to
plough the fields. Krushna stops work at
noon. On the way back he bathes in the
Krushna the farmer sitting with his son
at the entrance to his house. Beside his
feet is a sack of rice.
river, washes his animals and gossips with
his friends about farming. He says his
prayers before eating his food and rests un¬
til the sun loses its strength, about three in
the afternoon. He returns to the fields to
work until it gets dark, around six in the
evening when his wife lights the oil lamp to
welcome the night.
He fetches water from the well, feeds the
animals and tethers them in their shed.
While drinking a glass of tea with roasted
rice sprinkled on it he tells his wife about
the day's work and listens to film music on
the radio. Some evenings his friends join
him and he discusses his daughter's wed¬
ding with them. She is seventeen and has
just left school.
"It is not good to keep an unmarried
daughter in the house", Krushna's mother
warns him again and again.
But it is not easy to find a suitable boy.
The parents demand dowries; wrist-
watches, cycles, radios and gold ornaments.
Now that television has come to the towns
it has been included in the dowry.
"If only my son could get a job my
problems would be over."
His eldest son is twenty-four and recently
graduated in arts from the local college. So
far he has not been successful in finding a
job and sits at home doing nothing.
"It's difficult for me to get ready cash,
we eat whatever we grow and very little is
left over to sell. I educated my son so that
he would be able to work in the town and
send me money."
If the rain does not fall at the right time
to germinate the paddy the farmers get
desperate. They have to buy more seeds,
which are expensive. After each harvest a
certain amount of paddy is kept aside to be
used as seeds but often most of it is either
eaten by rats and insects or cooked for
food.
Rice seedlings are cultivated specially for
transplantation and the process needs a lot
of care. First the seeds are sprayed with in¬
secticide and dried in the sun. Then they are
soaked in water for twenty-four hours,
taken out and kept in bamboo baskets.
They are covered with straw and sprinkled
with lukewarm water. Gunny bags are
spread over them. After three or four days .
the seeds begin to sprout. By then the
farmers have prepared special patches of
land with manures and the seeds are sown.
The seedlings take three weeks to grow to a
height of ten centimetres and are ready to be
transplanted. In the meantime the fields are
levelled, the soil must be like mud. The
seedlings are planted in rows, fifteen cen¬
timetres apart. The rice plants need a
constant supply of water, approximately
four centimetres. Two weeks before harvest
the fields are drained dry.
"It takes four months from the day I
plant the seeds until the day of the harvest.
There are lots of problems. If the wind
blows strongly at the time of flowering, the
rice is damaged. Insects eat the plants and
I have to spray them with insecticides,
which are expensive. But we don't use them
after the paddy has come out."
The intense green fields ripple in the
breeze like green waves. Gradually the col¬
our changes to deep green and when the
plants reach a height of a metre or so, they
turn golden yellow. If it is a good crop the
plants bend down under their own weight.
"It gives me a lot of pleasure to see the
fields full of crops. I'm glad that I'm a
farmer so that my family can eat pure food
grown by me. The food we buy is adul¬
terated. The traders mix sawdust with flour
and white oil with cooking oil. In the winter
months I grow lentils, potatoes and
vegetables and sell some of them in the
market. I like market days when I meet my
friends from the other villages. I also grow
a second crop of rice during the dry
season."
Krushna does not know what the green
revolution is. The farmers are encouraged
by the government to use high-yield rice,
fertilizers and pesticides to produce a
second crop. But it can only be achieved
from November until May. A few acres of
irrigated land are cultivated, the rest re¬
mains barren. Previously cow dung was the
only form of manure, but the village
women burned most of it as fuel. Fertilizers
and pesticides are sold in the market place
without any restriction. Most farmers are
15

not aware of the harmful effects they can
have on crops and health. The pesticides are
so poisonous that they have killed off much
wild life. The jackals have disappeared, the
frogs who used to fill the night air with their
croaking are gone.
"I spray pesticides, covering my face
with a cloth. I hire a pump from the govern¬
ment. It would be easier if I could have my
own pump, but it costs a lot of money. The
government has introduced new seeds pro¬
ducing more per hectare than the local
seeds. The rice is white and cooks well, but
there is no taste in it.
"I grow different kinds of rice; some
with long grains, some short, and all with
different flavours and typical of our area.
My mother insists on growing them. Other¬
wise we will lose them in a few years, she
says."
"When I harvest the rice in November
the sky is blue and the sun is golden. I cut
the paddy and leave it in the fields for a few
days to dry. I then tie it into bunches and
carry home the bundles on my head. I feel
very proud. When the harvest is good the
whole village smiles.
"On Thursdays during the harvest season
my wife cleans the house, gives the floors
and walls a mud plaster and decorates them
with rice paste to welcome Lakshmi, the
Goddess of Wealth. My daughters make
garlands with sprays of paddy and put them
around the house. I don't go out to work
and stay at home. My wife prepares an
image of the Goddess Lakshmi by putting a
bowl of rice in the middle of the room and
decorating it with coins and flowers. The
first rice from the field is offered to the
Goddess and shared among the family.
That night I can sleep well, but my prob¬
lems are not over. Whatever I get from the
land is just about enough to maintain my
family. With eight people to look after I
have to buy clothes, medicines and pay for
the education of my children. I can't afford
to buy a new shirt for myself. Floods and
droughts occur regularly and I don't get the
return for the labour I put in."
PRAFULLA MOHANTI is an Indian writer
and painter. His paintings have been shown in
many parts of the world, including Europe, the
US, and Japan, as well as India. His classic
book My Village, My Life (1973), an evocation
of the Indian village where he was born and
brought up, has been translated into
Japanese, Norwegian and Danish. His pen-
portrait of the English as seen through Indian
eyes will be published next year by the Oxford
University Press.

