The miracle of rice
by Monkombu S. Swaminathan
KNOWN to have been cultivated in
parts of India and China for seven
thousand years, rice today is an
integral part of the lives of millions of peo¬
ple throughout the world. Used almost ex¬
clusively as human food, rice constitutes
half the diet of one thousand six hundred
million people; another four hundred
million rely on it for between twenty-five
and fifty per cent of their diet.
Rice is an annual grass of the Oryza genus
and grows in a wide range of environments,
from 50 degrees north latitude to 40 degrees
south latitude and from below sea level to
more than 2,500 metres above sea level.
Although it was originally cultivated in the
humid tropics as a semi-aquatic plant, it is
adapted to a wide spectrum of environmen¬
tal conditions ranging from arid to rather
cold situations.
There are two species of cultivated rice:
Oryza sativa, which is a common rice wide¬
ly grown in the tropical and temperate
zones, and Oryza glaberrima, which grows
in west Africa. Besides these cultivated
species, the genus Oryza comprises about
twenty wild species.
Over time, three sub-species of Oryza
sativa developed: Indica, Japónica and
Javanica. The designation Indica was used
to label the tropical rices and sub-tropical
varieties of India and China, while
Japónica covered the short- and round-
grained varieties of Japan, China and the
Korean peninsula. Javanica was used to
designate the bulu (awned or bearded) and
gundil (awnless or beardless) rices of In¬
donesia. The summer rices, the aus varieties
of eastern India and Bangladesh and the
Iong-panicled and bold-grained rices of In¬
donesia, which showed a high affinity with
both the Indica and Japónica rices, were
classified as an Intermediate Type.
East Asia
39.6 (27.5 %)
U.S
1.2 (0.8 %|
1.3 (0.9 %>
N. Africa W. Asia
0.4 (0.3 %l 0.6 (0.4 %)
Others
2.1 (1.4 %)
N. Africa and
W. Asia
1.1 (0.7 %)
Brazil
6.2 (4.3 %)
West
Pakistan
2 (1.4 %)
India
39.8 (27.6 %)
Bangladesh
10.2 (7.1 %)
Burma
Extremes of climate also led to the for¬
mation of specialized types such as upland
and deep-water rices. Varieties capable of
tolerating salinity, alkalinity or cool night
temperatures also evolved under the com¬
bined forces of human and natural selec¬
tion. There were probably more than one
hundred thousand varieties of Asian rice
before genetic erosion set in shortly after
the Second World War.
The African Oryza glaberrima rices have
a parallel evolutionary pathway to that of
Schematic map showing land devoted to
rice production throughout the world.
The space for each country is roughly
proportional to the area of land (express¬
ed in millions of hectares) planted with
rice. Also shown is each country's
percentage of the world total.
China
34.4 (23.9 %)
Rep, of Korea
1.2 (0.9
Lao People's Dem
0.7 (0.5 %)
%)
. Rep
Japan
2.5 (1.7 %)
4.8 (3.3 %|
Thailand
9.4 (6.6 %)
2.3(1.6%) Central
and East
1.8 (1.3 %)
Dem. Kampuchea
1.3 (0.9 %)
Malaysia
Southeast Asia
34.7 (24.1 %)
Philippines
3.5 (2.4 %)
Subsanaran
Africa	
4.2 (2.9 %)
Sri Lanka
0.8 (0.5 %)
0.7 (0.5 %)
South Asia
54.1 (37.5 %)
Soc. Rep, of Viet Nam
5.4 (3.7 %)
Indonesia
8.9 (6.2 %)
Chart (: Scientific American, New York
Oceania
0.1 (0.1 %)

Rice-field songs in the Korean peninsula.
To the accompaniment of a drum, the
man standing leads the song and the
others respond in chorus. Folk songs ac¬
company every stage in rice cultivation,
from planting to harvest, andaré often ar¬
ranged into a kind of "show".
their Asian counterparts, although the
history of their cultivation in west Africa is
shorter and their diversity less than with the
Asian rices.
The many varieties of rice thus developed
constituted a valuable pool of germ plasm
which it was essential to collect, classify and
preserve for current and future breeding
programmes.
Shortly after the Second World War,
most Asian countries began to conserve
their cultivars (varieties developed under
cultivation). A number of foreign introduc¬
tions were also included in each national
collection. However, coverage was general¬
ly poor of varieties from the remote areas.
Few wild species were preserved.
Although rice is not indigenous to the
United States, the US Department of
Agriculture (USDA) made serious efforts to
assemble a world collection of rice. The
USDA also funded field collection projects
in India and Pakistan. The conservation ef¬
forts were materially aided by the construc¬
tion of a medium-term cold storage facility
at Beltsville, Maryland in 1957 and the
establishment of the National Seed Storage
Laboratory at Ft. Collins, Colorado in
1958-59. The US rice collection continued
to grow from about 6,000 in 1960 to about
13,000 in 1981.
During the early 1950s, the International
Rice Commission of the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the
United Nations attempted to set up three
regional collections for the ecogeographic
races: Indicas in India, Javanicas in In¬
donesia, and Japónicas in Japan. Another
set of deep-water rices was maintained in
Bangladesh. The four collections totalled
1,344 varieties, but the three centres in the

The rice plant
Oryza sativa, the world's major cultivated
rice species, was domesticated in Asia
more than 7,000 years ago and over the
centuries differentiated into three
subspecies based on geographic condi¬
tions. These subspecies are indica,
japónica (or sinica) and javanica.
tropics could not adequately maintain the
seed viability without refrigerated storage.
Among the Asian countries, Japan is the
only nation to have had medium and long-
term storage facility since 1965.
When the International Rice Research In¬
stitute (IRRI) began its research operations
in 1961-62, it took on the role of a global
repository and exchange centre. The IRRI
was able to acquire a duplicate set of most
national collections. When the high-
yielding semi-dwarf rices began to spread
quickly in the Asian tropics and to replace
the traditional varieties, fourteen Asian
countries collaborated with the IRRI in
launching systematic field collection opera¬
tions in both the threatened areas and other
remote, hitherto unexplored areas. These
collaborative efforts have added 38,000
samples to national collections and the base
collection maintained at IRRI. The dwind¬
ling wild rices are also a target of conserva¬
tion. Similar efforts by regional centres and
national programmes in west Africa have
added 7,700 African samples to the world's
rice gene pools.
Since 1978 the International Board for
Plant Genetic Resources (IBPGR) has join¬
ed the campaigns by providing some of the
funds. During 1984 the IRRI collection of
cultivars and wild rices totalled 74,000 ac¬
cessions. Thus, the collective efforts of all
concerned have not only saved the rice crop
from genetic impoverishment but have
greatly enriched the gene pools available for
further crop improvement.
Shortly after the IRRI was established,
its seed distribution service and the promis¬
ing sources of desired characters identified
by its staff greatly stimulated the national
rice research programmes to expand their
systematic evaluation projects. Since 1962
the International Rice Germplasm Center at
IRRI has supplied nearly 100,000 seed
packets to rice researchers around the world
in response to more than 3,000 requests.
The number of requests indicates the
magnitude of research experiments being
conducted by rice scientists in different
countries.
The IRRI's systematic evaluation opera¬
tions for a large number of desired traits
were expanded and streamlined in 1974
under the Genetic Evaluation and Utiliza¬
tion (GEU) Programme. Multidisciplinary
teams were organized to seek rice improve¬
ment in eight research areas: agronomic
characteristics (especially grain yield),
disease resistance, insect resistance, grain
and nutritive quality, drought resistance,
adverse soil tolerance, deep water and flood
tolerance, and extreme temperature
tolerance. The magnitude of the IRRI's
GEU programme is indicated by the
30,000-50,000 seed samples drawn from the
Germplasm Center each year. A major
thrust of the GEU programme is to raise
yield levels and to stabilize crop production
in vast rainfed areas where the numerous
subsistence farmers have not benefited
from the semi-dwarf rices, which dominate *

§. 'Il
Wkr
BMà
t«
;
â ' *8 il
i .. ;
*
!^^**N.
^fi^î;,*
From land to mouth
1. Ploughing a rice-field in Sri
Lanka.
2. Mechanized planting on a co¬
operative farm in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.
3. Replanting rice in Democratic
Kampuchea.
4. Harvesting rice with the sickle in
the valley of Paro, in Bhutan.
5. Añer the rice harvest, villagers of
Java (Indonesia) get together to
make stacks.
6. Winnowing rice in Burma.
7. In Nepal a wooden beam called a
dekhi is used for husking rice.
8. Lunch break in Pakistan.

The delta region of Bangladesh, con¬
sisting of the mouths of the Ganges and
the Brahmaputra, is an area where rice
farming is difficult because of abrupt
rises in the water level, especially since
embankments are still not widespread.
Farmers in the delta plant deep-water rice
which grows as fast as the water rises and
may reach a height of 6 metres. Current
research is aiming to improve varieties of
rice adapted to flooded land.
the irrigated areas. In recent years several
Asian countries have organized national
GEU programmes.
On an international scale, exchange and
evaluation were greatly expanded by the
establishment of the collaborative Interna¬
tional Rice Testing Programme in 1976.
From 1960 to 1980, average rice yields in
Asia rose by forty per cent and production
by more than sixty per cent, although it
must be remembered that Asia's population
rose fifty-five per cent over the same
period. These improvements in production
are due primarily to increases in yield per
hectare rather than to expansion of areas
cultivated. This has helped to lower the real
price of rice to consumers in several densely
populated countries.
How did the farmers of Bangladesh, Bur¬
ma, China, India, Indonesia, Japan, the
Philippines and other Asian countries
achieve the feat of raising rice production
more in this period of twenty years than in
the whole of the preceding 5,000 years?
Their success can be largely attributed to
five major advances:
1. The introduction of high yielding, semi-
dwarf, modern varieties.
Traditional, tall varieties of rice have a
tendency to "lodge", that is, to fall over
because of wind, rain or the weight of the
grain. The grain rots or is eaten by rats.
Modern semi-dwarf varieties can yield five
tons or more per hectare because their
strong stemsinherited from their Chinese
parents enable them to stand erect and
convert nutrients, water and sunshine into
grain more efficiently. About twenty-five
per cent of the world's rice acreage is now
planted to semi-dwarfs. Many of the new
varieties carry built-in genetic resistance to
a host of insects and diseases. For example,
a gene from a strain of Oryza nivara, from
north central India, has been instrumental
in limiting the ravages of the grassy stunt
virus.
2. The development of strains with short
growth duration which are insensitive to
day-length.
Teams of researchers selectively bred
these traits into the modern rice varieties to
make it possible for farmers to grow two or
three crops where they previously grew only
one crop, and to grow superior varieties at
different latitudes.
3. Cultivation of hybrid rice.
China is the world's pioneer in hybrid
rice production. China now grows more
than seven million hectares of hybrid rice.
Yields are about twenty per cent higher than
those of ordinary semi-dwarfs.
4. Improved irrigation and water
management.
Better availability of water gives farmers
the opportunity of growing two or more
crops per year in the same field.
5. Introduction of new farm-management
techniques.
Yields are higher and farm incomes more
secure because farmers now have improved
implements and mineral fertilizers and bet¬
ter methods of applying them, including in¬
tegrated procedures for pest control and
improved post-harvest technology.
There is a clear need for continued
genetic improvement in rice and advantage
must be taken of what the new technologies
such as tissue culture and genetic engineer¬
ing have to offer. The FAO has estimated
that merely to keep pace with population
rise an annual rate of increase of about
three per cent in rice production will be
needed to the end of this century.
Thanks to the development of early
maturing varieties we can now grow two to
three crops of rice every year provided there
is water and an adequate supply of
nutrients. In fact, in IRRI experimental
fields there is continuous cropping of rice
leading to yields of more than twenty tons
per hectare per year.
In this intensive rice production system a
hectare of land is divided into thirteen plots
because the variety used takes thirteen
weeks to mature from the date of planting.
By staggered planting one crop is harvested
every Monday. After harvesting the plot is
ploughed and planted again on the follow¬
ing Friday. Thus there are as many harvests
as there are weeks in the year.
This is a good demonstration of the
"green power" of the tropics where, thanks
to the abundance of sunshine throughout
the year, green plants can produce food
through the process of photosynthesis.
However, such continuous cropping of rice
can lead to serious problems of pest
epidemics and soil fertility depletion and
must be accompanied by integrated pest
management and balanced nutrient supply.
An old Chinese saying vividly portrays
the green power of tropical rice land. "A
field can look gold, black and green on the
same day". The gold represents the mature
rice crop, which the farmer and his family
harvest early in the morning. The same rice
field looks black around noon because the
family has already ploughed the field in
preparation for the next crop. Late that
afternoon the field looks green because the
family has transplanted a new rice crop.
No wonder that millions of people still
regard rice as a unique gift from God to
mankind.
MONKOMBU S. SWAMINATHAN is a
noted Indian scientist who played a leading
role in the "green revolution" in Asia and has
worked on a wide range of problems in plant
genetics and agricultural research and
development in the last 30 years. Since April
1982 he has been Director-General of the In¬
ternational Rice Research Institute, Los Baños,
The Philippines. He was formerly Director-
General of the Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (1972-1979), Vice-Chairman of the
Protein-Calorie Advisory Group of the United
Nations (1972-1977), and Secretary to the
Government of India in the Ministry of
Agriculture (1979-1980). He is the author of
some 200 scientific papers published in inter¬
national journals.
