Nature's nitrogen factory
To the untrained eye the floating mass of
vegetation to be seen on the paddy fields
of Viet Nam looks as if it is choking the life
out of the young rice plants. In fact, it is
nature's way of providing the rice with a
supplement of all-important nitrogen that
promotes healthy growth and increases
rice yield. This natural, floating nitrogen
"factory" consists of two plants, the water
fern Azolla and the blue green alga Ana-
baena azollae, that live together in a sym¬
biotic association. Azolla, the host plant,
provides a safe home in cavities in its
leaves for the Anabaena alga which in
return collects sufficient nitrogen from the
atmosphere to meet its own and its host's
total nitrogen requirements. Some of the
nitrogen thus "fixed" finds its way into the
water of the paddy field where it is taken up
by the rice plants; but Azolla is most effec¬
tive as a rich nitrogen source when it is
ploughed into the soil of the paddy field
during the fallow season as a "green
manure". Photos: (1) The blue-green alga
Anabaena azollae. (2) Azolla is propagated
in ponds during the summer and autumn. It
spreads with astonishing speed, doubling
the surface of water it covers within a
week. (3) A much magnified image of the
Azolla plant as seen by an electron scann¬
ing microscope. (4) During the 17th century
this temple was erected in the village of La
Van, Thai Binh Province, Viet Nam, in
honour of the legendary monk Khong Minh
Khong who is credited with having Initiated
the Azolla fertilizer technique.
22

Green winters on the Red River
by Dao The Tuan
IN the northern regions of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, the cultivation
of rice is closely linked with that of
Azolla, a water fern which, in association
with the blue-green alga Anabaena
azollae, has the ability to fix nitrogen
from the atmosphere. Nitrogen is a key
factor in increasing the yield of rice ob¬
tainable from a given area of cultivated
land.
For centuries Azolla has been used in
the paddy fields as a "green manure" for
winter rice. The term "winter rice"
designates a group of rice varieties that
are specific to the Red River delta which
were developed by our ancestors to grow
in the deep water paddy fields of the river
plain.
Being comparatively resistant to cold,
the Azolla of Viet Nam (Azolla Pinnata) is
well adapted to the winter climate of the
Republic. During summer and autumn,
Azolla is propagated in ponds in a few
villages in the Thai Binh Province in order
to produce spores, or inocula. These are
then sold to other villages to be scattered
in the winter rice fields after the
transplantation of the rice seedlings in
January. There the Azolla grows and
spreads until, by about the month of
March, when the rice is ripe for
harvesting, it covers the entire surface of
the water. After the rice has been
harvested, this mass of greenery is
ploughed into the ground where it
decomposes, releasing nitrogen into the
soil. A layer of Azolla covering a one-
hectare rice field produces about 10
tonnes of fresh vegetation, which is
equivalent to 25 kilograms of nitrogen.
The exact date when peasant-farmers
first began to use Azolla in the rice fields
of Viet Nam is not known. According to
popular legend, a giant Buddhist monk
named Khong Minh Khong, who lived in
the eleventh century during the period of
the Ly dynasty, was carrying on his
shoulders a yoke on which were hung
two large baskets of Azolla. As he was
passing near the Red River, he dropped
his load of Azolla on the rice fields of two
or three villages. As a result, only the
peasants of these villages knew the
secret of the propagation of Azolla.
During the seventeenth century a tem¬
ple was erected to the honour of Khong
Minh Khong in recognition of his role
as founder of the Azolla technique.
However, according to another legend,
the discovery of the properties of Azolla
is attributed to a woman, the goddess of
Azolla.
Towards the end of the seventeenth
century, the inhabitants of three villages
in northern Viet Nam, La Van, Bung and
Bich D.u, in. Thai Binh Province, are
known to have selected wild Azolla
plants which, during the summer
months, they raised in flower pots and
then in ponds sheltered from the heat of
the sun by hedges of bamboo. The in
ocula thus produced were then sold to
other farmers of the region. By about
1945, some 40,000 hectares of rice
fields were sown with nitrogen-fixing
Azolla.
During the 1 950s, this traditional tech¬
nique was studied by agronomists and
passed on to all rice farmers. By using
super-phosphates in place of the manure
and ashes previously employed to fer¬
tilize the Azolla, and by making greater
use of insecticides, the propagation of
Azolla was considerably improved. As a
result, during the 1960s and 1970s,
Azolla contributed to an important in¬
crease in the rice crop in Viet Nam. Since
then, with the introduction of new
varieties of rice, methods have changed.
Azolla is propagated in the paddy fields
before the transplantation of the spring
rice seedlings, which takes place ¡n
February.
Today, the use of Azolla is encounter¬
ing certain difficulties. It is labour-
intensive, and the shortage of super¬
phosphates and insecticides has imped¬
ed the development of the Azolla tech¬
nique. These problems are now the sub¬
ject of research in Viet Nam. Indeed, dur¬
ing the last few years research scientists
throughout the world have begun to
study this interesting plant with the aim
of developing its use in other countries. It
is to be hoped that current problems will
be overcome and that Azolla will con¬
tinue to make a contribution to the task
of increasing world rice production.
DAO THE TUAN is director of the Viet Nam
Agricultural Science Institute at the Ministry
of Agriculture, Hanoi. A specialist in plant
physiology, he has carried out extensive
research into the physiology of rice and the
Azolla plant described in his article.
23
