The master-craftsmen of Mexico
by Anharad Lanz de Ríos
Writing about the arts ofMeso-
America, Jacques Soustelle
noted: "The décor of life was
above all that used, with ex¬
ceptional skill, in the 'minor'
arts for the embellishment of
both rare and commonplace
objects; from the most
unassuming terra-cotta dish to
jewellery made of gold
nothing was vulgar, there was
no impression of work done in
haste or merely for effect or
profit."
OF all the countries of the American
continent, Mexico undoubtedly has
the largest number of active crafts¬
men and the highest level of hand-craft produc¬
tion both in quantity and quality. These popular
plastic art forms still reflect residual echoes of
the pre-Columbian heritage as well as impor¬
tant Spanish, Asian and universal influences
subject to constant adaptation and change.
There are no precise statistics concerning
the proportion of the population engaged in
hand-crafts in Mexico, but it has been
estimated that some one million two hundred
thousand heads of households undertake
some form of craft activity. Training in the
crafts is a part of normal family life and from a
very early age children are taught the basic
skills which will enable them to master these
crafts. Thus, although craft production in Mex¬
ico is organized in a number of different ways,
the greater part of it is the work of family
groups.
There is often a division of labour between
men and women. For example, men are
seldom involved in the manufacture of textiles.
Pottery, too, is women's work with the men
confined to transporting the clay and wood and
firing the vessels.
In the sixteenth century the Spanish con¬
quistadores came across craft centres in Mex¬
ico of varying levels of advancement many of
which, however, had mastered a number of
very advanced techniques, such as the
polishing of ceramics. Highly advanced tech¬
niques were also employed by goldsmiths and
weavers. The Conquest triggered off a vast
process of acculturation, giving rise to crafts,
such as forging, for example, which in time,
despite their strong Spanish roots, came to be
looked upon as traditional.
ANHARAD LANZ DE RÍOS, Mexican an¬
thropologist and sociologist, is a member of
Comunicación Educativa Latinoamericana, an
institution based in Cuemavaca, Mexico.
During the period of the Viceroyalties, the
crafts could be classified in three groups. In the
first group were artistic objects with ancient
Mexican motifs and using special techniques
and raw materials. These included pottery,
jewellery and woven materials. The craftsmen
knew and used gold, silver and copper. Among
vitreous materials they knew only quartz and
obsidian. For weaving they used soft fibres
such as cotton and silk, but they had no
knowledge of wool.
The second group consisted of the work of
indigenous craftsmen whose production was
intended to meet their own needs. In this group
decorative and manufacturing techniques
were not very advanced.
From the interaction of these two groups and
the reciprocal influence they had on each other
was born the third group which is today known
as "traditional mestizo". The main
characteristics of objects of this type are the
low economic value of the raw materials of
which they are made and the artistic expres¬
sion they incorporate. Regardless of their
economic value and the quantities produced,
all the crafts mentioned above still survive in
present-day Mexico.
Today the so-called "Mexican curio", or
"airport art", with its reduced production times
and costs, presents a distorted image of
authentic popular craftsmanship. By the very
nature of their production organization, coupl¬
ed with the lack of raw materials, the authentic
crafts find it difficult to compete on even terms.
Nevertheless, the staunch resistance of the
craft groups and the deeply-rooted craft tradi¬
tion make of Mexico a country outstanding for
the rich variety of craft objects produced.
34
