PONGAL
by Guy Deleury
WHAT could be more usual for a
farmer or villager of southern
India than to boil his rice? What
could be more common than the potbellied
vessel in which the women of his family
prepare the meals each day? Between the
Equator and the Tropics, what could be
more familiar than the Sun? And yet these
are the three commonplace ingredients
which, along with cows and oxen, form the
centre of the annual cosmic festival of
Pongal in the land of the Tamils.
Some civilizations have tried hard to
separate the sacred from the profane and to
confine religion to the sacristy. The Hindu
has a quite different approach. He creates
his liturgies from the humblest objects and
the activities of the daily round. For him the
cosmos is an organism in which the tremb¬
ling of a blade of grass on earth affects the
most distant stars. The castes gravitate
around the village like planets around a
sun, each in its own orbit. The caste system
is a solar system, like every atom of the
human body, the cycle of the seasons, and
the revolutions of the Moon.
Festivals are the nodal points at which all
the vibrations of the Universe concentrate
in a sound imbued with meaning. Pongal is
the most notable example of such a festival.
Every Hindu country has its own variant in
which it expresses its specific identity. The
festival of Ganpati in the land of the
Marathas, the festival of Durga in Bengal,
and the festival of Onam in Kerala are ex¬
amples of these manifestations.
Pongal is the festival of the winter
solstice, when the Sun returns to its nor¬
thern course; soon the days will begin to
lengthen again. Even if today the solstice
actually falls almost a month earlier,
around 21 December, the ritual solstice is
still observed on the same date as in the
sixth century, perhaps because the Sun's en¬
try into the constellation of Capricorn takes
place at the same time as the harvest of the
new rice. The date highlights the relation¬
ship between the Sun and rice, the ritual ex¬
tends the relationship to man and society.
The Sun causes the rice to emerge from
water and become food and life for man.
The instruments of this two-phase
transmutation are the oxen which work in
the rice-fields and the pot in which the rice
is cooked. The festival brings together these
four participants in the new life: the Sun,
rice, the cooking pot, and the oxas well as
a fifth, village society.
The festival may last two, three or four
days; its length varies in different parts of
Tamil Nadu. The first day is the vigil,
known as bhogi or "enjoyment", of the
16

During the Pongal festival celebrated in
Tamil Nadu, southern India, oxen and
cows become kings and queens fora day.
Opposite page below, in the village of Mel
Seval, Tirunelveli district, a woman cooks
rice for the household cattle. On the
ground can be seen the lines of the
kolam, a propitiatory design traditionally
traced in front of the house with white
lime powder (see Unesco Courier, March
1984). Right, newly washed and garland¬
ed, cows and oxen wander freely through
the village all day long.
kind that is celebrated at the summer
solstice, or diwali, the festival of lamps.
This is the day when people cleanse
themselves of the year gone by. The boys
pick up any scraps of wood or pieces of
basketwork that happen to be lying around;
the outer walls of houses and temples are
whitewashed. In the afternoon rice boiled
in water is eaten. Sometimes sacrifices are
made to Mariayamma, the goddess of
epidemics; more generally there are rituals
in honour of ancestor spirits. Old earthen¬
ware pots are smashed, and the potter gives
new pots to his customers. Just as they do
for the festivals of Durga in Bengal and of
Ganpati in Maharastra, the potters work
day and night for weeks beforehand to
make the pottery that will be used during
the festival.
Today it is increasingly common for this
pottery to be bought at the bazaar. In the
past there was a nexus of links, governed by
the jajmani system, between each family of
potters and a number of families of village
peasant-producers. Pongal was one of the
festivals at which the links between village
families of different castes were bolstered
and reaffirmed.
This was the purpose of the celebrations
on the second day, known as the day of the
great pongal or, in some cases, the pongal
of the gods. Each family boiled its pot of
rice and went, according to traditional rules
of precedence, to offer portions of it on
banana leaves to other families. Sometimes
the high castes cooked their pongal in the
morning and the other castes in the after¬
noon. The communal pongal was also boil¬
ed before the temples. On this day the
favourite form of pongal is sugar pongal;
its preparation is accompanied by a variety
of customs involving the use of brown cane
sugar, coconut, raisins, fried lentils, car¬
damom, saffron, and a hint of edible cam¬
phor. Each family was proud of .its own
recipe, and for the children this delicacy is
the very heart of the festival, along with the
sugar cane and the new clothes.
For the children are given fine stalks of
sugar-cane to chew. We know that the In¬
dians invented sugar, since the very word
can be traced back to Sanskrit. Pongal is
also pre-eminently a day for sugar. In
Maharastra, where the festival is called
Makara-Sankrant (entry into Capricorn),
tiny sesame pellets are given to elders and
friends to whom the giver says, "take this
sweet and tell me sweet things". By giving
and receiving these titbits the villagers vow
to put honey into all their relationships in
the coming year.
On that day or on the following day, red-
ochre stripes representing Shiva are painted
on the white walls of the temples of Vishnu.
But this third day is primarily the pongal of
the herds. Cows and oxen are the kings and
queens of this feast-day. They are washed
and beautified, their coats are decorated,
rice-straw garlands are hung around their
necks, their horns are trimmed, and a
sacred cord of munj grass fibre dipped in
yellow-red turmeric is hung between them.
Thus bedecked the animals are left to
wander at liberty through the village;
sometimes a solemn procession is organized
at which the rules of precedence of the
village castes are respected. Then the beasts
too are fed with perfumed and sugared
pongal.
Legend has it that cattle will only agree to
leave their paradise to help men work the
land on condition that once a year they will
be feted and given a holiday. By honouring
them, the village recognizes its debt towards
the milk cows and draft animals. The castes
of men and beasts must help each other out
so that the cosmos can turn.
Perhaps it is this cosmic aspect which
gives significance to the bull running which
takes place on the fourth day of pongal.
The animals are specially chosen for their
aggressiveness and strength; their horns are
sharpened to make them more dangerous;
gold or silver medals are attached to their
foreheads. They are released one by one on
a carefully marked out track winding
through the middle of the village. In the
midst of tumultuous shouting or anxious
silence, young people try to snatch the
medals from the bulls. The powerful vitali¬
ty of the bulls of the Sun is unleashed in the
land of the Tamils on the day of the winter
solstice, and they are dispatched on their
northern trajectory.
GUY DELEURY is a French author who has
spent much of his life in India and has written
widely about aspects of Indian thought and
civilization. Notable among his published
works are Renaître en Inde (1976) and Le
Modèle Indou (1978), an essay on the struc¬
tures of Indian civilization past and present.
His latest book, L'Inde en Fête, will appear in
1985 as part of an encyclopaedia of myths
and religions (Lidis publisher, Paris).
17
