twelfth to the sixteenth century
Ife-Benin:
two kingdoms, one culture
by Alan Ryder
Still considered by the Yoruba people as a holy city, Ife, in the Oyo province ofpresent-day
Nigeria, was from the eleventh century the capital of a flourishing civilization. By the late
twelfth or early thirteenth century, Ife artists were producing their famous terracotta heads
andfine bronzes made by the cire perdue (lost wax) process. This technique was transmitted
to the Kingdom ofBenin which began to prosper in the thirteenth century and where bronze
art of the highest order flourished for five centuries.
CONSIDERING the central place it
occupies in the general history of
the Yoruba, we know surprisingly
little about the history of Ife. After the
comparative wealth of detail attached to the
legendary founder of the State, Oduduwa,
and his immediate successors, we encounter
a very spare and broken narrative in the oral
traditions for subsequent ages. The archae¬
ological record has done something to fill
the gaps, but this research is in its infancy.
A first phase in the history of the State,
opening around the eleventh century, is
characterized by a scattered settlement pat¬
tern, the widespread use of floors made of
potsherds set on edge, a glass-bead industry
and a very fine terracotta art which specia¬
lized in the production of naturalistic
figures, especially human heads. Because of
this latter feature, a link has sometimes
been posited between the cultures of Ife and
Nok, despite the thousand years which
stand between them.
More significant is the very close resem¬
blance which the terracotta art of Ife bears
to that discovered in other centres of
Yoruba culture. Heads in a style related to
that of Ife have been found at Ikinrun and
Ire near Oshogbo, at Idanre near Ikare, and
most recently and interestingly at Owo,
where a large number of terracotta sculp¬
tures have been excavated in a fifteenth-
century context.
This wide distribution of the style may
indicate the extent of Ife influence, but it
may also be that it marks the spread of a
cultural trait among the Yoruba associated
ALAN RYDER, of the UK, is a professor at the
University of Bristol. A specialist in the history
of west Africa, he has published many works
on the pre-colonial and colonial periods of this
region.
with religious rites rather than with Ife
kingship.
The potsherd floors, which in Ife have
often been discovered in association with
terracotta figures, are likewise not a unique
feature of that city; similar floors have been
found at Owo, Ifaki, Ikerin, Ede, Itaji
Ekiti, Ikare and much further afield at Ketu
and Dassa Zoume in the Republic of Benin
and in the Kabrais district of Togo.
The earliest potsherd floors so far dis¬
covered in Ife date to about 1100 AD and
the latest bear maize-cob impressions,
which means that they cannot be earlier
than the sixteenth century. The subsequent
disappearance of the floors, and apparently
also of the terracotta art, probably reflects
some catastrophe which overwhelmed Ife in
the sixteenth century.
The twenty-five Ife "bronze" heads (they
are in fact made of brass and copper),
which bear so striking a stylistic resem¬
blance to the terracottas, may have been .
made in the years immediately before the
disaster, when imports of brass and copper
by the Portuguese had made casting metal
relatively plentiful. We can at present only
surmise the nature of the events which des¬
troyed this culture; conquest by an alien
dynasty seems the most likely explanation.
If the above interpretation of Ife history
is correct, the dynasty which now reigns
there is that which established itself in the
sixteenth century, built the palace on its
present site and threw up the earliest of the
walls around the central area of the town.
Perhaps the new dynasty has preserved
some of the political and social institutions
of its predecessor, but we cannot assume
that the earlier regime resembled the later in
its political arrangements any more than it
did in its art. Because the modern pattern of
installation ceremonies and royal insignia >
Nok art (900 BC-200 AD) is the most an¬
cient of known Nigerian art. It is named
after the small village in the region ofZaria,
central Nigeria, where the first sculpture of
this type was discovered in 1943. Once
thought to have been confined to the
Bauchi plateaux, the Nok civilization is
now believed to have covered a far wider
area. A natural link stretching across a
millenniumjoins these sculptures to the ter¬
racotta art of Ife, to the southwest, which
flourished between the 12th and the 15th
century AD. Left, Nok terracotta head
(height 19.5 cm) is now in the National
Museum, Jos.
5

Whether executed in terracotta, stone or
bronze, the sculptures of Ife mark a high
point in the art of portraiture (12th-15th
century). Both realistic and idealized, Ife
heads are outstanding for their nobility of
expression and the delicacy of their carving.
The head, top right, was discovered by the
German anthropologist Leo Frobenius,
who revealed Ife sculpture to the world In
1910. As so often in Ife art theface is scored
with lengthwise scarifications. Produced by
the lost wax method, Ife bronzes display a
high degree of technical accomplishment.
Above, representation of the oni ("king",
still considered a "father" by the Yoruba
people) and his queen. Above right, seated
figure (height 53.7 cm) cast in the Ife tradi¬
tion is a masterpiece of bronze sculpture
from black Africa. This highly naturalistic
effigy from Tada on the river Niger may
represent the hero Tsoede, who influences
the fertility of the people and their crops.
The magnificent bronzes discovered at
Igbo-Ukwu, a village near Awka in south¬
east Nigeria, are unlike those of Ife and
Benin in both design and the composition
ofthe alloy with which they were made. The
product of outstanding formal and tech¬
nical skills, these works of art dating from
the 9th century AD indicate that a vast and
powerful kingdom, of which Igbo-Ukwu
may have been the religious capital,
flourished in this region a thousand years
ago. Right, bronze stand depicting a
woman (not shown) and a man (height 27
cm). Above, bronze bracelet. Photos taken from Igbo-Ukwu © Th. Shaw, 1970

are so similar throughout most of Yoruba-
land, including Ife, and because these in¬
signia bear little resemblance to those worn
by supposedly royal figures in the earlier
phase of Ife history, it is reasonable to con¬
clude that modern Yoruba kingship derives
from the later phase, even though States
may originally have been formed on the
pattern of early Ife.
It is not impossible that the rise and fall
of States in the western Sudan in the fif¬
teenth and sixteenth centuries had a direct
influence on State formation in the Guinea
forest zone. Their appearance and expan¬
sion may well help to account for the
upheavals which happened about that time
in the adjacent southern States. We know
that the Nupe drove the Yoruba from Old
Oyo early in the sixteenth century, and that,
before they returned to their capital three-
quarters of a century later, the Oyo had
reorganized their military forces so as to
give greater prominence to the cavalry, the
striking force of armies in the savannah
States. From the Nupe the Oyo borrowed
the Egungun cult of ancestors, and certain
features of their revivified State may have
come from the same source.
Benin was the first State that the Por¬
tuguese visited on the coast; they soon
established diplomatic as well as trade rela¬
tions. Situated south-west of Ife, Benin
probably became a kingdom early on,
perhaps in the twelfth century.
In the fifteenth century a major upheaval
transformed this limited monarchy into an
autocracy and the small State into a large
kingdom. Tradition attributes the changes
to a ruler known as Ewuare, who acquired
the throne by ousting and killing a younger
brother; in the course of the struggle much
of the capital is said to have been destroyed.
Ewuare rebuilt his capital to a new plan
and gave it the name of Edo, which it has
borne to this day. In the centre of the city
a huge ditch and rampart were thrown up,
cutting across older structures as did the
city wall of Ife. Within the rampart a broad
avenue separated the palace from the
"town"the quarters which housed
numerous guilds of craftsmen and ritual
specialists who served the ruler. The palace
itself was organized into three
departmentsthe wardrobe, the ruler's
personal attendants and the harem each
with a staff graded into three ranks
analogous to the age grades of the Edo
villages.
Archaeology has confirmed the tradi¬
tions which assign the construction of the
great wall of Ewuare and a major
rebuilding of the palace to the fifteenth cen¬
tury. It has also shed light on the
developments of the renowned Benin art of
cire perdue (lost-wax) casting in brass and
bronze. All brass objects found in a pre-
sixteenth-century context prove to have
been made by a smithing not a casting pro¬
cess. Although the cire perdue technique
may have been known at an earlier date, it
would seem, both from the archaeological
evidence and from a stylistic study of the
very large body of Benin brasswork still in
existence, that only in the sixteenth century,
with the import of large quantities of Euro¬
pean brass, did this art become important.
In general, wood sculpture dominates
black African art. The Ife-Benin civiliza¬
tion is the brilliant exception, in that one
In the court art of
Benin, many bronze
artefacts are dedicated
to the greater glory of
the oba (king). Benin
figures, despite a
certain naturalism, are
usually highly stylized.
This flautist or
trumpet-player
(c. 1600; height
62.5 cm) belonged to
the oba's court.
finds works of art in terracotta and in
bronze which accounts for the particular
importance of this region in the general
evolution of black African art.
We noted earlier that objects in brass
were either forged or made by the cire per¬
due technique, which was known at Ife pro¬
bably earlier than the thirteenth century. In
the light of the most recent research, a
natural link unites the terracotta art il¬
lustrated by naturalistic figurines, par¬
ticularly human heads, with the culture of
Nok, which goes back to the Iron Age (the
fifth century before the Christian era). This
is most important and underlines the
widespread diffusion of the Nok culture;
moreover, we have evidence of exchanges
and continuing contacts between the coun¬
tries of the savannah and those of the forest
to the south. Thus the well-known bronzes
and naturalistic brass of Ife and Benin are
the culmination of an artistic evolution
begun at least as early as the Iron Age in a
vast cultural region.
This seems to be confirmed by the
discovery in 1939, in the east of Nigeria, of
the site of Igbo-Ukwu, which was explored
in 1959 by Professor Thurstan Shaw; some
800 bronze pieces have been brought to
light which are completely different from
the Ife-Benin bronzes. Igbo-Ukwu is an ur¬
ban complex in the middle of which were
the palace and temples. Different buildings
have been uncovered: a great room where
plates and objects of worship and treasures
i were stored; a burial chamber of a great
I priest, richly decorated; and an enormous
hole in which were deposited pottery, bones
and other objects.
Certainly there are some differences bet¬
ween the bronzes discovered at Igbo-Ukwu
and the works of art of Ife. Nevertheless, a
number of shared traits show that the two
centres were part of the same culture. In¬
deed, we are in the presence, as at Ife, of a
ritual monarchy.
It is believed that Igbo-Ukwu was the
religious capital of a very vast kingdom,
and that the treasures were stored there
under the keeping of a priest-king, Ezi Nzi.
Information is lacking on the culture of
Igbo-Ukwu; inquiries among those who
guard oral tradition are continuing, and ar¬
chaeologists see an extension of the area of
bronze manufacture. Nevertheless, Igbo-
Ukwu appears to contradict much of what
has so far been postulated about State for¬
mation; on the evidence of radiocarbon
dates, this highly sophisticated culture had
evolved by the ninth century among Ibo
peoples who otherwise maintained a
"stateless" form of society. In other words,
the Igbo-Ukwu culture antedates those of
Ife and Benin, and all others of comparable
complexity so far discovered in the forest
region, by at least two centuries.
Alan Ryder
