REFLECTIONS
ON SIVA
NATARAJA
General impression of the Siva :
Fullness of life, the river of life, air, sun, overflowing sense
of being. This is how the art of the Far East appears to us!...
The divinity of the human body was captured at that time,
not because they were closer to the origins, for our forms
have remained entirely the same; but the servitude of today
thought it had achieved total emancipation; and we are out
of orbit. The taste is lacking...
Bronze statues of Siva Nataraja, the Lord of the Dance,
are an important expression of Hindu thought and
philosophy and are to be found in separate, south-facing
shrines at almost all Siva temples. They portray sym¬
bolically the pancakrityas, or five acts of the Supreme
Beingcreation, sustenance, destruction, the banish¬
ment of ignorance and the bestowal of grace. The four-
armed Siva is depicted within a flaming aureole (see
photo above and detail left). One hand holds a small,
double-headed drum, symbolizing the initial vibration in
space of cosmic creation, while another holds the fire
that consumes all that is created. The palm of the third
hand, facing the devotee in the abhaya pose assures him
of freedom from fear. The hand of the fourth arm, swung
across the body in the gajahasta pose, points to the rais¬
ed left foot, the place of refuge from ignorance and delu¬
sion (which are symbolized by the dwarf demon trampled
by the right foot) and the ultimate goal of the individual
soul where all is bliss and where there is neither birth nor
death. Siva is the greatest exponent of music and dance.
He is said to dance in the vast expanse of the sky as well
as in the pure mind of the devotee.
The great French sculptor Auguste Rodin (1840-1917) was a
highly perceptive admirer of Indian art. In an issue of the
magazine Ars Asiática published in 1921 he made a series of
succinct and penetrating comments on photos of statues of
the god Siva preserved in the Madras Museum. Below,
salient passages in which Rodin evokes the head andface of
a bronze sculpture of Siva dancing at the centre of a circle
offlames (Siva Nataraja).
During long contemplation of the head
of the Siva:
This swollen, out-thrust mouth, abundant in its sensual
expressions...
The tenderness of mouth and eye are in harmony.
These lips like a lake of pleasure bordered by nostrils
palpitating and noble.
The mouth undulates in damp delights, sinuous as a
snake; the eyes closed, swollen, closed with a stitching of
lashes.
The wings of the nose rise tenderly on a full surface.
The lips which form the words, which move when they
escape. Such a delicious snake in movement!
The eyes which have only a corner in which to hide have
the purity of line and the serenity of nestling stars.
The still fair weather of these eyes; the still outline; the
still joy of this calm.
The chin is the stopping point on which the curves
converge.
The expression is continued with an ending which
dissolves into another. The movements of the mouth are
lost in the cheeks.
The curve which comes from the ear echoes a small curve
which pulls the mouth and, slightly, the wings of the nose;
it is a circle which passes beneath the nose and the chin as
far as the cheekbones.
The high cheeks which curve.
Still before the eloquent head of the Siva:
This eye stays in the same place with its companion; it is
in a propitious shelter; it is voluptuous and luminous.
The closed eyes, the sweetness of time gone by.
These eyes purely drawn like a precious enamel.
The eyes in the casket of the eyelids; the arc of the brows;
that of the sinuous lip.
Mouth, a cavern of the sweetest thoughts, but a volcano
for the furies."
The materiality of the soul that one can imprison in this
bronze, captive for several centuries; desires for eternity on
this mouth; the eyes which are going to see and talk.
For ever, life enters and leaves through the mouth, as the
bees continually enter and leave; sweet perfumed
respiration.
This pretty, lost profile has a profile, but the profile where
the expression reaches completion, sinks, leaving the
charm of the declining cheeks to join the attachments of the
n6Ck. Auguste Rodin
25
