THAILAND
When the tornera was king
by Dome Sukvong
THE story of the cinema in Thailand
began eighty-five years ago when
S.G. Marchovsky brought some
reels of "Lumière" films and showed them
in Bangkok on 1 0 June 1 897. Thailand's first
film was made in 1900 by the younger
brother of King Rama V, and the year 1927
saw the start of the feature film industry in
Thailand. Since then more than 100,000
kilometres of film and some 3,000 feature
films have been produced in Thailand.
We can be almost sure that more than half
the footage of these films made in or brought
into Thailand has been lost forever, while the
other half is scattered in private collections,
in forgotten corners of attics, garages, store¬
rooms and old movie theatres, with termites
and rats as their only custodians.
In 1 980, 1 started to gather all the available
data concerning Thai films and in one year
I had amassed enough data about most of
the films made in Thailand, or made by Thai
DOME SUKVONG, of Thailand, is a founder of
the Old Films Preservation Project launched at
Thailand's Institute of Technology and Voca¬
tional Education.
nationals, between 1 897 and 1 945 to be able
to start looking for the films themselves.
In 1981, when this search started, I came
across 50,000 feet (15,200 metres) of film in
a very old railway go-down (warehouse).
This footage had been shot by the State
Railways of Thailand between 1922 and
1945. The originals were all black and white
negatives made of nitrate film. At least half
of this footage may not be in a condition to
be salvaged.
Hoping somehow to salvage the other
half, I contacted the officials of the National
Archive and asked them to approach the
State Railways and have the film transferred
to the Archive so that it could be salvaged
and preserved. All the State Railway films
are now kept in the Thai National Archive.
Since then we have been able to locate at
least ten more sources of old films. Some of
them had been lying forgotten for at least
half a century. One interesting and impor¬
tant discovery came from a lady who hap¬
pened to read a newspaper headline about
my discovery of the State Railway films. She
found forty reels of old films in a store-room
in her house. Later she contacted me and we
immediately recovered the films only to find
that the 35mm black and white nitrate prints
were in bad condition.
These films were originally the personal
effects of the late King Rama VII (1 926-1 935)
who was known to enjoy movies and film¬
making. The films had come into the posses¬
sion of her father who had at one time been
a member of the King's palace staff.
Together we found forty reels of film each
some 1 ,000 to 1 ,500 (300 to 450 metres) feet
in length. Among them were films of the
King's personal and State activities, such as
royal ceremonies and his trips in the South-
East Asian Peninsula, to Europe and to the
United States of America. The films in this
category were made by film companies of
the countries he was visiting. The visit to the
United States, for example, was filmed by
Paramount Pictures. There were also a
number of films made personally by the King
while visiting Japan, as well as some
Hollywood silent features starring Douglas
Fairbanks, the King's favourite film star.
The most exciting discovery was that of
two reels of film with a sound track made in
the year in which the 150th anniversary of
the founding of Bangkok was celebrated.
The film was made in 1932 by the Srikung
Sound Film Company, a famous early Thai
film production firm and the first in Thailand
to produce sound films. The Srikung Com¬
pany played a great pioneering role in
starting up the popular film industry ih
Thailand; but during the inter-war years,
after rising to a peak, business declined and
the Company closed down just after the
Second World War. These two reels are
A Handful of Rice, one of Thailand's earliest
films, was made in 1939 by a Swedish pro¬
duction team and a Hungarian director who
had been invited to shoot a film in the coun¬
try by a Thai prince. The story of a young
peasant couple, it was set in a mountainous
forested region of northern Thailand. Local
people acted in the film which won a prize at
the 1939 Venice Film Festival. Both a work
of fiction and a valuable anthropological
document about a traditional way of life, A
Handful of Rice was preserved in the
Swedish NationalArchives and was recently
presented by Sweden to the Thai
authorities.

4 Three stills from Suvarna of Siam (1923).
The first feature film made in Thailand, it is
being sought by the Thai Film Group,
created in 1982.
Photos © National Archives of Thailand, Bangkok
perhaps all that remains in Thailand of the
films made by the Srikung Company.
Another fruitful source of old films was the
Siam Society which provided us with 270
reels of 16mm diacetate film, each 400 feet
(120 metres) in length. These films had also
been the personal property of King Rama VII
and had been made between 1926 and
1945. Some reels had been shot by the King
himself.
The Thai Film Group, founded in 1982 to
celebrate eighty-five years of movies in
Thailand and to promote the preservation of
old films, now has a forty-square-metre room
for film preservation at the Department of
Photography and Cinematography of the
Bangkok Technical Institute. All the films
that we have discovered are stored in this
room. We hope in the future to establish a
proper store-room when sufficient money
becomes available.
At present we have no experts to restore
the films in our possession. However, the
35mm nitrate films are in fairly good condi¬
tion except for a little shrinkage.
As' far as the 16mm diacetate films are
concerned some forty per cent of them are in
various stages of deterioration. Some have
already dried up and become brittle; others
are twisted or have melted. Unfortunately,
we know of no technique for upgrading
these films.
In an attempt to supplement our collection
by exchanges we have, during the past two
years, contacted overseas film archives and
have asked for their help in tracing certain
lost films. There are two films that we are
desperately trying to locate. The first, called
Suvarna of Siam, or The Kingdom of
Heaven, is the first feature film ever made in
Thailand. It was produced by a Hollywood
company under the supervision of a Mr.
Henry MacRae in 1923. The other film, en¬
titled Berne: Arrivée du Roi de Siam, is the
first film ever to portray the Thai people.
If one day we are able to obtain these two
films it would be a significant step towards
the establishment of a Thai National Film Ar¬
chive. It is my personal conviction that our
immediate target for the future should be to
launch a crusade to recover the approx¬
imately 3,000 feature films that have been
produced in Thailand since 1923.
I Dome Sukvong

