UNESCO
and nutrition education
by Susan Van Der Vynckt
'M
ALNUTRITION occurs when,
over an extended period of
time, the food consumed by
an individual does not provide energy
and/or nutrients in the amounts needed by
the body. Under conditions prevailing in
most developing countries, malnutrition
may be more accurately described as under¬
nutrition, since it reflects an insufficient in¬
take of food, often combined with infec¬
tions and parasitic diseases that lower the
capacity of the body to utilize the energy
and nutrients of whatever little food is con¬
sumed... There are also situations in which
the food intake may be sufficient, even if
marginally, to meet the individual's energy
requirements, but is lacking in one key
nutrient. This results in specific nutritional
diseases, the most common of which are
iron-deficiency anaemia, vitamin A-
deficiency xerophthalmia and iodine-
deficiency goitre."
The cold technicality of this excerpt from
a recent document issued by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Na¬
tions (FAO) (it goes on to state that about
This game ofSnakes and Lad¬
ders has been adapted as an
educational tool to teach
Tamil children some basic
facts about nutrition. Players
landing on the second square
from the bottom in the second
column from the right learn,
for example, that unhygienic
habits will send them sliding
down the snake to a sick-bed
(bottom line, second column
from the left). Adding fruit
and vegetables to their daily
diet (third line from the bot¬
tom, left hand column) will
find them climbing the ladder
that leads to proper growth
and a healthy life (left hand
column, second line from the
top).
a quarter of the children in those developing
countries for which data are available suf¬
fer from moderate to severe malnutrition)
does nothing to lessen the horror of the fact
that malnutrition has become perhaps the
major public health problem facing the
developing world.
Poor and inadequate nutrition and
related illnesses interfere substantially with
learning ability, educational performance
and the capacity to work. Malnutrition is
thus both a symptom of underdevelopment
and a major obstacle to the successful pur¬
suit of national advance.
Although poverty is undoubtedly the
principal cause of malnutrition, ignorance,
taboos and poor nutrition practices are im¬
portant contributory factors. Nutrition
SUSAN VAN DER VYNCKT is a specialist in
nutrition, health and home economics educa¬
tion in Unesco's science education section.
She is currently preparing a nutrition educa¬
tion sourcebook for teachers in primary and
secondary schools in developing countries to
be published by Unesco in 1985.
V4jry
1Axtikrï B«í
29
».y
IS
U
o ra
II
©
LU
O ».
o o
J= =

Food for growth
Proteins
Food for energy
Sugar and starch
Lentils
Bomli
(dried fish)
Semolina
"greau"
Maize
(corn)
Above, these three groups of drawings are
taken from Primary School Curriculum
Planning and Selected Case Studies, No.4
in the Nutrition Education Series published
by Unesco to promote exchange of infor¬
mation and ideas about nutrition educa¬
tion. Theyform part ofthe Teaching Guide
for lessons on ' 'Our Body and Health "that
were first tried out in primary schools in
Mauritius. Bomli, which figures in the
drawings on proteins, is a small fish which
is dried and which is a popular element in
the Mauritian diet. Below, Tamil school¬
children carry shields depicting valuable
dietary items. Left to right: spinach,
beetroot, carrot, papaya, tomato, egg.
Potatoes

education, if properly designed and effec¬
tively carried out, can help people, young
and old, to learn about their nutritional
needs and what they themselves can do the
better to meet these needs. It is in this field
that Unesco is making a major contribution
to the fight against hunger.
All too often in the past nutrition educa¬
tion has been confined to the teaching in the
classroom of food values and nutrient con¬
tent. A much broader, far more effective
approach to nutrition education is being
developed which views nutrition as the
study of all aspects of food and eating
behaviour and includes all levels of formal
and non-formal education and the mass
media.
There are many channels for nutrition
education and its effectiveness depends on
using as many of these channels as possible.
Nutrition education is, for example, being
successfully incorporated into a range of
non-formal education programmes in¬
cluding literacy, post-literacy, adult educa¬
tion, rural extension and community
development work.
Some successful attempts are being made
at incorporating nutrition teaching into
literacy programmes for women. These
programmes are an excellent opportunity to
reach mothers with young children and can
provide them with knowledge and skills
that are practical, affordable and necessary
to improve their own nutrition and that of
their young children. Well-designed and ef¬
fectively carried out, nutrition education in
female literacy could bring about signifi¬
cant changes in the nutritional situation of
millions of mothers and children in the
developing world.
Over the past several years an impressive
and growing base of experience has been ac¬
cumulating around the world concerning
the use of the media in nutrition and health
promotion and the important role it can
play in supporting other channels of nutri¬
tion education.
The efficacy of mass communication is
indisputable in terms of its cost-
effectiveness in delivering nutrition infor¬
mation to large numbers of people and
stimulating and sustaining interest in nutri¬
tion. It is therefore important that in and
out-of-school nutrition education benefit
from a close partnership with the media.
Communication and education personnel
must work together in developing in¬
tegrated media and education strategies for
the promotion and maintenance of better
nutrition and health.
Unesco is involved in a number of ac¬
tivities aimed at addressing problems of
nutrition through education both in and out
of school. These include:
the preparation of a package of nutrition
education materials consisting of a
sourcebook for education planners and
those responsible for the elaboration of cur¬
ricula and the training of teachers, and
instructional support
collaboration with the
Organization (WHO),
media specialists and
other low-cost
materials;
conducting, in
World Health
workshops for
assisting in the development of national
media campaigns fpr the promotion of
good nutrition and public health practices;
developing methods for teaching and
learning about nutrition that emphasize
learning by experience and problem-solving
(storytelling, educational games, food
demonstrations, garden projects, activities
based on children teaching other children);
developing, in collaboration with the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF),
a series of teaching modules and materials
on child health and nutrition for literacy
programmes. These modules are based on
the identification of local nutritional
problems and the specific knowledge and
skills needed to enable these problems to be
handled within the household.
publication of a nutrition education series
to promote international exchange of infor¬
mation on teacher-training and com¬
munication activities appropriate to nutri¬
tion education. Monographs in this series
are distributed free of charge throughout
the world to those involved in nutrition
education at all levels.
Susan Van Der Vynckt
31
