CINE QUA NO
An ABC offilm preservation
by Frantz Schmitt
OUR civilization today is confronted
with a flood tide of recorded moving
¡mages, a heritage which poses
serious problems for those responsible for
its transmission, even in part, to future
generations. How can they ensure its sur¬
vival, the full recognition of its cultural value,
and its free circulation?
It is impossible, within the scope of this ar¬
ticle, to elaborate a fundamental theory on
this question, and so far as methods are con¬
cerned, the identification of priorities must
be guided by commonsense rather than by
doctrinaire considerations, even if this
means repeating what for some people are
elementary facts.
For all those who have responsibilities
at the national level in this matter, the
preservation of films should be envisaged
and planned in a long-term perspective,
never only in the short- or medium-term. Col¬
lection is not preservation.
Whatever the size of a country's produc¬
tion, the collection and subsequent preser-
FRANTZ SCHMITT, French film-maker, has
worked on many short films as director,
cameraman or editor. A member of FIAF's
preservation committee, he took part in the
preparation of the Unesco Recommendation
on moving images. He is head of the film ar¬
chives service of France's National Centre of
Cinematography, and teaches in the depart¬
ment of film and audiovisual research at the
University of Paris III.
vation of films calls for the intervention and
active participation of the State, not only
because this work, if well done, is always
costly, but also because nowadays the State
is inevitably involved in the legal, ad¬
ministrative and even scientific and
methodological measures which must be
adopted.
In many film-producing countries the
collection of films for safeguarding has been
neglected for too long not only through indif¬
ference but also for reasons associated with
safety. Inflammable film was still being used
A French banker and philanthropist, Albert
Kahn (1860-1940), was an early believer in
the idea of creating and preserving for
posterity a pictorial record of everyday life
in different countries. To constitute his "Ar¬
chives of the Planet", he despatched
cameramen throughout France and to many
other countries including China, India and
Japan with instructions to "record once and
for all aspects, practices and modes of
human activity whose inevitable disap¬
pearance is only a matter of time. ' ' Between
1910 and 1930 his team took 170,000 metres
ofdocumentary film and 72,000 autochrome
photos. The project came to an end after
Kahn was ruined in 1929 but today his
astonishing collection is preserved at the
Fondation Albert Kahn in the Paris suburb of
Boulogne. Below, street scene in Beijing, a
still from a film in the Archives de la Planète.
until the 1950s and it was difficult if not im¬
possible to store it in premises of national in¬
stitutions responsible for statutory deposits
or copyright. Nowadays the collection of
films can no longer be left to private in¬
itiative. The necessary administrative
measures must be taken to ensure that there
is a statutory obligation to deposit a copy of
every film produced in the country.
Where difficulties of one kind or another
hinder compliance with this requirement, the
authorities could invoke the financial aids to
productionwhich exist in various forms in
many countriesto encourage the statutory
deposit of a sizeable proportion of the coun¬
try's production. If many Western countries
are today deprived of a large part of their film
heritage, it is because they took too long to
recognize this fact and to take appropriate
measures.
The problem of selecting films for
preservation is a false one. As a matter of
principle, a selection should not be made
between one category of film and another.
All products of the "non-commercial"
cinema, whether they be advertising films,
industrial documentaries, propaganda,
amateur films or local reportage, should be
accepted with the same respect as the latest
work of a famous director.
In the past, too many national film ar¬
chives made unhappy choices when they
gave preference to, amongst others, fiction
films. By doing so they encouraged the
authorities, who are not very generous when
26

it comes to allocating funds, in the belief that
after all the need to preserve films as objects
of cultural value can be satisfied while adop¬
ting a compromise solutiona solution
devised by people who, consciously or not,
possess the mentality of technocrats. Ac¬
cording to their school of thought a film
about industrial robotization may be of more
interest in fifty years time than the tenth ver¬
sion of Les Misérables. Selection, if per¬
missible at all, can be based only on prac¬
tical administrative needs.
Where responsibility for safeguarding
different categories of film is assigned to
several bodies in the same country, it is
essential that their respective respon¬
sibilities be strictly defined and that they
adopt common technical criteria. It is an illu
sion to think that the proliferation in some
countries of regional, local, specialized and
decentralized film archives will improve the
long-term chances of survival of a greater
number of films.
In too many instances the only functions
that are properly discharged by these bodies
are those of distribution and presentation,
and it would be desirable that the sole or
master copies in their possession be handed
over to an official central archive. A film ar¬
chive's pride in finding an "only" copy and
repeatedly projecting it until it is worn out
has often been responsible for the disap¬
pearance of a film for all time.
Whenever an archive has to envisage
the restoration of films made before the
disappearance of "nitrate" film, and for
budgetary reasons it cannot undertake all
the restorations at once, it should in my opi¬
nion be guided by five basic criteria when
choosing its priorities.
It should consider the state of
deterioration, especially chemical
deterioration, of the film, the most
threatened films being given priority. For
various technical reasons, these are not
necessarily the oldest. In France, for in¬
stance, it has been found that the original
soundtracks of films made during the
Second World War are very often in an
advanced state of decomposition, where¬
as silent films dating from 1910 are still
perfectly intact. Genuine priorities can be
established objectively on technical


grounds by applying the control methods,
such as stability tests, recommended
by the International Federation of Film
Archives (FIAF).
Before undertaking the lengthy pro¬
cess of restoring a film that is believed to
be the only copy, it should be confirmed at
the national and international levels that a
better copy does not exist in some other
archive with which exchanges can be
made. The development of such ex¬
changes, which is partly linked to the
greater availability of computerized infor¬
mation facilities, especially in regard to
cataloguing, should in the future eliminate
costly and unnecessary duplication,
something which is still too common. Also,
recognition of the special role of film ar¬
chives in safeguarding national heritages
should gradually allow for some relaxation
of the regulations governing the protec¬
tion of copyright and other rights, which in
too many cases paralyse exchanges.
Save in exceptional circumstances,
priority should be given to safeguarding a
country's own films. This may appear to
be a selfish attitude, but it can be compen¬
sated to some extent by organizing
systematic exchanges of work.
For an equal degree of physical or
chemical deterioration, priority should be
given to a country's oldest films, so that
that part of its heritage which is least
known because it is older is made more
rapidly accessible to the public. I have had
many occasions to observe how projec¬
tions of French "incunabula" dating from
before 1915 (Lumière, Méliès, Emile Cohl,
for instance, but also short films by
unknown directors) were received en¬
thusiastically by viewers of all ages, thus
indirectly helping to draw the attention of
official circles to the need to provide better
financial support for the most urgent
essential rescue operations.
Finally, in the case of important ar¬
chives which still possess hundreds or
even thousands of "nitrate" films which
must be copied onto safety film, speedy
action for the largest possible number of
films should take precedence over the
quest for perfect restoration. Previously
unknown sequences from Gance's
Napoléona film which Kevin Brownlow
took years to reconstitute (see article page
14)have just been discovered, but this
approach cannot be followed by archives
that have millions of metres of film for
transfer and have to act quickly to
reproduce hundreds of silent films, even
though some sections may be temporarily
missing.
A film archive does not really deserve
the name unless it has taken certain
technical measures to ensure the long-term
survival of the material in its possession. In
particular, it should give absolute priority to
the preservation of matrices: negatives,
inter-positives, duplicate negatives. If it only
has copies which it uses for consultation or
projection, it has not yet become a real ar¬
chive. A film archive cannot be compared to
a public library. It must have strict rules
about limiting the use of its material. If it
engages in restoration it should at the same
time and as far as possible make several
safety versionsduplicate, inter-positive,
copyfor each title, otherwise it is only
postponing the problem for a few decades.
Of course, an archive with long-term ob¬
jectives will take all the scientific and
technical precautions to preserve its
material that are recommended by the Inter¬
national Federation of Film Archives: strict
air conditioning, careful choice of con¬
tainers, absolute segregation of nitrate and
acetate film, separate storage of originals
and copies, checking of safety and quality
control arrangements, measuring the
thiosulphate residue for copies made by the
archive. There is nothing optional about any
of these precautions.
The everyday work of the archivist also
includes the collection, cataloguing,
safeguarding and, where necessary,
restoration of all those documents and other
material which constitute the historical,
documentary or technical background to a
film. These include scenarios, photographs,
posters, contemporary magazines, publicity
material of various kinds, apparatus,
patents, all of which should be associated
with the films themselves. Indeed, in many
cases they help to restore their identity more
completely.
Very often the student or professional
who comes to an archive to study a film also
needs to have access to this non-film
material, such as catalogues, in order to
complete his research, and it is a pity that
sometimes material of this kind is dispersed
amongst other bodies, such as museums
and libraries.
While it is desirable that every archive
should keep itself well informed about
developments in new technologies and
should try to apply them in its work, this does
not mean that it should constantly postpone
adopting technical solutions for its problems
in the hope that eventually some new
development will supply a radical solution to
its present difficulties. It is already some
time since the introduction of magnetic
tapes for images, but neither these nor other
much-heralded innovations such as the
video-disc, high definition television, the
holographic image or data processing are
likely to cause major upheavals in the
organization of the world's leading archives.
As long as film continues to be used, recent¬
ly created audio-visual archives whose
directors think in terms of the distant future
should be cautious about committing
themselves to new techniques whose value
is still unproved. Can one seriously imagine
that, if all the books and manuscripts in the
great national libraries were transferred to
high definition video-discs, the originals
would be thrown out? The situation will be
the same for the film, and people will always
have recourse to the negative when
possible.
On the other hand, because they
guarantee a much longer life for copies,
there is no doubt that the new positive colour
films which have come on the market in re¬
cent years are likely to have a considerable
influence on the choice of technical solu¬
tions adopted by archivists, and that the
preservation of colour films at very low
temperatures (a very costly and troublesome
system) will in many cases be abandoned.
Frantz Schmitt
The Lumière brothers, Auguste (1862-1954)
and Louis (1864-1948) were two French
scientists who invented an early motion-
picture camera and projector called the
cinématographe. From 1896 until they aban¬
doned production in 1903 they sent a team
of cameramen-projectionists to cities
throughout the world to show their films and
shoot "documentaries" of everyday life.
Left, Tverskaya street, Moscow, a still from
the Gazette des Frères Lumière.
28
