*A voyage to the centre of
JULES YERNE
by Albert Ducrocq
READ again today, most scientific
works published in the last
century seem distinctly old-
fashioned. Both the theories propound¬
ed at that time and the terminology in
which they were expressed appear out¬
dated. The laboratory equipment used
then looks to us archaic, almost
grotesque.
But Jules Verne remains eternally
young. A century after they were writ¬
ten his books are still best-sellers, not
only in France but all over the world;
only the Bible, Shakespeare and Lenin
outstrip them. Today Verne's work is
more popular than ever, and not only
among young people.
What is his secret? Above all else he
was a novelist to his fingertips, adept at
fascinating his readers with descriptions
in which poetry vies with fantasy and
captivating them with the twists and
turns of excellent plots full of adven¬
tures and mysteries prefiguring the
modern whodunit.
Jules Verne is one of the masters of
the art of suspense, which he sometimes
prolongs into severai volumes. When
you have finished Twenty Thousand
Leagues under the Sea you still do not
know the identity of the mysterious
Captain Nemo. This is only revealed in
a later book, The Mysterious Island.
The dénouement often contains a
scientific message. Here appears
another of Jules Verne's talents: he was
a consummate teacher of the kind who
stimulates the interest and enthusiasm
of his pupils by amusing and intriguing
them.
He excels at presenting abstract ideas
in attractive form. One example is the
difference of a day in calculating the
length of a trip round the world. This
discovery was made, not by Jules
Verne, but by the Portuguese explorer
Ferdinand Magellan and his crew who
were astonished to find that the date
when they reached Sanlucar was Satur¬
day 6 September 1522 whereas accor¬
ding to their logbook that day should
have been Friday the 5th; by voyaging
westwards they had "lost" a day.
Verne's novel Around the World in
Eighty Days is constructed around this
phenomenon which has not occurred to
the hero, Phileas Fogg. He thinks he has
lost his bet after being held up in Great
Britain near the end of his journey.
Then, as he looks at a newspaper, he
suddenly realizes that by travelling
eastwards he has gained a day. He had
seen the sun rise once more than people
who had stayed in England. The few
minutes he had lost here and there dur¬
ing his journey as he periodically ad¬
justed his watch to solar time had gain¬
ed him twenty-four hours.
In other cases, the solution of a prob¬
lem is purely and simply imagined by
the astonishingly inventive mind of
Jules Verne. Thus the explorers in The
Fur Country should have observed a
total eclipse of the Sun but in fact they
only observe a partial eclipse. Does this
mean that an error has slipped into the
calculation of the ephemerids? No, this
is absolutely inconceivable in view of
the degree of precision with which the
movement of the Moon is known. The
only possible explanation is that the ex- .
plorers are no longer where they think
they are because their island has become
a raft.
With this incident Jules Verne
thought up nothing less than the space
sextant which was tested by Thomas
Professor Aronnax, the narra¬
tor and one of the heroes of
Jules Verne's novel Twenty
Thousand Leagues under the
Sea (1870). In this novel Verne
created an extraordinary pre¬
cursor of the modern subma¬
rine in the Nautilus, comman¬
ded by Captain Nemo. The
illustrator has depicted Profes¬
sor Aronnax with the features
ofJules Verne, then in his early
forties.
35

An illustration from Jules Verne 's novel
Around the Moon (1870). The travellers
in the projectile hurtling towards the
Moon suddenly float weightlessly.
Mattingly and Henry Hartsfield on the
fourth mission of the space shuttle Col¬
umbia in the summer of 1982. This in¬
strument works on the principle of tak¬
ing account of the Moon's position in
relation to the Sun in order to locate
one's position.
These prophetic insights are all the
more astonishing since Jules Verne was
not a scientist; he had studied to be a
notary. But paradoxically his lack of
scientific training was useful to him in
the sense that it encouraged him to ex¬
press himself in language accessible to
the layman whom he wished to initiate
in scientific subjects just as he had
learned by questioning the scientists he
knew.
At Verne's request, a mathematician
friend of his calculated the speed a body
must attain in order to escape the attrac¬
tion of the earth. This speed is 11.2 km
per second, a figure that today's space
missions have made familiar. Jules
Verne was the first person to reveal it.
His two books From the Earth to the
Moon and Around the Moon were writ¬
ten on the basis of this piece of scientific
data.
Does this mean that everything is
rigorously exact in Jules Verne? Far
from it. It is astonishing that he did not
think of rockets as a means of reaching
this speed of 1 1 .2 km per second. It was
not that he knew nothing of rockets, but
he only assigned them a secondary role
as a means of braking the lunar projec¬
tile. Doubtless the nineteenth century
believed most strongly in the future of
artillery and thought of the rocket as a
' vestige of the past.
The EPCOT Center, which opened at
Walt Disney World near Orlando, Florida
(USA) in 1982 is a realization of Walt Dis¬
ney's dream of creating what he called
an "Experimental Prototype Community
of Tomorrow". A voyage through time
and space worthy of Jules Verne, the
Center is a showcase for the latest tech¬
nological developments and takes its
visitors to all the continents. Left,
"Spaceship Earth", a 55-metre-high
geosphere, dominates the entrance to
"Future World", a group of futuristic
pavilions, one of which is largely de¬
voted to a presentation of ways of life in
the 21st century
36

future thanks to the resources of
technology he foresaw. This is why he is
so much admired.
The essential message of his work, a
message whose full importance can be
gauged in the age of electronics and
robots, is this conviction that mankind
which through science has the power to
reorganize nature as it wishes, is the sole
creator of its future, a future with
extraordinary perspectives.
Some would like to claim that the
future holds in store a world in which
man will be dominated by the machine,
reduced to the state of a robot. We
know that is absurd. Robots are only
the agents of our will. It is we who take
the decisions. The thinking and the in¬
itiative are ours. The reality is simpler;
only yesterday man had to devote much
of his time to non-creative physical or
intellectual tasks. Today he is freed
from these tasks for reflection and
decision-making.
Jules Verne's great achievement is
that he announced that this would come
about in a masterly series of works writ¬
ten a century ago.
ALBERT DUCROCQ, French engineer,
writer, broadcaster and journalist with the
French daily newspaper Le Figaro, is a
specialist in cosmology and space matters and
was also one of the pioneers of cybernetics in
France. The most recent of his many books. Le
Futur Aujourd'hui, has just been published by
Les presses de la Cité, Paris.
The launching of the European rocket
Ariane III atKourou (French Guiana) on
4 August 1984. The rocket set two tele¬
communications satellites in orbit.
It also seems amazing that Verne did
not grasp, using the laws of ballistics,
that a state of weightlessness would exist
in his machine all through the space
flight. He simply thought that there
would be a point near the Moon where
the pull of the two planets would
neutralize each other so that passengers
and objects would float in the cabin of
the lunar projectile, a situation depicted
in an illustration which became famous.
Some would claim that one of
Verne's novels is based entirely on a
full-scale scientific heresy: Journey to
the Centre of the Earth. The pressure at
the centre of the planet is so high that
matter as we know it on the Earth's sur¬
face cannot exist. It would therefore be
inconceivable to send a man there.
But there is no reason not to imagine
that another planet in the solar system
may not conceal in its midst an immense
"ocean" similar to that which Verne
' 'And so I do not think I am going too far
when I say that there will soon be trains
ofprojectiles in which the journey from
the Earth to the Moon will be comfortably
effected," says the Jules Verne hero
Michel Ardan in From the Earth to the
Moon (1865) from which this illustration
is taken.
imagined at the centre of the Earth. This
could be the case, for example, of
Enceladus, a satellite of Saturn whose
inner mysteries may one day be ex¬
plored by man.
For there can be no doubt that the
human adventure is only just beginning
and that it has very far to take us. It was
perhaps Jules Verne's greatest merit
that he understood this. In addition to
being a novelist and a teacher Jules
Verne was above all a man who had
faith in mankind, whose fantastic
37
