RY IN A LANDSCAPE
The world of Sangam
An early 10th-century
bronze of the poet-saint
Manikkavasaghar, author of
the great collection of devo¬
tional hymns known as the
Tiruvasagham. His extend¬
ed left hand holds palm
leaves, representing his
hymns, while his right hand
is in the vyakhyana position,
representing the teaching of
the supreme faith.
32
by François Gros
THE magical word Sangam conjures
up the golden age of Tamil litera¬
ture, that lost paradise of Dravidian
culture. It calls to mind the myth of the
three successive literary academies (the
word "sangam" means "academy") of a
fabulous era. The first and second
academies were swallowed up in deluges
comparable to the end of the world; only
the third was rescued from oblivion.
This third Sangam corresponds to
historical reality. Medieval commentators,
followed in turn by nineteenth- and
twentieth-century scholars, have preserved
the essence of this unique series of an¬
thologies, written in the oldest of all the
modern languages of India, which most
likely date back to the first centuries of the
Christian era. The Sangam is unques¬
tionably one of the high points in world
literature.
Little is known of the more than 450
authors, except that they came from all
classes of society, the sole criterion by
which they were judged being the recogni¬
tion of their talent by their peers. These
court poets sang the exploits of princes and
warriors or the sorrows of a nation at war.
Kings honoured them and they felt a keen
sense of their own dignity. On one occa¬
sion, the bard Mucikkiranar fell asleep in
the palace near the place reserved for the
royal drum, a sacrilege punishable by
death. Discovering him in this invidious
situation, the king, rather than taking harsh
measures against him, picked up a fan and
cooled his sleep, thus rendering homage to
his genius.
In this exemplary anecdote the magical
origins and totemic aspects of royalty are
seen in their relation to the sacred function
of the poet and the cathartic role of the
drummers (Pariahs). It should be added
that contemporary Tamil humour declares
Mucikkiranar to have been the first Indian
civil servant to fall asleep on the job! Yet if
today's poets are ironical, those of the
Sangam were the ambassadors of kings on
conciliatory missions (like Auvaiyar) and
tutors to the royal heirs (like Kapilar). Their
praise had to be merited and could not be
bought; their contempt or curse was
degrading, for they were men who exchang¬
ed gifts with kings.
Among themselves, Tamil poets were far
more than a brotherhood of starving bards
who exchanged addresses of generous
patrons. Rather they formed a sort of
academy, as indicated by the word
"Sangam". The legend of the Sangams was
FRANÇOIS GROS is director of studies at
the Ecole Pratique des. Hautes Etudes and
director of the Ecole Française d'Extrême
Orient, Paris. A specialist in Dravidian history
and literature, he was awarded the Prix Sain-
tour in 1969 for his translation into French of
Paripatal, an anthology of ancient Sangam
texts. The editors of the Unesco Courier wish
to acknowledge with gratitude the help and
advice given by Mr. Gros in the preparation of
this issue.
to be written later, but the historical reality
is somewhat elusive, save what can be
gleaned from the texts, from the stylized
mannerism of refined classicism, the
academism of a lost academy. Its code,
however, is well known to us. The Tolkap-
piyam, both a grammar and a richly com¬
mentated treatise on rhetoric, serves as a
linguistic reference book for this entire
period, which spanned several centuries at
the beginning of the Christian era.
At first reading, this poetrybrief and
varied, violent and outspoken, and at times
excessively romanticseems to speak to all
mankind in the language of the senses and
the passions. The wisdom it preaches is a
very humanistic, hedonistic stoicism, with,
quite exceptionally for India, very few
religious references. Yet these poems,
presented in strictly ordered anthologies,
have an inner discipline; words and images
are never arbitrarily employed. A system of
conventions and figures of speech imbues
even the least significant of notions with
underlying meanings and harmonies.
The anthologies lend themselves ad¬
mirably to modern linguistic analysis, for
they constitute a metalanguage within
which the universe is perfectly structured.
Some poems are concerned with the world
of the senses, with all that is tangible and
external (puram), dealing with civic or war¬
time exploits the seizure or recovery of
cattle, preparations for war (a place of safe¬
ty had to be found for the cattle, women,
children, the elderly and the priests), sieges,
battles, triumph and disarray, victory and
defeat. Others speak of the feelings and
more abstract relationships of the heart, the
anonymous and the internal (agam).
Every situation is described using themes
in which the time, the place and the floral
symbols of each episode are codified. The
inner universe is divided into five geo¬
graphical landscapesmountains, forest,
cropland, seashore and wasteland used as
symbols to imply a socio-economic order,
occupations and behaviour patterns which,
in turn, are symbolized by specific flora and
fauna. Details of secondary aspects are just
as rigidly codifiedthe seasons, the hour, a
god, musical instruments and, above all,
the sentimental connotations of each land¬
scape: lovers' meetings, patient waiting,
lovers' quarrels, separation, and the anx¬
iously awaited return.
The mountain is the scene of the lovers'
union at midnight. It is the cold, dewy
season. The forest is rich with lakes, water¬
falls, teak, bamboo and sandalwood. In
this region millet grows and wild bees are a
source of honey.
Love in this setting is exemplified by
Murugan, that most Tamil of gods, and one
of his wives, Valli, the daughter of moun¬
taineers. He wears the sparkling red kantal
flower and rides a peacock, the bird of the
mountains. The name of the region, kurin-
ci, is also the name of a famous flower from
the lofty hills of Tamil country. In this same

region grows the strobilanth, a shrub whose
brilliant white flowers blossom for only a
few days once every ten or twelve years,
blanketing the slopes in radiant whiteness
under the sun. This event of jubilation and
purity symbolizes the frenzy of a sudden
love shared, in concert with the unleashed
forces of nature: the amorous dance of
peacocks, their echoing cries, the splash of
waterfalls, the roar of savage beasts.
The lovers hold each other tighter still
and forget the dangers of the mountain
path. This region is dearest to the hearts of
the Tamil people and, according to legend,
the great poet Kapilar wrote the Song of
Below, the central figure of
this sculpture at the great
temple of Tanjore, built by
the Chola emperor Raja Raja
I around 1 000 AD, is the god
Murugan seated on his
mount, the peacock. The
chief deity of the ancient
Tamils, Murugan later
became identified with
Skanda, the northern Indian
god of war and first-born
son of Siva, and still has a
large following in southern
India under the name of
Subrahmanya. Right,
modern street mural depic¬
ting Murugan.
Kurinci as an example for an Aryan king of
a typical Tamil love poem.
The theme of wasteland and separation
occupies half of one of the most famous an¬
thologies, the theme of the mountain being
only secondary. The theme of the forest and
of shepherds at play, the image of confident
waiting for the loved one, produced an
original offshoot; for this is the region of
Vishnu, and the love theme it represents
symbolizes the devotee waiting in the hope
that Vishnu, as Krishna, will eventually
come and fill his soul, thus experiencing the
joys of expectation.
The plains were the scene of triangular
Photo Emmanuel Guillou © Atlas Photo,
Paris
love plots in which the hero's visits to the
courtesan oblige the heroine to counter with
a mixed show of coquetry and moodiness,
tactics whose limits are described in the
Kural ("Sulking is like flavouring with salt;
a little suffices, but it is easy to go too
far."). Sangam poets offer countless ex¬
amples of this:
The man of the village by the ponds
where the carp seize the ripe fruit of the
mango trees that line the fields.
In our land he is high and mighty; but in
theirs. . .
When arms and legs are raised, he raises
his
Like a puppet, a reflection in a mirror,
He does all he is asked, for the mother of
his son.
The courtesan, jealous of the wife, is
speaking here. The landscape is defined by
the designation of the hero (a fellow from
the village), the mention of a creature (the
carp), the tree (the mango), the water-filled
scenery (the pond), the season (that of
ripened mangoes and sultry heat, a secon¬
dary characteristic and sign of separation).
The situation implies that the courtesan
wishes to be heard by the heroine's con¬
fidante. Through the image of the opening
lines she indicates that the hero has fallen
freely for her wiles and that to win him she
did not have to infringe upon his home
ground; he is a hero of little substance, it
would seem, in a situation dominated by
women.
Although interpretation and the
deciphering of the conventions of these
texts can at times seem tiresome, the last
landscape, the seashore, affords many ex¬
amples of the compelling charm of Sangam
poetry and the extraordinary freshness of
its realism. From behind the conventional
symbolization of waiting there emerges a
picture of the life of the fisherfolk; the nets
and boats drawn up on the beach, scuttling
crabs and cart wheels bogged down in the
sand, the odour of drying fish, cut into
thick slices, which attracts the birds,
beautiful village girls peering through the
pandanus hedges, and the wind blowing
through the cracks in the roughly con¬
structed straw huts at night.
We must allow the texts to speak to us.
The more the theoretical account highlights
the unreality of the conventions used, the
more each verse bristles with realistic
imagesa marvellous juxtaposition of
words and subtle manipulation of rhetoric
in which a twofold technique of suggestion
(iraicci) and complex metaphor (ullurai
uvamam) evokes a situation, and thus a
mood, by describing a natural
phenomenon, whilst the description alone
suffices to imply the, most explicit of sen¬
timental relationships.
Careful use of rhetoric and its underlying
themes and conventions make for great
economy in descriptive writing. In contrast
to the weightiness of the theoretical inter¬
pretation, the poems reveal a subtle
freedom of movement in the dense matrix
of allusions and in the art of bending the
conventions by mixing the themes to test the
shrewdness of the cultivated reader.
Sangam poetry has often been considered
the crowning achievement of a long oral
tradition; however, the works that have sur¬
vived to this day are among the most
magnificent and most living examples of
written poetry. François Gros
33
