FROM C AT H A Y T O Ä INTT I O C H
A SILKEN
FROM EASTi
by Ma Yong
IN 1958, archaeologists working at a
site at Qian Shan Yang, in Wuxing
district, Zhejiang Province, discov¬
ered the earliest fabrics yet found anywhere
in the world. Here, in China's Tai Lake
region, long famous for its silk industry,
among other cultural relics of the Neolithic
Age, they found relics of silk fabrics in¬
cluding silk yarn, silk belts and pieces of
spun silk fabric.
Examination showed that the pieces of
fabric were woven from the silk of domestic
silkworms which had been reeled before
weaving. The weave is plain, the yarn of
both warp and weft is almost identical in
thickness and the average density of the
cloth is of forty-seven threads per cen¬
timetre. Chronological tests indicate a date
for these fabrics of 2,750 ± 100 years. In
view of the advanced levels of the technique
used, the silk textile industry had already
evolved beyond the primitive stage when
these fabrics were made, and it can safely be
assumed that China's silk industry has a
history of more than 5,000 years.
We do not Know for certain how silk first
came to be shipped abroad, but China's silk
industry must have been experiencing a
MA YONG, of China, is director of the Ancient
Sino-Foreign Relations section of the Institute
of History of the Chinese Academy of Social
Sciences. Vice-Chairman of the Chinese
Society for Central Asian Studies, he is a
specialist in the history of the Xinjiang region
of China and the author of The Historical
Relics of Xinjiang Region (1978) as well as
numerous studies on the history and ar¬
chaeology of Xinjiang. He is a member of the
International Editorial Council of A History of
the Civilization of Central Asia, sponsored by
Unesco, and is one of the editors of the
History's third volume.



HIGHWAY
TO WEST
period of great prosperity when its much-
prized products began to spread to the West
sometime between the sixth and the fifth
century BC.
During the early years of the Spring and
Autumn Period (770 to 476 BC), the Jin and
Qin Kingdoms, situated in the southern and
central part of Shanxi Province and in the
southeastern part of Gansu Province, had
extended their influence to the region of the
nomadic peoples to the northwest, thus
establishing closer contacts with the in¬
habitants of the regions of the Great Bend
of the Huang He River (Yellow River) and
the corridor west of the Huang He. It was
probably from there that the first shipments
of silk to the West were made. However, it
seems that at that time there was no direct
established trade between the Chinese in¬
terior and the regions of central Asia. Silk
was carried to the Eurasian hinterland by
nomadic tribes such as the Xianyun and the
Yue-chi and from there spread to Europe
via the Scythians.
Chinese silk fabrics have been unearthed
from the huge stone-capped tomb of a fifth-
century chief of the Altai region of the
USSR. Among them was a splendid silk
saddle-cloth with a phcenix embroidered on
it. Beside it lay a bronze mirror, also of
Chinese manufacture. Silk fabrics and silk
fringes sewn on to woollen garments have
also been found in sixth- and fifth-century
BC graves in Greece, Germany and Luxem¬
bourg. All this would seem to indicate that
the oldest Silk Road started at the Great
Bend of the Huang He River, passing to the
north of the Alps via the eastern and nor-
In 1971, Chinese archaeologists working on
a site at Mawangdul, near Chang-sha, Hunan
Province, discovered three tombs, one of
which was still Intact, containing a wealth of
valuable artefacts, all of which are over two
thousand years old. They Included silk
garments and coverings and a number of
documents printed on bamboo and silk. The
tombs are believed to be those of a high-
ranking nobleman, the Marquis Da, his wife
and son, who lived during the early years of
the Western Han dynasty (202 BC to 9 AD,
approx.). Right, fragment of a copy, printed
on silk, of the Tao Te Ching (The Book of the
Way and Its Power), one of the most sacred
books of Taolst literature. Above, a silk
gauze dress, 1.28 metres long.
them parts of the Altai and across the
steppes of Kazakhstan and south Russia, to
reach the shores of the Black Sea and on to
regions inhabited by Greeks and Etruscans.
Although some silk from China reached
Europe via this route, it can hardly be said
that a proper trade route existed at this
time. The Greeks, whose curiosity was
aroused by the novel luxury of silk, had on¬
ly the vaguest ideas about the far off eastern
land they called simply the "Land of Silk",
a name which persisted until the Roman
era.
Chinese silk may also have been in¬
troduced to India at that time. It is said that
the word Cinapatta, which means "Chinese
silks", is mentioned in the Artha-sastra
(Handbook of the King), written by the
fourth-century BC Indian writer Kautiliya.
Furthermore, the Sanskrit vocabulary in¬
dicates that ancient Indians already knew
that silk was a secretion from a kind of
insect.
However, the credit for the opening of
the real Silk Road belongs to Emperor Wu
of the Han dynasty (middle of the second
22

Lak.
Balkhash
-xAntioch
vy-^ * Palmyra
7>re
pâfàr^biuni
a Karakhoto
"" "* *» # Hamadac
Caspian. Bokhara c ^^^i^^ ^f'' ' Kucha '' """***
iV-1».
<.
J*x'* Yarkand
2¡.-'>»_ Khotan
'V
V k£ V» Srinhgar % %Z% leh^\><^- -~ -i*-^'V->>-^«k\\
Lanchou
	 ^»
KeHoiv Sea
Chang 'an
(Xian)
*
^it:
century BC) and his general Zhang Qian.
Anxious to forge an alliance with the people
of the Great Yue-chi of central Asia to offer
common resistance to the Xiongnu (the
Huns), Emperor Wu sent Zhang Qian to the
western region as an envoy in 139 BC. Some
ten years later, Zhang Qian reached the nor¬
thern part of present-day Afghanistan, thus
opening for the first time a direct line of
communication between the interior of
China and central Asia.
Later, the Han dynasty began to exploit
the western region systematically, devoting
to this task huge resources of manpower
and materials. The opening of an official
post road along the southern and northern
fringes of the Takla Makan desert was only
possible due to the military strength and ef¬
ficient administrative organization of the
Han dynasty. The road was extended
beyond the Pamirs and connected up with
already existing roads in central, western
and southern Asia. Chinese silk was ship¬
ped continuously to the West along these
roads, while products from central and
western Asia also began to reach the
Chinese interior in large quantities.
When the Silk Road first opened, this
trade was probably carried mainly by the
diplomatic envoys of China and the coun¬
tries of central Asia. Later, however, it
became the monopoly of merchants of
Sogdia, Kushan and Parthia. The "Hu
merchants" (merchants of non-Han na¬
tionalities), as they were called in Chinese
historical records, were heavily-bearded
men with deep-set eyes and large noses who
spoke a variety of Iranian dialects. They
organized camel caravans, heavily laden
with goods such as perfume, jewels and
glassware, which travelled across the snow-
covered Pamirs, stopped at the oases of the
Tarim Basin, passed through the corridor
west of the Huang He River and over
Mount Long before finally arriving at
Chang'an or Luoyang.
On the return journey they carried with
them cargoes of silks, the round trip taking
anything from one to two years. Although
they experienced countless natural dangers,
risking their lives along the route, there
were huge profits to be made. They amass¬
ed fortunes by shipping silks to the West
to Rome and later to Byzantium. This
wealth became the economic basis of the
prosperity and embellishment of many a
famous city of central and western Asia.
Along the Silk Road travelled not only
silk but also the technology of the silk in¬
dustry, and in ancient times many a legend
grew up about the propagation of silk-
making techniques. One famous story re¬
counts that when a Chinese princess was
married to the King of Khotan, as she pass¬
ed the customs officials at the frontier, she
hid some silkworms in her hat and thus suc¬
ceeded in bringing the silk industry to the
Khotan region. Another legend relates how
two Byzantine priests hid some silkworm
ova in hollowed-out bamboo sticks and
brought them to Constantinople, thus
revealing the secrets of silk manufacture to
the West.
In fact, the introduction of the silk in¬
dustry to the western regions occurred quite
early. Frescoes can be seen in graves dating
from the Wei and Jin dynasties, found in
the west of Jiuquan, Gansu Province,
depicting members of the family of the
deceased collecting mulberry leaves in his
orchards. This seems to indicate that the
silk and mulberry industry was already very
developed to the west of the Huang He
River during the third century AD.
23

Archaeologists examine a
2,300-year-old silk quilt
recently unearthed in Hubei
Province, central China, from
a tomb dating from the period
of the Warring States (480 to
221 BC).
Photo © China Features, Beijing
Documents of the fifth century AD
unearthed at Turfan in the Autonomous
Region of Xinjiang Uighur show that the
silk industry already existed both in Qoco
(now the Turfan Prefecture) and Kucha at
that time. Indeed, it seems that brocades
were also being made there.
During the sixth century AD, the tech¬
niques of silk weaving were known in cen¬
tral Asia and Persia. The Sassanid dynasty
of Persia once tried to monopolize the silk-
weaving industry and to prevent its spread
to the West. The story about the Byzantine
priests is, perhaps, a factual reflection of
the introduction of the silk industry to the
West in spite of the Sassanid ban.
The introduction of the silk industry to
the West had little effect on economic and
cultural exchange along the Silk Road. By
the seventh and eighth centuries these ex¬
changes between East and West had reach¬
ed unprecedented heights, due principally
to the prosperity, power and high level of
civilization of the Sui and Tang empires.
After the ninth century, although trade
along the Silk Road was not quite so intense
as in earlier periods, it remained quite ac¬
tive, with both Uighurs and Mongols play¬
ing an active part.
With the profound changes in the world
situation that occurred in the middle of the
fifteenth century, the historical importance
of the Silk Road came to an end. There were
three reasons for this decline.
Turfan, in the Sinkiang Uighur Autonomous
Region of China, is situated in a fertile oasis
and has always been an important trade
centre. Located on the traditional border
between the nomadic peoples of the north
and the settled oasis-dwellers of Sinkiang,
Turfan was a key staging post on the north¬
ern branch of the Silk Road. Below, the Imin
mosque at Turfan, built in 1779.
First, the improvement in navigation and
the development of maritime routes made
the hazardous journey across the hinterland
of the Eurasian continent unnecessary.
Second, after the death of Tamerlane in
1405, the permanent political instability,
economic depression and gradual cultural
decline of the central Asian regions meant
that they were no longer capable of playing
their role of intermediaries between East
and West. Finally, following a decision
adopted in 1424 by Emperor Yongle of the
Ming dynasty, China closed her borders to
the northwest. Economic and cultural rela¬
tions were maintained, however, with a
number of countries in central Asia west of
the Pamirs. With the coming of the Qing
dynasty, these relations were greatly inten¬
sified, even exceeding those established
under the Han and Tang dynasties. But
these were regional relationships which
were not of world significance. The Silk
Road, with a glorious career as the trunk
route of communication between East and
West which had lasted for more than 1,500
years, gradually faded from the world
scene.
° In recent years, however, rapid changes
have been taking place in central and
western Asia. Movements of national
resurgence are making themselves felt. Fur¬
thermore, there have been great changes in
the world situation since the end of the
Second World War. The energy problems
arising from the development of modern in¬
dustry, the strategic position of the Gulf
and the development of aviation are all fac¬
tors that are giving new importance to the
regions through which the Silk Road once
passed. It is more than likely that, after
lying dormant for some five hundred years,
this great trunk route of international com¬
munication will once again prosper and
take on a new mission of historic
importance.
Ma Yong
©
-r
v>
