'Never eat rice in the dark
s
Never eat rice in the dark or you will at¬
tract the evil spirit called momo (the ghost).
You might even swallow the evil spirit and
bring misfortune upon yourself.
If anyone wastes rice or throws it away,
his hand will become deformed and he will
never know abundance or prosperity.
If you give rice to a beggar, offer it to him
on a plate and not in the pangtakal (measur¬
ing cup), otherwise your supply of rice and
food will diminish.
Never place the measuring cup in the rice
bin upside down for this may result in a bad
harvest.
On the steep slopes of the mountains in
the north of Luzon, the largest island of
the Philippines, the ¡fugaos people, with
great skill and enormous effort, have
carved out an amazing complex of ir¬
rigated rice terraces. Creation of this
complex involved the construction of
20,000 kilometres of revetments, in¬
cluding 7,000 kilometres of stone walls.
Above, the Ifugao village ofBatud. Right,
an effigy of the rice goddess,
photographed in Batud.
Colour page
A cook prepares a meal of rice for
distribution to volunteers working on
the construction of a rice-field irriga¬
tion canal in the province of Da Nang,
Viet Nam.
Proverbs from the Philippines
selected by
	 Samuel K. Tan	
Professor of history, University of the
Philippines.
LI wM
-.-o
Rice should never be lent or given away at
night or early in the morning because this
brings bad luck. Rice may, however, be
bought at night.
Showering rice on newly-weds brings
prosperity both to the couple and to the per¬
son who throws the rice.
Rice must be washed three times for this
is in keeping with the ancient ways.
It is best to plant during a full moon and
on a clear and starry night for this will en¬
sure a good harvest.
Sundays, Mondays, the first day of
August and odd-dated days are in¬
auspicious for planting. Even-dated
Wednesdays and Fridays are the best days
for planting for they bring a plentiful
harvest and healthy grains, especially if the
planting is accompanied by prayers.
When planting, the planter should have a
full stomach for this brings good luck and
fruitful days and months ahead. When
planting is completed, the planter should let
out a great shout to signify that the day has
ended in triumph over adverse conditions
and unforeseen eventualities.
Harvest-time is the most keenly-awaited
period in the cycle of rice cultivation and
harvesting should be carried out before the
dew and morning mists have disappeared.
This will bring speedy good fortune to the
people.
31
