RICE AND RITUAL
The Tamil art of cooking
by Thilaka Baskaran
Photo © Vivant Univers. Namur, Belgium
To prepare food for
their families village
women use two age-
old devices for milling
and grinding the sad¬
dle quern (a round
stone rolled or rubbed
on a flat stone) and,
visible in the
background, a pestle
and mortar.
SANGAM literature paints a vivid picture of the social life
of the ancient Tamils and provides the historical back¬
ground for their eating habits. In the Sangam poems
(see article page 32) land is classified into five geographical
areas and the food related to each area is described.
Many inscriptions chiselled on the walls of temples reveal
how food habits and religious practices became intertwined.
These epigraphs give an idea of the role of food in rituals, as
THILAKA BASKARAN, is a Tamil nutritionist and college lecturer.
12
sacrificing, cooking, dedicating and feasting all became part of
worship. Not eating... fasting, also emerged as a ritual.
By the 1 1 th-1 2th century AD, caste groups had appeared
with distinct lines of demarcation, and the eating habits of each
caste began to assume different characteristics. (The culinary
profile of the castes can still be noted by the careful observer).
Such issues as "who can serve whom?" and "from whom can
one accept food?" became significant in the context of caste
structure. Depending upon the degree to which a caste was
"Sanskritized", it became vegetarian or non-vegetarian. A
tradition of vegetarianism, which was largely absent from an¬
cient Tamil Nadu began to emerge, mainly as a result of the
popularity of Buddhism and Jainism.

Over the years, certain interesting concepts in food ap¬
peared. Taste was classified into six groups, and all food com¬
modities were divided into two broad categories, hot and cold.
The whole of Tamil cuisine is still largely based on this
classification which also influenced indigenous medicinal prac¬
tices: illnesses were classified as hot and cold and the diet
therapy was based on treating with cold food those caused by
heat and with hot food those caused by cold. This belief still
persists. Chicken pox, for example, is believed to be a
manifestation of body heat and the foods permitted are those
that are supposed to counter this heat fruit, butter milk and
tender coconut.
Some of the recipes. that were in use in the 1st century AD
are still being followed today, pretty much unchanged. Cooking
is elaborate and complex, and is considered to be a fine art.
Treatises on cooking specify the size of the kitchen, the kind of
stove to be used, the direction in which the stove is to face, and
even the desirable characteristics of a cook (he should be "a
native born of good caste, he should observe the cooking and
eating taboos, not harbour any grudge, be absolutely clean in
his habits, and always tie his long hair into a bun").
The everyday diet is fairly austere, consisting of boiled rice,
sambar (dhal [lentils] vegetable and tamarind), fish or meat
In modern Tamil cuisine coffee has become one of the main
drinks. Brewed from freshly roasted and ground beans, and
served with plenty of milk and sugar, it is always drunk at
breakfast. This method of coffee-making is holding its ground
in all Tamil kitchens in the face of instant coffees promoted in
the media.
Change in food habits is slow in coming to Tamil Nadu, but
some signs of it can be seen. Wheat is being increasingly used
in urban areas. Chappathi (wheat flour pancake) may be
substituted for rice, especially for dinner, and poori (a deep-
fried wheat pancake) and potato be served as breakfast.
Though stainless steel cutlery and crockery are used in urban
homes, food is still served on ceremonial occasions in the tradi¬
tional way on a banana leaf. The leaf is spread in front of the
diner, with the tip pointing left. Serving begins with salt and
pickle being placed at the extreme left. The first course is
sweet everything has to begin with a sweet whether it is an
infant's first solid meal or the newly-wed's first drink. The
series of vegetable dishes, pachadi (a vegetable and curd salad)
and the crisp appalam, all of which go with the various rice
courses, are placed on the top half of the leaf. With every
course the leaf is carefully replenished, the diner's protests be¬
ing totally ignored. Even among non-vegetarians, ceremonial
A celebratory meal being serv¬
ed to guests in the traditional
manner on banana leaves (see
article this page) on the occa¬
sion of the upanayana, or initia¬
tion, of the son of the
household. During the initiation
ceremony, which usually takes
place around the age of twelve,
the boy is invested with the
"sacred thread", a loop of cot¬
ton cord placed over the left
shoulder and falling diagonally
across the body to the right hip.
The thread, which the owner
wears throughout his lifetime,
being replaced annually, in¬
dicates that the wearer has
joined the ranks of the dvija, or
"twice-born".
curry (for non-vegetarians), a vegetable pugadh, rasam (spicy
pepper water) and curds. On special occasions payasam, a
milk-based dessert flavoured with cardomom, is served.
Even in affluent families there is not much variety in the daily
menu, but when there are guests or a wedding is held it is a
totally different story, and a truly ambrosial meal will be produc¬
ed. The food served on these occasions is an indication of the
hosts' status.
Eating habits vary geographically and are shaped largely by
what is grown in the different areas. In the riverine and delta
regions, paddy, sugar cane, banana and coconut figure largely
in the diet. In dry areas millets and grams are the major
foodstuffs.
The delicate blending of herbs, condiments and spices is the
touchstone of good cookery. The combination and quantity of
spices used vary from family to family, providing subtle varia¬
tions in taste. The contrast between opposing tastes is a recurr¬
ing theme. Most of the popular dishes like sambar, morekolum-
bu (curds and spices with coconut) pulikolumbu (a spicy sour
curry with vegetable and tamarind) and the red-hot fish and
meat curry are all different combinations of sour and hot tastes.
The staple cereal in most parts of Tamil Nadu is, of course,
rice, which is often eaten at all three meals. Breakfast in most
middle class families consists of idli (a rice and dhal batter,
steamed), dosai (the same batter fried like a pancake), puttu (a
steamed rice-flour preparation served with coconut scrapings,
banana, and sugar), idiappam (a rice-flour dough pressed
through a mould to resemble vermicelli and steamed) or appam
(a rice-flour and coconut delicacy fermented with toddy and
cooked like a pancake).
feasts are always vegetarian.
Every festival and ceremony has a traditional menu. The first
rice meal given to a baby in the seventh month is sarkarai
ponga!, a combination of rice-milk, sugar and ghee. The
teething of a child calls for pal koshukattai (tiny rice flakes
resembling teeth, cooked in milk with sugar). The coming of
age of a daughter is an important family event, as it is in all tradi¬
tional communities. Milk, banana and sugar are given to the girl
and to all well-wishers who visit her. Seemandam, celebrated
in the seventh or ninth month of pregnancy, calls for a variety
of rice preparations.
Since Tamil Nadu is predominantly agricultural it is not sur¬
prising that the most important festival should be pongal, the
harvest festival, which is celebrated at the beginning of the
Tamil month of Thai (see box page 31 ). Pongal, which literally
means "boiling over", symbolizes the farmer's overflowing
prosperity. Newly decorated mud pots are used to cook dishes
to fit the occasion, such as sarkarai pongal and ven pongal.
Modernization is slowly bringing changes to the culinary
scene. Compromises and adaptations are being made. Tradi¬
tional recipes that call for elaborate and leisurely cooking are
disappearing. Processed foods such as ready-made idli-m\x and
pre-packed curry powders have invaded urban kitchens.
Mechanical aids such as motorized ;d//-grinders are also being
used in traditional cooking. The break-up of the joint family and
the increase in the number of career women have inevitably
changed some Tamil eating habits. A movement towards a
simpler cuisine can be sensed. All the same, Tamil food prac¬
tices and their cultural implications still retain their basic
character.
Thilaka Baskaran
13
