HI
t^at
il rediscovered epic of the silent screen
NAPOIEON
mate« a tome-back
by Roy Malkin
ON three evenings in July 1983, the
3,700-seat auditorium of the Palais
des Congrès in Paris was packed
with expectant audiences impatient to see a
film which had been made over half a cen¬
tury before, had been received with acclaim
by public and critics, and had then virtually
disappeared without trace. The film was
Napoléon, the greatest creation of the
legendary French director Abel Gance (its
full title is actually Napoléon vu par Abel
Gance). It traces the career of Napoleon
ROY MALKIN is assistant editor of the English
edition of the Unesco Courier.
Bonaparte from his schooldays to the mo¬
ment when, as heir to the ideals of the
French Revolution, he took command of
the army of Italy in 1796.
Napoléon was vast in its conception and
proportions. The version seen by Paris au¬
diences in 1983 lasted five and a quarter
hours (one version prepared by Gance and
shown to critics in 1927 lasted nine); it was
accompanied by an orchestra of forty-eight
musicians playing a score specially compos¬
ed and conducted by U.S. composer Carl
Davis; and its last twenty minutes revealed
the revolutionary wide screen "triptych"
process called Polyvision which Gance had
invented, twenty-five years before
Cinerama, to present epic scenes using three
simultaneously projected images (in one in¬
stance Napoleon is shown in close up on the
central panel while his marching army ap¬
pears on the two flanking screens).
At the end of the performance surviving
veterans of the film actors, actresses,
technicians went on stage and received the
acclaim of the audience. Two men, one ab¬
sent, one present, also shared the applause.
The first was Abel Gance himself, who had
died two years before at the age of ninety-
two before he could see the homecoming of
the prodigal son he had created. The second
14

Presentation of Napoléon af a
London cinema in November
1980, with orchestra con¬
ducted by Carl Davis.
was British film director and historian
Kevin Brownlow, who had reconstituted
Gance's film after many years of painstak¬
ing efforts, with the collaboration of the
Cinémathèque Française, the British Film
Institute, and film archives in many parts of
the world.
Brownlow has written a book, Napoleon,
Abel Gance's Classic Film*, which vividly
describes how Napoléon was made and then
reconstructed. In it he tells how his
obsessive enthusiasm for Gance's work was
first kindled in 1954 when, as a fifteen-year-
old film-mad London schoolboy, he found
in a suburban film library two reels of a film
called Napoleon Bonaparte and the French
Revolution and acquired it for his hand-
cranked home projector. "The two reels
contained such superb sequences that they
left me breathless," he wrote. "The in¬
troduction of the Marseillaise, the pursuit
of Napoleon across Corsica, the storm at
sea intercut with the storm in the Conven¬
tion. For someone accustomed to showing
Felix the Cat to bored relatives, this was an
unforgettable event."
The reels were of 9.5 mm film, a gauge
invented for home cinemas. If they are so
good, he thought, what must the rest be
like? He set off combing through junk
shops, photographic stores and old film
libraries. Miraculously he found more reels,
and the more he found the better, he
thought, the film became. He began show¬
ing it to his friends. "I felt it was up to me
to do what little I could to show my modest
'rediscovered' version to as many people as
possible. I set up twin turntables, selected a
range of 78 rpm gramophone records and
presented the film with full orchestral ac¬
companiment, the thunder of which was
equal to any Napoleonic cannonade. My
audiences were always stunned".
Film critics and historians began to hear
about Brownlow's version of Napoléon and
some came to see it for themselves.
Brownlow began to find out what he could
published in the UK by Jonathan Cape and in the US
by Alfred A. Knopf.
about Gance, discovered that he was still
alive, wrote him a fan letter and received a
warm reply. He found that Gance was one
of the great figures of the early cinema, the
self-taught, daemonic, epic figures who
were inevitably drawn to epic subjects. He
had been born in 1889 and by the time he
began to make Napoléon in 1925 was
already famous as the director of an anti¬
war film, J'accuse (1919) with an extraor¬
dinary final sequence in which the
mutilated dead of World War I rise and
march towards the audience to ask whether
their loss was justified, and La Roue (1922)
a film about railway workers in which he
pioneered rapid cutting techniques to create
rhythm and pace.
Gance may have been unique in that he
seems to have believed that the cinema had
a kind of divine mission. A speech he made
during the making of Napoléon to the hun¬
dreds of extras (strikers from the Renault
factory at Billancourt) taking part in the
siege of Toulon gives something of the
measure of the man. "It is imperative that
this film should allow us to enter once and
for all into the temple of the arts by way of
the huge portal of history. An unspeakable
anguish grips me at the thought that my will
and the gift of my life even are nothing if
you do not give me your undivided loyalty
and devotion... The task is without
parallel... My friends, all the screens of the
world await you!" When interviewing
veterans of the film in the 1970s Brownlow
found that they often made a slip of the
tongue, saying "Napoleon" when they
meant "Gance".
Shooting of Napoléon began in January
1925, and ended late the following year. A
film of the filming and photos taken at the
time show some of the ambitious technical
innovations for which Napoléon would
become celebrated: a camera mounted on a
sledge plunging down a bank of snow to
bring animation to the filming of a
children's snowfight; a camera lens sur¬
rounded by a sponge so that the fighting
boys can punch it; a camera mounted on
horseback and powered by cylinders of
compressed air to film a chase in Corsica;
remote control cameras; frames of a
The ghosts in the Convention, a sequence
regarded by Gance as the best in the pic¬
ture. Before leaving Paris to join the Army of
Italy, Napoleon visits the empty meeting hall
of the National Convention, the Assembly
that governed France from 1792 to 1795.
Gradually the hall is peopled with phantoms.
In foreground are the ghosts of the guillotin¬
ed revolutionary leaders : (left to right)
Saint-Just (played by Gance himself),
Robespierre, Danton, Marat (Antonin Ar¬
taud), and Couthon. They tell Napoleon that
the Revolution will die if it does not expand
beyond France; he promises them that he
will liberate oppressed peoples.
pillowfight which divide into nine separate
images in a checkerboard effect; a swinging
pendulum camera to create sweeping move¬
ment in a scene, involving over a thousand
extras, in the Hall of the Convention, the
Assembly that governed France during the
most critical period of the Revolution; the
siege of Toulon so realistic that each night
wounded extras were hospitalized; a
machine devised to simulate a storm at sea
that doused Albert Dieudonné, the actor
who played Napoleon, with thousands of
litres of water rushing down chutes from
massive barrels poised above.
Then came a financial crisis, the realiza¬
tion that the five more Napoleon films
would never be made, a race against time as
Gance prepared a three-and-a-half hour
version of the film, accompanied by music
composed and directed by Arthur Honeg-
ger, for its triumphant première at the Paris
Opéra, the later showing of the version
definitive to the critics. Then... silence.
There were paralysing legal disputes with
distributors who, in France and elsewhere,
wished to reduce the film to a length they
could exploit more easily. But above all the
success of The Jazz Singer, the first film
with synchronized speech, in the same year
of 1 927 , heralded the new age of talking pic¬
tures. Cinemas now had to invest in the new
sound equipment; it was unlikely that they
would buy the machines needed by Gance's
Polyvision process. Gance's great project
foundered.
Gance's material was chopped up into
many different versions, "adjusted" for^
15

Marat, played by the French
actor and poet Antonin Ar¬
taud, is stabbed in his bath by
Charlotte Corday in a scene
from Napoléon inspired by the
painting by Louis David.
In Spain during the Second
World War Abel Gance
prepared to make a film about
the celebrated matador
Manolete. He wrote the script
andshot a few scenes (such as
the one shown here with the
Spanish actress Isabel de
Pomés) but the film was never
completed. It is thought that a
300-metre fragment of
Manolete discovered in 1983
by the Spanish Film Archive,
the Filmoteca Española, is all
that remains of the project.
audiences around the world. Sequences
were changed or cut. Discarded scenes were
thrown away or stored and forgotten.
Prints were acquired by collectors who
showed them to their families. Bravura se¬
quences were occasionally resurrected to
whet the appetites of enthusiasts. But for
many years fragments big and small of
Gance's 1927 Napoléon lay forgotten all
over the world like so many pieces of a
jigsaw puzzle waiting to be reassembled to
reveal its grand design.
Interest in Gance seems to have revived in
the mid-1950s. Henri Langlois, the head of
the Cinémathèque Française, who had
preserved several versions of the film,
showed the final triptychs at the 1955
Venice Film Festival and in the same year a
truncated sound version Gance had made in
1935 was successfully shown in Paris. By
this time Brownlow was working as a film
editor, had met Gance several times, and
was still hunting for Napoléon material.
But there were endless difficulties. One trail
which began in the Paris Flea Market led to
the discovery of a rare print of fresh
material which he tried to incorporate into
his growing version, only to find that they
were the same scenes he already had, but
shot with different cameras. "I wondered
how many versions of Napoléon one might
have seen in 1927... and how difficult it
would be to produce one authentic ver¬
sion." (In fact at the end of his book he lists
no less than 19 versions of Napoléon
prepared between 1927 and 1982.) He met a
collector who showed him a rare 17.5 mm
print of the Opéra version. But what he
wanted to do was to restore the film on the
professional gauge of 35 mm on which it
was originally shot.
His chance came at the end of the 1960s.
As Brownlow tells the story, "A strange
series of circumstances enabled me almost
forced me to put my hands on a substan¬
tial print and to start the reconstruction. A
year or so later, Abel Gance undertook his
own version which, with extra shooting,
emerged as Bonaparte and the Revolution.
He gave me access to all his negatives. Extra
scenes came, literally, from all over the
world, thanks to Jacques Ledoux, head of
the Royal Belgian Film Archive. When he
heard what I was doing he contacted every
archive that had even a reel of the picture
and told them to send it to me. When I had
finished, the reconstruction was shown by
the National Film Theatre in London,
followed by the American Film Institute's
Theatre in Washington and the Pacific Film
Archive in Berkeley. At the last show was
the American director Francis Ford Cop¬
pola who said 'What a terrific experience.
Wouldn't it be wonderul to do it again with
three big screens and a live orchestra
conducted by my father?' " But nothing
happened for several years. The project was
completed but no one seemed interested in
showing the film.
Then in 1979 an American named Bill
Pence decided to present it at the Film
Festival he directed at Telluride, a Col¬
orado mining town in the Rocky Moun¬
tains. The 89-year-old Gance was persuad¬
ed to attend. As Brownlow tells it, "In this
picturesque mining town, there was no
building large enough to accommodate the
film with its three-screen Polyvision climax,
so the organizers held the show in the open
airfrom 10:30 at night to 3:30 the next
morning. The cold was intense and we'all
felt like survivors from the Retreat from
Moscow. When the Polyvision sequence
began, I was as overwhelmed as everyone
else. For although I had seen the rest of the
film hundreds of times, this was the first
time I had seen it complete with its three-
screen ending. It was an incredible moment.
What the 89-year-old Gance thought, half a
century after he had made it, I could not
wait to find out. He had watched it all from
his hotel window overlooking the park, and
when I raced up to his room I found him
surrounded by enthusiastic admirers. He
pronounced it 'as good as the première'...
He received a splendid ovation from the
crowd, despite their frostbitten hands."
Nothing could outdo that, Brownlow
thought. He was wrong, however, for in
1980 a British TV Company, with the
British Film Institute, sponsored the first
screening of the reconstruction with a live
orchestra playing the Carl Davis score.
Then Francis Ford Coppola followed up his
idea and brought the film, with a live or¬
chestra conducted by his father Carmine, to
Radio City Music Hall in New York, where
it received a rapturous welcome from pack¬
ed houses of 6,000 spectators. Gance was by
this time too frail to attend. "Using the
backstage phone we contacted him in Paris
at the end of the performance and let him
listen to the wave upon wave of applause
and cheers. He was overwhelmed. He wept.
(So did we.)" There followed an American
tour, a showing at the Colosseum in Rome
to an audience of 10,000 on a screen 50
metres wide with a 90-piece orchestra, a
showing at the 1981 Edinburgh Festival.
Meanwhile Abel Gance had died while the
acclaim for his film poured in. Then came
the final triumphant homecoming of the
film to Paris under the auspices of the
Cinémathèque Française. "I decided,"
Brownlow says, "that this occasion would
symbolize the end of the reconstruction of
Napoléon. But now Nelly Kaplan, a close
associate of Gance in the 1950s and 1960s,
has produced a documentary about the
making of the film called Abel Gance et son
Napoléon. And in her film is a shot from
Napoléon I have never seen before!"
Roy Malkin
16
