The god
who stole the rice
by Obayashi Taryo
ACCORDING to a legend of eastern
Japan, told in the Somegawa loca¬
lity of the Iwate Prefecture, there
was, in the beginning, no rice in Japan. One
day the god Inari-sama stole some rice
grains from Kara (China) which he hid in
the hollowed out stem of a large reed. Plug¬
ging the open end of the reed with paper, in¬
verting it and using it as a walking-staff, he
returned to Japan bringing with him the
country's first rice.
Because the god had used an inverted
reed to hide the rice grains, a reed is always
inverted and stood in the seedling bed. Once
the seedlings have been successfully
transplanted, it is then safe to stand the reed
with its root end down.
Linked to such rice-transplanting rituals
and the accompanying myth of Inari-sama
(literally, "the rice-carrying god") we find
a very old method of preserving rice by par¬
ching it. Making yakigome, or parched rice,
involves roasting the grains of rice and
pounding them to remove their outer husks.
Yakigome may be simply eaten as it is, re-
parched, or softened by mixing with hot
water and served as a hot cereal. In the last
few centuries yakigome has come to be used
primarily as a food-offering to the gods in
rituals that take place in the rice paddy.
In eastern Japan, when the rice seedling
beds are first sown, the minakuchi
ceremony is held to bless the water-control
inlet where water enters the field from the
communal irrigation system.
At Muraoka village, Fujisawa, in the
Kanagawa Prefecture, during the
minakuchi sowing ritual, yakigome is
presented to the gods and then divided up
among the children to be eaten. The
yakigome, which the happy children spill
on the ground around them as they eat it,
serves to feed the sparrows and the crows.
In this way, it is said, as the seedlings are
growing, they are protected from the
ravages of hungry birds. Many other
localities also used to believe in the efficacy
of the ritual involving the spilling or
spreading oí yakigome at the irrigation in¬
let, to be eaten there by the birds and so pre¬
vent them from harming the rice seedlings.
In western Japan, yakigome is presented
to the gods at the harvest festival, when the
first rice of the season is cut with a scythe
and presented in a rite of thanksgiving. It
was the custom in many areas of western
In the Aichi district of Japan, on the day
the rice seed is sown, flowers are offered
to the deity of the rice field at the irriga¬
tion water inlet.
After the harvest, in the Noto area,
Ishikawa district, Japan, farmers perform
the aenokoto rite in which the deity of the
rice field, symbolized by bales of rice
seeds, is venerated.
Japan that the first rice should be ritually
cut and parched even before the grains were
fully ripe. This yakigome was offered to the
gods and ancestors and also exchanged as a
ceremonial gift among the farm households
of the village.
Today, yakigome is almost exclusively
used for ritual purposes, but at one time,
along with hoshii'i, rice that is first steamed
and then dried, yakigome was an important
and convenient foodstuff for soldiers and
travellers.
While yakigome is no longer enjoyed as a
food, mochi remains popular and impor¬
tant in Japanese cuisine. Mochi is usually
translated into English as "rice cake",
which may be misleading because they are
made neither with regular boiled rice nor
with rice flour. Mochi is short-grain
glutinous rice steamed until soft and then
pounded while hot in a mortar until it
becomes a gluey dough with no discernible
grains. The dough in turn can be shaped
and seasoned in a myriad ways.
Mochi plays an especially important role
at the New Year festivities. Throughout
Japan it is the custom to arrange round-
shaped mochi in graduated sizes (osonae) in
In a field carpeted with snow, a Japanese
peasant family goes through the motions
of planting rice. This rite is performed
during the first month of the lunar calen¬
dar (February) to ensure a good harvest
for the following autumn.
20

the central alcove of the main room. Mochi
are presented to the family gods and are
eaten in a special soup, o-zoni, partaken by
the family in the first ritual meal on the
morning of New Year's Day.
Mochi has also been widely used at
religious rituals other than those of the New
Year, and today it is a common food served
on many occasions. Combined with other
ingredients, especially sugar, it is a well-
loved sweet and a popular snack food.
Another type of rice-based food with
traditional and ritual significance in Japan
is sekihan (red bean rice) which is a short-
grain glutinous rice steamed with small red
beans (azuki) that impart a distinctive and
auspicious red hue. Today, rather than
steaming, many housewives simply add red
beans to their regular rice as they boil it in
order to make sekihan. Sekihan has tradi¬
tionally appeared at a variety of rituals,
while today it is often served on occasions
of celebration such as birthdays. Sekihan is
also dished up on less happy occasions; in
the northern Tohoku region it is served at
wakes and funerals.
Although some scholars are less than
satisfied with the explanation, it is said that
the red sekihan is an attempt to reproduce
on special occasions a reddish variety of rice
that was cultivated in ancient times. In the
sacred rice paddy of Homan Shrine,
On 24 June, in the sacred rice field of the
Izawa Shrine, near Ise, Japan, young
boys and girls, dressed in red and white
kimonos, celebrate the rice-transplanting
festival to the accompaniment of drums,
rattles and ritual chants. The songs re¬
count the Shinto myth according to which
rice was brought to Japan by a white
crane and offered to Amaterasu, the god¬
dess of the sun.
Tanegashima Island, in the Kagoshima
Prefecture, they grow a variety of red rice
for ceremonial presentation to the god. At
several other locations reddish rice is grown
for a ritual function. Red types of rice are
also found in China and southeast Asia.
Red bean rice porridge, azuki-gayu, is
similar to sekihan. Azuki-gayu is made by
simmering the small red beans with regular,
medium-grain rice in lots of liquid until it
attains a thick consistency. This is served on
the fifteenth day after the lunar New Year's
Day. In some regions it is customary for
men, not women, to prepare the porridge.
The fifteenth day after the lunar New
Year, called the "Little New Year", was
formerly a day on which many agricultural
rituals were performed. Indeed, it is a
characteristic Japanese custom to ensure
the success of the year's crops by means of
rituals and ceremonies held on this day,
long before actual planting time.
Two important customs of the Little New
Year are rituals that reproduce the actual
activities of farming dances that mimic
transplanting the rice seedlings, and the
decoration of homes and farm buildings by
placing branches of trees hung with such
things as mochi to represent prolific rice
with full heads of grain.
Traditionally, mochi and sekihan were
cooked in steamers; indeed, until the Mid¬
dle Ages, regular rice was not directly boil¬
ed but prepared in steamers of earthenware
or wood. Today, a few households still boil
their rice in large iron pots with heavy lids
(kama) over charcoal fires. Since the
Second World War, however, these have
been mostly replaced by electric or gas auto¬
matic rice cookers.
The work of agricultural households has
also been revolutionized by new techno¬
logy. Rice cultivation has been mechanized
and the number of Japanese families engag¬
ed full-time in agriculture has dropped
dramatically. Traditional agricultural
rituals have largely disappeared. Tradi¬
tional foods made from rice have lost their
ritual significance and religious meaning.
Families no longer grow their own rice or
make mochi or sekihan at home. Instead
they buy ready-made products.
OBAYASHI TARYO. See biographical note
page 13.
21
