Poster for Vent de Sable (1982-1983), a
Franco-Algerian film by Mohamed Lakdar-
Hamina which examines the question of
women's situation in a Third World country.



Africa: the ¡mages that mast not fade
PAULIN SOUMANOU VIEYRA. Benin-born
Senegalese film critic and director, is head of
the film section of his country's Ministry of In¬
formation and a professor at the university of
Dakar. He has produced many film reports and
short features, mainly on African subjects.
Notable among his published works is Le
Cinéma Africain des Origines à 1 973, the first
part of a two-volume study.
THE finest examples of the African
cultural heritage are today to be
found outside Africa. This became
glaringly apparent during the exhibition of
traditional art at the World Festival of
Negro Art, held in Dakar, Senegal, in 1966.
Indeed, feelings ran so high at the time that
the idea of retaining in Africa the works
which had been loaned for the festival was
much discussed.
Subsequent efforts on the part of
Africans themselves to create public
by Paulin Soumanou Vieyra
awareness of the importance of the cultural
heritage for the education of their people,
through the medium of such movements as
Présence Africaine and La Société Afri¬
caine de Culture, made the recovery of
works of art and their return to their place
of origin an issue of continuing concern.
The claim is a legitimate one, against
which the only argument offered by the
West is a technical one namely, that the
conservation of the works in question poses
material and financial problems which none ^

Poster for Finye or
le Vent ("Finye" or
"The Wind", 1982)
by the Malian direc¬
tor Suleymane
Cisse. Profoundly
African in spirit, the
film evokes the links
between the dif¬
ferent generations,
the young and the
old, and traditional
culture.
Le lilrncte Souleymane Clsüc
t
ff
V
LE VEN
FINYE
of the African States, struggling as they are
at present with the life-and-death issues of
under-development, is in a position to
resolve. But neither this argument, nor the
observation that no concerted cultural
policy has ever been seriously envisaged by
the countries in question, is sufficient to
justify the continued pillage of African art,
even though it must be admitted that their
transfer to museums in Europe and the
USA has saved a great many works from
destruction.
With regard to "moving images" we may
consider as being part of the African
cultural heritage all the films made about
and in Africa by non-Africans at a time
when Africans themselves were not in a
position to make such records themselves.
What remains to be done is to make an in¬
ventory of these documents so that they can
be systematically classified and given an
African re-interpretation. This huge task of
sorting, classification and duplication
would require the allocation of substantial
resources.
The same process must be applied in the
case of material produced since in¬
dependence, whose origins are easier to
determine. Emerging as sovereign States,
the countries of Africa rightly wanted to
record for themselves, in moving images,
their own national realities.
Among the French-speaking countries of
Africa, Senegal took the initiative of mak¬
ing provision, within the framework of the
Ministry of Information, for a Cinemato¬
graphic Service whose task it was to pro¬
duce newsreels. These were at first made on
a monthly basis and made available, free of
charge, to two film distribution companies.
Later, when they were produced on a fort¬
nightly basis, they were screened so ir¬
regularly that the State was obliged to in¬
tervene, making projection obligatory and
imposing a screening fee. When the
distributors and cinema proprietors failed
to screen the national newsreels, arguing, in
obvious bad faith, that they already had
foreign newsreels available for projection,
the State intervened once more, putting an
end to the screening of foreign newsreels
and allowing only the Senegalese newsreels
to be shown.
At this point the French Government
proposed a co-operative arrangement bet¬
ween the interested African States and
In 1971, the
Senegalese director
Ousmane Sembène,
one of the most
outstanding figures
of the African
cinema, made his
third feature, Emitai
("Thunder God").
The film shows the
animist Diola people
at odds with the
French colonial
authorities. Sem¬
bène used non¬
professional actors,
and skilfully mingl¬
ed fact and fiction.
Left, a poster for
Emitai.
French and other foreign newsreel pro¬
ducers within an association known as the
Consortium Audiovisuel International.
This led to the joint production of a weekly
newsreel in three parts, the first comprising
national news, the second, news of more
general African interest culled from the
newsreels of the participating States, and
the third, consisting of international news
provided by the foreign producers.
The arrangement stipulated, among
other things, that the Consortium would
assume half the costs of processing the films
and would provide each participating State
with the services of a reporter-cameraman
and the equipment necessary for filming. In
return it had the right to incorporate
material shot in Africa in the newsreels it
distributed throughout the world. In this
way, there began to accumulate, not only in
Senegal but also in Tunisia, Algeria,
Cameroon, Madagascar, the Ivory Coast,
Togo, Benin and Chad, the African
heritage of moving images. With the
development of television in Africa, this co¬
operative venture came to an end and in
1980 the Consortium was disbanded.
In English-speaking Africa, the heritage
of moving images has been built up in a dif¬
ferent manner. When independence came
to this part of the continent, newsreels were
not produced systematically. Instead, films
were made on the occasion of important of¬
ficial events, such as visits by Heads of
State. The films themselves were, of course,
processed in London, just as those made in
Portuguese-speaking Africa were processed
in Lisbon. Other European countries, in¬
cluding Sweden, Denmark, Yugoslavia,
Italy and the Soviet Union, as well as
Canada and the United States of America,
also took part in this work.
Today, newsreel films have practically
disappeared from Africa, thanks to the
development of television which has thus
become the principal source of the heritage
of moving images. Quite a lot of televised
news is produced, but the ephemeral all too
frequently takes precedence over the essen¬
tial and the documents produced are only of
relative value. There are better ways of fur¬
nishing a country's collective memory.
With regard to the conservation of
documents, there is a lack of proper
organization. Store-rooms are poorly ven¬
tilated or lack adequate air-conditioning,
while the work of classification is not
always entrusted to specialists. Financial
resources are lacking. The stored material
deteriorates and eventually becomes
unusable.
Another problem, again due to lack of
resources, arises from the fact that the tapes
bearing the sound tracks that accompany
filmed material are erased for re-use, leav¬
ing silent pictures that are virtually mean¬
ingless. Both sound and image disappear
when video-cassettes are used a second
time. Efforts are doubtless made in the first
instance to erase only what seems to be of
least importance, but when there is a serious
shortage there is a tendency to take cassettes
at random from a pile of material that has
not always been carefully classified. Where
television is concerned, the State is the
authority and is thus responsible for the
conservation of moving images, just as it is
for the creation of archives for printed
material. Feature films produced by private
companies or official bodies have, on occa¬
sion, been preserved simply because, in the
absence of laboratories in Africa, the
negatives have been stored abroad.
It should be noted that Africa has two im¬
portant film libraries, in Cairo and Algiers.
Only Egypt, however, thanks to its own
highly developed film industry, has archive
services in Cairo and Alexandria with
adequate conservation resources. Every
country should, of course, possess its own,
well-organized film archive. For the time
being, however, one solution might be the
creation of two regional archive centres at
Dakar and Nairobi.
Many African States are undoubtedly
aware of the importance of preserving any
document that has a contribution to make
to the history of their countries. Never¬
theless, whole chapters of this history in
moving images are disappearing for ever,
partly because of lack of resources, and
partly through negligence. The time has
come for the countries of Africa to pay
serious attention to the problems posed by
the preservation of moving images and the
safeguarding of the African cultural
heritage in this as in all other domains.
Paulin Soumanou Vieyra
