Sea, silk and sutras
by Rinnie Tang and Pierre Colombel
MANY stories tell of the exchanges
between ancient China and other
countries along the "Silk Road"
which wound across the deserts of central
Asia. Little is known, however, of the seafaring
exploits which also made such commercial and
intellectual exchanges possible for over 2,000
years.
Ancient annals describe how at the time of
the eastern Zhou (770-256 BC) the Qi kingdom
possessed many ships that plied through the
Yellow Sea. Under the western Han dynasty
(306 BC-23 AD) sea-borne trade became an
official State activity, and Canton became a
major port from which Chinese ships regularly
sailed to trade with what is now Viet Nam,
Malaysia, Sumatra, India and the Middle East.
The return journey along this route took four
years.
The Tang dynasty (618-907) was a time of
great expansion in shipbuilding and maritime
trade. There were two major sea routes, one
leading eastwards, the other to the west:
ships sailed from Dengzhou on the Shan¬
dong peninsula across the Yellow Sea to
Korea and from there to Japan;
from Canton a route led across the South
China Sea to the Malay archipelago and
Sumatra, a major place of call for Chinese
traders. Continuing their voyage across the
Gulf of Bengal, Chinese vessels sailed to
India and then on to the Gulf where they
traded with the Arabs before embarking
on the return journey during which they
took on passengers and cargoes at the
different ports of call.
The outbreak of armed conflict on the nor¬
thern frontiers caused the Tang to impose strict
controls on exported goods, especially iron
objectsit was feared that the nomad warriors
would transform them into weaponsand silk,
which was used as currency to obtain horses
from the people of the steppes. At the same
time the Government accorded privileged
treatment to foreign traders who reached
China by sea from the south; they were pro¬
tected and exempted from certain forms of
taxation.
In the fields of intellectual exchange, ac¬
counts have come down to us of Buddhist
monks from India, Persia and other regions of
central Asia who risked the perilous journey
across the desert to spread their faith in China,
just as Chinese monks took the same route in
the opposite direction, as they travelled to India
in quest of Sutras, or sacred Buddhist
scriptures.
Light has been shed on the penetration of
Buddhism into China by sea during the eastern
Han Dynasty (25-220 AD) by the remarkable
rock carvings which have recently been iden¬
tified on Mount Kongwang, near the port of Lia-
nyungan in Jiangsu province.
In 399 the famous monk Faxian, accom¬
panied by three other Chinese Buddhist
monks, left Changan for India in search of
Sutras. Their journey took eleven years. They
followed the Silk Road, and travelled through
some thirty countries before returning to China
across the southern sea and landing at Canton.
Later Faxian settled at Nankin where he
translated the Sutras he had brought back with
him and wrote an account of his journey to the
countries of the Buddhas. One of his travelling
companions, the monk Zhi-Yan, set out at an
advanced age on a sea voyage to India and
died on the return journey.
In the sixth century Bodhidharma, an Indian
monk who founded "Chen" Buddhism in
China took the same route and also landed at
Canton. "Chen", which became the school of
Buddhism most highly esteemed by cultured
Chinese, reached Japan in the twelfth century
and took the name by which it is better known
in the west, "Zen Buddhism".
The memory of this great spiritual master
who came from the sea is symbolically
perpetuated by Chinese painters who depict
him crossing the waves on the stem of a reed.
RINNIE TANG, of France, is an ethnologist at
the Musée de l'Homme, Paris, and was
responsible for the organization of an exhibi¬
tion on Chinese cave paintings held in Paris in
1983.
PIERRE COLOMBEL is a French specialist in
cave paintings at the Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique; he is at present at¬
tached to the Musée de l'Homme, Paris.
When Bodhidharma, the 6th-century Indian
monk who founded the Chen (Japanese
Zen) branch of Buddhism, arrived in China,
he went to the Shaolln monastery near
Loyang. He is said to have spent nine years
there in contemplation, seated motionless
facing a bare cave wall. At the end of this
period he enounced his new conception of
Buddhism. All beings, he said, possess a
Buddha-nature and true enlightenment lies
in realization of this fact which is obscured
by physical and mental distractions. The
walls of the Shaolin monastery are covered
with murals dating from the Qing dynasty
(1644 to 1911). One of these, 500 Arhats
Crossing the Sea, covers an area of 300
square metres. Detail (above right) shows a
group ofArhats (holy men) carrying fans and
Sutras (sacred Buddhist texts) whose
magicalattributes enabled them to cross the
sea in miraculous fashion. Curiously
enough, the Shaolin Monastery was also the
birthplace of a form of combat known as
Kung-fu, of which Bodhidharma is con¬
sidered to be the father. Mural (right) depicts
a Chinese andan Indian monk practising the
martial art in the courtyard of the
monastery.
