alfares the land...
Have we reached the end of a growth era in world food output? by Lester R. Brown
AS the world recovered from World
War II, hopes for improvement in
world J agriculture were high. An
accumulating backlog of agricultural
technologies such as hybrid corn and
chemical fertilizers were waiting to be ap¬
plied on a massive scale. Between 1950 and
1973 world grain production more than
doubled, to nearly 1.3 billion tons.
Although output expanded more rapidly in
some regions than in others, all regions
shared in the growth. This rising tide of
food production improved nutrition
throughout the world, helping to boost life
expectancy in the Third World from less
than forty-three years in the early 1950s to
over fifty-three years in the early 1970s.
This period of broad-based gains in
nutritional improvement came to an end in
1973. After the oil price hike that year the
growth in world grain output slowed. Since
LESTER R. BROWN, of the USA, is President
of WorldWatch Institute, Washington, D.C., a
non-profit research organization which was
created to focus attention on global problems
and is funded by private foundations and
United Nations organizations. The present ar¬
ticle has been extracted from "Securing Food
Supplies", a chapter from State of the World
1 984, a WorldWatch Institute report on pro¬
gress toward a sustainable society. The
report, of which Lester Brown was project
, director, monitors changes in the global
resource base (land, water, energy and
biological support systems). It is published by
W. W. Norton and Co., New York and London.
1973 world grain production has expanded
at less than 2 per cent yearly, barely keeping
pace with population. Although the period
since the 1979 oil price hike is too short to
establish a trend, $30-a-barrel oil may well
slow growth further.
In per capita terms world grain output
climbed from 248 kilograms in 1950 to 326
kilograms in 1973, an impressive gain of 31
per cent. Since then, however, annual grain
output per person has remained around 325
kilograms. A global average, this figure em¬
braces countries where yearly grain
availability per person averages only 150
kilograms, requiring that it all be consumed
directly, as well as countries where it ex¬
ceeds 700 kilograms and is largely con¬
verted into meat, milk, and eggs.
Since 1973 attention has focused on the
impact of petroleum prices on food supply,
but demand has also been affected. On the
supply side, rising oil prices have increased
the costs of basic agricultural inputs
fertilizer, pesticides, and fuel for tillage and
irrigation thus acting as a drag on output.
On the demand side of the equation,
escalating oil prices combined with ill-
conceived national economic policies have
contributed to a global economic slowdown
so severe since 1979 that it has brought
world growth in per capita income to a vir¬
tual halt.
Had incomes continued to rise at the
same rate after 1973 as they did before,
prices of food commodities would have
been stronger, thus supporting a more
vigorous growth in farm investment and
output. Agricultural under-investment in
Third World countries has also contributed
to the loss of momentum, but the central
point is that the rise in oil prices, affecting
both food supply and demand; has brought
the era of robust growth in world food out¬
put to an end.
Oil is not the only resource whose ques¬
tionable supply is checking the growth in
food output. The loss of topsoil through
erosion is now acting as a drag on efforts to
produce more food, And the scarcity of
water is also beginning to affect food pro¬
duction prospects. Since World War II, the
world irrigated area has more than doubl¬
ed, but the flurry of dam building of the
past generation has now subsided. With oc¬
casional exceptions, most of the remaining
potential projects are more difficult, costly,
and capital-intensive.
As the demand for food has climbed each
year, the farmers of the world have begun
to "mine" its soils, converting them into a
non-renewable resource. It has been
estimated that erosion on cropland exceeds
new soil formation by 23,000 million tons
peryear and that topsoil reserves will disap¬
pear in about 150 years if steps are not
taken to protect them. Below, cactus being
grown as an anti-erosion measure near the
Ousseltia experimental and demonstration
centre, Tunis.

» The worldwide loss of momentum will
not be easily restored. Although
agricultural mismanagement abounds, it
has not worsened appreciably over the
years. Nor can the situation be explained by
any farmer's loss of skills. The explanation
lies in the more difficult circumstances fac¬
ing farmers everywhere.
The cheap energy that permitted farmers
to override easily the constraints imposed
by the scarcity of land, soil nutrients, or
water is simply no longer available.
Increasingly, the energy used in
agriculture will be in the form of chemical
fertilizer. As population grows, cropland
per person shrinks and fertilizer re¬
quirements climb. And erosion that has
robbed soils of nutrients is forcing farmers
to use more fertilizers. Even urbanization is
raising demand, since as people move to
cities it is harder to recycle the nutrients in
human and household waste. Yet the com¬
bination of rising energy costs and
diminishing returns on the use of additional
fertilizer raises doubts that adequate food
supplies can be produced in the future at
prices the world's poor can afford.
The central importance of the popula¬
tion/land/fertilizer relationship is a recent
phenomenon. Before 1950 increases in food
output came largely from expanding the
cultivated area, but with the scarcity of fer¬
tile new land and the advent of cheap
chemical fertilizer this changed. Between
1950 and 1983 world fertilizer use climbed
from 15 million to 114 million tons, nearly
an eightfold increase within a generation.
In effect, as fertile land became harder to
find, farmers learned to substitute energy
in the form of chemical fertilizer for land.
Fertilizer factories replaced new land as
the principal source of growth in food
production.
This substitution of energy for land is
graphically evident: In 1950, when world
population totaled 2.51 billion, the
harvested area of cereals per person was
0.24 hectares. As growth in population
greatly outstripped that of cultivated area,
the area per person fell steadily, declining to
0.15 hectares by 1983. While the amount of
cropland per person declined by one third,
the fertilizer consumption per person quin¬
tupled, climbing from just over 5 kilograms
in 1950 to 25 kilograms in 1983.
The hybridization of corn and the dwarf¬
ing of the wheat and rice varieties that have
been at the heart of Third World
agricultural advances over the last two
decades figured prominently, of course, in
the growth in world food output. So, too,
did the doubling of irrigated area. But the
effectiveness of all these practices depends
heavily on the use of chemical fertilizer.
Without an adequate supply of plant
nutrients, high-yielding cereal varieties hold
little advantage over traditional ones.
Likewise, an increase in irrigation is of little
consequence if the nutrients to support the
higher yields are lacking.
The response of crops to the use of addi¬
tional fertilizer is now diminishing, par¬
ticularly in agriculturally advanced coun¬
tries. During the 1950s, the application of
another ton of fertilizer on average yielded
1 1.5 more tons of grain. During the sixties,
the fertilizer/grain response ratio was 8.3 to
1. By the 1970s it had fallen to 5.8. Some
10
countries, such as Argentina and India, still
apply relatively little fertilizer and so have
quite high response ratios. But worldwide
the return on the use of additional fertilizer
is on the way down.
At some point, biological constraints on
crop yields will make the substitution of fer¬
tilizer for cropland increasingly difficult
and costly. When this is combined with the
projected long-term rise in real cost of the
oil and natural gas used to manufacture,
distribute, and apply chemical fertilizer, the
difficulty in restoring the steady upward
trend in per capita grain production of
1950-73 becomes clear.
With grain, as with oil or any other basic
resource, excessive world dependence on
one geographic region for supplies is risky.
As the North American share of world
grain exports has increased it has surpassed
the Middle Eastern share of oil exports and
made the world more dependent on one
region for its food than ever before, f
This extraordinary dependence on one
geographic region for grain supplies is a
historically recent phenomenon.
As recently as the late 1930s, Western
Europe was the only grain-deficit region
and Latin America was the world's leading
grain supplier, exporting some nine million
tons per year. North America and Eastern
Europe (including the Soviet Union) each
exported five million tons of grain annual¬
ly. Even Asia and Africa had modest expor¬
table surpluses.
By 1950, the shift from regional grain
surpluses to deficits was well under way and
the outlines of a new world grain trade pat¬
tern were beginning to emerge. Today, with
North America's unchallenged dominance
as a grain supplier, international grain trade
bears little resemblance to that of the 1930s.
The restructuring of world grain trade
over the last generation has resulted in part
from soil erosion problems and in part from
differential population growth rates, as a
comparison of North America and^ Latin
America shows. During the late 1930s,
Latin America had a larger grain export
surplus than North America, but the
region's more rapid rate of population
growth soon changed this. Indeed, if the
regions had grown at the same ratefsince
1950, North America's population in 1983
would be so large that it would consume the
entire grain harvest, leaving little or none
for export. And North America, too, would
now be struggling to maintain food self-
sufficiency.
Today the countries with significant ex¬
portable surpluses of grain can be counted
on the fingers of one hand the United
States, Canada, Australia, Argentina, and
France. Of these, the United States ac¬
counts for over half and with Canada
covers close to 70 per cent of the total.
This overwhelming dependence on one
region, and on one country in particular,
brings with it an assortment of risks. To
begin with, both the United States and
Canada are affected by the same climatic
cycles. A poor harvest in one is often
associated with a poor harvest in the other.
When reserves are low, even a modest fluc¬
tuation in the region's exportable grain
surplus can send price tremors through the
world food economy.
Countries that rely on North American
food should take heed of the philosophical
debate emerging within the United States
about the wisdom of mining the nation's
soils to meet the ever-growing world de¬
mand. Both agricultural analysts and en-
virorunentaJists argue that the country
should make whatever adjustments in its
agricultural practices are needed to protect
the resource base, even though this would
reduce the exportable surplus.
Some argue that it makes little sense to
sacrifice a resource that has been a source of
economic strength since colonial days mere¬
ly to buy a few billion barrels of oil. And
some contend that the current generation of
farmers has no right to engage in the
agronomic equivalent of deficit financing,
mortgaging the future of generations to
come. \e
The current trend is fraught with risks,
both for those whose livelihoods depend on
sustained land productivity and for those in
countries dependent on food imports that
eventually will dry up if the mining of soil
continues. Even for the importers, reduced
supplies in the short term and less pressure
on North American soils would be better
than losing the region's export capacity
over the long term.
One of the most useful indicators of the
world food situation is the food security in¬
dex, which incorporates both grain carry¬
over stocks and the grain equivalent of idled
cropland. This combines the world's two
basic reserves of food and expresses them as
days of consumption, a concept readily
understood by policymakers everywhere.
The two components of the index differ
in important ways. Carry-over stock's, the
grain in storage when the new crop begins to
come in, are readily accessible and require
only time for shipping arrangements to be
made and for transport. Idled cropland, on
the other hand, can take a year or more to
be converted into food by farmers.
The food security index measures the
adequacy of food supplies at the global
level and thus the broad potential for
responding to national shortages, but it
says nothing;; about conditions within in¬
dividual countries. Here the best indicator,
of course, is the nutritional state of a coun¬
try's population.
Assessing nutritional adequacy requires
some knowledge of how the national food
supply is distributed. But a lack of data on
distribution makes it very difficult to
estimate the extent of malnutrition, thus
leaving the subject open to continuing
debate.
The only time a decline in nutrition shows
up officially is when it is severe enough to
affect mortality. When this happens a
country is facing famine, the most obvious
and severe manifestation of food insecuri¬
ty. Using this criterion, inadequate though
it is, developments over the past decade
have not been encouraging.
From the postwar recovery years until the
early 1970s, famine virtually disappeared
from the world. Except in China, which
now admits to a massive famine in 1960-61 ,
%hen it was largely isolated, the world en¬
joyed a remarkable respite from famine for
a quarter of a century. Whenever famine
did threaten, the United States intervened
with food aid, even when it required nearly

,¿ . ' c L.
one-fifth of the U.S. wheat crop two years
in a row, as it did following monsoon
failures in India in 1964 and 1965.
By the early 1970s, however, food
deficits were widening and famine was un¬
folding in several African countries and in
the Indian subcontinent. Several famines
claimed hundreds of thousands of lives,
providing a grim reminder of the fragility of
food security even in an age of advanced
technology. Most were the product of
drought and a failure of international food
relief mechanisms.
During the late 1970s world reserves were
rebuilt and, except for strife-torn Kam¬
puchea, famines subsided only to return
in 1983, a year of widespread climatic
anomalies. The capacity of poor countries
with falling per capita food production and
deteriorating soils to withstand drought and
floods has lessened. As a result, more coun¬
tries than ever before face the possibility of
famine in early 1984.
Among the threatened countries are
Bolivia and Peru in Latin America, and
over a score of countries in Africa. An FAO
team of agronomists assessing the food
situation in Africa in late 1983 identified 22
countries where crisis seemed imminent
Angola, Benin, Botswana, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Lesotho, Mali,
Mauritania, Mozambique, Sao Tome and
Principe, Senegal, Somalia, Swaziland, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Togo, Zam¬
bia, and Zimbabwe. The team of experts
concluded that four million tons . of
emergency grain supplies would be needed
to avoid starvation among the 145 million
people living in these countries.
There is no simple explanation of why ef¬
forts to eradicate hunger have lost momen¬
tum or why food supplies for some
segments of humanity are less secure than
they were, say, 15 years ago. Declines in
food security involve the continuous in¬
teraction of environmental, economic,
demographic, and political variables.
Some analysts see the food problem
almost exclusively as a population issue,
noting that wherever population growth
rates are low, food supplies are generally
adequate. Others view it as a problem of
resources soil, water, and energy. Many
economists see it almost exclusively as a
result of under-investment, while agro¬
nomists see it more as a failure to bring
forth new technologies on the needed scale.
Still others see it as' a distribution problem.
To some degree it is all of these.
The issue is not whether the world can
produce more food. Indeed, it would be dif¬
ficult to put any foreseeable limits on the
amount the world's farmers can produce.
The question is at what price they will be
able to produce it and how this relates to the
purchasing power of the poorer segments
of humanity. The environmental, demo¬
graphic, and economic trends of the 1970s
and early 1980s indicate that widespread
improvements in human nutrition will
require major course corrections. Nothing
less than a wholesale re-examination and
re-ordering of social and economic
prioritiesgiving agriculture and family
planning the emphasis they deserve will
get the world back on an economic and
demographic path that will reduce hunger
rather than increase it.
Lester R. Brown
X
Traditional cereal storage silos in Upper
Volta. Crop losses occur at every stage of
the chain from thefield to the table. Losses
ofcereals in storage due to rodents, insects,
birds and moulds are estimated to have
been around 70 million tons, or 10per cent
of thefoodproduction ofdeveloping coun¬
tries in 1982.
11
