Children in peril
by V. Ramalingaswami
THE British economist Barbara Ward
spoke of two environments "the
inner environment of biological
health, full creativity and mental develop¬
ment and the outer environment of culture,
stimulus and beauty, of shared affection
and civil security". How can we bring
about a harmonious development of these
two environments for the world's children?
Developing countries are not a
homogeneous entity. They are at various
stages of socio-economic development, and
are developing at various speeds, but they
all face one most important problem high
infant and child mortality rates and mor¬
bidity. In India for example the infant mor¬
tality rate is around 129 per thousand live
births, more than 50 per cent of infant
deaths occur within the first month of life,
and low birth weights are found in almost a
third of all births. For mothers under twen¬
ty years of age, the birth weights are
significantly lower than for mothers from
twenty to twenty-four years of age. The fre¬
quency of low birth weight increases with
rising birth orders.
The story of infant and child health in the
Third World is one of needless illnesses, of
avoidable disabilities and of missed human
opportunities. Acute diarrhoeal disease is
the leading cause of death in children under
one year of age. Malnutrition, over¬
crowding, lack of protected water supplies,
poor environmental sanitation and low
levels of education all act together in a
vicious cycle.
When oral rehydration with glucose-salt
mixture is instituted early, the death rate
from this group of disorders can be brought
down dramatically within a short period of
time. One oral rehydration solution can
now be used to treat most cases of watery
diarrhoea, irrespective of the causative
agent virus, vibrio or bacterium. The goal
is to make oral rehydration therapy a home
remedy so that in the not-too-distant future
the bulk of diarrhoeal diseases may be no
more than a mere nuisance managed by the
mothers themselves in their homes.
Many factors combine in the form of a
chain reaction to perpetuate protein-energy
malnutrition as one of the most endemic
and intractable nutritional disorders of the
Third World. These factors include defi¬
cient intake of food, diarrhoea and other
common childhood infections, the attitudes
V. RAMALINGASWAMI is Director-General
of the Indian Council of Medical Research,
New Delhi.
12
and perceptions of mothers, traditions and
taboos with regard to infant feeding prac¬
tices, and poverty with all its ramifications.
This vast problem has still not been tackl¬
ed effectively. The supplementary feeding
programmes of the past few decades have
had remarkably little success in bringing
about lasting changes in the attitudes of
mothers towards providing the best possible
nutrition for their children. Protein-energy
malnutrition is a problem that calls for co¬
ordinated multi-sectoral action to deal with
the convergence of poverty and unemploy¬
ment, of disease and illiteracy accentuated
by rapid population growth. These issues
are in turn linked to cultural factors,
economic distortions, human inequalities
and social injustices.
Action should be carried out within the
health sector to provide a package of in¬
tegrated services wherein nutritional and
health care services, especially infection
control measures, are combined. Efficient
surveillance, early diagnosis and simple
treatment of common childhood infections
can be carried out by village volunteers and
mothers, who should be regarded as first
among front line health workers.
Certain illnesses can be remedied by sim¬
ple and inexpensive "magic bullets" (see
also article overleaf).
Nutritional blindness affecting young
children is a problem that can be resolved
by increasing the intake of either pre¬
formed vitamin A or of pro-vitamin A in
the form of green leafy vegetables as a
regular part of the diet. Pending this long-
term solution, it has been shown by Indian
workers that giving massive doses of
vitamin A every six months to children
under the age of five is a feasible method of
controlling this deficiency.
Endemic goitre which afflicts an
estimated 200 million persons, mostly in the
Third World (including 40 million in India
alone) can be treated by the simplest and
cheapest public health measure known to
man iodized salt. Injected or administered
orally, iodized salt will not only control
goitre but when given to pregnant women
will eliminate the developmental disorders
of deaf mutism and cretinism which are
associated with severe forms of iodine defi¬
ciency. But in spite of their cheapness, pro¬
grammes to control goitre are not working
effectively in many parts of the developing
world.
Nutritional anaemia is essentially the
result of an iron deficiency which can be
made good by a periodical supplementation
of the diet with an iron-containing tablet or,
as has been shown by Indian workers, by
the fortification of domestic salt with a
small quantity of iron.
It is in the application of what we know
that we are failing more than in the
discovery of new knowledge. We need to
carry out serious social science research in
order to identify the behavioural factors
which influence the acceptance and diffu¬
sion of a given technology. The health
history of the world teaches us that there is
a direct relationship between improvement
in socio-economic status and reduction of
infant mortality rates. It is futile to believe
that a health system can function outside
the overall developmental processes. The
maximum health benefits can be derived
from development when health activities
are integrated into activities in other
sectors.
In the Third World experience during the
past two decades has shown that with able
leadership, well-designed and effectively
operated programmes, appropriate tech¬
nologies and forms of health-care delivery
together with professional back-up sup¬
port, infant mortality rates can be reduced
by 50 per cent or more even by poor coun¬
tries, in a relatively short period of time and
at a cost less than the equivalent of 2 per
cent of annual per capita income.
V. Ramalingaswami

