The vibrant world ofCándido Portinari
by Antonio Carlos Calado
BORN in 1903 into a family of poor
Italian immigrants who worked on
the coffee plantations in the State of
Sao Paulo, Cándido Portinari won a
travelling scholarship in painting which
took him to Europe. There he absorbed im¬
pressions like a sponge, and recorded what
he saw in the great art galleries and exhibi¬
tions. On his return home he soon made a
name for himself and by 1935 was already
well known not only in Brazil but in the
United States, where his famous painting,
Coffee, received favourable notice at the
International Exhibition held at Pittsburgh
under the sponsorship of the Carnegie In¬
stitute. A study of his work was published
by the University of Chicago Press in 1940
under the title PortinariHis Life and Art.
This book contains many black and white
and full colour reproductions, including
paintings on social and religious themes and
some magnificent portraits which show that
he reached the height of his powers at an
early age. It also reveals that by this time
Portinari had already been acclaimed by no
less a person than Rockwell Kent, the
American painter, illustrator and writer.
Kent (1882-1971) wrote the introduction to
the book, and it is still a pleasure to note the
enthusiasm with which he welcomed his
young colleague from the south. This is
how he describes the vision that is central to
Portinari's art:
"The world of Portinari: as, compelled
by it, in thought, we move about in it, with
wonder fear, perhaps but with the same
acceptance of its macabre elements as our
unconscious selves accord the most fan¬
tastic dreams that trouble us in sleep, we
come gradually to the realization that this is
no world of pure imagination but an inten¬
sified, fantastic re-creation of the world
that Portinari knows, his native land,
Brazil. Of this his other paintings are the
evidence. In them we see the landscape,
tread the soil; we see its workers and their
poverty not agonized about, just told.
And told with love. Not love for poverty
and unremitted toil, but love for woman,
man, and childwho, rich or poor, to him
are lovable. He paints them trustfully.
'Blessed are the meek' would seem to be his
utterance from his heart. And if the condi¬
tions of their life on their Brazilian earth
would seem to us to be no great inheritance,
they by their goodness make life seem
worthwhile. They work; they marry and
rear families'; their children play. And of
their happiness, of the happiness of
carefree children at their play, there are no
paintings in the treasury of art more
eloquent".
Thus wrote Rockwell Kent about the
great Brazilian painter in 1940. I have just
ANTONIO CARLOS CALADO is a Brazilian
novelist and playwright. His best-known novel
is Quarup. A film based on his widely acclaim¬
ed play Pedro Mico is currently being made.
The author of one of the most comprehensive
and reliable biographies of Cándido Portinari,
he was awarded the Goethe prize for literature
in 1983.
Coffee (1935), oil on canvas,
by Cándido Portinari. After
winning an award at the
Pittsburgh International
Festival the painting was ac¬
quired by the National
Museum of Fine Arts of Brazil.
been looking in the Encyclopaedia Britan¬
nica (1972 edition) for the article on Por¬
tinari. There is none,' and the entry on
Brazil contains only two lines about him.
On the other hand Rockwell Kent is the sub¬
ject of an excellent article, running to more
than twenty lines and accompanied by a
reproduction of one of his pictures, The
Trapper. And yet if Kent has a certain posi¬
tion in the art and culture of the United
States, it is in no way comparable to that oc¬
cupied by Portinari in the painting and
culture of Brazil and Latin America. The
tribute which Kent paid him in 1940 was
prophetic. Portinari's art continued to
develop until the end of his life.
Cangaceiro, oil on canvas
(1951). Amelia and Leao Gon-
dim de Oliveira Collection.
No painter of comparable stature has ap¬
peared in Brazil since his death in 1962.
During the first half of the present century
two Brazilian artists, each working in a dif¬
ferent art-form, enriched their country's
culture and enhanced its international
standing. They were Portinari and in
musicVilla-Lobos. To add the name of
Oscar Niemeyer, the architect of Brasilia, is
to define the area in which the Brazilian
cultural sensibility has spread and influenc¬
ed the sensibilities of other peoples. But
there is no doubt that it is Portinari who
best and most directly illustrates the
Brazilian phenomenon, and by "illustrate"
I mean describing a country in figurative
terms.
For reasons of personal taste some peo¬
ple may think that other Brazilian painters
are more important than Portinari, but no
one would deny his absolute primacy as the
painter of Brazil as a whole. The monumen¬
tal heritage of Portinari's work is gradually
being recorded, photographed and
catalogued as part of the Portinari Project
(see "Unesco Newsroom", Unesco
Courier, August 1983). The Project gives
an idea of the artist's impressive output of
more than 4,000 works on social themes
Säo Paulo peasants, migrants from the
poverty-stricken Nordeste, cowhands,
labourers, popular musicians as well as
religious and historical paintings, and
portraits.
Portinari produced flawless masterpieces
in each of these fields, including murals
which alone would have brought fame to
less prolific artists. Two enormous works
by him, War and Peace, can be seen in the
entrance hall of the United Nations
29

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 29
building in New York. Thanks to these two
paintings, to Kent's book, and to the two-
volume work by Eugenio Luraghi published
in Italy (one of them is devoted to Por¬
tinari's visit to Israel and the attractive
works it inspired) art-lovers everywhere can
appreciate the genius of this Brazilian
painter who was so. important an interpreter
of his country's culture.
Portinari's stature in Brazil has con¬
tinued to grow since his'death. He has been
the subject of a steady flow of newspaper
30
articles, essays, and studies not only in his
own country but also in the international
press. And even if there is a certain indif¬
ference towards the Third World, as il¬
lustrated by the shocking example of the
Encyclopaedia Britannica, Portinari's
prestige continues to grow in Brazil.
Of all artistic manifestations it is paint¬
ing, perhaps, which provides the clearest
evidence that the great works of today will
provide our psychological substance
tomorrow.
Cándido Portinari is the painter who in
his canvases and murals forged the con¬
sciousness of the Brazilian people with the
greatest assurance. The success he enjoyed
during his lifetime and his posthumous
fame stem from the fact that he gave an en¬
tire people the instruments of its vision.
Antonio Calado
