jr
The secrets of Zimbabwe
Deep in the heart of southern Africa,
awayfrom the zones of influence of the
Islamic and Christian powers, the
basins of the Zambezi and Limpopo
Rivers were for centuries the setting for
a number of brilliant civilizations, the
most famous of these being that of
Great Zimbabwe. Thanks to painstak¬
ing research by archaeologists, linguists
and anthropologists, the ancient city of
Great Zimbabwe, with its cyclopean
buildings, is gradually yielding up the
secrets of its past.
8
WHATEVER the fundamental
causes behind the rise of Great
Zimbabwe, there is no doubt
that it is a most impressive monument. The
site is dominated by the Acropolis, a long,
granite hill covered with enormous boul¬
ders. Successive generations of occupants
linked the boulders together with stone
walls, making small enclosures and narrow
passages. The westernmost enclosure is the
largest, enclosed by a thick, free-standing
stone wall. It contains a long sequence of
later Iron Age occupation that provides the
basis for subdividing Great Zimbabwe's
history into at least three stages.
The most intensive occupation began in
about the eleventh century; but no stone
walls were built until the thirteenth century,
when the small pole-and-mud huts of
earlier times were replaced by more sub
stantial mud houses. The stone retaining
wall for the western enclosure was also built
at that time, as more imports appear in the
deposits. It was during the thirteenth or
fourteenth century, also, that the first
buildings were constructed in the valley
below the Acropolis.
The Great Enclosure with its massive
free-standing walls was built progressively
during the following century. The enclosing
wall of the Great Enclosure has an average
height of 7.3 metres, is 5.5 metres thick at
the base and between 1.3 metres and 3.6
metres at the top. A length of 52 metres is
decorated with a chevron pattern. Inside is
an unfinished enclosure wall which was evi¬
dently replaced by the present one and
which helps to form a narrow defile bet¬
ween the two walls, leading to a skilfully
constructed conical tower that dominated

by Brian Fagan
the Great Enclosure. The Great Enclosure
itself was divided into a series of smaller
enclosures, in which the foundations of
substantial pole-and-mud houses are to be
seen. It was presumably the dwelling place
of the rulers of Great Zimbabwe, an
impressive and politically highly significant
structure.
Great Zimbabwe is a unique site only on
account of its scale, for it is the largest of an
estimated 150 ruins in the granite country
that forms the Zambezi-Limpopo water¬
shed. There are other ruins with between
one and five enclosures, at least partially
surrounded with free-standing walls and
with mud-and-pole huts inside them, built
near Zimbabwe and in Mashonaland. The
regularly coursed masonry is in the Great
Zimbabwe style. Those that have been exca¬
vated contain occasional gold objects,
copper-wire bracelets, glass beads, and the
fire pots and spindle whorls characteristic
of the Great Zimbabwe culture. At the
Ruanga and Chipadze ruins, cattle were
important. Five of the excavated ruins have
produced dates that suggest they were all
built and occupied between the beginning
of the fourteenth and the end of the fif¬
teenth centuries. Some have been dated as
late as the sixteenth century.
All these ruins are small, having had but
a minimal population. They were normally
built near hills that were a plentiful source
BRIAN FAGAN, of the UK, is professor of an¬
thropology at the University of California,
Santa Barbara, USA. An anthropologist and
archaeologist, he has published many studies
on the Iron Age and Stone Age cultures in east
and southern Africa.
South of Harare, the capital ofZimbabwe,
rise the massive stone ruins of Great Zim¬
babwe. Settled by Iron Agepeoples as early
as the 10th or 11th century, by 1300 Great
Zimbabwe had become the centre of a
powerful and influential State. Chinese,
Persian and Syrian china, glass and
porcelain have been unearthed in the ruins
and on other sites nearby, indicating that
the Great Zimbabwe complexplayed an im¬
portant role in the East African coastal
trade which by the 14th century reachedfar
into the interior of the continent. Above
left, air view of the most spectacular ruin,
the Great Enclosure, girdled by ramparts
over 7 metres high. Narrow defile, above, is
formed by the outer rampart and an un¬
finished inner wall which runs part way
along it. Great Zimbabwe was built using
abundant local granite. Its architecture is
considered to be an extension of the
enclosures and chief's quarters which in
other African States were constructedfrom
grass, mud and poles.

stone. Too small to be viable economic
units, they were probably built by external
labour from surrounding villages that were
able to support themselves by shifting agri¬
culture on the savannah.
At Nhunguza ruins there was a single,
very large hut, divided into three rooms.
One of the rooms was large enough to hold
a large number of people, a second con¬
tained a single seat, a third was a "com¬
pletely secluded room that must have con¬
tained objects of special value including...
what must have been a monolith set in a
grooved stone platform". This unusual
structure may well have been the location
where a prominent religious authority held
sway, an authority that was not only the
reason for the building of the isolated
enclosure, but also the human cement that
held together the Great Zimbabwe State.
One has a sense of an extremely strong
and unquestioned political and religious
authority whose hold over the scattered
rural population was based on some form
of unifying faith in the powers of the divine
Mwari or some other religious catalyst that
reached out to every family.
The borders of the Great Zimbabwe State
are still ill-defined, although its heartland
was in central Mashonaland. Some Great
Zimbabwe-style ruins occur in what is now
Matabeleland, where Great Zimbabwe peo¬
ple infiltrated Leopard's Kopje territory.
The influence of Great Zimbabwe and its
tributary settlements were felt far outside
the immediate, relatively limited boun¬
daries of the State itself. The prosperity of
Kilwa on the East African coast was closely
tied to the fluctuations in the gold trade
with Sofala. Already in the tenth century
the Arab geographer al-Mas'udi was
writing of Kilwa and the gold trade. Four
centuries later Ibn Battuta described Kilwa
as one of the most beautiful cities in the
world, a town whose prosperity depended
on the southern gold trade.
Without question the wealth of the rulers
of Great Zimbabwe waxed and waned with
the fortunes of the coastal trade. Kilwa
itself went through commercial vicissitudes,
reaching the height of its prosperity in the
fifteenth century with the reconstruction of
the famous Great Mosque and its elaborate
domed and vaulted roof. But a century later
Kilwa, the east African coast and Great
Zimbabwe itself had all declined. By the
time the Portuguese arrived at Sofala the
coastal trade was but a shadow of its former
self. For all its isolation, Great Zimbabwe's
trading connexions and the gold within its
borders contributed not only to prosperity
and economic growth on the east African
coast, but also in much remoter lands as
well.
In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries,
however, there was considerable trading ac¬
tivity in northern Mashonaland and the
Zambezi valley, which is reflected in some
remarkable archaeological discoveries.
This region was settled during the Early
Iron Age, which survived until the end of
the first millennium. Between the twelfth
and fourteenth centuries northern
Mashonaland was occupied by the makers
of Musengezi ware, subsistence farmers
with minimal trading contacts, thought to
be Shona speakers. Their culture is a far cry
from the wealth of their southern
neighbours at Great Zimbabwe, although
more trade goods occur in later Musengezi
settlements.
But the same is certainly not true of the
extreme north-western corner of
Mashonaland and the lower part of the
middle Zambezi valley, where large set¬
tlements and the working and trading of
copper assumed great importance. The
Chedzurgwe site in the fertile Urungwe
district covered over 24 hectares of fine
grassland; abundant cattle and game bones
testify to the importance of pastoralism and
hunting. But copper and iron-working was
of considerable significance, both ores be¬
ing abundant nearby. Copper was made in¬
to standardized ingots of two fixed weights;
wire bracelets made from copper and tin
alloy were commonplace. Textiles were also
in use, and extremely fine pottery was
made, with a finish and delicacy of decora¬
tion on shallow bowls and beakers that is
almost unparalleled elsewhere.
Brian Fagan
The ruins of the great enclosure at Great
Zimbabwe (see previous page) are domina¬
ted by a massive A cropolis, a hilltop strong¬
hold integrated into a natural mass ofgiant
rocks. Left, entrance to a narrow covered
passage in the Acropolis.
The bird depicted
in this soapstone
sculpture
unearthed In ruins
In the valley of
Great Zimbabwe is
today the national
symbol of the Statel
of Zimbabwe.
