Photo Emmanuel Guillou © Atlas Photo, Paris
The great temple at Tanjore. Built entirely of granite this grandiose temple to Siva was erected during the
reign of the great Chola monarch Raja Raja I (985 to 1014).



GATEWAY TO THE GODS
1. Sermons in stone
by R. Nagaswamy
FOR the past two thousand years the
life of the Tamil people has cen¬
tered on their temples with their
lofty towers, elegant sculptures and
remarkable bronzes.
A number of places in Tamil Nadu are
said to be directly or indirectly connected
with episodes in certain popular myths
and legends relating to one or other of the
divine manifestations of Siva, Vishnu,
Subrahmanya, Durga and other gods.
Places mentioned in epics and puranas
(collections of legendary tales) assumed a
sacred aura and were visited by a large
number of devotees. While some such
legends are pan-Indjan in nature, most of
them are purely Tamil in origin and in
essence.
R. NAGASWAMY is a specialist in Tamil art
and archaeology. He was curator for art and
archaeology at the Madras Museum from
1959 until 1962 when he joined the State
Archaeology Department, becoming its first
director in 1966. He is the author of over a
hundred books, articles and studies; his Tan-
trie Cults of South India was published, in
English, in 1982.
14
The Vishnu temple of Srirangam and
the Siva temple of Ramesvaram are thus
connected with the Ramayana epic.
Rama worshipped Siva at Ramesvaram
to purge his sin of having killed Ravana.
Thiruchendur, a place sacred to Muruga,
This 16th-century mural
was discovered recently in
the gopuram (entrance
tower) of a temple in the
district of Tirunelveli. It
portrays the arrival from
the Gulf of a ship laden
with horses. The princes
of southern India imported
large numbers of horses
from Persia and Arabia,
despite their high cost; the
king of Vijayanagar is
reputed to have imported
13,000 horses annually
for his own personal use
and to provide mounts for
his officers.
Photo © I.F.I., Pondicherry
is believed to be the spot where
Subrahmanya killed the demon Surapad-
ma. The Meenakshi temple of Madurai is
said to be the place where Siva performed
sixty-four miraculous sports.
Temples were also built for the welfare

of the people. An inscription at
Mamallapuram records that a temple of
Lord Siva was erected by the king to fulfil
the desires of his subjects. Whenever a
king settled his people in a new place, he
erected a number of temples and arrang¬
ed for worship for the well-being of the
inhabitants. When Karikala, the
celebrated Chola ruler of the Sangam
period, established Uraiyur as his capital,
in accordance with the instructions given
in the ancient treatises he erected temples
before building housing for his subjects.
Temples were also often built in honour
of rulers, parents, relatives or famous
men.
The great majority of temples,
however, were erected by kings, queens
and nobles out of piety and devotion.
Koccengannan, a Chola ruler of the
Sangam period, erected seventy lofty
temples to Siva as an act of devotion. The
celebrated Pallava monarch Mahen-
dravarnam I (590-630 AD) excavated a
number of temples out of rock as an act
of piety. "Having made this abode for
the Lord Siva, whose image he has in¬
stalled there, he bore the supreme Lord
on his head", says an inscription of his at
Tiruchirapalli. Indeed, Mahendra even¬
tually assumed the title of Mahachet-
takari, or "Great Temple Builder". The
great temple of Tanjore, built by the
great Chola monarch Raja Raja I
(985-1014 AD), was erected as an act of
pious dedication.
Temples were also erected to honour
the dead, either at the place of burial or
in the form of memorials. After a period
of mourning, the dead, it was believed,
became celestial beings and were
therefore to be worshipped. The erection
of monumental structures for the dead
can be found in very large numbers.
Dolmens in particular played an impor¬
tant role in the evolution of temples to
the dead and, in later periods, minor
Façade of the Sivaite temple of
Minakshi at Madurai, the an¬
cient capital of the Pandya
dynasty. The city was totally
destroyed in 1310 and the pre¬
sent temple dates from the
17th century. Our photo bears
witness to the open-minded
catholicity of the Hindu
religion, for, although this is a
Sivaite temple, the statue right
portrays Vishnu who is seen
astride his mount, the fabulous
bird Garuda.
Photo © Claude Sauvageot. Paris
The interior of the Minakshi
temple at Madurai. To the left
can be seen Nandi, the bull
mount of Siva, and, to the right,
a statue of Ganesh, the
elephant-headed son of Siva
and Parvati. Crouched before
him is his mount, a rat.
Photo © Claude Sauvageot, Paris
temples closely resembling dolmens are
to be found. Often an image of the dead
person appears on the back wall.
The form of worship in the temple is
prescribed by ritual treatises called
Agamas or Tantra Sastras. All agamic
texts consist of four parts: Caryapada,
Kriyapada, Yogapada and Jnanapada.
The Caryapada deals with such things as
the personal cleanliness, discipline and
initiation of the worshipper. The mode of
worship in the temple is treated under the
Kriyapada. The Yogapada details the
yogic path to be followed by the devotee.
The Jnanapada is essential as it deals
with the ultimate end of worship,
culminating in the realization of
knowledge and final emancipation and*
15

thus embodies the essential philosophic
concepts of each sect.
The earlier Agamas are elaborate
treatises dealing not only with temple
ritual but also, in great detail, with such
matters as the lay-out of villages and
cities, the building of houses and
temples, and the manufacture of utensils.
Temples dedicated to Gods like Siva,
Vishnu, Durga and Jain and Buddhist
deities existed during the Sangam period
(approx. 300 BC to 200 AD), but they
were mostly built of bricks, mortar and
timber. Virtually nothing of that age has
survived, although the remains of a
fourth century AD Buddhist chaitya
(temple proper) and vihara (monastery)
have been unearthed at Kaveripattinam.
Stucco heads and torsos have also been
found which attest to the continuation of.
the artistic tradition mentioned in early
Tamil literature. By 600 AD, in the wake
of the Bhakti (devotion) movement,
several hundred temples dedicated to
Siva and Vishnu had been erected and
these were also brick and mortar con¬
structions. King Mahendra Pallava I was
a great builder as well as being an ac¬
complished artist, composer and
dramatist. He seems to have taken a keen
interest in the art of painting and called
himself Chitrakarapuli, or "Tiger among
artists". To him are due several rock-cut.
cave temples carved out of small hills
from Madras in the north to Thiruchi in
the south.
His successors continued his work.
Mamallapuram, near Madras, was
established as a seaport in the middle of
the seventh century by Mahendra's son
Mamalla. Here Pallava artists lavished
their skill on the carving of monolithic
temples, the excavation of caves and on
sculptural friezes carved on open rock
faces. Around 700 AD, Pallava artists
were encouraged by king Rajasimha
Pallava to embellish with their carving as
many caves and temples as possible.
There are several monolithic temples in¬
cluding a group of five temples, known
because of their shape and appearance as
the Five Rathas (chariots), which are
Dwarfs dance in ecstasy in this
frieze adorning the base of the
Kailasanatha temple at Kan-
chipuram. The temple, sacred to
Siva, was built by the Pallava king
Rajasimha in about 725 AD.
Photos © R. Nagaswamy, Madras
perfect examples of symmetry and
careful planning and execution. They
simulate the structural temples of the
period, reproducing wooden elements,
such as balustrades and beams, in stone.
As well as the monoliths there are over
fifteen rock-cut temples in various stages
of completion. Some are adorned with
remarkable sculptures of Siva and the
goddess Durga. A carving in the
Mahishasuramardini cave temple por¬
trays the goddess Durga seated on a pran¬
cing lion accompanied by dwarfs and
female attendants. The goddess wields a
bow and a sword and, facing her, a
buffalo-headed demon is retreating van¬
quished. All his warriors are hastily
withdrawing, some falling dead and
others fleeing the battlefield. On the side
of the sculpture depicting the goddess
everything has a vigorous forward move¬
ment, while on the side of the Asura
(demon-god) everything is falling. This is
undoubtedly one of the greatest
sculptural creations of India. Opposite
this sculpture is another depicting Vishnu
reclining in cosmic sleep on a serpent
couch, a picture of composure and peace.
Another masterpiece at Mamalla¬
puram is the great panel carved on a rock
face depicting "-The Penance of Ar-
juna". A central fissure in the rock is
visualized as the celestial river Ganga
descending from heaven to earth and fall¬
ing down to the nether world. Surround¬
ed by celestial beings, hunters, musicians
and other figures, as well as animals and
birds, Arjuna, the hero of the
Mahabharata, performs a penance under
the eyes of Lord Siva. The herd of
elephants at the bottom of the panel is
perhaps the most outstanding animal
sculpture in Indian art.
Nearby is another sculpture portraying
Krishna holding the mount Govardhana
beneath which cowherds and their cows
are taking shelter. The cow and the calf in
CONTINUED PAGE 18
This 13th-century sculpture from
the Vishnu temple at Srinangam
echoes the imagery of many
Vishnavite poems in which the
devout soul is visualized as a
young girl longing for union with
the Supreme Being, personified as
her lover.
16

THE TEMPLE
SCULPTURES
OF MAMALLAPURAM
The temple complex at Mamallapuram, on the coast
some 80 kilometres south of Madras, is one of the
great architectural and sculptural achievements of the
Pallava dynasty (4th to 9th century). The most im¬
pressive work is the huge panel carved on a rock face
known variously as "The Penance of Arjuna" or "The
Descent of the Ganga". Near the centre of the panel
Arjuna, a hero of the great Hindu epic, the
Mahabharata, performs a penance to Siva. Beside Ar¬
juna, a fissure in the rock represents the celestial river
Ganga descending from heaven to earth. Stretching
out on either side of the central fissure are magnifi¬
cent sculptures of deities, sprites, saints, musicians,
hunters and townsfolk (see detail right) and of animals
(detail below) and birds, all of whom have come to
witness the Ganga's miraculous descent. In a nearby
cavern are sculpted scenes from the lives of Vishnu.
Bottom right, Vishnu is depicted milking a cow, in his
8th avatar as Krishna the Shepherd-King. In the same
cavern another sculpture depicts Krishna holding up
mount Govardhana to protect shepherds and their
flocks from the wrath of his rival Indra. Bottom, also
at Mamallapuram is a group of monolithic temples
known as "The Five Rathas" (chariots) since they
resemble in shape the chariots on which deities are
carried in procession at festivals. Dedicated to the
Pandava heroes of the Mahabharata and their com¬
mon wife Draupadi, they were hewn out of rock dur¬
ing the reign of Mamalla Pallava (630 to 668) who
gave his name to Mamallapuram.
m &><
&*
ST«*
i %+'
j^fel £*Ä?
^
&
1
J/
:ii*fc.
X
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
1 V*:
:t«

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 16
the group are another example of the
Pallava artists' ability to portray animals
vibrant with life. Mamallapuram is a
treasure-house of the sculptor's art and
must rank among the great centres of
classic world art.
The rise to dominance of the Chola
dynasty in the ninth century brought a
change in architectural style. Most of the
structural temples were of modest height
and built of granite. Special attention
was paid to the structure of the sanctum
in which fine sculptures of gods and god¬
desses were placed in appropriate niches
as prescribed in the ritual treatises.
Despite their modesty, their simplicity
and elegant proportions are arresting.
Within a century, these unpretentious
beginnings were to culminate in the con¬
struction of perhaps the greatest of all
temples in southern Indian style, built by
king Raja Raja Chola (985 to 1014).
Some 85 metres in height and built entire¬
ly of granite, the temple at Tanjore is a
marvel of symmetry and structural
design. Everything about it is grandiose.
Even the five-metre-high monolithic
sculpture of the dwarapalas (guardians'
of entrances) pales into insignificance in
the grandeur of the architecture whose
upward thrust overwhelms the visitor.
Raja Raja's son, Rajendra Chola, built a
similar temple at his capital Gangai-
konda-cholapuram and the Chola royal
temples at Darasuram and Tiru-
bhuvanam, near Kumbhakonam, are
edifices of great beauty.
Chola art differed from that of the
Pallava period in that the Cholas were
essentially great architects whereas
Pallava artists specialized in delicate, ex¬
pressive sculpture. By the twelfth century
a new trend began to emerge. Enclosure
walls and lofty entrance towers known as
gopuram were built at all the important
temples and mandapas (halls) with from
1 00 to 1 ,000 slender pillars were built for
festive purposes.
From the sixteenth century, the en¬
trance towers were built to greater
heights, up to sixty metres, and became
the most important feature of Hindu
temples. The Vijayanagara Emperor
Krishna Devaraya (1509 to 1529) built
several such towers at places like
Chidambaram, Kanchipuram, Kalahasti
and Thiruvannamalai. So imposing were
they that all -entrance towers came to be
known as Rayagopura (royal towers).
The ground floors of these towers were
built of stone and the entire superstruc¬
ture was of brick and mortar, painted
and studded with hundreds of stucco
figures, a trend that continues to this
day.
R. Nagaswamy
18

GATEWAY TO THE GODS
2.
Images in bronze
TAMIL bronze sculpture represents a distinctive contri¬
bution to world art. In early Sangam literature (see
article page 32) there are allusions to metal images,
and ancient hymns of Sivaite and Vishnavite devotees refer
to the statues of deities being taken in procession at
festivals; these processional images were traditionally
made of copper.
Metal ¡mages were made by the lost-wax, or cire perdue,
process and were solid cast in copper, silver or gold.
Later, an alloy of five metals copper, brass, zinc, gold and
silver was used. God is said to pervade the five basic
elements of earth, water, fire, air and ether and his cosmic
body is believed to be composed of these five elements.
Each of the five metals used in the making of images is taken
to represent one of the five elements and ¡mages made of
them are known as panca lona murthi, or "five-metalled
¡mages".
From the initial sculpting of the figure in wax to the very
last act of consecration, every stage in the process is ac¬
companied by rituals and the recital of sacred hymns. The
last sacred act performed by the artist is the "opening of the
eyes" as the carving of the eyes is called. The right eye of
the deity represents the sun, the left eye the moon and the
mark on the forehead fire. The ritual fixing of the ¡mage to
its pedestral is considered to be the final consecration.
Metal ¡mages are worshipped regularly, receive daily of¬
ferings and, on days of festival, are decorated, placed on
chariots and taken out in procession, acting, as it were, as
the representative of a temple's main stone statue. Almost
all temples possess a number of metal images and
altogether they must number several thousand.
The earliest metal objects found in Tamil Nadu are grave
goods excavated at Adiccanallur in the Thirunelveli district.
They consist of copper lamps and ornamental plates often
with bases in the form of dogs and cocks. One tiny figure,
thought to represent the "mother goddess", has also been
found.
Of the few eighth-century bronzes that have come to light
most are representations of Vishnu and are modest in size.
One of the finest examples of bronze sculpture of the
Pallava period, however, is a figure of Siva with his consort,
now in the Madras Museum. A statue of Vishnu in his form
as Trivikrama (the conqueror of the Three Worlds that con¬
stitute the Universe) and another Vishnu statue from
Kodumudi are classic examples of eighth to ninth-century
bronze art. The heights reached by Tamil artists of this

Photos © R. Nagaswamy, Madras
Detail of a Chola bronze image of Lakshmana, the
brother of the epic hero Rama. Dating from the
mid-1 Oth century it is still an object of worship at
Paruthiyur in the Tanjore district.
23

The marriage of Siva and Parvati. This 9th-century
bronze from Vadakkalathur is a superb example of the
bronze sculpture of the late Pallava period (see article this
page and detail on colour page 20).
period are exemplified by a superb bronze of Siva marrying
Parvati. It portrays the bashful tenderness of a young girl
standing at the side of her lover and the majesty and pride
of the master conscious of the delicate sensitivity of his
consort whose hand he holds. More than simply a represen¬
tation of a divine union, it is also a vivid portrayal of human
emotions.
Bronze art reached its zenith under the Chola emperors
during the tenth and eleventh centuries and its artistic merit
is now recognized the world over. Early Chola bronze art can
be divided into three schools: the Aditya, the Sembiyan
Mahadevi and the Raja Raja schools.
Aditya Chola (875 to 906) and his son Parantaka (906 to
955) built many temples famed for their beautiful sculptures
24
and ornamentation. Among the many types of bronzes
made under their patronage one in particular won the ad¬
miration not only of the artists of the succeeding genera¬
tions but also of modern thinkers and artists. These are the
Siva Nataraja, or figures of Siva as the master dancer. Both
as an art form and as a symbol representing the highest
philosophical thought of India they are unparalleled. Since
that time images of Siva Nataraja have been a feature of
every Siva temple.
Sembiyan Mahadevi was a Chola queen of great devotion
and refined aesthetic taste. Widowed while still young, she
devoted her life to visiting sacred sites, having temples
rebuilt and bronzes made. She made generous donations to
temples of gold and silver vessels and jewels to adorn their
statues. Bronzes made to her command are notable for their
slender grace and charm.
Raja Raja Chola (985 to 1014) had many bronzes made
for the great temple at Tanjore. Raja Raja's personal atten¬
tion to every aspect of temple life is attested to in inscrip¬
tions, many of which refer to the consecration of bronze
statues which are often described in detail.
Many superlative examples of the bronzes of the Raja Raja
school, remarkable for their majesty and dignity, are now
preserved in the Tanjore Art Gallery. A few still remain in
temples, the finest of these being the statue of Siva Nataraja
in the great temple of Tanjore. The trend set by the Raja Raja
school continued until the end of the eleventh century after
which, although a great number of bronzes were made,
there was a steady decline in quality.
R. Nagaswamy
