Seeds ofplenty
The promise of biotechnology
OVER the past twenty-five years,
total world agricultural production
has doubled. Nevertheless, the
problem of ensuring adequate nourishment
for the world's growing population is still
exceptionally acute. The Director-General
of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO), Edouard
Saouma, recently declared that if present
rates of impoverishment in the developing
countries continue, the number of people
suffering from hunger in the world will
reach 750 million in the year 2000. But at
nearly 500 million, 30 per cent of whom are
children under ten years old, it is already
quite high enough and is fraught with
serious risks for the physical and mental
development of future generations.
In an uneasy world, the food problem is
aggravated by a series of social, economic
and political factors, from the unequal or,
to be more exact, inequitable distribution
of goods to the often primitive conditions
of production and processing of
agricultural output. It is impossible today
to achieve an increase in production yields
per hectare of land, per head of cattle, or
per ton of raw material unless advantage is
taken of the latest scientific discoveries.
Nowadays production, including
agricultural production, is becoming a
science in its own right, with its own
theoretical applied, practical and inventive
aspects. The very development of agricul¬
ture, for instance, has led to many scientific
discoveries such as fertilizers, insecticides,
new means of plant protection, hew species
and varieties of farm animals and crops. All
man's inventiveness was required to solve
the problems of supplying water to farms
and meeting their energy needs. Science
the biological scienceshas
enabled agriculture to obtain record harvest
yields, to produce strains of livestock of
previously undreamed-of productivity, and
to bring about "green revolutions".
In recent years work has intensified in
,many countries in the fields of cellular
YURI OVCHINNIKOV, of the USSR, is a
specialist in the field of bio-organic chemistry
whose work has earned him many awiards, in¬
cluding the Lenin (1977) and State (1982)
Prizes for science and technology. A vice-
president of the USSR Academy of Sciences
and head of the Academy's Shemyakln In¬
stitute of Bio-organic Chemistry, he is the
author of over 250 articles and studies, in¬
cluding a famous monograph on Active Com¬
plexes of the Membrane.
22
biology, physiology, the biology of growth,
ecology and, above all, in those branches of
physics and chemistry concerned with the
study of the vital processes of organisms at
the level of their molecular structures. The
improvement in agricultural productivity is
in large part due to genetics, to which we are
indebted for many valuable varieties of
plants, strains of livestock and productive
families of micro-organisms.
Between 1976 and 1980, for example, in
the USSR alone, 723 new agricultural plant
varieties were perfected and introduced to
certain regions of the country noted for
their unfavourable climate and which
statistics show to be characterized by far
from propitious weather conditions during
the planting and harvesting periods. A fur¬
ther 3,000 varieties were sent for quality
testing at State experimental stations.
At the present time, Soviet scientists are
busy working out theoretical bases for the
selection of methods of creating new
varieties, such as mutagenesis induced
chemically or by irradiation, polyploidiza-
tion and hybridization, and the preserva¬
tion of genotypes.
Thanks to the chemical mutagenesis
method, more than a hundred varieties of
Merino sheep are prized for the quality of
their wool. These specimens raised on a
State farm- in the north of Soviet
Kazakhstan yieldfrom 5. 3 to 6.3 kg ofwool
and weigh between 95 and 115 kg.
Photo © Tass, Moscow

^^»*
by Yuri Ovchinnikov
^^^^V^^H
1 . v
^*^^ Photo © Tass, Moscow
i
<
wheat, rice, oats, maize, sunflower and
Qther crops have been obtained.
The advantage of this method is that it
makes possible the production of complete¬
ly new forms, previously unknown in plant-
breeding, which are resistant to various
diseases. From the hybridization of two
mutants of sunflower, for example, one
which synthesizes oleic acid in place of
linoleic acid thus making its oil similar to
olive oil, and another having a short stalk
which enables a marked increase in sowing
density to be achieved, a new strain with a
yield capacity of up to 4,000 kilograms per
hectare has been obtained. Furthermore, by
using irradiation techniques, scientists in
the USSR have produced a more productive
variety of spring wheat and more than fif¬
teen resistant varieties of cotton plant.
Research development in the field of
genetics, selection and pedigree breeding is
of the utmost importance for improving
productivity in cattle. Among achievements
in this field mention should be made of the
acclimatization and propagation of the
Touvinian yak. Yaks are now being in¬
troduced to central Yakutia and it is pro¬
posed to breed them later in the Urals and
the Far East. Highly productive breeds of
sheep have also been created which are
adapted to Siberian conditions and to con¬
ditions prevailing in the high mountainous
regions of Kazakhstan. Work is also pro¬
ceeding on the cross-breeding of the Rus¬
sian black breed of meat cattle with the
Azerbaijanian zebu.
A new branch of biology, biotech¬
nology in particular, genetic and
cellular engineering opens up un-
China 's stock ofpigs numbers 310 million
and is far bigger than that of any other
country. It may also be one of the world's
oldest since there is some evidence thatpigs
were already domesticated in China some
7,000 years ago. Right, 16 piglets of the
Mel-shan breed, the first litter of Chinese
pigs born in France.
precedented prospects. Scientists in coun¬
tries that lead in this field have reached the
stage at which it is possible, by following a
preconceived plan, to obtain new organisms
with valuable characteristics; they have, in
fact, become manufacturers of new living
systems. Ten, or even five, years ago, such
achievements were possible only in the do¬
main of the simpler micro-organisms, and
many laboratories throughout the world are
making brilliant use of these methods. To¬
day, however, plants and animals are also
the subject of experiments which are giving
spectacular results.
The cultivation not only of plant cells and
tissues but also of isolated protoplasms has
become a reality. This makes it possible to
overcome physiological incompatibility in
the cross-breeding of widely differing plant
species. This method involves fertilization
in test tubes and the cultivation on artificial
nutrient media of isolated embryos and
seed-buds of hybrid combinations where
there is incompatibility of the parent stock.
Cloning of new varieties has made it possi¬
ble to achieve a threefold or fourfold ac¬
celeration of the reproduction span for
perennial plants. In this way they become
immune from disease and under certain
reproduction conditions from viruses.
Modifications of this kind in the selection
process' to which reference has been made
earlier, are. possible for those agricultural
crops (rice, potatoes, tomatoes, lucerne,
clover, rape, etc.) whose passage from cell
to plant is familiar to biologists.
In experiments with mulberry Bombyx,
Soviet biologists have been the first in the
history of science to succeed in obtaining,
To increase livestock farming productivity
a hybrid race of cattle has been bred in the
USSRfrom the Azerbaijan Zebu (1/8) and
the Russian black cow (7/8). Specimen
above is 5 1/2 years old and weighs 900 kg.

Throughout the world research scientists
are working to obtain by selection new
varieties of hardy, high-yield cultivated
plants. Rapeseed, top, is a source ofoil and
cattle feed. In France, where rapeseed is
grown on some 400,000 hectares, recent
research has raised hopes of boosting pro¬
ductivity through a new hybrid variety, the
"double zero". Above, a new type ofpea,
the "Omsky 7" has been developed at the
Kolos Centre near to Omsk in western
Siberia. It yields up to 40-45 quintals per
hectare.
Photo A. Chepurko © Tass, Moscow
* on an unlimited scale, genetically identical
twins and perfect genetic replicas both of
father and mother. A selection scheme has
been devised which makes it possible to
breed separate individuals in millions of
copies remarkable for their productivity,
and to reproduce their unique posterity in a
series of generations. The problem of sex
regulation has been resolvedmale silk¬
worms give 20 per cent more silk than males
and females taken together. The applica¬
tion of sex regulation methods to
agricultural pests could open up new
possibilities in the fight against agricultural
production losses.
As well as the question of pests one of
the great scourges of agriculture which not
infrequently causes enormous losses
mention should be made of the counter-
measures against plant and animal diseases,
in particular the highly purified vaccines
which the USSR provides for many
countries.
Special mention should be made of two
new methods which have a great future.
The first, which has been successfully
employed in the diagnosis of virus diseases
in particular, is hybridomic engineering
now just as popular as genetic engineering.
Scientists have learned how to create
hybriaomes (cells obtained from lym¬
phocytes and special cancerous cells) which
grow at great speed and produce only one
previously ordered antibody (in contrast to
the multiplicity of different antibodies pro¬
duced by lymphocytes when a pathogenic
agent attacks an animal organism). The
second method, recently discovered, offers
even greater future prospects. It consists of
the use of synthetic preparations (antigens)
which are already being referred to as the
vaccines of the twenty-first century.
Among the biological methods of com¬
bating pests and vectors of infection, the
use of pheromones (sexual attractants of in¬
sects and other animal species) seems to be
very promising. According to WHO statis¬
tics, a single grey rat devours up to 30
kilograms and spoils about 150 kilograms
of foodstuffs per year, and there are seven
thousand five hundred million of them in
the world. Pheromones of rodents make
catching operations in storehouses several
times more efficient.
Another important trend which promises
substantial results concerns biochemical
methods, especially the ' study of the
polymorphism of albumens. The variability
of such important characteristics of plants
as productivity, grain quality, resistance to
frost, resistance to diseases, is closely
related to variations in albumens. A close
analysis of the composition and nature of
these albumens makes it possible to predict
results accurately and to select the best
varieties.
In resolving such an important
agricultural problem as the production of
fodder, albumen insufficiency can be
reduced by industrial production of
valuable fodder additives obtained by
micro-biological synthesis. The scientific
basis for such production and a powerful
microbiological industry have been created
in the USSR. At the present time, experts
are engaged in converting the production of
fodder protein from oil hydrocarbons of
the paraffin type to other raw materials
methanol, methane, natural gas and waste
from the timber, food and other industrial
sectors. The utilization of wood sawdust
and straw, for instance, yields biomass with
an albumen content of up to 20 per cent. A
means of obtaining consistently high
percentages of amino acids by genetic
engineering methods has been patented in
the USA.
The preservation of stocks of genes
(meristems, cells, pollen) of different kinds
at a temperature of - 196° in liquid
nitrogen may become an important new
method. The genetic apparatus of plants
will itself gradually become subject to
genetic engineering. In many laboratories in
a number of countries, including the USSR,
work is being conducted on the introduc¬
tion into plants of nitrogen-fixing genes
found in tuberous micro-organisms living
in symbiosis with leguminous plants, and
also of groups of genes responsible for
resistance to viral diseases.
While it is obviously impossible to cover
the entire field of activity in the biological
sciences in such a cursory survey, the
problem of soil science cannot be overlook¬
ed. Soil is the essential basis of agriculture
and without good soil the highest-yield or
most productive varieties or strains are of
no avail.
Although 14 per cent of the world's
agricultural land is in the USSR, more than
half of this is situated in climatically un¬
favourable areas and there is not all that
much fertile land. Considerable areas are
exposed to wind and water erosion and to
salinity. These factors determine the direc¬
tion of scientific research. Agricultural soil
protection systems have been devised and
introduced on more than forty million hec¬
tares of land. This has made it possible to
obtain millions of additional tons of grain
annually, to reduce the negative effects of
drought and to protect the soil from
erosion.
Aerial surveys to determine soil humidi¬
ty, water-table levels, biomasses of a series
of agricultural crops for a given quantity of
electro-magnetic radiation of the soil sur¬
face in an ultra high frequency wave range,
have proved their value. These investiga¬
tions have demonstrated the great efficacy
of télédétection methods for verifying the
condition of soil resources, appraising the
growth and ripening of crops, selecting ob¬
jectives for land improvement, detecting
disease in agricultural crops, determining
the condition of large tracts of forest, and
many other operations.
Yuri Ovchinnikov
24
