The story
of the Universe
urfh» i -,:-r


The echo of the Big Bang
It has been hailed as the most remarkable scientific observation
of modern times, and like many great discoveries it came about
by accident. In 1964 radio-astronomers Arno Penzias and
Robert Wilson of the Bell Telephone Laboratories in the United
States detected a baffling radio noise through the giant "ear
trumpet", a 7-metre horn antenna (right) with which they were
working on the development of a satellite communication
system. The noise seemed to come evenly from all directions
in the sky. It did not change as the months went by and, with
the rotation of the earth around its own axis and around the
sun, the antenna was pointed to different parts of the sky. It
could not be accounted for by any source on earth, in the solar
system, or in our galaxy. Could it be due to a fault in their equip¬
ment? Could it be caused by the pigeons roosting in the throat
of the antenna? The antenna was dismantled and rebuilt, the
pigeons were removed. But the noise in their microwave
receiver was still, inexplicably, there.
Then Penzias and Wilson heard about the calculations of a
Princeton University physicist, P.J.E. Peebles, who had
calculated that if the universe had originated in a Big Bang, a
massive amount of radiation would have been needed to pre¬
vent all the densely packed particles from fusing together into
heavy elements and to leave enough hydrogen and helium to
form the stars and galaxies of the universe as we know them
today. As the universe expanded, the radiation cooled, continu¬
ing to permeate the universe but in a weaker, more "diluted"
form. Peebles predicted that it should today be detectable as
radiation with a temperature of a few degrees above absolute
zero on the Kelvin scale. This immediately explained the origin
of the radio hiss heard by Penzias and Wilson: this cosmic radia¬
tion filling all of space was a distant echo of the Big Bang. The
excitement of astronomers at the discovery of a phenomenon
which seemed to confirm the Big Bang theory so conclusively
was mingled with the irony that radio telescopes of the 1 950s
would have been capable of detecting this background radia¬
tion, whose existence had been predicted in the mid-1 940s,
but no radio astronomers had looked for it. In 1 978 Penzias and
Wilson were awarded the Nobel Prize for their discovery.
Just at the time these new theoretical ideas were emerging,
astronomers were developing a series of large telescopes
which probed the nature of the Universe and showed how
parochial their earlier ideas had been. Our Milky Way
Galaxy, the mass of all the stars visible in the night sky, was
shown to be just one collection of stars among many in the
Universe. The Milky Way contains thousands of millions of
stars, a collection forming a flattened disc like an island in
space, but the Universe contains many millions of other
galaxies like this, separated from one another by truly empty
stretches of intergalactic space. The crucial discoveries con¬
cerning the nature of these objects came from a succession
of telescopes on mountain tops in California the 60-inch
reflector at Mount Wilson, completed in 1908; the 100-inch
at the same observatory in 1917; the 200-inch at Mount
Palomar in 1948. Edwin Hubble, working at the Mount
Wilson observatory from 1919 onward, first showed that
many faint patches of light in the sky could be resolved into
individual stars, and were island galaxies in their own right,
lying far beyond the Milky Way. He then made an even more
dramatic discovery. He found that distant galaxies show a
systematic red shift in their light, a red shift that is propor¬
tional to the distance of each galaxy from us.
This red shift literally involves a displacement of features
in the visible spectrum from their expected position towards
the red end of the spectrum. It is interpreted as a stretching
of the light waves, because red light is at the long wave end
of the visible spectrum (blue light has shorter wavelengths;
a compression of wavelengths would cause a blue shift).
There is only one plausible explanation for such a
phenomenon. The wavelength of the light is stretched
because the distant galaxy is moving away from us, in exactly
the same way that the note of a police or ambulance siren is
6
deepened if the vehicle rushes away from us. Hubble's
discovery in the 1920s that red shift is proportional to
distance was exactly the effect predicted by the Eins-
tein/Friedmann models, the effect Einstein tried to get rid of
with his cosmological constant. It doesn't mean that our
Galaxy is at a special place at the centre of the Universe, with
everything else moving out from it, because those distant
galaxies will "see" us in retreat from them. The motion is
relative. Imagine an expanding balloon, dotted with paint
spots and being inflated. Every spot "sees" every other spot
receding at a rate proportional to the separation of the two
spots, but none of the spots is actually moving across the
rubber of the balloon's skin (See page 16). Hubble's law
showed that the Universe is made the same way empty
space, Einstein's space-time, expands and pushes the galax¬
ies further apart, even though the galaxies themselves are not
moving through space.
Astronomers were intellectually aware of this in the 1930s,
and for three decades they lived with the implication that the
Universe must have had a definite beginning from which the
universal expansion had begun. But it was only in the 1960s
that this abstract intellectual concept became something
more concrete and immediate. The Big Bang was an abstract
concept, seemingly remote from the world of today. It
couldn't be seen, or felt, or touched, and astronomers seem
to have had no "gut feeling" that the idea was correct. And
then, in 1964 Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson, working at
the Bell Laboratories in the US, found a way to "touch" the
Big Bang.
Penzias and Wilson had been working with a sensitive
radio antenna and amplifier system studying faint radio
signals bounced off the Echo satellites. They also took the

opportunity to use this sensitive equipment to study the faint
radio noise of the Milky Way, and to their surprise they
found a weak, but uniform, signal coming from all direc¬
tions in space. Space the Universe seemed to be full of
very weak radio waves, with an energy equivalent to 3 K
(zero on the Kelvin scale of temperature is - 273 °C). This
is a very weak signal by everyday standards, but if it fills all
of space it adds up to a great deal of energy altogether.
Where had it come from? Princeton theorist P. J.E. Peebles,
working just a few miles away from Penzias and Wilson,
quickly came up with the answer. This weak, 3 K
background radiation must be the echo of the Big Bang
itself, the last trace of the fireball in which the Universe was
born.
The argument is simple. When the Universe was born out
of the Big Bang, it was very hot, full of energy as well as
matter. As space expanded, the radiation expanded as well,
so that space has always been full of this electromagnetic
energy. But as space has got bigger, the energy has been more
and more diluted. The density of the energy has got less, and
so its temperature has fallen. The temperature of the
background radiation today is exactly right for the amount
of expansion that must have occurred since the Big Bang,
and there is no serious alternative explanation for the
discovery made by Penzias and Wilson. Following that
discovery, astronomers had to accept, deep down in their
hearts, that the Big Bang was real, not just some interesting
quirk of the mathematical equations. Penzias and Wilson
received the Nobel Prize for their discovery in 1978, some
measure of the impact it made on science.
The discovery of the cosmic background radiation led to
new interest in the Big Bang. How, astronomers wanted to
know, could a superdense, superhot fireball of energy have
expanded and evolved into the Universe we see about us,
where stars are gathered into galaxies which move quietly
apart from one another in an expanding sea of space-time?
The universal expansion has long since been proved a reality;
we can take the temperature of the Big Bang itself, and we
know that the origin of the Universe lies in a fireball of ere-
"Shorthand"
for mathematicians
Any discussion of the universe and of particle
physics involves talking about both very large and
very small distances and quantities. We therefore
need a form of shorthand to express the very large
numbers involved. Conventionally, for example,
ten times ten times ten i.e. one thousand is ex¬
pressed as 103, one million is written as 106, and
1014 means a hundred million million. A similar
method is used to express very small distances or
quantities; one divided by a million i.e. one-
millionth is expressed as 10~6 The radius of an
atom, for example, is about 10~8 of a centimetre.
ation 15 thousand million years ago. Those were dramatic
discoveries in themselves to previous generations. But in the
past ten years even more dramatic progress has been made,
not by astronomers but by particle physicists whose work
with giant accelerators like those at CERN (the European
Organization for Nuclear Research) in Geneva has given
them an insight into the world of very high energies. We can¬
not, in fact, go back to the instant of creation, when the
Universe was infinitely dense and infinitely energetic, and
occupied a mathematical point with zero volume. But the
theorists can come pretty close to this. They now claim to
have pushed back the understanding of the Big Bang to the
point where they can explain how a minuscule object, a
Universe containing all the mass energy of our present
Universe packed into the volume of a proton, blew up into
something like the Universe we see today.
John Gribbin
Open or closed? The fate of the Universe
If we accept, as do most physicists today
(for alternative view see article page 1 3),
that the universe began with the "Big
Bang" and is expanding, is it possible to
deduce how it will end? There seem to be
two possible scenarios for the future and
the choice between them is finely balanc
ed. Everything hinges on just how much
matter there is in the universe. Just as
our solar system and all the galaxies are
held together by the attractive force of
gravity, so the total mass of the universe
exercises a steady pull on all its com¬
ponents. As the universe expands, im
pelled by the explosive force of the Big
Bang, this gravitational pull decreases.
But if there is enough matter in the
universe, gravity will eventually over¬
come the expansion which will gradually
slow to a halt. Like a film being run
backwards, the whole process will go in¬
to reverse, the universe will contract
faster and faster as the force of gravity
becomes increasingly ascendant until it
collapses back into another dense
fireball, perhaps to die for ever, perhaps
to expand again in another Big Bang. If,
however, the total mass of the universe
is insufficient to enable the gravitational
force to become predominant, the ex¬
pansion of the universe will continue for
ever. Cosmologists have attempted to
work out the total mass of the universe
by measuring the amount of matter in the
volume of space that we can "see".
Curiously, their estimates give an ap¬
proximate total mass for the universe
that lies within the critical zone between
these two possibilities. The fate of the
universe is balanced on a knife edge.
Big Bang
