The Gaduliya Lohars: India's
RESEARCH in linguistics, anthropo¬
metrics, ethnology, and other fields
has conclusively established the
Indo-Aryan origin of the Gypsies. But the
precise nature of the kinship between the
Gypsies as we know them in different parts
of the world and the various groups which
live in northwestern India has not yet been
determined. One nomadic group, the
Gaduliya Lohars of Rajastan, has attracted
attention from Indian and European
specialists because of the many similarities
observed between its members and those of
other groups which have been studied in
Europe. These similarities occur in
language, family and social structures,
dress, and certain forms of popular
literature and folklore.
Lohar means "smith", and Gaduliya is
the name given to the distinctive type of ox¬
cart used by this group. The term Gaduliya
Lohar may thus be translated as "wander¬
ing smith", as distinct from the sedentary
Hindu smiths belonging to the maru and
malviya castes who live in the same region.
This dual status of smith and nomad deter
mines their place in India's complex social
system.
Rajastan is the region of origin of the
Gaduliya Lohars, and they claim to belong
to the famous Rajput group. Many orally
transmitted accounts agree on this point.
The present-day Gaduliya Lohars are
descended from groups which served the
Rajput princes, for whose armies they made
and serviced weapons. Consequently, they
enjoyed special esteem and consideration
until 1567-1568, when the repeated assaults
of the emperor Akhbar overcame the
seasoned defenders of the Fort of Chit-
torgarh, bringing the Rajput dynasty to an
end.
The defeat of the arms manufactured by
them was felt by the Lohars as a serious
blow to their reputation, and they swore to
give up this traditional activity until the
dishonour was repaired, devoting
themselves in the meantime to the peaceful
manufacture of domestic utensils and
agricultural implements. In order to avoid
conflict with smiths belonging to other
castes who were already established in the
large centres of population, they decided to
take to the roads and serve towns and
villages far from the main highways.
To cover the great distances involved, it
was necessary to adapt the traditional cart
of the region and create a modelthe
gaduliyathat would meet their new re¬
quirements. This model, created in the six¬
teenth century, can still be seen today on the
roads of northern India. The original size
and layout of the interior, used to store
utensils, tools, and food, have not changed,
although nowadays the cart is used only for
transport and no longer as a dwelling as in
the case of other nomad groups.
The gaduliya is made from kikar (Acacia
Arabica) wood, and is stronger and heavier
than other types of cart. Its peculiar
features are the thalia and the pheechla.
The former is a fairly spacious triangular
chest which forms the forepart of the cart.
The middle and rear parts, which are un¬
covered, constitute the pheechla, to which
side panels are attached. The carts are built

wandering blacksmiths *»***« o*»»*«»
only by a small number of craftsmen who
are established at Gangura for the north
and west of the region, and at Barmer for
the south and east.
The side panels, or pankhalas, the out¬
side of the chest, and the wheels, are the
only surfaces which the owner can decorate
to give a distinctive aspect to his gaduliya.
This decoration consists of bronze plates
fixed to the wood. Those whjch cover the
side panels are invariably divided into four
sections, each containing sixteen compart¬
ments, and it is by means of the motif
chosen to decorate each of these compart¬
ments that the family gives a distinctive ap¬
pearance to its vehicle. These motifs include
squares, lozenges, stars and stylized
flowers. The long shaft by which the oxen
are attached to the cart is decorated with
plaited strips of buffalo hide.
The gaduliya is the real centre of family
life. All the family belongings are stored
there according to an unchanging order. In
< This young Gaduliya Lohar is wearing,
suspended from the black cord around
his neck, an amulet in honour of Ramdeo-
Jl, a protective divinity who bestows
health, prosperity, fertility and hap¬
piness. He Is also wearing the men's ear¬
rings known as murki and, unusually, at
top of his left ear, an organia, a piece of
women's jewellery. The woman at his
side is wearing ivory and silver bracelets,
betokening hermarried status. On her ear
can be seen the mark left by a heavy silver
ring, which, like all these Jewels, is used
as security in borrowing and lending.
Traditionally the Gaduliya Lohars use
goatskin bellows to stoke the fire of their
open-air forge, but today some of them
have adopted instead the more
sophisticated mechanical devices used
by sedentary craftsmen, such as this
bicycle wheel attached to a pulley and
turned by the smith's wife or daughter
using the pedal as a handle. In
background is the Gaduliya, the waggon
from which this group of Indian nomads
takes its name. The Gaduliya's design
has not changed since the 16th century.
Decorative motifs on the rectangular side
panels are the family's distinctive
emblem.
the triangular chest in front, the small door
of which can be locked for security, are kept
cash, jewels when not being worn by the
women, gold, sweetmeats, solidified butter,
needles and thread, the looking-glass, kohl
and other cosmetics. In a word, the thalia is
the family treasure chest. In the open part
of the vehicle sacks of rice, lentils and flour
are placed in the centre, while domestic
utensils are placed on one side and the
smith's tools on the other. The family
clothing is stored between the sacks and the
thalia.
As soon as a camp has been established,
family life takes place exclusively around
and under the cart; matting provides pro¬
tection from sun and rain.
The new activities of the Lohars after the
defeat of Chittorgarh must have been in¬
fluenced by the nature of the environment
in which they found themselves. They must
have had to devise a balanced economic
system based on the relationship between
man and nature, between the natural and
the artificial in a region like Rajastan where
natural conditions and features can vary
sharply from area to area and from season
to season. For instance, the rainy season
puts a stop to nomadism, and so fixed camp
sites were established for the Lohar groups.
Even today the Lohars still stay at these
sites, known as thiya, every year from mid-
May to mid-September. The period from
May to July is devoted to rest, visits, wed¬
dings, and meetings of the group's ruling
council. From July to September visits are
made to local livestock fairs to purchase
draught animals.
The remaining eight months are spent
travelling, according to a pattern which has
not changed since the sixteenth century and
which enables each group to cover a par¬
ticular part of the region. Every group has
established relations with the peasants in its
area, and these relations have been kept up
by both sides for generations.
Life for the Gaduliya Lohars is lived
mainly within the group. They do not stay
long in populated centres. Much of their
time is spent travelling, and contacts with
individual peasants or peasant groups tend
to be brief. This explains how they have
managed to preserve their customs un¬
changed since they decided over 300 years
ago to devote themselves to the service of
agriculture. Their style of dress, their
jewellery, even the men's hairstyles, have
scarcely changed over the centuries. The
same goes for their family customs, and
their birth, wedding and funeral rites.
In the cultural mosaic of India, the
Gaduliya Lohars occupied a distinctive
place in Rajastan; they were accepted as an
essential factor in the region's social and
economic structure. They were not in com¬
petition with sedentary smiths. Each group
had its own clientele. This situation prevail¬
ed for more than 300 years until in this, cen¬
tury large-scale industry began to alter the
pattern of India's economy.
The impact was such that many groups of
Gaduliya Lohars were obliged to abandon
their traditional circuits and sought new
customers in other areas. It was a severe test
for a nomadic smith to have to compete
with other nomadic or sedentary smiths

from neighbouring areas, to give up old
connexions, and above all to face the risk of
coming into contact with other cultural
models which were powerful enough to
undermine his group's stability. The roads
westward lead to the desert regions of the
Sind, which are ill-siyted to agriculture.
The only practicable route led eastwards,
where lay prosperity and promise. Many
groups migrated in this direction; others
stuck obstinately to the old circuits. The lat¬
ter have suffered greatly from the changes
which the invasion of the market by mass-
distributed industrial products has brought
to the region's economy.
During the past two or three decades at¬
tempts have been made by the authorities to
solve the problem. As in other times and in
many other places, the solution propos'ed
was the sedentarization of the nomad. The
Indian sociologist Professor Satia Pal
Ruhela, a leading authority on the Gaduliya
Blacksmiths at work. The anvil Is a cube
of steel which, as the home of Lakshml,
goddess of wealth, Is Invested with divine
powers. The family's most precious
possession, the anvil must never be lent
to others nor used for any other purpose
than metalwork. The head of the family,
crouched beside the anvil, uses a small
hammercalled a hatoda. Contrary to what
Is shown In this photo, It Is usually the
wife who stands in front of her husband
and wields the large hammer, the ghan.
Her place may be taken by her daughter
but never by daughters-in-law, who are
not allowed to work at the forge.
Lohars, has made a detailed study of of¬
ficial plans for "rehabilitation" by means
of "colonies" established on permanent
sites -in the territory. He explains why most
of these attempts have failed. He found
evidence of ignorance or neglect of the
psychological factors inherent in the
nomadic character of the group, as well as
of the mythological factors associated with
the dwelling and the workshop. Above all,
the balance of a number of social and
cultural factors such as the internal co¬
hesion of the groups and families was
destroyed by their dispersal and by in¬
discriminate distribution of land in an at¬
tempt to transform them into farmers
overnight.
Other Gaduliya Lohar groups which have
gradually decided to modify and extend
their circuits have entered into direct con¬
tact with other cultures and groups, and
learned new techniques from them which
have enabled them to improve and even ex¬
pand their production of handmade goods,
to their economic advantage.
The acculturation process which is an in¬
evitable consequence of these contacts is
reflected in a number of changes in the life
style of the Gaduliya Lohars, some of
which are very striking. The style of dress,
especially for women, has been changing,
becoming adapted to the new environment.
Men, too, are changing their appearance
by, for instance, adopting a less traditional
hairstyle.
Faced with a hard struggle for survival,
those who have remained faithful to the
traditional circuits are also finding it dif¬
ficult to preserve all their traditions,
whether they be the decoration of their
vehicles or the feasts and ceremonies of
their traditional calendar. The situation is
one which is not, unfortunately, confined
to the Gaduliya Lohars. A social group is
faced with a terrible dilemma when it has to
decide whether to remain faithful to its
traditions and risk the very survival of its
members as a group, or to abandon these
traditions and expose itself to all the risks of
acculturation but ensure a level of
economic well-being that satisfies its
members' needs.
The solution does not seem to lie in either
of the two relentless alternatives to con¬
tinue being Gaduliya Lohars and die slow¬
ly, or to cease being Gaduliya Lohars and
survive. Between these two extremes there is
a broad area full of possibilities which
should be explored and exploited in order to
save the cultural identity of those concern¬
ed. The benefit will not be for them alone.
When a social group prospers and lives an
active life, the whole of society benefits
thereby.
ESTEBAN COBAS PUENTE, of Cuba, is a
member of the Association des Etudes
Tsiganes (Association for Gypsy Studies), a
non-governmental organization associated
with Unesco, whose membership consists of
researchers from many disciplines. This article
is based on a study made for the Association
on the Gaduliya Lohars (itinerant blacksmiths)
of India. Since 1969 he has been studying the
Sinti Gypsies of northern Italy, in particular the
semi-sedentary communities of the Milan
region.
