'A MORAL IMPERATIVE'
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
HE eradication of illiteracy represents a moral
imperative for the international community. The
reasons for this are evident. It is sufficient to
consider the number of illiterates, an estimated 824
million in 1980 or 29 per cent of the adult population, a
number which is constantly on the increase even as the
rate of illiteracy slowly declines.
If present trends continue, there will be 900 million il¬
literates towards the end of the century. Illiteracy is
generally closely associated with poverty. It is most
widespread in the most deprived areas of those countries
which have the least resources, and among the most
destitute sections of the population those that suffer
from serious inadequacies as regards food, health and

housing or who are affected by unemployment.
The persistence of widespread illiteracy is a major im¬
pediment to development, and makes it impossible for
millions of men and women to take their destinies into
their own hands. It condemns to failure the fight against
poverty, the elimination of inequalities and the attempts
to establish relations of equity and justice between both
individuals and nations.
Unesco's strategy and actions in favour of literacy
have evolved over the years to reflect the experience ac¬
quired by Unesco and its Member States. Thus the pro¬
gramme approved by the recently concluded 22nd ses¬
sion of the General Conference for the 1984-1985 bien-
nium contains several noteworthy innovations.
The most important of these is the adoption of a global
strategy whereby action for generalization and renewal
of primary education the only means of attacking il¬
literacy at its very root is combined with literacy educa¬
tion for young people and adults. It is a fact that illiteracy
thrives on the inadequacy of primary education. There
are today some 120 million children of primary school
age who do not have the opportunity to attend school
and who, if adequate measures are not taken, will swell
the ranks of adult illiterates in the future. Sixty per cent
of these children cut off from school are girls, the women
and mothers of tomorrow whose role and influence in
every sphere of life are of decisive importance.
But even many of those fortunate enough to attend
school will not necessarily pursue their studies long
enough or receive an education of a sufficient quality and
relevance to their lives to enable them to achieve an en¬
during level of literacy. Hence, the extension and reform
of primary education is an indispensable element in any
realistic strategy to overcome illiteracy.
Unesco's programme also gives immediate attention
to an alarming phenomenon the relapse into illiteracy of
many young people and adults. Studies must be under¬
taken to diagnose this complex problem systematically.
Another aspect of the problem of illiteracy which has
recently attracted the attention of researchers is the no¬
tion of "functional illiteracy". With the rapid develop¬
ment of science and technology, the level of literacy re¬
quired to cope with the demands of social and economic
life is rising. The measure of "functional literacy" is not
fixed, but is steadily advancing. For example, the level of
instruction which qualified one for employment yester¬
day may not suffice tomorrow.
It is only by acquiring literacy skills that each individual
begins to become a full and active member of his culture,
is able to benefit from the accumulated wealth of
knowledge and know-how and takes part in the collec¬
tive process of reflection on the implications of his socie¬
ty's evolution in a word becomes a full-fledged citizen.
While its elimination requires first and foremost a
strong national commitment, illiteracy has become a pro¬
blem of truly planetary dimensions. Its eradication also
calls for efforts on a world-wide scale and in particular for
international co-operation reinforced by a greater con¬
cern than in the past for the fundamental human re¬
quirements of authentic development.
I therefore appeal once again to all those in positions of
authority to increase the total volume of aid devoted to
literacy work, thus enabling the upward trend in the ab¬
solute number of illiterates to be halted, then reversed,
before the end of the century. In this way we shall ensure
that we enter the new millennium in a climate of liberty,
creativity and progress for all.
