wandering voice'
i
by Giulio Soravia
These two young Gypsy girls, at a State
school in Thessaloniki, Greece, are learn¬
ing about the history and culture of the
country in which they live.
THE Rom or Romany people provide
a particularly striking example of
the notion that language is a key to
a people's identity.
Scattered all over the world in a diaspora
which has lasted many centuries, the Rom
are united only by a common origin for
which their language has provided decisive
proof. Subdivided into as many dialects as
there are groups of Rom on the five con¬
tinents, this common language bears the
imprint of their travels and links them to
India, their original homeland.
What is remarkable, and what surprised
the first students of the subject, is the per¬
sistence of grammatical forms which are in
many ways similar to those of the Indo-
European languages spoken in India today,
and of a basic vocabulary which, in spite of
certain phonetic changes, contains words
found in Hindi, Punjabi, and the Dardic
languages.
This is not surprising. When, a thousand
years or more ago, the nomadic ancestors
of today's Rom began their long journey
westwards, they often had to halt,
sometimes for a long period, in regions
where they lived in proximity to peoples of
different languages and customs from
whom they borrowed certain cultural and
linguistic traits. As a rule, however, they
did not stay in these countries long enough
to become totally assimilated or to become
so far integrated as to lose their identity or
their originality.
But even when they paused in a given
region they continued to practise nomadism
on a local scale. In the Middle East were
groups which were given various names by
their neighbours (such as Nawar in
Palestine) but called themselves Dom. In
Armenia they changed this name to Lorn. A
few decades later, in Greece, they became
the Rom, a name they would retain
throughout Europe and elsewhere in the
world, thus breaking with their origins.
The phonetic evolution of their ethnic
name makes it possible to trace the history
of the Rom right back to the beginning.
Thus, the language spoken by European
Rom today contains many words with an r;
words quite similar to these are found in In
dian languages, containing a corresponding
phoneme, the cerebral d*. There is even a
group of Indian nomads today who call
themselves the Dom.
Many other nomadic peoples of India
recall what must have been the origins of
the European Rom. The most notable of
these peoples are the Banjara and Lamana,
who speak a language which is quite distinct
from that of their European brothers and is
closer to Hindi, for although they have re¬
mained in their country, their language has
been influenced by the strong pressure of
the sedentary culture. This explains its
gradual divergence from the Rom language,
while not invalidating what has been said
above.
The course followed by the European
Rom was slow but inexorable. Their traver¬
sal of Asia did not leave a profound mark
on their language, in spite of the affinity
between Indian and Iranian languages.
* A cerebral consonant is articulated by curling
the tongue tip up and back until its under surface
touches the hard palate.
21

However, Romani chib, the language of the
Rom, undoubtedly contains Iranian and
Armenian borrowings.
Words of Iranian origin are found in all
the dialects such as baxt (luck, fortune),
ambrol (pear), khangeri (church), angustri
(ring), ruv (wolf), vurdon (waggon). Words
of Iranian or Armenian origin are: zor
(strength), cikat (front). Words of Arme¬
nian origin are: bov (oven) and grast
(horse).
The language of the most westerly group
of Rom was decisively influenced by their
sojourn in Greece, which was probably one
of their longest and which brought about
the assimilation of a vocabulary and gram¬
matical forms to be found later in all the
Rom dialects of Europe.
The following words are of Greek origin:
drom (path, road), karfin (nail), klidi (key),
kokalo (bone), papin (goose), petalos
(horseshoe), tsox (skirt), zumi (soup),
(v)amoni (anvil), and isviri (hammer).
Many Rom dialects have morphemes of
Greek origin including: -mé, which is used
to form the past participle (ramomé: writ¬
ten; pahomé: frozen; vezlimé: em¬
broidered) and -mos, which is used to form
nouns derived from verbs or adjectives,
taking the place of the suffix -pé, which is
of Indian origin and is still used in certain
dialects (pimos or pibe: beverage, from pi-:
to drink; nevimos or nevipé: novelty, news,
from nevo: new; temimos or ternipé:
youth, from terno: young; barvalimos or
barvalipé: wealth, from barvalo: rich).
From the fourteenth century on, the
language of the Rom was transformed,
sometimes profoundly, in the different
European countries they "visited". It is a
rich and flexible language, with complex
declensions for nouns and verb conjuga¬
tions which allow for a very wide degree of
communication. In the Balkan dialects,
where declensions have survived, a
masculine or feminine noun, singular or
plural, may have eight cases. Let us take the
example of the plural of phral (brother):
nominative: phrala (brothers)
genitive: phralengo (of the brothers)
dative: phralenge (to the brothers)
accusative: phralem (the brothers)
vocative: phralale (brothers!)
ablative: phralendar (by the brothers)
locative: phraleste (at the brothers')
instrumental: phralentsa (with the brothers)
Verbs have five tenses:
present: kerav (I do)
imperfect: keravas (I was doing)
past: kerdem (I did)
perfect: kerdemas (I have done)
future: kam-kerav (I shall do)
The declension of nouns survived with
less difficulty in eastern Europe because of
the influence of the Slav languages in which
the noun is fully declined. Other dialects,
however, such as that of the now extinct
group of Welsh Gypsies, preserved declen¬
sions of remarkable richness. Nevertheless
in western Europe the tendency was for
declensions to disappear and for the noun
to be "declined" using prepositions. In
some Sinto dialects of central Europe
prepositions taken from German are used:
fon u pral (of the brother)
an u pral (to the brother)
mit u pral (with the brother)
The Romani vocabulary was enriched by
many borrowings from the Slav languages,
from Hungarian, from Romanian, from
German, from Italian and from other Euro¬
pean languages.
The flexibility oî Romani is also revealed
in a capacity to create new forms,
sometimes by means of astonishing com¬
binations of words of different
etymological origin. In one Sinto dialect,
for instance, the word svigardaj (mother-in-
law) has been composed from daj (mother)
a word of Indian origin, and an adaptation
of the German word Schwieger (Schwieger¬
mutter: mother-in-law). The word ledomé
(frozen) occurs in the dialect of a group of
Muslim Gypsies in the south of Yugoslavia;
it is composed of the Slav word led (ice)
followed by thésuffix mé, which is of Greek
origin, as we have seen.
Thus, instead of degenerating, the
language of the Gypsies changes in tune
with a process similar to that undergone by
other languages. Its vocabulary is enriched
and adapts in accordance with new needs,
changes in living conditions, periods and
environments." But clearly this also makes
the difficulties of understanding between
the different groups more acute, since there
is increasing divergence between the
dialects.
What are these dialects?
At least two-thirds of the world's three
million Rom (this is the most conservative
estimate; it is impossible to give precise
statistics) speak the Danubian dialect which
the English specialist B. Gilliat-Smith nam¬
ed vlax, a term which emphasizes the
notable Romanian contribution to its
vocabulary but which is today perhaps no
longer appropriate. Certain groups, in spite
of their Rom origins, have abandoned their
language and adopted that of their seden¬
tary neighbours (one example is that of the
Rudari and Romanian). The other dialects
are presented in the following list, which is
not exhaustive. It should also be
remembered that classification by
geographical groups is today only used for
the sake of convenience, since these dialects
have spread all over the world with those
who use them.
1) The Danubian group (Kalderash,
Lovara, Curara, etc.);
2) The western Balkan group (Istrians,
Slovenes, Havates, Arlija, etc.);
3) The Sinto group (Eftavagarja, Kranarja,
Krasarja, Slovaks, etc.);
4) Rom groups of central and southern
Italy;
5) British (Welsh, now extinct; today only
Anglo-Romani survive, speaking a mixture
of English and Romani);
6) Finnish;
7) Greco-Turk (their existence as a separate
group is debatable);
8) Iberian (today represented by Calo, the
Hispano-Äomaw dialect of the gitanos).
According to a theory set forth by R.L.
Turner, the origin of the Gypsies should, in
view of their language, be sought in central
India. Others maintain that they originated
in northwestern India. Because of their con¬
stant mobility and the fact that at least ten
centuries have gone by since their exodus
from their homeland, it is difficult to say
with certainty whether or not they
originated in the Punjab. What is not in
doubt is the number of Indian words that
occur in the vocabulary of this so-called
"European" people to express the most
common concepts:
house: kher (Hindi ghar)
tree: rukh (Hindi rukh)
salt: Ion (Hindi Ion)
land: phuv (Hindi bhu)
man: manus (Hindi manus)
spoon: roj (Hindi dot")
Gypsy children at an encampment Install¬
ed at Vllleplnte, a suburb in the Paris
area, greet the driver of the "school on
wheels" which they attend. The integra¬
tion of Gypsies Into modern society
usually implies that education Is dispens¬
ed in the language of the host country.
This can be a source of enrichment pro¬
vided that it does not lead to a loss of their
own cultural Identity.
22

References to Gypsies In the works of
Shakespeare have been cited by several
specialists. In The Tempest, for example,
the name ofthat tenebrous figure Caliban
Is derived from the Romanl word kaliben,
which means "perfidious". In As You
Like It, "the melancholy Jaques" com¬
poses a song In which the word "duc-
dame" is repeated three times. This
word, which Jaques declares Is "a Greek
Invocation to call fools Into a circle", has
long puzzled Shakespearean commen¬
tators. In fact, It Is of Romanl origin deriv¬
ing either from dukdom me (I have wrong¬
ed others), or from drukkerdom me (I tell
fortunes). Other references to Gypsies
are to be found In Romeo and Juliet, An¬
tony and Cleopatra and, above all, In
Othello. "The Moorof Venice" Is accused
of winning Desdemona's affections by
"spells and magic bought of
mountebanks". Othello himself tells
Desdemona that the handkerchief he
gave her as a gage of fidelity and whose
loss sparks off the tragedy, "did an Egyp¬
tian (I.e. a Gypsy) to my mother give; she
was a charmer and could almost read the
thoughts of people". Above, engraving
of Othello and Desdemona by Théodore
Chassérlau, a French artist of the Ingres
school.
black: kalo (kala in Punjabi)
white: parno (panar/parana in Dardic)
young: temo (tarun in Hindi)
walk: ga (Hindi ja)
sleep: sov (Hindi so-)
outside: avri (Hindi bahir)
In recent years a marked desire for union
has appeared among the Rom of different
countries; not for political or territorial
union, but for cultural union based on their
common origins and values. Although this
movement is still restricted to a circle of in¬
tellectuals, there are some indications that it
is growing.
The problem of the unification of the
Romani language has been discussed in
various Rom congresses held in Paris,
Rome, Geneva and Göttingen. For the mo¬
ment this remains a legitimate but scarcely
feasible aspiration; the unification of a
language cannot be decided in an office,
and it is not enough simply to discuss the
theoretical side of the question.
On the other hand, there is an increasing¬
ly widespread tendency to write in Romani,
a language which has hitherto been oral.
Not only are the words of Gypsy songs and
fables being transcribed, but also "private"
documents and even literary works which
have little to do with traditional folklore.
Periodicals are also being published and in
Yugoslavia a Romani grammar written in
Romani has been published. The study of
Romani grammar is thus no longer the ex¬
clusive privilege of non-Rom students.
Even though still confined to a handful
of dialects, the publication of literary works
in Romani and the propagation of the
language in written form may be a first step
towards its unification and may lead to a
deeper self-awareness among this people in
search of itself.
Today this movement is contributing to a
transformation of the traditional, not .
always positive, image, of the Gypsy
(whether he be called a Tsigane, a Gitan, a
Zigeuner, or a Cygan) with a view to his
becoming a full member of modern society,
strengthened by his culture and his capacity
to communicate in his own language.
GIULIO SORAVIA, of Italy, is associate pro¬
fessor of linguistics at the University of
Catania. He has written several works on the
theory of linguistics and now specializes in the
study of Gypsy languages. His works include
Vocabulario Sinto delle Venezie (The Sinto
Vocabulary of Venezia), 1981, and Gram-
matica del Dialetto dei Rom Xoraxane (Gram¬
mar of the Xoraxane Gypsies), 1983.
23
