FROM A LEXAN D R I A TO G I B R A L TAR



NORTH AFRICA'S
GREAT ROMAN ROAD
by Eugenia Equini Schneider
®
THE existence in Roman times of a
great coastal highway linking all the
African provinces facing the Medi¬
terranean, from Alexandria in Egypt tö the
Pillars of Hercules, is attested, not so much
by archaeological remains, as by two
famous documents dealing with ancient
highways: the Antonine Itinerary and the
Peutinger Table.
Both these documents date from the Late
Roman Empire, but they appear to reflect
historical facts of an earlier period. They
mention two East-West routes which large¬
ly followed different itineraries. The An¬
tonine Itinerary speaks of a route which
kept close to the coast most of the time,
although it swung inland at a number of
places which were recognized as being mar¬
shy or inaccessible. The itinerary mentioned
in the Peutinger Table generally runs
parallel to the coast but further inland than
the other. Apart from these documents,
milestone inscriptions found so far are a
valuable source of information about the
construction of the individual sections of
the main highway.
EUGENIA EQUINI SCHNEIDER, of Italy, is a
lecturer in the archaeology of the Roman Pro¬
vinces at the University of Rome.
There is no doubt that the great coastal
highway linking Alexandria and Tingis
(Tangiers) was originally mapped out in
such a way as to take account of the
topographical relief, and met certain
military and commercial needs as well as en¬
couraging the growth of urbanization. It
was still incomplete in the time of Tiberius,
but was very extensive at the end of the first
century AD. It probably acquired its final
form under the Emperors Trajan and
Hadrian.
In Roman times, several sections of the
highway followed routes previously taken
by the Phoenicians and the Greeks,
stretches of which were joined up or cor¬
rected as the Roman dominion was extend¬
ed or confirmed in each region. Indeed,
then as now, the northern coast of Africa
was marked by two places of major impor¬
tance: in the east the Nile delta on which the
great port of Alexandria was built in the
fourth century BC, and in the west the pro¬
montory of Bizerta, on which the Phoeni¬
cians established Carthage, which
dominated all trade in the western Mediter¬
ranean until its destruction by the Romans
in 146 BC.
In ancient times trade between Alexan¬
dria and Carthage, through Cyrenaica and
the region of the Carthaginian trading sta¬
tions (Sabratha, Oea-Tripolis, Leptis) must
have been quite considerable. The existence
of a sea-current flowing from east to west
which, according to some experts,
hampered the movement of ships coming
from Egypt, must have encouraged the
overland transport of goods, at least from
Alexandria to Cyrene.
Sources of information about the pre-
Roman road network are, however, very
fragmentary. The only trustworthy docu¬
ment which has come down to us is the so-
called Periplus of Scylax, dating from the
fourth century BC. It suggests that there
was at that time either a coastal maritime
itinerary divided into several short stages
from Egypt as far as Hesperides (Ben¬
ghazi), or a guide to longer overland routes
along the Cyrenaican and Syrtic coasts. The
latter were taken in 308-305 BC by Ophelia
and his Greek army when, as the ally of
Agathocles of Syracuse, he mounted an of¬
fensive against Carthage from Cyrene. But
the journey cannot have been an easy one,
because Diodorus of Sicily reports that
Wharf scene in the port of
Alexandria, photographed in
the second half of the 19th
century by Félix Bonfils.

"Ophelia's army advanced with great dif¬
ficulty in territory without water and in¬
fested by wild animals", and that a large
part of the army was decimated by the
privations suffered when rounding Syrtis
Major (the Gulf of Sidra) on the way to
Leptis. The Greek geographer Strabo tells
us that between 48 and 47 BC Cato of Utica
also crossed the Syrtis Major region in thir¬
ty days with 10,000 men, probably follow¬
ing a difficult coastal route.
The rebuilding of Carthage, undertaken
on the orders of Julius Caesar and com¬
pleted under Augustus, and of its port, to
which the products of North Africa soon
began to flow, especially wheat for the im¬
perial capital (one and half million
bushels enough to feed 600,000 people for
a year were delivered annually to Rome)
stimulated the revival of trade. It also con¬
tributed to the development of the great
coastal highway which ran across the Lib¬
yan desert from present-day Tunisia to
Sabratha, the most westerly city of
Tripolitania. The principal geographical
feature of the region is the jebel, a rocky
plateau which rises to 700 metres, just
behind the coast. It was in this region where
a Mediterranean climate and seasonal rains
contribute to the fertility of the soil, that the
great trading centres of Sabratha, Oea and
Leptis arose. They were focal points of Car¬
thage's maritime empire and natural
outlets, even in Roman times, for the com¬
mercial traffic which was conducted from
the Sudan and central Africa across the
Sahara to the Mediterranean. Trade in
ivory and in wild animals for the Roman
circus must have flourished as is indicated
by the marble statue of an elephant found
at Leptis Magna, and the figure of an
elephant (the emblem of the Sabratha mer¬
chants) in the mosaic in the Square of the
Corporations at Ostia, the port of ancient
Rome.
Forty miles from Sabratha, Oea-Tripolis
possessed a fine natural harbour, abundant
supplies of fresh water, and olive-groves in
the hinterland. The amount of oil produced
was such that Julius Caesar could demand
a tribute of a million measures to punish
the city for having supported the enemy.
Leptis Magna was the third city of Tri¬
polis, and undoubtedly the most important
of those on the Mediterranean littoral bet¬
ween Carthage and Alexandria. Leptis
possessed a small, natural river-port, form¬
ed by the estuary of the Lebda wadi and
sheltered from the Etesian winds by a pro-
8
Detail of the Peutinger Table, a
copy made in 1265 by a monk
of Colmar (Alsace) of an an¬
cient route map of the Roman
empire in the 3rd and 4th cen¬
turies. The copy was found at
Worms in 1494 and later came
into the hands of the German
humanist Konrad Peutinger
(1465-1547). The map consists
of 12 sheets ofparchment, the
elongated shape of which
(6.82 x 0.34 m) causes grave
deformations. Recognizable
at left is a "stretched"
representation of the island of
Crete, and below, almost at
centre, is the Nile delta. The
map is now in the Hofbibliotek
in Vienna.
Heads of a white woman anda
black woman are joined to
form a two-handled Greek
terracotta cantharus or drink¬
ing cup (late 6th century
BC, height 19.2 cm).
Photo © Museum of Fine Arts, Boston
montory. The port was certainly already
equipped and commercially active in the
first century AD, but probably not very
functional. Its final layout was due to the
Emperor Septimius Severus, who was a
native of Leptis. His plan included a break¬
water to facilitate the runoff of the torren¬
cial waters, powerful embankments made
of enormous blocks of stone to protect the
harbour on the sea side, and a series of
quays for mooring and unloading. A
lighthouse stood at the end of the
breakwater. Communications by land and
sea thus became increasingly efficient, and
large-scale interprovincial and interna¬
tional trade was henceforth organized on a
sound basis.
From Leptis, the great coastal highway
passed along the sandy coast east of the
town as far as the Altars of the Philaeni,
which marked the border between
Tripolitania and Cyrenaica. On this long
stretch between the promontory of Car¬
thage and that of Cyrenaica lies the depres¬
sion of Syrtis Major, much feared because
of its inhospitable coast and its reptile-
infested land. The inscription Dissio aqua
amara ("brackish water") in the Peutinger
Table shows that it was not always possible
to get fresh-water supplies at the various
"stationes" along the highway.
After passing through many towns, the
highway traversed Berenice (Benghazi),
Hadrianopolis (Driana), Tauchira (Tocra)
and Ptolemais (Tolmeita) before reaching
Cyrene which, with its port of Apollonia
(Marsa Susa), occupied a highly favourable
geographical position and formed a road
junction of strategic importance. During
Antiquity an extensive coastal strip of
Tripolitania was cultivated to a depth of at
least sixty kilometres from the coast, and
the plateau was covered by a dense network
of secondary roads linking the coastal cen¬
tres with the hinterland. A magnificent
caravanserai, dating from the second cen¬
tury BC and capable of accommodating
most of the port-bound commercial traffic,
was recently identified near the entrance to
the town. This proves that Cyrene was a
collection-point for all kinds of products
from the pre-desert hinterland and
neighbouring regions and destined for ex¬
port overseas.
From here the highway led towards
Egypt via Antipyrgos (now Tobruk). At
this stage the route was no longer marked
by milestones but by heaps of stones at in-

tervals of twenty miles (a day's journey)
where the stationes and fresh-water wells
were located. In those days the traveller
would first pass through Taposiris, on the
great bay of Sinus Pilinthinus (Marmarica),
the first Egyptian coastal town of any im¬
portance; then after a further day's journey
he would reach the outskirts of Alexandria.
"There is an island called Pharos in the sea
off the coast of Egypt. Here there is a bay
with good anchorage from which ships
head out to sea after taking on fresh
water". This is how Homer, in the Odyssey
describes the promontory on which the
great lighthouse of Alexandria was built
under Ptolemy II in the third century BC
"in honour of Jupiter the Saviour, for his
sailors". The great port of Alexandria, the
finest and best equipped of the ancient
world, rose on the west of the Nile delta. In
Roman times the city, exceptionally well
situated between the Mediterranean and the
Red Sea on the route to India, was a huge
emporium not only for foodstuffs (Roman
Egypt was the empire's granary) but also
for glass, linen, textiles of all qualities,
papyri, precious woods, ivory and precious
metals.
In 42 AD the Emperor Claudius officially
annexed Mauretania, a vast region of
mountains and desert comprising present-
day Morocco and the whole of coastal
Algeria. By restoring and widening a Car¬
thaginian trail and gradually extending it
westwards as far as Tingis and southwards
to Rabat, the Romans created a continuous
Roman ruins at Leptis
Magna (today Labdah)
on the Mediterranean
coast east of Tripoli.
The capital of the
ancient province of
Tripolitania, Leptis
Magna achieved great
prosperity in the 3rd
century. It was a centre
of trade with the
African hinterland and
a starting point for
caravan routes.
coastal highway stretching for 2,100 miles
from the Atlantic to the Nile. West of Car¬
thage the road system was very simple: it
followed the coastline as far as possible,
passing through and connecting the coastal
towns. From Chillu, on the coast, it con¬
tinued westwards through Mauretania to
Icosium (Algiers), Caesaria (Cherchel),
capital of the province of Caesarian
Mauretania, as far as Rusaddir (Melilla)
and Tingis the chief town of Tingitian
Mauretania. It then continued along the
Atlantic coast through Zilis (Asilah), Lixus
(Larache) and Salé (near Rabat). The
Romans imported from Mauretania the
famous cedarwood used for making fine
tables, as well as pearls, ivory, purple dye,
asphalt and copper.
Eugenia Equini Schneider
Detail of a marble
mosaic from Thysdrus
(today El Jem in
Tunisia). The whole
mosaic shows a
Dionysiac procession
in a rustic setting.
Shown here, the two
figures in the rear of the
procession: a drunken
Silenus outstretched
on the back of a
dromedary and a bac¬
chante (female reveller)
beside whom a panther
calmly pads. Bardo
Museum, Tunis. ^
»grew
