Unesco and the struggle
against illiteracy
DESPITE the huge effort that has
been made to advance educa¬
tion and despite the progress
achieved, the full exercise of the right
to education is still far from being at¬
tained worldwide. The most visible
sign of this, in terms of the number of
human beings it affects and the
number or countries it concerns, is
illiteracy.
In 1980, illiterates accounted for
60.3 per cent of the adult population in
Africa, 37.4 per cent in Asia and 20.2
per cent in Latin America. In spite of a
decrease in the world illiteracy rate,
which fell from 32.9 per cent in 1970
to 28.6 per cent in 1 980, the absolute
number of adult illiterates is still grow¬
ing because of the population increase.
There were 760 million illiterates in
1970, 824 million in 1980 and, if pre¬
sent trends continue, there will be 900
million illiterates towards the end of
the century.
At its twenty-first session, in
Belgrade in September-October 1980,
the General Conference of Unesco
recognized that the elimination of il¬
literacy had become a matter of the
greatest urgency, and deserved the
highest priority. At the same time, the
Conference stressed the importance of
acting simultaneously on two fronts to
secure the general introduction of
primary education, on the one hand
and to promote adult education, and
adult literacy in particular, on the
other.
This double strategy for the develop¬
ment and renewal of primary education
and the promotion of the elimination of
illiteracy will be one of Unesco's
priorities during the coming decade.
Unesco's Medium-Term Plan
(1984-1989) includes a Major Pro¬
gramme: "Education for All". This pro
gramme proposes a new approach,
designed to stem illiteracy at its source
by reducing considerably the number
of children not attending school, while
continuing to increase the literacy rate
among young people and adults. In
practical terms, this implies as mat¬
ters of priority the strengthening of
national research, planning and train¬
ing capacities, and the institution of
regional programmes of co-operation
to prepare the ground for the im¬
plementation of integrated school
enrolment and literacy training
strategies, the aim being to arrest or
even reverse, by the end of the period
covered by the Medium-Term Plan, the
current trend towards an increase in
absolute figures for illiteracy. As far as
Unesco is concerned, activities will be
directed towards four objectives:
A better understanding of the prob¬
lem of illiteracy with the aim of identi¬
fying illiterates more closely (in¬
dividuals and groups) and throwing
light on the reasons for illiteracy in
each particular context, its conse¬
quences for the population and possi¬
ble measures to eliminate it;
Assistance in the framing and im¬
plementation of national, regional and
international strategies for the promo¬
tion of general access to primary
education and for the eradication of il¬
literacy, special attention being paid to
rural areas, with stress on action in
favour of disadvantaged groups and of
girls and women in particular;
Strengthening of training and
retraining of various kinds of literacy
workers able both to teach children
and to run adult literacy programmes;
Promotion of the struggle against
relapse into illiteracy and of educa¬
tional activities to help young school-
leavers to develop further the
knowledge and skills acquired in
school or through literacy courses, and
to impart know-how which will enable
these young people to find employ¬
ment, particularly in the agricultural
and craft sectors.
The Organization has already in¬
itiated training programmes for na¬
tional literacy personnel and
specialists; promoted regional con¬
ferences and regional co-ordination in
the different continents; organized
meetings and seminars; facilitated the
dissemination and exchange of ideas,
information and experience; and en¬
sured the publication and distribution
of technical documents and promo¬
tional materials. Steadily increasing
encouragement and support for na¬
tional strategies are accompanied by
efforts to arouse and mobilize the inter¬
national community, on behalf of the
least-favoured countries in particular.
At the same time, while encouraging
the policies and measures which will
enable the developing countries to
render their own efforts to eliminate il¬
literacy more effective, the Organiza¬
tion also stimulates direct co-operation
between countries with common
problems and interests. Multi¬
dimensional, mutual assistance of this
kind in the field of education is beginn¬
ing to bear fruit, through "horizontal"
co-operation such as that embodied in
the Major Project on Education in Latin
America and the Caribbean, and the
Regional Programme for the Eradica¬
tion of Illiteracy in Africa.
It cannot be over-stressed that ,
Unesco's contribution has been in the
past and continues to be motivated by
the concern to activate and materialize
national initiatives, and to encourage
solutions which take account of na¬
tional realities and respond to specific
national problems.
33
