War, Hunger, Poverty
by Luis Echeverría
WE now know, in every detail, the
links in the chain which set the
nuclear race in motion. We
know the exact moment when the first chain
reaction was triggered off in Chicago, in the
apparatus designed by the Italian physicist
Fermi. His theoretical venture, which some
members of the scientific élite of his time
believed to be unfeasible, was celebrated by
a small group of people, including the
physicist Eugene Wigner, who was
noteworthy for having brought with him a
bottle of Chianti to toast the great event. A
coded cable containing secret proof of the
experiment's success was sent from the
laboratory in Chicago to the President of
Harvard University.
Four years later, Fermi's experiment had
led to the first two atom bombsthose
dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Some weeks before, President Truman had
received another historic and awesome
cable. It had announced that the first
nuclear detonation had been a success, and
read: "Babies satisfactorily born". The
bombs dropped in August 1945, the
radioactive fallout from which has since
LUIS ECHEVERRÍA was President of Mex¬
ico from 1970 to 1976. Jurist, journalist, and
a former professor of political science at the
National Autonomous University of Mexico,
he is Director-General of the Centre for Third
World Economic and Social Studies, Mexico
City. He has also served as his country's am¬
bassador with Unesco and in Australia.
become fixed in the human memory, were
proof that science had betrayed its noble
calling as mediator between mankind and
development and progress, and had also
become part of the "chain economy" of
destruction.
We now know, in every detail, every link
in the theory of nuclear extermination,
which bears no comparison to anything
man has ever before devised to dominate
other men and entire peoples, to the extent
that the ever-increasing atomic power
which the world's leading arms-producing
nations have built up over the years has
come to furnish incontrovertible proof of
the irrationality of the present-day world.
We now know all too well that a nuclear
war cannot be won and that such a war can¬
not be planned or conducted in terms of a
conventional struggle between opposing
military forces for, regardless of ideological
considerations, the adversaries would be
united in the same nuclear catastrophe,
with radioactive fallout forming their com¬
mon heritage.
Paradoxically, the world's most power¬
ful leaders, to whom it would fall to press
the button setting off atomic war or nuclear
retaliation, have no hesitation in proclaim¬
ing that fact from the most important plat¬
forms in their own countries and in the
United Nations. Yet rearmament con¬
tinues, and the build-up of nuclear
warheads is assuming proportions that bear
scarcely any relation to the weapons
In 1983 alone, 15 million young children
died in the developing world, in large part
as a consequence of hunger and malnutri¬
tion. It is as if the combined under-five
populations of the United Kingdom,
France, Italy, Spain and the Federal
Republic ofGermany had been wiped out in
a year. Right, this drawing by a young
French schoolgirl symbolizes the need for
international solidarity ifsuch tragedies are
to be prevented.
"Every minute, throughout the world,
more than 1.3 million dollars are spent for
military purposes. During that same
minute, 30 children die in the poor coun¬
tries, many of them as a result of hunger
and malnutrition. "
Below, Hiroshima after the atomic explo¬
sion of August 6, 1945.
¿*V i V,
=l4
è
fllíc¿!
'* ' s
©
©
^>>>2S£%

fl^^ ^^4-
vveri y JnLun
*v
¡jc jL» X^^'c 1 ri
responsible for the tragic destruction of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Those two bombs now belong to the
prehistory of nuclear extermination. The
Nagasaki bomb, with its power equivalent
to 20,000 tons of TNT, was a mere radio¬
active spark compared with present-day 10
or 15 or 50-megaton warheads. Every
megaton corresponds to one million tons of
conventional explosiveas measured by
the traditional TNT yardstickand the
major powers have apparently stockpiled
more than 50,000 such warheads. No
greater or more impressive proof can be
given of human blindness.
We now know, in every detail, the risks
entailed, whether in tactical combat or in a
more wide-ranging strategic conflict, in
resorting to a pattern of terror which, once
set in motion, would leave no place of
refuge unspared.
All the peoples and nations of the Earth
would suffer from the consequences of
nuclear war in one way or another, either
directly or indirectly. In view of its nature,
a war of this type could not be confined to
the geographical theatres projected by
military planners. Unlike the bomb drop¬
ped on Hiroshima, which was the final
pressure exerted on an already defeated na¬
tion, nuclear war in this day and age would
represent an unbroken leap from a local
conflict to a worldwide struggle by dint of
the very dialectic of the arms build-up and
of the widespread dissemination of strategic
weapons on the high seas, on land and in
the air. Nobody can predict or foresee how
recourse to nuclear terror will move from
the tactical phase to the strategic phase, or
can prevent this from happening.
We now know, in every detail, all the
scientific evidence that has been adduced in
predicting the consequences of a war of this
33

The outcome would be devastating
and, at the same time, there is every
likelihood of changes occurring in climate,
and biological structure and of an ensuing
breakdown in the ecological system which,
as a result of the destructive inroads being
made by technology, is already becoming
an urgent problem for all mankind. In
short, not only would it be a war without
victors or vanquished; it would be a war of
progressive self-destruction that would give
rise to all kinds of Kafkaesque mutations
and metamorphoses. This list of conse¬
quences does not reflect any desire to exag¬
gerate. Researchers at the Sloan-Kettering
Institute for Cancer Research, New York
City, put the matter in a nutshell when they
acknowledge that nuclear war would be
suicidal not only for an enemy attacked by
nuclear weapons but for the very nation
which used such weapons, even if there
were no retaliation. Such is the level of
precision that has been reached in demysti¬
fying nuclear war as an ideological instru¬
ment of power politics.
The world spends more than $650,000
million a year on rearmament. This sum is
admittedly huge, but the figures do not tell
the whole story. What is more serious is that
a high and constantly increasing percentage
of the sums devoted to research and
development are being earmarked for the
construction of new rockets. The search for
the ultimate weapon has already given rise,
in theory at least, and this is by no means in¬
conceivable or impossible, to talk of star
wars, of wars in space. The ideology of
power has never before illustrated the
degree of aberration and irrationality ex¬
isting at its very core.
All this highlights one major factor,
namely that disarmament cannot be en¬
visaged me/ely in terms of the redistribu¬
tion of the amounts spent on rearmament
and of their automatic allocation to the
construction of housing or infant schools.
This "Father Christmas" view of things has
had a very negative effect on the debate,
primarily because it is well known that rear¬
mament is instrumental in supporting a
large part of industry and that science and
technology are therefore very much involv¬
ed in the development and expansion of the
economic model of arms production. Disar¬
mament should be regarded in its own right
as a revolutionary force aimed at liberating
science itself.
Disarmament and the liberation of
science have the same underlying
significance, above all because it is essen¬
tial, at the present time, for the arms build¬
up the juridico-political expression of
power politicsto be superseded by a
development model that would make it im¬
possible, as if it were historically inevitable,
for hunger and the wastage of the material
and scientific resources so necessary to life
to exist side by side.
The liberation of science from rearma¬
ment plans would mean a radical,
epistemological break with the outmoded
definition of domination. If it were to come
about, mankind would not only be provid¬
ed with the material resources it needs but
also with an objective system for laying
down a new order of priorities and for gain¬
ing an insight into the main principles in¬
volved in establishing the most concrete
forms of human solidarity. Hunger is an
everyday fact of life for hundreds of
millions of people who will never be able to
perform their social function or historical
role to the full.
The praxis of disarmament accordingly
emerges as the creative political develop¬
ment of the human species towards a new
economic order. By contrast» the im¬
perialistic expansion of the major economic
powers has hitherto relied on the logic of
the arms race because it was through this, in
the manner of all justificatory ideologies,
that it brought science and industry under
its hegemonistic control. This is why the
highly "developed" economies have tended
to combine the optimization of gain and the
will to dominate with the logic of
rearmament.
Hence, peace does not consist in
redistributing the sums devoted to warlike
ends but in dismantling a system which,
over the centuries, has founded its
historical reproduction on force and
supremacy. Peace, therefore, is the deter¬
mination to link the praxis of disarmament
with the praxis of a new form of develop¬
ment and not merely a swing in government
budgets from one extreme to the other. In
short, peace has to be visualized as a vast
process of human emancipation primarily
affecting science and technology. In other
words, disarmament must be seen as the
liberation of the accumulated stock of
knowledge for the service of the liberation
of mankind by mankind and, consequently,
of its liberation from its greatest common
enemy: hunger and poverty.
Luis Echeverría
