t
9 * +
&
THE words "Tamil culture" im¬
mediately evoke the image of the
towering gopuram (entrance
gateways) of the Hindu temple, at once a
commanding grandeur and solemnity; of a
beautiful dancing girl, decked out in all her
finery, graceful and lovely; to the literary
minded, of the squatting sage Tiruvalluvar
with his palm-leaf and stylus; to the
gastronomically inclined, of idli (a rice and
lentil batter) and sambar (lentils, vegetable
and tamarind).
When we attempt to understand what
constitutes Tamil culture in terms of an
average man's life, particularly in the con¬
text of the present day, we encounter
elements which cannot be isolated and
defined, yet are deep rooted in a society
which has always been instinctively aware
of its strengths and weaknesses.
Over the centuries Tamils have spread
outside their territory and in this process
have planted signs of their presence many
of which can be found even today. The
Tamil community thus represents a popula¬
tion outside Tamil Nadu also. In their own
land Tamils have been subject to significant
foreign influences and, today, the admix¬
ture of these influences is so complex that it
is difficult to talk about "typical" or
"native" Tamil culture. Today's fashions,
food habits, life-styles, values are all pro¬
ducts of this long history of interaction.
For the first time in the known history of
two thousand years the land of the Tamils
has definite boundaries and this has
brought about a greater cohesion among
Tamils. Particularly since Independence
and the creation of States based on
linguistic regions, Tamils have had a land
with which to identify their language and
culture. With the introduction of Tamil as
a medium of education at all levels, an at¬
tempt has been made to update the
language after it lay submerged and sub¬
jugated for nearly three hundred years
under the impact of the English language.
The recent establishment of a university
at Thanjavur Tamil University crystall¬
izes the aspirations of their society. The ob¬
jective of this university is to strengthen the
various applications of the language in a
modern context and to enquire systema¬
tically into its past so that a relationship can
be established between tradition and
modern life.
m 4
The emotional togetherness that has
come about has been aided by the planned
economic activities in the State. The most
striking result of the economic programmes
is the high degree of mobility seen among
the people. Tamil Nadu is among the very
few States in India in which almost every
village is connected by road or rail. This
^
S. RAMAKRISHNAN is a qualified econo¬
mist and social scientist who began his career
in marketing. A few years ago he founded a
publishing company to promote the dissemi¬
nation of new, high quality Tamil literature. He
is closely associated with the Kafadataba
literary movement.

The living culture
of the Tamils
by S. Ramakrishnan
mobility has affected the personal,
economic and social life of average Tamils.
The facility of communication has began to
narrow down regional differences in life
styles.
A mobile population is an informed
population. Tamil Nadu is one of the States
in the country with a high rate of literacy.
It must be remembered that one of the first
three universities to be established during
the colonial era (1857) was at Madras, the
present capital of Tamil Nadu. Educational
facilities are growing so rapidly that bet¬
ween 1979 and 1981 the number of boys at
higher secondary schools increased by 45. 1
per cent and that of girls by 66.5 per cent.
Education is no longer confined to tradi¬
tional general education. It has diversified
and new branches of training are constantly
evolving. While the number of universities
offering general education has risen,
separate universities for technical subjects
have also been established. Tamil Nadu
now has one Agricultural University, one
engineering and technological University,
as well as a National Institute of
Technology. Significantly too, women are
entering professional colleges in increasing
numbers.
In Tamil Nadu, the reading habit is
widespread. Every week 1.73 million copies
of eight popular magazines are sold and
read by approximately 8.5 million people.
In one segment of the reading public the
urban Tamils42 per cent of those above
fifteen years of age read a daily newspaper
and 46 per cent read a weekly publication.
The second most widely read weekly in In¬
dia is a Tamil weekly.
These magazines shape public opinion on
all vital issues, but their main motive is
entertainment. They cater for popular
tastes; the three most common themes are
cinema, religion and politics almost in
that order of importance. Cinema gossip
and news dominate.
There are no large-circulation magazines
catering for specialist tastes and preferences
and serious writers have to find another
forum in the small-circulation magazines.
A far more influential medium in Tamil
is the cinema (see box page 1 1). More than
a sixth of the total number of permanent
theatres in India are in Tamil Nadu. This
gives some indication both of the extent of
rural electrification (99 per cent of all
towns, villages and hamlets have been elec¬
trified) and of the penetration of the cinema
into rural areas.
The popularity of the cinema is maintain¬
ed and increased by the popular magazines.
Similarly the commercial channel of the
government-controlled radio is dominated
by film music and programmes on films.
In Tamil Nadu the demands of the film
world gave birth to a "poster-culture".
When talkies were introduced, the popula-
MILESTONES
IN TAMIL HISTORY
\
INDIA L^V 1 BAY
ANDHRA /
PRADESH /
\tamil nadu^ l*s
lu J A.Í *4
\jm y^~< > "^
vH Hf
\^Ft\ ¿r . ~~i i H
W{\ ^T ^ r- . i~-'VÍ J »
\S JK Ba^galor
' jy1 fy* "~v- T
A^j \^¿/ Kanchipuram» J@9S
"""- /"* v. 'n.y Mahabalipuràrn~2Hj
\
KARNA>AKA j S^ /
V
x*> ^J y jTSbndicherry
-i-v r / Salem í
V. Í--VJ2.637 ml I s¿z^L^^B
I r Coimbatore S^_auv_ery ^^^ BB
Ä KERALA ^ Ti,uchi,apalli^^^^^JN,ga(jamilm
\ I N N«
\ * )~J^KP
\ ^S*\ 1
A .' /> ^~^< Madurai ^bH _^\
l\ Vi ^-v / ^CO^
\\ in \^ M T^yvJ
1 V *""*? ^s^^H v^
\ f ^Xl
^» Tuticorinl
V. iPalayankottai ^^H I
i^feu Tnujndrum SRI
\C s*' K LANKA
INDIAN OCCAN 1
1	 	 '	 ' t 1H
JHE TAMIL LANGUAGE is the official language of the State of
TAMIL NADU (population over 48 million) in southeast India and
is also spoken by some 4 million people living in Sri Lanka, Burma,
Malaysia, Indonesia, as well as parts of east and south Africa and islands in
the Indian Ocean, the South Pacific and the Caribbean. There is a scholarly
literature in Tamil dating back to the early centuries of the Christian era. The
language is o/DRAVIDIAN origin. The DRAVIDIANS were the founders
ofone of the world's most ancient civilizations, which already existed in India
sometime before 1000 BC when the ARYANS invaded the sub-continent
from the north. The Aryans, who spoke the SANSKRIT language, pushed the
Dravldians down into south India. Today 8 of the languages ofnorthern and
western India (including Hindi) are of Sanskrit origin, but Sanskrit itself is
only spoken by Hindu Brahman priests in temple worship and by scholars.
In southern India, 4 languages of Dravidian origin are spoken today. Tamil
is the oldest of these.
THE HISTORY OF TAMIL NADU begins with the 3 kingdoms, CHERA,
CHOLA and PANDYA, which are referred to in documents of the 3rd cen¬
tury BC. Some of the kings of these dynasties are mentioned in SANGAM
LITERATURE (see article page 32), and the age between the 3rd century BC
and the 2nd century AD is called the SANGAM AGE. At the beginning of
the 4th century AD the PALLAVAS established their rule with Kanchipuram
as their capital. Their dynasty, which ruled continuously for over 500 years,
left a permanent impact on the history of Tamil Nadu, which was during this
period virtually controlled by the PALLAVAS in the north and the PAN-
DYAS in the south.
In the middle of the 9th century a CHOLA ruler established what was to
become one of India's most outstanding empires on account of its ad¬
ministrative achievements (irrigation, village development) and its contribu¬
tions to art and literature. THE AGE OF THE CHOLAS is considered the
golden age of Tamil history.
Towards the end of the 13th century the Cholas were overthrown by the
LATER PANDYAS who ruledfor about a century and were followed by the
VIJAYANAGARA DYNASTY, whose greatest ruler was Krishnadeva Raya
(1509-1529), and the NAYAKS of Madurai and Tanjore. THE COLONIAL
AGE opened in the' 17th century. In 1639 the British East India Company
opened a trading post at the fishing village of Madraspatnam, today
MADRAS, the capital of Tamil Nadu. In 1947, India achieved IN¬
DEPENDENCE. The overwhelming majority of the population of Tamil
Nadu is HINDU, with active CHRISTIAN and MUSLIM minorities.

<
Cigarettes, betel leaves, fruit and soft drinks are the principal wares of this typical village shop near Madurai.
tion was largely illiterate and magazines
were only just beginning to appear. Posters
were the only major medium to announce
new films. Now poster-oriented publicity
has spread to other areas of public life and
today one finds the walls of Tamil Nadu
plastered with posters, with those for the
cinema still the largest and most colourful.
The high rate of literacy and the degree of
worker mobility have contributed to the
process of industrialization in Tamil Nadu.
As a result of a planned economic pro¬
gramme a wide range of industrial products
6
are manufactured in Tamil Nadu creating
an incredible range of industrial and con¬
sumer products and large-scale cement, fer¬
tilizer, refining and automobile industries.
The latest addition is the construction of an
atomic power plant to meet the energy
needs of a growing society.
Textile and leather industries have tradi¬
tionally been strong in Tamil Nadu. Two
major ports cater for the needs of industry
and a well-organized transport system
keeps people and goods on the move. In
order to create local employment and to
prevent large scale migration to cities,
dispersal of industry is encouraged by a well
thought out system of incentives. A big
chain of industrial estates for medium and
small-scale industries in the non-traditional
areas has been established in an attempt to
minimize regional imbalances. Thus both in
technology and end-products Tamil Nadu
has revealed pronounced adaptability to
change.
Industrialization has brought about
dramatic change in peoples' life styles and
mode of working. Farm equipment, fer-

Above, street scene in Madras
(Chennai to Tamil-speakers),
capital of Tamil Nadu and the
fourth largest city in India: in the
background, the imposing towers
of Madras University (founded in
1857). With its advanced centres
of research in plant pathology,
physics, biophysics and Indian
philosophy, Madras University is
the hub of a rapidly expanding
educational system. Economic ac¬
tivity is aided by an effective
transport system and high popula¬
tion mobility. Tamil Nadu is one of
the very few States in India in
which almost every village has a
road or rail link. Some 6,000 local
and express buses, operated by
both government and private
transport agencies, cover some
1.27 million kilometres every day.
ranging from pressure cookers to grinders
have replaced traditional modes of cook¬
ing, offering new leisure opportunities to
the housewife in a family structure which
has changed much.
Industrialization brings in its wake ur¬
banization. Tamil Nadu has the second
highest urban population in India. The
migration of rural populations to the town
and the transformation of rural areas into
new industrial, urban areas continue
unabated. This has brought about enor¬
mous pressure on space in the urban areas.
Housing is becoming more and more dif¬
ficult; open spaces are filled with concrete
blocks; slums are growing; sanitary condi¬
tions crumble under the impact; water
facilities are becoming inadequate; children
have less space to play. Traditional house
architecture is disappearing and today,
flats, with their cell-like rooms and limited
moving space are the reality. Although the
Government is making efforts to alleviate
the problem through housing and slum
clearance programmes, the requirements
are fast outstripping the efforts.
These changed conditions have resulted
in a need to adapt traditional modes to the
new constraints. Women are more free and
have better opportunities to get education
and jobs. However, they continue to be
bound by traditional tasks and modes of
behaviour such as looking after the home
and maintaining a distance from men. Even
dividuals' chart (see photo story page 8).
Religion continues to be a dominant
force in the lives of Tamils. In fact, one
observes a more pronounced increase in the
interest in religion and occult beliefs. At a
time when the average man's life is deter¬
mined by economic motives and security,
this may be the new kind of insurance he
seeks against economic and physical
insecurity.
Observance of religious ceremonies is
marked among the newly educated,
employed population both men and
women. The spread of electronics is helping
religious activity; cassettes, discs and
microphones have invaded places of wor¬
ship. Educated middle-class housewives
organize bhajan (worship through song)
groups in towns and it is not an uncommon
sight to see women commuters on their way
to work absorbed in the reading of simple
stotras (poems in praise of deities). No im¬
portant function, domestic or business is
organized without consulting the almanach
and fixing an auspicious hour. Magazines
pour out information on the movements of
astral bodies and their effect on the average
Tamil's life.
Was the traditional culture of the Tamils
merely the culture of a particular class?
Whether in literature, music or philosophy,
was the thinking that of the dominant
group? It is said that Sangam literature does
not mention caste differences, but the ma¬
jority of people can have had little access to
Tamils are avid readers of newspapers and magazines. Some one and
three-quarter million copies of eight popular magazines are sold each
week and among urban Tamil adults 42 per cent regularly read a daily
newspaper and 46 per cent a weekly magazine.
tilizers and micro-nutrients have altered the
agricultural scene. Increasing numbers of
farmers are installing motor-pumps to draw
water, dispensing with traditional methods
and, in the process, sweeping away into
disuse and oblivion their charming and
evocative work songs.
The electronics industry with its tran¬
sistors, stereos and television sets has
changed the rural landscape, offering new
forms of entertainment and providing
employment to increasing numbers of
school-leaving girls. Domestic appliances
in Madras city, there are still State Govern¬
ment buses meant exclusively to carry
women during peak hours.
Marriage as an institution is a good ex¬
ample of how tradition and modernity can
co-exist or be a source of friction. Marriage
is an important event in the life of an in¬
dividual in any society, but in Tamil Nadu
it reveals a great deal about Tamil society's
attitude to the man-woman relationship
and its place in society. Most marriages are
still arranged by the parents and determined
by the astral bodies governing the in-
the cultivated arts and the conceptual levels
of religion.
Independence brought a greater sense of
social equality and an opportunity for the
majority to express itself. With rapid
economic and technological progress and
the acceptance of values dictated by urban
societies, there is a danger that indigenous
culture may be gradually eroded. It is essen¬
tial that popular forms of expression and
ways of life do not disappear and that the
true essence of Tamil culture shall survive.
S. Ramakrishnan

I ^2*W
^BÀ Kl«î
* 1
&*k «*
Jf i l»T*
ME i
" "i^
Ji
^Jni
@
Mass weddings are a comparatively recent phenomenon and are part of an attempt to
reduce the heavy cost of getting married. Above, a mass wedding in Madras begins
with music played on the nagasvaram, a metre-long wood-wind instrument with a dou¬
ble reed fitted in the mouthpiece. No festival or other auspicious occasion is complete
without the music of the nagasvaram, whose powerful tone can carry as far as two or
three kilometres. Many nagasvaram players come from families that have specialized
in the instrument for generations.
GETTING MARRIED
In Tamil Nadu most marriages are still
arranged by parents and intercaste mar¬
riages, although no longer rare, are still the
exception rather than the rule. Child mar¬
riage is now a thing of the past.
Economic status and caste are crucial
factors in the process of selecting a mar¬
riage partner. Marriage is an expensive
business and the bride's family usually has
to meet all the expenses as well as providing
a dowry. To parents with several daughters
this financial burden is a source of constant
worry.
Paradoxically, the education of women
has added to the problem. In many castes
an educated girl can only marry a man with
an equal or better education, but the better
educated the bridegroom is the higher the
dowry the bride has to bring. For many
middle-class families education and
employment for women has meant that
woman have to earn their own dowries! In
earlier days the dowry consisted ofcash and
jewellery, but today it may include such
modern items as scooters, refrigerators,
television sets and pressure cookers.
In the past weddings were big social
events spread over five days. Today the
ceremony is completed in a little over one
day. Weddings are no longer celebrated at
home but are performed in rented halls.
Government legislation on civil marriage
has made things easier for those who want
to keep things simple and laws have been
passed to facilitate intercaste marriages.
For those who, either from conviction or
for the sake of convenience, want to
dispense with ceremonies the Government
has introduced a Self-Respect Marriage Act
which validates marriages solemnized in
non-traditional fashion.
8
In the Hindu religion the wedding
ceremony is the most important of the sam-
skaras (sacraments). The date is arranged in
accordance with careful astrological
calculations. At one point in the ceremony
mT '^m
^^t^m&^ä
«>1Bk ^S^Lv '
ï !Uil
HP
the bridegroom takes his bride by the hand
and leads her round a sacrificial fire to
solemnize their new and irrevocable union.
Finally the newly-weds are taken in proces¬
sion to their new home. It is customary for
a married couple to renew their vows at a
second ceremony held when the bridegroom
reaches the age of sixty.
S. Ramakrishnan
It is customary for married couples
to renew their wedding vows at a
ceremony held on the husband's
sixtieth birthday. Offerings are
made round a sacrificial fire and
water from consecrated pitchers
is poured through a sieve and
sprinkled over the couple. The wife
traditionally receives a second tali,
or wedding jewel.
Seated on her father's lap, a young
bride waits for the mangalyam (the
sacred thread on which is
suspended the tali, or wedding
jewel) to be fastened around her
neck. This is a crucial moment in
the wedding ceremony when the
bride passes from the control of
her parents and comes under the
protection of her husband.

A BOOMING
FILM INDUSTRY
Photo © Raghavendra Rao, Madras
Poster for a film entitled "Skanda's Pardon" (Skanda, also
known as Murugan, Is the son of Siva and the Hindu god of
war). In the foreground, a young lottery ticket vendor.
The cinema is perhaps the most powerful, and certainly the most
popular, of the media in Tamil Nadu. Film stars wield great
influence over the public. Fan clubs (strangely enough only for
male actors, notfor actresses) are common, each with a large mem¬
bership. Club members promote their favourite stars and try to
keep them in the spotlight ofpublic attention. They publicize the
release of new films in which their idols appear, celebrate their
birthdays and garland their cut-out portraits and banner advertise¬
ments outside cinemas.
Films have been produced in Tamil Nadu for over seventy years
and thefilm industry is now huge (487films released in 1982 alone)
with a sophisticated production and distribution network and
employing a large workforce. As technology has improved, black
and white films have become rare (only two black and white films
released in 1982) with the public demanding colour films.
The content of films is largely shaped by popular tastes.
Although for a while, with the advent of the talkies, films became
a powerful toolfor thepropagation of the nationalist message and,
later, the ideals of the "self-respect" movement, no such tendency
is now discernible. Today almost every film has love as its main
theme. There has been a shift away from studio-oriented produc¬
tion and towards location filming in rural surroundings, but the
ingredients have remained the same boy meets girl, violence and,
inserted willy-nilly into the fabric of every production, the theme
of "honour". The beauty of the landscape is emphasized, lovers
express their emotions in dance and song and fighting scenes are
scattered throughout and usually provide the climax.
S. Ramakrishnan
11
