AFRICA
The hunger belt
IN the 1970s, sub-Saharan Africa had
the highest rate of population growth
of any area in the world; furthermore,
the rate of increase is still accelerating,
whereas in all other developing regions it is
tending to slow down. Food production, on
the other hand, is increasing more slowly
than in other tropical and sub-tropical
areas.
As a result, Africa is the only region that
is currently losing the race to keep food pro¬
duction ahead of population. The figures
clearly bring out the drop in per capita pro¬
duction, but they also show that the results
achieved during the 1970s were inadequate
only in relation to the growing numbers of
people to be fed. In terms of total produc¬
tion, the increase was greater than in the
developed countries.
The attention of the international com¬
munity is being increasingly directed
toward the "African food problem". In
fact, a series of separate problems, rather
than a single pattern of difficulties,
underlies the disappointing performance of
agriculture in tropical Africa. The situation
varies widely by crop, by country and by
agro-ecological zone.
In the production of staple food crops,
the record since 1969-71 contains more
failures than successes. Four of the largest
producers of millet south of the Sahara saw
their output drop in absolute terms, as did
five of the largest sorghum producers, four
of the largest rice producers and six of the
largest maize producers. In relatively few
cases did production growth exceed the in¬
crease in population. Only in cassava was
there no decline in production, although
only four of the large producers managed to
keep output ahead of population during the
1970s.
In some cases, declining production can
be attributed to war or political instability.
But many other factors have also been at
work: the inherent difficulties of farming
on fragile soils subjected to violent but ir¬
regular rainfall; lack of economic incen-
This text is taken from World Food Report
1983, one of a series of annual briefings on
the world food and agricultural situation
prepared by the FAO.
20
tives; the migration of rural people
(especially the young) to the cities.
Of forty-one sub-Saharan countries with
a significant agricultural sector, only five
(Cameroon, Central African Republic, the
Ivory Coast, Rwanda and the Sudan) have
kept food production consistently ahead of
population growth in recent years. At the
other end of the scale, countries in which
food production per person dropped by
more than 20 per cent between the start of
the 1970s and 1982 include Angola, Gam¬
bia, Ghana, Mauritania, Mozambique,
Senegal and Somalia.
The African food-deficit countries have
made up their shortfalls by imports, par¬
ticularly of cereals, and among cereals
mainly of wheat. Urban and to a lesser ex¬
tent rural populations have developed a
taste for bread made from wheat flour,
which offers considerable advantages over
traditional foods in terms of convenience,
and also has higher prestige. Yet wheat can¬
not be grown in the temperature regimes
prevailing in most of Africa outside the
eastern highlands. An escape from this
"wheat trap" is being sought through
technology for the processing of local
crops, including cassava and traditional
cereals. It is hoped that wheat flour can be
at least partially substituted by local pro¬
ducts in ways that will prove acceptable to
townspeople. Rice, on the other hand, is
well suited to tropical environments;
however, production has been rising more
slowly than demand, and imports have been
soaring.
Cereal imports into sub-Saharan Africa
are still below the average for developing
countries in per capita terms. But they have
been growing fast, doubling every seven
years approximately. And they are already
large in relation to the ability of low-income
countries to finance food imports. In 1981,
the region imported over 12 million tons of
cereals, at a cost of about $2.5 billion. This
absorbed over 27 per cent of the total
receipts of all sub-Saharan developing
countries from the export of agricultural,
forestry and fishery products the main
source of foreign exchange apart from oil
and mineral exports. Imports provided
more than a fifth of total cereal supplies.
If the food situation in sub-Saharan
Africa was difficult in 1982, it begins to
look really alarming when recent trends are
projected into the future. World Bank pro¬
jections show the population of the
developing countries south of- the Sahara as
quadrupling between 1980 and 2020. By the
latter year, the population of Nigeria could
be about 340 million, Zaire some 95 million
and Kenya approximately 80 million. On
the basis of food production trends in the
1970s, sub-Saharan Africa would be able to
feed from domestic sources little more than
half of its population. The food deficit in
the year 2020 would correspond to the en¬
tire present-day agricultural production of
India.
Even over the shorter term the picture
looks grim. Few countries can continue to
cover mounting food deficits with cor¬
responding increases in cereal imports. In¬
deed, the general economic situation is
forcing countries to cut back on food im¬
ports, rather than step them up. Food sup¬
plies per person will inevitably fall if deficits
cannot be made up by imports or by food
aid. Nutrition levels are, therefore, likely to
come under increasing pressure, and the
danger of worsening malnutrition on a wide
scale should by no means be under¬
estimated.
Nevertheless, there are certain plus-
factors which can justify a measure of op¬
timism. Foremost among these are the
underestimated versatility and skills of the
African farmer. His readiness to innovate is
clear from the fact that many of the food
and export crops most widely grown have
been introduced from outside Africa in
modern times. Furthermore, traditional
cropping systems are frequently elaborate
andwithin their limitsefficient. The
difficulty is that they were developed over
many generations to feed an approximately
stable population, and do not lend
themselves to sustained increases in produc¬
tivity. Indeed, no fully satisfactory ap¬
proach has yet been found for continuous
and intensive cropping under the agro-
ecological conditions that prevail in much
(though not all) of tropical Africa. There is
a technological gap, particularly with
regard to soil management and labour pro¬
ductivity, which must be filled before the
African farmer can cope with the food
needs of the continent.
Technology, however, is not all.
Agriculture can prosper only in a
favourable policy environment. At the time

7M*i' -v*- "/.^S8.
Centuries of grinding sorghum have left
their moulds in the rocks of Lafon,
southern Sudan. The Sudan is one of the
few countries ofsub-Saharan Africa which
have kept food production ahead of
population growth in recent years.
of their independence, many African coun¬
tries appear to have seriously under¬
estimated both the importance and the
difficulties of the agricultural sector. As a
result, domestic food production has
seldom been given the priority it needed.
In a broader context, a bias against
agriculture generally, and food production
in particular, has become built into the
socio-economic structure of many African
States, and affects such fundamental issues
as exchange-rate and taxation policies,
relative price levels, and priorities for the
development of infrastructure. It is
reflected also in the relatively low prestige
attached to work in the farm sector. If food
production is to find a new vitality, many
countries will have to alter profoundly the
attitude toward agriculture held not only by
planners and politicians but also by the
population as a whole.
The international community, for its
part, must find new ways of helping Africa
to help itself. Investment and technical
assistance are vitally needed, but a
multiplicity of small projects, each with its
own administrative requirements, can place
disproportionate demands upon govern¬
ment services which are desperately short of
trained people. Ways must be found of
helping governments to redress the balance
of economic power in favour of food pro¬
ducers, without precipitating a revolution
in the cities. And it must be recognized that,
if the African food crisis has been develop¬
ing for twenty years, it may well take just as
long to resolve.
The gravity of the situation has been fully
recognized within Africa, for instance in
the Lagos Plan of Action adopted in April
1 980 by the members of the Organization of
African Unity. A framework for action
within Africa and by the international com¬
munity is contained in FAO's Regional
Food Plan for Africa. Many studies have
been made by other organizations, notably
the World Bank, and there is no shortage of
analysis and prescription. However, there is
as yet no clear evidence that the tide has
started to turn. Africa south of the Sahara
remains the world's principal food-problem
area.
21
