ÎTJiK
4**«?*
^4 'Plov' is as good as a feast
by Boris V. Andrianov
PLOV, the national dish of Uzbe¬
kistan, is relished not only by
the Uzbeks but by the peoples of
many other regions of the Soviet
Union. Fragrant, hot, ready to melt in
the mouth, the rice is cooked with car¬
rots, onions, and garlic, and served ¡n
white mountains on a huge platter with
morsels of mutton or beef. Among the
Uzbeks, the Kara-Kalpaks, the Tajiks
and other peoples of central Asia, it is
the favourite dish for high days and
holidays.
Rice cultivation came to central Asia
from more southerly Asian countries
where irrigation and cereal farming ap¬
peared in the sixth-fifth millennia of the
pre-Christian era. In the second half of
the third millennium and the beginning
of the second, the area under culti¬
vation grew considerably, and ar¬
chaeologists believe that an urban
civilization emerged in south-central
Asia during this period in an area where
two influences converged: the in¬
fluence of Sumer and Elam in the west,
and the influence of the ancient Indian
civilizations of the Indus plain in the
south.
Links with India undoubtedly
favoured the emergence of irrigated
rice cultivation in central Asia. As yet
there is not enough archaeological
evidence to give a precise date to this
development, but clearly it could only
have occurred when the peoples of
central Asia had learned how to build
vast- and complex irrigation networks,
a phenomenon connected with the
appearance in the cultivated oases of
major urban trading centres.
In central Asia as in many other
regions of Antiquity with an arid
climate the frontiers of the earliest
State structures largely corresponded
34

This head chef of a restaurant in
Samarkand, Uzbek SSR, in central Asia,
is renowned as a master in the art of
preparing Plov, a favourite rice dish of the
Uzbeks and peoples of many other
regions of the USSR.
to the limits of irrigated land. At the
end of the second and the beginning of
the last millennium of the pre-Christian
era, this accounted for the territorial
outline of many countries, including
Bactria which developed on the upper
course of the Amu Darya and its
tributaries, Dagestan on the Terek,
Margiana on the Murghab, Parthia in
the foothills of the Kopet-Dag moun¬
tains, Sogdiana in the valley of the
Zeravshan, and Khorezm in the ancient
delta of the Amu-Darya. The Greek
historian Herodotus (c. 484-420 BC)
mentions an irrigation installation on
the river Ak (Akes) which watered land
on the borders of Khorezm, Hyrcania
and Parthia.
Under the Persian Achaeminid
dynasty (sixth-fourth centuries BC)
which dominated a large part of central
Asia, the development of agriculture
was stimulated by the construction of
canals, and wheat, barley, millet and
many other crops were grown, in¬
cluding the vine, and possibly rice.
When Alexander the Great was
treading the path of conquest to India
around 327 BC, rice was fairly widely
grown in Bactria.
According to Chinese sources, rice-
growing was widespread in central
Asia in the second century of the pre-
Christian era. The traveller and
diplomat Zhang Qian tells how in
Fergana and Parthia "the way of life is
sedentary, agriculture is practiced, rice
and wheat are sown; wine is taken
from the vine". The results of ar¬
chaeological excavations, especially in
ancient Margia, confirm this
description.
In very early times, rice and the
dishes prepared with it became part of
the daily life of many peoples of central
Asia. But rice was primarily the food of
the rich who had the means to prepare
plov or boiled rice almost every day. At
the beginning of this century,
moderately well off families still only
made plov once a week at most. For
the poor it was a dish eaten at ban¬
quets given by the rich, and on
ceremonial occasions such as wed¬
dings, funerals, and the new year
festival (navruz).
Even today, among several peoples
of central Asia, plov and other rice-
based dishes are cooked at the home
of the bride and bridegroom and served
at weddings. Another custom which
has survived is for groups of young
men to club together and regale
themselves at plov picnics, with each
member of the group paying his share.
Rice has always been an important
ingredient in the ritual food served at
funerals. The meal begins with rice
cooked in milk, which is, according to
an old religious tradition, a sacred dish
fit only for the servants of the cult, the
khans (chiefs) and their entourage.
Rice cooked in milk was rarely eaten by
the mass of the people, who believed
nevertheless in its curative properties
and fed it to those suffering from
stomach ailments and nursing mothers
in need of energy and milk. All kinds of
popular beliefs are thus associated
with rice, considered to be sacred. It
was regarded as sinful to spill rice in a
dirty place.
In former times in central Asia rice
was only grown on land belonging to
the wealthy and powerful. From the
second half of the nineteenth century
on, however, when most of this region
became part of Russia, the poor
peasants began to grow rice for the
market, on rented land.
Today rice has entered every
household, thanks to common owner¬
ship of land and water, the use of fer¬
tilizer, machines for harvesting rice,
and the appearance of new varieties.
Plov prepared in giant saucepans is
sold in the streets, and it is widely
available in cafés, canteens and
restaurants.
There are over forty recipes for plov,
using meat, vegetables, salads,
raisins, etc. The art is proudly transmit¬
ted from generation to generation.
Cooking plov requires plenty of
strength and stamina! A saucepan may
contain anything from 50 to 300
kilograms of food... For each kilogram
of rice the cook must add an equal
quantity of meat, carrots and onions,
not forgetting condiments such as
barberry, chestnuts, and macerated
quinces which give plov its distinctive
taste. And woe betide the cook who
does not know how to boil rice so that
the grains don't stick together! Then,
when the dish is ready, hundreds of
trenchermen gather for the feast.
The area of rice-growing land has
greatly increased. It has risen from just
over 150,000 hectares in 1913, to
more than 800,000 hectares today.
The main rice-growing areas of the
Soviet Union are in central Asia, but
rice is today grown slightly further
north, thanks to the development of
new varieties obtained by selection. In
the European part of the Soviet Union
the most extensive and highly
mechanized rice-growing region is in
the Kuban basin north of the
Caucasus.
BORIS VASSILIEVICH ANDRIANOV, a
Soviet specialist on irrigated farming in Anti¬
quity, is attached to the Ethnographic Institute
of the USSR Academy of Sciences. He has
published a number of scientific studies and is
a co-author of a forthcoming collective
History of Irrigation in the USSR, commission¬
ed by the International Commission on Irriga¬
tion and Drainage (New Delhi) in collaboration
with Unesco.
A family get-together on a kolkhoz (col¬
lective farm) in Uzbekistan. The kolkhoz
produces both rice and cotton.
35
