A HOUSEHOLD GOD
by Lee Kwang-Gyu
THE Korean peninsula is a moun¬
tainous area only one-fifth of which
is available for cultivation. Rice-
growing is possible, especially in the south,
thanks to the hot summer and abundant
rainfall amounting to 800-1 ,000 millimetres
a year. Sixty per cent of the precipitation
occurs in the summer months from June to
early September.
What are the origins of rice cultivation on
the Korean peninsula? When and how did it
begin? Of eleven archaeological sites that
have yielded evidence for rice cultivation,
the two earliest, Naju in the southwest and
Hunam-ri in the middle of the peninsula,
date back to sometime between the eleventh
and the thirteenth century BC, the early
Bronze Age in Korea.
Archaeologists have suggested that rice
may have reached Korea from south China
in two waysvia a land route through nor¬
thern China and via a sea route across the
Yellow Sea from central China, as an exten¬
sion of the Lungshan culture in China.
Another hypothesis has been put forward
by agriculturists, who contend that rice
came to Korea from north China because
the Japónica rice and the dry rice found in
Korea today are grown in north China.
The earliest type of rice cultivation was
by dry farming, with the land being
prepared using the slash-and-burn method.
Wet rice cultivation seems to have been
adopted in the first century AD, and the
construction of large-scale bank revetment
and irrigation systems in the second and
third centuries is reported in Sam-guk-sa-gi,
the History of the Three Kingdoms in
Korea.
During the Koryo dynasty (918-1392)
which followed the Three Kingdoms, rice
became the country's major crop. The
Choson dynasty (1392-1910) developed
agriculture and especially rice-growing,
even further. Rice even became a form of
currency, along with metal coin and cloth.
Officials were paid in rice, and paddy fields
were allotted to them according to their
rank.
Rice is still very important in Korean life
today. As in other parts of southeast Asia it
is the principal food of the people. It is serv¬
ed three times daily, and is the main dish
around which all other foods are disposed.
Even when a rich variety of food is served,
a meal is not considered a meal unless it in¬
cludes rice.
For purposes of the daily diet, rice is
thoroughly washed, then boiled vigorously
for five minutes, simmered for ten minutes,
and left unheated to steam for another five
minutes. Sometimes it is also boiled with
barley, soybeans, red beans, or millet.
Rice is also used for making gruel, cakes,
and wine. Rice gruel or porridge is made
with polished white rice for infants, the
sick, and the elderly, and is served with or
Threshing Floor and Farmers turning the
Soil, two stages in the cultivation of rice
painted by Kim Hong-do, a famous 18th-
century Korean artist. Left, watched by
their master, the peasants thresh the
sheaves of rice. Right, scenes such as
this, of peasants ploughing and prepar¬
ing the soil, can still sometimes be seen
in the Korean countryside today.
without side dishes. Over a hundred
varieties of rice cakes and confectionery are
made with rice flour derived from both
glutinous and non-glutinous rice. Different
rice cakes are prepared for different occa¬
sions such as seasonal holidays, ritual ser¬
vices for ancestors, birthdays, weddings
and festivals.
Wine is made from rice by mixing steam¬
ed rice with fermented leaven made from
wheat bran and water. There are three main
kinds of rice wine: the first is a turbid brew
called Makulli; the second is a clear
beverage called Yakju; and the third is a
distilled liquor called Soju.
Because of climatic limitations, only one
rice crop is grown each year, and in the
southern part of the peninsula the fields are
used for barley in winter and rice in sum¬
mer. In the central part of the peninsula,
rice cultivation begins with the washing of
the seeds in late March or early April by
solar calendar. The high-quality seeds,
preserved from the previous year's harvest,
are first washed in salty water to free them
from their husks and then washed again to
remove the salt.
In the sunniest part of the paddy, furrows
one metre wide are ploughed in preparation
for seedbeds which are then covered with
grass and ash and allowed to dry for two or
three days. Rice seeds are then sown and
watered generously so that they sink into
the soil. Fifteen days later, the water is
drained out of the seedbeds in order to
stabilize the roots; then the seedbeds are
watered again. This process is repeated
twice, and then the seedbeds are covered
with compost. After about a month, young
rice plants are transplanted from the seed¬
bed to the rice paddy field.
Prior to transplantation the paddy is
ploughed. Oxen were used for this purpose
in the past but today they are rapidly being
replaced by the power tiller. The field must
be levelled before it can be flooded to
receive the seedlings. The farmer must re¬
inforce the retaining banks of the field and
spread fertilizer, now using chemical fer¬
tilizers whereas in the past dung, muck, ash
and grass were used.
The young rice plants are planted a fixed
distance from each other, and are aligned
using a rope in which equidistant knots
have been tied. Men and women plant in
single file. Planting must be done in the
traditional way by hand as the complexities
involved in the development of the
mechanization of transplantation work
have yet to be solved.
In earlier times rice fields were weeded
three times a year; this was a long and
laborious task whether hoes were used or
whether the work was done by hand. Today
chemical herbicides have largely eliminated
the need for weeding by hand.
24

v
W- %- !
MJJ^C
Tfte tug-of-war contests that traditionally
take place in January in villages in the
southern part of the Korean peninsula are
preceded by loop fightslively contests
between two teams equipped with
100-metre-long ropes to the end of which
are attached huge loops made of straw
and wood. The loop fight is a pushing
contest the aim of which is to force the
opposing team's loop to the ground.
Team leaders sit astride the rope or stand
on the loops which are held up on
wooden poles by the 50- to 80-strong
teams. The combination of men, ropes
and loops makes the entire scene look
curiously like a fight between two huge
dragons.
In early October the rice is harvested
. within a period lasting ten days or so.
Because of this time limitation, concen¬
trated effort is required of the farmer. After
being dried, the seeds are taken from the
plants by thresher a few weeks after the
harvest.
The typical farming village is located
near the rice field, at the foot of a moun¬
tain. Farmers say that they must be able to
look after the rice plants every day and that
if a plant is neglected it will fade away like
an abandoned child.
Most villages have a band in which the
farmers play at harvest time, on seasonal
holidays, or after the ritual service for a
village god on the day of the first full moon
by the lunar calendar, when many villages,
especially in the southern part of the penin¬
sula, engage in tug-of-war competitions.
This custom is also practiced elsewhere in
southeast Asia.
Above all rice is worshipped as the
housegod in farming villages. Rice in a
small jar is the main symbol of the
housegod. In the central regions of the
peninsula it is placed in the back yard, while
in other regions it is kept in the inner room.
The housewife offers rice cakes before
the god once a year, praying for good luck
for the family farm and for the good health
of the family.
Even today people feel uneasy if the rice
harvest has been poor, despite the
knowledge that imported rice will offset
any shortages. The opposite is also true.
People feel happy and fulfilled when the
harvest is bountiful, behaving generously
and forgiving past wrongs. In short, despite
modernization and industrialization, rice is
still the most important element in Korean
social, economic, and cultural life.
LEE KWANG-GYU, of the Republic of Korea,
is a professor at the College of Social
Sciences, Seoul National University, and a
former President (1976-1979) of his coun¬
try's Society for Cultural Anthropology. He is
the author of many studies on family structure
and kinship in his country and elsewhere in
east Asia.
25
