'*£" ^1
i®lR£iJäi
^^^^^^^^^^
Waf (temple) Mahathat is situated at the
heart of the ruined city of old Sukhothai,
the cradle of Thai civilization.
Í
Unearthed in central Thailand, this brick
contains rice husks, evidence that rice
was grown in the ancient kingdom of
Dvaravati which flourished in the region
from the 6th to the 13th century.
i
V --. \ v -, » J <» i
©
26

A CITY BUILT ON RICE
by Srisakra Vallibhotama
IN Thai history, the significance of rice
for the development of the State is
related to a cultural practice called
kalapana, the act of endowing sacred
monuments or objects with land, labour
and goods. This practice resulted in increas¬
ing the number of village communities pro¬
ducing rice for subsistence.
The rationale behind this practice was
that Thailand was a sparsely populated
country so that manpower was at a
premium in order to provide for the security
and prosperity of the State. Manpower
could be obtained in several ways. The
harsh solution was to wage war and
organize raids in the hope of capturing large
numbers of families. A gentler solution was
to offer protection to refugees or to per¬
suade merchants and travellers to come and
settle in the country. To assimilate these
people of different origins into society, it
was necessary to build a community to
which they could feel they belonged.
With this in mind the ruler would
establish a religious monument or a shrine
in a given place and for its upkeep he would
perform an act of kalapana, donating a
number of families, draft animals and ob¬
jects to the site in question. As a rule such
families were brought from outside. They
would clear the land, turn forest into pad¬
dy, make homes for themselves, and look
after the religious monument. In this way a
peasant community was created, to become
not only a unit of the wider society but a
supplier of labour to the State to which it
belonged. Accordingly, any assessment of
the strength and persistence of a Thai city or
State in the past must take into account not
only its size but also the number of religious
sites associated with rice-land in the sur¬
rounding area.
The State of Sukhothai, which emerged
in the thirteenth century and is generally ac¬
cepted as the earliest Thai kingdom in
Thailand, is a case in point. An inscription
records of its greatest ruler, Ram Kam
Haeng, that before he became king he had
honestly served his father and elder brother
in waging war against other States and had
taken many captives, whom he did not kill
or torture but made citizens of Sukhothai.
When he became king he persuaded mer¬
chants and travellers from outside his
kingdom to trade freely in Sukhothai and
settle there.
The city of Sukhothai was a large settle¬
ment surrounded with triple walls and pro¬
vided with large ponds for drinking water.
There were four main gates at the cardinal
points through which people thronged on
special religious occasions to pay homage to
the Buddha at the heart of the city. Around
Sukhothai there were orchards and temples
to the great Buddha; to the south and west
were the living quarters of monks, while to
the north and east were rice-lands and
villages.
During the lifetime of King Ram Kam
Haeng, the Sukhothai State was pros¬
perous: "there is fish in the water and rice
in the fields" runs a famous saying
associated with him. In order to integrate
outsiders into the Sukhothai State the King
built wat (Buddhist monasteries) donating
rice-land, labour and goods to form the
basis of village communities. We know that
this practice continued, for many later
Sukhothai inscriptions mention how
members of the royal family and
bureaucrats followed in his footsteps and
restored or built roads, bridges, weirs and
canals which were necessary for com¬
munication and rice cultivation.
The city of Sukhothai was, and still is,
situated near the slope of a mountain sur¬
rounded by low-lying land to the north and
east where rice is grown. These lowland
areas are dotted with ruins of temples and
stupas indicating the centres of peasant
villages. The main source of water for rice
cultivation was the Mae Lampan river
which passes by the city from north to east
before flowing into the Yom River about
eleven kilometres away.
Traces of ancient weirs and irrigation
channels can be seen on the northern and
eastern banks of the river, indicating
hydraulic facilities provided by the State for
the rice-growing communities formed as the
result of kalapana. In addition there is a
large rectangular area bounded by earthen
dykes near the northeastern corner of the
city which was reserved for rice cultivation.
These remains of ancient irrigation works
are a unique feature of the city which still
bear witness to the attempts of the rulers of
Sukhothai to grow sufficient rice to ensure
the survival of the city and its people in a
region prone to drought and where the
quality of the soil is poor.
SRISAKRA VALLIBHOTAMA, Thai
historian and social anthropologist, has been
associate professor of anthropology at
Silpakorn University, Bangkok, since 1980. In
1977 he was seconded as chief sociologist to
the Sukhothai Historical Park Development
Project, working in conjunction with Unesco,
and in 1980 he was a visiting professor at
Cornell University, USA.
Rice is Thailand's major crop, the basic
foodofthe Thaipeople, and the country's
most important export.
27
