The Gosfilmofond of Moscow
by Vladimir Dmitriev
GOSFILMOFOND, the federal State film
archive of the USSR, has one of the
world's richest collections of film. A
State-financed body, it is an integral part of the
Soviet cinema system.
Located some sixty kilometres from
Moscow in the village of Bielye Stolby,
Gosfilmofond came into being on 4 October
1948. Films were being collected in the USSR
long before then, however, especially by the
Cinema School which already had a collection
in 1934.
The Second World War, which destroyed so
much precious cultural property in Europe,
also dealt the Soviet cinema a terrible blow. As
a result, immediately after the war a single
centre was created to collect, restore,
reproduce and safeguard in the best scientific
and technical conditions all the films which
VLADIMIR YUREVICH DMITRIEV, sower film
archivist, critic and historian, has been work¬
ing with the Gosfilmofond of Moscow since
1 962 and also plays an active part in the work
of FIAF. He is the author of over 20 studies on
the cinema.
had been dispersed throughout the cities of
the USSR. The centre even accepted film that
had almost entirely decomposed in the hope
that it could be salvaged.
The collection originally consisted of
negatives and copies of Soviet films by
Eisenstein, Vsevolod Pudovkin, Alexander
Dovzhenko, Lev Kuleshov, the Vassiliev
brothers, Mark Donskoi, Mikhail Romm and
many other directors who have contributed to
the glory of the cinema. It was soon enriched
with films by great directors from other coun¬
tries. Its expansion dates largely from 1957
when it joined the International Federation of
Film Archives (FIAF) and began to exchange
films with other film archives on a large scale.
The prime task of every national film archive
is of course to collect and preserve the pro¬
ducts of its own country's cinema. But each in- .
stitution is faced with the same problems:
should it preserve all films? Should it spend
large sums to save for posterity works which
were misunderstood or rejected by the public
when they first appeared? Should complex
restoration work be carried out on films that
may be of no interest to anyone?
Gosfilmofond closely follows international
discussions about problems related to the
preservation of archives and knows the
arguments in favour of a selective approach.
But it is guided by another principle, namely
that the entire output of a national cinema,
without exception, should be preserved ir¬
respective of artistic or any other criteria. This
is the only way of avoiding fatal errors resulting
from personal bias or hasty decisions. Since
Gosfilmofond was created, it has not
destroyed a single metre of film without mak¬
ing and keeping a good copy.
All State bodies connected with the cinema
in the USSR respect this principle. Every film
studio is obliged to provide the archive, at its
own expense, with the original negative of the
cut version of a film, the interpositive, the
sound track and the copy passed for exhibi¬
tion. Since this requirement applies to all films
produced, it naturally creates storage prob¬
lems and means that new facilities are con¬
tinually being built. On the other hand, it
enables Gosfilmofond to have a collection in
good condition and to replace defective copies
when necessary.
A shot from Mechanics of the
Brain (1926), directed by
Vsevolod Pudovkin
(1893-1953). This scientific
documentary presents the
work of the Russian
physiologist and medical doc¬
tor Ivan Pavlov whose study of
conditioned reflexes led him
to establish laws governing
the activity of the higher ner¬
vous system.
Scene from Que viva México, made in Mex¬
ico between 1930 and 1932 by Sergei
Mikhailovich Eisenstein in collaboration
with the American writer Upton Sinclair. The
film was never completed. After a che¬
quered career, it was reconstituted by the
Soviet director Grigori Alexandrov, who had
worked with Eisenstein, and today, un¬
finished though it is, Que viva México Is
recognized as a classic. The film, made in
Spanish, helped launch the Mexican
cinema.
30

Gosfilmofond has a long-term programme,
now nearing completion, for transferring old
positives, interpositives and negatives onto
non-inflammable film and then destroying the
inflammable material. Not all the inflammable
film has been destroyed, however. Some of it
is being permanently conserved in special
facilities. Some original negatives and positive
colour copies have been kept, including some
old hand-painted copies whose polychromatic
colour-scale could not be reproduced even
under the most sophisticated conditions.
Thanks to its membership of FIAF Gosfilmo¬
fond has been able to reconstitute the
originals of such films as Abram Room's
Tretya Meshchanskaya ("Bed and Sofa",
1927) with the aid of the Bulgarian Film Ar¬
chive, and two films by Grigori Kozintsev and
Leonid Trauberg, Union of a Great Cause
(1927), with the aid of the Royal Belgian Film
Archive and the film archives of the German
Democratic Republic, and The Overcoat
(1926) with the aid of the New York Museum
of Modern Art.
In turn Gosfilmofond has helped film ar¬
chives in many countries to complete their col¬
lections by supplying them with films produc¬
ed in those countries and preserved in the
Russian archives since the beginning of the
century. It has, for example, sent to the United
States the first film made by the Universal Pic¬
tures Company, Neptune's Daughter (1914);
to France La Terre, a film based on Zola's
novel made by the famous stage director An¬
dré Antoine, and a series of Max Linder films;
to West Berlin films featuring the German ac¬
tress Henni Porten. Other films have been
supplied to the national archives in Poland,
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, the German
Democratic Republic, Belgium, Denmark, The
Netherlands, and many other countries.
A film archive should regard no films as
"untouchable". Nervertheless, some films are
given privileged treatment because the
slightest damage to them would diminish the
national and world film heritage. Among such
works are the films of Sergei Eisenstein,
Vsevolod Pudovkin and Alexander Dov-
zhenko, whose ninetieth birthday is being
celebrated this year. Gosfilmofond has
restored copies of Dovzhenko's films Arsenal
(1929), Earth (1930), and Shchors (1939) so
that people all over the world can appreciate
the philosophy that inspired them as well as
their artistic qualities.
Because of the constantly increasing cost of
preserving 35 mm films, some archives have
reproduced them in 1 6 mm format and others
in 8 mm or Super 8. The reason for this is that
the films take up less space and their preser¬
vation costs less. But reproduction impairs the
quality of the image, and by adopting this
practice an archive may fail to perform its duty,
which is to preserve a copy whose quality is as
near as possible to that of the original.
m
1
«I '
Gosfilmofond thus follows the traditional prac¬
tice and as far as possible preserves films in
their original format.
Today, film archivists are wondering what
benefits they can expect from video-cassettes,
video-discs and other modern supports for
moving images. Some insist that all film collec¬
tions should be reproduced on these new sup¬
ports, pointing out the lower cost of preserva¬
tion, the greater ease of reproduction, and
other advantages offered by these new
methods.
Gosfilmofond is closely following the
development of these techniques, but feels
that at present the quality of a video recording
is not as high as that of an image on film. It
believes, therefore, that it would be premature
to switch to video at this stage. Even if video¬
discs are perfectedand in terms of quality
they have better prospects than video-
cassettesthey will be no more than auxiliary
supports in archive work. Gosfilmofond will
continue to collect and make reproductions
from original material.
In the light of its thirty-five years' ex¬
perience, Gosfilmofond has reached the con¬
clusion that national film archives can only
carry out their mission adequately if they enjoy
the full support of the State, develop close
contacts with archives in other countries, and
have free access to all the films produced in
their respective countries.
Vladimir Dmitriev
One of the founding fathers of
Soviet cinema, the Ukrainian
directorAlexander Dovzhenko
(1894-1956) is here seen in ac¬
tion on the set of one of his
films. His great work Earth
(1930) was included on the list
of the 12 great films of all time
at the World Film Festival held
at Brussels in 1958.
31
