A continent resists
North Africa: the long struggle
by Abdallah Laroui
A spotter aircraft
dropping range
adjustment
instructions to an
artillery unit during
the Rif War,
Morocco.
T
HE nineteenth century colonialist
drive in north Africa was unusual in
being a sequel to earlier campaigns.
For four centuries the Moroccan Govern¬
ment had been resisting the Spaniards who
had established themselves at Ceuta and
Melilla. Moroccans were forbidden to have
anything to do with the Spaniards and it
was to break this blockade that Spain
launched the war of 1859-1860 that was to
be so disastrous for Morocco. By the end of
the century, with the Bay of Rio de Oro,
whose occupation was notified on 26
December 1884 to the signatories to the Act
of Berlin on the division of Africa into
zones of influence, Spain had three bridge¬
heads on the north African coast.
In 1880 and 1881, when the Madrid Con¬
ference on the granting of "protection" to
individuals in Morocco met in two sessions,
the Makhzen (the government of Morocco,
and in a more general sense the country's
religious and political élite) made a last
attempt to get its independence and sov¬
ereignty over a clearly defined territory
accepted at the international level. Despite
British support, the attempt failed in face of
a self-seeking alliance of France, Spain and
Italy.
Immediately after the conference,
France, which for a time had thought that
all was lost in Morocco, raised the problem
of the Tuat oases. There was much talk in
ABDALLAH LAROUI, of Morocco, is professor
of modern and contemporary history at the
University of Rabat. A specialist in the history
of the Maghreb, he is the author of several
studies and articles on the history of north
Africa in the 19th century.
Paris at that time about the plan for a trans-
Saharan railway line that would open up
central Africa to French trade. But the plan
ran up against a serious obstacle. The oases
of the central Sahara were politically depen¬
dent on Morocco. France tried to win over
the Sultan but, buttressed by British sup¬
port, he rejected the French demands while
at the same time strengthening his adminis¬
trative and political presence at Tuat.
In the east of the Maghreb, the Tunisians
had for centuries been fighting the Italians,
just as the Moroccans had been fighting the
Spanish. A unified Italy had designs on the
Regency of Tunis, where it. sent immi¬
grants, invested capital and propagated its
culture. But the real danger threatening
Tunisia came from the French who had
already been established in Algeria for over
half a century.
Following the setbacks he had suffered in
Algeria, the Sultan in Constantinople had
decided to bring Tripolitania and Cyrenaica
back under his direct administration and to
regain his political influence in Tunisia.
There was considerable pro-Ottoman feel¬
ing among the élite in the Regency, but the
Bey, who saw in the Sultan's moves a threat
to his prerogatives, turned to Italy and
France for support. This more or less deli¬
berate line of conduct proved fatal to him.
When the French Government took advan¬
tage of a favourable political conjuncture
to attack the country, the Bey found him¬
self isolated both at home and abroad and
with no option but to sign a treaty, on 12
May 1881, placing himself under a French
protectorate.
However, the inhabitants of the Sahel
and of the religious capital of Kairouan at
once revolted, hoping for a rapid Ottoman
intervention. A second French expedition
was then raised which was to meet strong
resistance in the mountainous areas of the
north-west, the centre and the south. Sfax
and Gabes were bombarded by naval units,
Kairouan withstood a long siege during the
autumn of 1881, and the southern territo¬
ries, near Tripolitania, for long remained
an insecure zone.
Italy maintained her claims on the
country, but the Tunisians obviously could
not play that card. However, they remained
faithful to Islamic sovereignty and this was
to be one of the foundations of early Tuni¬
sian nationalism.
Up until the general agreement of April
1904 between France and Britain, the Euro¬
pean powers with an interest in the Magh¬
reb contented themselves with keeping their
claims alive, occasionally grabbing bits of
territory as security. At the end of the reign
of Hassan I, the war of 1893 enabled Spain
to consolidate her gains of 1860 in the
neighbourhood of Melilla.
Seven years later, at the end of the regen¬
cy of the vizier Ba Ahmad, France judged
that the time was ripe finally to settle the
Tuat problem to her advantage. On the
pretext of scientific exploration, a strong
expedition gradually approached the
coveted oases and, in December 1899, ap-
' peared before In Salah and demanded im¬
mediate surrender. The local chief, ap¬
pointed by the Sultan of Morocco, backed
by the soldiers of the Makhzen and assisted
by the sherifs of In Salah, put up a fierce
resistance. After a series of bloody battles,
such as that of In Ghar, on 27 December
1899, where, given the disparity between
the two sides the outcome was never in
doubt, the whole oasis region was con-
25

quered, the final battle taking place at
Talmin in March 1901.
Alerted by the young Sultan Abd al-Aziz,
Britain and Germany advised him to accept
the fait accompli; this he did, signing under
duress the draft treaty of 20 April 1902. In
return for this major concession, he tried to
have the line of demarcation in the south
and east between Morocco and the French
possessions clearly defined; but his efforts
were unsuccessful since the French prefer¬
red a certain imprecision which offered her
the prospect of further conquests.
The loss of Tuat was one of the main
reasons for the break-up of the Sultan's
authority which continued to crumble until
1911. The Makhzen knew that France
planned to encircle Morocco in order to
isolate and subjugate it. It also knew that
Britain no longer opposed the French
designs and that it could no longer count on
Germany for anything but diplomatic help;
Germany did indeed uphold Moroccan in¬
dependence until November 1911, when it
signed an agreement with France giving the
latter a free hand in Morocco in exchange
for compensations in equatorial Africa.
Having always refused to define the fron¬
tier with Morocco beyond the Figuig oasis,
France pursued a policy of nibbling away
slowly at Moroccan territory. Working
their way up the valley of the Sawra, French
forces gradually occupied the territory bet¬
ween Wadi Gir and Wadi Zusfana on the
pretext of ending lawlessness and insecurity
and allowing frontier trade to expand. The
French Government also proposed that the
Makhzen should share with it customs
receipts, and this was agreed in March 1910.
i
Further south France had imposed her
protectorate on the Emirs of the Trarza and
the Brakna. Then, in 1905, Xavier Cop-
polani introduced the policy of "peaceful
penetration", which took the form of mak¬
ing direct contact with the ethnic and
brotherhood chiefs with a view to winning
them over to French influence. He found
himself up against a worthy opponent in
Shaykh Ma'al-Aynayn who, for more than
thirty years, had been the Sultan's unof¬
ficial representative. The Sultan, Mulay
Abd al-Aziz, was informed and sent his
uncle Mulay Idris who galvanized the
resistance forces. Meanwhile, Coppolani's
camp at Tidjikdja was attacked in April
1905 and the apostle of peaceful penetra¬
tion was killed.
Taking advantage of the internal crisis
racking Morocco, France demanded the
recall of Mulay Idris, which it obtained in
January 1907. Nevertheless, resistance con¬
tinued. A strong expedition led by Colonel
Gouraud moved northwards. It suffered a
severe reverse at Al-Muynam on 16 June
1908, but succeeded in entering Atar on 9
January of the following year. Shaikh
Ma'al Aynayn withdrew with his followers
into the Sakiyat al-Hamra, from where his
forces continued to harass the French and
the Spanish until 1933.
During the same period Spain was ad¬
vancing in the wake of the French. When
France occupied Shinkit, the Spanish struck
out from their settlement on the Bay of Rio
de Oro; in 1906, they organized a Sanaran
intervention force which penetrated thirty
kilometres inland. In the north, the Spanish
waited until the French entered Wadjda, in
1907, before mounting a 45 ,000-strong ex¬
pedition which, in September 1909, set out
to conquer the Rif. In response, galvanized
by Shaykh Ameriyan's call for a holy war,
the Moroccan people mounted a fierce
resistance which was to last until 1926.
Abdallah Laroui
The Italian Occupation of Cyrenaica and Tripolitania
The Italian colonial drive was directed
against the Ottoman-controlled regions of
Cyrenaica and Tripolitania. On 28
September 1911, Italy presented an
ultimatum to Constantinople complaining
of Ottoman negligence, and in October
landed armies at Tripoli, Benghazi, Horns
and Tobruk. The Turks were soon obliged
to withdraw from the country, but the
Italians were unable to subdue the local
population, organized under the banner of
Ahmad al-Sharif (below right), the spiritual
leader of the Islamic fraternity known as
the Sanusiyyah. In 1913, the Italians laun¬
ched an attack on Ahmad al-Sharif''s forces
south of Derna, but, on 16 May, they suf¬
fered a stunning defeat at the battle of
Yawm al-Djuma. Sanusiyyah resistance to
the Italians continued for two decades,
notably under the leadership of Umar al-
Mukhtar (below left). Despite such drastic
Italian measures as the mass imprisonment
of the population in concentration camps,
this resistance was only finally broken with
the capture and execution of Umar al-
Mukhtar in 1931.
