The Gypsy craftsmen ofEurope
by Miklós Tonika
ACCORDING to biassed contem¬
porary studies, Gypsies are regard¬
ed in Europe as work-shy riff-raff,
vagabonds who only occasionally practise
some of their traditional occupations such
as metalworking, woodcarving, or carpet
and horse dealing. At the same time it is
assumed that during the 600 years of their
presence in Europe they have always lived
and pursued their occupations on the fringe
of society. On the contrary, we maintain
that for hundreds of years Gypsies were
welcome and highly respected craftsmen in
their first European homeland, in central
and eastern Europe, and that it was only the
bourgeois-industrial revolution that drove
them to the fringes of society. Moreover,
we believe that opinions about Gypsies in
western Europe, which varied greatly from
the outset, were due to the conflict between
differing types of economy and life-style,
one of them clearly pre-feudal and the other
late feudal and then bourgeois.
It is probable that all the Gypsies of
Europe, except, perhaps, those of Spain,
passed through central and eastern Europe,
and even today this region is the home of
more than three-quarters of the Gypsy peo¬
ple. From the fourteenth to the seventeenth
century this region was relatively thinly
populated; there were very few towns and
the population was repeatedly decimated by
wars and frontier conflicts. Political
organization was decentralized and often
rudimentary.
Distinctive features of feudal culture
were its ethnic diversity and active contacts
with the peoples and cultures east of the line
formed by the river Bug and the Car¬
pathians, and sometimes with those of
Asia, as well as with those of western
Europe. The social system was prepared for
population movements and caravans of
exotically-dressed people of unusual ap¬
pearance who spoke foreign tongues. In the
midst of traders, emissaries, monks, the
With the spread of Industrialization since
the Second World War and the Increasing
use of vehicles and agricultural
machinery, many Gypsies have had to
give up their traditional trades and
become factory workers or find seasonal
employment with which to supplement
their Income. Above, a Gypsy at work dur¬
ing the grape harvest in a vineyard in
eastern France.
multifarious personnel of royal and oligar¬
chic courts, travelling craftsmen and groups
of mercenaries, and above all in the midst
of systematic settlement operations, Gyp¬
sies did not attract much attention. Their
assertion that they were pilgrims or
penitents was readily accepted.
Although their communities were
sometimes very large, they were always
given the hospitality to which they were en¬
titled. The increase in the number of vir¬
tually ownerless estates made gradual in-
15

Photo © Diane Tong, New York Photo © Roger Viollet, Paris
filtration possible without leading to any
major conflicts or opposition on the part of
the indigenous population. Nor was there
any cultural conflict, especially since the
last waves of ethnic migration had only just
subsided and the arrival of relatively large
groups of new settlers was still remembered
by many.
Religious, linguistic and behavioural dif¬
ferences were regarded as normal, as was
progressive assimilation through mastery of
the local language, conversion to the
"right" religion, and other such channels.
National and cultural identity were not im¬
portant in those times and did not con¬
stitute obstacles to socio-cultural integra¬
tion. The decisive question was whether and
how the new arrivals could earn their
livelihood. In theory all paths were open to
them and were often tried even simulta¬
neously. Feudal deeds of endowment speak
of Gypsy villages or Gypsy families who
earned their living as shepherds or peasants.
Patents of nobility granted to families
bearing the name of Cigány or Czigány sug¬
gest participation at an early date in'
military operations and prove, not only
complete integration, but also the accession
of individual Gypsies to the ruling class.
From the outset Gypsies favoured certain
activities, such as goldwashing, which in¬
evitably brought them into close contact
with feudal lords, non-Gypsy villages,
military institutions and other parts of the
fabric of the socio-cultural system. These
contacts, the means of pressure available to
the powerful, the inherent potential of the
occupations they practised, combined,
perhaps, with the desire to exploit the
available economic and social possibilities,
led to steady assimilation. The Gypsy
origins of many families and villages was
soon forgotten.
The occupational opportunities mention¬
ed above were not, of course, always equal¬
ly good. Prolonged periods of warfare such
as the Tartar invasions of Poland and
Hungary, and especially the Turkish ad¬
vance from Asia through the Balkans and
across Hungary as far as Viennaa power-
shift which was probably one of the chief
reasons for Gypsy immigration to
Europe caused a decline in the indigenous
population and created extensive
depopulated areas. However, subsequent
political stabilization soon led to the settle¬
ment and division of the lands, so that the
possibility of freely acquiring land became
the exception rather than the rule.
Likewise, a military career cannot be
regarded as an habitual form of Gypsy life,
and although some individuals may have
pursued such a career, it could not have
provided sustenance for the extended fami¬
ly group. Typical Gypsy occupations were
those which met the real social needs of the
host country while providing temporary
employment at a given place, sometimes for
several persons. Such occupations were
metalworking and woodworking, in which
women were often equal partners, basket-
making, with the women and children pro¬
viding the twigs and the women peddling
the finished articles, and brickmaking. In
this way families or groups of families
formed a working community.
Although wrought-iron nails, gimlets
and kettles, wooden tubs, troughs, plates
and spoons, wicker baskets and cart-
bodies, rush mats and brooms, were essen¬
tial to life on a farm, many small villages
could not maintain their own smith, still
less trough-cutters and basket-makers.
Moreover, neither serfs nor poor freemen
could pay in cash but only in kind, and so
they were of little interest to urban crafts¬
men. For centuries articles of this kind, as
well as bricks, wood charcoal for metal-
smelting, and bells for herds, were mainly
produced by Gypsies.
The growth of villages and their needs
eventually led many families of craftsmen
to settle down permanently and become
village smiths, smiths to big landowners, or
weaponmakers in castles. They made
wooden spoons and supplied bricks to sur¬
rounding villages. Those, such as trough-
cutters, who produced rare and durable
goods, continued to lead an itinerant life.
Like the others they fulfilled an extremely
important role. Until the mid-nineteenth
century Gypsy craftsmen were regarded as
irreplaceable in central and eastern Europe.
It was not until the end of the eighteenth
and the beginning of the nineteenth century
that conflicts arose with urban craftsmen or
guilds. These conflicts became increasingly
acute with the emergence of industry and
the resultant hardships for those engaged in
handicrafts. A certain proportion of the
permanently settled craftsmen of Gypsy
origin had meanwhile become fully
assimilated and for them there was no going
back. As a result of industrialization they
became proletarians or workless, or were
forced to emigrate. Those who were not ful¬
ly assimilated were ousted from a society
that was itself in the birth-throes of a new
era. They reacted to the loss of their means
of livelihood and incipient discrimination
by withdrawing into their own milieu. Con¬
fronted by non-Gypsy society, they sought
and found support in family ties which grew
into a competing social system.
The old Gypsy crafts continued to be
practised but they were no longer enough to
guarantee an adequate livelihood. Social
marginalization went hand in hand with in¬
creasing poverty and such consequences of
poverty as ill-health and high infant mor¬
tality. What were formerly highly respected
occupations now merely attracted curiosity,
and those who practised them were often
outcasts. Gypsies were obliged to supple¬
ment their traditional sources of income by
mastering new techniques of survival, and
thus their isolation became complete.
In the eighteenth and nineteenth cen¬
turies a Gypsy problem emerged in central
and eastern Europe; by the turn of the last
century, it was increasingly becoming a
criminal problem. In 1900, for instance, the
crime rate for Gypsies in Hungary was 1.7
times higher than that for non-Gypsies. Fif¬
teen years later it was 4.3 times higher; it
had increased almost threefold. Whether
the crime rate had really increased or the
vigilance of the justice authorities had in¬
tensified is not a question to be debated
here. At all events statistics reveal the rapid
growth of the Gypsy problem.
A new factor appeared after the Second
World War. The growing use of agricul¬
tural machinery and motor vehicles made
horses redundant and transformed horse
dealers into figures of the past. Isolated col¬
onies of Gypsies continue to practise their
crafts in associations, but the vast majority
of those in central and eastern Europe are
abandoning the old handicrafts and becom¬
ing unskilled industrial and construction
workers. The acquisition of new dwellings
16

Photo Bruce Dale © National Geographic Society,
Washington, D.C
Woodwork, metalwork and basketwork
are among the crafts traditionally
associated with Gypsies. Right, an Irish
tinsmith repairs a bucket, and, top left, a
basket-maker at work in Thessaloniki,
Greece. Many Gypsies, however, have
had distinguished careers In activities In¬
volving closer Integration with the socie¬
ty around them. Notable examples in¬
clude the Belgian-born French Gypsy,
guitarist and composer Django Reinhardt
(1910-1953), above centre, who created a
unique form ofjazz imbued with Gypsy ar¬
dour, and physician Sabl Yordanoff
(above), pictured here In the laboratory of
a hospital at Sllven, Bulgaria.
or old farmhouses, and a few years of
school attendance, have once again
facilitated integration into non-Gypsy
society, this time not by practising tradi¬
tional occupations but by abandoning the
past. Thus, Gypsy occupations are now of
interest only to students of folklore.
Gypsies were given a friendly welcome
when they arrived in the countries of
western Europe, because they were able to
produce good letters of recommendation
and were regarded not as settlers but as in¬
offensive passing strangers. (We now know
that at least some of these letters were
forgeries). However, a somewhat prolong¬
ed stay prompted people to ask questions:
on whose land should they live, and with
what money? A higher population density,
close-meshed political organization and a
more highly developed economy left no
room for settlements and no certainty of an
income.
The number of occupations which could
be practised legally such as show-
business, which was more dangerous than
remunerative in the period from the fif¬
teenth to the eighteenth century was very
low. Most of these activities lay outside the
prevailing economic order (this was the case
for most trades and handicrafts), or, as in
the case of fortune-telling, conflicted with
the official philosophy and the law.
Weaknesses and uncertainties in the
system, such as differences in the economic
situations and jurisprudence of the coun¬
tries concerned, were cleverly exploited by
the Gypsies. Nevertheless, legislation oblig¬
ing them to leave the country under pain of
severe punishment and in some places
declaring them to be outlaws, together with
a policy of repeated prosecutions, succeed¬
ed in scaring them away. Most of them
either stayed in, or returned to, central and
eastern Europe. A few small groups led a
marginal existence, eventually merging with
other rejects of late feudal subsequently
bourgeois society.
Post-industrial societies, concerned for
human rights but also nostalgically turned
towards the past, present a new scenario. In
the welfare society all kinds of ex¬
travagances are possible, from a life on
wheels or on water to the successful
marketing of old-style handicraft goods.
Thus, some Gypsy families are enabled to
maintain their time-honoured life-style and
occupations or to create new traditions by,
for instance, entering the antiques and
carpet business. It may be asked, of course,
whether these are in fact old occupations,
or whether they are not rather the activities
of uprooted, alienated people, or indeed no
more .than tourist attractions.
MIKLOS TOMKA, Hungarian economist and
sociologist, is engaged on research at the
Budapest Mass Communication Research
Centre, and lectures at the Eötvös Lorant
University. He is vice-chairman of the
sociology of religions research committee of
the International Sociological Association and
a specialist in the problems of ethnic
minorities.
17
