THE SOUL OF A PEOPLE
by Zainal Kling
IN Malaysia, it was traditionally believed
that rice, or paddy, was animated by
a soulthe rice soul (semangat padi).
The semangat (soul) is a generalized idea or
notion of a vital principle which enlivens
and animates objects and living things in
this world. It is the extra vitality or vigour
complementing the life principle (nyawa) in
living beings or the intrinsic power em¬
bodied in magical objects and is variously
conceived as "a diminutive but exact
counterpart of its own embodiment", or as
appearing in the form of an insect, a bird,
or an animal. Nevertheless, in the central
part of the Malaysian peninsula an an¬
thropomorphic conception of the rice soul
was often encountered in myth:
"In olden times, rice was not harvested
from the fields. Every morning a grain
would appear in the house of the farmer
and find its way into the rice cooking pot.
The housewife would normally cook the
rice grain without even opening the pot
cover, which was taboo (pantang). By the
afternoon the pot would be full of rice
ready for consumption.
"One morning, the housewife planned to
leave the house for her farm and therefore
she warned her children never to open the
rice pot during her absence. Once the
mother had gone, one of the younger
children grew curious and tried to open the
pot. Unbeknownst to her elder sister she
peeped into the pot and saw a little girl in¬
side. Suddenly the little girl disappeared
leaving only a small grain of rice. Her elder
sister was very angry and scolded her
severely.
"When their mother returned, she found
that there was no rice in the pot. She knew
that it had been opened and scolded her
younger daughter for disobeying her in¬
structions and breaking the taboo. But it
was no good crying over spilt milk, and
from that day onwards they had to work
very hard to plant the rice, harvest it, and
then carry home all the grains."
The anthropomorphic conception was
further elaborated by a series of endearing
names used to address the rice soul in in¬
vocations and incantations during various
rites, especially at first harvest (menuai
sulung). The soul was adored like a new¬
born baby and lovingly addressed as "the
nine-month baby" (anak sembilan bulan),
"sunray princess" (anak maharaja
cahaya), or "the crystal princess" (si dang
gemala). This human treatment of rice
reflects the inherent Malay attitude of
treating all humanity with the utmost
respect and kindness.
The rice soul was also regarded as a
manikin, or thumbling, with the most sen¬
sitive feelings which could be easily offend-
M jHhi
1 , i -
' * wmgm. A
	 / '
»
*
1 ^riM&M
"ai M
W i 	 -tmf
Each year in May, the Kadazan and Murut
villagers of Sabah (Malaysia), celebrate
the rice harvest with one of the most im¬
portant traditional ceremonies in their
cultural life. The festivities begin with the
celebration of magavau, a ritual in which
the "soul" of the rice is carried from the
rice-field to the home of its owner. Then,
to the beating of drums and gongs, the
bobohizan or Kadazan priestesses per¬
form the sumazau, the Kadazans' best-
loved dance, and the head priestess begs
fora good harvest the foliowing year. The
people join in the dance, the traditional
way of expressing everlasting gratitude
to their creator Kinoingan for sacrificing
his only daughter Huminodun so that the
different parts of her body could become
food for the starving people. Rice is the
embodiment of the spirit or soul of
Huminodun.
ed and hurt. It had to be handled with cau¬
tion, like a fragile, vulnerable baby or, as
the Malay saying puts it, as though "hand¬
ling a flat-bottomed tray brimful of cook¬
ing oil" (menatang minyak yang penu).
These human characteristics symbolically
project the personality traits generally
displayed by Malays themselves, for as a
people they are sensitive and unassuming,
easily offended and shamed by harsh words
and treatment.
The human attributes of the rice soul
became the focus of complex rituals and
elaborate ceremonies with a strong emo¬
tional content which built up to almost
cultic veneration and adoration in the
various rites throughout the cycle of rice
cultivation. From the first step of selecting
rice seeds, to the process of growing,
32

transplanting and weeding and up to the
time of the first harvest, the final storage
and the first tasting of the crop, a series of
rituals was carried out to express the
primordial need for a good harvest and the
survival of the community from hunger and
starvation.
The souls were entreated and invoked to
remain with the rice and not to abandon its
rice-seed embodiment or the community.
The ritual specialist, the Pawang, would
tenderly cradle a handful of seeds at the
beginning of the sowing ceremony or dur¬
ing the cutting of the first few stalks at the
first harvest. The Pawang's entire attitude
would be one of appeasement and tender
care of the soul against human violation or
destruction by malignant spirits. The first
few stalks were cut with a small palm-size
reaping knife to avoid hurting the tender
soul or inflicting violence on the ears of
rice.
Female Pawang, or housewives, would
normally invite the soul, believed to be em¬
bodied in a selection of the best of the
newly-reaped seeds, to return home with
them. The first seven ears of rice to be
reaped were swaddled and tenderly placed
in a specially-made basket, the cradle of the
rice soul. The basket would then be careful¬
ly kept in the rice store for next year's
cultivation. Whatever interpretation may
be placed on these various rituals, they
nevertheless clearly suggest a strong notion
of the rites of fertility, the concept of
"mother earth" and rebirth in the "mother
seeds" (ibu benith), the receptacle of the
child-like rice soul.
For generations these attitudes and rites
were part and parcel of the Malay cultural
system as reflected in rice cultivation, until
modern technologies reduced them to mere
memories, to sub-conscious skills to be
briefly recalled during a particularly bad
harvest or a period of unfavourable plant¬
ing conditions. In the modern technological
context of machinery, chemical fertilizers,
irrigation systems and hybrid seeds, the
idea of rice souls and ritual ceremonies
seem more and more irrational and
meaningless.
ZAINAL KLING, of Malaysia, is head of the
department of anthropology and sociology at
the University of Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. He
is currently carrying out research into cultural
forms in Malaysia.
33
