:^
Jar
&*
>:
'>>*
Caravan transporting salt
across the Danakil desert in
Ethiopia.

Ttrcrw»nrn:w3rTtne*r'fiiii,,B: a b we
Retracing the caravan routes of East Africa
by Joseph Frederick Mbwiliza
TWO factors have directly influenced
the development of long-distance
trade in east Africa. The first is the
existence of a long coastline stretching from
Cape Guardafui in the north to Sofala in
the south. Along this coastline were rich
fishing grounds, mangrove swamps, salt,
and a variety of other products. These serv¬
ed as major incentives in the development
of commercial relations between the
peoples of east Africa on the one hand and
those of Asia and the Mediterranean world
on the other. The second relates to the in¬
terior, where salt-lakes and springs, and
deposits of minerals such as iron, gold and
copper served similar purposes and helped
to bring people from different parts of
Africa's heartland into regular commercial
contact.
A dearth of information on the east
African interior has given substance to the
view that there was no contact between the
interior and the ports which dotted the
coast during the centuries preceding the ar¬
rival of the Portuguese in the Indian Ocean
JOSEPH FREDERICK MBWILIZA, of Tanzania,
is a senior lecturer in history at the University
of Dar-es-Salaam. He is a member of the
Council of the Southern African Universities
Social Sciences Conference and is the author
of a number of articles and studies on east and
southern African history.
at the close of the fifteenth century.
However, new evidence shows that long¬
distance trade could not have been suddenly
imposed on the societies of the interior but
rather grafted itself onto older local pat¬
terns and regional networks of trade in
foodstuffs, livestock, and especially iron
tools and salt. It was most probably from
these humble beginnings that the peoples of
the interior eventually came into contact
with the coast and thus with international
trade.
However, it does seem plausible that a
revival of commercial contact between the
interior and the coast came in late in the
eighteenth century, and that caravan routes
to the great lakes did not become firmly
established until the nineteenth century.
This was in response to increased world de¬
mand for ivory and slave labour for the
plantation economies in Zanzibar, the
Mascarene Islands and the Caribbean. By
the middle of the nineteenth century three
main caravan routes with feeder networks
in the interior had been established.
The Kilwa-Lake Nyasa caravan route is
perhaps the oldest of the three caravan
routes. Its origin can be dated back to the
first decade of the seventeenth century. Un¬
til then Kilwa, like all the other coastal
towns at that time, was oriented outwards
to the sea rather than inwards towards the
continent. Established by Muslim sailors
from the Middle East, Kilwa was an Islamic
commercial outpost for centuries. Through
intermarriage and concubinage the popula¬
tion had been gradually Africanized, giving
rise to the development of a Swahili culture
oriented outwards towards the ocean. The
only significant point of interaction with
the people in the interior was through
Sofala, the port to the south which was link¬
ed by an overland trade route to the Zim¬
babwean goldfields. Kilwa's glory dates
from its successful commercial domination
of the gold trade from the Zimbabwean
plateau, made possible by its control of the
sea route to Sofala rather than any trade
with its vast hinterland.
The earliest reference to commercial rela¬
tions between Kilwa and its hinterland is by
a Portuguese Jesuit, Father Monclaro, who
mentions that trade in ivory existed in 1569.
Several other Portuguese sources tend to
support the view that by the last quarter of
the sixteenth century Kilwa had already
changed its commercial priorities from its
once exclusive seaward orientation to rela¬
tions with its hinterland. This was the only
alternative to economic ruin since the Por¬
tuguese had effectively cut off her links
with the Zimbabwe gold trade. Kilwa now
turned to the ivory trade.
Although the impetus came from the
coast, changes within the political economy
of the societies in Kilwa's vast hinterland
View of a 16th-
century Portuguese
fort at Kilwa, United
Republic of Tan¬
zania. An important
commercial centre
as early as the 10th
century, Kilwa was
the maritime ter¬
minus of one of the
oldest interior trade
routes of East
Africa.
27

HM
were equally significant. The emergence of
the Yao as leading traders along the Kilwa
route was the result of a number of
economic factors. In the vanguard of their
expeditions to the coast were the Chisi,
ironsmiths who held a key position within
Yao society and played an important role in
local and regional trade. It has been sug¬
gested that these expeditions probably
began between 1590 and 1616. What is
known for certain is that the transition to
international trade between Yaoland and
Kilwa was a gradual process growing from
a limited regional trade in hides, ironware
and agricultural products of secondary in¬
terest to the coastal merchants to a thriving,
well-organized trade by the end of the
seventeenth century.
The second major caravan route was the
Pangani valley route, further north, where
commercial relations between the trading
cities along the coast and the peoples of the
interior appear to have developed earlier
than along the Kilwa coast. The density of
the population in the intermediate zone
together with the troubled relations with the
Portuguese seem to have been instrumental
in forcing Mombasa to cultivate trade rela¬
tions with the peoples of the interior as early
as the sixteenth century, and it seems
probable that the rise of Mombasa as one of
the leading commercial centres of the east
African coast owed much to its successful
cultivation of trade with its hinterland. In
the second decade of the sixteenth century
Mombasa traders were said to be sometimes
at war with those on the mainland,
sometimes at peace and conducting trade in
honey, wax and ivory. It was this relative
independence from the Portuguese-
dominated trade in the south that enabled
Mombasa to weather successive Portuguese
attacks between 1505 and 1589.
This trade, however, does not appear to
have survived the upheavals which accom¬
panied the changing political and economic
fortunes of Mombasa during the seven¬
teenth century. Commercial relations bet¬
ween the people of the interior and mer¬
chants in the towns which dotted the Mrima
coast from Malindi to Pangani picked up
during the first half of the eighteenth cen-
28
tury. Like that between Kilwa and the Yao,
it appears to have developed as an extension
of old regional trade networks, although
once again the impetus would seem to have
come from the coast. The earliest European
accounts of caravan trade in the Pangani
valley all show that this was firmly in the
control of people from the coast by the
middle of the nineteenth century.
Despite this situation there were impor¬
tant regional trade networks which extend¬
ed from Usambara to Masailand, including
trade in mpaa skins, an essential item in
Shambaa rituals for the newly born. The
only reliable source for these skins was in
southern Pare where herds of Impala
abounded. This trade eventually expanded
to include not only mpaa skins but also goat
skins, goats and cattle. Similarly, and
perhaps at about the same time, individual
Shambaa traders began to trade in ghee,
livestock and tobacco to the coast in ex¬
change for shells which were also used in
certain rituals.
In northern Pare an important regional
trade developed between the Gweno and the
Mamba chiefdoms towards the end of the
eighteenth century. Mamba ironsmiths
travelled to Ugweno to trade cattle for the
iron which they fashioned into weapons for
Chagga and Arusha markets. The Kibosho
further east extended this regional trade
network to Taveta and Taita in Kenya and
westwards to the plains people of Kahe and
Arusha Chini. Besides iron, other com¬
modities such as agricultural produce, salt,
tobacco, livestock and women entered into
this network of exchange. This trade,
however remained regional or local until
the second half of the nineteenth century.
This enabled the Swahili from the coast to
move up-country, establishing trading sta¬
tions in the plains well before the demand
for ivory at the coast evoked a positive
response from the interior.
Though not the oldest, the caravan route
which linked the Tanzanian coast to the
shores of Lake Tanganyika and beyond is
probably the best known of the three major
caravan routes. Beginning as a regional net¬
work in western and central Tanzania, it
had extended to the coast by about 1 800. As
View of Mombasa (Kenya) a
leading centre of trade on the
east African coast. As early as
the 16th century Mombasa
established trading links with
the hinterland which provided
such commodities as honey,
wax and ivory.
in Yaoland, iron hoes were the principal
commodity traded throughout the period, a
fact that underscores the degree of integra¬
tion between agriculture and craft industry
which had been attained during the eigh¬
teenth century. There were only a few scat¬
tered iron ore deposits in the region, and the
technology was strictly controlled through
ritual and taboos so that it remained a
monopoly of a few families on the Ufipa
plateau and in northwestern Tanzania.
Similarly salt, an equally important item
for an agricultural people, was not readily
available everywhere in the region. By the
nineteenth century Uvinza salt was traded
from the southern shores of Lake Victoria
to northern Zambia and from eastern Zaire
into the Ruaha valley.
A third widely sought item of regional
trade was copper. This was mined and cast
into bars in Katanga and carried by Sumb-
wa and Galagansa itinerant traders
northwards into western Tanzania. Here it
was drawn into wire by local smiths and
then used in the manufacture of ornamental
ware such as bangles and royal insignia for
chiefly families. During the same period, in
the southern interlacustrine States of Buha
and Burundi, copper was used for the
manufacture of royal spears and bracelets.
As in the other two cases, the develop¬
ment of this great regional trade preceded
the penetration of Swahili and Arab
caravans from the coast into the interior.
The latter were mainly interested in trading
for ivory and slaves and not in iron, salt or
copper, and only reached central Tanzania
during the second decade of the nineteenth
century.
The addition of ivory to the indigenous
trade goods of central and western Tan-

zania led to the formation of a vast long¬
distance trading network which linked the
coast to the remote interior as the pattern of
regional trade came to support the opera¬
tions of international commerce. Trade in
iron, salt, copper and ivory again converg¬
ed around Unyamwezi.
Once this happened, it becomes
untenable to maintain that there was a
dichotomy between long-distance trade and
regional or local trade. By its very nature,
long-distance trade was from the start
dependent on production in the interior and
was therefore entwined with local trade.
Food was grown in most cases by women,
if not by slaves, and exchanged locally. Iron
and salt were brought from neighbouring
districts, and carried by caravans mainly
engaged in the ivory and the slave trade.
Some ivory and slaves were obtained locally
from bands of hunters or warlords, but
many more reached Tabora from distant
lands. Ivory with little local utility value
was destined for the coast, but many of the
slaves brought to Tabora or Ujiji were
employed locally in domestic and
agricultural work, in ivory hunting and
porterage. Thus a caravan leaving Tabora
in the nineteenth century for the coast to sell
ivory and slaves and perhaps some copper
wire would also carry goods for exchange or
to pay tolls along the way. Salt-stacks and
iron hoes for use in Ugogo and Usagara
were important on the outward journey,
while caravans on their way back home
were laden with imported cloth, wire, and
beads.
These commercial links between the coast
and the interior strongly affected the older
economic infrastructure on which they were
grafted or from which in some cases they
evolved. Not only did they stimulate an in¬
tensified exploitation of east Africa's
natural and human resources, they also
sparked off a social and political trans¬
formation. Seen from a global perspective,
caravan trade facilitated the integration of
east African economies into the world
economy at uneven terms of trade in the
sense that it consisted basically of the ex¬
port of African raw materials in exchange
for finished consumer goods; this led to an
asymmetry between production and con¬
sumption and dislocation of existing pat¬
terns of production and exchange. Within
this world economy the ivory hunter, the
slave raider, the porter and, indirectly, the
food producer, had become by the middle
of the nineteenth century the forerunners of
the migrant workers and peasants of the
colonial labour force.
Traditional African institutions were not
spared the impact of the long distance
caravan trade. Ideas as well as goods and
new crops travelled along the caravan
routes and left their mark on African
societies. The most important of these for
contemporary east Africa was the spread of
Swahili from the coast to the interior which
has made the region a single cultural zone
extending into Zambia, Malawi, eastern
Zaire, and northern Mozambique. It was
due to the expansion of international trade
into the interior of east Africa that Islam
made headway there. Among the
matrilineal peoples of south-east Africa, in¬
ternal trade facilitated the liberation of men
by presenting them with alternative sources
of wealth outside the matrilineal kinship
structure and in this way paved the way for
the emergence of the patriarchal
polygamous family.
Joseph Frederick Mbwiliza
In the 18th century iron hoes
were one of the main com¬
modities traded in the com¬
mercial network which linked
the peoples of western and
central Tanzania. Certain
families, largely concentrated
on the Ufipa plateau in
western Tanzania, held the
monopoly of forging and
smelting technology. Right,
view and cross-section of a
traditional iron-smelting kiln
from this region. A strict ritual
governed the construction of
such kilns, which stand about
3 metres high.
Copper mine in the
Shaba (formerly
Katanga) region of
Zaire, the world's
sixth most impor¬
tant producer. Cop¬
per was one of the
main commodities
traded on the great
caravan route link¬
ing the coast of Tan¬
zania with Lake
Tanganyika. It was
used in the
manufacture of
gems and weapons.
