Psychology
in Black Africa
by Amewusika Kwadzo Thy
ANY attempt to define the current
situation of psychology in Black
Africa depends on what is meant
by psychology modern (or Western)
psychology, or traditional African
psychology.
While the former enjoys full scientific
and administrative recognition in many
Black African countries, the latter still has
to assert its existence as a body of
knowledge and practice which can be tested
by the scientific method of hypothesis, ex¬
perimental verification and proof. The
mistrust and sometimes mutual rejection
which prevail between these two kinds of
psychology seriously limit the possibilities
of a form of official collaboration between
them which could lead to a veritable
synthesis.
Modern psychology in Black Africa can
be evaluated in two ways. It can be con¬
sidered as a science with universal validity,
in which case its level in Black Africa is the
same as that which is found throughout the
world. On the other hand, if it is held that
modern psychology can only be truly scien¬
tific in a specific historical and cultural con¬
text, its evaluation entails an assessment of
the evolution it has undergone in its new set¬
ting by being either receptive or closed to
methodological changes and to models
previously elaborated and tested elsewhere.
We take it that modern psychology in¬
cludes the major currents of Western
psychology which lay claim to be scientific
by virtue of their biological, physiological
and/or psychic foundations. It thus cor¬
responds to the ancient physic of the mind
as opposed to the philosophy of the soul,
and englobes psychiatry, psychological
testing, experimental' psychology, which is
often associated with educational psycho¬
logy, social psychology, psychotherapy and
psychoanalysis. Of these major branches,
with their many ramifications and theoret¬
ical trends, only educational psychology
and psychiatry have been trying, in the last
four decades, to take root in Africa. Since
1960, the year when many countries achiev¬
ed political independence, modern ^
AMEWUSIKA KWADZO TAY, Togolese
sociologist, is on the editorial staff of the
French language magazine Présence Africaine
and a member of the staff of the Société Afri¬
caine de Culture, Paris. Formerly assistant
director of the Education Planning Service of
Togo, he is the author of many studies and ar¬
ticles on education and culture in Africa.
"Modern psychology in Black
Africa can be evaluated In two
ways. It can be considered as a
science with universal validity,
in which case its level in Black
Africa is that which is found
throughout the world. On the
other hand, if it is held that
modern psychology can only be
truly scientific in a specific
historical and cultural context,
its evaluation entails an assess¬
ment of the evolution it has
undergone in its new setting by
being either receptive or closed
to conceptual and methodolo¬
gical changes and to models
previously elaborated and
tested elsewhere." Right,
Chieftain's chair from the Lun-
da region of Angola.
Photo © Musée de l'Homme, Paris
11

psychology has been taught virtually
everywhere in Africa, generally in faculties
of human sciences.
Psychiatry, however, is usually con¬
sidered as a medical discipline and is often
taught in faculties of medicine. This dif¬
ference in status, due to the fact that it is
taken seriously by the authorities, is cer¬
tainly one of the reasons why its develop¬
ment has been more remarkable than that
of other branches. The Universities of
Dakar (Senegal) and Ibadan (Nigeria) are
among those which have a world-wide in¬
fluence in this field. Journals, books, inter¬
national meetings and a range of document¬
ary information promote the exchange of
ideas and experience between specialists
and institutions in Africa and those in other
continents. According to the University of
Dakar periodical Psychopathologie Afri¬
caine, 448 articles were devoted to
psychiatry in Black Africa between 1965
and 1979, 200 of them appearing in this
same journal. During the same period 274
works, the proceedings of 70 meetings, and
68 miscellaneous documents were also
published. Although few Africans are in¬
volved in these exchanges of information,
their participation is remarkable in view of
the fact that modern psychology is a recent
import to Africa; it did not reach Black
Africa until 1940.
Nevertheless, it must be admitted that in
psychiatry alone, the human and material
capacities available are far from meeting
the needs of the sub-continent: in some
countries there is only one psychiatrist for
over 500,000 head of population. This
situation is aggravated by certain trends
and characteristics which are peculiar to
modern psychology in Africa, and which
are themselves a result of the cultural and
historical context in which psychology
began to take shape in Greek Antiquity.
The term psychology, or discourse on the
psyche, derives from the Greek notion of
the soul. In Homer, the word soul (in Greek
anemos, breath) had a twofold significance,
englobing on the one hand thumos, mind,
will, passion, that which characterizes the
individual personality; and on the other
psyche, life, the animal inspiration which
gives life to all bodies. From the fifth cen¬
tury BC until the Christian era, this dual
conception of man was worked out more
fully and rationalized within philosophical
and religious doctrines which underlay the
idea of immortality and the divinity of the
psyche.
These doctrines included reincarnation
and the imperative of autoperfection of the
psyche. The individual person was respon¬
sible for achieving this perfection and con¬
sequently for his fate in life and after death.
The precept "know thyself", which was in¬
scribed on the temple at Delphi, is a good
expression of the Greek belief that the hap¬
piness of the individual is based on
knowledge of his-psyche and of his duty to
it.
These Greek ideas on the psyche persisted '
until the nineteenth century when they were
exposed to the test of reason supported by
science, which had triumphed in almost all
fields of knowledge. Psychology was
criticized on the grounds that it was based
on scholastic reasoning which did not stand
up to scientific experimentation. Thus it
was classified as a magical practice because
12
of the bad reputation it had acquired during .
history.
In the Western perspective, that of the
Greek and Judaeo-Christian psyche, the
"madman" is someone inhabited by a
defective soul, which is dangerous because
it can corrupt other souls. Deprived of a
healthy spirit, he ceases to be a person and
thus loses the right to speech. Disconnected
from his culture, he has nothing to com¬
municate. He is dead but responsible for his
state. He must be destroyed, often by fire,
an element as subtle as the soul. For cen¬
turies mental alienation and disagreement
with the established order were confused in
the name of religious and political in¬
tolerance, and heretics, outlaws, and
madmen were transported to distant islands
or interned in asylums in the remote
countryside.
In the nineteenth century Western
psychology reacted against this bad image
and the criticisms of science by diversifying .
itself in a search for scientific foundations.
But in spite of the progress it has made in
this direction, psychology is still considered
as a science of secondary importance, ex¬
cept in the Soviet Union and the United
States. When modern psychology took root
in Black Africa there was a strong concern
that its scientific status should be preserved.
Hence the ambiguities of its attitudes to
African psychology: rejection of it at the
theoretical level, coexistence with it in cer¬
tain universities, and in some cases i col¬
laboration with it in the practical sphere.
While anyone practically concerned ¡with
the question cannot fail to realize that an
authentic African psychology really exists,
in the current state of research and publica¬
tions (numerous though they are) it is im¬
possible to define it in simple, general and
universally acceptable terms. In any case
such is not my intention in this article.
The question of the nature of African
psychology is part of the vaster problem of
the rehabilitation of African negro culture.
For example, the existence of African
psychology as a scientific theory is closely
connected to that of African philosophy,
which is the source of continuing debate
among African philosophers. Nor is it
possible, within the limits of this article, to
give a general assessment of the state of
African psychology in all its aspects.
Accordingly, we have restricted our
reflections to African psychiatry which, by
virtue of its presence and role in the con¬
tinent seems sufficiently representative of
African psychology. If it is accepted that
there is a connexion between mental health
or alienation and the individual personality,
and that psychiatry cannot be effective
unless it is part of a specific geographical
setting, a specific human history, and a
specific culture, then African psychiatry
cannot be understood without reference to .
a specifically African culture and
, personality.
The work of anthropologists,
Africanists, and men of culture both from
Africa and from other continents supports
the idea of the cultural unity of Black
Africa. The basic features of the African
personality exist within this fundamental
unity, which is often masked by physical or
linguistic diversity or by differences in
customs. Since the publication of La
This hand-bell (42.5 cm), carved
from an elephant tusk and known
as a lonflin, is one of the in¬
struments used by priests of Fa, a
traditional divinatory technique in
countries of the Gulf of Guinea.
Photo © Musée de l'Homme, Paris

In traditional African societies,
the soothsayer has a status
similar to that of the
physician both are consulted
at critical moments in the lives
of individuals or of social
groups. In his own way the
soothsayer fulfils a broad
therapeutic function. Fa (a
word in the language of the Fon
people; Ifa in Yoruba) is a tradi¬
tional divinatory technique of
the countries of the Gulf of
Guinea. In Dahomey (present-
day Benin) the Bokonon or Fa
priest (right) was consulted
before any important decision
was taken. In our photo, taken
in 1 930, the Bokonon is holding
ritual palm-nuts in his left hand,
whilst in front of him are spread
other divinatory accessories in¬
cluding a fatè, a tray symboliz¬
ing space, on which a powder is
sprinkled and in which the
soothsayer/priest draws Fa
signs with his finger-tips.
Photo © Musée de l'Homme, Paris
Philosophie Bantoue by Placide Tempels in
1 945 , the concept of the African personality
as developed by African philosophers ap¬
pears (according to Ibrahima Sow) to con¬
sist of four elements: the body (the corporal
envelope); the biological principle (internal
organs, automatic and psychosomatic
systems); the life principle; and the spirit as
such, the substance of immortality.
This conception of the personality is
situated in a dynamic psychological field
which is defined by three main axes of rela¬
tionships; the personality is at the meeting
point of these axes. There is a vertical axis
which brings the individual into relation
with his founding Ancestor, with God and
with the other invisible Existents; a
horizontal axis, or axis of social order,
which brings him into relation with the
cultural community; and the existential
axis, the axis of the person or the axis of
biolineal existence. (Dr. Ibrahima Sow,
Psychiatrie Dynamique Africaine). The
balance of the personality and thus of its
mental health depend on the balance of this
psychological universe. The coherence of
the whole is maintained, at each level, by
origin-myths, creation-myths, or founder-
myths, as well as by reason, which indicate
the conditions of individual and collective
human experience.
This conception of the personality
defines the individual neither as a Leibnitz-
ian monad (unity) nor, as certain an¬
thropologists would have it, as a tribal sub- 1
Psychotherapy was practised m
Africa by the Egyptians and long
predated the Greek, Roman and
Hebrew tradition in which much of
modern Western psychology is
rooted. Imhotep (right), chief
minister, astrologer and physician
to king Djoser (c. 2686-2613 BC),
who has been described as "the
first figure of a physician to stand
out clearly from the mists of anti¬
quity", practised psychotherapy
with such skill that he was ele¬
vated to the rank of a deity to
whom temples were erected at
Memphis and on the island of
Philae.
Photo © Archives Photographiques, Paris
13

without liberty. Each personality is
unique, while also remaining an expression
of the totality of the main cultural deter¬
minants. This means that there is the
possibility for a psychology of individual
differences in the modern sense, just as
there is everywhere else.
Ibrahima Sow has also written that "the
cause and effect of mental disturbance meet
in that which either affects the vertical
dimension of the Being, its relationship
with the Ancestor or with God, and thus
shatters the person's fundamental identity,
or in that which affects the horizontal
dimension of existential experience and
provokes misfortune. (...) The disturbance
can never simply be an isolated and
restricted inner debate, because the African
conception of relationship is a total and
dynamic one". According to specialists, the
ideas of personal sin and guilt are virtually
non-existent in African madness. The
persecution-depression theme, on the other
hand, is more common, conforming as it
does to the .anthropological structure
described above. The pathogenic agent,
which is always outside the sick person, is
either a wicked person, or an invisible
force, or the founding Ancestor.
Among the various methods used to seek
the deep-lying causes of the sickness are in
tuitive or deductive divination such as Fa,
which is extensively practised in the coun¬
tries on the Gulf of Guinea. An investiga¬
tion is carried out into the sick person and
all the suspect networks of relationships.
The treatment prescribed by the
geomancer, who in addition to his other
qualities possesses that of a subtle
psychologist, takes many forms, incor¬
porating the use of plant drugs, trance,
possession, prayer, incantation, sacrifice,
ritual and propitiatory offerings, and a
temporary change of community (although
the patient is never separated from people
he knows). Constantly cared for by his
family and his community, the "madman"
does not need to be exiled unless his condi¬
tion is so serious that it constitutes a real
physical danger for those around him. Only
if it is can he be temporarily deprived of
freedom of movement.
Thus although African psychiatry has
not yet been expressed in a body of theory,
it cannot be identified, as those who believe
in an extreme form of scientism would
maintain, with magic, savagery or ig¬
norance, and consequently condemned to
disappear or become a "folklore"
psychology. In the urban environment
where mental disturbance develops, the
families of the sick seek the concomitant aid
of both modern and traditional psychiatry,
and the latter often turns out to be more ef¬
fective than tranquillizers which do not
always bring about a definitive cure. This is
one reason why in some countries
specialists and authorities are showing an
increasing interest in collaboration between
modern psychology and African
psychology.
This approach seems particularly
necessary today because there can be no
doubt that, unlike the other sciences, even
those branches of psychology which have
won the most scientific recognition, such as
psychiatry or social psychology, cannot be
exported "tailor made". If it is to be effect¬
ive for a given people it must be developed
from within that people's culture. But it
should also be stressed that the develop¬
ment of African psychology cannot take
place in isolation. Collaboration will be
necessary with all the human and social
sciences, above all with philosophy.
It is in this sense that current debate
about the conditions for the achievement of
cultural identity and about African
philosophy have a particular interest for all
those who believe that the overall qualities
and abilities of a people are in a sense a
reflection of those of each of the persons
comprising it.
Amewusika Kwadzo Tay
The Impact of Psychology on Third World Development was the theme of an international con¬
ference organized by Unesco and the International Union of Psychological Sciences and held in
Edinburgh, Scotland, from 24 to 28 July 1982. The conference was attended by specialists from
a wide range of countries, including Venezuela where, in 1979, a Ministry for the Development
of Intelligence was created. The Minister has described the development of intelligence as "ab¬
solutely necessary for the political, economic and social development of peoples". A national pro¬
gramme has been established consisting of 14 projects. One of these. Project Chess, which is
under the direction of a psychologist, aims to develop a "chess-oriented" way of thinking among
schoolchildren aged 7 to 9 and to study its possible transference to other areas. Below, a game
of chess in progress in a street in Caracas.
- *Ï-.!"J~ v -
14
