The nitrate ultimatum by Ray Edmondson and
Henning Schou
Cellulose nitrate film in
various stages of decomposi¬
tion. The film produces a gas
which bleaches the photo¬
graphic images. Then it
becomes sticky, bubbles,
solidifies and finally crumbles
into a brown powder.
IF there had been newsreel cameras in the
days of the Pharaohs we might today
have the answer to one of history's most
intriguing questionshow did they build the
pyramids? The ancient Egyptians left many
records from which modern man has
reconstructed their culture: stone tablets,
papyrus scrolls, the pyramids themselves
and their contents. But a newsreel would
have brought it all to life, unconsciously cap¬
turing the things the Egyptians might not
have thought to record in their writings.
Even if they had been able to match the in¬
ventions made around the turn of the cen¬
tury, we should not have been able to see
the results today: while the pyramids and
RAY EDMONDSON, of Australia, is the Direc¬
tor of the National Film Archive, National
Library of Australia, Canberra.
HENNING SCHOU, of Australia, is head of the
preservation department of the National Film
Archive, National Library of Australia and
chairman of FIAF's Preservation Commission.
some papyrus have survived for thousands
of years, the movie film would have perished
within the first hundred, leaving nothing but
containers full of brown dust for the ar¬
chaeologist to puzzle over....
The motion picture as we know it is less
than a century old. It is a child of technology:
unlike older forms of art and record, it can be
created and used only through mechanical
or electronic means. It has become the
universal medium of mass communication,
the first genuinely new art form in thousands
of years, andalmost without our realizing
itit has become one of our principal forms
of historical record.
Until 1951, most professional motion pic¬
ture film was made of a mixture of cellulose
nitrate and camphorsometimes called
celluloid or nitrocellulose. Durable in heavy
use, easy to splice and work with, it met the
most important and immediate re¬
quirements of film-makers and cinema
operators. But it has two serious disadvan¬
tages: it is highly inflammable, and it has a
limited life-span (generally from forty to
eighty years).
When ignited, a roll of nitrate film is im¬
possible to extinguish, even by submersion
in water, and it burns with an almost ex¬
plosive ferocity. Under certain conditions, it
is capable of spontaneous combustion.
The second disadvantage, the instability
of the material, did not particularly concern
the film industry, at least at the time that mat¬
tered. During most of the "nitrate era"the
period from the popularization of movies in
the 1890s until the discontinuation of nitrate
manufacture in 1951film was largely
perceived as popular entertainment, and
little thought was given to its permanent
value or to the problems of preserving it.
Because the industry itself exercised such
far-reaching control over the exhibition and
ownership of film prints it was not a problem
that entered the public consciousness
either. And it was not until the latter years of
the nitrate era that a significant amount of
film had actually reached the end of its
10

Chemical life and the nature of the nitrate
time-bomb became obvious.
What happens to nitrate film as it ages?
From the moment of manufacture, cellulose
nitrate slowly decomposes. Some of the
chemical bonds between the cellulose and
the nitre groups break, resulting in release of
heat and of nitrogen oxides, mainly the diox¬
ide, which accelerates the process as the
reaction products accumulate. This decom¬
position may take many years, showing no
external signs of disintegration. However,
eventually the gases bleach the
photographic image (first stage of decom¬
position). The emulsion carrying that image
becomes sticky, then the reel becomes soft
and exudes blisters of "nitrate honey" and a
pungent smell. In the fourth and final stage,
the film congeals into a solid mass and then
Scene from Quo Vadis ? (Italy,
1912-1913), a historical spec¬
tacular directed by Enrico
Guazzoni which had a sensa¬
tional success in many coun¬
tries. Guazzoni was a pioneer
in constructing enormous
sets, which he designed
himself. This classic of the
early Italian cinema has been
reconstituted and transferred
onto non-inflammable film,
with the aid of the Italian Film
Archive, the Cineteca Italiana.
disintegrates into brown powder giving off
an acrid odour. This may occur rapidly, in a
matter of a few months.
The rate of decorpposition is temperature-
dependent, roughly doubling with every in¬
crease of 5°C. Storage, therefore, needs to
be as cold as possiblewith low humidity to
prevent the nitrogen dioxide from reacting
with the water in the atmosphere and the
photographic emulsion to form nitrous and
nitric acid which, in turn, attack the film. The
Preservation Commission of the Interna¬
tional Federation of Film Archives (FIAF)
recommends that nitrate be stored at 2°C
and 50 per cent to 60 per cent relative
humidity. Colder conditions, while more ef¬
fective in slowing the decomposition rate,
are economically impractical; actually, for
financial reasons, most archives are obliged
to store nitrate at 5°C or higher.
How do you preserve nitrate film? There
are no economically practical means of stop¬
ping the relentless decomposition: sooner or
later every reel of nitrate film will turn to
"honey" and then to brown powder. To
preserve the visual, audiovisual content of
silent and sound nitrate films, respectively,
copies must be madeon the more stable
safety film stocks whose potential life can be
estimated in hundreds of years. The copying
process can be complicated by the condition
of the nitrate reel. Shrinkage, brittleness,
scratches, tears and image fading are just
some of the problems that are often en¬
countered. Technical restoration and ar¬
chival printing is specialized work often far
removed from the mainstream expertise of
commercial film laboratories.
Once made to a satisfactory standard, the
new preservation copy must thereafter be
put into an administrative system which will
protect it from future degradation. It will
need to be stored at the correct temperature
and humidity, handled only by those
technically competent to do so, and its con¬
dition regularly monitored. Its existence,
description and use will need to be ap¬
propriately recorded, catalogued and con¬
trolled. And these steps are vital. No matter
how perfect the preservation copy, the ex¬
pense and effort spent in making it will be
wasted if the copy is damaged, worn, or
even lost. It is from the preservation copy
that duping copies (intermediate printing
masters) and, thence, new screening copies
in future will be derived, and whatever
blemishes it accumulates might mar the film
forever.
Already, film archives are being forced to
make value judgments about which films to
copy, and which films they will allow to
distintegrate and be permanently lost.
Already large portions of the work of many of
the world's outstanding film-makers have
vanished, or are at this moment in danger.
Does it really matter? How much would it
have mattered if 95 per cent of the works of
Shakespeare had been lost? Or if the cre¬
ations of Leonardo da Vinci, Tolstoy or
Beethoven had been discarded?
Whatever our response, there isn't much
time to answer the question!
Ray Edmondson and Henning Schou
