A telescope in space
by Albert Ducrocq
ALBERT DUCROCQ, French engineer,
writer, broadcaster and journalist with the
French daily newspaper Le Figaro, is a
specialist in cosmology and space matters and
was also one of the pioneers of cybernetics in
France. The mostrecentof his many books. Le
Futur Aujourd'hui, has just been published by
Les presses de la Cité, Paris.
DESTINED to multiply by 350 the
volume of the observable universe,
the Space Telescope will be the
most important scientific instrument ever
sent into space, according to NASA (the US
National Aeronautical and Space Ad¬
ministration) administrator James Beggs. It
is scheduled to be put into orbit 550
kilometres above the earth sometime in
1986 by the space shuttle, to the dimensions
of which it has been tailored (when folded
it will be 13.1 metres long with a diameter
of 4.27 metres).
The key component of the 1 1-ton instru¬
ment will be a telescope only slightly dif
ferent in conception from that devised in
the seventeenth century by the French
physicist N. Cassegrain and the Scottish
mathematician James Gregory: the light
rays strike a hyperboloidal primary mirror
with a diameter of 2.4 metres; they are
reflected to a 30-centimetre secondary mir¬
ror five metres away before being directed
through a 60-centimetre hole in the centre
of the primary mirror and penetrating back
into an instrument section consisting of a
photometer, two spectrographs (a high-
resolution spectrograph to study the
chemical composition of celestial objects,
and a faint-object spectrograph to study
their speed), and two cameras (a wide-fiëld
I 1
©

Aperture door
Radio antenna
Support module
Primary mirror
Above, diagrammatic representation of
the Space Telescope, which Is scheduled
to be placed In orbit by the space shuttle
In 1986. Left, exterior view of the Hale
Observatories' 5-metre (200-Inch) Mount
Palomar telescope, California, the
world's second most powerful optical
telescope after the 6-metre UTR-Z tele¬
scope at Zelenchukskaya, In the USSR.
Axial scientific
instruments
Radial scientific
instruments
camera sensitive to wavelengths ranging
from the infra-red to the ultraviolet, and an
ultrasensitive faint-object camera with a
field forty times smaller).
The great telescopes of Mount Palomar
and Zelenchukskaya have 5- and 6-metre
apertures respectively, but the Space
Telescope should produce a far higher per¬
formance, if only because of the extraor¬
dinary care with which its mirror has been
made from fused silica glass with a very low
coefficient of thermal expansion, fixed on a
honeycomb structure. Construction of the
829-kilo mirror began in October 1977 and
it was delivered in December 1978.
Computer-controlled polishing was so
precise that the overall deviation of the
reflecting surfaces from their ideal contour
is no more than 10 nanometres*; the same
precision was observed in the application of
an 80-nanometre-thick coating of
aluminium and a protective layer of
magnesium floride 25 nanometres thick.
Observations of the sky from the earth
are impeded by the earth's atmosphere,
which is always turbulent (even when it is
supposedly calm the stars "twinkle" in a
conventional telescope) and is slightly
1 J nanometre = 1 millionth of a millimetre.
luminous because it diffuses all kinds of
radiation. In space these disadvantages do
not exist.
How will the Space Telescope be con¬
trolled? Its rear section is a "support
module" which will act as a platform and is
equipped with a stellar sensor and a
gyroscope with a fine-guidance precision of
.007 arc-seconds. It will be possible to hold
the optical axis on to a point 30 kilometres
away to within 1 mm for a very long period.
For some programmes the optical axis will
be held steady for up to ten hours which
should make it possible to observe stars of
the 29th magnitude.
The instrument will not take
photographs. A solid-state CCD (charge
coupled device) system has been chosen in¬
stead of film. There will be four microelec¬
tronic silicon chips, each one a square
measuring 1.2 cm, with 800 individual pic¬
ture elements (pixels) on each side, so that
each-chip has a total of 640,000 pixels. The
sensitivity will be 50 times that of film.
A retransmission system in the support
module will relay information to the earth
by means of the NASA Tracking and Data
Relay Satellite System at a rate of a million
bits of information per second. The energy
distribution system will also be housed in
the support module. The current will be
provided by two solar panels, one on each
side of the Telescope. Each measures 2.3
metres by 11.8 metres. The panels are ex¬
pected to produce 2.4 kW.
Astronomers will adjust the instruments
and carry out experiments using scientific
equipment installed in eight boxes mounted
behind the primary mirror. There could be
no question of their being in direct physical
contact with the Space Telescope while it is
in operation. In view of the degree of preci¬
sion that is being sought, human heartbeats
alone would make the apparatus vibrate. In
the normal course of events, operations will
be carried out automatically according to
procedures controlled from earth.
From time to time, perhaps every two
years, the Space Telescope will be visited by
astronauts who will check the equipment
and make any necessary adjustments.
The Space Telescope will be the
spearhead of astronomy until the end of the
century. After five years' service it is plann¬
ed that the Telescope will be returned to
earth in the shuttle to be modernized and
equipped with the new and more compact
CCDs which will have been developed by
that time.
Albert Ducrocq
37
