Children in nomansland
The dilemma of second-generation immigrants
>^^ui^S^
Some countries are trying hard to put an end to the cultural nomansland in which many second-
generation immigrants live. Above, in a school at Oullins near Lyons (France) young musicians take
part in a creativity session held during a series of encounters with art and artists organized in the
town's schools in 1983. In school shown here, 97 per cent of the pupils are the children of
immigrants.
26
Photo © Populan, Oullins, France

<
©
"What is needed is to ensure that society regards the child of
an immigrant as a person and not as the fruit of an economic
policy. He is, indeed, a person, with his own capacities and
gifts, who has a right to education and training, just as he has
a right to be different."
"The illiterate are excluded because they cannot read, but at
the same time they cannot read because they are excluded",
says a recent French Government report on "The Illiterate in
France". Above, a literacy lesson in Paris.
by Sonia Abadir Ramzi
CERTAIN European countries count
amongst their, populations today
a very large number of immigrants
from a variety of countries and cultures.
(In the case of the Federal Republic of
Germany and France, they represent 7
per cent and 8 per cent of the population,
respectively). This means that the most
diverse cultures are destined to co-exist
permanently in the host country. This
necessary and unavoidable co-existence
gives rise to conflicts if the groups con¬
cerned continue to ignore, or even to op¬
pose, one another.
According to statistics, 85 per cent of
immigrants belong to the working class,
and their working conditions are ex-
SONIA ABADIR RAMZI, of Egypt, has
taught at the University of Algiers. She is the
author of a book entitled La Femme Arabe au
Maghreb et au Machrek (at press) and has col¬
laborated on a collective work, La Femme et la
Politique, to be published by Unesco.
tremely hard. A large majority of them
are illiterate. To this major handicap must
be added the effect of being removed
from their traditional cultural milieu,
unhealthy living conditions (75 per cent
of the insanitary dwellings in France are
occupied by immigrants), precarious
economic conditions and permanent
legal insecurity. Immigrants are con¬
fronted with an industrial civilization
which is interested in them only as "pro¬
ductive" individuals, denies their right to
be different and ignores their cultural
potentialities. Consequently immigrants
and their children live on the fringe of
social and civic life. Nevertheless,
second generation "immigrants" have
never emigrated from anywhere!
Some host countries give immigrants
the chance to become citizens after a
certain period of residence, others give
them no security of long-term residence
and maintain them in a permanently
uncertain, temporary legal situation. This
situation has repercussions on the
second generation. In five European
countries (Belgium, France, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Sweden and
Switzerland), 3,800,000 persons under
25 have not formally acquired the
citizenship of the host country.
The marginalization, not to say rejec¬
tion, of immigrants is due to racial or
xenophobic prejudice, often transmitted
via the media, which belittles the
cultures of people from formerly coloniz¬
ed countries. Because of a cultural
heritage shared in common with the host
countries, this problem is, relatively
speaking, less manifest in the case of
Italian, Portuguese and Spanish
immigrants.
Immigrants especially those of
Islamic origin are cut off from their
roots without for all that succeeding in
acquiring the cultural identity of the host
country. Consequently they live in a
cultural no man's land. Whereas adult im¬
migrants, whose personalities have
already been formed by a set of values,
moral codes, customs, myths and sym¬
bols, can to a certain degree resist the
"dangers" of their new situation,
second-generation immigrants cannot
escape exposure to the effects of a
double sub-culture. The result is that im¬
migrants constitute an anxious, disturb¬
ed population. The initial insecurity and
inequalities lead to a loss of interest in ac¬
quiring literacy. The consequence of this
27



is a structural form of illiteracy and il¬
literacy due to revulsion, both amongst
adult immigrants and their children,
which places them at a disadvantage as
regards access to employment or job
advancement.
Whatever the circumstances, impar¬
ting literacy to immigrant workers is a
special problem. Not only are the majori¬
ty of these workers and their families in¬
capable of reading or writing their native
language, but making them literate is
rendered more difficult by the fact that,
at the same time, they have to learn a
new language. So, belonging to under-
stance, action has been conducted for
the past six years under the auspices of
the European Community. Its aim is to
improve collaboration between native
and -foreign teachers. Efforts are not
limited to teaching the language and
culture of origin. The regular teachers
meet the foreign ones and gradually
establish the programme of school ac¬
tivities. In very many cases, this has
enabled immigrant children to reach the
normal level of education. But the experi¬
ment is still on a limited scale; it has not
been extended to Belgium as a whole
(which has between 10 and 16 per cent
Photo Salgado Jr. CÇJ Magnum, Paris
Scene from a performance staged during
immigrant workers' theatre festival in Paris.
privileged socio-economic milieux,
deprived of their traditional cultural sup¬
port, having in many cases only an inade¬
quate command of the host country's
language, the children of immigrants
have a disturbing school failure rate. Dur¬
ing the symposium on immigration
problems held in Luxembourg from 4 to 5
May 1982 and organized with the co¬
operation of, amongst others, Unesco,
the representative of the European Com¬
munities stated: "We now know that the
degree of failure or backwardness of 60
per cent of the children of immigrants on
leaving school is still so serious that they
cannot be rescued by the educational
system".
Nevertheless, efforts have been made
in various countries in recent years to
remedy this state of affairs. In the
Belgian province of Limburg, for in-
28
of foreign pupils, depending on the level).
In the Netherlands/special courses in
Dutch have been provided for foreign
pupils since 1974 in addition to instruc¬
tion in the culture of origin. Whenever the
number of immigrants justifies it, schools
are allowed to employ supernumerary
teachers, 80 per cent of whom are
recruited amongst the immigrants
themselves.
In France, the eleven training and infor¬
mation centres for the education of the
children of immigrants have been in¬
tegrated by the Ministry for Education in¬
to the teachers' training colleges in the
main cities. They receive a thousand
teachers per year for further training
courses. Provision is made for time to be
allotted to native language courses for
immigrant children in elementary schools
but, despite the Ministry of Education cir¬
cular of 3 April -1 975 providing for an in¬
crease in the number of such courses,
there were only 2,510 integrated
courses in the 1979-1980 school year,
which were attended by 33,600 pupils
out of the 400,791 foreign pupils in
primary schools. The agreement of 1
December 1981 between France and
Algeria provides for the inclusion of in¬
tegrated Arab language and civilization
courses in elementary schools, within
the official French school time-tables. At
the secondary level, Algerian students
may choose their language of origin as a
first or second foreign language. The
number of Algerian teachers, at present
1 50, will be doubled.
Education policies affecting children of
immigrants in the Federal Republic of
Germany vary from State to State. In
North Rhineland, for instance, they are
given complementary education in their
native tongue. Elsewhere they are taken
into preparatory classes for two, four or
even six years.
In Luxemburg, a bilingual country,
reception classes are aimed at bringing
foreign pupils up to an acceptable level in
French and German.
In Switzerland, the reception classes
introduced in the sixties have been
replaced by support programmes.
In the United Kingdom, a law dating
from 1 966 authorizes local authorities in
whose areas immigrants account for
more than 2 per cent of the population to
seek reimbursement of 75 per cent of the
cost of salaries for teachers and social
workers responsible for the reception of
immigrants. The National Association for
Multi-cultural Education leads the cam¬
paign to adapt the British education
system to the presence of immigrants.
It is, perhaps, in Sweden that the big¬
gest effort has been made in favour of
minorities. Under a law of 1 976, bilingual
education is guaranteed to all im¬
migrants, both young and adult. The
number of teachers providing this educa¬
tion in the 20 native languages of the im¬
migrant children (7 per cent of Sweden's
school-going population) grew from 835
in 1974'to 2,000 in 1977.
In spite of these advances, all the
problems will not be solved until the reali¬
ty of immigration and the riches it brings
are better appreciated by the host socie¬
ty. It would be desirable that campaigns
be launched to prepare the latter to see
itself as a multicultural, multiracial socie¬
ty and to accept this fact with all its at¬
tendant consequences in the school, at
work, in the life of the community, in the
laws, the mass-media and recreation.
These campaigns should also stress that
over the past twenty years the influx of
foreign workers has slowed down the
ageing of the total population in most of
the host countries.
In fact, what is needed is to ensure that
society regards the child of an immigrant
as a person and not as the fruit of an
economic policy. He is, indeed, a person,
with his own capacities and gifts, who
has a right to education and training just
as he has a right to be different.
Sonia Abadir Ramzi
