Unesco's library
and archives
ORGANIZATIONS like Unesco
need a library "to give access
to knowledge" and to furnish the
printed information necessary for the per¬
sonnel in their work. In fact, the Unesco
central Library is the focal point of a
house-wide network of sectoral documen¬
tation centres which together serve the
programme specialists . and the
secretariat units.
With 100,000 volumes kept up to date
and 2,200 serials, including periodicals,
the Library is in a position to answer any
questions that may arise in the course of
the work of Unesco. Under certain condi¬
tions the Library is also open to outside
researchers.
The Library, however, is not merely a
collection of books; it is also a cataloguing
and indexing unit for Unesco's own
documents and publications. The best
and most detailed source of information
on what Unesco issues is to be found in
the Unesco List of Documents and
Publications, a printed and computerized
reference tool available in main libraries
and documentation centres throughout
the world and accessible on-line at
Unesco headquarters. The data base now
contains about 60,000 document
references available for consultation in
paper form and also on microfiches pro¬
duced by the Unesco Microfiche Service.
A Systems Development Section main¬
tains and develops the computer software
necessary for indexing. This programme,
called Isis, is also available to Member
States free of charge.
The Library is an organized collection of
books, while the Archives incorporate all
the records created or received by the
Organization in the course of its activities.
Unesco's archival documents are the
natural and unavoidable result of its work.
They comprise files, letters, memos,
speeches, working and meeting
documents, budgets, plans, programmes,
agreements, photographs, tapes, etc., all
reflecting faithfully the action taken in the
execution of the Organization's pro¬
gramme. Unesco's archival documents
are open, according to the established
rules, to researchers and students and all
other interested persons can consult
Unesco's published documents in the Ar¬
chives reading room.
The services described above are the respon¬
sibility of the Unesco Library, Archives and
Documentation Services, Programme Support
Sector.
