Bullt between 1753 and 1759 during the
reign of Ferdinand IV ofSpain and named
after him, the fortress of San Fernando
controlled the strait of Bocachlca, the
narrow passage that gives access to the
outer bay of Cartagena. It was built In the
shape of a horseshoe the two points of
which were on the land side with a solid,
seml-clrcular wall facing out to sea.
Above, one of the many turrets In which
lookouts were posted to warn of the ap¬
proach of enemy warships.
32

Cartagena de Indias
'A city with a soul'
by Renata Duran
TTHE string of tall luxury blocks
stretched along torrid Caribbean
beaches suggests a modern city
meekly submissive to the demands of in¬
ternational tourism. This is only partially
and superficially true. Not far away stand
the steeply rising fortifications of old Car¬
tagena, the city built on the lovely bay of
the same name, on the Atlantic coast of
Colombia, as a magnificent riposte to the
attacks which this region coveted by the
enemies of imperial Spain had to endure
in the seventeenth century.
In the sixteenth century Europeans
were dazzled by the New World and long¬
ed to possess it. The seventeenth cen¬
tury, the age of pirates and privateers
(the latter, unlike the former, obeyed the
laws of the State which granted them
"letters of marque" authorizing them to
seize enemy ships and merchandise),
saw the growth of strongholds whose
ramparts and defences were vastly
superior to those of medieval times.
Solid and massive fortresses were
needed to withstand attack by heavy ar¬
tillery and cannon. The Spanish forts in
America met these specifications. Car¬
tagena was one of the most typical of
them and is, perhaps, the only one to
have survived virtually intact.
Sir Francis Drake, the English sailor and
privateer who fought the Spaniards in the
Gulf of Mexico and ravaged the coasts of
Chile and Peru, suffered a severe defeat
at the hands of the terrorized but valiant
citizens of Cartagena. The man who
would later take on the Invincible Armada
attacked the city a second time, in 1 586,
when he granted it freedom in exchange
for 100,000 ducats, 200 black slaves
and the church bells. On account of this
humiliation the Council of the Indies in
Madrid decided on the complete fortifica¬
tion of the city. For the Spanish empire,
Cartagena, the prey of greedy pirates,
was a vital point for the defence of its
communications with the whole of South
America, and especially with the
viceroyalty of Peru, since it was through
this warehouse and arsenal that all the
treasures of the former Inca empire were
sent to Spain.
Hence the exceptional geopolitical im¬
portance of Cartagena for the Spaniards
and, of course, for their enemies. Hence
too the strategic position of what was
then called "the key to the Indies of
Peru".
The walls of Cartagena, rebuilt and im¬
proved over two centuries, constitute a
piece of military architecture that
resisted repeated assaults by the Dutch,
the English and the French. Treasures of
colonial architecture are conserved
within them. Traces of the original in¬
habitants, many of whom came from An¬
dalusia, survive in the Mozarabic design
of balconies, windows and patios, and in
the language and traditions. Stone-lined
pools and luxuriant gardens surround the
The skyline of the old city of Cartagena
(founded In 1533) provides a backdrop to
the old port through which passed the
treasure of the New World to replenish
the coffers of Imperial Spain.
33

inner thoroughfares of a still living city
with moisture and magic.
Cartagena has not suffered from the
excesses of progress. Thanks to its wise
master plan and architects, a substantial
part of the original layout has been
preserved. It is still possible to relive the
moments of the city's splendour. Saint
Peter Claver (1580-1654), the Spanish
missionary to the black slaves of
America, still imbues the city with that
heroic humanism that helped to mitigate
the cruelties of the Inquisition (the place
where its sombre ritual was performed
has wisely been preserved almost in¬
tact). Convents, churches, public foun¬
tains, cobbled alleys, tiny circular plazas
bring to the city an evocative charm.
Even the vaults built here and there in the
city walls have been preserved; they not
only served as shelters for the in¬
habitants during attacks by the English
and French but ironically were later
used by the Creoles when they fought
the Spaniards for independence, having
previously served as prisons for these
self-same heroes.
The forts of San Felipe de Barajas and
San Fernando de Bocachica which
defended the harbour are remarkable for
their original and ingenious design. A
group of fine mansions bears witness to
the magnificence of a port that grew rich
from the merchandise it redistributed
throughout South America.
The city was a rallying point for people
and ideas as well as for goods and ambi¬
tions. In Cartagena, a city with a soul,
blacks, mulattoes, mestizos and whites
lived and still livetogether. The cruci¬
ble of a new world, it has been the scene
of successive experiments in Latin
American integration. The Andine Pact
and the Cartagena Agreement are suffi¬
cient proof of this vocation. During the
colonial period the city succeeded in in¬
tegrating Catholic austerity with a pas¬
sion for adventure; today it combines
fidelity to the past with love of life. Car¬
tagena's vitality greets the visitor at
every step. Its present creativity gives
the lie to those who simplistically identify
conservation with stagnation. It is im¬
possible to escape the bewitchment of
the city's colonial atmosphere and
fortress-like character, but its people are
not drugged by the perfume of its past.
!i.SSSr-i
A typical street In the old town of Car¬
tagena. Corbelled balconies provide
welcome shade and add Interest to the
façades of the houses.
On the contrary it stimulates them to
face the challenges of today.
Cartagena de Indias is a city which has
miraculously resisted the corrosion of
time, the assaults of pirates and smug¬
glers who also tried to sell its soul, and
the indifference of the powers-that-be.
But above all it has survived the more
dangerous assaults of the worshippers of
progress who, insensitive to the charm of
the past, are always ready to demolish a
colonial house and replace it with a
pretentious concrete cube to show that
the city is vigorously facing the future.
Fortunately this wonderful city is also
determined to preserve its past, and the
intelligent expression of this determina¬
tion is, perhaps, the best contribution
Cartagena can make to the year 2000.
RENATA DURAN, Colombian lawyer and
writer, is a member of her country's perma¬
nent delegation to Unesco. She is the author
of two volumes of poems, La Muñeca Rota
(The broken Doll) and, to be published shortly.
Oculta Ceremonia (Secret Ceremony).
Covered balcony with carved wooden
balustrade ¡s a feature of the house of the
Marquis of Valdehoyos, a wealthy mer¬
chant of the 18th century. Recently
restored, this lordlyproperty is one of the
finest examples of colonial architecture
In Cartagena.
