Sense and censorship
Behind the censor's blue pencil by Peter Hanak
LARGE quantities of documents from
the censorship services of the old
Austro-Hungarian monarchy are
today preserved in the Kriegsarchiv in Vien¬
na and in the military history archives in
Budapest. Between 1916 and 1918 a thou¬
sand censors, grouped according to
language, examined from eight to ten
million letters a month, devoting particular
attention to correspondence with foreign
countries, soldiers and prisoners-of-war.
Letters considered to be harmless were sent
on untouched to their recipients; passages
in others were obliterated and some letters
were even confiscated. The obliterated
passages were scrupulously copied out by
the censors, and, with the confiscated let¬
ters, provided the basis for reports written
by the Censorship Office on the morale of
the troops and the civilian population. Half
a century later these documents have
become historical sources.
These letters and fragments of letters pro¬
vide the scholar with little reliable informa¬
tion about troop movements, casualties, the
output of factories or harvest yields. On the
other hand they do contain precious infor¬
mation about everyday life and about the
prevailing spirit in the army and the coun¬
try. Of course, the opinions expressed are
far too moderate and loyal to be totally
sincere, for their authors were quite aware
that their letters would pass through the
hands of the censor. But this in no way
detracts from the informativeness of the
materia], for reading between the lines it is
possible to discern grievances and news
which the writers ingeniously but vainly
sought to conceal from the censors.
Towards the end of the war, self-
censorship became notably more relaxed.
From Spring 1917 on, the letters reflect to a
fair extent what the population was think¬
ing and feeling. Some reports and extracts,
like those concerning the desertion of the
Serbs (1,300 extracts) or the repercussions
of the October Revolution in Russia are of
considerable interest to scholars. The
overall impression of revolutionary ferment
and of the radicalization of public opinion
which emerges from these letters written by
simple people is far more accurate than the
contents of a biassed press subject to
pressure from the authorities.
This material was highly suitable for
quantitative studies through the statistical
treatment of representative samples. But
the first step was to establish a grid of the
basic themes of popular thinking. To
analyse the state of mind of the population
between November 1917 and March 1918,
the author of this article took a sample of
1,500 letters, two-thirds of which had been
written by workers and peasants, and one-
third by intellectuals and middle class peo¬
ple. In view of the ethnic structure of the
monarchy, 46 per cent of the letters chosen
were written by Austrians and Hungarians,
and 54 per cent by members of other
nationalities.
The most common theme is that of social
discontent (inequalities between rich and
poor, boss and workman), which was ex¬
acerbated during the war and is evoked in
37 per cent of the letters, in which the lives
of the privileged, profiteers, and people in
easy jobs are contrasted with the sacrifices
of soldiers at the front and the poverty of
the workers. Then comes the question of'
work which is raised in 36 per cent of the let¬
ters, most of the complaints expressed at the
beginning of the war being motivated by the
disruption of normal activities. Thirdly,
patriotism, referred to in 27 per cent of the
letters, covers the conflict between loyalty
to the State (represented by the emperor)
and the nationalism of the different peoples
of the monarchy.
Social discontent, expressed in com¬
plaints against dire poverty, oppression and
flagrant inequalities, and in sympathy for
socialist movements and the Russian
Revolution, intensifies in all the national
groups as the months go by. The same
tendencies emerge from letters in which the
second theme appears, with nostalgia for
peace being transformed into positive
demands. The majority (60 per cent) of the
letters in the third group reveal the discon¬
tent caused by the oppression of the na¬
tionalities and a more or less explicit desire
for autonomy, although loyalty towards the
State remains firmly rooted.
Quantitative analysis of the letters con¬
firms the existence of a close correlation
between social discontent and a desire for
peace, and an inverse correlation between a
desire for social justice and peace on the one
hand, and aspirations for national
autonomy on the other. It seems that after
the Russian socialist revolution, the masses
were ready to accept the maintenance of the
system in exchange for an immediate peace,
a point of view not shared by the intellec¬
tuals of the oppressed nationalities. "Vic¬
tory is unnecessary, Russia is bringing
peace", the Austrian censor remarked.
"The people will soon put an end to all
that", noted the Czech censor. "We need
peace even at the price of a revolution," is
the message of the letters read by the
Hungarian censor. Strike movements at
that time illustrate the same state of mind.
As well as making a direct contribution to
our knowledge of the history of the First
World War, the systematic analysis of the
censorship archives in Vienna and Budapest
can help us, in a broader context, to under¬
stand the mechanisms which formed public
opinion and moulded public attitudes.
PETER HANAK, of Hungary, is professor of
the history of cultures at the Eotvos Lorant
university and director of research at the In¬
stitute of Historical Sciences of his country's
Academy of Sciences. His research is mainly
concerned with the history of the Austro-
Hungarian monarchy and with problems of
social and cultural history.
31
