Putting thé'S'm Unesco
OF the many factors which com-
billet in 1945 to bring about the
creation of Une co the most
important were undoubtedly the historic-
al climate of the day and the overwhelm-
ing political wi ! ! of aH nations, after the
mort destructive war ever, to establish
mechanisms for the preservation of
peace.
A third crucial factor, the importance
of which has often been under-estimated,
was the contribution of individuel men
and women who, driven on by pas-
sionately held personal convictions, left
an indelible stamp on the infant Organi-
zation ; outstanding among them were
"the men who put the S in Unesco".
In fact, the original letter of invitation
which resutted in the establishment of
CAME (Conference of Allied Ministers
of Education) spoke only of educational
questions, although the ministers'discus-
sions rapidly broadened to cover a wide
range of cultural and some scientific
topics. At the end of 1943, when it was
proposed to widen membership of
CAME, the Conference was stiU talking
in terms of creating a permanent interna-
tional organization"with the object of
promoting co-operation in educational
matters" (UNEO ?),
When the United States became
associated with CAME, the US delega-
tion arrived with a plan for a United Na-
tions Organization for Educational and
Cultural Reconstruction (UNECREC ?),
while by January 1945 the US State De-
partment was referring to the creation of
a United Nations Educational and Cultu-
ral Organization (UNECO ?), and it was
The destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasa-
ki by atom bombs in August 1945 made the
consequences and uses of scientific re-
search the focus of intense concern, re-
Mecfed in the debates which led to the
creation of Unesco and defined the scope
of Its activitles. Left, the mushroom cloud
over Nagasaki, 9 August 1945.
an organization with this provisional
name that the Conference of November
1945 set out to estabtish.
It was against this background that,
behind the scenes, a number of scientists
were fighting desperately for the inclu-
sion of Science both in the title of the
organization and in the content of its
programmes.
The fight was spearheaded by Joseph
Needham, head of the British Scientific
Mission in China, ably seconded by Ju-
lian Huxley. The documents reproduced
below give an insight into the course of
the struggle and into Needham's obsti-
nate, and finally successful, single-min-
dedness.
On 29 December 1943, Needham outlined
for the/irst time his conception of an
International Science Co-operation
Service :
1 would like to indicate, in just a few
words, what 1 feel is necessary in post-war
International Science Co-operation. 1 be-
lieve that the time has gone when enough
can be done by scientists working as indi-
viduals, or even as organized groups in
universities, associations, etc., within in-
dividual countries, and contacting each
other across national boundaries, as indi-
viduals. Science and Technology are now
playing, and will increasingly play, so
predominant a part in ait human civiliza-
tion, that some means whereby science
can effectuaHy transcend national bound-
aries is urgently necessary. The Science
Co-operation Offices which have already
been set up in the capitals of the United
Nations are a piece of machinery which
ought to continue after the war. The need
for contact can be met neither by institut-
ing"scientific attachés"at ail Embassies,
for that would be too subject to diploma-
tic formalities, nor by sending from one
country to another industrial scientists
whose loyalty is to particular commercial
interests, for then their advice is likely to
be neither disinterested nor unbiassed.
What 1 should like to see is some kind of
International Science Co-operation Ser-
vice, whose representatives in ail lands
would have semi-diplomatic status and
full governmental facilities in com-
munication and transportation, but who
would be drawn from either governmen-
tal or academic laboratories-to which
after their period of service they might
return-and would therefore be free
from commercial entangtements. One of
the immediate aims of such an Interna-
tional Service would be the conveyance
of the most advanced applied and pure
science from the highly industrialized
Western countries to the less highly in-
dustrialized Eastern ones ; but there
would be plenty of scope for traffic in the
opposite direction too.
Needham developed these ideas in three
detailed memoranda which he sent to a
large number of diplomats, politicians
and men of science in the Allied countries,
following up this initiative by personal
contact with important personalities in the
United States, Britain and the Soviet Un-
ion. From them he learned of the proposai
for a United Nations Educational and
Cultural Organization and he immediate-
ly saw this as suitable vehicle into which to
integrate his International Science Co-
operation Service, It was in his third
memorandum, entitled"The Place of Sci-
ence and International Scientific Co-
operation in Post-war World Organiza-
lion"and dated 15 March 1945, that the
name"Unesco"appeared for the first lime in
a published document (see extract from
Needham's own summary to Memoran-
dum 11 belon),
SUMMARY
1) An International Science Co-opera-
tion Service (ISCS) has been proposed. It
is shown that there are immense tasks for
the benefit of humanity in the rapid ex-
pansion and dissemination of knowledge
lying before such an organization. Espe-
cially in rendering assistance to scientists
and technologists in the more outlying
parts of the world, there is much which is
not being done, and which could not be
done, by any other agency. 
21
'"
Na[l.
aic :o
""
0
o
Õ. r:c[l.

 2) The United Nations Educational and
Cultural Organization (UNECO), now
being planned, could embody the
machinery proposed above, subject to
certain conditions being met. It would be
desirable to inclure the word"Science"
in th title, so that it should be named
UNESCO, and to ensure that its constitu-
tion covers international interchange in
Applied as we ! ! as Pure Science.
There was at first some opposition to
Needham's proposai as the following ex-
tracts from a letter dated 11 May 1945
from a British Foreign Office officiai to a
colleague in the Ministry of Production
demonstrate :
(...) We have already had copies of Dr.
Needham's remarks from several
sources. Insofar as his anxiety about the
position of science in the proposed Un-
ited Nations Organization for Education-
al and Cultural Co-operation is concer-
ned, 1 can assure you that the daims of
science will certainly not be overlooked
when the new organization begins its acti-
vities (..,) Dr. Needham's observations
were reported to the Executive Bureau of
the Conference of Allied Ministers of
Education by the Secretary of its Science
Commission, Dr. J. G. Crowther. There
was a general feeling against incIuding
the word"science"in the title of the
organization on the ground that it implied
a distinction between science and culture,
which not merely the English language
but British usage would not sustain (...)
Meanwhile, Julian Huxley had been
pressing the case for science behind the
scènes. On l4th August 1945 he wrote a
letter (see opposite page) to Philip Noel-
Baker at the British Foreign Office in
which he summarized the main points of a
ion the forefront of the drive to Include sci-
ence ln Unesco's activities was the British
blochemlst, slnolaglst and hlstorlan of sci-
ence Joseph Needham (b. 1900), below.
conversation the two men had had earlier
in the day and fram which the following
extracts are taken :
(...) a number of scientific men are con-
cerned that the proposed new cultural
and educationa) organization of the Un-
ited Nations should be more definitely
scientific than now appears. Culture does
Hof cover aU of science, any more than
science covers ai) of culture. To use an
Americanism, we want to put the S in
UNESCO. This, it seems to us, could be
achieved (1) by inserting"Scientific"in
the tille, (2) by having the organization
essentially tripartite, one section dealing
with education in the narrow sense, the
second with culture in the sense of the
humanities and arts, the third with sci-
ence, pure and applied (..,) Unesco
should have definite positive functions in
ait sections-in education in actually pro-
viding certain types of educationa) faciH-
ties, in culture in positive stimulation of
e. g. the arts, and in science in just such
functions as you outhned (...)
Even when the Conference which was io
establish Unesco began on 1 November
1945 the battle was not won, ln his speech
of welcome to the delegates the British
prime minister, Clement Attlee, spoke at
some length about education and culture
but said not a word about science, Never-
theless, the mushroom c/ouds over
Hiroshima and Nagasaki had made sci-
ece an c ; e/ ! f ;/ : c eeayc/ ! fAe &M ! ; Mgnce d sci ntifi r search the burning
question of the day and in her opening
speech, Ellen Wilkinson, British minister
of education and President of the Con-
ference, dec/ared :
Though Science was not included in the
original titte of thé Organization, the
British delegation will put forward a
proposa ! that it be included, so that the
titre would run"Educational, Scientific'.
and Cultural Organization". In these
days, when we are hall wondering, perhaps
apprehensivety, what the scientists will
do to us next, it is important that they
should be linked closely with the humani-
ties and should feel that they hâve a res-
ponsibility to mankind for the result of
their labours. 1 do not believe any scien-
tists will have survived the world cata-
strophe, who will still say that they are
utterly uninterested in the social implica-
tions of their discoveries.
These words of Ellen Wilkinson summed
up the anxieties felt by a majority of the
delegates and on 6 November 1945, dur-
ing the third session of the First Commis-
sion of the Conference (whose task it was
to decide on the title of the Organization,
to draft the preamble to the Constitution
and to define its objectives and principal
functions),"S"for Science was finally
incorporated into the title of the new body
henceforth to be known as The United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultu-
ralOrganization..
22
! I
[l.
