Mining fossil water
by Jean Margat and Kamal Saad
Semi-arid
Sub-humid to humid
Maps based on Map of the World Distribution ofArid Regions.
Unesco, 1977.
Maps show, top, zones of aridity In north
Africa and, lower map, the location of the
main sedimentarybasins containing deep
aquifers.
FAR below the surface of the earth,
vast quantities of life-giving water
have lain concealed for thousands
of years in huge aquifers (layers of water¬
bearing porous rock) formed in the exten¬
sive sedimentary basins that exist in every
continent.
Most of these aquifers were first
discovered and exploited during the nine¬
teenth century, but, in some countries, it
is only in the last few decades that inten¬
sive use has been made of them.
In arid areas such reservoirs have, of
course, become of outstanding impor¬
tance and often represent the sole perma¬
nent source of water. Fortunately reser¬
voirs of this kind are to be found in the
subsoil of several countries in arid areas,
including, in particular, the huge desert
area which stretches from the Atlantic
Ocean to the Gulf, covering the north of
the African continent (the Sahara) and the
Arabian peninsula (see map).
Naturally enough, the primary concern
in these countries was to improve pros¬
pection and exploitation techniques. More
and more wells were drilled and water pro¬
duction was often substantially increased
in each basin.
This increased exploitation had the
predictable effect of reducing water levels
and in some cases the quality of the water
drawn deteriorated. It soon became evi¬
dent that what was needed was to
establish a strategy for the long-term ex¬
ploitation of each basin as a whole.
Research carried out in a number of
countries soon showed that the water con¬
fined in these deep aquifers represents a
non-renewable resource. There was
clearly a need for a special conception of
water resources and special procedures
for evaluating them. A model example of
this type of approach is Unesco's Study
Project on Water Resources in the Nor¬
thern Sahara.
In absolute terms hardly any ground¬
water exists completely independently of
the natural water cycle. However, water
moves at very different speeds in different
aquifer layers, and in addition the
distances travelled may vary greatly.
Where water has to cover hundreds or
even thousands of kilometres at speeds of
the order of several metres a year, it may ^
14

Above, as this dramatic aerial view of a
rotary irrigation system in northern Africa
demonstrates, the mining of water from
deep aquifers allows desert areas to be
reclaimed for agriculture. In the Sarir
region of the Libyan Arab Jamahlriya 500
productive wells have been drilled and
50,000 hectares of desert reclaimed for
cultivation. Right, well and pivot mecha¬
nism round which the sprinkler rotates at
the centre of an irrigated area. The huge
sprinkler arm can be moved round as
required and can irrigate an area of some
80 hectares.

stay in the subsoil for periods of up to tens
of thousands of years.
This does not mean that this "fossil"
water, as hydrologists call it, is stagnant
or that there is no renewal of water in
these very extensive deep aquifers. It is
simply that the renewal is very very slow.
It is also, strictly, incorrect to call this
water a non-renewable resource; it is only
non-renewable in relation to its use on the
human time-scale. On the larger scale of
the natural water cycle, water drawn is
never lost, but is merely transferred and
modified.
However, the local structure that pro¬
vides the resource may, through intensive
exploitation, undergo irreversible
changes such as the compaction of the
soil or an intrusion of salt water. Thus
harnessing the water resources of one of
these aquifers amounts to drawing on the
water reserve capital and, by analogy with
the extraction of mineral ores, it can right¬
ly be described as the "mining" of
groundwater.
"Water mines", productive drilling
fields exploiting deep aquifers on the
basis of withdrawal from storage, are ¡n
operation in various countries in the arid
zone where they account for the bulk of
water production.
In the developing countries in the arid
zones of Africa and the Middle East such
projects have been increasing rapidly and
plans exist to intensify them, for example,
in the northern Sahara (Algeria and
Tunisia), in Egypt and in the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.
Deciding whether or not to exploit
groundwater reserves, whose use means
their depletion, ¡snot an academic ques¬
tion since this is already current practice.
The deliberate mining of groundwater
raises first, as in any mining operation, the
problem of evaluating the formationin
this case the reservoir and its exploitable
resourcesand forecasting the effects of
withdrawals on usability. The exploitation
of a dynamic reserve which reacts to ex¬
ploitation is more complex than that of a
passive ore deposit.
Furthermore, mining costs rise as water
levels fall, with a marked increase when
the change takes place from artesian ex¬
ploitation to pumping or where the pro¬
ductivity of wells declines as a result of
compaction of the aquifer.
Questions also arise in a wider perspec¬
tive as to the long-term disadvantages of
such exploitation. The gains for one or two
generations are achieved to the detriment
of future generations. The choice is bet¬
ween maximizing production for the
benefit of the present generation in order
to speed up socio-economic development
or spreading production out over a
Desert aquifers are to be found at depths
ranging from 50 to 1,500 metres. Below,
"fossil" water gushes forth after a suc¬
cessful drilling operation in Saudi Arabia.
relatively long period in order, for exam¬
ple, to make it easier to adapt to the even¬
tual requirements of a different water
economy.
Replacement solutions for water supply
might involve, for example, the recharg¬
ing of depleted aquifers with water pro¬
duced by the desalinization of sea water
(as in the current Qatar project for the
recharge of deep aquifers) or, rather
analogous to the closing down of a mine,
moving the population or at least limiting
it to activities involving low water con¬
sumption (as in the project to end irriga¬
tion in various counties in the State of
Arizona, in the United States).
Should the mining of groundwater be
encouraged or discouraged? In practice
action has often preceded analysis and a
commitment made to the mining option.
Thus the question that now arises for
those responsible for water resource
management is primarily one of choosing
between maintaining the present trend
and even intensifying it, or modifying it
with a view to prolonging production at a
reduced level.
JEAN MARGAT is a French hydrogeologist
at the Bureau de Recherches Géologiques et
Minières, Orleans.
KAMAL F. SAAD is a water specialist at
Unesco's Regional Office for Science and
Technology for the Arab States.
This article is taken from a longer study
published in Unesco's environmental
magazine Nature and Resources, Volume XX,
No. 2, April-June 1984.
16
