Acid rain
1. An unwelcome export
MANKIND has always reverenced
what Tennyson called "the use¬
ful trouble of the rain". With¬
out the 120,000 cubic kilometres of it that
fall each year the continents would be
barren.
Yet now the rain in parts of the earth has
taken on a new and threatening complexity.
It mixes in the air with pollution from burn¬
ing fossil fuelsparticularly in power sta¬
tions, factories and motor vehiclesand
brings down dilute sulphuric and nitric
acid. This is killing fish and other water life,
and corroding buildings, including some of
the world's most important ancient
monuments. It may also damage forests
and croplands, and possibly pose a substan¬
tial threat to health.
Acid rain is not a new phenomenon the
term was first coined by a chemist, Robert
Angus Smith, who described pollution in
Manchester, England, over a century ago.
What is new is the realization that it is an in¬
ternational problem. The air of towns like
Manchester has been largely cleaned, partly
by building tall chimneys at power stations
and factories, which push pollution high in¬
to the air. These chimneys have made things
better locally, by dispersing the pollutants,
but have aggravated the international dif¬
ficulties. For the sulphur and nitrogen com¬
pounds emitted by burning fossil fuels can
be blown thousands of kilometres by the
winds, to cause acid rain in countries far
from their points of origin.
Acid rain was first raised as an interna¬
tional issue by Sweden at the United Na¬
tions Conference on the Human Environ¬
ment in Stockholm in 1972, and it has now
developed into a major international en¬
vironmental issue. At first the Swedish
views were treated with some disbelief, par¬
ticularly by some of the emitting countries.
Over the last decade, however, there has
been a great deal of international research
into the issue. Ample information was
available by the end of 1982 through the ac¬
tivities of the Co-operative Programme for
Monitoring and Evaluation of Long-range
Transmission of Air Pollutants in Europe
(EMEP), under the Convention on Long-
range Transboundary Air Pollution 1979,
and activities conducted in accordance with
the Memorandum of Intent Between the
Government of Canada and the Govern¬
ment of the United States of America con¬
cerning Transboundary Air Pollution. Fur¬
thermore, there was a special conference in
Stockholm in 1982 on acidification of the
environment, and this reviewed and assess¬
ed a large amount of scientific information
not previously available.
So far, acid rain has been seen as an
essentially regional problem, confined to
the industrial areas of the northern
hemisphere. But, though the problem was
first perceived there, it may become much
more widespreadfor acid rain is likely to
occur wherever fossil fuels are intensively
used.
Acidification is an environmental prob¬
lem, or becoming one, in parts of Europe
and North America. Around five to ten
million square kilometres of these con¬
tinents are affected. Similarly polluted
areas are likely to exist elsewhere in the
world, especially around large urban and
industrial conglomerations. We do not yet
know where they are, because so far no
evidence on them is available.
Industrial regions of the world suffer
much more acidic fall-out than they did
before the industrial revolution. This is
because power plants, some industrial pro¬
cesses, vehicles and homes emit sulphur and
nitrogen compounds, mainly from the bur¬
ning of fossil fuels, and have greatly in¬
creased the amount of them in the
environment.
Natural processes also put sulphur and
nitrogen compounds into the air, besides
man-made sources. Nobody knows precise¬
ly how much they contribute around the
globe. Estimates vary between 78 and 284
million tons of sulphur a year in the form of
sulphur oxides, and between 20 and 90
million tons of nitrogen a year in nitrogen
oxides.
In comparison, man emits between 75
and 100 million tonnes of sulphur a year.
So, despite the differences in estimates of
natural sources, it can be concluded that
man-made and natural emissions of sulphur
are, globally, of the same order of
magnitude.
Burning coal provides about 60 per cent
of the man-made emissions, burning
petroleum products gives rise to another 30
per cent, and various industrial processes
account for the remaining 10 per cent. Ap¬
proximate estimates indicate that burning
fuel in electric power stations and industry
provides almost three quarters of sulphur
emissions in the European Economic Com¬
mission countries.
There are indications that sulphur diox¬
ide emissions (the main pollutant in Europe
and North America) have not increased
during recent years, as they were predicted
to do, and are not likely to rise over the
coming decades either. This is the result of
two factors: better pollution control, and
less burning of fossil fuel as a result of
energy conservation and, possibly, slower
economic growth in the west than had been
expected.
Like sulphur oxide pollution, pollution
from nitrogen oxides is also of the same
order compared to natural sources. Fossil
fuel combustion yields about 20 million
tons of nitrogen a year, which have already
caused environmental problems on a
regional and local basis in industrialized
countries.
Not all the pollution is acid rain, i.e.,
sulphuric and nitric acid dissolved in
precipitation. Some of it happens when the
sulphur and nitrogen oxides themselves fall
out on the land, in what is known as "dry
deposition". In general this tends to be the
main form of the pollution near its source,
and the longer the gases stay in the air, the
more likely they are to go through the com¬
plex changes that will turn them into acid
rain (or wet deposition), to fall perhaps
thousands of kilometres from where they
began their journey. Wet deposition rates
are fairly well known, but dry deposition is
harder to calculate and rates remain more
uncertain. Both types of deposition can be
intercepted by vegetation canopies. The
canopies of evergreen forests, in particular,
can be subjected to high deposition rates.
Lakes and rivers were the first victims of
acid rain to become evident. Hundreds of
lakes in parts of Scandinavia, the north-east
United States, south-east Canada and
south-west Scotland have turned acid. Parts
of these areas are particularly vulnerable
because their soil and bedrock offer little
protection against acidic rain. They are
made up of minerals like granite, gneiss and
quartz-rich rocks which contain little lime
and do not weather easily, and therefore
can do little to neutralize the acid when it
falls.
As the water becomes more acid, the
amount of aluminium in it starts to increase
rapidly. Concentrations as low as 0.2
milligrams per litre of the metal in acid
water kill fish. Large scale fish kills have
been recorded in some Swedish lakes, and
these have been attributed to aluminium
poisoning rather than to high acidity alone.
21

©
At the same time, phosphates, which
nourish phytoplankton and other aquatic
plants, attach themselves to the aluminium
and become less available as a nutrient. So
increasing aluminium levels may reduce
primary production on which all other
water life depends. As the water gets more
acid still, other metals, like cadmium, zinc,
lead and mercury also become increasingly
soluble. Several of them are highly toxic,
and some may be taken up by water life
through food chains, though little evidence
of this is available so far.
Soils are normally much better able to
resist acidification than lakes, rivers and
streams, and so can take much more acid
without noticeable ecological drawbacks.
Their vulnerability differs depending on
their type, the kind of bedrock they cover,
and the use to which man puts them. The
most vulnerable lands are those that have
bedrocks poor in lime, covered with
shallow layers of soil containing low con¬
centrations of protective substances. Large
parts of Scandinavia are like this.
Intensive experimental research into the
effects of acidification on forest, land and
wood production was carried out in the
1970s. It is still going on, but so far the
results are inconclusive. Acid fall-out does
seem to have a distinct effect on soil
microbiology, chemistry and fauna but
the effects on the growth of plants, in¬
cluding trees, are far less clear. Indeed,
depositions of nitrogen may even have a
fertilizing effect and increase productivity
significantly, at least in the short term.
Studies on the trends of tree growth in
southern Sweden between 1950 and 1974,
for example, failed to reveal any statistical¬
ly significant pattern.
In the Federal Republic of Germany, on
the other hand, 7.7 per cent of the forest
area was reported in 1982 to be damaged by
wasting disease due to the consequences of
deposition and accumulation of air
pollutants. In addition, trees have suffered
more storm damage and experienced
regeneration difficulties. These forests
receive much more fall-out than Scandina¬
vian ones because they are close to cities and
big industrial areas, such as the Ruhr, with
many polluting sources.
One reason postulated to explain this
damage is the combined effects of surges of
naturally produced acid, extreme climatic
situations (very high or low rainfall,
temperature extremes) and atmospheric
acidic deposition. These release aluminium
into the soil and make it easier for bacteria
to damage the fine roots of the trees. This
reduces their vitality, leads eventually to a
rotting disease, and may make them more
vulnerable to storms. High concentrations
of sulphur dioxide in the air may damage
leaves, and so cut the trees' productivity.
Acid fogs, persisting for several days, may
also damage trees in mountain areas.
As well as the health of important
ecosystems, human health may also be put
at risk by pollution. High concentrations of
sulphur dioxide, nitrogen, oxides and dust
have long been known to be harmful. This
issue is only marginally related to the
problem of acid rain, since such concentra¬
tions are usually only found close to the
sources of pollution, and sulphur oxide
levels in many European and North
American cities have been decreasing
recently. The minimum concentrations of
sulphur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide con¬
sidered to cause health damage are: sulphur
dioxide, 250 micrograms per cubic metre as
a 24-hour average or 100 micrograms per
cubic metre as a long-term average;
nitrogen dioxide, 190-320 micrograms per
cubic metre, as a maximum one hour ex¬
posure not to be exceeded more than once
a month.
Other, indirect, health hazards are
suspected. These would be caused by the
metals like lead, copper, zinc, cadmium and
mercury released from soils and sediments
by increased acidification. They can get in¬
to groundwater, rivers, lakes and streams
used for drinking water, and be taken up in
food chains leading ultimately to man. The
releases of cadmium in particular may give
rise to a growing problem as acidity in¬
creases, as normal levels in human food are
already close to the acceptable daily intake.
Acid water may also cause galvanized steel
and copper water pipes to release metals,
and it seems that the risk arises as soon as
the acidity of the water rises above normal.
Most drinking water in industrialized coun¬
tries, however, is supplied by public water
works which eliminate this problem with
proper treatment techniques; but much re¬
mains to be done in developing countries.
Meanwhile, acid accelerates corrosion in
most materials used in the construction of
buildings, bridges, dams, industrial equip¬
ment, water supply networks, underground
storage tanks, hydroelectric turbines, and
power and telecommunications cables. It
can also severely damage ancient
monuments, historic buildings, sculptures,
ornaments and other important cultural ob¬
jects. Some of the world's greatest cultural
treasures, including the Parthenon in
Athens and Trajan's column in Rome, are
being eaten away by acid fall-out.
Tests have shown that materials corrode
between twice and 10 times as fast' in
polluted urban and industrial atmospheres
as they do in the countryside. Carbon steel
(both coated and uncoated), zinc and
galvanized steel, copper, nickel and nickle-
plated steel, sandstone and limestone all
corroded faster as the amount of sulphur
dioxide in the air increased. On the other
hand, materials such as aluminium and
stainless steel were only negligibly affected. >
22

The damaging effects of acid rain first
became apparent in lakes and rivers. In
Sweden, damage to fisheries attributed
to acidification has been observed in
2,500 lakes and evidence of acidification
has been found in another 6,500. Of the
5,000 lakes In southern Norway, 1,750
have lost all their fish and another 900 are
seriously affected. In Canada, nearly 20
percent ofall the lakes so far examined in
Ontario have become acidified or are
extremely sensitive to acidification. Bet¬
ween 30 and 60 per cent of the lakes of
southwest Quebec are sensitive or highly
sensitive to acidification. In Canada's
Atlantic provinces many lakes have
become 10 to 30 times more acid during
the past two decades. Above, Lake Mali¬
gne, Alberta Province, Canada, is seen
against the backdrop of the Henry
MacLeod Mountains.
The sensitivity ofaquatic organisms
to a lowered pH in fresh water
pH 7.5 7.0 6.5 6.0 5 5 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5
HEM&
Crustaceans, snails, molluscs, etc
Salmon, char
ß ^^sé^.
Sens
and
itive
animal
trout, roach die
insects and plant
plankton die
Whitefish, "siklöja", grayling die
Perch arid pike die
die
Eel and brook trout die
'11112! Insensitive insects, certain plant and animal
plankton can survive
Damage starts at
pH less than 6.5
All "norimal" life
pH less ithan 5.
gone at
White moss increases
Source : Acidification today and Tomorrow, Report by the
Swedish Ministry of Agriculture to the 1982 Stockholm
Conference on Acidification of the Environment, i
O
©
t
23

Acid rain
2. Can we save our lakes and forests?
THE damage caused by acid rain can
be alleviated by adding lime to
lakes, rivers and streams and/or
their catchment areas. Many chemicals such
as caustic soda, sodium carbonate, slaked
lime, limestone, or dolomite can be used to
counteract the acidity. Slaked lime and
limestone are the most popular. Sweden
began a liming programme in the autumn of
1976, and by the summer of 1982 about
1,500 Swedish lakes had been limed at a
total cost of about $15 million.
Liming alleviates some of the symptoms
of acidification, but it is no real cure, is not
practicable for many lakes and running
waters, and does not attack the causes of
the problem. It should, however, be con¬
sidered as an interim measure which offers
some defence until the emissions of
pollutants can be reduced to a satisfactorily
low level.
The only lasting solution is to reduce the
emissions of the pollutants in the first place.
Apart from the effect that strict controls
would have in protecting water and forests,
they could save millions of dollars by
avoiding corrosion. The Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) made a first attempt in 1981 to find
a way of quantifying corrosion costs. This
came up with the estimate that strict emis¬
sion control measures in 13 European coun¬
tries could save about $1.2 billion in corro¬
sion costs every year.
The easiest way to control the pollution is
to use fuels that are low in sulphur; but this
will not be feasible for long because the
world supply of these fuels is believed to be
limited. A more permanent solution is to
use other sources of energy instead of fossil
fuels, and to improve energy conservation.
According to some recent estimates, in¬
cluding those submitted to the 1982
Stockholm Acidification Conference, tak¬
ing sulphur out of fuel oils would cost about
$20 to $40 for every ton of oil, depending
mainly on the type of the oil and the size of
the plant, among other factors. This would
add about $5-10 to the cost of every
megawatt/hour of energy produced (in
1980 prices), adding about 10 to 20 per cent
to the cost of electricity production. In¬
dustry, on the other hand, puts the costs at
$40 to $85 for every ton of oil.
Coal contains two kinds of sulphur
pyrite (iron sulphide) and organic sulphur.
Washing coal, after first crushing and
grinding it, will remove pyrite sulphur. The
cost of this mechanical process is estimated
to be $1 to $6 per ton of coal. On average
it will remove about half of the pyrite,
though at best the process can be made to
remove up to 90 per cent of it from some
coals. The chemical methods are more ef¬
fective, but also more expensive and have
not yet been fully developed. They can
remove organic sulphur as well as pyrite.
The cost of getting rid of 90 to 95 per cent
of the pyrite and half the organic sulphur
would be around $20 to $30 per ton of coal.
The extra costs for coal washing range from
less than $1 to about $3 per
megawatt/hour, adding between one and
six per cent to electricity costs. Chemical
desulphurization would cost much more,
about $8 to $12 per megawatt/hour, and
this would add between 15 and 25 per cent
to electricity costs.
Nitrogen oxide emissions can be reduced
by changing the ways of burning fuel, par¬
ticularly in heat and power stations. One of
the methods proposed for doing this is to
reduce the combustion temperature to
below about 1500°C and/or to allow only
low intakes of air. Such changes could cut
in half the amount of nitrogen oxides
emitted.
Removing sulphur from fuel and gases
creates waste products solids and
slurrieswhich have to be disposed of pro¬
perly to avoid water, groundwater, or soil
pollution. Naturally, this problem grows as
emission controls are increased.
According to preliminary calculations by
OECD, it costs a total of some $800, on
average, to stop a ton of sulphur from get¬
ting into the air. More recent estimates sug¬
gest that the costs may be somewhat higher.
If northwestern and southern European
countries were to cut their annual sulphur
emissions by about half (around 5.9 million
tons) within the next 10 to 25 years by con¬
trolling the emissions of conventional
power stations, it would cost them about 10
per cent of the total cost of producing their
electricity.
There are, moreover, other factors that
complicate such analyses. Onecommon
to many other instances of damage to
shared natural resourcesis that the coun¬
tries which would benefit from the reduced
pollution would often be different from
those that would have to bear the cost of
cutting it back. Another is that all the
estimates of benefits assume that the
damage caused by acid rain can readily be
reversed if enough pollution control is
implemented and in reality this may not
be so. It might be a long time before the
ecological damage, in particular, began to
be reversed. Unfortunately, scientific infor¬
mation on the recovery process is extremely
scanty.
This is only one of the problem areas in
the whole field which, despite considerable
progress in research on the subject, still re¬
main unknown or only superficially
understood. Research is needed on dry
deposition of polluting gases and particles,
and their effects on water, soil, young and
old foliage, and other recipients of their
pollution; on how the pollutants undergo
changes in the atmosphere, and how they
are transported and deposited; on how
bedrocks weather under different acid in¬
puts and release nutrients; on how acid af¬
fects the soil, particularly in the long term;
and on the possible adverse effects of acid
fall-out on forest growth.
In addition to these meteorologically and
ecologically orientated research topics, in¬
formation is needed on the effects on health
of the increasing spread of cadmium and
other toxic metals as a result of acidifica¬
tion. Among other things, the levels of the
metals in food, human tissues and body
fluids must continue to be monitored.
Some areas in the tropics may be highly
or moderately susceptible to acidification,
and this could cause special problems. We
need to work out the nature of these
problems. In dry tropical areas, acid rain
itself cannot play a major role owing to
scarce precipitation, but the role of dry
deposition is unknown. In humid areas the
ecosystems, temperature and moisture
levels are different from those in the
temperate areas where acidification has
been studied so far, and quite different
problems may arise.
Besides, some soils have too little sulphur
in them or are highly alkaline. These could
benefit, to a certain extent, from extra
sulphur and nitrogen fall-out or merely
from more acidic rain. This could add a
significant new factor to calculations of
costs and benefits from the pollution, but
the issue has not yet been explored.
This article is based on a longer study publish¬
ed in the UN CHRONICLE, Volume XX, No. 5,
and entitled State of the World Environment
1 983, A Report from UNEP.
24
