Cultural persecution: the first step
towards genocide by Frederic V. Grunfeld
"Part of my purpose in writing this book [Prophets Without Honour, see biographical note
below] is to give readers some inkling of what was lost in the collapse of thé Weimar
Renaissance, and how much of it remains forgotten to this day. Those who have not studied
the arts ofGermany in detail can hardly be expected to grasp the magnitude of the disaster... "
Text © Copyright 1979, 1980, by Frederic V. Grunfeld.Reproduction prohibited
THE racial policies of the Third Reich
were applied with equal ferocity to
the orthodox and the assimilated,
to bankers and beggars, Nobel laureates,
department store clerks and school
children; to the president of the Academy,
Professor Liebermann, and to the German
women's fencing champion, Helene Mayer
(popularly known as die blonde He), who
won two Olympic medals for Germany; to
the 100,000 Jewish veterans, many of them
wounded or crippled, who had fought for
Germany during World War I and had
earned their 31,500 iron crosses as bravely
as the next man. At the same time, the Nazis
proceeded with the willful destruction of
everything that had to do with the Weimar
Renaissance. During the early years of the
regime the world was treated to the unusual
spectacle of a whole nation deliberately
committing cultural suicide. In the prevail¬
ing mindless frenzy to follow-the-Fo^re/-,
the mere possession of intellect became
grounds for suspicion, and "Aryans" who
persisted in trying to exercise it were de¬
nounced in the Nazi press as weisse Juden
(white Jews). As one popular Nazi jingle ex¬
pressed it:
Intellectual the word sounds so Jewish
and shrill;
A true German man can never be an
intellectual!
Nazism from the first had been essential¬
ly a revolt of the Know-Nothings, though
their ranks were soon swelled by members
of the aristocracy: as a cultural revolution it
aimed at nothing less than the annihilation
of the German intelligentsia. It was as if the
early Nazis could hardly wait to get their
hands on the machinery of State so that
they could begin smashing works of art and
burning books. As a matter of fact, one of
the party's first official acts, after winning
the local elections in Thuringia in 1930, was
to order the destruction of the fragile,
elegant murals created by Oskar Schlemmer
(an artist of impeccably "Aryan"
antecedents) for the Bauhaus at Weimar.
And within months after taking over the
central government of the Reich in 1933
they had succeeded in paralyzing the
literary life of the nation, pauperizing its
theatrical and musical activities and stripp¬
ing its museums of all great modern art
from Van Gogh and Picasso to Max
Beckmann and Paul Klee.
All this was done with an air of triumph
and complacency, as well as an utter
disregard for any practical consequences.
More than 1,100 "non-Aryan" faculty
members of universities and technical in¬
stitutes lost their jobs in the initial wave of
persecution. When the Nazi minister of
education, Rust, jovially inquired of Pro¬
fessor David Hubert, mentor of the famous
Göttingen Mathematical Institute, how
mathematics was faring at Göttingen under
the new dispensation, he received the
laconic reply "But Herr Minister, there is
no mathematics left at Göttingen!" A
travelling exhibition that made the rounds
of German schools at the same time
displayed Einstein's picture in the form of a
"wanted" poster that identified him as an
exiled subversive who remained at large and
"still unhanged." A postwar German
writer, assessing the damage which Nazi
policy inflicted on the nation's scientific
establishment, described the result in the
rueful phrase, die emigrierte Bombe.
Altogether, some 360,000 people-
slightly more than half of the German-
Jewish community were able to flee Ger¬
many so long as the exits remained open;
virtually all those who were left behind were
annihilated. The refugee intellectuals ac¬
counted for only a small fraction of the
total, yet they constituted the greatest in¬
tellectual migration in history. Included
among them were countless non-Jews who
chose not to make their peace with Hitler:
Heinrich and Thomas Mann, for example,
or the playwright and ex-cavalry officer
Fritz von Unruh; the poet Max Hermann-
Neisse, the Austrian novelist Robert Musil,
Erich Maria Remarque (All Quiet on the
Western Front) and the Bavarian writer
Oskar Maria Graf, who had responded to
the Nazi burning of the books with an open
letter demanding, "Burn my books, too!"
They were joined in voluntary exile by musi-
' cians like the brothers Fritz and Adolf
Busch and the composers Paul Hindemith
"A comprehensive system ofconcentration
camps served as an instrument for massive
population annihilation in the occupied
countries. The Nazis established 6,900
camps ofvarious kinds within the Reich and
the occupied countries in Poland these in¬
cluded A usch witz, where 4, 000, 000 perish¬
ed, andMajdanek, with 360,000 victims. In
addition to mass assassinations, such as
those at Auschwitz where whole convoys of
prisoners were taken from the arrival point
direct to the gas chambers, starvation was
also used as a means of extermination.
Prisoners' rations provided only about 700
calories a day and this, coupled with heavy
manual work, soon resulted in physical
deterioration. The average life expectancy
of a prisoner in a concentration camp was
barely six months".
Piotr Matusak (Poland)
The infamous concentration camp
of Auschwitz-Birkenau (Oswiecim-
Brzezinka), in southern Poland. It is now
the site of the Oswiecim State Museum
founded in 1946 as a memorial to the vic¬
tims of the Nazi terror who perished there
during World War II.

and Ernst Krenek; by the architects Walter
Gropius and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe,
and by the painters Max Beckmann, Kurt
Schwitters and Paul Klee. Their attitude
was summed up by the composer Bêla Bar¬
tok, who left Hungary for America when he
saw the Nazis taking over the lands of the
old Hapsburg empire: "If someone stays on
here, when he could leave, he can thereby be
said to acquiesce tacitly in everything that is
happening here."
For understandable motives, some of the
minor poets stayed behind to applaud the
exodus. "Our wheat is being threshed on
the threshing-floor of literature," declared
the neo-romantic poet Börries von
Münchhausen (appropriately enough, a
descendant of the celebrated "Liar Baron"
von Münchhausen). "What does it matter
that, in sweeping out the chaff, a few
golden grains are lost? Germany, the heart
of all nations, is wasteful, like all true
hearts; stormy and Siegfried-like beats its
pulse." The truth was that virtually the
whole harvest had been swept out the door.
As Dorothy Thompson informed her
American readers, "practically everybody
who in world opinion had stood for what
was called German culture prior to 1933 is
now a refugee." But it was not until after
the war that the full extent of the damage
became apparent. "German literature is so
mutilated that it cannot recognize its own
condition," wrote Walter Muschg, who
had watched "the destruction of German
literature" from a neutral sanctuary in
Switzerland. The Nazi years had extinguish¬
ed a vital spark. "Since then Germany has
no longer possessed a great literature. When
the terror came to an end it remained
silent."
A whole generation of writers had been
"buried alive" in the process, their books
sent to the pulp mill, their names expunged
from the libraries. In exile, if they were not
already internationally known like Thomas
Mann, they lost their reading public and the
possibility of earning a living with their
native language: only a few of the younger
authors able to switch languages in
midstream, like Arthur Koestler, could con¬
tinue to support themselves by writing. And
postwar Germany, for a variety of reasons,
was slow to come to terms with its uncom¬
fortable ghosts of the twenties and thirties.
What remains is "a literature of the dead,"
as Muschg pointed out, "or rather of those
who died too soon, of those who were
disowned and forgotten. There is a great
modern German literature, but it lies buried
beneath the ruins."
But besides material for a tragedy it also
contains the makings of an epic, for the
most terrifying Odyssey of modern times
had, at almost every stage and station, its
poets and chroniclers who left a soul-
shattering record of their struggle to remain
human in a murderous world where death,
in Paul Celan's bitter line, had become "a
master craftsman from Germany"(fer
Tod ist ein Meister aus Deutschland. There
was, I am afraid, no satisfying moral con¬
clusion to this epic: as a test of human en¬
durance it was as meaningless as the trial of
Kafka's Joseph K. Significantly, one of its
first victims was the assassinated Existen¬
tialist Theodor Lessing, whose most in¬
teresting work, Geschichte als Sinngebung
des Sinnlosen, concerns the idea that the
writing of history is the art of conferring
meaning upon events that, in the very
nature of things, have no meaning. If one
searches for a meaning in the German-
Jewish tragedy there is, I fear, only one
lesson to be learned: thai in the never-
ending confrontation between the head and
the truncheon, the latter usually wins out, at
least in the short run. As the philosopher-
poet Salomo Friedländer, who called
himself Mynona (anonym spelled
backward), pointed out at the time, "Any
damned fool can put a bullet through the
most brilliant brain."
FREDERIC V. GRUNFELD, of the USA, is a
cultural historian and a contributing editor to
Connoisseur magazine. He is the author of
several books including Berlin, The Hitler File,
a social history of Nazism, and Prophets
Without Honour (McGraw-Hill, 1980) from
which this article is extracted. His Wayfarers
of the Thai Forest: the Akha (Time-Life Books,
7 982) is the first book ever on these hill people
from the Burma-Thai border region.
On 10 May 1933, a torchlight procession
of students, carefully orchestrated by
Nazi propaganda minister Goebbels,
wound its wayalong the Unter den Linden
to a square opposite the University of
Berlin where a huge pile of books had
been accumulated. Torches were set to
the pile and some twenty thousand books
went up in flames in the biggest auto-da-
fé of modern times. Among the authors
whose books were thus destroyed were
Thomas and Heinrich Mann, Lion
Feuchtwanger, Erich Maria Remarque,
Albert Einstein, Jack London, H.G. Wells,
Freud, Gide, Zola and Proust.
The Polish paediatrician, educator and
writer Janusz Korczak (1878-1942)
devoted most of his life to writing for and
about children and to work in child
welfare, notably as director of a Warsaw
orphanage for Jewish children where he
practised educational methods far ahead
of his time (see Unesco Courier, June
1 979). In October 1940 his orphanage was
transferred to the newly constructed War¬
saw ghetto. Two years later Korczak died
in the Treblinka extermination camp to
which he was deported with the orphans
whom he had refused to abandon
although he received several offers of
safety for himself. Unesco has published
a selection ofKorczak's works (in French)
as part of its literature translations pro¬
gramme. Below, Korczak with some of
the pupils of his Warsaw orphanage.
