Unesco and the conservation of Old Cairo
THE inclusion of the old city of Cairo
in the World Heritage List by the
World Heritage Convention, in
1 979, underlined the international cultural
significance of historic Cairo. But with
over six hundred listed buildings in an ex¬
panding city whose population is ex¬
pected to rise from twelve million to bet¬
ween sixteen and twenty million by the
year 2000 the problems of preservation
are enormous.
In February 1980, in response to a re¬
quest from the Egyptian Government,
Unesco undertook to send a mission to
prepare a report on a conservation
strategy for the old city of Cairo. The
members of this mission made a number
of visits during the period February to
August 1980.
The team concentrated its attention on
a study area of some three and a half
square kilometres (see map) containing
450 listed buildings. They found that the
resources available for the maintenance
of these historic monuments were totally
inadequate to the magnitude of the
problem. The area's narrow medieval
streets are choked with traffic, new and
unsuitable industrial and business ac¬
tivities are driving out the traditional
craftsmen and small tradesmen, and
building fabric is deteriorating due to
general decay, inadequate maintenance
and the ravages of a rising groundwater
table.
The team's report proposed two levels
of priority action for the study area. The
first of these covers the study area as a
whole and suggests a general programme
of housing improvement, limitation of the
size, speed and number of vehicles allow¬
ed into the area and improvement of road
maintenance, street cleaning and rubbish
collection.
At the second level of action the report
proposes a five-year emergency pro¬
gramme for six priority zones containing
clusters of monuments. Within each zone
urgent action is required to deal with the
restoration of monuments, to control the
design and construction of new buildings,
to rehabilitate and improve existing sites
and buildings, to introduce new compati-
Study area showing 6 priority
conservation zones
North
Old Cemetery
City
/
Old Cairo
South
Cemetery
O 1Km
Schematic map of historic Cairo.
Street scene Zone 6.
ble functions for monuments and to im¬
prove and contribute to the social facilities
of the neighbourhood.
The six clusters of monuments have
been selected to form potential conserva¬
tion and rehabilitation zones and are
spaced out at almost equal distances bet¬
ween the northern gates and the Ibn Tulun
Mosque (see diagram), each focussing on
a single street about 250 metres long.
Each group is thus tightly integrated, yet
they are spaced out in such a way that
their upgrading will have the maximum
impact on the whole of the central area of
the old city.
The six priority zones or clusters and
their general characteristics are as
follows:
Zone One, centred on Sharia (street) al
Muizz li-Din Allah, covers the heart of
Fatimid Cairo and is the site of the former
Fatimid palaces which were replaced by
other major buildings during the Ayyubid
and Mamluk periods. Historically the zone
demonstrates the development of the
typical Cairene madrasa-mosque with at¬
tached mausoleum of the founder. Major
public buildings and commercial struc¬
tures prevail, with shopfronts often
obstructing the view of important
monuments. Due to the vicinity of Khan al
Khalili and the Sharia al-Azhar, this zone
is the most frequented tourist area and,
with its unique architectural heritage,
represents a showcase of Islamic Cairo.
Zone Two, centred on Sharia al-
Gamaliya, represents one of the finest
and most homogeneous street scenes of
the old city. It includes fine wakallas
(buildings facing on to courtyards and
consisting of shops on the ground floor
with living quarters above) and sabil-
kuttabs (buildings with a single ground
floor room in which is installed a public
fountain, with a balcony room above
where young children are taught to chant
the Koran) on the north-south spine of
Fatimid Cairo, leading from Bab (gate) al-
22

Nasr to the shrine of Hussein. The street
is also a sub-centre for the adjacent hous¬
ing districts which are accessible through
the many lanes branching off from the
spine.
Zone Three, centred on the Ghouriya,
contains the buildings of the Mamluk
Sultan al-Ghoury and a series of tradi¬
tional suqs (markets). These originally ex¬
tended from the Sharia Muski southwards
as far as the Mu'ayyad complex (Zone
Four) and were cut by the Sharia al-Azhar.
To the east, close to the Sharia Hammam
al-Masbaja is a vegetable market which
acts as a local focus for the surrounding
area. Further east, the al-Azhar Mosque,
which is adjacent to this zone, is both a
major tourist attraction and an important
religious centre.
Zone Four is centred on Bab Zuweila,
the southern gate of the Fatimid city, link¬
ing the walled city with its southern exten¬
sions. Immediately south of the gate, the
spine features a unique sequence in the
old city, from the small open space out¬
side the gate to the covered Street of the
Tent-Makers. Due to industrial activities
nearby this zone suffers from the impact
of heavy vehicular traffic and contains
many dilapidated and abandoned plots.
Yet it remains a vital centre of life for the
southern part of the Fatimid city.
. Zone Five stretches along the Sharia Ba
al-Wazir, a section of the street running
from Bab Zuweila to the citadel which is
itself a ramification of the main north-
south spine of Islamic Cairo. This street
has kept much more of its traditional
character and activities than the main
spine south of Bab Zuweila. With several
Mamluk mosques and mausoleums pro¬
jecting diagonally into the street space
and with some fine specimens of tradi¬
tional housing structures surviving, the
area offers an important potential for
rehabilitation. This zone includes a
number of modern housing blocks and a
large irregular open space behind the
Blue Mosque which is used as a youth
centre. Traffic is less of a problem than in
the other zones, although large buses
operating on this spine often cause
congestion.
Zone Six contains a fine sequence of
Mamluk and Ottoman monuments on the
road leading from the Ibn Tulun Mosque
to the Citadel. The zone is crossed by the
main north-south spine leading from Bab
Zuweila to the cemetery of Saida Nafisa
and offers possibilities of future exten¬
sion. More than any other zone it has suf¬
fered from the impact of change and
redevelopment, due to the fact that Saliba
Road is today a major traffic artery.
This text is based on The Conservation of the
Old City of Cairo, the technical report on the
Unesco mission to Cairo. The drawings il¬
lustrating the text are by Jim Antoniou, field
director of the project and author of Islamic
Cities and Conservation, Unesco, 1982.
In 1982, as a follow-up to the mission
described on this page, Unesco commis¬
sioned architect Jim Antoniou to "define
the extent of conservation zones in the
safeguarding plan for al-Fustat, Old
Cairo, the Citadel and the North and
South Cemeteries" (see map opposite
page). As a result of population pressure
and shortage of housing some 500,000
people live in the cemeteries in and
around the tombs. The cemeteries con¬
tain many of the finest mausoleums and
monuments in the Islamic world. Above,
the North Cemetery which contains
the tombs and mausoleums of the Burji
Mamluks (1382-1517 AD/785-924 AH).
Bab Zuweila, the southern gate of the
Fatimid city (Zone 4). U
<
©
23
