This apple-wood gingerbread mould
depleting Adam and Eve Is part of a col¬
lection of wooden stamps and moulds
made In the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries
at the town of Torun, Poland.
Bottom photo : this 19th-century Cauca¬
sian carpet is from the Karabakh region of
Azerbaïdjan (USSR). The S-shaped
figures symbolize benevolent dragons,
and the diagonal lines, running water.
Below, Liatlf Kerlmov ¡s an ornamental
weaver and designer who has written a
major work on the carpets ofAzerbaïdjan.
j ÍLMI ' ^B ' jH'
mJejBy
26

Unesco and the Preservation
and Protection of Folklore
ACTIVITIES for the safeguarding
of folklore were included in
Unesco's Programme in 1 973 as
the result of a communication from the
Government of Bolivia asking that con¬
sideration might be given to the possibili¬
ty of drawing up a Protocol to the Univer¬
sal Copyright Convention which would
govern "the conservation, the promotion
and the diffusion of folklore".
Following a number of preliminary
studies and exchanges of views with the
Committees set up by the International
Copyright Conventions (the Universal
Convention and the Berne Convention) in
order to determine the extent to which
the protection of folklore might involve
copyright, Unesco embarked on a global
study of the protection of folklore which,
if it is to be complete, requires an inter¬
disciplinary effort, and on a study of the
"intellectual property" aspects involved.
The latter is being carried out jointly with
the World Intellectual Property Organiza¬
tion (WIPO).
The comprehensive study of the pro¬
tection of folklore was begun in 1981
when a questionnaire was sent out to
Unesco Member States. Then, in
February 1982, a Committee of Govern¬
mental Experts met at Unesco head¬
quarters in Paris; it did not reach a con¬
sensus on the definition of folklore but in¬
vited Unesco to continue its work aimed
at formulating general regulations con¬
cerning the safeguarding of folklore.
In January 1985 a second Committee
of Governmental Experts met at Unesco
Established In 1981 with the support of
Unesco and its International Fund for the
Promotion of Culture, the an¬
thropological cinema workshop in Cairo
is the first of its kind In the Arab world. As
a centre for training, research and pro¬
duction Its aim Is to preserve and assert
traditional cultural values. Below, still
from a film made In Egypt by the
workshop shows a young potter at work.
headquarters to study the possible range
and scope of such regulations. In its con¬
clusions the Committee proposed that
folklore could be defined as follows:
"Folklore (in a broader sense, traditional
and popular folk culture) is a group-
oriented and tradition-based creation of
groups or individuals reflecting the ex¬
pectations of the community as an ade¬
quate expression of its cultural and social
identity; its standards and values are
transmitted orally, by imitation or by
other means. Its forms include, among
others, language, literature, music,
dance, games, mythology, rituals,
customs, handicrafts, architecture and
other arts."
Concerning the identification of
folklore, the Committee considered it ad¬
visable that systems should be set up to
collect and record its various manifesta¬
tions, and to co-ordinate the classifica¬
tion systems used by different
institutions.
The Committee also concluded that
the conservation of documentation
regarding folk traditions calls for the
establishment of a network of archives,
the standardization of archiving methods
and the creation of museums where
folklore would be represented. To pro¬
vide for the safeguarding of folk tradi¬
tions, it would be advisable to introduce
the study of folklore into educational cur¬
ricula, to guarantee the right of the
various ethnic groups and national com¬
munities to their own folklore and to set
up national folklore councils where
various interest groups would be
represented.
The dissemination of folklore should be
encouraged through organizing regional,
national and international folklore events
and keeping the mass media informed
about them, publishing periodicals, and
creating documentation centres and
libraries specializing in folklore.
As far as the use of folklore is concern¬
ed, the Committee concluded that it
would be useful to call the attention of
the relevant authorities not only to the
"intellectual property" aspects of the
question which are the subject of the
"model provisions for national laws"
adopted in June 1982 under the joint
auspices of Unesco and the World In¬
tellectual Property Organization, but also
to the fact that the protection of folklore
should cover the transmitters of tradition
as well as the materials gathered, and
that measures should be taken to
safeguard against misuse, whether in¬
tentional or due to negligence.
The Committee considered that
Unesco Member States should be invited
to co-operate with the relevant institu¬
tions and organizations and among
themselves, notably to ensure interna¬
tionally that the various interested par¬
ties (communities, or natural or legal per¬
sons) enjoy the economic and moral
rights resulting from the investigation,
creation, performance, recording and/or
dissemination of folklore.
With regard to the nature of possible
international regulations, the Committee
felt that these should not take the form of
an international convention. On the other
hand, there was unanimous agreement
that they might take the form of an inter¬
national recommendation, whereby
Unesco's General Conference formulates
principles that it invites Member States
to adopt in the form of a national law or
in some other way.
To preserve China's outstandingly rich
heritage of traditional folk music and
make It more widely known, the Chinese
authorities have launched a project to
collect popular songs from every pro¬
vince in the country. The resulting an¬
thology will eventually comprise 30
volumes. Unesco 's International Fund for
the Promotion of Culture is supporting
the project by providing the necessary
recording equipment. Photo shows musi¬
cians from Xianghe (Hebelprovince) play¬
ing traditional instruments. In fore¬
ground, a 75-year-old farmer Is playing a
kind of flute, known as Shuang Guan, In a
bowl of water to evoke swans at play.
27
