The application of science
and art
*W T NESCO cannot be highbrow and
confine itself solely to"pure"sci-
ence, and"fine"art. It cannot do
so, because it must concern itself with the
whole of humanity, not only with the spe-
cialists, the highly educated élite, or the
privileged few, and is expressly charged
with advancing the ideals of equality of
educational opportunity ; and this is not
possible if Unesco's concern with science
and art is confined to the encouragement of
the scientist and the artist and to the learned
study of their achievements. It cannot do so
for another reason-because its Constitu-
tion lays upon it the duty of advancing the
common welfare of mankind. For the
advancement of human welfare depends in
the main upon the right application of sci-
ence-physical, biological, psychological
and social-and also, in the sphere of emo-
tional and spiritual satisfactions, upon the
application of the arts.
Unesco must therefore concern itself
with the widest extension and the fullest
application both of the sciences and of the
arts. It has, of course, neither the right nor
the wish to deal with the detailed problems
of nutrition and agriculture, medicine and
health, to however great an extent they
depend on the applications of science,
since, to cope with them, other Agencies of
the United Nations have been created.
With the scientific bases of these questions,
however, it must concern itself and must
therefore establish a proper liaison, with
clear delimitation of functions, between it-
self and the FAO [Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations] and
the World Health Organization. The same
holds for those applications of the sciences
which, because of their importance for
labour welfare, fall to be dealt with by the
ILO [International Labour Organisation],
and of those which, because of their military
importance, fall within the province of the
Atomic Energy Commission of the Security
Council.
Further, it is clear that practical problems
of economics and of social structure and
welfare, in so far as they are to be dealt with
by an international body, must be the con-
cern of the Economie and Social Council ;
while certain sectors of social anthropology,
such as culture-contact between more and
less advanced cultures (which include prob-
lems not only of applied science but also of
art and literature and of education), will be
the primary concern of the Trusteeship
Council and of the section of the Economie
and Social Council dealing with non-self-
governing peoples.
This overlap, however, far from de-
barring Unesco from concerning itself with
the applications of the sciences and the arts
in general, makes it aH the more imperative
that it should do so, and should do so in a
particular way. These other Agencies and
organs ofthe United Nations which we have
mentioned are concerned with particular
fields or problems some larger, some more
speciaHzed. Unesco alone is charged with
the comprehensive task of studying and
promoting al) the higher activities of man
and their applications, and of doing so in a
co-ordinated way, subject to a definite set
of purposes.
What Unesco can do in this vast sphere of
the practical application of creative know-
ledge and art is, accordingly, to study the
problems in correlation, to endeavour to
promote the best methods of translating
theory into practice, and to give guidance as
to right application. The terms best and
right are not used merely in the technical
sense of most immediately efficient, but as
definitely implying value-judgement. It is
possible to exploit new agricultural
methods in a way that is in the long run
technically disastrous to agriculture itself,
by causing soil exhaustion or erosion, but it
is also possible to do so in a way which is
technically sound but socially wrong-by
causing over-population, for instance, or by
ruining natural beauty or causing the ex-
tinction of striking or interesting species of
animais and plants, or by creating a depress-
ed agricultural class with unduly low stan-
dards of living. Similarly, it is possible to
devote too much attention to exploiting the
discoveries of mechanical, physical and che-
mical science, to the grave detriment of
interest in the arts and appreciation of the
value of beauty in everyday life and of
artistic creation as a human activity ; while a
contrary effect is also ait too readily pos-
sible, when religious prejudice or cultural
obscurantism puts obstacles in the way of
scientific research and new knowledge, or
their beneficent applications.
Again, there are fields with which other
Agencies are not expressly or immediately
concerned. No other United Nations Agen-
cy deals with the important question of
seeing that the arts are properly and fully
applied, or that provision is made for satis-
fying man's need for aesthetic enjoyment,
whether of scenery and natural beauty, of
the everyday furniture of life, of buildings
and cities, or of great works of art and music
and Hterature. Nor is any other Agency
concerning itself with such important ap-
plications of the sciences as the disciplinirig
of the mind to produce so-called mystical
experience and other high degrees of spir-
itual satisfaction ; or with the application of
psychology to the technique of government,
or to preventing the abuse or the exploita-
tion of democracy.
Thus in this general field Unesco should
pursue three main objectives. First, it
should discover what applications of science
and art are not being considered by other
United Nations organizations, and then
pick out from among them those it thinks
most important to promote or to study.
Secondly, it should study the practical ap-
plications of science and art as a particular
social problem, to discover what are the
reasons which prevent, frustrate or distort
them, what are the effects of undue speed or
undue delay. Such a study should be of
considerable help in promoting the technic-
al efficiency of this process-a problem
which will become steadily more pressing
with the increase of scientific knowledge
and of social comptexity. And the third
objective, the most difficult though perhaps
also the most important, is to relate the
applications of science and art to each other
and to a general scale of values, so as to
secure a proper amount and rate of applica-
tion in each fietd. If such a task were satis-
factorily carried out, and if its findings were
acted upon, this would constitute one of the
most important contributions towards dis-
covering and pursuing the desirable direc-
tion of human evolution-in other words,
true human wetfare. t
Julian Huxley
Extract from Unesco Its Purpose and its Philo-
sophy. This document was written by Julian Hux-
ley during a fortnight's holiday taken in 1946
shortly after his appointment as Secretary-
General of the Prepara tory Commission.
28
