Nature's water wheel
Precipitation on land
Moisture over land
Evaporation
from water
turface
Evaporation from land
Interception and transpiration
from vagstation from soil
Evaporation
from ocean ' Precipitation
OUR earth has been called the Water Planet, and with good
reason. If it were not for the pervading presence of water
on earth, the life forms that we know simply would not
be here. Some very simple organisms can exist without air, but
none can do so without water.
If this globe on which we all reside were not 150 million
kilometres from our sun, the earth would not have its present
mixture of gaseous, liquid, and solid moisture. Calculations
show that if the earth were located closer than 134 million
kilometres from the sun, our water would be boiled away. On the
other hand, should the orbit of the earth have turned out to be
more than 166 million kilometres out from the sun, the Ice Age
of the earth would have been without end.
So things happen as they do because our solar system's ther¬
monuclear fireball is located where it is. The sun is just the right
distance to keep the earth's "water wheel" (the "hydrological
cycle" as scientists call it) in constant motion.
The sun lifts water from the surface of the oceanas well as
from fresh water lakes, reservoirs, and streams. Additional
significant amounts of moisture are obtained from the surfaces
of plant leaves through a process called transpiration.
These masses of moisture, invisible unless temperature condi¬
tions are such that clouds form, move over the oceans and land.
When lifted by mountain rangesor when they come in contact
with cooler air massesthe water molecules coalesce, and can
no longer be supported aloft. Rain, hail, or snow then takes
place.
If the precipitation falls upon relatively impermeable soil, the
water may flow over the land as a small rivulet. But if the surface
of the soil is quite porous, or with thick vegetation which softens
the blows of the falling drops, there will be more infiltration and
less direct runoff.
Once water begins to infiltrate the soil surface, its rate of move¬
ment drastically decreases. If the soil is tightly compacted or con¬
tains much clay, the water may move hardly at all. In such an in¬
stance, the water may be hundreds of years in reaching what is
called the groundwater tablethat area of the ground which is
saturated with water.
It should be noted that the area between the surface of the soil
and the top of the groundwatercalled the unsaturated zone-
is of major importance to vegetation. If it were not for this region
which contains some water, along with oxygen, most plants
could not exist.
The moisture which reaches the groundwater is not per¬
manently removed from the water which is circulating in the
world-wide hydrological cycle. The groundwater will move,
however slowly, back towards the ocean. It may reach a lake
where it may be lifted skyward. It may come to the surface in a
spring where it joins the overland movement of a stream. When
the stream does reach the river/ocean interface, the hydrological
cycle may be said to have been completed.
In fact, of course, the cycle continues. The earth is still
operating with its original supply of water which is still essentially
undiminished. The molecules of water in Archimedes' bath are
still floating around in some ocean, lake, stream, or aquifer.
It is estimated that approximately 505,000 km3 of ocean water
is evaporated annually. However, about 458,000 km3, is of no
use to us as it precipitates back into the oceans. Only about
47,000 km3 is carried far enough to precipitate over the land. It
is only this water that is available to us for our multiple domestic,
agricultural and industrial uses. In reality, the total annual
precipitation over the land is much more than that; it is of the
order of 119,000 km3, the balance of 72,000 km3, comes from
water permanently retained as moisture by the atmosphere, soil
and vegetation in a never-ending cycle of evaporation from
ground and water surfaces, transpiration from vegetation, and
precipitation from the atmosphere. The excess of about 47,000
km3 of water carried over from the evaporation of the oceans
returns to the oceans as rivers and groundwater runoff.
This text and those on pages 25 to 28 are .
adapted from the booklet Water and the City,
published by Unesco within the framework of
the International Hydrological Programme and
written by Gunnar Lindh, professor of water
resource engineering at the Lund Institute of
Technology, University of Lund, Sweden. .
