Grassroots of the pampas
by Cesar A. Garcia Belsunce
T
"T was the first time a dentist had
come to the village, and I was his
first patient. There were no fa¬
cilities for anaesthetics in the village then. I.
was ten years old and they put me in a chair
opposite a hanging skeleton. The skull
seemed to be smiling, and I smiled back at
it. Then the lady who was helping the den¬
tist said to me, 'So that you won't be
frightened, I'll play the guitar for you while
the doctor is working.'" Seventy-five years
later the heroine of this adventure was
reminiscing into a tape-recorder and
describing what may have been the first ap¬
pearance of dentistry and music therapy in
Castelli, a village in the wet pampa of
Argentina, where a regional museum and
archive have recently been created.
This region, which bordered on Indian
territory until 1820, was inhabited by
native-born Argentinians and immigrants,
mostly Italians and Basques, who have
always had a strong sense of their past and
have withstood the impact of the modern
world with greater firmness than other
peoples in the region. As a consequence, the
area was chosen by the Latin-American Ar¬
chives Association for a pilot project on the
collection of data relating to its social
history. The idea was to collect
systematically all existing documentation in
private hands, such as letters, account-
books, school exercise books, photos, and
films, as well as the kind of eyewitness ac¬
count quoted above.
The National University of La Plata has
also launched an archaeological research
project in the same district and taken steps
to create a museum there, based on the cer¬
tainty that many traces of more or less
sedentary indigenous populations must sur¬
vive in this region rich in lagoons. In addi-
Photographs, post-cards, letters, oral
testimony, all these are grist to the mill of
the Museum and Regional Archive of
Castelli, Argentina, In its effort to create a
documentary record of the life of the
region. In these two photos, now In the ar¬
chives, can be seen (above left) a local
family, photographed In 1905, and (above
right) a viewof the village ofCastelliat the
beginning of the century.
tion to archaeological specimens, the
museum will collect and display objects
relating to the farming and stock-breeding
civilization which developed in the area
following its occupation by populations of
European origin, as well as examples of
animal and plant life in the local
environment.
The execution of these projects, which
were launched simultaneously in the middle
of 1983, was immediately co-ordinated,
although each retains its distinctive nature.
This co-ordination led to the creation on 8
August 1984 of the Castelli Regional
Museum and Archive. It is not yet open to
the public, but an inaugural exhibition has
already been held there with marked
success.
The written documents that have been
assembled provide interesting evidence
about the organization of social life at the
beginning of the century, and about such
matters as the cost of living and the way in
which contracts were drawn up. A mass of
photos vividly illustrate changing customs
and ways of living, notably the change from
traditional to modern dress, the evolution
of housing from humble cottages to opulent
estancias inspired by the manors and villas
of Europe, the floods which periodically hit
the region, and rural activities as they were
before the mechanization of agriculture.
Even more interesting are the eyewitness
oral histories. Old villagers have been inter¬
viewed and have told racy anecdotes about
the paternalistic relationship between the
land-owners and their "peons", and about
the political rivalry between radicals and
conservatives: "A long time ago, in the
1920s," said one, "the different parties
were always accusing each other of electoral
fraud. And so one day it was decided that
elections would be strictly supervised and
from then on the irregularities stopped. But
the ballot-boxes had to be taken by train to
the town of Dolores for the votes to be
counted and once, when the train was
winding its way along the banks of the
lagoon of Sevigné those who thought! they
had lost the election threw the boxes into
the water."
Both projects have been organized to en¬
courage the active participation of the
villagers. Volunteers are given instruction
by professional archivists, museologists and
archaeologists and when they have been
trained they are sent out to do fieldwork. In
Castelli today young people can be seen go¬
ing from house to house in search of
documents and museum objects, while
other volunteers excavate on the banks of
the Rio Salado.
CESAR A. GARCIA BELSUNCE, of Argen¬
tina, is a member of the Executive Committee
of the International Council on Archives and
chairman of the Latin-American Archives
Association. A former director ofhis country's
General Archives, he is the author of many
published works on archival and historical
themes. He is in charge of the project to col¬
lect social history documents which has given
rise to the museum and archives centre
described in this article.
25
