A novelist and his century
by Victor Brombert
VICTOR Hugo prided himself on
having been born with his century.
1802: "Ce siècle avait deux ans..."
(This century was two years old...) Every
French schoolchild can quote the opening
line of Les Feuilles d'Automne, a line which
is echoed in the concluding piece where
Hugo sees himself as the son of his epoch.
"Je suis fils de ce siècle" (I am a son of this
century). Son or is it father? Hugo's his¬
torical self-dramatization is not merely an
expression of solidarity with the events and
the destiny of his own post-revolutionary
period; it is rooted in the early belief that
the truly exceptional writer's vocation is to
represent his century and fill it with his
presence.
It obviously suited Hugo's imagination to
think in terms of huge chunks of time, and
to conceive of a siècle as a living reality. La
Légende des Siècles is his epic account of
humanity's adventure through history. He
saw a century as a massive unit with a life
and a personality of its own. Conversely, he
felt that great personalities embodied their
time. Hugo, so fond of double-substantive
metaphors, glorified the homme siècle. In
his dithyrambic essay William Shakespeare,
he affirms that every epoch is concentrated
(condensée) in one figure. When that figure
disappears, the epoch has come to an end.
His own fiction provides any number of
illustrations of characters who, in a less
exalted fashion, embody an entire century,
or are its anachronistic survivors.
Hugo's association of a human figure
with an entire century has of course specific
relevance to his conception of himself as
writer. There exists a link in the larger
design of the Book of Time: from Dante to
Shakespeare, to Pascal, to Voltaire, to the
advent of a new age ushered in by the
Revolution. Hence Hugo's very special and
self-glorifying view of himself in William
Shakespeare: as the poet of the nineteenth
century, he faces the poet of the sixteenth
century, as the poet of France he faces the
poet of England; but above all, as the su¬
preme French writer of the immediate post-
Revolutionary world, he is the poet of that
new world: the vatic, visionary thinker and
mythmaker of a radically new era.
Put in those terms, Hugo's notion of him¬
self associates by an inner logic his literary
vocation and presence-in-the-world to poli¬
tical upheavals and social change. The
nineteenth century, according to him, is
without precedent: it corresponds to the
personal quest for originality. Like any true
work of genius , it is the offspring of an idea .
And that idea the Revolution is in his
terms the grand climacteric ("le tournant
climatérique") of humanity, the turning
point in a providential scheme. Artistic
creation, historical becoming, and political
commitment, thus seem destined to exist in
a state of symbiosis.
It is hardly surprising that, in Hugo's
view, the thinker's or artist's function is not
so much to glorify the notion of the demo¬
cratic peuple, as to create it. The belief in
the possibility of projecting through art the
as yet unshaped but potentially powerful
figure of the common people remained a
constant feature of Hugo's thought. He
seems to have been convinced from his
earliest years that this was the specific mis¬
sion of the writer.
The nineteenth-century playwright,
novelist, or poet (Hugo was all three) had to
create his audience, and such an act of
creation had undeniable political implica¬
tions. As he puts it in William Shakespeare,
a text which in more ways than one is a
profession of faith, "the masses become the
audience, which in turn becomes the peo¬
ple." The prime mission of creative intellect
is to transfigure the masses, to metamorph¬
ose the mob: "construire le peuple." And
peuple is of course one of the most ideologi¬
cally loaded terms of the century, and one
of the pivotal words in Hugo's lexicon.
A concern with the deep social issues of
/". ¿*

the nineteenth century is obvious in all his
novels, even in the ones which do not seem
to be political in nature. Bug-Jargal deals
with the 1791 slave revolt in what was to
become the Republic of Haiti, and is filled
with echoes of the French Revolution. The
violence of the insurrection is related to the
fall of the Bastille, as political forces seem
to take precedence over individual des¬
tinies. Hugo's career as novelist begins
under the sign of the fatum of history. Poli¬
tical forces will continue to determine the
thrust of his fiction. The barricades and the
street fighting of the early 1830s, in the
wake of the July Revolution, are the back¬
drop to the most dramatic episodes in Les
Misérables. Even more significant is the
insistent recall of the battle of Waterloo,
seen at the same time as the end of a world,
a return to the past, and a new beginning
in other words, as a major, yet problematic
turning point in the destiny of Europe.
Les Travailleurs de la Mer, even though
focused on man's epic struggle against
politics, the implicit references are power¬
ful. The background to Han d'Islande is a
large-scale revolt by mutinous miners.
Notre-Dame de Paris, though historically
situated in 1482, is filled with anachronistic
or prophetic allusions to the French Re¬
volution; it describes a world of transition
and change that corresponds, in Hugo's
mind, to the transitional nature of the early
days of Louis-Philippe's regime. But if the
end of the feudal world in Notre-Dame de
Paris is understood to coincide with the
invention of the printing press (the Book
was to replace the Cathedral), there was
also nostalgia for bygone structures and
values; and this historical duplicity (looking
forward and feeling backward) is projected
in the key chapter "Ceci tuera cela."
L'Homme qui Rit displays a similar political
ambiguity. It too talks about the past
(seventeenth-and eighteenth-century En¬
gland) while constantly referring to the
narrator/reader's present. The story of the
grimacing human monster a victim of
projects the image of the "predestined"
genius, Hugo extols the men of the Revolu¬
tion as the heralds of the whirlpool of ideas
known as the nineteenth century. And in
the acceptance speech at the Académie
Française (1841), the link between the Re¬
volution and the nineteenth century is made
even clearer. After glorifying Napoleon as
the providential child of the Revolution
capable of transforming history into an
epic, Hugo proclaims his allegiance to his
own time ("j'aime mon temps") even if
this time implies upheavals and violence.
But there is a flagrant paradox in Hugo's
notion of le grand siècle, for this notion
appears to straddle two potentially incom¬
patible fields of action: politics and liter¬
ature. Ideologies can lead to political deeds
(good and bad), and writing can of course
be a form of political action. But writing
and ideas can also be action in and by
themselves. Political immanence and intel¬
lectual transcendence are not necessarily
attuned to each other. In the concluding

oceanic forces, is filled with allusions to
contemporary history. Captain Lethierry
launches his steamboat on a fourteenth of
July. A revolutionist in navigation, the old
skipper is in fact known as l'homme révolu¬
tion, and prides himself on having been
"suckled by '89" ("J'ai tété '89"). Topical
allusions to the world of the Restauration
(the fall of Villèle, the death of Pope Leo
XII, the arms sales to the Tsar for the
repression of Poland) are constant remin¬
ders that this allegorical saga, filled with
monsters and archetypal figures, is rooted
in history.
Needless to comment on the historical
and political focus of Quatrevingt-Treize;
the very title points to the climactic year
1793, the year of the Terror and the reign of
the guillotine. Even in those works not
10 overtly concerned with nineteenth-century
royal absolutism, but himself (without
knowing it) a born nobleman points to the
end of the aristocratic era.
Anachronism is provocatively inscribed
into the glorification of the nineteenth cen¬
tury. In Les Misérables, Hugo calls it the
"grand siècle" (a polemical expression,
since these two words are traditionally
associated with the reign of Louis XIV) and
he refers to the dawn of new ideas as a vast
"lever d'idées" an ironic image which at
the same time recalls and discredits the
despotic ceremonial at Versailles. But
Hugo did not wait to sing the glories of the
post-Revolutionary age until the period of
political exile when, converted to Republi¬
can ideals, he saw himself increasingly as
the inspired yet troubled apologist of re¬
volution. As early as 1834, in an essay on
Mirabeau through whom he self-revealingly
section of Le Rhin, Hugo attributes modern
France's greatness to its clergé littéraire.
The institution of Literature is exalted as a
spiritual power.
Hugo in fact develops a revolutionary
ideology all of his own. The saga and aspira¬
tions of the French Revolution are read into
the lines of a new providential text that sings
the adventure of the human spirit and the
prowess of the creative mind. Genius is to
take precedence over the hero, the pen is to
vanquish the sword. Thought is power. The
defeat of Waterloo is seen, in Les
Misérables, as a major shift in the moral and
intellectual perspective. The sword-wiel-
ders, the sabreurs, have had their day; the
time of the thinkers has come. William
Shakespeare, this paean about the nature
and destiny of genius, proclaims the demise
of the warrior-hero, the entrance of the true

giants on the scene of action. The opposi¬
tion of pen and sword, of warrior and poet,
is given added significance if one remem¬
bers that Hugo's own father had been a
general under Napoleon.
The paradox of Hugo's grand siècle helps
explain the central importance of Waterloo
in Les Misérables. For Napoleon's eclipse,
in the structure of the novel, is clearly ar¬
ticulated on Valjean's re-emergence and
ascent. The symbolic contrast is implicit in
the name of Bonaparte's early victory at
Montenotte a word coupling the images
of ascent and darkness (monte/notte) a
victory which coincides chronologically
with Valjean's descent into the prison hell.
Victory and defeat are dialectically bound
to each other. Waterloo appears as a hinge,
a turning point.
History itself thus turns out to be para¬
doxical and ambiguous. Political reactions,
such as the Bourbon Restoration of 1815,
are setbacks, but also fertile discontinuities
in the larger text of History. Is it not objec-
\
%7
t
2
©
The poet's father and mother. General
Leopold Hugo (1773-1828) as drawn by
Victor Hugo; and Sophie Hugo (1772-
1821), née Trébuchet, by Achille Devéria.
\

tively the fate of revolutionary thinking
throughout the nineteenth century to be
Janus-faced? For the Revolution, whose
interrupted work still remains to be com¬
pleted, is already an event of the past.
Hugo's personal experience mirrors the col¬
lective experience of an archaeology of re¬
volutionary moments: 1789, 1830, 1848,
1870. The double glance progressive and
regressive helps explain why Hugo's
thematics of Revolution are at the same
time future-directed and deeply concerned
with origins. The genetic motif is clearly
stated in William Shakespeare: the French
Revolution has spiritually engendered all
modern thinkers. "C'est là leur père et leur
mère. "
The paternal and maternai images may
seem banal. What is less banal is that
Hugo's work insists almost obsessively on
the themes of severance from the mother
and eclipse of the father. The weaning of
the Vendéen children at the beginning of
Quatrevingt-Treize , when they are adopted
by the Revolutionary battalion, corres¬
ponds no doubt to Hugo's autobiographical
awareness of withdrawal from the royalist
ideas represented by his own Vendéenne
mother. But though Marius in Les
Misérables, and Hugo himself, accede re-
gressively to the truth of the Revolution by
belatedly discovering their Bonapartist
father, it is equally telling that their father
has to disappear and that a hiatus is estab¬
lished.
The name ofMarius' father is Pontmercy,
the first syllable of which (pont) clearly
suggests the image of a bridge; and a bridge,
in this context, can be understood to span a
gap, to connect the past and the future, to
provide a meaningful legacy. But bridges
can also collapse, or be destroyed, suggest¬
ing the need for a new beginning. It is
significant that, in Les Misérables, father
and son never meet. The fathers are in fact
notoriously absent in Hugo's fiction; the
Condemned Man mentions only the women
in his family (is he not perhaps guilty of
parricide?); Frollo, an orphan early in life,
becomes a substitute father to his brother
Jehan; Valjean loses both his parents as a
child, and also becomes a surrogate father
to his family; Gilliatt, in Les Travailleurs de
la Mer, is only known to have had a mother;
Gwynplaine's father, in L'Homme qui Rit,
has died in exile; Gauvain, in Quatrevingt-
Treize, is also an orphan.
Sometimes a grandfather may take over,
usurping the role of the real father, as when
Monsieur Gillenormand, in Les Misérables, ^''

The Marquis de Lantenac, a character in
Hugo's novel Quatrevingt-Treize (1874),
reads the poster declaring him an outlaw.
Illustration by Gustave Brion (1875).
wilfully cancels the father's presence, sym¬
bolically erasing the entire 1789-1815 epi¬
sode as criminal and irrelevant. But more
significant, in terms of the paternal image,
is Hugo's affirmation in the very text that
states that all nineteenth-century thought is
a child of the Revolution that the Revolu¬
tion is itself fatherless. The section entitled
"Le Dix-neuvième Siècle," at the end of
William Shakespeare, begins with the
peremptory assertions that the nineteenth
century is answerable only to itself ("...ne
relève que de lui-même"), and that it is the
nature of the nineteenth century to dispense
with ancestors ("// est de sa nature révolu¬
tionnaire de se passer d'ancêtres"). There is
only one step needed to extend this negative
family metaphor to nineteenth-century
writers, and we can guess whom Hugo has
in mind: "The poets and writers of the
nineteenth century have neither masters
nor models." The revolutionary metaphor
suggests a declaration of independence and
originality for Literature itself. But such a
notion of being one's own origin, one's own
father, does not go without a sense of
anguish and even guilt. Subliminally, it
©

involves a death wish. The Revolution
remains for Hugo a deeply troubling
reality: he knows that regicide is but a
form of parricide.
Complicating this sense of guilt and
anguish is a latent fear of the masses, and a
not-so-hidden dim view of the otherwise
positive and progress-oriented notion of
siècle. What is involved is something more
profound than fear of violence, distrust of
the mob, or hostility to an increasingly
materialistic socialism. It is history itself, as
a grim process and as a catalogue of crimes
that Hugo the homme siècle is paradoxically
led to denounce. History is the brutal fait
accompli. And the key word siècle, often
associated with epic vision and Utopian opti¬
mism, also condemns the worldly spirit, the
sequential nightmare of history, the mur des
siècles of the sombre opening poem of La
Légende des Siècles.
Thus Hugo's lasting fascination with his¬
tory and the historical process is attended
by misgivings and anxiety. He comes to
question the validity and ethics of a historic¬
al perspective, while convinced that the wri¬
ter must speak for his time. Compelled to
Photo © Bulloz, Paris. Collections de la Maison de Victor Hugo
Pen drawing by Hugo depicting Thénar-
dier, a character in Les Misérables (1862).
confront and decipher the laws of history,
he also experiences an almost Voltairean
view of history as a cortège of unjustifiable
calamities. Hugo's tone at times reveals a
true sense of horror. He writes of the "tragic
sob" of history; he defines history as the
accomplice of crime, as the great spiller of
blood. La Légende des Siècles was to be the
great epic poem of humanity's quest across
historic time. Yet Hugo, using the word
siècle, also stigmatizes the commitment to
this time of history as a way of denying the
timeless life of the spirit.
Le siècle ingrat, le siècle affreux, le siècle
immonde
A triple indictment such as this helps to
put into proper perspective the prophetic
vision of Hugo as he looks forward into the
future: the century that lies ahead. We are
reminded of the idealistic student-revolu¬
tionary Enjolras who, from atop the barri¬
cades in Les Misérables, as he is about to lay
down his life for a political cause, prophe¬
sies a time when it will be possible to put an
end to the political adventure, emerge from
the nightmare of history, and make an exit
from the "forest of events."
Is this not precisely the ultimate paradox
of Hugo, l'homme siècle: that the man most
committed to the history and politics of his
day should also be the one who most steadi¬
ly dreamed of transcending them?
VICTOR BROMBERT, of the United States, is
the Henry Putnam University Professor of Ro¬
mance and Comparative Literature and Director
of the Christian Gauss Seminars at Princeton
University. He is the author ofa number of works
on French literature, including The Romantic
Prison. The French Tradition (1978), for which he
was awarded the Harry Levin Prize in Compara¬
tive Literature, andVictor Hugo and the Visionary
Novel (1984).
/". ¿* .
