A challenge for the schools
by Georges Vignaux
THE place where, essentially and his¬
torically, necessary change occurs
is the school. That is where migrant
children are subjected to their crucial first
experience of adjustment to a different
culture and, conversely, where the children
of the host country come into contact with
their otherness and their differences, which
prompts them to reconsider and to under¬
stand their own culture.
Many conflicts can arise in the migrant
child as a result of minority practices that
can identify him and make him visible as
a member of another community (clothing,
diet, personal background, etc.). Unfor¬
tunately, certain underlying cultural
assumptions will then act as kinds of "basic
concepts", axiomatizing images of the
world, codes and conventions that are leg¬
itimated by family consensuses and per¬
ceived by the child as. being at variance
with the very rules, implicit or explicit, of
the school, itself the expression of a major¬
ity consensus.
But the school is not only the "reflec¬
tion" of a national consensus; it also aims
actively to integrate and cast all children
in the same mould. Thus, inevitably, there
is often not so much ignorance as rejection
of their differences.
Yet each of us, each child, needs these
personal and collective differences, if only
to locate and perhaps dedramatize his posi¬
tion on a continuum of images, stereotypes
and prejudices ranging from the nearest
to the most remote. Thus those relegated
to the fringes of society draw upon people's
attitudes to social relegation their own
and those of others. All these attitudes can
only serve to widen the gap between how
the child perceives his social status and how
he experiences his cultural identity. Thus
school can serve as much to materialize
these exclusions, by giving them form and
typology, as to relativize them. This can
happen on two general levels: those of
expression and guidance.
Young Swedes and the children of Turk¬
ish migrant workers learn carpentry in a
school at Göteborg, Sweden.
The acquisition of expression involves
first of all the forced learning of a dominant
rhetoric, that of the host country and its
language, which is the language of know¬
ledge since all subjects will be taught in
it. Very early on, therefore, the migrant
child comes to compare two languages:
that of the school and that of the family,
the latter being necessarily diminished in
value relative to the former. In a great
many cases this linguistic handicap will be
further aggravated by the absence of family
support. If the migrant child succeeds in
overcoming it, he will have to pay the price
in terms of a rift between himself and the
family cultural environment, which he will
now regard as being antagonistic towards
the surrounding model.
With regard to guidance, as a result of
the standards applied in the school (age-
limits, "backwardness", so-called special¬
ist courses etc.), even the best intentions
in the world can turn out to be terribly
selective here. Teachers and counsellors
often arrive at a certain, perception of the
family and social environment which will
lead them to treat the children as special

In a class comprising 30 per cent of Immi¬
grant children In a co-educational State
school at La Seyne-sur-Mer in the south
of France, an experiment was carried out
In 1983 to foster greater mutual under¬
standing among the children and to
encourage the young North Africans to
take greater pride in the achievements of
Arabic culture and language. Combining
imaginary and real-life incidents, the
pupils wrote a story about their town
in French and Arabic and Illustrated It
with their own drawings and photos.
cases. As they are moved from one course
to another and from one institution to
another they will very soon be victims of
relegation, this time to the educational and
administrative fringe.
Thus for the migrant child school proves
to be essentially a place where differences
are recognized, distinctions are drawn and
exclusion occurs. The selection systems it
involves rely on explanations and, con¬
versely, these explanatory systems, which
are gradually internalized by the children
concerned, will further the development
in them of paradoxical processes of self-
selection and self-elimination ("I am not
good at school because I am different. . . and
the same applies socially...").
The educational fate of migrant children
can thus be sealed as a result of the subtle
processes whereby they are transferred to
specialist courses, vocational or not, and
their concentration in certain establish¬
ments. Their place of education is as much
a reflection as a result of their physical
location within society (overcrowded
schools in some urban areas). Thus it might
even be claimed that the environment is
fully responsible for under-achievement,
thereby ignoring the ill-preparedness of
teachers for the intercultural problems con¬
fronting them.
Every educational institution is based on
a profound elitism which can only lead to
the exclusion of a substantial percentage
of pupils. This fate is, of course, also that
of children from the under-privileged sec¬
tions of the host society, but the con¬
sequences are necessarily more serious
among migrant children in terms of the
ways in which they perceive their own iden¬
tity. They will resent this selection more
than others as a kind of social rejection,
a return to the same jobs as their parents
or, quite simply, as a sign that they are
being consigned to the ranks of the unem¬
ployed.
School, which they experience as a place
of obligations and constraints, will soon
seem alien and even hostile to them
because they see it as leading them into
a dead end symbolizing a society in which
they cannot see their place. Academic fail¬
ure thus reflects a more general social fail¬
ure generating strategies of despair.
Cultural dysfunctions gradually engen¬
der social maladjustment. "Illegitimate
offspring" of a society in which they believe
they have no place, from countries which
are no longer theirs, these migrant children
will then demand the visibility they once
feared. Their social dis-identification leads
them necessarily to adopt more conspic¬
uous fringe behaviour patterns (formation
of minority groups) or to re-identify with
a mythical native culture which will never
iii^D^I
tf '"Vi^xUl
i^^ S^J>'
vtT
111 7 i i íAIUJA
te Soif
be that of the family. Symbolic crises
develop as ethnic aspirations grow. These
crises express a search for strategies of self-
improvement and self-justification as much
as they reflect the failure of integration in
a school environment which is not pre¬
pared to receive these children with the
respect that they and their families want.
The answer lies in educational diver¬
sification. Various kinds of culture-based
or technology-based courses designed to
be equivalent must be grafted onto a com¬
mon core of basic education. The present
mistake of selective streaming, inevitably
leading to failure at school and in society,
must not be repeated. Hence the impor¬
tante of a cultural re-moulding of ele¬
mentary and pre-elementary education.
Teacher training, analysis and thinking
about methods must concentrate on these
points. All children, not only immigrants,
must be offered common educational facil¬
ities that will provide them with freedom
of choice later on. Recognition of cultural
diversity also implies recognition of dif¬
ferences in rates of progress and adjust¬
ment and hence a re-evaluation of present
modes of enforced "hierarchization"
between types of teaching and curricula.
It is thus important that all children
should enjoy a free interplay of linguistic
expression which is crucial to cognitive,
intellectual and, particularly, technical
development. In this sense, the establish¬
ment of conditions to ensure respect and
understanding not only between cultures
but also between modes of expression in
language, literature and technology, must
go hand in hand with efforts to define and
develop intercultural education.
No culture can be identified with a closed
system of values and behaviour, even if
it is necessary, at certain stages of history,
for it to act as if this were the case. On
the contrary, all cultures can only be nour¬
ished by contact with others that are close
and by contrast with those that are distant.
Schools can help to promote understanding
of this "natural" living process. This is,
perhaps, one of their fundamental roles.
This article is adapted from a report entitledThe
Education of Migrant Children: Problems and
Prospects, prepared by Georges Vignaux for
the 13th session of the Standing Conference
of European Ministers of Education, held in Dub¬
lin from 10 to 12 May 1983.
