At home with Hugo
by Rubén Darío
I recently paid a visit to the Victor Hugo
museum, wondering whether I should
find any of the faithful at the shrine.
The museum is located in the house in the
Place des Vosges, Paris, in which the great
man used to live. It is well known that the
museum was assembled thanks chiefly to
the unswerving esteem, love and admira¬
tion of Victor Hugo's friend and disciple
Paul Meurice, who tackled this labour of
love with wholehearted enthusiasm. His
painstaking attention to detail was pushed
to such lengths as to arouse criticism in
certain quarters for such exhibits as "a mo¬
lar that Victor Hugo had extracted on such
and such a date". For my part, I have never
seen this famous molar.
In the entrance hall there is a bust of the
great poet. The staircase is lined with pic¬
tures depicting scenes from his plays, poems
and novels as well as from his life. Farther
on are many illustrations by Rochegrosse,
Boulanger, J. P. Laurens, and others, and
then photographs, caricatures and all the
pictorial Hugoliana, ranging from the ear¬
liest days, from childhood to death-bed, to^
Retouched inkstain on folded paper by
Victor Hugo, dating from around 1850. The
symmetrical inkstain obtained by folding
the leaf of paper was later imaginatively
retouched by the pen. In the centre is the
bust of a figure and, above, two adjoining
profile heads. Hugo practiced this "ink¬
stain art" before he went into exile and
continued to do so until the end of his life. 33

the fine head photographed by Nadar and
painted by Bonnat under the lights of the
mortuary. There are show-cases with the
usual exhibits; academic robes, the robes of
a nobleman of France, a cap, a fine walking-
stick in a case on which can be seen the
inscription Benito Juárez à l'illustre Victor
Hugo.
There are medals and quills, and letters
addressed to the poet bearing the signatures
of famous personalities. There is a morsel
of siege-bread, and, in a box, four large
locks of hair which cover, as it were, the
spectrum of his life.
The fair hair of his days at the "College of
the Nobles", in Madrid; the tresses of the
"golden boy" of Paris; the darker locks of
the author of Hernani, of the young and
brilliant pioneer of Romanticism; the grey
hairs of the fighter, of the stormy outbursts
of the Chamber of Deputies and of political
agitation; the grey-head of L'Année
Terrible and of Les Châtiments; the silver
locks of Guernsey and of L'Art d'Etre
Grand-père; the venerated, white hairs of
the ancient, of the high priest of the lyric
world, of the revered patriarch of thinkers,
whose death shook the world and over
whose mortal remains all Paris stood vigil in
that most grandiose of all catafalques the
Arc de Triomphe.
On a small table stand four ink-wells and
four quills those of Lamartine, of Dumas
senior, of George Sand and of the master of
the house himself. Hugo delighted in mak¬
ing strange objects with his own hands and
used to construct "Chinese" and
"Japanese" artefacts well before the Gon-
court brothers launched the oriental
fashion. The museum contains a mantel¬
piece decorated by Hugo in the oriental
style as well as several panels skilfully col¬
oured and gilded by him in picturesque
style.
There are whimsical mandarins, Chinese
scenes, fantastic animals, outrageous dra¬
gons, comic characters from the Celestial
Empire, rare flowers, gaming boards deco¬
rated with lines and patterns, some multi¬
coloured and apparently in poker-work,
most of them of much interest and inven¬
tiveness. There are paintings and portraits,
and more paintings and more portraits. But
what, above all, attracts the eye and de¬
mands attention is the pictorial work of
Hugo.
The day that an artist-thinker writes a
book that brings out the true value of the
graphic creativity of the finest French poet
we shall have a profoundly important addi¬
tion to our libraries.
For it is in his drawings, in Victor Hugo
the painter, that the extraordinary per¬
sonality of the great and prophetic poet
finds completion. Only in Turner, in Blake
and in some of Piranesi's works can be
This Chinese dining room was designed
and created by Victor Hugo for Hauteville
Fairy, Juliette Drouet's house on Guern¬
sey, the decoration of which he super¬
vised. The softwood panels were pyro-
graphed and painted by Hugo. This décor
occupies what was formerly the grand
salon of the house In the Place des
Vosges, Paris, where the writer lived from
1832 to 1848. In 1903, as a result of efforts
by Hugo's close friend, the poet Paul
Meurice (1820-1905), the house became a
museum dedicated to Hugo's life and
work.
found the wealth of fantasy and mystery, of
eternal and transcendent "Romanticism"
with which Hugo's drawings are imbued.
Ruins, fantastic palaces, splendid eastern
buildings straight from the pages of The
Thousand and One Nights, curious con¬
structions like symbolic pyramids, baleful
skies, unreal moonlight, night terrors,
twisted shadows and bright bursts of light,
magical architectures, resurrections of the
past and foretastes of the future, the world
of fantasy, nightmares, horror, the grotes¬
que, the arabesque, the hidden face of art,
all are to be found in the pictorial work of
the great man. So vast is the cathedral-like
façade of his literary work that we fail to
notice the volutes and whorls it was his
delight to conjure from his pen in leisure
34
"Toto vanquishes Pista", a drawing by
Victor Hugo dating from 1832. Toto was
the pet name of the poet's younger son
François-Victor, who was born In 1828.

*
111
1
'
j] » u
! i . Mfe
MB n^ >u
L J £¿bl i A^
i#i ] 1
M Or i
B -
-1
,*r<^'
Mi«
'* '.
\ ,
fl /, O* J *>>** *>cnt*i~-ÇJ
/*. ^,
3?
**<

moments. To obtain his strange effects he
used as ink anything that came within reach
of his capable acquisitive hand charcoal,
coffee, milky coffee, soot from a burnt
wick.
Farther on can be seen the bed in which
he died, two portraits of his grandchildren
on the nearby mantelpiece, and the desk at
which, an early-riser, he used to work each
morning standing up. One senses an aura of
greatness.
There are not many visitors one or two
foreigners; a father telling his son in a low
voice about the various objects and
documents, a few workmen, for it is a Sun¬
day, and two artists, Germans by the look of
them, making sketches in the room with the
drawings. '
Coming out of the bedroom, I saw on a
table, under a sheet of glass, a paper on
which the poet affirmed his adhesion to a
political party that had yet to come into
being, but which, he asserted, would be
formed in the twentieth century, a party
which would give birth first to the United
States of Europe and then to the United
States of the World. This notion is more
fully developed in lengthy paragraphs in a
number of his works, especially in his writ¬
ings on Paris. It should not be forgotten
that, rather than "The Thinker", Hugo was
"The Great Dreamer".
RUBEN DARIO is the pseudonym of the Nicara-
guan poet, journalist and diplomat Félix Rubén
GarcíaSarmiento(1867-1916).Theleaderofthe
"modernist" movement in Latin American liter¬
ature, he is considered one of the leading writers
in the Spanish language. His works include Azul
(Blue, 1888) and Cantos de Vida y Esperanza
(Songs of Life and Hope, 1905). He travelled
widely, sending back a series of brilliant articles
to the Buenos Aires newspaper La Nación. A
collection ofhis'articles was published in 1906 in
a book entitled Opiniones, from which this text is
taken. He lived in Paris almost uninterruptedly
from 1900to 1914 and was greatly influenced by
Victor Hugo.
