The glory of the spoken
by Salah Stétié
ARABIC is a verbal reality, and some¬
thing more an act. Before they were
embroidered in golden letters on the
walls of the Ka'ba, then the temple of three
Meccan divinities, the seven orten? great
odes of pre-lslamic Arabia, the celebrated
Muallaqat (literally "suspended", in allusion
to the way in which they were disposed on
the walls of the sacred precinct) had long
been an intense oral experience, the glory
of the poetic discourse whereby the cultural
identity of each tribe was redefined, revi¬
talized by the word of the poet and poised
to challenge, not without pride and panache,
other tribal identities assembled around their
own messages.
A major verbal feat, indeed, was the Qas-
idah, the great inspired poem, whose theme
was nevertheless rigorously pre-established,
and which was the banner of the group and
the impressive expression of its existential
challenge. It was for each spokesman, and
the tribal bard was in a sense the admirable
spokesman of his community, to bring to a
pitch of excellence a subject prescribed by
a rhetorical game whose roots ran deep.
For memorative and commemorative
populations, the Qasidah was an act of
remembrance.
Every year in jâhilite ("pagan" or "igno¬
rant") Arabia before the coming of Islam, from
the four corners of the peninsula and beyond
the shadeless horizons people came to Suk-
Ukaz, the market or fair of Ukaz, where they
stayed, exchanging on the public square,
through the mediation of poets who held
tumultuous, ecstatic audiences spellbound,
verses impregnated with frenzy and wisdom,
"/ firmly believe that the first, the most
ancient language was born in resistance
to the desert (in resistance to all deserts,
however they may be defined), and that
it was born as a primitive enterprise for
safeguarding and salvation.
desire and serenity, triumph and invective,
with despair and the greenness of hope, with
a lover's attachment to a mare or she-camel,
or with the tearful refusal to accept the loss
of a woman or girl who was the acme of
presence before being transformed into utter
nothingness. All this, the glory of the spoken,
the fabulous opera of the word, was enacted
against the splendid and virtually unadorned
backcloth of the desert: sand and wind, solar
oven, arena for vast, formless protagonists.
The utterance of man is here the only form;
the word empowers him to confront the
elemental.
I firmly believe that the first, most ancient
language was born in resistance to the desert
(in resistance to all deserts, however they
may be defined), and that it was born as a
primitive enterprise for safeguarding and sal¬
vation. The working of primordial magic, a
talisman, a form of sacrament. This and other
reasons attest to the antiquity of Arabic,
which is one of our mother languages and
which, before Massignon'11 but largely due
(1) Louis Massignon (1883-1962), French Orientalist,
author of major works on Islamic mysticism.
to him, is better known as an immemorial
matrix. The immemorial is also memorial.
The Arabs, inventors of genealogical chains,
recited. The others, the descendants of Abra¬
ham, the Jews and the Christians with whom
they lived in familiar proximity were, solely
through their use of the written text, suffi¬
ciently exceptional to be defined by this
unique and enigmatic characteristic as "Peo¬
ple of the Book". One day the Arabs too
would fall into the same category when they
received, through the Muhammadan reve¬
lation, the supremely sacred deposition of
the Book.
But so deep was the groove traced in them
by archetypal pure orality, that it was by ear
that the illiterate Muhammad apprehended
the Book dictated by the Angel Gabriel and
entrusted to him, the Prophet, to be com¬
municated to men. This Book he would him¬
self transmit by recitation, sequence after
sequence, verse after verse, surah after
surah, with those astonishing silences
between one verse and the next, which seem
intended to highlight the miraculous way in
which the word erupts in the circus of sound;
yes, verse after verse, silence after silence,
surah after surah, the Prophet verbally trans¬
mitted the spoken message to those who,
in their turn, would transmit it until scribes
and writers, those who knew and practiced
the art of writing as well as the science of
sacred conservation, commit the word of God
to writing.
And so the Qur'an would retain for eternity
the sign that it is deeply rooted in orality:
Qur'an, that is, "reading". The Qur'an cer¬
tainly gave to writing, in the Arabo-lslamic
world, its patent of nobility. It is the meta-
21

Immensely popular throughout the Arab
world, the Hilali Saga Is an epic poem
which recounts the historic migration of
the Banu Hilal, a nomadic Arab people
whose travels took them from the Arab
Peninsula to Egypt and the Maghreb. The
epic is thought to have been composed
around the 11th century, but certainly not
later than the 14th century since the Arab
historian and traveller Ibn Khaldun (1332-
1402) quotes a number of verse passages
from it in his writings. A variety of written
versions of the Hilali Saga are current
throughout the Arab world, but oral ver¬
sions transmitted by narrator poets or
singers have all but vanished. French
researcher Lucienne Saada of the CNRS
(Centre National de la Recherche Scien¬
tifique), Paris, has recently published a
French version of the Saga as she heard
it from the lips of Mohammed Hisni, a
story-teller from Sfax, Tunisia. This ver¬
sion consists of some 3,700 lines of verse
interspersed with long sequences of nar¬
rative prose. Above, this painting on glass
by an anonymous 19th-century artist
depicts Jazia, one of the great heroines
of the epic.
physical and physical articulation which
takes the entire cultural process from one
phase to another with its visible dynamism
and invisible potential. Beginning with the
Qur'an the Mother of which, the absolute
matrix, pre-exists in all creation and in every
formulation or emanation of existence, eter¬
nally established spirit and letter, in the very
eternity of God the text acquires density,
and orality, without ceasing to be creative
fervour and multiplicatory fermentation, Is
entrapped, as it is refined, in the symbolic
snares of the page, line after line. After the
Greek library, the Arab library, heir of all
those which preceded it but pregnant and
fertile in its own right, would become one
of the richest and, when ransacked, would
give birth to many another library according
to the law whereby a constellation is formed.
Why should we deny Borges'2», to cite only
him, the right' to be the descendant of Mai-
monides and Averroes, since he considers
himself to be such? He has also often rec¬
ognized his debt as a story-teller to the Thou¬
sand and One Nights.
Narrative too is above all a verbal fact. The
story and the novel came much later, ben¬
efitting from the qualitative and quantitative
contribution of printing, as they established
themselves as distinct forms. In Arabic nar¬
rative the story comes from a mingling of
remote times and places. The Arab world
established itself on the dust of the oldest
empires in which Sumer and Babylon min¬
gled, as well as that which came one day
from Athens and Alexandria, and that which
came from Central Asia and China, and that
which came from India and Persia, and
stories and legends which circulated on the
shores of the Mediterranean before Islam.
In addition to the ferment, on the Arabian
peninsula itself, of men and jinns, spirits and
ghouls and all kinds of strange fancies and
often cruel imaginations mingled in prodi¬
gious disorder in the vast empty phantas¬
magoria of the desert. The oral tradition of
the Arab tale Is at the confluence of all these
influences and all these interferences.
And so it is not unduly surprising to find,
for example, in the Kalila and Dimna of Ibn
al-Muqaffa' (c.720-c.756), beside the old
Indian backcloth of animal stories by Bay-
daba (the Bidpai of the Europeans) such and
(2) Jorge Luis Borges, Argentine writer born in 1899;
author of poems, short stories, novels and essays.
"Yes, verse after verse, silence after
silence, surah after surah, the Prophet
verbally transmitted the spoken message
to those who, in their turn, would transmit
it until (...) those who knew and practiced
the art of writing as well as the science
of sacred conservation could commit the
word of God to writing. And so the Qur'an
would retain for eternity the sign that it
is deeply rooted in orality: Qur'an, that
is, 'reading'. The Qur'an certainly gave to
writing, in the Arabo-lslamlc world, Its
patent of nobility." Above, detail of the
Ka'ba, the most holy shrine of Mecca. The
Ka'ba is covered with a Kiswah, or ves¬
ture, made of black cloth with gold let¬
tering, which is renewed every year.
such an evocation from Aesop or some other
fabulist, possibly Chinese, whose name has
disappeared, to the advantage of a "story"
whose meaning still enriches us. Nor is it
surprising that in the Thousand and One
Nights, beneath the characteristics of Sind-
bad the Sailor and in many of his adventures
it is possible to make out an episode from
the Odyssey, the ingenuity and mischievous
wisdom of Ulysses. Even more enigmatically
and more profoundly in the vortex of time,
it is perhaps possible to recognize In stories
which are set in rediscovered and lost places,
forbidden thresholds, magic uncrossable
frontiers, living and reviving springs, mi¬
raculous trees, offensive or defensive génies,
yes, in these stories which trace the extra¬
ordinary history of the Babylonian quest of
Gilgamesh In search of his friend En-Kidu,
perhaps it is possible to recognize some fun¬
damental features of the collective Semitic
imagination of which we are all, thousands
of years later, to a greater or lesser degree
the heirs.
Even today the theme of the initiatory jour¬
ney is a recurrent theme of the contemporary
Arabic novel. Thus, between the oldest store
of legend which gave rise to the myths of
an antiquity which disgorged its substance
in other myths through the mediation of sto¬
ries transmitted orally from generation to gen¬
eration and the inspiration of some of the
most significant writing today, there is a link
which nothing has snapped, neither the mod¬
ification of structures of thought nor the evo¬
lution of men in history. It must be admitted
22

that the Orient remains a place of unique
magnetism for all those for whom man is,
at some point in himself, wounded by the
invisible. Man, says the Orient, isalso
invisible. Whence it follows naturally that the
apparent history of men and of their civili¬
zations is only an equivocal and illusory
advance from an absolute anchoring point,
a central well in which the eternal is mani¬
fested, if it reaches the surface, and if one
cares to slake one's thirst in it. In many sto¬
ries, legends and episodes of Oriental mys-
tagogy there is a well. A well or a waterhole.
It is often there that the ghouls, the voracious
ogresses of the old Arab tales, wait for their
prey the wretched man to whom, like the
sphinx over whom Oedipus triumphed, they
ask the absurd question which will cause him
to die.
I shall only cite as examples two sacred
wells: it was into a well that Joseph was cast
by his brothers, and it was at the well of
Zemen, miraculously opened for the thirst
of the child Ismael, that the pilgrims of
Mecca slaked their thirst at the end of their
pilgrimage.
But let us return to poetry. Borges affirms
that if, according to Greek tradition, Homer
was blind, this was a way of stressing the
priority of the lyrical, that is the musical and
the verbal, over the visual. There is in the
purely verbal a power of concentration that
limits the imaginative content inevitably con¬
fined within the very frontiers of the image.
The system of images of classical Arabic
poetry seems to me, even when unexpected,
unusual and precious, strangely con¬
stricted firstly by a deliberate codification
of themes, signs and symbols, then by a
quasi musical décantation of an ontological
experience in which everything is perceived
In reference not only to the constellations of
the language according to a mode which is
already almost Mallarmean, but also, some¬
what mysteriously, by allusion to some orig¬
inal shaking of the sensibility, on a cosmic
scale, of which the poet's own sensibility, put
into words, would only be an epipheno-
menon.
Thus the archetypal and the highly singular
combine at the level of the collective uncon¬
scious in classical Arabic poetry. This does
not fail to accentuate the abstracting effect
of this poetry, through a corporality. which
is often insistent through the evocation of the
most natural and, if required, of the most
denuded and raw. The projection of the word
in a declamatory orality strongly marked by
the rhythms of short and long syllables, not
so much compensates for this as, on the
contrary, and paradoxically, broadens it con¬
centrically. The Arabic chant is incantation;
it is that above all, like magic. One could even
go so far as to say that the Qasidah is a
blueprint for a universe. It is centration, it is
the equivalence of a universe grouped
around its leading impulses, love and nos¬
talgia, destruction and glory, desire and its
exaltation in phantasm, the exaltation of the
festival as an expression of community,
space and the known yardstick of space: this
highly strung horse, that she-camel as young
and beautiful as a beautiful young girl, which
are for the poet one of the possible names
for his identification with his most intimate
solitude, horse, mare or she-camel being for
him a confidence granted to himself, destiny
of his becoming, diverted magnification of
a more secret identity. I add that if space
is everywhere present in the Qasidah, time,
yJ ^fc_- ~^ ** *-"V*" if i
©
The book Kalila and Dimna, a celebrated
collection of moralistic animal stories, is
a translation by Abd Allah Ibn al Muqaffa
(7th century AD/2nd century of the Hejira)
of the Indian Fables of Bidpai. Above,
illustration from a 15th-centuryArab man¬
uscript of an episode from Kalila and
Dimna in which the lion falls into the trap
prepared for him by the hare.
that eternal point, without being really absent,
only presents itself in the light of a time-
lessness without figurative form: it is, essen¬
tially, that which was, far more than that which
is or that which will be; it is a fixed reference.
Thus the orality of the Qasidah is, invisibly,
one of the arches of its ontological structure
and, confronted with the space crystallized
in the imaginary world of the word, it is the
temporal dimension of this word. Hardly a
simple orality, then. Orality on another level.
The Arabs, before becoming the people of
the Book, had thus foreseen what one day,
much later, Joë Bousquet'31 would admirably
formulate in another language after a quite
different experience: "Poetry is the word of
the word."
Did Labid (560-661?), a poet who lived at
the meeting point of two ages and was con¬
verted to awakening Islam, have this intui¬
tion? His celebrated Mu'allaqa opens with
the following lines on which Jacques
Berque''" has made this comment: "The
return to the mass is also a return to the
original."
Now that they are gone the houses of Nina
The halting places and the places of sojourn
Rijam and Ghawl return to the permanences
like the slopes of the Rayyan
whose imprint is denuded to the mass
as the stone contains an inscription.
Berque notes that: "The birth of the poem
coincides here with the dynamic of its con¬
tents. Circularities."
(3) French poet (1897-1950)
(4) Jacques Berque, born 1910, French sociologist and
Orientalist. A specialist in Arab culture.
SALAH STETIE, Lebanese ambassador to The
Netherlands and formerly for many years his
country's representative at Unesco, is one of
the leading contemporary poets and essayists
of the Arab world. His works include three books
that deal more particularly with aspects of Arab
culture, Les Porteurs de Feu (The Bearers of
Fire, 1972), La Unième Nuit (The First Night,
1980) and Firdaws (1984), a study of Islamic
gardens.
23
