How science unlocks the secrets
of the past by Tony Hackens
ARCHAEOLOGY was born in sixteenth-century Europe as
an offshoot of the scholarly pleasures of the Renais¬
sance. Many early archaeologists were collectors moti¬
vated by an aesthetic interest in Antiquity and a desire to recon¬
stitute the background of events described by ancient writers.
Until the beginning of the twentieth century, generations of
archaeologists set out to rediscover and excavate great sites, to
record the evolution of styles and to retrace the interplay of cul
tural influences according to aesthetic criteria and typology
the study of objects by types.
Today's archaeologist usually lives in a world which is far from
the preoccupations of scholarly collectors or prestige excava¬
tions. He or she is at the centre of a group of specialists from dif¬
ferent scientific disciplines. Working with these specialists and
profiting from methods used in the natural sciences, modern
archaeologists attempt to decipher the messages stored in the
Tell-tale tree rings
In the late 15th century Leonardo da Vinci discovered seasonal
growth patterns in trees. In this century tree-ring dating (den¬
drochronology) has become a science. Each ring produced in a
tree's trunk during its yearly growth is unique. The rings are
wide or narrow depending on the prevailing growth conditions,
and precisely the same long-term sequence of wide and narrow
rings is never repeated, because year-to-year variations in
climate are never the same. By putting together tree-ring pat¬
terns from overlapping living trees and dead wood (see diagram)
scientists construct a tree-ring chronology. Samples of wood
from objects discovered by archaeologists can be dated by be-
/
W 1572 MdKacreol St. Bartholomew
1589 Asiaitmation ol Htnr III
1610 Anamination ol Henr IV
HI
1643 Dnthof Log« XIII
©
1715 Death of Louii XIV
17 89 French Revolution
1804 Coronation of Napoleon I
1852 Loun Napoleon proclaimed emperor
' 11)70 Proclamation of the 3rd Republic
1669 Inauguration of the Eiffel Tower
1914 Firjt World War
ISM Strand World War
ing matched, either visually or using a computer, to such master
chronologies, established region by region.
Because they live to such a great age, the bristlecone pines
which grow in the White Mountains of California have served as
a unique tool in tree-ring dating. Using them, Dr. C.W. Ferguson
of Arizona University has established a continuous tree-ring
sequence which stretches back over 8,500 years into the past
(see back cover). Ferguson hopes that this sequence will even¬
tually reach back at least 10,000 years. This sequence and
others developed in other parts of the world have been used to
"calibrate", or cross-check, dates established using radiocar¬
bon or carbon 14, another important scientific dating method
used by archaeologists.
Developed in the late 1940s, radiocarbon dating is based on
the fact that living organisms absorb radiocarbon from the at¬
mosphere. When they die the carbon disintegrates at a known
rate, and by measuring the amount of it left in a sample ol
organic material such as charcoal or bone, it is possible to deter¬
mine how long ago the plant or animal died. However, when
scientists analysed the carbon 1 4 content of tree rings of known
age they found that although the carbon 1 4 age and the tree-ring
age should have been the same, there were actually con¬
siderable discrepancies. Earlier than 1000 BC the carbon 14
dates give a progressively greater underestimate of the true
calendar date. Why is this so? The reason is that radiocarbon
dating was based on the assumption that the cosmic rays that
created carbon 14 had bombarded the atmosphere at a fixed in¬
tensity, but in fact carbon 14 has fluctuated. Today, tree-ring
calibration charts have been established which convert
radiocarbon years into calendar years. It is amazing to think that
some Swiss lake-villages of the 4th millennium BC can be dated
not by millennia or centuries but down to the year in which the
trees used to build them were felled.
This development had far-reaching consequences for ar¬
chaeology. Many European prehistoric monuments and sites
were shown to be centuries older than previously thought. The
classical theory whereby their origin was due to skills and
motivations which were diffused into Europe from the east was
no longer tenable in the light of tree-ring calibration.
Left, section of an oak felled in the Forest of Fontainebleau in
1952. By counting the tree-rings it was possible to establish the
age of the tree which, because it began to grow around the time
of the Massacre of St. Bartholomew in Paris, in 1572, is known
as the oak of St. Bartholomew.
©
mi; 1 1 trrm
an
Liv,nfj
tu
Dead t rees Dead wood

material archives of human activity in the form of multifarious
traces left on a wide variety of materials. Although they may not
tread in the footsteps of Schliemann at Troy and Mycenae, or
those of Lord Carnarvon in Egypt, nor experience the excitement
of discovering tombs overflowing with precious objects and
jewellery, they perform an equally valid humanist task as they
use the latest scientific techniques to recapture aspects of the
life, environment, landscape, economy or technology of the past.
To excavate is to destroy, and once destroyed the archaeologi¬
cal heritage unlike naturecannot grow again. These seem¬
ingly commonplace observations underlie the mission of the
archaeologist, who must identify the slightest hint of past human
activity, analyse every facet of the information it can yield by
using every available method, and evaluate his or her interpreta¬
tion through reasoning which may later be tested with the
computer.
The following text, with accompanying boxes and illustrations,
attempts to provide a highly simplified and selective account of
some of the complex scientific techniques being used today by
archaeologists in prospection, excavation, analysis, dating and
preservation.
WHERE TO EXCAVATE. One problem a field archaeologist
faces is that of knowing where to dig. Sometimes the study of old
documents and literature is helpful: in other cases clues must be
found from the air or on the ground. The use of aerial photo¬
graphy in archaeology (see page 1 8) goes back to the beginning
of the century, when photos were taken from a balloon above
Ostia, the port of Rome. Its systematic application has made it
possible to study the layout of towns before beginning to exca¬
vate, to locate traces of Roman roads and villas and to observe
systems of land management. More recently télédétection from
satellites has vastly expanded the scale of possibilities for aerial
prospection.
On the ground, the use of electrical resistivity to detect buried
walls and ditches is now widespread. In making a resistivity sur¬
vey, an electrical current is passed through the ground to mea-
These 3 drawings of the site of ancient Troy reflect some of the
changing techniques and approaches in field archaeology since
the last century. Top, a cross-section drawn in 1879 and publish¬
ed by Heinrich Schliemann. It shows the accumulation of debris
to which the great German archaeologist often referred as a ma¬
jor obstacle to his search for Homeric Troy. Middle drawing is a
diagrammatic section of a deposit at Troy by Carl Biegen, who
directed the University of Cincinnati's research at Troy from
1932 to 1938. Biegen 's major interest was the analysis of
stratigraphical sequences in different parts of the artificial hill of
Troy. Bottom drawing is a recently published section showing
not only stratigraphy but the sampling of soil in the different
layers. This is done to help reconstruct the environment at dif¬
ferent periods.
©
13

)> sure the resistance of the soil, which is affected by moisture.
Metal detectors are being widely used by treasure hunters in
some countries where, when used indiscriminately and irrespon¬
sibly, they have caused havoc to the archaeological heritage.
Recently US and Swedish technicians have developed a radar-
truck capable of recording structures buried to a depth of four
metres in certain terrain such as peat.
EXCAVATION. When they come to excavate, the most impor¬
tant method used by modern archaeologists is to study the strati¬
graphy of a site, the arrangement of archaeological deposits in
superimposed layers or strata. The earliest excavations at Rome
in the sixteenth century and at Pompei and Herculaneum in 1717
were above all a harvest of objects from the soil, and Schliemann
himself admitted that he had dug through (and destroyed) many
recent levels before reaching the "interesting" Trojan levels. He
was not alone in acting in this way. His drawings give some idea
of the superposition of strata and remains, but he made no pre¬
cise visual records which can be interpreted without reference to
his reports.
The next generation of archaeologists made abundant
records, drew vertical and horizontal sections, and covered the
site with a grid of squares of standard size in order to "read" the
way in which the strata were superimposed, to analyse their rela¬
tionship with the levels of soil on which people had lived, and with
layers of building and destruction. A meticulous description was
made of every trace revealed during the methodical removal of
earth, often using precision instruments to locate the exact posi¬
tion of each vestige.
The present generation of archaeologists takes large numbers
of samples while excavating samples of earth, pollen, and
charcoal. In this way it is possible to deduce from the ruins of a
building what the building was actually like, to reconstitute its
environment, and to identify the occupation of those who lived in
it. Analysis of the isotope Carbon 13 in bones and tissue can pro¬
vide evidence of the diet of prehistoric men, and the study of
insect finds can help indirectly to identify their occupations. Stra¬
tigraphy now makes use of a range of scientific disciplines,
among which the earth sciences play an increasing part.
Top photo: analysis of a small Byzantine
cross being carried out by proton-
induced X-ray emission (PIXE), at the
Laboratoire d'Analyses par Réactions
Nucléaires, Namur, Belgium. The cross is
bombarded with protons from a "proton
gun", inducing X-rays whose
characteristics are measured by X-ray
detectors at each side of the cross. The
analysis showed the relative content of
gold, copper, iron and silver. Photo,
above, shows the non-destructive nature
of this test : a member of the Namur team
uses the same method on his own teeth.
Did Philip of Macedón
look like this?
In 1977 Professor Manolis Andronicos of
the University of Thessaloniki discovered
three royal graves at Vergina in
Macedonia (see Unesco Courier, June
1979). It seemed possible that King Philip
II of Macedón (382-336 BC), the father of
Alexander the Great, might have been
buried in the biggest tomb, but proof was
lacking. In 1981 Richard Neave of Man¬
chester University, Dr. John Prag of the
Manchester Museum and Dr. J.H.
Musgrave of Bristol University began to
co-operate with Professor Andronicos in
examining the skull in question and
reconstructing the dead man's ap¬
pearance. Casts were taken of the bones
of the skull, in fragments after cremation.
It proved difficult to fit the bones
together, and study showed that this dif¬
ficulty was largely due to injury and con¬
genital deformity. "In short," Dr. Prag
has written, "the left side of the dead
man's face was markedly
underdeveloped and the right side
overdeveloped, to compensate for this."
Plastic surgeons also noted injuries to the
right eye-socket which, they concluded,
could only have been caused by a missile
from above. Portrait heads of Philip show
an injury to the right eye which was ap¬
parently sightless, and a 1st century BC
author noted that "he had his right eye
cut out when he was struck by an arrow
while inspecting the siege engines and
the protective sheds at the siege of
Methone." This account, Dr. Prag notes,
"tallies exactly with the injury we noted
on the skull from Vergina. It provided the
proof that Andronicos has always been
hoping for and appears to have silenced
the sceptics." The team which
reconstructed the head used the same
techniques as those used by the police to
identify unknown decomposed bodies.
Measuring pegs were inserted at different
points on the skull to establish the
thickness of soft tissue, muscles were
modelled, and then superficial layers
added. The details of the scar were based
on an almost identical injury received
some years ago by a Canadian
lumberjack.
1. Reconstructed skull
showing injury to right
eye
2. Plaster cast of the
finished head
3. Wax cast of the
reconstructed head
with hair, beard and
skin colour
14

THE ANALYSIS OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL FINDS. Since the
end of the Second World War great strides have been made in
the analytical techniques used by archaeologists. Objects may
be analysed to discover how they were made, what they were
made of, and where those materials were obtained. The Lydian
stone or touchstone was the earliest method used to determine
the proportion of precious metal contained in an object. It pro¬
vides remarkably precise results. The metal to be assayed is rub¬
bed on the touchstone which is then exposed to a reactive agent
whose colour changes are evaluated.
In the third century BC, Archimedes used the concept known
today as specific gravity to solve the problem of whether or not
King Hieron of Syracuse's crown was made of gold or of an alloy
of gold and silver. According to the story, it occurred to him one
day as he stepped into his bath and saw the water overflow that
the excess of bulk caused by the introduction of alloy could be
measured by putting the crown and equal weights of gold and sil¬
ver separately into a vessel of water and measuring the differen¬
ces of overflow. Each of these techniques is still used today.
In chemical analysis techniques a sample has to be taken from
the object being analysed, and in the case of precious objects
this is often undesirable. Spectrographs analysis, which suc¬
ceeded "wet chemistry", investigates the chemical nature of a
material by examination of its spectrum. Using this technique
only a single point may be examined in each object, and if a
sample is taken it is destroyed and the experiment cannot be
repeated. The ¡deal remained a method of analysis which did not
destroy the object being analysed.
The next step towards non-destructive analysis was to
bombard objects with X-rays which cause no damage and simply
provoke other rays whose diffraction or energy levels are
characteristic of different materials. This analysis is confined to
a microscopic layer of atoms on the surface of an object. A
specimen which is not homogenous will thus deceive the analyst
as to its true nature. The X-ray method requires a profound
knowledge of series of objects so as to avoid hasty generali¬
zations made from surface analyses.
Dating prehistoric sites
In an experimental study which could
open up fascinating possibilities for
future work on human evolution and ar¬
chaeology, Swedish scientist Svante
Pääbo recently succeeded in extracting
and cloning (reproducing identical copies
of) a DNA sample from the 4,500-year-old
mummy (right) of an ancient Egyptian boy
who died at the age of one. DNA (deox¬
yribonucleic acid) is the master molecule
of life and carries the hereditary instruc¬
tions that determine the nature of a living
organism, and information on DNA se¬
quences can give us a clear picture of a
population's genetic identity. Informa¬
tion on the DNA sequences of ancient
Egyptian mummies could, therefore, tell
us not only about the relationships bet¬
ween members of the Egyptian royal
families, but also about population
movements in ancient Egypt. It should be
pointed out that, despite sensational
rumours, it is not possible using these
techniques to reconstitute a functional
gene, and even less a living human being,
from such DNA sequences.
Methods Materials Range of time
Thermoluminescence Ceramics
burned rocks
(silex,
sandstone,
granite)
stalagmites
0 to several
hundreds of
thousands of
years
Comments
Dendrochronology Wood 0 to 7,000
Carbon 14 Organic
remains
(wood,
bones)
shells
0 to 40,000
Uranium- Stalagmites 10,000 to
thorium ratio bones
shells
250,000
Electron spin
resonance
Stalagmites
bones
1 ,000 to several
million years
under
development
Fission tracks Volcanic
glass,
minerals rich
in uranium
0 to several
hundred thousand
years
Potassium-argon volcanic larva 1,000 to
1,000 million years
Amino-acids Bones under
development
Chart (0 Centre des Faibles Radioactivités, Centre mixte CNRS-CEA, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
Certain dating methods are more appropriate than others,
depending on the approximate age of the site and the materials
available. Whenever possible it is advisable to use several
methods and to compare results.
Rome has embarked on a far-reaching
project in which the conservation of the
antiquities in its historic centre is an in¬
tegral part of the wider canvas of modern
city planning. The protection of marble
and bronze monuments and statues
disfigured by air pollution was a priority
step. Right, statue of Marcus Aurelius
undergoing treatment at the Central In¬
stitute of Restoration.

The use of more penetrating rays has made it possible to elimi¬
nate both the disadvantages of destructive analysis and the
superficial character of X-ray analysis.
Nuclear analysis using neutrons either produced from a re¬
actor or an accelerator has greatly extended our knowledge of
ancient metalwork, as well as helping to identify recent forgeries,
through establishing the respective content of certain elements
and identifying the sources of metals in ancient coinage by what
are called the "geological fingerprints" of their original mines.
But one field of nuclear analysis is particularly fruitful: that of the
proportion of isotopes of certain bodies determined by mass
spectrography. The proportions of Oxygen 16 and Oxygen 18 in
ancient marble are characteristic of different deposits, and it is
much safer to identify the origins of Greek marble artefacts using
this method rather than by an "experienced" judgment of the
grain and the colouring of the veins. The application of this
method to lead is even more widespread, since lead is so exten¬
sively used in building and glass. It has been possible to identify
deposits of lead from ancient Spain to Iran with considerable
certainty.
Finally, analyses are carried out to find out more about the
nature of ancient technologies. The electron probe micro-
analyser provides an enlarged image on a screen of responses
recorded when electron beams bombard a surface. This method
has been used to determine whether gilding was done with mer¬
cury. Detailed and repeated analyses can be carried out, even on
cumbersome objects, using Proton Induced X-ray Emission
(PIXE) apparatus in which protons strike a small area of the
object and provoke X-rays whose characteristics are measured
by X-ray detectors.
DATING. The Carbon 14 dating method invented by Willard F.
Libby is today part of the dating arsenal of many archaeologists.
An accurate measurement of the proportion of Carbon 14 con¬
tained by a given sample makes it possible to estimate its age
"BP" (Before Present, i.e. before 1950). Extensive research
revealed that Carbon 14 dates were in some cases erroneous
In many countries today treasure hunting
using metal detectors is a popular out¬
door hobby. Archaeologists preoccupied
with the problem of the erosion of the ar¬
chaeological heritage and damage to
sites have strongly criticized treasure
hunters on the grounds that they are only
interested in objects and that by remov¬
ing objects from their context they
destroy valuable information about the
past. At the same time many ar¬
chaeologists are also aware of the danger
of a "comprehension gap" between them
and the public and feel that it is important
to try to mobilize the enthusiasm of
treasure hunters for the buried heritage
and reconcile their hobby interests with
the scientific investigation of the past.
Georadar is an electromagnetic method
of site investigation which has been
developed to map geological structures
and which also has applications for ar¬
chaeology. Electromagnetic energy is
transmitted into the ground from a unit on
Graphic
Recorder
Power
Supply
Tape
Recorder
Pulse
Transmitter
Receiver
Transmit
Receive
Selector
Antenna
iround. \
urface \ \
Transmitted
Pulse
Target
the surface. On its way through the soil
part of the energy is reflected when it
meets an interface between two materials
of differing electrical properties (such as
soil and bedrock, or soil and an ar¬
chaeological object) while the rest pro¬
ceeds to greater depths (see diagram). By
measuring the time between the transmit¬
ted and reflected signals it is possible to
survey the different layers of soil and rock
and the location of buried objects. The
reflected signals are displayed on a
cathode ray tube and on a graphic
recorder, providing a continuous profile
of the subsurface. Below, the radar
system in field operation. The antenna is
mounted on a boom which can be raised
or lowered by a winch inside the vehicle.
The graphic record of the reflected
signals is a close approximation to the in¬
terfaces that would be seen in the wall of
9
dip jwr*2^^j Baa«
BHaMBaaaHMBB^HPrfl
a trench dug along the path taken by the
radar apparatus. Below, "radargram" of
a Bronze Age road in a Danish bog. The
oak road, slightly inclined, was based on
sand. The depth of the road surface was
approximately half a metre.
Oak road
'
G round surface

because of wide fluctuations of cosmic rays in the past. Carbon
14 dates have been adjusted after confrontation with dates pro¬
vided by other methods such as thermoluminescence and den¬
drochronology (see box page 1 2).
Thermoluminescence is based on the phenomenon that rays
from radioactive elements in the soil and cosmic rays accumu¬
late in the crystalline materials of pottery and that when the mate¬
rials are heated this energy is liberated and emitted in the form
of light. The quantity of energy and thus of light is proportional
to the length of time during which they have been accumulated.
The system acts as a kind of clock which starts at zero when the
material is heated to a certain temperature. (In the case of pottery
this is when the pottery was baked.) The quantities of light invol¬
ved are infinitely small, and photomultipliers are needed to make
them visible and measure them. Nevertheless, the accumulation
is significant for long periods of over 1,000 years, and this
method is of inestimable value above all for periods earlier than
50,000 years. In very ancient civilizations lacking any written or
typological references, such as the prehistory of Brazil, or the
Jomo culture of Japan, or the oldest cultures of West Africa, ther¬
moluminescence has become accepted as a pioneer dating
method. For space reasons it is not possible to include all dating
methods such as magnetic dating and new nuclear methods now
being developed (see chart page 15).
COMPUTERS AND MATHEMATICAL TECHNIQUES. The
possibilities opened up to archaeologists by access to big
archaeological data banks are virtually limitless. This would
replace cumbersome paper files and the consultation of annual
bibliographies which often inevitably appear with delay. We
should have literally at our fingertips information about objects
and monuments, sites and current research which we could call
up at will. But the danger is that of the tower of Babel. Computer
languages and software must be compatible, yet even in a field
with a concise and international language such as numismatics
different teams have different aims and equipment. Views and
experiences are being exchanged but not yet, automatically at I
The preservation of Pete Marsh
The body of a man was discovered in a
peat bog at Lindow Moss south of Man¬
chester (UK) in August 1984 and taken to
the British Museum for analysis and
preservation. The body had been
mutilated by an excavating machine but
its upper half, including part of the
digestive tract and much skin and hair,
were still intact after preservation in peat,
partly decayed plant matter that gives off
a preservative acid, absorbs moisture and
excludes oxygen. Radio-carbon dating
showed that the corpse of "Pete Marsh",
as the man was nicknamed, was about
2,500 years old. A team of scientists in¬
cluding specialists in forensic science,
dermatology, anatomy, microbiology and
botany immediately began to investigate
the remains and a portrait of Pete Marsh
emerged. He is estimated to have been
1 67 cm tall, aged between 20 and 30, with
mousey-coloured hair, red moustache,
beard and sideburns, and immaculately
trimmed fingernails. He had come to a
violent end by garrotting. Further study of
the body has been carried out by X-ray,
and computerized images of its insides
have been taken with a nuclear magnetic
resonance scanner. Using newly
developed genetic engineering tech¬
niques, researchers are also proposing to
extract genes from the corpse and
"grow" them in the laboratory. Before
being put on public display, Pete Marsh is
being "freeze-dried" (lyophilized) using a
technique which involves freezing the
water content of the body which is then
placed in a vacuum chamber where its ice
crystals vaporize.
17

any rate, information and data themselves. Too many data banks
are closed systems reserved for the privileged who have access
to them. Distance questioning is rarely possible. However, tens
of thousands of images can already be recorded on a video disc,
and theoretically the major photo libraries could become accessi¬
ble like those museums which have published illustrated micro¬
fiches of their holdings.
Computerization has also made it possible to carry out com¬
plex reasoning through simulation in short spaces of time, and
to catalogue, record and relate masses of data at great speed.
Interdisciplinarity is thus a keynote of archaeology today. It
should not be limited to the use of costly new methods. Archaeo¬
logists also call increasingly on the expertise of geologists, soil
scientists, botanists and others working in long-established disci¬
plines. It is not possible here to make acomplete list of the
sciences nowadays involved in the reconstruction of the past, but
such a list would include the study of shells, diatoms and
fishbones, mining and ore processing techniques, the study of
glass and paper, not to mention the whole field of underwater
archaeology.
TONY HACKENS, of Belgium, is Professor of Classical Archaeology,
Numismatics and Technical Methods in Archaeology at the Catholic
University of Louvain-la-Neuve, and a research associate with the
Center for Old World Archaeology, Brown University, USA. He is Vice-
President of PACT, the European Expert Group for Physical, Chemical,
Mathematical and Biological Methods in Archaeology, Council of
Europe, Strasbourg. He is also scientific rapporteur for the inter¬
disciplinary post-graduate schools of sciences in archaeology held at
the European University Centre for the Cultural Heritage, at Ravello,
Italy.
Archaeology from the air
Aerial photography has become a major
tool of modern archaeology and each
year leads to the discovery of large
numbers of new sites which are often in¬
visible at ground level. Buried traces of
human activity can affect plant growth for
thousands of years, and these dif¬
ferences in vegetation can be observed
from the air. Interpreting aerial photos is
a highly specialized task; the image
changes as the light changes at different
times of day and at different seasons, and
varies with the state of the vegetation and
other factors. Buried sites may be reveal¬
ed as soil-marks (traces of differently col¬
oured or textured soil) or crop-marks.
Drawing above shows how crop-marks
develop. The vegetation is taller over the
buried ditch but stunted above the stone
foundations. Photo gives a rare oppor¬
tunity to see why crop-marks appear. The
dark soil of a silted up Iron Age ditch can
be seen at the edge of this gravel pit. The
barley above it is taller as a result of the
extra depth of soil and moisture. Remote
sensing technology using devices
mounted on spacecraft and aircraft which
can "sense" on wavelengths that cannot
be detected by the human eye or by con¬
ventional photography seems bound to
affect radically the way in which ar¬
chaeological reconnaissance is planned
and carried out. As yet the potential of
this technology for archaeological
research has only begun to be tapped.
The Nazca enigma
Immense patterns made of furrows or ditches are etched into
the barren Nazca desert almost 500 km southeast of Lima,
the capital of Peru. They are so vast that they cannot be seen
from ground level, but when viewed from the air they unfold
into a fantastic bestiary of semi-naturalistic monkeys, long-
necked birds, a spider, a lizard, dogs, fish and whales, sur¬
rounded by zigzags, spirals, star-shapes, rectangles and
trapezoids. The lines, scored by moving aside lines of rocks
to expose the lighter alluvial soil beneath, are named after
and widely attributed to the Nazca culture which flourished
in the area from around 200 BC to 600 AD.
What was theirpurpose? Eversince the discovery of the Naz¬
ca display over 40 years ago by Dr. Paul Kosok, this has been
a perplexing archaeological mystery. Many theories have
been put forward, some far-fetched. Did the lines indicate a
space-port built by or for extra-terrestrial beings? Did they
have a ritual significance, with torchlight processions
winding along the pictograms on ritual days? Were they a
star map of the ancient heavens, "the world's largest
astronomy book," in Dr. Kosok's phrase? Did they contain
symbolic information for transmission to later generations?
Although many different interpretations have been made of
the individual components of the Nazca display, today many
scholars agree that it has social, political, economic and
religious implications of some kind.
Ever since the Nazca lines were discovered, astronomer-
mathematician Dr. Maria Reiche has devoted her life to stu¬
dying them andattempting to establish correlations between
them and astronomical occurrences. She has specially
recorded some of her conclusions for the Unesco Courier.
"The perfect proportions of these figures, some of them 200
or 300 metres long, suggest that they might have been made
in order to be seen from the air. They could represent con¬
stellations which, as in other ancient cultures, were con¬
sidered to be divinities. These constellations characterize
the different epochs of the year according to their visibility
at night. The most important time of the year was always
December because it was then that water was expected to
flow in the drier rivers and people prepared for this event by
making ploughs... In Nazca this water-announcing constella¬
tion was the Big Dipper. When afraid the water would not ap¬
pear, the people would draw on the ground an image of the
water-bringing divinity, that is the constellation which
always appeared at the same time as the water, so big that
the divinity could see itself from high up and be reminded to
send water again. For several reasons the Big Dipper is
depicted as a monkey. The spider can be considered to
represent Orion."
Not all archaeologists agree with Dr. Reiche's theories, but
they pay tribute to her determination to preserve the fragile
Nazca lines for posterity, so that even if their mystery is
never fully explained they will remain among the most
beautiful creations of human ingenuity.
Right, 90-metre-long Nazca humming Bird seen from the air.
18
