World Congress on Youth
ONE of the most important events
marking International Youth Year
will undoubtedly be the World
Congress on Youth, to be held in Barcelona
(Spain) from 8 to 15 July and sponsored by
Unesco in collaboration with the Spanish
authorities and the municipality. Six hun¬
dred participants and observers, most of
them young people, from all over the world
are expected to attend. They will review the
situation and role of young people in society
since the first conference on youth, held in
Grenoble in 1964, and will attempt to iden¬
tify future orientations.
The main work of the Congress will be
conducted in three commissions each of
which will examine one major theme. On
Youth, Education and Work participants
will put forward their views on the in¬
dividual and collective contribution of
young people to development, research,
production and creation, as well as their
attitude to work. They will discuss leisure
activities and family life, technological
change, migration, economic and social
marginalization, as well as problems that
are specific, for example, to women. Final¬
ly, they will attempt to establish the outlines
of a youth policy that would guarantee the
right of young people to work and make it
easier for them to take part in the produc¬
tion process.
On the theme Youth and Cultural
Development participants will take a closer
look at the forms of cultural expression
specific to young people, their new values,
their speech forms and behaviour, the links
between tradition and modernity and the
conquest of new fields of creativity. They
A group of young Japanese, some of
them dressed in traditional costume, on
"Adult's Day", which is celebrated on 15
January every year. It marks the transi¬
tion from youth to adulthood which, in
Japan, occurs during a person's twen¬
tieth year.
will seek together new development models
in which culture will be restored to its cen¬
tral place in the evolution of society, as well
as ways of putting into practice cultural
policies for young people and with young
people, considered as fully involved in the
process of cultural development.
On the theme of Youth, Mutual
Understanding and International Co¬
operation five young people from the major
regions of the world will express their views
on poverty, ignorance, racism, intolerance,
unemployment, human rights, the arms
. race, degradation of the environment and
the crisis in international co-operation. The
participants will attempt to lay down the
conditions for greater mutual understand¬
ing and perhaps also to suggest the different
ways in which young people, as agents of
development, as the intermediaries in the
dialogue between the developing and the in¬
dustrialized countries and as fashioners of
peace, can harness their efforts in the ser¬
vice of international co-operation.
