s-.'
.-tí^í?'- ->-
E£^?v*\
A composer ofgenius, Johann Sebastlap
Bach was also a great organist. Organ
works and cantatas predominate In his
output, which grew directly from his ac¬
tivities as organist, Kapellmeister, and
Kantor. From 1703 to 1707, Bach was
organist at the Neuklrche ("New
Church", known since 1935 as the
"Bachklrche") at Arnstadt In Thuringla,
some 40 kilometres from Weimar. At this
period Bach became acquainted with the
art of the great German composer
Dietrich Buxtehude (1637-1707), a
decisive experience In his musical
development, and wrote his first cantata
and possibly his earliest organ works.
This 18th-century German engraving
shows Bach at the organ of the Neu¬
klrche. Virtually nothing remains of this
Instrument except for the console, which
¡s displayed at the Bach museum In
Arnstadt (German Dem. Rep.).

Johann Sebastian Bach
'Between memory and prophecy'
THE works of Johann Sebastian Bach,
the Kantor maximus, the musician
who more than anyone else left an
indelible mark on the musical life of his age
(which we now call the "Baroque") are to-,
day so widely known, so often performed
and recorded, that the three hundredth an¬
niversary of their composer's birth is an
event for which the public should not be
unprepared.
The course of Bach's industrious life
took him all the way from the lowly posi¬
tion of "chamber musician" to that of
director musices of Leipzig, superintending
the musical activity of what was then a city
with no more than 30,000 inhabitants, after
being an organist, a konzertmeister ("con-
certmaster", leader of a collegium musicum
at a court), a Kapellmeister in charge of a
Kapelle or chapel of musicians, and a Kan-
tor (the official responsible for musical
education in a school and the official com¬
poser of a town or city).
Yet scarcely any trace of his itinerary has
survived. As a brilliant interpreter of im¬
ages which after the Renaissance brought
grandeur to Baroque art, an obstinate
devotee of the past, and a sceptical oppo¬
nent of things modern, Bach had the good
fortune or, from another standpoint, the
misfortune to voice a message which was
somewhere between memory and prophecy
and which could only be grasped by a hand¬
ful of dedicated followers who had been
trained in his school.
--
» *
by Alberto Basso
This community of initiates, which
followed the teachings dispensed by a mind
that was equipped to deal with any dispute
or challenge, subsequently split into small,
silent groups which discreetly made their
way into the musical world of the second
half of the eighteenth century and brought
with them both an outstanding mastery and
the musical heritage bequeathed to them by
the Kantor.
Indeed, these followers, disciples and
apostles were to be the channel through
which one of the fundamental principles
underlying Bach's music was confirmed: its
possession of an extraordinarily powerful
instructive and exhortatory impact. In
other words, it is a music that opens up to
the outside world, dictates exempta to it,
and suggests exercises, practical applica¬
tions and projects.
Emerging as they did in a fascinating
world that was a focus of the clash between
the rational and the irrational, between
science and divine grace, between the ex¬
position of historical fact and faith, Bach's
works did not enjoy the consideration they
deserved among his contemporaries.
Through one of those contradictions that
make historical interpretation so unreliable
and hazardous, the most outstanding figure
SB
5^
of the age which we have become accustom¬
ed to call the Late Baroque, and his un¬
disputed musical leadership, do not occupy
their rightful place in the annals of the
period, indeed can scarcely be said to
feature in them at all.
There was widespread indifference to his
art, because Bach himself was generally,
and even provocatively indifferent to the
new trends. The society of his time thus did
not trouble to transmit to future genera¬
tions documentary evidence about a life
that was dedicated exclusively and uncondi¬
tionally to art.
As a result, his biography is riddled with
gaps. Contemporary sources are few and
far between; information about Bach's
material situation is unreliable and indeed
almost non-existent; psychological data
about him are vague; attempts to establish
definitive dates for many of his works,
especially the instrumental music, have
been vain; it is impossible to calculate how
many of his compositions have been lost;
the contribution made by his meagre
correspondence there are only some thirty
letters extant is very modest; the commer¬
cial impact of his works, which were virtual¬
ly unknown outside Thuringia and Saxony,
was insignificant; and the critical response
they aroused was slight and by no means en¬
thusiastic. In 1737, one of his pupils,
Johann Adolph Scheibe, would tax him
with being a musical anachronism.
Bach's music was forgotten by those who
had lived in close contact with the com¬
poser. His own sons regarded it as odd, as
fit for the museum, and it was unknown to
music lovers of the succeeding generation.
"Officially", it did not exist. This abnor¬
mal silence, which was nevertheless to some
extent justified by historical circumstances,
did not start to be broken until near the end
In 1707 Bach married his cousin, Maria
Barbara Bach. Four of their children sur¬
vived, two of them becoming musicians:
Wilhelm Friedmann (1710-1784) and Carl-
Philipp Emanuel (1714-1788). In 1720
Maria Barbara died and the following year
Bach married Anna Magdalena Wülcken
(or Wilcken), a singer at the court of
prince Leopold of Kothen near Halle (in
what is now the German Democratic
Republic), where Bach was
Kapellmeister. Anna Magdalena bore 13
children, two of whom became musi¬
cians: J. Christoph Friedrich (1732-1795)
and Johann Christian (1735-1782). In
spite of her onerous household tasks she
constantly helped her husband by copy¬
ing many of his scores, singing for him,
taking part In rehearsals and entertaining
visitors. Bach wrote several works tor
her. At the beginning of 1722 he wrote for
hera Clavierbuchleln, left, containing the
first five of his French Suites.
17

52,
I
*- IL..5 (X
^ of the eighteenth century when a number of
theorists began to quote scattered
fragments of Bach's works in support of
certain technical approaches and a handful
of music lovers sponsored hesitant and
sporadic private performances of the in¬
strumental music. The German
musicologist and composer Johann
Nikolaus Forkel, in 1802, was the first per¬
son to tackle the problem of Bach's life and
work. This spelt the beginning of the "Bach
Renaissance", and a number of publishers
immediately began to put some of his works
on the market.
In 1829 Felix Mendelssohn, then aged
twenty, presented a recast version of the St.
Matthew Passion, 120 years after its first
known performance, and thereby launched
what might be called the "Bach
phenomenon". Paradoxically, the
"discovery" of the Leipzig musician was
primarily an outcome of the crisis of
Lutheranism which spanned two centuries.
The decisive impetus in the "rehabilita¬
tion" of Bach came from those who, in a
bid to give a new and vigorous lease of life
to Lutheranism, brought back to light the
great treasury of chorales which formed the
lifeblood of the German nation.
Once the Lutheran musical repertory had
been rediscovered and studied, it was only
natural that attention should be focused on
Bach. There was an immediate chain reac¬
tion: a "Bach Society" was founded in 1850
and a year later embarked on the publica¬
tion of the master's collected works. An im¬
portant study by C.H. Bitter was published
in 1865, followed in 1873 and 1880 by two
monumental volumes by another German
musicologist, Philipp Spitta. History is full
of contradictions; once rejected, Bach was
now regarded as a turning point. With him,
one era came to an end and another began.
Indeed, Bach had never lost sight of
history. He took an extraordinarily close in
to 1723, Bach was appointed Kantor of
the Thomaskirche (St. Thomas' church)
in Leipzig, a major German economic and
musical centre, and director musices
director of church music the city. As
well as organizing programmes of sacred
music, he taught music and Latin at the
Thomaskirche school adjoining the
church, where he lived with his large
family. Throughout this longperiod, Bach
wrote abundant church music, especially
admirable cantata cycles. From 1729 to
1740 he also directed the Collegium
Musicum, one of Germany's leading
associations for organizing public con¬
certs, which had been founded In 1 702 by
Georg Philipp Telemann (1681-1767) and
gave a concert each week. He travelled,
performedat concerts outside the city, In¬
augurated organs, visited his children,
and wrote a large number of occasional
works until his death on 28 July 1750.
Above, engraving dating from Bach's
lifetime showing the Thomaskirche In
Leipzig; the school, at the end of the alley
at left, cannot be seen.
terest in the works of others, ancient and
modern alike. He approached them in all
modesty, with the mind of a researcher.
Study was the purpose of his life, and his art
was the expression of a tireless scientific ap¬
plication. His taste for eclecticism and
historical synthesis undoubtedly stemmed
from study. Concepts such as research and
experimentation were part of his innermost
nature. It is significant, for example, that
much of his instrumental work is a product
of both poetry and science.
In view of certain aspects of his artistic
temperament there would appear to be
grounds for believing that he intended to
devote himself to an abstract art, and that
external circumstances alone obliged him to
produce "ordinary" music. In fact, the
real, concrete musical situation never
escaped his attention, ready as he always
was to grasp opportunities to display the
novelty of his thinking and to communicate
his musical findings.
In this respect, Bach made no distinction
between works sacred and profane, bet¬
ween vocal and instrumental music, bet¬
ween theory and practice. The mediums,
styles, materials and situationsin other
words, his working tools were always the
same (and many were the times that Bach
made use of pages that had originally been
conceived for quite another purpose), but
he transformed them with flashes of in¬
tuitive expression, breathing life and poetic
substance into what seems to have been con¬
ceived in the abstract or to have been
capable of adaptation to all uses.
There is naturally an indication of a
moral attitude in all this. Bach's work is
primarily the fruit that ripened in the soul
of a fervent devotee of the Lutheran creed
and not a single page of it can be said to run
counter to that religious experience. Even in
the most popular and fashionable works,
the sheer gravity and severity of his poetics
preclude any alternative interpretation of
the musical text since, in Bach, this is
always determined by a motive of rigorous
speculation and is governed by a persistent
feeling for geometry, the symbol of order
and wisdom, the reflection of a privileged
intelligence and an exemplary human
condition.
The idea that musical space was condi¬
tioned by mathematical principles and that
creativity could be likened to a scientific
pursuit was fairly widespread during the
Enlightenment. Throughout his life, Bach
showed that he was intent on quantifying
the principles of logic and formal abstrac¬
tion and on linking them to the sentimental
and dramatic consistency both of poetic
creation and of the circumstances in which
a work was created. For a long time,
however, he acted as if he were obeying an
18

instinct or an irresistible force of attraction,
perhaps even unconsciously in some cases,
driven on by a modus operandi that was
specific to his time.
Even so, with the passage of time, his ap¬
proach became more refined and his in-
depth analysis of "composition" gave rise
to a burst of speculative energy and to
theoretical conceptions which, when he
came to apply them, went beyond the
bounds of contemporary musical practice.
Accordingly, little by little, Bach drew
closer to what was to be the supreme goal of
his life: the exercise of perfect inner
discipline, control of the imagination, and
the stifling of instinct. At the same time, the
great musician showed that he was retracing
the steps of musical history, as it were, and
was drinking from the pure wellsprings of
polyphony. What he was proposing was
tantamount to a "return to the antique"
which, because it was so singular and indi¬
vidualistic, had absolutely no influence on
contemporary musical developments, and
remained isolated and unique, an enigmatic
reminder of the past, an impregnable bas¬
tion of memory.
The approach to the "new music" Was
gradual, but it became a burning issue in the
last decade of Bach's life. The principle of
construction adopted with the aim of
renewing musical language and its
significance was that of the variation, but
the variation as understood in a totally dif¬
ferent sense from that which later became
established. The material was organized on
the basis of a theme or arbor (trunk), which
was then developed in a series of derivations
and ramifications in accordance with an
organic plan, although this was always link¬
ed to the starting point. At the same time,
the overall architectural structure of the
composition was also a manifestation of an
encyclopaedic approach, in that the com¬
poser aimed at combining in a single entity
the different aspects of a given technique or
a number of seemingly incompatible formal
possibilities.
All Bach's works, including those he
composed before taking up residence in
Leipzig, are authentic proof of an en¬
cyclopaedic culture applied to a given
musical situation. But the principle was
developed further while Bach was working
at the church of St. Thomas in Leipzig, and
especially during his last creative phase.
Even a work like the B Minor Mass which,
in its final version, is contemporaneous
with the Art ofthe Fugue, is the outcome of
an application of the encyclopaedic ap¬
proach to musical doctrine, which reached
its culminating point in the last keyboard
works, by linking them with the common
denominator of the art of the variation, in
an unspoken bid to achieve perfection using
the instruments of a consummate scientia
universalis.
The new and rigorous self-discipline and
the new-found mysticism entailed devoting
the utmost attention to the facts of
Manuscript page of the first part of the
Christmas Oratorio (1734), one of Bach's
most popular religious works. It consists
of six beautiful and melodious cantatas.
"One can sense the man who, each year,
experienced with his children the poetry
of Christmas, " wrote the French doctor
and organist Albert Schweitzer
(1875-1965) of the Christmas Oratorio.
geometry, to order, and to reduction of the
macrocosm and the microcosm within a
symmetrically designed organic system in
which the cabalistic, alchemical and
mathematical disciplines were finely
balanced. Rationalism was impregnated
with magic, occultism and hermeticism,
and the approach to music of a certain type
involved initiatory rites after the manner of
a secret society. Indeed, Bach's ultimate
aim was to gain access to that secret
knowledge, which he only succeeded in
mastering on the eve of his death.
Bach prepared himself for the difficult
art of dying, the ars moriendi of the an¬
cients, by engaging in acts of purification
and exercises in musical asceticism. In the
last ten years of his life he changed beyond
recognition. Perhaps he lost touch with his
old self when his sight failed. Once he had
forsaken his old habits and severed his links
with the outside worldperhaps because,
in his heart of hearts, he no longer believed
in the forms and styles which he had so
fiercely championed in the first ten or fif¬
teen years of his association with the institu
tions of Leipzig Bach withdrew to Mount
Zion, into the solid fortress, the citadel, the
tower, where the only guest was science,
with its virtues as an elect creature and its
luminous and vibrant aura of acquired cer¬
tainties and unexpected developments.
It was a new apocalypse, and hence a
revelation of what is and what has been, a
testimony to prophecy not so much in the
sense of prediction of the future as of a
reading of the past and an interpretation of
the signs through which thought manifests
itself, thought that can also be composed of
pure sounds that are the faithful mirror of
a strict spiritual discipline.
ALBERTO BASSO, Italian musicologist, was
president of the Italian Musicology Society
from 1973to 1979. He is the author of several
books including a history of music and a two-
volume study of the life and work's of Johann
Sebastian Bach. He is at present editing an
eight-volume Dizionario Enciclopédico Univer¬
sale della Música e del Musicisti (Universal En¬
cyclopaedic Dictionary of Music and
Musicians).
¡j, &*if (Plnei.f'ÛTXj
19
