The love-story
of Hir and Ranjha
by Hakim Mohammed Said
PAKISTANI culture has known writing
from a remote past, and its oral tra¬
ditions were committed to writing at
different periods, although the mode of their
transmission has always been oral. Each of
the four provinces of Pakistan (North-West¬
ern Frontier Province, the Punjab, Sind and
Baluchistan) has a number of folk-stories
which have been transmitted from generation
to generation in this way. Expressed in
poetry, almost all of them were meant to be
sung to the accompaniment of local musical
instruments.
Hir and Ranjha is a favourite folk-story of
the Punjab, a vast fertile plain watered by
five rivers (the Indus, the Jhelum, the
Chenab, the Ravi and the Sutlej). Sir Richard
Temple, an authority on the legends of the
Punjab, wrote that "Hir and Ranjha are com¬
monly said to have flourished 700 or 800
years ago, but some other scholars assign
them to the time of the Moghul emperor Akbar
the Great, in the sixteenth century AD." The
version which is regarded as a classic was
composed by the poet Waris Shah in 1766
in Punjabi, one of the mother-languages of
Urdu, the national language of Pakistan.
The story, according to Waris Shah's ver¬
sion, is simple, symbolic and dramatic. It
opens with the following line:
Praise be to God who made love the foun¬
dation of the world.
The poet refers to the sacred relationship
between God and man based on love, and
glimpses of this humanized philosophy are
seen throughout the long narrative, which
may be summarized as follows. "Takht
Hazara was a pleasant place on the banks
of the River Chenab. The chief land-owner
of the place had eight sons. He loved his
youngest son Ranjha the most, so Ranjha's
brothers hated him. On his father's death,
Ranjha's brothers turned him away. He jour¬
neyed through wild forests and wastes and
came to the River Chenab. He found a barge
on the bank but the boatman refused to let
him in. To kill time Ranjha played his flute
which attracted the boatman, who allowed
him onto the barge where he soon fell asleep.
A little later he was awakened by a noise
and to his great surprise he found a beautiful
maiden by his side. She was Hir, the daughter
of the chief of the Sial family of the town of
Jhang. When she stepped on the barge she
was furious to see this stranger, but when
she took a close look at Ranjha she fell in
love with him.
"She took him home and by some con¬
trivance persuaded her father to employ him
as a herdsman. She met him daily when he
went out into the forest to graze the herd.
Their clandestine meetings were soon dis¬
covered, Ranjha was banished, and Hir was
Hir and Ranjha, heroine and hero of a
traditional Pakistani love story that orig¬
inated in the Chenab Valley of the Punjab,
probably during the 16th century, as vis¬
ualized by Ustad Allah Bux, a well-known
contemporary Pakistani artist.
given in marriage to Saida, to whom she had
been betrothed while still quite young. Saida
belonged to a family of Rangpur. Hir was
not happy living with her husband and missed
Ranjha badly.
"Ranjha left Jhang, disguised himself as
a beggar, and went to Rangpur. On his way,
he visited a Hindu guru and begged for his
help. The guru blessed him. Ranjha came
to Rangpur and somehow managed to get
in touch with Hir. After a time they escaped,
but they were pursued, caught, and brought
back. They were taken before a judge who
ordered Ranjha into exile.
"Unfortunately, immediately after this inci¬
dent Rangpur caught fire. The people attrib¬
uted this misfortune to the forced separation
of lovers. Ranjha was called back and Hir
was handed over to him. They went back
to Jhang to Hir's home. But Hir's family had
taken it as a disgrace. The family planned
a stratagem. Ranjha was asked to go home
to make preparations for his formal marriage
to Hir. Meanwhile Hir was told that Ranjha
had been murdered, whereupon she fell
down unconscious. While in this state she
was given a poisonous drink and she died.
A messenger was sent to Ranjha to inform
him of her death. He came and was straigh¬
taway taken to her tomb. The shock was
unbearable and he fell dead at the tomb of
his beloved."
This story, reminiscent of that of Romeo
and Juliet, has.a symbolic and esoteric sig¬
nificance. It is a protest against the ills and
vices of the feudal system prevalent at the
time it was written by Waris Shah. Hir is a
symbol of protest against the exploitation of
women. Ranjha symbolizes protest against
the social system and the inefficient insti¬
tutions of his time.
The story of Hir and Ranjha is still as pop¬
ular as ever. Dr. Mumtaz Hasan has noted
how "Buffaloes and cowherds are still the
same in the old Punjab where wandering
minstrels to this day sing the familiar poem,
just as the bards of ancient Greece used to
sing Homer. And when the ploughmen gather
together in the village Dara (meeting place)
at the end of the day's toil, it is remarkable
how readily they turn to Hir and Ranjha to
soothe and refresh their tired spirits. A man
who can recite Hir well is always in demand.
Nor is the popularity of the poem confined
to villages. City audiences take just as much
delight in Hir recitations broadcast by
radio."
HAKIM MOHAMMED SAID, of Pakistan, is
president of the Hamdard Foundation and edi¬
tor-in-chief of the Foundation's magazine Ham¬
dard Medicus and editor of the Urdu edition of
the Unesco Courier.
32
