'The voice of justice'
Victor Hugo in China
VICTOR Hugo was one of the first
Western writers to be known and
translated in China.
Chinese readers discovered him at the
beginning of the century thanks to Su Zigu,
a Chinese translator who in 1903 published
the first eleven chapters of Les Misérables
as a serial in a Shanghai daily newspaper.
However inaccurate it may have been, this
translation helped to make Hugo known to
the Chinese and was soon followed by two
more in 1906 and 1907. Keen interest was
aroused in Hugo and more of his works
appeared in Chinese: Bug-Jargal, Le
Dernier Jour d'un Condamné, Notre-Dame
de Paris, Quatrevingt-Treize, Les Travail¬
leurs de la Mer, and Han d'Islande.
Lu Xun (1881-1936), one of China's
greatest writers, translated an extract from
Les Misérables, which he published under
the title of Fantine.
Zeng Pu (1872-1935), famous for his
novel The Flower Emerging from an Ocean
ofSins, was the first Chinese who set out to
produce a Chinese version of Hugo's com¬
plete works. Between 1907 and 1935 he
translated Marie Tudor, Quatrevingt-
Treize, Ruy Blas, Hernani, L'Homme qui
Rit, Cromwell, Marion de Lorme, Le Roi
s'Amuse, Les Jumeaux, Angelo, Tyran de
Padoue, Le Théâtre en Liberté, and Notre-
Dame de Paris, as well as many other prose
texts and three poems.
In the meantime, other works by Hugo
were being translated and published in
Chinese. They included versions of. Pauvres
Gens, by the writer and linguist Liu Ban-
nong (1891-1934); La Conscience, by the
poet Dai Wangshu (1905-1950); and Saison
des Semailles and Le Soir, by the poet Liang
Zongdai.
The height of Victor Hugo's fame in
China came in 1935, the fiftieth anniversary
of his death.
On that occasion, Mao Dun, one of our
greatest modern novelists, published stu¬
dies on Les Misérables and Hernani. Shen
Baoji, a specialist in French culture, also
brought out a study on Les Misérables and
an "Anthology of the Poems of Victor
Hugo". Ma Songrong, who had just paid a
long visit to France, wrote "The French
Novelist Victor Hugo" and "Victor Hugo as
seen by the French Today".
Hugo was also given wide coverage in the
most influential newspapers of the time
such as "Beijing Morning" and "Impar-
24 tiality".
by Li Meiying
In 1952, many noted Chinese personali- I
ties published newspaper articles on the |
occasion of the 150th anniversary of Hugo's I
birth. The poet, playwright and politician I
Guo Moro (1892-1972), then Vice-Presi¬
dent of the permanent committee of the |
People's National Assembly, paid a vibrant |
tribute to Hugo's memory in a work entitled |
"For Peace, Democracy and Progress". I
Mao Dun, then Minister of Culture, wrote I
"Why the Chinese like the Works of Victor I
Hugo", and proposed that the memory of I
Victor Hugo should be honoured at the I
second session of the World Peace Council, |
in Vienna.
At the same time, the Beijing Library I
organized an important exhibition on |
Hugo's life and work, and his works were I
prominently displayed in the bookshops.
New translations appeared of some of his |
major works, notably Quatrevingt-Treize,
L'Homme qui Rit, and Les Misérables.
Biographical studies were also published.
Since 1976, texts by Hugo have been
appearing at an even faster rate: there have
been no less than eight different versions of
Les Misérables! Three anthologies of his
poetry, translated by Wen Jiasi, Jin Zhiping
and Cheng Baoyi, are currently in course of
publication.
In 1981 a nationwide symposium on
Hugo, held at Changsha, the capital of
Hunan province, was attended by hundreds
of teachers and researchers specializing in
French literature. Almost ninety studies
were presented, and some twenty of them
have appeared in a collection entitled Com¬
mentaries on the Literary Works of Victor
Hugo.
Liu Mingjiu is preeminent among Hugo
specialists in China. His work, begun in the
early 1960s, was interrupted by the ten
years of the "Cultural Revolution", but it is
nevertheless considerable. He has trans¬
lated all Hugo's theoretical texts and col¬
lected them in a work entitled "Victor Hugo
Talks of Literature". And in the
monumental "History of French Liter¬
ature", the first two volumes of which have
been published, one of the most important
chapters is that in which Liu Mingjiu discus¬
ses Hugo.
Another leading specialist, Feng Hanjin,
is making a special study of Hugo's art of
versification and the richness of his lan¬
guage.
Hugo's work has influenced a number of
Chinese writers. Reading Les Misérables

inspired Su Manshu (1884-1918) with the
idea of a new world, an extremely advanced
theme in China at that time.
Lu Xun, who as we have seen translated
an extract from Les Misérables, had a par¬
ticular sympathy for Fantine, the woman
"who was not left to live even in the slums".
He keenly wished that one day such injus¬
tices would be brought to an end.
It has been maintained that Ba Jin, at the
outset of his career, was fundamentally in¬
fluenced by Emile Zola. But essentially he
preferred Hugo. In his essay Ba Jin talks of
Literature, he says: "People think that
Maupassant and Zola are the most widely
read and best known French writers in
China. But personally I should mention, in
addition to them, Victor Hugo and Jean-
Jacques Rousseau." And Ba Jin recognized
that Les Misérables had had a profound
impact on his life.
But in China Hugo's popularity goes far
beyond a circle of initiates. He is known,
understood, and loved by a large part of the
population. When the French film Notre-
Dame de Paris was shown at the end of the
1970s, there were endless queues outside
the cinemas and a televised version of Marie
Tudor in 1983 was enthusiastically received.
We like Hugo the revolutionary of litera¬
ture whose Cromwell in 1827 was a triumph
for the Romantic school and restored liber¬
ty to the imagination and to the subject.
We like Hugo the noble fighter, the
valiant defender of justice. To fight the
tyrant and defend the Republic, he pub¬
lished Napoléon le Petit, Histoire d'un
Crime, and Châtiments. In 1859, he con¬
temptuously refused the amnesty offered by
Napoleon III with the declaration: "When
liberty returns, so shall I." He would only
set foot in Paris again after nineteen years of
exile when the Second Empire fell and the
Republic was proclaimed.
His loftiness of spirit reminds us of Qu
Yuan (340-278 BC), the first great Chinese
poet, who died fighting a corrupt and reac¬
tionary nobility.
The voice of Victor Hugo spoke out
whenever there was oppression in the
world. It should not be forgotten that for
over a century China was a prey to foreign
oppression, a country raped and plundered
without being able to put up an effective
resistance. Thus Yuanmingyuan (the Sum¬
mer Palace), a marvel of architecture, was
sacked and burned by the expeditionary
forces of England and France! In those dark 25
/".. ^-

«*l
Ink drawing by Victor Hugo depicts a
Chinese figure in front ofa kind of temple.
days when the Chinese people seemed to
have been abandoned by everyone, from a
little island in far-off Europe, from the
home of an exile, rose a voice vibrant with
justice, to condemn this act of banditism. It
was the voice of Victor Hugo (See page 14).
Yes, for us Chinese, the voice of Victor
Hugo is the voice of justice. Always on the
side of the weak, on the side of those who
claimed the right to live, Hugo's magnanim¬
ity went so far that he opened his door to the
outlaws of the Paris Commune. Several
times in the French Senate he called for a
"total, generous amnesty, without reserva¬
tion, without conditions and without res¬
trictions" for the Communards, unafraid of
the jeers of reactionary forces athirst for
vengeance.
Finally, Hugo is loved in China because
of the democratic and humanist ideals
which imbue his titanic work. His finest,
most powerful, purest pages describe the
humble, the wretched, the outcasts, all
those who possess true nobility of soul.
Quasimodo, the bell-ringer of Notre-
Dame, is monstrously ugly, but his soul is
pure and he is good. Esmeralda the gypsy is
generous, sensitive, and great-hearted. The
convict Jean Valjean, who languished in
gaol for stealing bread to feed his starving
nephews, displays dauntless courage. He is
the symbol of humanity's hope for a juster
world. And since he appeared on television,
Gavroche, the irrepressible, mischievous
Parisian youngster, has become a legendary
image of adolescence in China.
Finally, this ardent humanist detested
war and was a champion of peace. This is
yet another reason why he is so popular
with the Chinese people.
Today on the hundredth anniversary of
his death, the Chinese people wishes to join
the French people and all the peoples of the
world in paying him an admiring and grate¬
ful tribute.
Victor Hugo will always live among us, in
our hearts.
LI MEIYING, of China, is professor of French at
the University of Beijing, where she herself was
once a pupil before completing her studies at the
University of Rennes, France. She has trans¬
lated several works of famous Chinese writers
into French, including La Maison de Thé (The
Teahouse), by Lao She, and three works by Ba
Jin, La Pluie (The Rain), La Brume (The Mist)
and L'Automne (Autumn).
