The
showman
poet
by René Char
Below, manuscript of the first two stanzas
of a poem written by Hugo at Jersey on 3
April 1854 and published in 1881 in the
collection Les Quatre Vents de l'Esprit.
"/ am made of shadow and marble.
Like the black feet of the tree
I plunge deep Into the night.
I listen; I am under ground;
From below I say to the thunder:
Wait! make no noise.
I, whom they call the poet,
Am in the speechless night
The mysterious staircase;
I am the Darkness-staircase;
In my gloomy spirals
The shadow opens its dim eyes."
RATHER than a clear step forward in
our understanding of the poetry of
the nineteenth century, Hugo is an
intense and teeming moment of the culture
span of the period. Portly and august of
bearing, his is the success of the extrava¬
gant, or, perhaps, the extravagance of the
successful. Before his giant presence we
gape, we admire, we guffaw with laughter,
we seethe, we rage, or we declare ourselves
partisans of the whole "Hugo show". We
are taken aback by such an outpouring of
cunningly contrived fatuity. On the instant
we are filled with remorse. He is the least
indispensable of the poets of our time; yet
he it is who best succeeds in playing alter¬
nately upon the lost art of verse, when that
art is inspired, the most harmonious and
then the most vibrantly crimson of lights.
He is effortless, mysterious, with the
bounding grace of a tiger. His touch defies
description, at times almost matching
Racine's bewitching caress. He reaches the
heights with the vertiginous speed and ver¬
tical flight of a rocket. Herein lies his share
of greatness.
There are themes for all ages and all
viewpoints, but not one of them is wholly
satisfying for anyone. The flow from his
torrential hand, seen in fragments traced
out like runic spells on crumpled scraps and
sheets, is unequalled. As the genius of the
woods he out-Pans Pan. Taken as a whole
he is impossible a big-talking Barnum,
flaunting his honours, his poesy, his wealth,
wielding his verbal virtuosity in the ordinary
affairs of daily life like a baton, a pass, an
open-sesame. With his eclipse in the violent
death inflicted on him by the rising star of
Baudelaire the Baudelaire bomb literally
blew him to pieces , all his fair fiefs claim
their freedom, his days no longer, rise in
boastful dawn, whole segments of his
poems break away , flying in their splendour
before us. Of his interminable and often
senile discourse with God and Satan there
remain but a few needle-sharp barbs and
some scattered lilies, which yet are almost
unique in their fragrance and flame.
As a writer of prose Hugo cannot com¬
pete with Chateaubriand. He is worlds
apart from Gérard de Nerval who, with his
Sylvie, lent enchantment to age-old groves.
Yet he could convey a picture of things he
had seen far better than could the lens of
Nicéphore Niepce's camera.
Hugo, it must be added, is the archetypal,
grandiose mirror, shaped in the form of a
heart and reflecting his achievement, to
which must be held up for comparison the
reputations of certain of our great contem¬
poraries. This much too must be granted
him.
RENE CHAR is one of France's leading contem¬
porary poets. In 1983, Complètes, a
collection of his poems and writings, was pub¬
lished in Gallimard's prestigious La Pléiade
series, a very rare honour for a living poet. His
latest work, Les Voisinages de Van Gogh, was
published earlier this year.
¿t-ifarf'ju.. L¿) hat K lluirT-
huf
i:
ok fl*tHH^ U pot*C
U JuXi ic+*i f¿L fruir mtvrffc-
23
