Peace
and human values
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
» Director-General of Unesco
THE Second World War came to an end in 1945, on 8 May in the
European theatre, on 2 September in the Pacific. The war had
seen the systematic practice of collective massacres, the destruc¬
tion of cities on a massive scale, the deportation of entire populations,
and the organization of many extermination camps. Precipitated by the
will to dominate, its mainspring blind intolerance and prejudice, the
war afflicted humanity not only through its toll of flesh and blood but
by striking at the source of its deepest beliefs, the most precious
elements of the cultures of peoples. The brutal rejection of human
values was a characteristic of this world conflict, but so too was the un¬
compromising defence of such values. It is our duty to honour those
who gave their lives to preserve world civilizations and human freedom,
and to remind today's generations of their sufferings and sacrifices.
To honour their memory is also to recall the task of reconciliation and
reconstruction which began at the end of the war with the foundation
of the United Nations and of Unesco. The mission specially entrusted
to Unesco has been to reinforce peace between the nations through
education, science and culture, by contributing to the establishment of
new relationships based on the principles of knowledge, justice and
mutual comprehension.
Today more than ever, this mission which Unesco has resolutely
endeavoured to accomplish remains imperative.
The image of the world which is increasingly gaining ground in the
minds of people everywhere is that of a single and complex expanse in
which the sources of friction are proliferating while the means of com¬
munication are growing more effective and the reasons for co-operation
are becoming explicit.
Never more than today have men felt so capable both of mutual
understanding and of mutual destruction. Since 1945, there has been an
endless succession of so-called local wars which have caused the deaths
of tens of millions of persons. Today the acceleration of the arms race,
coupled to the extension of these local conflicts with international
ramifications, heighten the danger of a generalized confrontation and
threaten the future of mankind to an unprecedented degree.
The gravity of these dangers is beginning to be widely felt and giving
greater prominence to the aspiration of all the peoples of the world to
a lasting peace, based on respect for the rights of individuals, for the
liberty of nations and for justice, and on universal progress.
This is why Unesco, faithful to the principles set forth in its Constitu¬
tion, is continuing to make a contribution to the development, in its
fields of competence, of mutual understanding, tolerance, respect and
solidarity between individuals and between peoples, as well as the
recognition of their reciprocal rights and duties.
It is incumbent on all of us to work towards a genuine renewal of
values, bringing to them the sense of an uninterrupted continuity bet¬
ween the rights of each man, those of each nation and those of the entire
human community.
The commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of the end of the Se¬
cond World War reminds us of this duty and urges us to perform it.
