A back-to-the-earth approach
to housing by Jean Dethier
Arealistic picture of the new trends in
architecture and housing tech¬
niques that are destined to prevail
at the end of this century would be in¬
complete without reference to a domain in
which rapid and important developments
are already taking place building which
uses unbaked earth as its prime material.
Earth building as an architectural tech¬
nique, which in its up-dated form has an im¬
portant role to play in meeting the needs
and challenges of our time, has a very long
history. Since towns were first created,
some ten thousand years ago, men have
used this material to build entire cities
palaces and temples, churches and
mosques, warehouses and forts, defensive
walls and proud monuments.
Readily available over most of the globe,
this seemingly humble material has been us¬
ed in every continent and climate, in all
latitudes and in nearly every pre-industrial
culture and civilization, in long stretches of
the Great Wall of China, built over twenty
centuries ago, as well as in both the simplest
and the most imposing dwellings. It has
proved its versatility and the extraordinary
variety of forms and functions to which it
can be applied. Its solidity and strength,
when it is correctly used, have been abun¬
dantly demonstrated.
Over recent years Unesco has helped to
promote recognition of this part of the
universal heritage by proposing the
classification of towns with fine examples
of buildings in unbaked earth such as Ouro
Prêto, in Brazil, Shibam, in the People's
Democratic Republic of Yemen, and
Sanaa, in the Yemen Arab Republic.
Since the beginnings of modern science
attempts have been made to rationalize and
improve the empirical earth-building
techniques used in pre-industrial societies
all over the world.
The pioneer in the use of these techniques
in modern times was the French architect
François Cointeraux (1740-1830). As early
as 1797 he invented several processes for
stabilizing earth to increase its mechanical
and chemical resistance and its adaptability
to the new creative trends in architecture
which had been launched by such visionary
architects as Claude Nicolas Ledoux
(1736-1806) and Etienne Louis Boulée
(1728-1799).
Cointeraux was not only a theoretician,
he was also a practitioner and an enlighten¬
ed teacher and published many works which
were widely read not only in Europe but
also in the Americas and Australia. For the
best part of a century his designs were used
in the construction of factories, schools and
Unbaked earth dwellings at Shibam in the
Wadi Hadramaout valley, People's
Democratic Republic of Yemen. Built
around the 4th century AD, the town is
one of the most remarkable examples of
Yemeni art and architecture. Its construc¬
tions of unbaked earth date from between
the 16th and the 20th century. In
December 1984 the Director-General of
Unesco launched two appeals for interna¬
tional solidarity, one for the safeguard of
Shibam (which has been on Unesco's
World Heritage List since 1982) and Wadi
Hadramaout, and the second on behalf of
Sanaa, the historic city which is capital of
the Yemen Arab Republic.
public buildings as well as of dwellings of all
kinds, ranging from stately homes and
middle-class residences to housing estates
for workers and five-storey city apartment
blocks.
Cointeraux can thus be considered to
have invented modern earth architecture
two centuries ago. In the Grenoble and
Lyons areas of France, where Cointeraux
lived, several specimens of his creative
talent survive in perfect condition, adding
their contribution to the age-old traditional
urban and rural architectural heritage of
buildings made of earth. So this region is a
kind of vast open-air museum of the oldest
31

This vast modern building of unbaked
earth was built near Luxor, Egypt, in 1980
by the French architect Olivier Sednaoul.
and the most modern earth-building
techniques.
But in France, as elsewhere, the irresisti¬
ble commercial progress of industrial
materials such as cement, concrete, baked
bricks and steel has led to a gradual decline
in the use of earth during the present cen¬
tury. It was only when violent crises inter¬
rupted the production of these materials
that architects and builders again had
recourse to unbaked earth. This happened
in Europe during and after both world
wars. Tens of thousands of earth dwellings
were built, especially in Germany, during
the 1920s and again in the 1940s. Also dur¬
ing the 1940s some of the great stars of
modern architectureFrank Lloyd Wright
(1867-1959) in the United States and Le
Corbusier (1887-1965) in Francedesigned
a number of projects in unbaked earth.
During the same period this new architec¬
tural approach had its first repercussions
outside the industrialized countries. A very
rational and impressive regional hospital
was erected in 1943 at Adrar, Algeria, by
the Belgian architect Michel Luyckx. In
Egypt, Hassan Fathy was to set out on a
long cultural Odyssey lasting forty years
which would lead him to rediscover the age-
old earth building traditions of his country
and to rehabilitate and modernize them.
His approach, at one and the same time
theoretical and practical, philosophical and
militant, was to make him the first guru of
a democratic form of architecture that was
specifically adapted to the cultural and
economic realities of a Third World
country.
However, despite the important work ac¬
complished by these and many other ar¬
chitects all over the world, during the 1950s
and 1960s earth building continued to be
marginal and precarious as compared with
the predominant modes of thought and pro¬
duction. The advocates of "progress at any
price" were strong in numbers at that time
of economic euphoria in the West and of
political euphoria in a number of Third
World countries then coming to in¬
dependence. From the very start the mere
idea of using earth as an officially approved
building material was scorned and rejected.
This was the golden age of the "interna¬
tional style" in architecture, of unbridled
industrialization and "heavy" technology
which so many countries adopted as their
chief or sole model for economic, technical
and cultural development.
For many reasons decision-makers and
planners have now become more realistic
and have adopted a more diversified ap¬
proach. Various development myths have
given way to doubts followed by a search
for less grandiose, less "universal" solu¬
tions that are better adapted to local
realities. The concepts of "appropriate
technology" (appropriate to a specific con¬
text) and "intermediate technology" (in
termediate between the costly heavy
technology of the industrialized countries
and archaic, outmoded traditional tech¬
niques) have come into their own.
Since 1972 international energy and
economic crises have imposed an urgent
reappraisal of modes of thought and action,
not only in the rich but also in the poorer
countries. Substitute energy-saving solu¬
tions were suddenly needed in the building
sectora big energy consumer in all coun¬
tries. It was then discovered that the
customary building materials, such as ce¬
ment, concrete, steel and even baked bricks,
were, by their very nature, high energy
consumers.
By the early 1970s a small international
group of architects and engineers had
already foreseen this inevitable develop¬
ment. They started discreetly to elaborate
alternative solutions and set up a non-profit
association within the Grenoble School of
Architecture the Craterre group. Its aim is
threefold: first, to study the whole range of
earth building techniques scientifically and
without any pre-judgement, to modernize
them and make them operational, reliable
and economical in the light of present and
future requirements; second, to participate
directly in earth building schemes, both in
Europe and in the Third World, so as to
provide a practical demonstration of new
approaches to housing and public works
problems; finally, on the basis of this
Map showing the main world regions
where there is a tradition of using unbak¬
ed earth as a building material. All told,
1.5 thousand million persons (30 per cent
of the world's population) live In dwell¬
ings made of unbaked earth. Half the
population of the developing countries is
housed in dwellings of this kind: most of
the rural population and at least 20 per
cent of town- and city-dwellers.
Adobe and rammed earth
A score of traditional techniques of
building with unbaked earth exist In dif¬
ferent parts of the world. The two leading
methods are based on the use of the
adobe brick (a word of Arabic or Berber
origin assimilated Into Spanish and
transmitted to the Americas where It Is
also used In English) and the wall of pisé
de terre ("rammed earth", a French ex¬
pression which first appeared In Lyons In
1562 and has since found its way Into
many other languages).
The traditional adobe brick Is hand
moulded in a wooden frame In which a
mixture of earth, water and chopped
straw is piled and then dried In the sun.
Today adobes are made by using a mix
ture of earth, water and a fixative (e.g. 2
or 3 per cent of cement). The mix Is then
strongly compacted In mechanical
presses which produce more rapidly
adobes that are far more robust than the
hand-made kind.
Traditional pisé Is made by compacting
earth mixed with water and chopped
straw In mobile wooden forms set up on
each side of the wall which Is being built,
to a minimum width of 40 cm. This tech¬
nique has also been modernized by In¬
troducing a small amount of fixative Into
the mix Instead of straw and by using a
pneumatic rammer Instead of manual
compaction using a pestle.
32

Architecture using unbaked earth has
taken on a new lease of life In the United
States. The "La Luz" housing complex in
the suburbs of Albuquerque, New Mex¬
ico, comprises a hundred ultra-modern
luxury dwellings. It was completed in
1975. The walls of earth-plastered adobe
bricks are girdled at the top by a concrete
armature which extends to form a flat
roof. This project by the American ar¬
chitectAntoine Predock has already been
Inscribed on the United States National
Register of Historic Places.
balance between research and its applica¬
tions, to fill a serious void in the field of
training by setting up specialized courses at
university level.
In the early 1970s, thanks to this
threefold approach, the Grenoble School of
Architecture became the only one in the
world to provide this type of training, which
was open to architects and engineers from
all countries. A setting was thus created for
study and practical work on the future of
economical building techniques at a time of
very rapid growth in demand for ultra-
cheap urban and rural housing in the Third
World (the needs of urban Africa alone
within the coming fifteen years are
estimated at fifty million housing units) and
of worsening economic crisis in many of
these countries due to their enormous
foreign debts.
Under these circumstances, recourse to
earth makes it possible to avoid importing
costly materials or the energy to produce
them locally. The earth option enables a
form of development to be envisaged that is
centred on the indigenous economic,
natural, cultural and human resources of
the country or region concerned. Thanks to
appropriate transfers of modern earth
building technology it is possible to move
directly from outmoded techniques to the
most efficient processes, the houses being
constructed, if so desired, by the future oc¬
cupants themselves.
There has been a radical change in recent
years in the attitude, both of the public and
of decision-makers, towards the use of this
material previously regarded with prejudice
if not hostility. This change has been con¬
firmed by the international success of ex¬
hibitions such as Earth Architecture: the
future ofan age-old tradition (organized in
Paris in 1981 by the Centre de Création In¬
dustrielle) and the construction of a unique
experimental housing centre in the new
town of l'Isle d'Abeau, at Villefontaine,
near Lyons, France.
The interest aroused by the latter achieve¬
ment has led many experts and technicians
from other parts of Europe as well as from
Asia, Africa and the Americas to come to
l'Isle d'Abeau to study on site the possibili¬
ty of adapting the techniques used there to
the needs of their respective countries. In
November 1984, Unesco, in collaboration
with the Craterre group, organized a one-
week, on-site seminar for a group of ar¬
chitects and decision-makers from six coun¬
tries in Africa and the Middle East who are
faced with the need to build a large number
of schools at very low cost for which this
technology could be adapted.
Encouraged by the success of this initial
experiment in earth-built dwellings and the
international interest it has aroused, the
authors of the project are already planning
a second, more ambitious and structured
project in France to meet the growing de¬
mand in this field.
An International Earth Building Institute
is to be established this year with Craterre as
its nucleus and in association with a number
of scientific, technical, university and
cultural partners. Its activities will be con¬
centrated in four sectors of major impor¬
tance: research, practical applications,
university-level education and information.
This strategy corresponds exactly to the
forms of action requested as an "urgent
priority" at the First International Sym¬
posium on Earth Construction, held at
Brussels in December 1984 under the
auspices of the United Nations.
It is hoped that a second complex will be
built in earth at l'Isle d'Abeau to house the
future Institute, the complex being com¬
pleted by an Earth University, an Earth Em¬
bassy, a Museum of Earth Building Techni¬
ques, an hotel and a number of individual
and collective dwellings. By its nature this
complex would provide an opportunity to
make use of an extensive range of architec¬
tural, urban, technical and functional
variations using earth as the building
material.
This project should be completed by the
summer of 1987, the date set by Plan
Constructionan experimental and
research body attached to the French
ministry for housing and town-planning
for an important international symposium
The French architect François Cointeraux
(1740-1830) was the first man to mod¬
ernize unbaked earth construction tech¬
niques and waged a lifelong struggle on
behalf of this form of architecture. He
designed urban and rural housing as well
as buildings foragricultural and Industrial
use. Above, three types of dwelling built
in 19th-century France "fordiverse social
classes" from plans by Cointeraux.
in this region to be organized in collabora¬
tion with the Institute. One of the objectives
of the symposium, provisionally entitled Le
Sommet de la Terre, will be to review the
real political, economic, social, technical
and cultural issues involved in the use of
earth-building methods in different parts of
the world.
Meanwhile, in 1985, China will play host
in Beijing to another international seminar
which will review the results of recent
research in which that country, like so many
others, is closely interested.
These reviews and perspectives will form
a vital, realistic contribution to the Interna¬
tional Year for Housing and the Homeless
which has been proclaimed by the United
Nations for 1987.
JEAN DETHIER, Belgian architect and town-
planner, is architectural consultant and
organizer of architectural exhibitions at the
Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris. He has a
special interest in the promotion and spread of
information about the techniques of earth ar¬
chitecture, a subject in which he has become
an internationally recognized expert. He is the
author of Earth Architecture: the Future of an
Age-old Tradition and organized an exhibition
of the same name which was held in Pafis in
1981.
33
