A cultural crossroads
by Giovanni Dotoli
«**
O
/
The Mediterranean can be seen at right of
this map of the worldproduced in 1154 by
the Hispano-Arab geographer al-ldrisi
(C.1100-C.1166). In accordance with a
convention of Islamic cartography at that
time, the south is shown at top of map.
THERE was already a flourishing civi¬
lization in the Mediterranean area
3,000 years before the Christian era.
Each of the regions of the Mediterranean in
turn has been a source of influence, each
has made an outstanding contribution to
the development of mankind. The sole
point of reference has always been the
material and spiritual progress of mankind.
From one era to the next, these successive
polarizations created a ferment of intellec¬
tual activity and a body of convergences
that make the Mediterranean tradition a
unique example of cultural identity.
The Mediterranean is a crossroads of
history uniting three continents Africa,
Europe and Asia, that is to say the entire
known world at the Renaissance in a pro¬
cess of reciprocal exchanges, a circular
movement which enabled each of the many
centres which emerged to absorb some¬
thing of the other.
The unity to which the Mediterranean
tends is inscribed in its long history and has
been sought many times in different parts of
the region. All the peoples and cultures
which today coexist in the Mediterranean
basin call for recognition and respect. In a
sense the Mediterranean peoples are at
once Arab, Greek, Hebrew and Latin. And
the history of the world would be quite
different without the contributions of these
peoples to science, medicine, literature,
law, religion and politics. It is therefore jus¬
tifiable to speak of a Mediterranean human¬
ism centred on the person, the basis of
every assertion of human rights.
Today the Mediterranean is seriously
threatened as a beacon of civilization
whose special feature is unity in diversity.
Urgent action is required if the Mediterra¬
nean basin is to be saved from grave cultur¬
al, economic and political damage.
Unless they commit themselves to active
collaboration, the Mediterranean countries
will be condemned by the kind of economic
relations that prevail in the world today to be
mere market outlets for the costly, unsuit¬
able products of an alien technology.
But if they overcome their prejudices and
realize that no one can succeed alone, the
Mediterranean countries, with their extraor¬
dinary economic situation, will be able to
surmount their handicaps rapidly and-
benefit from an interdependence recog¬
nized as indispensable.
In the conviction that cooperation is the
40

best way to halt this decline a Conference
on Scientific Cooperation between
Mediterranean Universities was held at
Bari (Italy) on 1 9 and 20 May 1 982. The aim
of the conference was to initiate an integra¬
tion process for Mediterranean peoples by
analysing the possibilities for cultural and
scientific collaboration. The following prop¬
osals were adopted:
- to establish training programmes in
conformity with the special cultural features
of the countries in the region and their
specific needs;
- to set up research groups concerned
with the protection and development of the
man-made and natural environments;
- to establish a data bank for education
and research;
- to create an information centre on the
activities of each university;
- to initiate training programmes in the
fields of energy, biotechnology, agro-food
production and hydrology;
- to prepare a map of existing Imbalances
in the fields of health and the environment;
- to set up intervention centres for the
protection of the cultural, artistic and natu¬
ral heritage and the defence of minorities;
- to draw up an inventory of the common
heritage of popular traditions;
- to establish a linguistics centre;
- to expand collaboration in music, the
visual arts, literature, archaeology and
town planning;
- to create university chairs related to
Mediterranean studies;
- to provide information about the norms
governing the activities of the various re¬
search institutions.
On these foundations the Community of
Head of a statue commemorating Ibn
Rushd (Averröes) In his native city of
Cordoba. This 12th-century Hispano-
Arab philosopher Is one of the most
Illustrious Intellectual symbols of co¬
operation and understanding among the
countries of the Mediterranean. Born in
Andalusia, he achieved a synthesis of
classical Greek philosophy (especially
Aristotelian theories) and Islam In a body
of work which profoundly Influenced the
thought of the Christian West.
Mediterranean Universities, whose mem¬
bers include some hundred universities
and research centres, was created in 1 984.
Its objectives are to reassert the role of
culture and scientific and technological re¬
search in solving the difficult problems sur¬
rounding the development of Mediterra¬
nean countries, and to promote scientific
cooperation between universities by using
the competence and resources of each of
them while respecting the specificity of the
different nations to which they belong.
The Community is not an isolated in¬
itiative. It forms part of a network of special¬
ized centres created by Unesco in different
countries in the region under the authority
of a general coordinating bureau.
In this way some of the conditions are
being met for the sustained and orderly
growth of Mediterranean countries, whose
unity and diversity are a source of strength
and fortune.
GIOVANNI DOTOLI, of Italy, is professor of
French language and literature at the University
of Bari, and general co-ordinator of the Commu¬
nity ofMediterranean Universities, of which he is
a co-founder. He has launched and directed
literary magazines and book series, including a
number of international co-publications. He has
taken part in many international seminars and
was rapporteur of a meeting on Mediterranean
writing organized by Unesco at Hammamet (Tu¬
nisia). He is the author of 16 books and many
essays on French and Italian literature, and as¬
pects of European and Mediterranean cultures.
