The outlook for urban man
MAN is increasingly becoming an
urban species. Whereas in 1960
about a third of the world's
population lived in towns and cities, by the
turn of the century it is expected that
around half will do so. Cities are also in¬
creasing in size. In 1950 there were only
six urban agglomerations with more than
5 million inhabitants; today there are 26,
and by the end of the century there could
be as many as 60all but 12 of them in
developing countries. It is in the cities that
the problems of population growth are
magnified to frightening proportions: the
urban population of the Third World is ex¬
panding at a rate of 3.6 per cent a year,
almost twice as fast as the population in
general, and some cities are growing
three or four times as fast, a few at over 1 0
per cent a year.
For Third World countries, the implica¬
tions are enormous in terms of providing
adequate common services and ensuring
food and employment for at least double
the number of people currently residing in
urban areas. Many cities are already
familiar with the problem (although few
would claim to be coping adequately):
Säo Paulo, for instance, is already adding
half a million inhabitants every year. An
extreme example of the scale of the pro¬
blem is the estimate that to bring in the ex¬
tra water needed for Mexico City by the
year 2000 will require electricity consump¬
tion equal to the total present-day elec¬
tricity consumption of the city's buildings.
Problems are compounded by the fact
that between one-third and two-thirds of
most Third World city dwellers live in
squatter settlements with inadequate
water supply and other amenities.
Often, programmes intended to im¬
prove conditions in different urban sectors
are planned and carried out independent¬
ly, sometimes cancelling out each other's
benefits. For instance, efforts to expand
industry and create employment may
reduce water or energy for domestic
purposes.
Those concerned with modern city
planning thus have to grapple with
problems of considerable complexity. Ur¬
banization needs increasingly to be seen
in the context of overall development
plans and investment strategies, as
Recommendation 39 for the further im¬
plementation of the World Population
Plan of Action adopted in Bucharest in
1974 suggests, "with the aim of achiev¬
ing... a reduction in current high migration
to capital cities and other large urban cen¬
tres, the development of medium-sized
towns and a reduction of rural-urban and
regional inequalities".
A better understanding of the urbaniza¬
tion process is one of the aims of
Unesco's programme in this field. At a re¬
cent meeting of experts, a common pro¬
gramme was agreed for identifying
sources of vulnerability within urban
systems as they evolve, and various
means outlined of increasing the
resilience of systems and their adaptabili¬
ty to change.
Many Unesco studies on migration
have a bearing on urbanization and help
to throw light on the motivations for move¬
ment from the countryside and to the city,
the choice of migrant destination, and on
adjustment and failure to adjust to the
host society.
Bearing in mind one of the key recom¬
mendations of the Plan of Actionthat
population distribution policies should be
integrated with economic and social
policies Unesco has increasingly linked
its migration research to the broader
perspectives of national development. Its
main aim is to investigate the variations in
migratory patterns and their causes, as
well as the consequences for the areas of
origin and destination. It studies the in¬
teractions between rural and urban en¬
vironments and their implications for
population growth and change in different
areas. Migration has complex conse¬
quences for the lives and welfare of the
migrants and their families, as well as for
their home and host communities. Recent
Unesco country studies cover a wide
range in time and space: migration into
Mexico City from 1930-1970, three cen¬
turies of internal migration in France, in¬
ternal migration in India, and the growth of
medium-sized towns in Nigeria.
Unesco research on the dynamics of
migration has highlighted the complex¬
ities of both "push" and "pull" factors in
the movement of workers and their
families. The density of settlement on the
land, carrying capacity stress, the degree
of commercialization, the forms of land
tenure and labour use, the farming
technology in use, the reform of land
tenure arrangements, and the degree of
provision of social and economic services
to the countrysideall impinge directly on
the process of rural out-migration. These
factors may assume even more impor¬
tance in the future as population growth in
marginal farming areas contributes, in a
vicious circle, to further environmental
degradation.
The central idea emerging from
Unesco's work in this field is that migra¬
tion policies should be formulated within
the context of general development plans,
and that these policies and plans should
aim to remove rural-urban inequalities,
create more small towns to act as a
counter-attraction to the cities and a focus
of rural development, and to introduce
strong welfare components and the provi¬
sion of basic services into rural develop¬
ment programmes.
In many countries, internal migration is
a crucial element in achieving and main¬
taining a balance in the various productive
sectors of the economy, and as such is a
major element in the development pro¬
cess. If allowed to occur in a policy
vacuum, however, migration can have
severe consequences and impose a strain
on the provision of basic services.
Governments should recognize this and
make appropriate plans and policies.
Unesco studies indicate that well thought-
out Incentive structures and policy in¬
terventions at the source region have a
higher probability of success than either
migration controls or policy actions at the
destination region alone. Migration con¬
trols, as Recommendation 38 for the fur¬
ther implementation of the World Popula¬
tion Plan of Action notes, "are difficult to
enforce and may infringe on human
rights".
Unesco research has also drawn atten¬
tion to the fact that most Third World plan¬
ning has failed to take account of the com¬
plexity of the relationship between "pull"
towns and cities and the surrounding rural
areas. As they grow, towns come to de¬
pend on ever more distant regions for
their supplies of water, energy, food and
building materials, and the extra demand
created often leads to the degradation of
both neighbouring and more distant land
through overexploitation. Another area for
intervention is the almost total lack of
knowledge and understanding of the
causes and consequences of migration
on the part of the public and of local and
regional leaders both in rural and urban
areas. This area of migration information
and communication is one which Unesco
is paying increasing attention to.
Although rural-rural migration Is more
widespread and more Important than was
thought only a few years agofor in¬
stance in India it is now known that around
70 per cent of all migratory movements
are of this typeit is the widespread drift
to the towns and cities of the Third World
which creates most concern among
governments.
Unesco has also drawn attention to the
need for population involvement in im¬
proving urban settlements, since the solu¬
tions to many development problems can
often be found within the society, and
much work can be carried out by the peo¬
ple themselves with little external support.
One way of achieving this goal is through
the use of "barefoot architects", who,
after simplified training, would be able to
solve many of the major problems of shan¬
ty towns or villages. He or she would be
able to deal with the basic problems of
roadways, water supply, drainage, house
construction and the building of communi¬
ty buildings such as schools. Such a per¬
son, drawn from the community itself,
would be able to mobilize community sup¬
port and guide local people in the use of
simple technologies to enhance the use of
locally available resources.
This text has been extracted from Unesco,
Population and Development, a study
prepared by Unesco for the International Con¬
ference on Population held in Mexico City from
6 to 13 August 1984.
30
