TER
-J
W^BMMI mmhmk
One or f/ie natural wonders ofSouth Ame¬
rica, the Iguacu Falls are situated on a
stretch of the Rio Iguacu forming the
boundary between Brazil and Argentina.
The horseshoe-shaped falls are over
4 km wide (4 times wider than Niagara in
North America). During the rainy season
from November to March the flow rate
may reach 12,740 cubic metres per
second. The Falls derive their name from
a Guarani Indian word meaning "great
water".
THE Earth is a sphere covered with a
humid envelope, the hydrosphere,
which comprises the oceans, the
seas, and all other water resources. It was in
the oceans that life appeared and took
shape. But the extremely complex
mechanism of life on our planet today can¬
not function without fresh water or, more
precisely, without the very small proportion
of water that is renewed each year in the
water cycle through evaporation, precipita¬
tion, infiltration and runoff (that part of
precipitation that flows toward streams on
the ground surface or within the soil).
As part of this great natural movement
(see drawing page 7), some 120,000 km1 of
water reaches the continents as rainfall; this
is only 1 per cent of total surface runoff
water and 0.001 per cent of underground
water. This water is today the essential
source of life on our planet: it humidifies
the plant layer of the soil, which is indispen¬
sable for agriculture; it conserves the
forests and promotes their expansion; it
completes the underground reserves whicl
provide drinking water for almost one fiftl
of the world's population.
' A large proportion of precipitation, som<
40 per cent, constitutes the hydrographica
network which controls the biológica
equilibrium of lakes, seas and oceans, anc
influences world economic activity. Rive:
water provides the habitat of edible fish anc
is an important link in the biological chaii
of certain sea and river fish such a
sturgeon, salmon and eel.
Deltas and estuaries formed by rive
mouths, river systems, lakes, marshes anc
fresh water reservoirs all provide importan
habitats for a large number of anima
species necessary for human needs.
River water runoff constitutes annuall;
some 50,000 kmJ, or a little more than 0.:
per cent of the total fresh water of thi
planet. But its geographical distribution i
unequal: it is mainly concentrated in thi
northern hemisphere, and in one-third o

AND
by Grigori Voropayev
'-*
	 &
the hottest continental zones there are few
or no rivers.
The birth of civilizations, population
growth, increased production in all fields,
from agriculture to advanced electronics,
would be impossible without fresh water.
While many countries have been notably
successful in developing techniques for the
desalinization, purification and re-
utilization of used water, world consump¬
tion of river water continues to increase
each year. Since the beginning of the twen¬
tieth century consumption of fresh water
has risen more than sevenfold and now
stands at almost 3,000 km' per year. In the
next twenty or thirty years the figure is ex¬
pected to rise by at least 50 per cent.
Where the river network is insignificant,
notably in the world's arid zones, the main
existing watercourses are already or soon
will be fully exploited in order to satisfy
economic needs. This is the case of such
rivers as the Nile, the Tigris, the Colorado,
the Syrdarya, the Chu, the Amu Darya, and
many other rivers in Australia, India, Mex¬
ico, Africa and elsewhere. In these regions
the provision of drinking water and the
development of irrigation are major
problems.
The unequal distribution of river runoff
on the different continents has a con¬
siderable impact on the water supply. Its
annual volume per head of population is
some tens of thousands of cubic metres for
Oceania, South America and North
America, but only a few thousand cubic
metres in the case of Europe and Asia. The
gap is even bigger in countries and regions
where the annual volume per head is no
more than several hundred cubic metres,
which in practice makes it impossible to
supply the population with drinking water
or to establish modern hygiene facilities.
For people living in these regions, water
supply is a vital question which mobilizes all
their efforts.
However, in spite of these major dif¬
ficulties, the problem would be easier to
solve if the natural mechanism of the water
cycle remained constant. Unfortunately
this is not the case. Man's economic ac¬
tivities modify the water cycle by influenc¬
ing the hydrological regime, as well as water
reserves and quality. The release of sulphur
compounds into the atmosphere leads to
the formation of "acid rain" which
modifies the acidity of the aquatic environ¬
ment, has a harmful effect on all forms
of life and restrains the development of
vegetation.
Intensive urbanization has an impact on
evaporation and infiltration, modifies the
runoff regime and the chemical composi¬
tion of the water, and loads it with
pollutants that are in many cases toxic. In
some regions the catchment basins of rivers
have already been and continue to be
transformed by human activity.
The consequence is a drop in Spring
flooding and flooding caused by rainfall.
The area of naturally irrigated land is
reduced, while the salinity of the water in- 1

Below, a mangrove swamp in El Salvador.
The mangrove is a tropical tree that flou¬
rishes in estuaries and swamps where
fresh water mixes with the salty ocean
and no other tree can grow. As it grows it
sends down roots from its branches.
Mangrove swamps were once considered
wastelands, but their environmental
Importance and their economic potential
are now recognized. Their leafy canopies
and maze of roots constitute unique
ecosystems sheltering an astonishing
array of bird, insect and marine life. They
are also an important source of timber,
fuel, fisheries, fertilizer and other pro¬
ducts. In collaboration with the Interna¬
tional Council ofScientific Unions (ICSU),
Unesco is conducting a research and
training programme to promote the ratio¬
nal utilization and conservation of man¬
grove ecosystems in different parts of the
world.
Lake Baikal, in the southern part of east¬
ern Siberia, is the world's deepest lake
and a unique living museum of aquatic
plant and animal life. Some 25 million
years old, it contains about one fifth of
the fresh water on the Earth's surface,
and is 636 km long with an average width
of 48 km. Its area is 31,500 sq km. More
than 300 rivers flow Into the lake. Most of
the outflow is through the Angara river
which flows out from the southwest coast
of the lake, shown in photo.
creases in the river mouths.' Many streams
and rivers disappear forever. As a conse¬
quence of the construction of reservoirs,
sluices and tapping facilities, river flow is
diminished, water quality is radically
changed, and the exchange of water bet¬
ween land and sea is accordingly slowed
down. Effects on the environment are
negative, especially as regards humidity and
air temperature.
If, as certain scientific data now suggest,
the climate of the globe is changing, the
heat and water balance of the continents
and their water resources will undergo
major changes.
In recent years there have been major ef¬
forts to improve domestic and industrial
fresh water supplies. In addition to progress
in techniques for desalting sea water,
several projects have been mooted for off¬
setting the water penury of certain regions:
the transport of icebergs, a more extensive
use of glaciers, long-distance transfer of
water by tankers and by aqueducts.
Successes achieved so far provide
grounds for a certain degree of optimism.
But massive efforts will be required to solve
these regional water supply problems, and
ultimately these are bound to affect the
geographical distribution of population
and industries.
We live at a time when progress in the
Earth sciences is such that environmental
change can be foreseen and this knowledge
can provide the scientific basis for a
strategy for the utilization of natural
resources and notably for the wise manage¬
ment of the hydrological regime and water
resources as the most important and effec¬
tive lever for modifying natural processes.
It is for the world scientific community to
unite in the search for a solution to this
urgent problem.
GRIGORI VOROPAYEV, of the Soviet
Union, is a corresponding member of the
USSR Academy of Sciences and director of its
Institute ofHydrology. A member of the USSR
National Committee for Unesco's Interna¬
tional Hydrological Programme, he is the
author of some 170 books and studies on
problems of water including a monograph on
the Physical and Geographical Principles of
Water Supply in Agriculture.
