m.
An international competition
for young architects
AS part of its activities to mark International Youth Year,
Unesco, in collaboration with the International Union of
Architects, has organized a world competition for young
architects on the theme "Tomorrow's Habitat". Seventy-two
countries announced that they would participate in the competi¬
tion and would organize a national competition to select five pro¬
jects from among works submitted by students of architecture
and young architects under the age of thirty-five.
Entrants were required to submit a project on two boards, each
measuring 700 mm by 1,000 mm, showing their design for a
model dwelling set in the socio-cultural context of their country,
in harmony with their environment and taking into account the
most appropriate scientific and technological advances.
In May 1 984 an eight-member international jury met at Unesco
Headquarters in Paris to choose ten prizewinning entries from
among those selected in the national competitions. According to
the terms of the competition, the winning projects were to be built
in model form and exhibited in the "World Peace PavilionThe
United Nations Family" at the international exhibition being held
at Tsukuba, Japan, from 17 March to 16 September 1985. The
main theme of the exhibition is "Dwellings and Surroundings-
Science and Technology for man at home". With the co¬
operation of Japan Airlines, a two-week trip to Tokyo and
"Tsukuba Expo.85" was awarded by Unesco to the ten prizewin¬
ners. (In the case of a group project, the team is to select its
representative for the trip).
In its assessment of the entries, the Jury noted that "The whole
concept of the future and the notion of 'tomorrow' differ from one
socio-cultural context to another... Many architects admit that it
is difficult even to design contemporary housing fully consonant
with the needs and aspirations of today's men and women.
Moreover, it has to be borne in mind that tomorrow's habitat is
being built today, using the theoretical and technical knowledge
of our time, and that in many countries such a habitat can only
be created by adapting a greater or lesser proportion of the ex¬
isting stock of buildings.
"The many projects submitted... reveal that the different coun¬
tries are motivated by a great variety of concerns. Apart from the
purely Utopian or dream-world projects, there are a large number
of entries that show some degree of realism and demonstrate
that young architects are concerned not only with the way their
project fits into its environment but also with how it fits in with
society. Furthermore, many projects indicate that the training of
architects has undergone extreme diversification over the past
few years and that many schools in developing countries are now
showing a great deal of intellectual independence and a com¬
plete awareness of the specific features of the socio-cultural con¬
text in the country or region in which their graduates will have to
work."
The prizewinning projects are presented from page 8 to page
17. They are preceded by a text, beginning this page, in which
the president of the jury, Kenzo Tange, describes his conception
of architecture and urbanism. Quotations in captions accompa¬
nying the projects are from texts written by the entrants
themselves.

