Occupation of the Yuanmingyuan or sum¬
merpalace by British and French troops in
1860, before the palace was destroyed by
fire. This imperial residence was situated
on Lake Kunming, northwest of Beijing.
ühx-kííü u3 '&mm.

A ¿* *
The sack of the Summer Palace
To Captain Butler
Hauteville House,
25 November, 1861
You ask my opinion, Sir, about the China
expedition. You consider this expedition to
be honourable and glorious, and you have
the kindness to attach some consideration
to my feelings; according to you, the China
expedition, carried out jointly under the
flags of Queen Victoria and the Emperor
Napoleon, is a glory to be shared between
France and England, and you wish to know
how much approval I feel I can give to this
English and French victory.
Since you wish to know my opinion, here
it is:
There was, in a corner of the world, a
wonder of the world ; this wonder was called
the Summer Palace. Art has two principles,
the Idea, which produces European art, and
the Chimera, which produces oriental art.
The Summer Palace was to chimerical art
what the Parthenon is to ideal art. All that
can be begotten of the imagination of an
almost extra-human people was there. It
was not a single, unique work like the Parth¬
enon. It was a kind of enormous model of
the chimera, if the chimera can have a mod¬
el. Imagine some inexpressible construc¬
tion, something like a lunar building, and
you will have the Summer Palace. Build a
dream with marble, jade, bronze and porce¬
lain, frame it with cedar wood, cover it with
precious stones, drape it with silk, make it
here a sanctuary, there a harem, elsewhere
a citadel, put gods there, and monsters,
varnish it, enamel it, gild it, paint it, have
architects who are poets build the thousand
and one dreams of the thousand and one
nights, add gardens, basins, gushing water
and foam, swans, ibis, peacocks, suppose in
a word a sort of dazzling cavern of human
fantasy with the face of a temple and palace,
such was this building. The slow work of
generations had been necessary to create it.
This edifice, as enormous as a city, had been
built by the centuries, for whom? For the
peoples. For the work of time belongs to
man. Artists, poets and philosophers knew
the Summer Palace; Voltaire talks of it.
People spoke of the Parthenon in Greece,
the pyramids in Egypt, the Coliseum in
Rome, Notre-Dame in Paris, the Summer
Palace in the Orient. If people did not see it
they imagined it. It was a kind of
tremendous unknown masterpiece, glimp¬
sed from the distance in a kind of twilight,
like a silhouette of the civilization of Asia
on the horizon of the civilization of Europe.
This wonder has disappeared.
One day two bandits entered the Summer
Palace. One plundered, the other burned.
Victory can be a thieving woman, or so it
seems. The devastation of the Summer
Palace was accomplished by the two victors
acting jointly. Mixed up in all this is the
name of Elgin, which inevitably calls to
mind the Parthenon. What was done to the
Parthenon was done to the Summer Palace,
more thoroughly and better, so that nothing
of it should be left. All the treasures of all
our cathedrals put together could not equal
this formidable and splendid museum of the .
Orient. It contained not only masterpieces
of art, but masses of jewelry. What a great
exploit, what a windfall! One of the two
victors filled his pockets; when the other
saw this he filled his coffers. And back they
came to Europe, arm in arm, laughing
away. Such is the story of the two bandits.
We Europeans are the civilized ones, and
for us the Chinese are the barbarians. This
is what civilization has done to barbarism.
Before history, one of the two bandits
will be called France; the other will be
called England. But I protest, and I thank
you for giving me the opportunity! the
crimes of those who lead are not the fault of
those who are led; Governments are some¬
times bandits, peoples never.
The French empire has pocketed half of
this victory, and today with a kind of prop¬
rietorial naivety it displays the splendid
bric-à-brac of the Summer Palace. I hope
that a day will come when France, delivered
and cleansed, will return this booty to de¬
spoiled China.
Meanwhile, there is a theft and two
thieves.
I take note.
This, Sir, is how much approval I give to
the China expedition.
Victor Hugo
15
