The Lay of Igor's Campaign
by Igor Shkliarevsky
THE barbarian hordes flooded across
the steppes, breaking like waves
against the wooden walls of the cit¬
ies of ancient Russia.
From his post atop the ramparts the
sentinel raised the alarm: "The Khazars!"
His son in turn cried out: "The Pech-
enegs!"
His grandson echoed: "The Polovtsy!"
And again and again their descendants
would take up the cry. Such was the nature
of things...
With no roof but the sky, no shelter
but the light of day, southern Russia was
a tempting, easy prey. Unwelcome guests
One of a series of engravings by the
Soviet artist Vladimir Favorsky (1886-
1964), Lenin Prize winner in 1962, illus¬
trating a re-edition of The Lay of Igor's
Campaign issued in 1954. It depicts a
scene towards the end of the poem when
Prince Igor's wife Yaroslavna begs the
powers of heaven to bring Igor back to
Russian soil:
Yaroslavna weeps in the early morn
On the walls of Putivl wailing:
"Wind, O wind!
Why blow, my lord, such a stormy
blast?
Why do you bring on your wings so
light
Pagan arrows down on my lover's
host?
Were you not sated with blowing
High up under the clouds,
And with rocking ships upon the blue
sea?
Why have you scattered my joy, O my
Over the feather grass?" lord'
hammered at the gates of Pereyaslav, of
Chernigov, of Kiev with their heavy sling-
stones. Burning arrows flew. Walls
crumbled. A grassy shroud covered and
recovered the charred ruins.
Nor was the suffering any the less when
inflicted by kinsmen, when the people of
Novgorod marched against Kiev, or the
people of Kiev took up arms against Cher¬
nigov.
For brother spoke to brother
Saying,
"This is mine,
And that, too, is mine!"
And the princes began
To call small things great,
To forge feuds
Among themselves...
to the despair of chroniclers over the cen¬
turies...
Whose was the hand that recorded The
Lay of Igor's Campaign? Did he live to
be an old man? What happened to him
after he had written The Layl Nobody
knows, but he was certainly a man of rare
courage, proclaiming out loud what others
dared but think. For a prince has his armies
and his ramparts, but a poet is without
defence...
He foretold the misfortunes that would
strike the land of Russia over many cen¬
turies. With a prophetic ear to the ground
he heard the muffled, drumming hoofbeats
of the Mongol horsemen, whose thirst for
conquest could have dried up whole rivers.
He could not know that far across the
steppes Genghis Khan was forging his
empire, but he had the political intuition
of a great poet.
A heavy sense of brooding anguish per¬
meates The Lay of Igor's Campaign. The
Russian town of Glebov has been sacked,
its defenders hacked to pieces. As though
a fiery brand from Glebov in flames had
set light to his raiment, Igor Svyatoslavich,
Prince of Novgorod, burns with shame.
The state of the roads at winter's end has
prevented him from joining the other Rus¬
sian princes who have taken up arms
against the Polovtsy.
Igor is racked with fear that the princes
will doubt the sincerity of his will to join
the expedition. He is tortured by his ambi¬
tion and his desire to prove his valour and
to make amends for failing to answer the
call of the motherland. Hastily he prepares
to venture forth alone on the Polovtsian
steppe.
At dawn on the day of battle the enemy
seemed to Igor's men like a great forest
advancing upon them. The enemy leader
Khan Konchak had mustered all his troops.
Another chronicler recounts that the
princes could still have forced their way
through the enemy and galloped to safety,
but they would not desert their foot-
soldiers and common men-at-arms. Igor
ordered the horsemen to dismount and
fight on foot.
This defeat of a prince of Novgorod,
which was to be of little consequence in
the history of Russia, is transformed by
the poetic genius of the author into a great
moral victory. A great poetic epic is born.
Plains, forests, steppes, the whole Rus¬
sian landscape becomes a living presence
in The Lay of Igor's Campaign. Stretching
out to the horizon can be seen the rapids
of the Dnieper, the sandbanks of the Don, ^

il fcá m my
il
t "* Ä
^H j^H ^^k ^|
Left, fwo scenes from a performance at
Moscow's Bolshoi Theatre of Prince Igor,
Borodin's famous opera inspired by the
great epic of ancient Russian literature
Slovo o Polku Igoreve (The Lay of Igor's
Campaign). Written during the 12th cen¬
tury and rediscovered six centuries later,
The Lay recounts an incident that was of
only minor importance in Russian his¬
tory Svyatoslavich's ill-fated expe¬
dition against the Polovtsy in 1185.
Despite doubts that have been expressed
by some as to its authenticity as a medi¬
eval document, this epic poem, some
3,000 words in length, is universally rec¬
ognized as a masterpiece of world lit¬
erature. For the Soviet expert on Slav cul¬
ture Andrei Nicolayevich Robinson, the
originality of The Lay lies in its rich sym¬
bolism and its powerful nationalist under¬
current. He writes: "The Lay of Igor's
Campaign occupies the middle ground,
in the geographical, historical and poetic
senses alike, between the epics of West
and East, and also between two periods,
the archaic (pagan) and the feudal (...) The
poetic originality of The Lay derives in
part from its author's use of ancient Rus¬
sian folk poetry (...) The basic symbols
of the heroic poetry of the Middle Ages
can in many instances be traced back to
a distant myth-making epoch character¬
ized by an animistic attitude to nature and
its interaction with human beings (...)
Through the force of his poetry the author
of The Lay tried to take a stand against
the feudal division of Russia (...) The
inspired idealization of reality in the lyrical
epic, combined with an uncharacteristic
criticism of that reality, are recognizable
in a large perspective as that civic sense
which is an important feature of Russian
literature."
grass-covered kurgans (burial
mounds), the wooden walls of Novgorod,
Polotsk and Kiev the entire expanse of
twelfth-century Russia. Above this
expanse, like a man with winged sandals,
his face reddened by wind, soars the author
of The Lay.
The original manuscript of The Lay,
discovered by Count Alexei Musin-Push-
kin (1744-1817), perished in the burning
of Moscow in 1812. The words of The Lay
writhed in the flames like living things. A
little of the soul of Russia perished with
them. All that remained was the copy made
by Musin-Pushkin for Catherine II, as well
as the poignant saying: "Manuscripts never
burn completely".
Doubt has been cast on the authenticity
of the text, yet the more one reads The
Lay the more evident it becomes that even
a poet of the stature of Pushkin could not
have composed it. How could anyone have
imitated the language and rhythms of the
twelfth century or captured with such
immediacy the excitement of the hap¬
penings of the period.
If The Lay was really written early in
the'eighteenth century, how are we to
explain the author's hostility to the Polov¬
tsy, six hundred years later? Only a con¬
temporary who had witnessed their incur¬
sions and who had known the smell of fire
and blood in the air could be capable of
such intensity of feeling. The Polovtsy have
long disappeared, fused in the great melt¬
ing-pot of peoples. Even during the twelfth
century, in times of truce and peace, blood
links had been forged between the Russian
princes and the Polovtsian khans. As The
Lay itself tells us, marriages "between
steppe and forest" were not unusual.
Behind the anonymous author of The
Lay an entire people stands revealed. The
poet has achieved a great exploit. Tau
tening his genius like a bow, he let fly
across the centuries the courage-tipped
arrows of his thoughts. In this poem, now
eight centuries old, all is movement, all
is life the fighting men, the clouds above,
the birds, the wind, the grass and the
words. The Lay is an integral part of our
language. It is in the air we breathe and
in the blood that flows in our veins. It
teaches us to love our country, but also
to maintain a wide perspective, to be for¬
giving and to respect other peoples.
IGOR IVANOVICH SHKLIAREVSKY, of the
Soviet Union, is the author of fifteen volumes
of poetry and a book of short stories entitled
The Shadow of a Bird. He has also translated
into modern Russian such important classics
as The Lay of Igor's Campaign and The Saga
of the Battle of Mamaev.
18
