Scandinavia
How to be a good host
by Carolyn Swetland
HOW are migrants adapting to life
in the Scandinavian countries? To
understand the problems of adap¬
tation that migrants face it might be better
to turn the question round and ask: How
are Scandinavians adapting to the presence
of migrants?
Scandinavians tend to think of migrant
workers as being people from Third World
countries, whereas in fact migrant workers
coming from other Scandinavian countries,
Europe and North America are far more
numerous.
During the economic upswing in Europe
during the 1960s Third World migrant
workers were encouraged to come to the
Scandinavian countries by open-door gov¬
ernmental policies aided by active labour
recruitment by private employers. Many
workers came from India, Pakistan and
Bangladesh, with Pakistani's now forming
the largest group (about 7,500).
Just as labour was recruited when it was
needed, so its entry was halted when it
was not. Norway was the last Scandinavian
country to call a halt to immigration (in
1975), but it did so with certain dispen¬
sations which permitted free movement of
labour within the Scandinavian countries
and provided certain special preferential
arrangements for North Americans.
Thus, until some five years ago the Third
World migrant was perceived as an eco¬
nomic element, but now he has become
an ethnic element. Coming from the Third
World and still attached to it in the eyes
of both officials and the public, he is a
"Third World problem" and, in a certain
sense, he is supposed to remain one. An
Indian immigrant, now a school psychol¬
ogist, was asked to provide some migrants
for a radio programme (the broadcasting
station was government owned and con¬
trolled). When he suggested himself as one
of them he was told: "Not you! You are
a successful migrant!"
The ban on Third World immigration
and the arrival of wives and children
changed the situation. The unaccompanied
male worker who, it was assumed, would
eventually return home when no longer
needed, had become a family man appar¬
ently there to stay. This not only affected
the structural situation in the Scandinavian
countries, but also attitudes towards immi¬
grants.
Structurally the Scandinavian States
define the migrant community as an ethnic
minority, their culture as a minority culture
Cover of Immigranten - The Immigrant,
a bilingual (Norwegian-English) quarterly
produced and published by the Immi¬
granten Collective, Oslo. "Norway is not
only for the Norwegians" proclaims the
poster carried by the little girl.
THE IMMIGRANT
>i. j ^im jh. »,-
z*PL
I
©
" <
and their language as a minority language.
They have created various institutions
exclusively concerned with migrants, such
as housing institutions, separate employ¬
ment offices and separate youth clubs, and
subsidized migrants' own organizations as
well as mother-tongue and two-culture
classes in schools and so on. Under this
policy of cultural pluralism, as it has come
to be called, ethnic differentiation has not
only been endorsed, but also encouraged.
What has been the outcome of this dif¬
ferentiation?
Once the migrant becomes eligible for
it, family housing is normally available
either in the older sections in the centres
of Scandinavian cities or, more recently,
in new suburban housing areas in the out¬
skirts. These areas are not limited exclu¬
sively to migrants, but in practice a high
percentage of migrant families live in them
since they are directed there by the housing
institutions to which they have to turn for
help in finding accommodation. It is not
uncommon to find that as much as 85 per
cent of the population of these areas con¬
sists of immigrants with the remaining 15
per cent being made up of Scandinavians,
including a number of Scandinavian girls
who have married migrants.
The phrase "once the migrant becomes
eligible for it" calls for some explanation.
In Norway, for example, there is a curious
ruling that an immigrant cannot bring his
wife until he has family housing, and he
is not eligible for family housing unless his
wife is there!
Separate employment offices for
migrants result in the sifting and control
of re-employment opportunities, job pref¬
erences and training programmes.
Migrants working on North Sea oil rigs are
a special case. Since the rigs are classified
as "ships" they are not subject to the
labour legislation that prevails on land.
Spaniards working on them are often
28

''- \ 1. :'f. ' W
recruited in Rotterdam, taken out directly
by boat and never set foot on Norwegian
soil. As a result these workers do not figure
in Norwegian labour statistics.
State subsidization of migrants' own
organizations led to the destruction of the
original single-organization system which
for a time offered a united front in defence
of migrants' interests. In Norway, for
example, the plurality of subsidies has
resulted in twenty-six separate and distinct
Indian organizations receiving State funds
for a total Indian population of a little over
two thousand. Ethnic youth clubs are also
given financial support.
The policy of cultural pluralism may give
the impression that all cultures are free
to flourish on an equal basis in the Scan¬
dinavian countries. But is this the case in
the schools?
The debate on the pros and cons of
mother-tongue teaching in schools is far
from being resolved. Without exception
the migrants' own organizations demand
mother-tongue teaching. Migrant parents
demand proficiency in the language of the
host country.
The State and local authorities make
proposals that chop and change from year
to year. A two-teacher, two-language, two-
culture class system is established for
grades 1 to 9. Two years later it is restricted
to grades 1 to 3. A series of changes and
new proposals that were later withdrawn
provoked one migrant father, himself a
Immigrant girls in Norway. The first signs
of adaptation to a culture which will soon
confront their own?
two-culture class teacher, to voice the opin¬
ion of many migrant parents when he
declared: "We want an end to experi¬
mentation in the teaching of migrant chil¬
dren."
Throughout all this the goal presumably
remains the same to educate migrant chil¬
dren in such a way as to place them on
an equal footing and to make them com¬
petitive with indigenous children when
they leave school. However, to be com¬
petitive with Scandinavian children the
migrant child has to know three languages.
Even a Swede, a Dane or a Norwegian
has to learn English in addition to his
mother tongue if he is to obtain anything
other than a menial job. Learning the lan¬
guage of the country in which he lives and
works, when that language is itself a minor¬
ity language, does not take the migrant
child very far. It could even be argued that,
apart from acquiring a minimum of nec¬
essary phrases in the language of the host
country, the migrant would do better to
become proficient in English.
No matter how well intentioned the
thinking behind it may be, cultural plu¬
ralism has differentiation as its starting
point and defines the migrant on an ethnic-
minority basis. And it is the host country
that defines what a minority culture is.
Today's man is a migrant. If he is treated
as a member of a minority when he arrives
in a white industrialized country, it is
because he has been ethnically labelled.
That he is part of a minority group in a
particular host country is one thing. For
him to be treated as a member of a minority
is another.
The Third World migrant, often a for¬
mer colonial subject, no longer sees him¬
self as he was taught to, that is to say, with
reference to the white industrial world, to
the white model. His models are changing.
The trouble lies in the fact that the former
model seems to be unaware of this change.
A migrant, as opposed to a man who
has never moved, is a highly adapted and
adaptable person. He has to be. In order
to survive he has had to learn the ins and
outs of other nations' cultures, languages,
income tax and social security systems. The
problem of adapting does not rest, and
never has rested with the migrant.
CAROLYN SWETLAND, Norwegian anthro¬
pologist, is a specialist and lecturer on migration
problems. She is the author of several studies
and articles including "The Ghetto of the Soul"
(Unesco, 1978) and "Migrant Workers, Lan¬
guage and Culture: Ethnolinguistic Models"
(Unesco, 1981).
29
