Tibet's Ge-sar epic
by Mireille Helffer
Recent Tibetan wood-cut depicting Ge-sar as the warrior-god.
FROM the land of the Burushaski in the
west to Mongolia in the east, In all the
regions where Tibetan civilization pre¬
vails, the oral as well as the written tradition
has preserved the name of a hero, Ge-sar,
whose exploits fill an epic cycle (sgrung)
which has many ramifications.
The name "Ge-sar" of course brings to
mind the title of the Caesars In the Medi¬
terranean world and Byzantium. But there
may also have been a historical Ge-sar,
whose existence is doubted by Tibetologists,
although coins recently discovered show that
there was in the ninth century a certain
Phromo Gesaro, who is thought to have been
one of the sovereigns of Gandhara (in what
is now northwestern Pakistan). Chinese and
Tibetan documents also mention a Gru-gu
Ge-sar, possibly a reference to the Turkish
tribes of Central Asia, and a Ge-sar of Gling,
who was connected with the kingdom of that
name to the east of Tibet. The latter term,
Gling, could be understood as an abbrevia¬
tion of 'Dzambu-gling, which means "the
world" in Tibetan.
In any case, the Ge-sar of the epic appears
in turn as a king of armies, a universal sov¬
ereign who overcomes the demons of the
points of the compass, and a god of war to
whom worship is paid, and even a Buddha.
The many episodes that illustrate the
exceptional qualities of Ge-sar include the
miraculous birth of the hero, who was the
son of a celestial father and a mother who
was the daughter of a divinity of the under¬
world; his unhappy childhood; his accession
to the throne of Gling and his marriage, after
a horse-race; his victorious combats with Klu-
btsan, the demon of the north, Gur-dkar king
of the Hor, Shing-khri king of the Mon, and
Sa-tham king of the 'Jang.
In addition to these main episodes there
were others, in an order that is not clear
the conquest of the Stag-gzig, Kashmir,
China, and the four great and eight small
30

castles, and indeed of the eighteen castles,
and the descent into hell.
We have manuscript or wood engraving
versions of most of these episodes, which
take up tens of thousands of pages. A printed
version, which is in Mongolian but is based
on a Tibetan original, appeared in Beijing in
1716. And around the middle of the nine¬
teenth century Tibetan scholars contributed
much to the development of Ge-sar and the
production of a version of the epic.
Tibetans today are again becoming inte¬
rested in the man they regard as a national
hero, and their interest has been stimulated
by the many re-editions brought out in India
and Bhutan as well as In the People's Repub¬
lic of China.
The dissemination of the epic in written
form did not put a stop to the oral tradition,
which remained alive thanks to the singers
of epics who were known as sgrung-mkhan.
Some of these singers were thought to have
been possessed by one of the characters
of the epic; sometimes they went into a trance
and maintained that they knew the epic
without having learned it, by direct inspi¬
ration. Others took lessons from teachers;
and yet others, who were mere amateurs,
used books that they had obtained or that
someone had read to them.
If we examine the sound recordings that
have been made in the last forty years, we
can see that those who sang the praises of
Ge-sar, whatever training they had had and
wherever they came from, alternated prose
tales, rapidly recounted, and strophic songs
composed of lines containing seven or eight
syllables, in which, in accordance with immu¬
table conventions, the characters introduce
themselves, state where they are, and des¬
cribe the situation, pronouncing many
adages.
Few sgrung-mkhan now sing the praises
of Ge-sar in Mongolia and Bhutan, but there
are quite a number of them in Ladakh, and
according to information obtained in August
1984 they had recently held a meeting at
Rtse-thang, in the Autonomous Region of
Tibet. One of the twenty participants, who
attracted special attention was an illiterate
young woman of twenty-five, a native of
Byang-thang. She knew by heart some sixty
chapters of the epic, which she had learned
from her father, who had died in 1968.
This confirms, if any confirmation were
needed, the vitality of the epic of Ge-sar in
the Tibetan context, and gives us reason to
hope that a systematic study of the ways in
which It has been handed down can be
undertaken in the near future.
MIREILLE HELFFER, of France, is a director
of research at the Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique , Paris. An ethno-musi-
cologist and a specialist on the music and mus¬
ical notations of Tibetan Buddhist ritual, she is
the author of Les Chants dans l'Epopée Tibé¬
taine de Ge-sar, (The Songs of the Epic of Ge-
sar, 1977) and has made two records, Castes
de Musiciens au Népal (Musicians' Castes in
Nepal) and Ladakh, Musique de Monastère et
de Village (Ladakh, Music of Monastery and
Village).
The Tibetan srung-mkhanfep/c singer)
Rin-chen Dar-rgyas, photographed in
1956.
'V ?* Vu
