Women under apartheid
'A triple oppression' by Caroline Flepp
IN the Republic of South Africa women
constitute the category of the popu¬
lation most seriously affected by the
apartheid system. They are subject to a
triple oppression: as women and on the
grounds of "race" and of class.
By adopting the principles of the patriar¬
chal society, the apartheid system has ac¬
centuated the subjection of women. Some
of the rights they had in pre-colonial days,
such as the right to work, which in rural
areas consisted traditionally of gathering
fruit and working the fields, have been
taken from them. In some regions, where it
did not exist before, the White authorities
have even legalized polygamy. In other
regions they have re-introduced corporal
punishment.
Apartheid pushes to its extreme the divi¬
sion of labour between men and women;
men, the producers, are employed in the
White economy, whereas women, the non-
producers, are confined to the Bantustans
(the "States" reserved for the Black
populations), their only right being to
reproduce an African labour force.
To say that they are "confined" is no ex¬
aggeration; they cannot leave the Ban¬
tustans because they are forbidden to take
up residence in the White zones. If they do,
they are liable to a fine or imprisonment. A
woman who enters one of these zones to
visit her husband can only stay for seventy-
two hours. The White authorities fear that
the permanent presence of these women in
the White areas would lead to the installa
tion of a Black urban population that would
then demand permanent residence permits
as well as other rights at present denied to
them.
Apartheid means the systematic destruc¬
tion of the family unit, which forms the
basis of classic capitalist society. In the
Republic of South Africa, a society, it can
never be repeated often enough, unlike any
other, everything is done to prevent the
Blacks from leading a normal family life.
Thus women are looked upon by the
Whites as nothing more or less than
superfluous hangers-on. Half the female
population lives in the Black reserves
among all the other "undesirables" of the
apartheid systemchildren, the sick, the.
elderly and the handicapped as well as those
rejected as trouble-makers, such as militant
union men and strikers.
Most of these women live on money sent
to them by their husbands out of the
miserable wages they earn working in the
White zones. It should be remembered that
Black workers are all treated as bachelors
and are therefore consistently underpaid,
since, according to the curious logic of the
system, the Bantustans are held responsible
for meeting the costs of maintaining their
families.
Exodus from the city, In Pretoria,
Republic of South Africa
Many women, however, receive nothing
from their husbands and sometimes lose all
trace of them. In the Bantustans, the educa¬
tion of the children is undertaken by the
women. In the absence of a hospital system,
the infant mortality rate is one of the
highest in the world with nearly one child in
two dying before the age of five, chiefly
from malnutrition.
In order to survive the women cultivate a
plot of land or work on a White man's farm
for the lowest wages paid anywhere in
South Africa. Otherwise they become
nurses or teachers.
In 1974, a Black nurse earned two-thirds
of the salary of a White nurse. Women
teachers earn ten per cent less than their
male colleagues. Their training is inade¬
quate; in 1978, out of seventy thousand
African teachers, only two hundred and
forty had diplomas.
To escape from this wretched, lonely life,
the women ignore the prohibitions and go
and settle in ghettos near the White towns.
The know that in coming to the towns they
run a big risk of being deported. Of the
three million Africans who have been for¬
cibly expelled from the urban areas the vast
majority are women.
The reason they go to the White areas is
to live with their husbands or to try to find
them. Some of the ghettos in which they
have settled, such as the Crossroads settle¬
ment, near Cape Town, which has a popula¬
tion of some twenty thousand, have surviv¬
ed thanks to the determination of the

women. Men and women live there
together, but this is not always possible.
Everything is done to try to separate them.
The Whites have built a number of hostels
for bachelors, but these, in fact, are oc¬
cupied by married couples who have
children. However, the women who live
there are not allowed to keep their children
with them and they have to send them back
to the reserves.
As far as work is concerned these women
have little choice since most of them have
had no education or professional training.
In the mid-1970s there was not a single
African woman judge, lawyer, magistrate,
engineer, architect, veterinary surgeon,
chemist or pharmacist.
The only possibility open to them is to
work for a White family as domestic ser¬
vants. The conditions of work for a
domestic servant in the Republic of South
Africa are tantamount to slavery. They
work sixty hours a week, on average, but
some work as many as eighty-five hours a
week. A third of them work seven days a
week for a pittance.
In the Republic of South Africa a
family Is evicted under the
Group Areas Act.
Furthermore, domestic servants are
housed in huts at the bottom of their
employers' garden and are strictly forbid¬
den to have their husbands and children
living there with them. In the past they were
allowed to keep their children with them up
to the age of three or four, but nowadays
that is strictly forbidden. They are therefore
unable to care for their own infant children,
a particularly cruel predicament for women
who spend their days looking after White
children. On top of all this there is no
legislation to protect them and they are not
permitted to join a union.
Women also work in the textile, food,
dress-making and canning industries in
which there are no fixed hours, no social
security and no guaranteed minimum
wages. Sexism is often sanctioned by
legislation, as, for example, in the textile in¬
dustry where a twenty per cent difference in
"The problem of improving the situation
of women In Africa Is inextricably linked
with the problem of poverty and can only
be resolved if we first tackle the latter (...)
A human being cannot walk very far or
very fast on one leg. How, then, can we
expect half the population of a country to
be capable of ensuring its development?
Yet, in fact, when it is a matter of discuss¬
ing development questions or of taking
decisions on methods of implementing
development projects, women are
generally left out of it..."
Julius Nyerere
President of the United
Republic of Tanzania
wages between men and women is decreed
by law. Women who become pregnant are
liable to instant dismissal and may even be
sent back to a Bantustan. On average,
African women workers earn less than half
as much as their partners and eighty per
cent less than White men.
Suffering from the evil effects of apar¬
theid not only in their daily lives but also in
their very bodies, women took up the strug¬
gle against the system very early on and
their role in that struggle has been very
important.
Their first combat, in 1913, was against
the pass laws which limited their freedom of
movement. This was one of the high peaks
of their struggle when for the first time they
began to organize themselves. A key princi¬
ple was at stake. The women knew that by
being obliged to carry a special pass they
were effectively being forbidden either to
live with their husbands in the White zones
or to work there; in other words, this meant
their seclusion in the reserves. For years
African women refused to carry these
passes which they burnt in public. They
demonstrated in the streets and were beaten
up and imprisoned in their hundreds by the
police.
The movement reached its culminating
point on 9 August 1956. On that day twenty
thousand women, of every "race",
gathered in Pretoria from every part of the
country, despite the dangers of the journey
and transport difficulties, bringing with
them over 100,000 petitions.
Despite this powerful mobilization of
forces, they were eventually obliged to yield
when the government decreed that it was
obligatory to have a pass in order to obtain
a job, to go to hospital, to receive a pension
or to register the birth of a child.
On 1 February 1963, the pass laws finally
came into force, but it had taken the
government fifty years to impose its will.B
CAROLINE FLEPP Is a French journalist and
heads the French Anti-Apartheid Movement.
This article is based on a speech she made on
International Women's Day, 8 March 1985, at
the invitation of the International StaffAssoci¬
ation of Unesco.
15
