Basque literature
and the oral tradition
by Juan Mari Lekuona
THE oral and the written tradition are
intimately Intermingled in Basque lit¬
erature. For those who know it well,
there is not a shadow of a doubt that Basque
literature is as rich and varied as that of any
other people, that it is just as fertile in original,
authentic literary forms, and that the oral
tradition is the vector of the essence of
Basque culture.
Coupled with this keen awareness of the
oral tradition is a realistic appreciation of writ¬
ten literature, which is seen as being a late¬
comer, neither very abundant nor fully rep¬
resentative, yet, at the same time, essential
to the very survival of the language and to
its adaptation to the demands of modern life.
Although this state of affairs is today widely
recognized, this was not always the case and
a glance back at the past may help us to
appreciate better the present complemen¬
tarity of these two forms of Basque literary
expression.
Under the impetus of the Renaissance
and the religious trends of the time, the six¬
teenth and the seventeenth centuries wit¬
nessed the publication of the first texts in
the Basque language. The output was very
small and was virtually confined to the north¬
ern or French-Basque region, as it was
called; this region was socially less devel¬
oped than the Spanish-Basque area where,
at the time, published material was virtually
limited to catechisms for parish use.
At that time oral expression was pre¬
dominant. Books containing religious texts
and texts for religious instruction were usually
read aloud in church to the congregation. In
preparing these books, their authors, bearing
in mind the instructional purposes to which
they were to be put, deliberately adopted the
forms and styles of oral literature.
These texts, which were both written and
spoken, became part of the collective mem¬
ory, colouring even popular forms of expres¬
sion; they were transplants grafted, as it
were, on to the language by educated reli¬
gious minorities.
The first written collections of oral texts,
gathered in both of the Basque regions and
consisting of old songs, refrains and popular
sayings, also date back to this period. Apart
from their inestimable value in tracing the
linguistic and literary development of the lan¬
guage, these collections also bear witness
to the vigour of the poetic forms and the
quality of the literary tradition from the Ren¬
aissance to the Baroque period.
During the two following centuries the links
between oral and written literature underwent
a transformation in the southern provinces
of Guipúzcoa, during the eighteenth century,
and Vizcaya, during the nineteenth century.
Literature flourished and the production of
published works outstripped that of the north¬
ern region.
The increase in the proportion of non-
religious books, accompanied by a rise in
the cultural level and a more pronounced
taste for the classics in the creation of oral
works, led to a new relationship between the
two forms of literature. Written literature was
obliged to turn to oral forms as the prime
source of literary structures and techniques,
whilst the oral tradition, particularly during
the Enlightenment, had to conform more and
more to the rules of written literature if it was
not to lose its topicality or even to disappear
altogether.
It was at this point that written transcrip¬
tions of oral literature began to appear. These
publications, ranging from fly-sheets of
poems by popular poets to magazines, peri¬
odicals and collections of folk tales, were
written versions of what was formerly trans¬
mitted by word of mouth. Forced to adaptx
to the rhythms, the norms and the mech¬
anisms specific to written literature, oral cre¬
ation was obliged to become more precise,
to adopt more complex structures. In so doing
it gave birth to a special branch of Basque
literature, born of the oral tradition but pre-
Taken in 1936, at Rentería, in the Basque
province of Guipúzcoa, this photo shows
a group of the finest Bersolaris (improv-
isers of poems) of the day, gathered
together to pay tribute to one of their num¬
ber, the renowned Txirrita (seated centre,
with walking-stick).
served and brought up to date in the written
word.
Those forms that could be safeguarded
in written form gradually declined, finally dis¬
appearing during the twentieth century.
These included ballads, romances, coplas,
lyric songs, choral and festive compositions,
short plays and other quasi-theatrical forms
which together had made up traditional lit¬
erature.
Modern life has led inexorably to the adop¬
tion of writing as the means of expression
and of preservation of literary works. Yet, in
the Basque language, written output has not
yet achieved the volume, the quality or the
popularity necessary for it to fulfil the func¬
tions that are attributed to literature in the
societies of today. The oral tradition remains
an inexhaustible source of means of expres¬
sion which still has a base broad enough to
allow the universal to be derived from the
particular and to embody the complexity of
the modern world as perceived by the col¬
lective personality.
Thus the twentieth century has witnessed
the forging of a new interdependence
between these two literary traditions. It is
clear that Basque literature can no longer
escape the written form and that it must seek
to achieve the level of the best national lit¬
eratures around it, taking quality as its only
criterion. As knowledge of it grows deeper,
Basque oral literature will become an essen¬
tial reference point for the creation of a mod¬
ern national literature.
In the period just before the Spanish civil
war, the lack of popularity of erudite, minority,
lyric poetry, as compared with the success
of improvised verse, popular theatre and folk
narrative, indicated the need for a redefinition
of cultural policy and a search for a rap¬
prochement with majority forms of expression
more firmly rooted in oral literature.
This trend was maintained in the post-war
period. The oral style, with its functionalism
and its specific rules, became a field of
research for writers seeking to create a new
aesthetic form which would enable them to
make the transition from the specific to the
universal on the basis of the fundamental
elements of their own cultural truths.
JUAN MARI LEKUONA Is professor of Basque
literature at the University of Deusto, Bilbao.
He is a specialist on Basque oral literature on
which he has published a major study, the fruit
of twenty-five years of research. He is also the
author of two volumes of poetry, Muga Beroak
(Deep Frontiers) and llargiaren Eskolan (The
School of the Moon).
33
