Transformation
and tradition
in Mediterranean Europe
by Salvador Giner In the Mediterranean region, traditions
die hard and are reflected in a wide range'
of Institutions and activities, from the
family and social customs to economic
systems. At Hama (Syrian Arab Republic)
magnificent traditional water-wheels, be¬
low, are still used to raise water to the old
houses with f/ie/rmoshrablyyahs (projec¬
ting oriel windows with a wooden lattice).
UNTIL not so long ago, the coun¬
tries of Southern Europe seemed
to be stranded half-way between
the more developed nations and the less
advanced nations. In recent decades,
however, the whole area, has embarked
on a process of political, economic and
cultural integration into the rest of
13

MEDITERRANEAN CITIES
10,000 pop.
500.000 pop.
5,000.000 pop.
LIBYAN
ARAB
JAMAHIRIYA
Map © Plan Bleu pour la Méditerranée. Source: U.N. Demographic Yearbook, 1981

The Mediterranean basin has a long histo¬
ry ofurbanization and is todaygirdledbya
dense network of urban settlements
ranging from small towns to great cities
such as Cairo, Barcelona, Rome, Athens,
Valencia, Istanbul, Marseilles, Alexandria,
Damascus and Algiers. A rapid exodus
from the countryside has led to anarchic
urbanization and widespread shanty-
towns on the outskirts of towns and cities.
Europe, as if Portuguese, Spaniards, Ita¬
lians and Greeks had decided to return on
equal terms to a home which after all is
theirs. Their reintegration into Europe at
a particularly creative moment in its his¬
tory has enriched and revitalized the col¬
lective life of all Europeans. But the
homeward path has been a difficult and
tortuous one.
After a remarkable flowering in the
Middle Ages and an extraordinary Re¬
naissance, the peoples of Southern
Europe experienced a profound reversal
in their fortunes. The Hellenic world had
already fallen victim to Ottoman expan¬
sion, which also seriously affected the
great maritime centres such as Barcelona
and Venice. Although the Atlantic
façade, including the ports of Lisbon and
Seville, would continue to benefit from
imperial and overseas trade, the econo¬
mic decline of the Mediterranean and the
growing prosperity of the North, com¬
bined with the wars of religion, began in
the sixteenth century to shift the centre of
gravity of European history towards
countries further from the south.
Although many features of the modern
world rationalism, science, capital¬
ism have their historical roots in South¬
ern Europe, the ankylosis which afflicted
the region during the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, a decisive period,
had a crucial impact on its precarious
participation in the great transformation
brought about by the industrial revolu¬
tion. The latter, which started in England
14
and soon spread through Belgium, the
Netherlands and northern France, en¬
countered very serious difficulties in tak¬
ing root in Southern Europe. In one of
the paradoxes that are so common in the
history of this part of the world, some
regions, such as Piedmont and Lombardy
in northern Italy and Catalonia in north¬
eastern Spain, succeeded in carrying out
their own industrial revolutions, led by
the enterprising and farsighted local
bourgeoisies of Turin, Milan and Barce¬
lona. But these islands of prosperity and
modernity could not totally transform the
societies of which they were part, so that
they long remained isolated in a world
that must have seemed backward, poor
and, perhaps, relatively uncivilized to
any traveller coming from the north.
Nevertheless, many of the inhabitants
of these countries soon realized that they
were in a tragic situation. As European
peoples they found it incongruous and
even unjust not to participate fully in the
great movement of modernization in
which their neighbours beyond the Alps
and the Pyrenees were engaged. Efforts
to join in this movement were made in the
eighteenth century both in the Iberian
peninsula and in Italy.
It was thus that Southern Europe be¬
came the first part of the world to experi¬
ence an agonizing longing for modernity
and rapid change that would enable it to
catch up with the developed countries.
What was later to become a movement in
which poor or "undeveloped" or "devel
oping" countries (the word backward be¬
came nothing short of taboo) aspired for
their transformation into" "developed",
industrialized, in other words rich coun¬
tries actually began in Southern Europe.
Thus the struggle between modernizing
and conservative forces, between city and
countryside, between the economic in¬
terests of the powerful and the emerging
urban proletariats, which unfolded in
Southern Europe between the middle of
the nineteenth century and the late 1960s,
presents some analogies with what is hap¬
pening today in many countries else¬
where in the world.
During most of the nineteenth century
there was slow, uneven progress towards
a bourgeois parliamentarian society in
the Iberian, Italian and Balkan peninsu¬
las. This process was dominated by oli¬
garchical governments, military coups
d'état and régimes of varying degrees of
despotism. Political life was dominated
by patronage, favouritism and
bureaucratic parasitism. The emerging
industrial bourgeoisies, especially in
Spain and Italy, struggled in vain to im¬
pose a European-style parliamentary sys¬
tem within profoundly agricultural
societies in which the interests of great
landowners either predominated or were
very strongly represented. At the same
time, constant and sometimes violent
repression of the working classes in these
countries led to growing political and
ideological polarization and endemic
class confrontations. The liberal political
CONTINUED PAGE 17

a.
o
S
©
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 14
formula which triumphed in northern
Europe failed in the south. There seemed
to be no place for tolerance, political
pluralism and peaceful rule by the
bourgeoisie, tempered by an opposition
of trade unions and the Left to which
concessions could be made. The political
formula which had brought relative
prosperity and equilibrium to the ad¬
vanced capitalist countries in central and
northwestern Europe seemed to have
failed completely in the countries of the
south.
At the end of the nineteenth century it
seemed as if the progress of industrializa¬
tion and the consolidation of bourgeois
parliamentarian régimes in several
Mediterranean countries would even¬
tually bring these countries closer to the
models of the advanced European coun¬
tries. However, a series of unexpected
reverses sharpened confrontations be¬
tween the different groups and deepened
the fissures which divided these societies.
In spite of attempts to establish republics
in Portugal, Greece and Spain and the
creation in Italy of a parliamentary sys¬
tem open to the socialists, the First World
War exacerbated the internal contradic¬
tions in these countries. Moreover, Euro¬
pean that they were, they had embarked
on, or were destined to embark on, a
series of disastrous colonial wars that di¬
vided them even further: the Spanish war
with the United States in Cuba and the
Philippines in 1898, the later Italian cam¬
paigns against various African countries,
and the Portuguese wars in Africa.
In the decades following the European
Great War which ended in 1918, all these
countries embarked upon various forms
of fascism. Fascism was a Mediterranean

political invention. It was a way of sup¬
pressing popular revolt and imposing
peace through rule by a single party allied
to the upper classes, afraid of losing all
they possessed in the event of an im¬
agined proletarian revolution. Fascism
was, therefore, a retrograde movement
aimed at neutralizing the working classes
by demagogy or terror. It originated in
Southern Europe although, paradoxical¬
ly, it was in the north, in Germany, that it
found its most violent and extreme ex¬
pression.
In the Mediterranean countries of
Europe, really democratic intervals were
few and far between, and consisted of
republican or radical experiments which
the dominant classes, allied with the
military or with semi-fascist or frankly
fascist parties, did not allow to succeed.
Nevertheless, during the same period the
forces of social change were already on
the move. The day would come in all
these countries when the dictatorial, anti¬
democratic régimes would become use¬
less and inadequate for an area of the
European world that had been complete¬
ly transformed.
To some extent the transformation of
the Mediterranean was obscured by these
régimes, which gave too backward an
impression of the societies they encom¬
passed. Italy, and to a lesser extent Spain,
were already minor industrial powers in
the decades before the First World War.
Large-scale industrial enterprises were
created in both countries under the aegis
of fascism, with State capital compensât- N
ing for the lack of private investment.
In the 1950s Italy, which had been
liberated from fascism by the Allies in
1945, became the first country to experi¬
ence what came to be called an "econo¬
mic miracle". The Spanish "economic
miracle" took place in the following de¬
cade, beginning in 1959. During this
period, and to a lesser degree later on,
these countries experienced spectacular
industrial growth rates which were sur¬
passed only by those of Japan. The same
years saw an increasingly rapid decline in
the numbers of people working on the
land, without any drop in agricultural
production. A veritable "deruralization"
was beginning to take place in all these
societies, although the phenomenon was
much less pronounced in Portugal. Cities
grew more quickly than ever before in
European history, and were unable to
absorb the massive influx of new immig¬
rants. Urban growth was particularly ex¬
plosive in Spain. The populations of
Milan, Turin, Barcelona, Madrid, Bilbao
and Athens doubled or tripled in two
decades. In their endlessly sprawling sub¬
urbs shantytowns proliferated on a scale
that dwarfed the bidonvilles of Paris.
Two other phenomena tourism, and
the economic growth and prosperity of
Europe in the 1960s coincided with this
massive migration from the country to
the cities and from agriculture to indus¬
try, and helped to avert an explosive poli¬
tical and social situation in these coun¬
tries. European economic expansion,
which continued virtually until 1974,
- m a a-T-t£ 1 >. = /
Immense In area, like Its neighbours
Algeria and Egypt, the Libyan Arab Jama-
hlrlya has one of the lowest population
densities In the world (only 2 Inhabitants
per Km2). Its per capita Income, on the
other hand, Is one of the highest In the
Mediterranean basin, higher than that of
Spain and Italy, essentially because of
the revenues from its enormous oilfields.
The percentage of the labour force en¬
gaged In agriculture Is low and that
employed In the services sector Is high.
Photo shows the head of a Medusa from
Leptis Magna, the Phoenician, Carthagi¬
nian and Roman city whose ruins stand
near to the Libyan capital of Tripoli.
absorbed an enormous quantity of man¬
power from Southern Europe. Millions
of Greeks, Spaniards, Yugoslavs, Turks,
Portuguese and Italians crossed the Alps
and the Pyrenees to look for work. The
money they sent back to their families
strengthened the currencies of the receiv¬
ing countries and increased the purchas¬
ing power of the recipients, thus stimulat¬
ing the domestic markets of these coun¬
tries. The advantages for the host coun¬
tries (the Federal Republic of Germany,
Switzerland, the Netherlands and
France) were, of course, even greater,
since they obtained /docile, cheap,
healthy workers in the prime of life.
For the countries of the south, tourism
was also an unexpected source of income
and one which, for the first time, bene¬
fited people of all conditions and not only
the ruling class. Mass tourism breathed
new life into the manufacturing and con¬
struction industries, led to an increase in
the number of mechanical workshops,
provided seasonal employment for
thousands of unskilled young people,
contributed to the development of
national airlines, helped to finance the
17

construction of motorways and airports
and accelerated changes in mentality
which had already been initiated by other
historical forces.
The fact is that by the mid-1970s, if not
before, these countries had changed. Of
course, visitors could still see not only
traces of the past but scenes from a pre-
industrial era of a kind which it is still easy
to find today in Portugal, in some parts of
Andalusia, in rural southern Italy, in
Apulia and Sicily, in many of the Greek
islands and in the inland mountain re¬
gions of Greece. Even if the numbers of
telephones, cars and electrical household
appliances per head of population are still
lower than elsewhere in Europe, the in¬
teresting fact is that they are gradually
catching up. Other figures, such as the
percentages of students at universities,
family size (and also, unfortunately, the
statistics for unemployment and delin¬
quency) are growing closer, if not equal,
to those for the rest of Europe. Although
the two Europes are still not fully com¬
parable, the gap between them in these
respects is now so narrow that it is im¬
possible to maintain that they are des¬
tined never to meet.
From 1974 onwards, with the fall of the
reactionary régimes in Greece and Por¬
tugal and the crumbling of the Franco
régime in Spain which began in the fol¬
lowing year, the eyes of the world were
on the Mediterranean. Italy, which had
enjoyed a liberal constitution since 1948,
This table reveals a general decline in the
agricultural labour force in Mediterranean
countries in recent decades, combined
with an increase in the percentage ofper¬
sons employed in industry, and In the ser¬
vices sector (which includes tourism, one
of the region's main sources of Income).
Also apparent are marked differences
between the northwest Mediterranean
countries and Israel (whose figures bear a
strong similarity to those of the Industria¬
lized countries) on the one hand, and the
countries of the southern and eastern
Mediterranean (closer to the developing
countries), on the other.
seemed to be the only country in the
region to have escaped dictatorship. In
addition, the violence of the recent civil
wars in Greece and Spain seemed to have
irremediably polarized their populations
into hostile camps, and the colonial wars
in which Portugal was engaged did not
augur well for a reasonably peaceful tran¬
sition to democracy.
But to universal surprise this is exactly
what happened. After several unsuccess¬
ful attempts, a democratic movement
within the Portuguese armed forces car¬
ried out a military coup d'état on 25 April
1974 and placed power (or, initially at
least, a large share of it) in the hands of
freely elected political parties. In the
same year the Greek colonels embarked
on a venture in Cyprus, the failure of
which discredited them with their dwind¬
ling number of supporters. In Spain the
dictator's death, after several years dur¬
ing which the régime had intensified its
repression of a number of popular move¬
ments (workers, students, professional
people) was followed by a final man¬
oeuvre to save the régime; but the latter
gradually lost credit from 1976 onwards.
A series of referenda and general elec¬
tions led to a de facto democratic situa¬
tion in 1977 and the proclamation of a
democratic constitution in the following
year. At the beginning of the 1980s the
West Mediterranean European countries
were not only enjoying liberal democratic
régimes but had progressed from a stage
of political transition to one of democra¬
tic consolidation.
One must proceed with caution and
even with a certain degree of scepticism
when considering the old societies of
Southern Europe. It cannot be denied
that these nations, heirs to ancient civi¬
lizations and participants in a long and
glorious history, are again showing signs
of great vitality. This is clearly indicated
by their recent economic expansion and
their participation in the technological
revolution, in which, not without difficul¬
ty, they are playing an ever more impor¬
tant role. At the same time their creativ¬
ity in the arts and sciences and in the
fields of culture and university education
is attaining ever higher levels. But their
situation does not justify unmixed
optimism.
Because they have not yet achieved the
level of industrial productivity and tech¬
nological rationalization of other coun¬
tries, the Mediterranean countries of
Europe are far less well equipped to cope
with the economic recession and financial
and employment crises of the 1980s.
Their socio-economic structures, i.e. the
pattern of distribution of private wealth,
were still relatively antiquated when the
period of rapid prosperity in the West
began to run out after 1973.
Moreover, unemployment, which
affects the middle classes and university
graduates as well as the working class, is a
more serious problem in Southern
Europe than in the North. When the
economic crisis hit the South the welfare
state was far less developed there than in
the North, and it is very difficult to ex¬
pand welfare services and improve the
quality of benefits in times of penury. In
Western Europe the development of the
vast apparatus of the welfare state free
education for all, free medical services,
unemployment and retirement ben¬
efits occurred during the prosperous
years which followed the Second World
War.
As if this were not enough, Southern
Europe is also one of the world's most
traditionalist regions. This is not always
in contradiction with its renewed vitality,
since innovation is an essential part of the
European cultural, technical and ideolo¬
gical tradition, but it can be an obstacle to
progress in times of crisis. Administrative
corruption and political patronage are
not a monopoly of the Mediterranean
countries but in these countries they
often reach proportions that in the Euro¬
pean political and cultural context are
intolerable. Nevertheless, in a growing
number of cases the courts of law are
functioning normally and prosecuting
offences of this kind, thus proving that
modernization is also making an impact
in this difficult field.
But the traditionalism of Mediterra¬
nean Europe also has less encouraging
aspects. Southern peoples are, for
instance, still deeply attached to their
ethnic groups, nationalities, regions and
localities. In order to relax the tensions
that such feelings could generate within a
democratic framework, Spain has be-
PERCENTAGES OF THE LABOUR FORCE
Agriculture Industry Services
1965 1981 1965 1981 1965 1981
Spain 34 14 35 40 31 46
France 18 8 40 39 42 53
Italy 24 11 42 45 34 44
Yugoslavia 57 29 21 35 22 36
Greece 51 37 22 28 27 35
Turkey 74 54 11 13 15 33
Syrian A. R. 53 33 20 31 27 36
Lebanon 28 11 25 27 47 62
Israel 12 7 35 36 53 57
Egypt 56 50 15 30 29 20
Libyan A.J. 42 19 20 28 38 53
Tunisia 53 35 20 32 27 33
Algeria 59 25 14 25 27 50
Morocco 60 52 15 21 25 27

come a semi-federal state with extensive
powers granted to minority nationalities
such as the Basques and the Catalans.
Italy has also introduced an extensive
system of regionalization in order to put
an end to the endemic centralism of the
past. Italy was one of the signatories of
the Treaty of Rome which set up the
Common Market, and one of the promo¬
ters of the European Community, which
is not only economic but aspires to the
eventual creation of a single political area
for all the citizens of Western Europe.
The vast majority of Spaniards, Portu¬
guese and Greeks are enthusiastic Euro¬
peans whose admission to the Commun¬
ity was hindered because of their dictato¬
rial régimes. After excessive delays the
Greeks joined the Common Market in
1981 and Spain and Portugal will do so in
1986. This is much more than a symbolic
event. It is a return to the family fold of
peoples whose recent tragic history kept
them apart from the rest of Europe. This
return will be crowned with success pro¬
vided the new Europe does not withdraw
into itself and becomes a force for peace
and solidarity with other nations. It is not
too much to hope that the Mediterranean
countries, which are much closer in many
respects to the less privileged nations of
the world, will oblige the rest of the conti¬
nent to reach out to a world that demands
fraternal, efficient collaboration from
Europe as a whole.
SALVADOR GINER of Spain, is Reader in
sociology and social anthropology at Brunei
University, London. He has also taught at the
Universities of Barcelona, Puerto Rico, Reading
and Lancaster, and has been a visiting profes¬
sor at Yale. He is currently vice president of the
Spanish Sociological Association, and a mem¬
ber of the executive committee of the Internatio¬
nal Sociological Association, which collabo¬
rates with Unesco. A number of his works have
appeared in English, including Sociology, 1972.
He is also the co-editor of Contemporary
Europe: Social Structure and Cultural Patterns,
7975.
.
<
z
<
©
Top, new cars parked near the Alfa Romeo
plant in Milan, Italy. Industrialization, more
advanced in the countries ofthe northwest
Mediterranean than elsewhere in the re¬
gion, is the most visible aspect of the mo¬
dernization process. In the rural areas, tra¬
ditions and a certain inertia are much
stronger, and development is inhibited by
the aridityprevalent in the southern part of
the basin. Above, land irrigated by water
from the Bin El Ouidan dam, In Morocco.
Agriculture is still centred on traditional
crops such as the vine, the olive and
wheat. Left, wheatfields south of Palermo,
in Sicily.
<
''.
*
is
19
