El Templo Mayor
The Great Temple of the Aztecs
in the heart of Mexico City
by Eduardo Matos Moctezuma
ON the night of 21 February 1978,
workers of the Light and Power
Company were digging on the
comer of Guatemala and Argentina
Streets in the centre of Mexico City. After
breaking the thick concrete surface and
penetrating about two metres down, they
encountered a hard stone which put a
stop to further progress. On removing the
clay adhering to it they found that the
stone was covered with a series of reliefs,
and decided to suspend operations until
the next day. A telephone call to the Office
of Salvage Archaeology of the National In¬
stitute of Anthropology and History led to
the despatch of a team of archaeologists
to identify the find. On 23 February it was
established that on part of the stone was
a piece of sculpture showing a face in pro¬
file with adornments on the head.
Salvage operations continued until the
27th under the supervision of the ar¬
chaeologists. An enormous monolith,
3.25 metres in diameter, was uncovered.
Its upper surface bore a sculptured
representation of a decapitated, naked
woman, whose arms and legs were
separated from the torso. Clearly this was
Coyolxauhqui, a lunar deity and sister of
Huitzilopochtli, the Aztec god of war who,
according to legend, killed his sister in
single combat on the hill of Coatepec.
This discovery marked the start of the
1 Great Temple Project. From the outset it
was planned in three principal phases.
This enabled us to apply the theory and
methods that would give us a clearer pic¬
ture of the chief temple of the Aztecs or
Mexicas, who settled on the little islands
in the lake of Texcoco around 1325 and
later became subject to the lordship of
Azcapotzalco, before achieving in¬
dependence around 1428. They then .
became an expansionist community and
: conquered large areas of central America,
until in 1 521 they succumbed to the domi¬
nion of the Spaniards who under Hernán
Cortés conquered Mexico during the six¬
teenth century and destroyed the Aztec
city of Tenochtitlán, and with it the city's
Great Templeel Templo Mayor.
The project was carried out in three ^
phases.
Below, the Coyolxauhqui Stone, 3.25
metres in diameter, whose accidental
discovery in 1978, in the heart of Mexico
City, was to lead to the comprehensive
excavation of the ancient Aztec Great
Temple of Tenochtitlán. The stone
depicts the dismembered body of the
goddess Coyolxauhqui, a moon goddess,
who, according to myth, was defeated in
battle, slain and dismembered by her
brother Huitzilopochtli, god of war and of
the sun.
23

The first phase consisted in assembling
all available information about the Great
Temple, both from historical sources and
from reports of previous archaeological in¬
vestigations, either on the site or on near¬
by sites. On the basis of this information,
a general plan covering both theoretical
and practical aspects was drawn up.
The second phase consisted of the ex¬
cavations proper, which were begun on 20
March 1978 and completed in November
1 982. Suitable techniques were employed
to ensure adequate control of the excava¬
tion process, the area being divided up in¬
to 2-metre-square grids. The site was also
divided into three sections, each supervis¬
ed by an archaeologist and his assistants.
Support units included a team of restorers
with a field laboratory, as well as
biologists, chemists, geologists and other
specialists from the Department of
Prehistory. There were also photographic
laboratories, a design section and a sec¬
tion for controlling the excavated material.
The third phase comprises the study
and analysis of the material recovered in
the preceding phase. After four years'
continuous work, the first two phases
have been completed, and we are now
engaged on the third phase which will
take longer.
We shall now summarize the results of
nearly five years of excavations and of the
investigations currently being carried out.
Architecture Until a few years ago
the chief sources of information about the
Great Temple were the accounts of
sixteenth-century chroniclers. Now,
thanks to archaeology, we have the tem¬
ple before our eyes, and we can see that
in fact the chroniclers' descriptions cor¬
respond very closely to what they saw or
to what the indigenous people told them.
Thanks to archaeology we have also been
able to learn about very early periods in
the temple's history, of which even the
last generations of Mexicas knew nothing.
The main façade faced west. The tem¬
ple stood on a vast platform, with a base
of four elements, including two stairways
leading up to two sanctuariesone on the
south side dedicated to the tutelary war
god Huitzilopochtli, and another on the
north side to Tlaloc, the god of water, rain
and fertility.
For various reasons the temple was
repeatedly enlarged. For instance, the city
of Tenochtitlán suffered from flooding,
which made it necessary to raise the level
of its buildings, as well as from structural
faults due to the instability of the terrain.
Again we know from historical sources
that certain rulers ordered a new temple to
be raised on top of the existing one, so
that different construction Epochs are
Plan © Scientific American, New York
superimposed upon each other. We now
know that the temple was enlarged on all
four sides at least seven times. There
were also four enlargements of the main
façade.
We shall now briefly describe each of
these construction Epochs, except for
Epoch I, which was located inside Epoch
II and was in a state of such deterioration
that it would be pointless to describe it.
The Roman figures indicate total
enlargements on all four sides and, if
followed by a letter, enlargements of the
main façade only.
Epoch II This structure is notable for
the fact that its upper part is remarkably
complete. We can see remains of the two
stone sanctuaries with some of the stucco
(mixture of sand and lime) which covered
them. Facing the entrance to the sanc¬
tuary of Huitzilopochtli is the sacrificial
stone. On the top step, in line with this
stone, is a head with a glyph, or carved
pictograph, of two rabbits above it, cor¬
responding to the year 1390.
Inside the sanctuary a platform runs
from north to south, in the middle of which
there is a small altar on which an image of
the deity must have been placed. On the
Tlaloc (north) side there is a chacmool
polychrome stone sculpture of the divine
messenger responsible for carrying the
offering into the sanctuary. The pillars at
the entrance to the sanctuary are still
decorated with mural paintings of black
and white circles (perhaps depicting the
god's eyes) on blue and red bands. Below
these are alternating vertical black and
white bands. Inside can be seen the plat- ^
24

* V
The great temple of Tenochtitlán
The Templo Mayor, or Great Temple of
the Mexicas, the people of the Aztec city
of Tenochtitlán, was a monument to the
power of the Aztec empire. Shrines
dedicated to Tlaloc (the god of water, rain
and fertility) and to Huitzilopochtli (the
god of war and of the sun) crowned the
temple reflecting the dependence of the
economy of the Mexicas on agriculture
and on tribute collected by conquest. Ex¬
cavation revealed seven major epochs of
construction (indicated by Roman
numerals on plan, opposite page). The
earliest epoch to be excavated, Epoch II,
dates from about 1390 AD and was found
almost intact. The last construction
epoch, Epoch VII, was razed to its founda¬
tions by the Spanish conquistadores.
Above, a view of the site from the south¬
west corner of the façade. The Coyolx¬
auhqui Stone can be seen (centre of
photo) surrounded by a metal framework.
In the foreground a sculptured snake
(often used as a symbol of Huit
zilopochtli) flanks the stairway leading to
the war god's shrine. Further to the left
along the façade are two sculptured frogs
(not easily visible on this photo). Frogs
were often used to represent Tlaloc the
rain god. Left, artist Ned Seidler's draw¬
ing depicts the complexity of the edifice.
Facing west, the temple rose to a height
of some 60 metres, with twin stairways
leading up to the double shrines. Ex¬
cavating a major site in the centre of a
major modern city is no easy task and it
was even more difficult in Mexico City
where the water table is only four to five
metres below street level. City traffic
often slowed the work down and thirteen
buildings had to be removed before ex¬
cavation could begin. However, the urban
location had some advantages.
Specialists, including city planners, ar¬
chitects, soil scientists, ethnologists,
historians, ornithologists and ich¬
thyologists were available for advice and
many students volunteered their help.
25

Plundering the past
The looting of archaeological sites and
the Illegal export and import of cultural
property has become a booming
worldwide business worth an estimated
3,000 million dollars a year. The principal
victims of the art traffickers are the
developing countries who often lack the
resources to introduce effective controls.
Not only are priceless artefacts being
lost, but whole pages of history are being
erased by the robbers' indiscriminate
destruction of archaeological sites.
Unesco has taken the lead in the fight to
eliminate this illicit trade, notably through
the establishment of the Convention on
the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property (1970)
and the Convention for the Protection of
the World Cultural and Natural Heritage
(1972). Photo shows part of an exhibition
of artefacts that had been illegally ex¬
ported from Ecuador and which were
recovered after a six-year legal battle in
the Italian courts. Heldin Quito, Ecuador,
in May 1983, the exhibition was entitled
Ecuador Recovers an Important
Fragment of its Cultural Memory.
form on which the image of the god must
have stood. This Epoch is mostly earlier
than 1428, the year when the Mexicas
became independent of Azcapotzalco.
Epoch III To this Epoch belong well-
made stairways, and the facings of the
steps of the base are still upright. Eight
sculptures of standard-bearers were
found in recumbent positions on the steps
of the stairway on the Huitzilopochtli side.
These figures may have adorned the
edifice, but when a new construction
Epoch was begun they were collected and
ceremonially placed on the stairway
where they were discovered. On the back
wall of the platform, on the Huitzilopochtli
side, is carved the glyph "4 Reed", which
corresponds to the year 1431.
Epoch IV This Epoch, with its addi¬
tions, is one of the richest in decorative
elements. The main platform was
decorated on all four sides with braziers
and serpent heads. The braziers on the
Tlaloc side are adorned with the face of
the god, while those on the Huitzilopochtli
side bear a knot, a symbol of the warrior
deity. Various offerings were found below
the braziers and serpents.
Epoch IV b is an addition to the main
(west) façade which was very rich in
decorative elements. It consists of the
vast platform on which the Great Temple
stands. This platform had a continuous
perron, at both ends of which enormous
serpents with undulating bodies and huge
heads were unearthed, still bearing some
of the paint which originally covered them.
The stairs leading to the platform are inter¬
rupted only by a small altar flanked by two
frogs standing on the stone flags of which
the altar is constructed. This altar is in line
with the middle of the stairs that once led
to the upper part of the temple dedicated
to Tlaloc. On the Huitzilopochtli side, op¬
posite the stairs leading to the sanctuary
of this god, a two-metre-wide stone block
decorated with serpents forms part of the
top of the platform. The base formed by
the remains of the two stairways which led
to the upper part includes four serpent
heads, one at each end and two in the
middle, marking the junction of the two
halves of the temple. In the middle of the
platform, on the Huitzilopochtli side, is the
place where the monumental stone
sculpture of the god's sister, Coyolxauh¬
qui, was found.
Chronologically, we believe that Epoch
IV corresponds broadly to the reign of the
Aztec ruler Moctezuma I, because the
glyph "1 rabbit", equivalent to the year
1454, is carved on the back part of the
platform on the Huitzilopochtli side.
Coyolxauhqui and the serpents may have
been added during the reign of Axayacatl.
Another glyph on the south side of the
edifice, with the symbol "3 house", cor¬
responds to 1469, the year in which Ax-
ayacatl's reign began.
Epoch V All that has been
discovered of this period is the stuccoed
main platform and part of the stone floor of
the ceremonial precinct.
Epoch VI This is the last Epoch but
one. Its vestiges consist of part of the main
platform. A wall of the main west façade is
decorated with three serpent heads.
Epoch VII This is the last Epoch of
the Great Temple and the one the
Spaniards saw. All that remains of it are
part of the slab floor of the ceremonial
precinct, some traces of the temple site,
and part of the platform on the north side.
Offerings During nearly five years of
excavations, some 7,000 objectsthe re¬
mains of almost a hundred offerings
were unearthed. These offerings were
found in three distinct places in stone
cists whose sides and bottoms bore
traces of stucco, inside movable stone
boxes with stone lids, and actually in the
fill of stone and earth covering a construc¬
tion Epoch.
It may be said that, as a general rule,
the manner in which objects were placed
in the offerings was not haphazard but
premeditated,.conforming to some kind of
symbolism which has still to be inter¬
preted. In other words these objects and
their positions correspond to a language.
Thus in some offerings certain objects oc¬
cupy the lower position, while others are
always found higher up. We also noticed
that the objects were placed facing in a
certain direction. Both the offerings on the
west (main façade) side as well as those at
the back of the temple faced the spot
where the sun sets, whereas those found
in the middle of the edifice, in its northern
and southern façades, were facing north
and south respectively.
Offerings 7 and 61 , located towards the
middle of the edifice on the south side and
on the north side, respectively, contained
the same arrangement of objectsat the
base, seashells facing north to south;
above them, crocodiles; and at the top,
seated deities which we thought to be
representations of Xiuhtecutli, an ancient
fire-god, centre of the universe and of the
hearth. To the right of these gods was a
coral, and to the left an earthenware vase
26

bearing an effigy of the god Tlaloc.
Perhaps this arrangement means that the
shells represent the sea, the crocodiles
the earthly level, and Xiuhtecutii and
Tlaloc the heavenly level. The same ar¬
rangement is found in offerings 1 1 and 17,
the first located in the main façade bet¬
ween the two serpent heads marking the
junction of the temples of Tlaloc and Huit¬
zilopochtli, and the second at the back
where the two edifices are joined. Both
are placed in stone-walled cists and, apart
from being very similar in their contents,
the objects are arranged in a similar order.
Some of the objects unearthed were of
purely Mexica origin; others came from
tributary areas. The former include
sculptures of seated ancients wearing on¬
ly the "maxtatl" or loincloth and a head¬
dress with two protuberances. They are
thought to represent Xiuhtecutii. Others
are effigies of the god Tlaloc sculpted in
"tezontle" (volcanic stone) and in other
kinds of stone. There are also representa¬
tions of coiled serpents, serpent heads
and rattlesnakes carved in obsidian,
stone braziers with knots, and, of course,
the magnificent representations of
seashells which are real works of art
although, like the Coyolxauhqui and ser¬
pent heads adorning the temple façade,
they did not figure among the offerings.
Interesting objects from the tributary
areas figure in greater numbers among
the offerings from Epoch IV onwards
(around 1454) when the Mexicas were in
full expansion. They include a large quan¬
tity of masks and figures in the Mezcala
style (from what is now the State of Guer¬
rero), of various types and sizes, alabaster
pieces from the Puebla region repre¬
senting deer heads, arrows and seated
deities. There are two magnificent orange
ceramic funerary urns from the Gulf
Coast. Inside them were the remains of
burnt bones, necklaces, and other ob¬
jects. The great variety of seashells,
fishbones, sawfish bills and corals come
from the Gulf and Pacific coasts. So do
the crocodiles and jaguars, which may
have come from Veracruz or Tabasco.
Another group of objects can definitely
be attributed to societies very much
earlier than the Mexica. Such are the
Teotihuacán masks, which can be dated
around the year 400 AD, and an Olmec
mask. Pétrographie analysis has shown
that the latter originated in the area now
occupied by the States of Puebla, Oaxaca
and Guerrero. It is believed to be the
oldest object discovered (800 BC).
We can say that most of the objects
represent Tlaloc or symbols associated
with him, including such objects
associated with the sea as canoes and
fishes. But there are also objects
associated with Huitzilopochtli, a god who
is only represented symbolically, in the
form of braziers with a knot, skulls, "tec-
patl" sacrificial knives with eyes and teeth
of conch shell and, generally, objects from
tributary areas, the spoils of military con¬
quest. All this confirms our thesis of the
existence of an agricultural and warrior
people who depended for their
sustenance on both agriculture and
tribute.
EDUARDO MATOS MOCTEZUMA, of
Mexico, is general director of the Centro de In¬
vestigaciones y Estudios Superiores en An¬
tropología Social at Tlalpán. Before beginning
the excavation of the Great Temple in Mexico
City, which he describes in this article and
which was carried out under his supervision,
he had done extensive fieldwork on the pre-
Columbian sites of Mexico.
EAGLE WARRIOR. Nearly two metres in
height, this pottery statue of a soldier of
the eagle order is one of the most
remarkable finds made at the Great Tem¬
ple. There were two main ocders of Aztec
soldiery, the eagles and the jaguars.
27
