The birth of Finland's national epic
I HO f%CIf©l/CIfCI by Lauri Honko
THE origins of epics based on folk
poetry are usually clouded in mys¬
tery. We can only guess at the gene¬
sis of such treasures as the Mahabharata,
the epics of Homer and Virgil, Beowulf,
the Nibelungenlied and the Edda. The Kal¬
evala, the national epic of Finland, which
was first published in 1835, is an interesting
exception.
We know that the Kalevala (Kalevala
is the name of the mythical land in which
the epic is situated) was compiled and
edited by Elias Lönnrot (1802-1884) , a doc¬
tor who for twenty years was district phy¬
sician in Kajaani, in north-eastern Finland,
and who later became professor of Finnish
language and literature at the University
of Helsinki.
We know, line by line, the sources of
the Kalevala, those folk poems that Lönn¬
rot collected during the eleven journeys
he made to the eastern and northern prov¬
inces during the period 1828-1844, as well
as poems recorded by dozens of other col¬
lectors which were included in the second
and final edition published in 1849.
We also know Lönnrot's working me¬
thods; his compilation work is illuminated
by his travel accounts and newspaper arti¬
cles, by the method he used in handling
his poetic raw material and by the five
editorial phases which preceded the final
published version. Since the original
recorded poems have been preserved and
published (1908-1948) in the thirty-three-
volume Suomen Kansan Vanhat Runot
(Ancient Poems of the Finnish People),
and since other documentary evidence
abounds, we are able to follow in the foot¬
steps of the compiler of the epic. It is as
if we were looking over his shoulder as
he sat working at his desk.
The story of the genesis of the Kalevala
began in the 1760s. It was then that Henrik
Gabriel Porthan, professor at the Turku
Academy, began publishing his treatise on
Finnish poetry {Dissertatio de Poesi Fen-
nica, 1766-1778). It was not until Porthan's
day, and largely thanks to him, that it was
realized that folk poetry, maintained in
oral tradition, was a more valuable part
of the Finnish-language literary heritage
than any previous Finnish literature, which
had been predominantly religious and eco¬
nomic in nature.
A second turning point came with the
treaty of Hamina (1809) which severed the
ties between Finland and Sweden (which
went back nearly seven centuries) and
attached her as a self-governing Grand
Duchy to the Russian Empire. The far-
advanced assimilation with Sweden was
broken, doors were opened towards the
Finno-Ugric tribes in eastern Europe, and
the first Diet planted in the minds of Finns
an image of a Finland which was more than
a few provinces belonging either to Sweden
or to Russia. ^
Caricature drawn in 1847 depicts Elias
Lönnrot, the author/compiler of the Kal¬
evala, tirelessly travelling the country In
search of the ancient songs of his people.

There are no known pictures of the great
singers interviewed by Lönnrot, and it
was not until the 1890s that photo¬
graphers and artists began to retrace his
footsteps. In 1894, I.K. Inka, the pioneer
of Finnish photography, made a journey
to north-eastern Karelia from which he
brought back some wonderful portraits
and landscapes. Photo shows Inka (right)
and his travelling companion K.F. Kar-
jalainen (left) with peasants from the
region during a halt on the shores of Lake
Kuittijärvi.
^ This resulted in an identity crisis. The
educated, Swedish-speaking minority had
to decide whether to turn towards Russian
culture or to identify themselves with the
language and underdeveloped culture of
the majority. They chose the latter course
even though it entailed a dramatic change
of language and the difficult task of build¬
ing a new identity. The Finnish language
had to be raised from its state of deg¬
radation and made into a. language of cul¬
ture. A Finnish-language literature had to
be built and material collected for a new
kind of Finnish history.
In the autumn of 1822, three students
enrolled at the Turku AcademyJ. V.
Snellman, J.L. Runeberg and Elias Lönn¬
rot. At the time no one could have foreseen
that Snellman was destined to become the
main ideologist of the national movement,
Runeberg the most important Swedish-
speaking poet in Finland and Lönnrot the
compiler of the Finnish national epic.
Elias Lönnrot represented the common
man in this group. He was a poor tailor's
son whose schooling was frequently inter¬
rupted for want of money. His talent
helped him to get ahead, his diligence
encouraged him to undertake great proj¬
ects at which others would have balked
and his unassuming manner won the
respect of both learned men and ordinary
people. His natural make-up and social
background coupled with his training as
a doctor gave him an understanding of and
an insight into the lives of ordinary people
and helped him to withstand the rigours
of his strenuous journeyings.
His interest in folk poetry aroused by
Reinhold von Becker, his teacher in the
Finnish language at the Turku Academy,
Lönnrot began his collecting expeditions
in 1828. These took him first to Finnish
Karelia and then to Archangel Karelia
beyond the border, where the Karelian
dialect was very close to Finnish.
What did Lönnrot find on his journeys?
He found poems, their singers and the
living environment in which the poems
formed an interlude to daily toil and the
high point of festive occasions. The var¬
iants known from collectors' manuscripts
now became a living stream of poems flow¬
ing from the lips of tens and later hundreds
of singers. In a word, Lönnrot stepped into
a world of living epic poetry and his mind
recorded not only the content of the poems
but also the whole varied but strictly
restricted verse language in which that
poetry lived. Without his mastery of that
language the peculiar genesis of the Kal¬
evala would not have been possible.
Lönnrot collected approximately two
thousand variants of poems, all in all some
forty thousand lines of poetry sung in the
ancient Finnish metre. This constituted
only a fragment of his collection in its
entirety since he also recorded fables,
riddles, proverbs and dirges as well as
material connected with local mores and,
above all with the language.
Lönnrot's journeys were comparatively
short, of only some weeks', at most
months', duration, and most of his time
was spent in travelling from one place to
another. He appears not to have stayed
long in any one place and it seems that
he did not record the entire repertoire of
any singer of note. There is no evidence
that Lönnrot was deeply interested in the
context in which the poems were per¬
formed or in the lives and fate of the rune
singers. As a rule he did not even record
the names of the singers in his notebook.
Thus there remained a considerable cul¬
tural distance between Lönnrot and the
rune singers.
The fact that Lönnrot did not identify
with any area or community that he
encountered was both understandable and
important understandable in that Lönn¬
rot was not primarily interested in modern
folk life but in the ancient Finnish society
of which it still possibly bore traces; impor¬
tant in the sense that he was freer to create
a poetic world of his own which repre¬
sented the entire tradition as conceived by
himself and not a system of tradition as
conceived by one singer or a single family
of singers.
Judged by the norms of our day, the
methods he used might be considered
unscientific; yet Lönnrot knew subcon¬
sciously that he needed time for the process
of integration to take place. In his relations
with the most important singers he met
Lönnrot maintained the attitude of an
apprentice almost to the end, until the first
edition of the Kalevala was published.
From the point of view of general com¬
parative epic research the question of the
authenticity of the Kalevala is very in¬
teresting. How well does the epic reflect
the folk poems preserved in oral tradition,
that is, how genuine is it as a folk poetry
epic? What were Lönnrot's goals in com¬
piling the Kalevala and how well did he
attain these goals with the poetic material
at his disposal? The endeavours of tra¬
ditional singers to combine tales of Väin-
ämöinen, for instance, have produced a
few minor epic cycles, which could be
called folk epics, but which are less than
a thousand lines long. There is no reason
to believe that the situation had been any
different in former centuries or that the
poems had originally been part of larger
entities. Thus the entity and structure of
the Kalevala represent Lönnrot's solution
to the problem upon which he may have
deliberated most during the compilation
what was the time sequence of the events
described in the narrative poems? His
interpretation involved no reconstruction,
only creative form-giving.
Study of the verse material reveals that
the proportion of Lönnrot's own com¬
positions is very small, three per cent
according to one calculation. Thus he man¬
aged with lines that he and other collectors
had found; this means that, if the criterion
is the authenticity of single lines, the Kale¬
vala is a very genuine folk poetry epic.
How about the remaining ninety-seven
per cent? Did they come straight from the
original poems? Some fifty per cent of the
Kalevala verses have been changed by
Lönnrot either in spelling, language or
verse. From the beginning of the Kalevala
process Lönnrot had been of the opinion
10

that differences in dialect or other incon¬
sistencies must not be too disturbing for
the reader, since the public consisted not
just of scholars but the whole nation. Four¬
teen per cent of the verses have no identical
equivalent in the poems but were com¬
bined from popular elements by Lönnrot.
Finally, thirty-three per cent of the lines
are exactly as found in the original
recordings.
The statistics show that Lönnrot never
aimed at poetic freedom where individual
lines were concerned. The liberties he took
lay elsewhere. Due to his working methods
the Kalevala contained few of the longer
sequences of lines to be found in the ori¬
ginal variants. Thus the context of most
lines had changed, not necessarily to a less
genuine one, but to a different one from
that in which they were found in oral tra¬
dition. This also means that the poems
have no place of origin, since lines from
variants found in different regions are
intermingled. This technique contributed
to the emergence of a pan-Finnish and not
a regional epic. Whether or not this was
Lönnrot's conscious aim is not clear, for
the actual function of this freedom was to
give form to the plot.
Lönnrot also tried to find a geographi¬
cally defined place for his vision and found
it south of the White Sea, where, according
to one contemporary view, the Finns could
have originated. As regards time, this idea
presupposed a time span of almost one
thousand years. In outlining this quasi-sci¬
entific view of antiquity Lönnrot ended up
developing a fuller insight into the world
of the Kalevala than we can imagine. As
a scholar he wanted to take account of all |
'The land of heroes'
THE Kalevala is a vast anthology of the Finnish popular
poetic tradition. In its definitive version it consists of fifty
poems, totalling 22,795 lines, painstakingly collected
between 1828 and 1849 by Elias Lönnrot from the mouths of
folk singers from Karelia, a remote district in northern Finland
where the traditional songs of the Finnish people had retained
all their original purity and freshness.
Ancient Finnish poetry did not rhyme, but it made great use
of alliteration and, above all, of "parallelism"; each thought or
topic had to be repeated in different terms in two or three con¬
secutive lines. These stylistic devices, which are often to be found
in the oral tradition, imbue the Kalevala with a bewitching fluidity,
as witness the following lines from the first poem of the epic.
They describe how two singers would recite a poem, sitting face
to face, holding hands and rocking gently backwards and forwards,
each reciting alternate lines.
Beloved brother, dear companion,
Dear comrade of my youth,
Come straightaway sing with me,
Since we are reunited,
Come close and sing with me (...)
Stretch out your hand to my hand,
Entwine your finger with my fingers,
Come sing our finest songs
Come spin our finest tales (...)
Then follows an account of the creation of the world and the
introduction of the great heroes whose exploits, loves and hates
make up the framework of the epic. These are the native sons
of Kalevala, the "land of heroes", the mythical cradle-land of
the Finnish people.
Reminiscent of the ancient pagan deities, these larger-than-life
characters with supernatural powers fight for possession of a mag¬
ical object, the Sampo. A mill or lid with miraculous powers,
the Sampo was made for Louhi, mistress of Pohjola, a cold
northern region, land of magicians and of darkness.
To Pohjola go three aspirants to the hand of Louhi's beautiful
daughter Väinämöinen, an aged bard whose wisdom is his
strength and who can charm the elements with his words, Lem-
minkäinen, valiant warrior and fickle seducer, and the dynamic,
enterprising blacksmith Ilmarinen.
After welcoming him to her castle, Louhi, mistress of Pohjola,
makes the following proposition to Ilmarinen:
"O mighty Ilmarinen,
Eternal blacksmith,
Canst thou forge a Sampo? (...)
My daughter shall be thy payment,
The recompense for thy labours."
In this fashion did Ilmarinen
The blacksmith, reply to Louhi:
"Yea I can forge a Sampo.
With feather of swan,
With milk of cull cow,
With grain of barley
And a tuft of lambswool,
I can fashion the ornate lid.
Did I not hammer out the sky,
Forge from nothing, not the merest scrap,
The great cover of the heavens?"
Thus Ilmarinen made the Sampo and married "the maid of
Pohjola". But after the death of his wife, the Sampo, for pos¬
session of which a furious struggle had erupted between the peo¬
ples of Kalevala and Pohjola, was broken in the course of a violent
sea battle. Its remnants brought happiness and prosperity to the
people of Kalevala, but, from that time on, their chieftain Väin¬
ämöinen had constantly to guard them against the vengeful sor¬
ceries of the mistress of Pohjola.
These two great adventures are interspersed with countless
mythological and traditional episodes, such as the theft of the
sun, of the moon and of fire, as well as other parallel intrigues
involving such vital and engaging personalities as the unfortunate
Kullervo, condemned to a life of slavery to satisfy the hatred
and desire for vengeance of others.
In the final poem, Väinämöinen yields pride of place to a
Messiah-like hero, born miraculously of a virgin, and disappears,
leaving to the Finnish people the echoes of his kantele, his world-
renowned harp.
Bronze medal by the Finnish artist Pekka
Pitkänen has been struck this year on the
initiative of the jubilee committee for the
150th anniversary of thepublication of the
first edition of the Kalevala. // Is being
awarded to persons who have helped to
make Finnish culture more widely known.
The jaws and teeth of a pike featured on
one side of the medal are a direct allusion
to the epic. They were used by Väinä¬
möinen, the central figure of the Kalevala,
to make the first kantele, the harp which
is the national instrument associated with
Finnish lyric poetry.
11

the research findings that could throw light
on the Finns' past; as a poet he wanted
to recount the past in the words of a folk
poem, as if calling the folk singers, the first
receivers of the poetic messages of the past,
to bear him witness. For him the ancient
times of Kalevala were a phase in history.
Seen from this standpoint it is easier
to understand the astonishing fact that at
'times Lönnrot speaks of the Kalevala as
a source of scientific research which sheds
light on life in the ancient society. This
indicates that he underestimated the sig¬
nificance of his own input and overesti¬
mated the value of the Kalevala as an his¬
torical and ethnographical source.
No poet can announce in advance that
he is going to compile a national epic. The
decision as to whether a work is a national
epic or not is made by the reading public.
Nevertheless, expectations were high with
regard to the Kalevala and the first
speeches hailing it as a national epic were
made even before it reached the book¬
shops. No one had cause to regret making
these speeches and very rapidly, both at
home and abroad, the Kalevala came to
be recognized as a valuable addition to
both Finnish and world literature. The
builders of the new Finnish national iden¬
tity drew new belief in the future from the
epic which seemed to restore to the nation
both its literature and its history.
This enthusiasm focused naturally on
the future and not on the past. The epic
was commented on and translated even
before people had had time to study it in
depth. In fact there was no need to know
what the Kalevala contained, only what
it was.
It was not until the mid-1870s that
critical folk poetry research began and the
Kalevala was rejected as a source and orig¬
inal recorded poems began to be studied.
Kalevala research became part of research
done on Finnish literature and general epic
literature.
The Kalevala as a symbol of national
identity, however, belongs to the history
of Western thought and to cultural history.
The message that Elias Lönnrot wanted
to convey to the nation with the epic is
to be found in the mystery of the Sampo.
In Lönnrot's hands this magic object,
which mills all material wealth and which
is fought over by the people, is transformed
in the Kalevala into the symbol of man¬
kind's cultural development.
LAURI HONKO, of Finland, is professor of Folk¬
loristas and Comparative Religion at the Uni¬
versity of Turku, Director of the Nordic Institute
of Folklore and president of the Finnish Lit¬
erature Society and the International Society
for Folk-Narrative Research. He is the author
of several books on ethno-medicine, folk reli¬
gion, lamentation poetry, and the methodology
of research into folk traditions.


