The Mediterranean:
Land,
by Fernand Braudel
Sea,
History
WHAT is the Mediterranean? A
thousand things at once. Not one
landscape, but landscapes with¬
out number. Not one sea, but a succession
of seas. Not one civilization, but a number
of civilizations, superimposed one on top of
the other. To travel in the Mediterranean
region is to find the Roman world in Leba¬
non, prehistory in Sardinia, Greek cities in
"In both Its physical and Its human
setting, the Mediterranean crossroads,
the Mediterranean patchwork, leaves a
coherent Image In the mind as a system
In which everything mingles and Is then
recast to form a new, original unity."
Below, vines growing on stony ground In
the South of France.
Sicily, the Arab presence in Spain, and
Turkish Islam in Yugoslavia. It is to reach
far back in time, to the megalithic buildings
of Malta and the pyramids of Egypt. It is to
encounter ancient things that still live on in
juxtaposition with the ultra-modern: beside
the deceptive immobility of Venice are the
heavy industries of Mestre; beside the
fisherman's boat, which is like the bark
sailed by Ulysses, are huge tankers, and
trawlers that ravage the sea bed. It is to
plunge into the archaism of insular
societies, and at the same time to wonder at
the extreme youthfulness of very old cities
which are exposed to all the winds of culture
and profit and which for centuries have kept
watch over the sea and lived on its
resources.
All this is because the Mediterranean is a
very ancient crossroads on which, for
thousands of years, everything has con¬
verged men, beasts of burden, vehicles,
merchandise, ships, ideas, religions and the
arts of living. Even plants. With the excep¬
tion of the olive tree, the vine and wheat
which were growing in the region at a very
early stage almost all the plants that we
think of as Mediterranean originated far
from the sea. If Herodotus, the father of
history, who lived in the fifth century BC,
were to return to earth and join the tourists
of today, he would face many surprises. I
imagine him, wrote the French historian
Lucien Febvre, "revisiting the places he
knew in the eastern Mediterranean. How
astonishing it all is! He cannot remember
ever having seen these golden fruits hanging
on dark-green bushes orange-trees,
lemon-trees, tangerine-trees. Why, they
were brought from the Far East by the

"The reason for the folds and fractures In
the Mediterranean, for the Juxtaposition
of sea depths and mountain peaks, Is a
restless and still seething geology, the
effects of which have not been effaced by
time." Above, view of Stromboll, one of
the Aeolian Islands In the Tyrrhenian Sea
north of Sicily. The Islands are so called
because In Antiquity they were thought to
be the home of Aeolus, the lord of the
winds. Crowned with a plume of smoke,
the volcano which forms the island Is
constantly active.
Arabs! These strange, oddly-shaped spiky
plants and flower stalks with their outland¬
ish names cactus, agaves, aloes and prick¬
ly pears he never saw such things in his
life. Why, they are from the Americas! And
these tall trees with light-coloured leaves,
which yet have a Greek name, eucalyptus
he never saw their like. Why, they come
from Australia! And the cypresses, which,
like the other trees, he has never seen, are
Persian. So much for the setting. But the
simplest meal brings him more surprises
the tomato from Peru, the egg-plant from
India, the pimento from Guyana, sweet
corn from Mexico, rice the gift of the Arabs,
not to mention the bean, the potato, the
peach-tree, a native of the mountains of
China which became Iranian , and tobacco . "
Yet all these things are now part of the
Mediterranean scene. "Today it would be
impossible to imagine the Riviera without
orange-trees, Tuscany without cypresses,
or vegetable stalls without pimentos."
And if we were to draw up a list of the
peoples of the Mediterranean those born
on its shores, the descendants of the men
who, in far-off days, sailed its waters or
cultivated its soil and terraced fields, as well
as all the new-comers who invaded it in their
turn would we not have the same impress¬
ion as we had when we catalogued its plants
and fruit?
In both its physical and its human setting,
the Mediterranean crossroads, the
Mediterranean patchwork, leaves a co¬
herent image in the mind as a system in
which everything mingles and then is recast
to form a new, original unity. How can this
undeniable oneness, this profound essence
of the Mediterranean, be explained? Sever¬
al approaches will be needed. The explana¬
tion lies not only in nature, which has
played a significant part, nor only in man,
who has obstinately bound all together; it
lies in both the blessings of nature and its
curses, which are equally abundant, and in
the manifold labours of man, both past and
present; in other words, it lies in an endless
succession of chances, accidents, and re¬
peated successes. (...)
On a map of the world the Mediterranean
is a mere slash in the earth's crust, a narrow
spindle stretching from Gibraltar to the
Isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea. Frac-

^ . , _r
-** ~""~ :~~Á "-~t^ It,
** ' f -, T?""^"? -» .
"Nature, history, and the quintessence of
Ufe differ from north to south of the sea....
In the direction of Europe and Its peninsu¬
las rises the screen of mountains.
Southwards, with the exception of the
tree-entwined djebels of northern Africa,
there is the desert, a sea of rocks or sand;
andbehindlies the Sahara, the vastness of
Black Africa and, extending beyond It, the
deserts ofAsia...." Above, expanse of salt
androck in the Mzab region ofthe Algerian
Sahara.

tures, faults, subsidence and folds in the
Tertiary period produced extremely deep
basins and, as a counterpart to their depths,
endless garlands of young, high mountains
with jagged outlines. Near Cape Matapan is
a depression 4,600 metres deep, which
could easily cover the loftiest peak in
Greece, 2,985-metre-high Mount Olympus.
These mountains jut out into the sea,
sometimes narrowing it down to a corridor
of salt water: at Gibraltar, in the Straits of
Bonifacio, in the Straits of Messina with
their swirling whirlpools of Scylla and
Charybdis, and along the Dardanelles and
the Bosphorus. Here, the sea is nothing but
rivers, or merely inlets.
These inlets, straits and mountains ar¬
ticulate liquid space. They delineate auton¬
omous realms: the Black Sea; the Aegean;
the Adriatic, which was long the possession
of the Venetians; and the much larger Tyr¬
rhenian Sea. This division of the sea into a
series of basins is the mirror image of the
division of the land into separate tracts: the
Balkan peninsula, Asia Minor, Italy, the
Iberian peninsula and North Africa.
Yet through this picture runs a line with¬
out which it is impossible to make sense of
the history of the Mediterranean from the
age of the Greek and Phoenician settle¬
ments until modern times. Geography and
history conspired to trace down the middle
a frontier of shores and islands which runs
from north to south, dividing the sea into
two hostile worlds. If we follow this fron¬
tier, from Corfu and the Strait of Otranto,
which half cuts off the Adriatic, as far as
Sicily and the coast of what is now Tunisia,
to the east of it we are in the Orient, to the
west, in the Occident, in the full, classical
sense of these terms. It is not surprising that
this frontier is the great line where battles
were once fought Actium, Preveza,
Lepanto, Malta, Zama and Djerba. (...)
The reason for the folds and fractures in
the Mediterranean, for the juxtaposition of
sea depths and mountain peaks, is a restless
and still seething geology, the effects of
which have not been effaced by time. It
explains why the sea is scattered with is¬
lands and peninsulas, the remnants of land
masses some of which have been buried
beneath the sea and others torn to shreds; it
explains why the jagged mountains have
not yet been extensively eroded; and it
explains why there are earthquakes and
fiery volcanoes which often grumble, fall
asleep, and dramatically reawaken.
Geology explains why there are so many
mountains in the Mediterranean region.
What a procession of recent mountains!
lofty, angular mountains that pierce the
skin of the Mediterranean countryside like
a stony skeleton the Alps, the Apennines,
the Balkans, the Taurus, Lebanon, the
Atlas, the Spanish mountain chains and the
Pyrenees! (...)
Yet some parts of the Mediterranean
coast are not mountainous. In the north, the
coast of Languedoc as far as the Rhône
delta, and the low-lying coast of Veneria on
the Adriatic. But the main exception to the
rule is in the south the long, extraordinari¬
ly flat, almost featureless littoral which
stretches from the Tunisian Sahel to the
Nile delta and the mountains of Lebanon.

"The Mediterranean Is honeycombed with
sea and land routes....llnked together. All
these routes form a system for the
movement of traffic. This system, I think,
Is the last element In our understanding
of the Mediterranean, which Is, In the full
sense of the term, space-movement."
Top, fragment of a marble group (1st
century BC) unearthed at Sperlonga (Ita¬
ly), possibly depleting the helmsman of
Ulysses' ship; above, rigging of an Egyp¬
tian boat depicted In a detail of a bas-
relief from Luxor (middle of the 2nd
millennium BC); right, a felucca on the
Nile In modern times.
On these endless, monotonous coasts, the
Sahara is in direct contact with the Inland
Sea. Seen from an aeroplane, two huge flat
surfaces the desert and the sea lie edge
to edge; their colours clash, one ranging
from blue to violet and even black, the
other from white to ochre and orange.
The desert is a strange world which brings
to the seashore the depths of Africa and the
restlessness of the nomadic life. Its ways of
life are quite unlike those of the mountain
regions. This part of the Mediterranean is in
opposition to the other, and is constantly
insisting on its place. Nature paved the way
for this duality, which might even be called
a congenital hostility. But history has mixed
the different ingredients, just as salt and
water are mixed in the sea.
And so when he listens to the Mediterra¬
nean concert, Western man should not only
hear the voices which are familiar to him;
there are other voices which he does not
know, and the keyboard is meant for two
hands. Nature, history, and the quintess¬
ence of life differ from north to south of the
sea and whether one is looking northwards
or southwards. In the direction of Europe
and its peninsulas rises the screen of moun
tains. Southwards, with the exception of the
tree-entwined djebels of northern Africa,
there is the desert, a sea of rocks or sand;
and behind lies the Sahara, the vastness of
Black Africa and, extending beyond it, the
deserts of Asia.(...)
Essentially, it is the climate that gives
unity to the Mediterranean. It is a very
special climate, which changes little from
one end of the sea to the other, and unites
different types of scenery and ways of life.
For it is virtually independent of local
physical conditions, shaped by two external
influences, the Atlantic Ocean to the west
and the Sahara to the south. Each of these
giants leaves its dwelling at regular intervals
to conquer the passive sea, whose mass of
lukewarm water makes it easy for each of
them to intrude.
Every summer, the dry, scorching air of
the Sahara covers the whole of the sea and
much of the land to the north. It creates the
glorious Mediterranean skies, the brilliant
spheres of light and the star-studded night
skies which have no like anywhere else.
This summer sky is only clouded over dur¬
ing the short period when the sand-laden
south winds rage the Khamsin or the

sirocco, Horace's "Plumbeus Auster", grey
and heavy as lead.
For six months, while it is under the sway
of the Sahara, the Mediterranean is a tourist
paradise, with its sea sports, its crowded
beaches, and its blue, still water glistening
in the sun. But this is a time when animals,
plants and the parched earth are longing for
rain, for the water that is the richest of all
prizes. From April till September, the pre¬
vailing north-east winds, the Etesian winds
of the Greeks, bring no relief, no real mois¬
ture to the furnace of the Sahara.
When the Ocean asserts itself, the desert
gives way. In October, the oceanic depress¬
ions, swollen with moisture, begin to move
in procession from west to east. Winds from
all quarters assail them and drive them on to
the Orient. The sea darkens, and becomes
as grey as the Baltic, or, buried beneath a
powder of white foam, looks as if it is
covered with snow.(...)
All in all, it is a strange climate, and one
that is hostile to plant life. The rainfall is too
heavy in winter, when the growth of vegeta¬
tion is halted by the cold. When the hot days
come, there is no water left. And so, if the
Mediterranean plants are scented, their
leaves covered with down or wax and their
stems with thorns, it is to protect them
against the dryness of excessively hot
weather, when only the cicadas are alive.
And if the wheat harvest is so early in
Andalusia in April it is because the
wheat is obedient to its environment and its
ears ripen quickly.
Visual beauty masks the treachery of
Mediterranean geology and climate. It
makes it too easy to forget that the
Mediterranean has not been a paradise bes¬
towed freely on man for his pleasure. Here
everything has had to be made, often with
greater difficulty than elsewhere. The
wooden swing plough only scratches the
surface of the shallow, friable soil. If it rains
too hard, the crumbly soil pours down the
slopes like water. The mountains obstruct
movement and occupy too much space, so
that the plains and fields are often mere
strips or handfuls of earth, beyond which
rise the steep paths that are so hard for man
and beast alike to climb.
And those plains that are of any size were
long crossed by meandering streams. Man
had to conquer the plains from hostile
marshes, protect them from destructive riv¬
ers swollen by the pitiless winter, and ban¬
ish malaria. Brackish water had to be puri¬
fied before the plains could be used for
agriculture. Then fresh, pure water had to
be brought for irrigation. (...)
Even today, in all the uplands of the
Mediterranean in Italy, Spain, Provence
and Greece festivals are held, in which
Christian beliefs and the vestiges of pagan
creeds are associated with work. But the
landscape itself, as much as folklore, bears
witness to these archaic ways of life. And
what a witness it is! It is a fragile landscape,
Air view of Herodion, the monumental for¬
tress built south of Jerusalem by Herod
the Great (73-4 BC). Excavations have
brought to light the building's four towers
and the ruins ofthepalace within the walls.

shaped entirely by human hand: the ter¬
raced crops and low walls that forever need
to be rebuilt, the stones that must be
brought up the hillside on the backs of
donkeys or mules before they are put in
place and consolidated, the earth that must
be carried in baskets and piled up behind
the wall. And remember, no cart hauled by
animals can be used on these steep slopes;
olives and grapes are picked by hand and
transported on the backs of men.
Today, as a result, this once cultivated
land is gradually being abandoned. The life
is too arduous and the profits too low. Even
the famous hills ofTuscany are slowly losing
their distinctive features; the low walls are
disappearing; olive trees over a hundred
years old are dying, one by one; no wheat is
being sown; and the slopes which have been
cultivated for centuries are returning to
grass and pasture or to nothing.
Another sight that is disappearing before
our eyes, but only began to do so recently, is
transhumance, an age-old phenomenon in
which mountains were associated with the
plains and the towns on them; this was a
source of both conflict and profit.
In the past, the movement of flocks of
sheep and goats between the summer pas¬
tures in the uplands and the grass that re¬
mained in the plains during the winter
months took streams of sheep and
shepherds back and forth between the
southern Alps and La Crau, between the
Abruzzi and the plateau of Apulia, between
northern Castile and the southern pasture-
lands in the region of Estremadura and La
Mancha, whence came Don Quixote.
Today this movement still goes on,
though on a much smaller scale. But in
many cases it has been replaced by road or
rail transport. (...)
All life must find its equilibrium. Other¬
wise it is doomed to disappear; this is not
the case of Mediterranean life, which is
sturdy and tenacious. (...)
Mediterranean life is hard and often pre¬
carious. In the final analysis, the balance is
often weighted against man, condemning
him to eternal frugality. A few hours or days
of feasting must be paid for by years, life¬
times of bare subsistence. The historian and
the tourist must not be over-impressed by
the urban successes, by the wonderful old
cities of the Mediterranean. Towns and
cities accumulate wealth, and consequently
they are exceptions; they are privileged
cases, especially in view of the fact that
before the industrial revolution almost 80 to
90 per cent of the population lived in the
countryside.
By and large, the life of the Mediterra¬
nean revolves around three things the
olive-tree, the vine, and wheat. "Too many
bones and not enough meat," as the French
geographer Pierre Gourou has jokingly re¬
marked. (...)
Of the three basic crops, oil and wine
(which are exported to countries outside the
region) have almost always been successful.
The only problem is wheat, but what a
problem! And the problem of wheat entails
that of bread and its consumption as a ne¬
cessity of life. What sort of wheat will it be
made of? What colour will it be? How much
will it weigh, since it is sold everywhere at a
Avlcenna (Ibn Slna) Is one of the greatest
names In Islamic science and philosophy
(980-1037). His Influence permeated the
whole of Islam and penetrated Europe
through Muslim Spain, al-Andalus, where
It remained a force for centuries. Imagi¬
nary portrait of Ibn Slna, above, Is an
Illustration from "Authentic Portraits and
Lives of Illustrious Men, Greek, Latin and
Pagan", by André Thévet (Paris, 1581).
fixed price although its weight varies?
Wheat and bread are the perpetual bane of
the Mediterranean; they are the decisive
figures in its history, a constant source of
preoccupation for the great. What will the
harvest be like? That is the important ques¬
tion asked in every exchange of letters,
including letters between diplomats,
throughout the year. (...)
The Mediterranean is honeycombed with
sea and land routes, so that the towns
small towns, medium-sized towns, and
great cities are linked together. And all
these routes form a system for the move¬
ment of traffic.
This system, I think, is the last element in
our understanding of the Mediterranean,
which is, in the full sense of the term, space-
movement. Movement adds its gifts ~to
those that form the basis of Mediterranean
life and are bestowed by the nearby space,
whether on land or sea. If movement be¬
comes faster, its gifts increase in number,
with visible consequences. For centuries,
Tuscany has been perhaps the most beauti¬
ful countryside in the world. Is not this
because the Florentines eat Sicilian wheat,
so that rural Tuscany has been able to spe¬
cialize in growing vines and olives. From
the fourteenth to the sixteenth century,
Venice was the richest city in Italy and
perhaps in Europe, certainly the richest in
the Mediterranean. She was at the centre of
the most extensive communications system
of the time, a system that extended over the
whole sea; she was the greatest purchaser of
the pepper and spices that came from the
Levant, or at least from the Indian Ocean to
the trading ports of the Levant; most impor¬
tant of all, she was the greatest retailer of
these precious commodities to the West,
and particularly to Germany, the greatest
consumer in Europe. In a sense Venice
confined the German merchants in the
great building known as the "Fondaco dei
Tedeschi" , just as the Islamic countries con¬
fined the Venetians themselves in the fon-
duks of the Levant. (...)
So it can be seen that the Mediterranean
routes increased enormously the space at
the disposal of the cities and merchants of

the Inland Sea. Yet it was a man of the
Mediterranean, Marco Polo, who revealed
the existence of distant China to his contem¬
poraries when he returned to Venice in
1296. Another, Christopher Columbus, dis¬
covered America in 1492. Italian merchants
dominated the trade fairs of Champagne in
the thirteenth century, and two centuries
later those of Lyons, around which for a
time the whole fortune of Europe soberly
revolved. (...)
A greater Mediterranean, then, lies
around the Mediterranean in the strict
sense and acts as a sounding board for it.
Nor is it only the economic life of the Inland
Sea whose repercussions are felt far away;
the same is true of its civilizations and of its
cultural movements with their changing col-
" ours. Florence is the centre from which the
Renaissance spread. The baroque arts,
which came from Rome and from trium¬
phant Spain, spread throughout Europe,
including the Protestant countries of the
north. Similarly, the mosques of Istanbul,
particularly the mosque of Suleyman, were
copied in countries as far distant as Persia
and India. (...)
Today we can recapture that splendour,
both in spirit and in fact, when we sail down
the Grand Canal, the world's finest thor¬
oughfare, or stand in the Piazza San Marco,
the world's finest square. But the splendour
was only possible because profits were
made from other people in distant lands.
For it took more than the exploitation of the
nearby countryside and the activity of the
little satellite ports in the Adriatic to
achieve such splendour. It needed the con¬
tribution of far-distant trade and of the
outposts which the Mediterranean scat¬
tered, through Islam, all the way to the Far
East. When the Doge of Venice weds the
sea at the feast of the Sensa, on Ascension
Day, standing before the church of San
Nicolo dei Mendicoli, it is not only a great
and magnificent spectacle, or a symbol; it is
a reality, for in wedding the sea he weds the
greater Mediterranean, the perennial
source of wealth.
The decadence, crises and difficulties of
the Mediterranean result from break¬
downs, shortcomings and disruptions in the
traffic system which goes through, beyond
CD
©
O
ê
Gl
and around it, and which for centuries over-
enhanced its status. Vasco da Gama's
voyage in 1498 was the first blow struck by
fate at the Mediterranean. Yet it survived
that trial. Decadence did not really set in
until 1620, when the English and Dutch
made inroads into the Mediterranean and
seized its distant trade outlets. That was a
long-term disruption. Was it definitive?
Even much later on, after centuries of re¬
cession, the opening of the Suez Canal in
1869 did not fully restore prosperity, let
alone pre-eminence, to the Mediterranean,
for by then England held absolute sway
throughout the world. There was no ques¬
tion of the Mediterranean, which had been
seized by foreigners in the sixteenth cen¬
tury, being given back to those who lived on
its shores.
Covering from six to ten millennia, in a
dislocated, inconsistent world as vast as its
human resources, a world that has been
studied exhaustively by archaeologists and
historians, the history of the Mediterranean
is a body of knowledge that cannot reason¬
ably be reduced to a synthesis. The
Mediterranean .past consists of an accu¬
mulation of layers as thick as the history of
distant China.
Let us look first at its civilizations.
"Over and above its present political
divisions, the Mediterranean consists of
three cultural communities, three huge,
thriving civilizations, three major modes
of thinking, believing, eating, drinking
and living.... First of all the West... or
perhaps we should say the Roman
world.... The second world Is another vast
expanse, that of Islam, which begins In
Morocco and extends beyond the Indian
Ocean to Indonesia and the Philippines....
The third civilization... Is the Greek world,
the Orthodox world." Above, from left to
right, mosque scene from the Maqamat
("Assemblies"), a collection of tales by
al-Harlrl (1054-1122), one of the first
masters of style In Arab literature. Illus¬
tration Is taken from a 12th-century Arab
manuscript by al-Wasitl; the centaur Chi¬
ron Instructing Achilles, as depicted In a
Roman fresco from Herculaneum (c. 1st
century AD), now In the National Mu¬
seum, Naples (Italy); The Marriage at
Cana of Galilee, a 14th-century Byzantine
painting from the church of St. Nicolas
Orp at Salonika (Greece).
10

If we are to give the reader a rapid over¬
view, we must select a guideline. Ana the
best way to do this is to look carefully át the "
Mediterranean as it is today, to try to define
the essential factor in its life and in its visible
equilibrium as it is now and probably as it
was at different points in the past. This
crucial element can be quickly and une¬
quivocally determined. Over and above its -
present political divisions, the Mediterra¬
nean consists of three cultural communities ,
three huge, thriving civilizations, three ma¬
jor modes of thinking, believing, eating,
drinking and living. (...)
Actually, these civilizations are the only
lasting forces that can be traced without
interruption throughout the vicissitudes of
Mediterranean history.
Three civilizations, then. First let us look
at the West, or perhaps we should say
Christendom, an old word overburdened
with meaning; or perhaps we should say the
Roman world, since Rome was and rerhains
the centre of the old Latin universe, later
the Catholic universe, extending as far as
the Protestant world, as far as the Atlantic
Ocean and the North Sea, to the Rhine and
the Danube, along which the Counter-Re¬
formation built its baroque churches, like so
many watchful sentinels; and as far as the
lands beyond the Atlantic, as if the destiny
of modern Rome had been to keep within
its sphere the empire of Charles V, on which
the sun never set.
The second world is another vast ex¬
panse, that of Islam, which begins in
Morocco and extends beyond the Indian
Ocean to Melanesia, Indonesia and the Phi¬
lippines, which were partly conquered and
converted by Islam in the thirteenth century
AD.
The third civilization is not immediately
discernible in our day. It is the Greek
world, the Orthodox world. It covers, at
least, the whole ofwhat we know as the
Balkan peninsula, Romania, Bulgaria,
almost all of Yugoslavia, and Greece itself,
where so much reminds us of the past and
ancient Hellas seems to come back to Ufe;
and of course it also covers the vast
stretches of Orthodox Russia. But what is
its centre? Constantinople, you may say,
which is the second Rome, and Santa
Sophia at its heart. But since 1453 Constan¬
tinople has been Istanbul, the capital of
Turkey: '
Turkish Islam, which owned the whole of
the Balkan peninsula, in the days of its
grandeur, kept its morsel of Europe! And
another centre doubtless played its part .
Moscow, the third Rome. But Moscow,
too, ceased to be a centre of Orthodoxy.
One might perhaps say that the Orthodox
world today is fatherless.
What better guide could there be than
civilizations? They traverse the passing
ages, they endure. While the film of history
is being made, they remain imperturbably
in position.
This immobility implants civilizations in a
far more distant past than is at first
apparent, and the ages through which they
have lived become an intrinsic part of their
nature. The Roman world did not begin
with Christ. Islam did not begin in the
seventh century, with Muhammad. And the
Orthodox world did not begin with the
foundation of Constantinople in 330. For a
civilization is continuous in nature, and
when it changes, even as profoundly as by
the adoption of a new religion, values in¬
herited from the past are part of it; they
survive through it, and continue to form its
substance.
Take the case of Greek civilization. It
arose and began to take shape around the
eighth century BC, following devastation
and invasions which had brought Greece
down to the nadir of history. Today it is still
alive. At the least, it has lasted for three
11

"From the 14th to the 16th century,
Venice was the richest city in Italy and
perhaps In Europe, certainly the richest In
the Mediterranean. She was at the centre
of the most extensive communications
system of the time, a system that extend¬
ed over the whole sea; she was the
greatest purchaser of pepper and spices
from the Levant, and above all the great
est retailer of these precious commodi¬
ties to the West... " Below, detail of a plan
of Venice by Jacopo de' Barbari (1440-
1516). In left foreground, the Island of
Giudecca with, at right, the island of San
Giorgio. In background, the Doge's pa¬
lace and the cupolas of the basilica of
St. Mark.
millennia. How many mishaps, catas¬
trophes and disasters have marked its long
journey! Greece and the Hellenistic world
fell to the Roman legions. But when Con-
stantine founded Constantinople, in 330
AD, the vanquished Greeks emerged from
their long period of subjection, the prison in
which they had been held for four or five
centuries. That was the beginning of a
Christian Empire as extensive as the Ro¬
man Empire. And in 395, when the Roman
Empire split into two parts, a "pars orien-
tis", which was ' to become the Greek
Empire of Byzantium, and a "pars
occidentis", which was to fall under the
hammer-blows of the Barbarians, Greece
revived, in all her power. Under this im¬
petus she survived for almost a thousand
years, until the Turkish conquest, in 1453,
which seemed once more to call everything
in question. But in the nineteenth century,
with the help of the Russian Orthodox peo¬
ples and of Europe, a veritable crusade
liberated the Christian peoples of the Bal¬
kans one after the other.
What we have just said about the Ortho¬
dox world is also true, mutatis mutandis, of
the two others Rome and Mecca. Theo¬
retically, in the case of Rome the starting
point is the birth of Christ. In the case of
Islam, it is the flight of Muhammad from
Mecca to Medina, on 16 July 622. But the
Western world is really only the continua¬
tion of the Latin world, whose language,
spirit, law and much else besides it took
over. And while Islam was indeed originally
Arabia, a land of deserts traversed by cara¬
vans with a long history behind it, it is above
all the countries that were so easily con¬
quered by horse- and camel-borne Arab
troops Syria, Egypt, Iran and North Afri¬
ca. Islam appeared in the main the heir to
the Middle East and to a number of cul¬
tures, economies and sciences of an earlier
day. The heart of Islam is the confined
space between Mecca and Cairo, Damascus
and Baghdad. It is too often said that Islam
is the desert and the image is a fine one.
But it should also be said that Islam is the
Middle East. This means that it is also the
heir to the untold wealth of ages.
FERNAND BRAUDEL, French historian, was
honoraryprofessor at the College de France and
a member of the French Academy. He was ad¬
ministrator of the Maison des Sciences de
l'Homme, in Paris, andservedaspresidentofthe
sixth section of the Ecole Pratique des Hautes
Etudes from 1957 to 1972. His first major work,
The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean
World in the Age of Philip II, playeda seminalrole
in the emergence ofa new schoolofhistoriogra¬
phy. In 1979 he published a 3-volume study,
Civilisation Matérielle, Economie et Capitalisme,
XVe-XVIIIe Siècles (published in English by Col¬
lins, 1981-82 as Civilization and Capitalism,
1 5th-1 8th Century). His study of French history
entitled Identité de la France is scheduled for
publication by Arthaud-Flammarion, Paris, in
1986. The present article has been extracted
from La Méditerranée, l'Espace et l'Histoire
(Flammarionpublishers, Paris, 1985), which was
first published in 1977 by Arts et Métiers Gra¬
phiques, Paris.
As this issue was going to press, the editors of
the Unesco Courier were saddened to learn that
Fernand Braudel had died in Paris during the
night of 27-28 November.
12
