The 'Archives Agreement'
A modern approach
to literary conservation and research
by Leopold Sédar Senghor
IT must be confessed that to bring together eight
countries Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico,
France, Italy, Portugal and Spain in a long-term
programme such as the Archives Agreement is a very con¬
siderable achievement.
Yet this alliance in a common cause was no chance occur¬
rence. At the Mondiacult Conference of 1982, judging by the
welcome received by the proposals I made there on this sub¬
ject, a movement was born, a unanimous will to save from
perdition, from the flames of a second Alexandria, the word
that tells us and future generations the meaning and purpose
of our existence.
AH at once, in this world of sound and fury, the word of
the poet seemed alone and defenceless against the ravages of
time and human malevolence.
The purpose of the Archives programme is, first, to
safeguard a hitherto neglected part of our cultural
heritage the manuscripts of contemporary authors and
then to research them and to publish critical editions. It in¬
augurates new forms of scientific co-operation and cultural
solidarity which, I am sure, will create a precedent that other
regions of the world will take as an example and adapt to
meet their own specific requirements. The Archives Agree¬
ment comes at a critical moment, at a time when it is the
general opinion that the revival of letters in our region is be¬
ing spearheaded by the poetry and narrative prose of Latin
America and the Caribbean, which has its roots deep in the
collective imagination of our peoples.
Today is born a great literary collection, since it consists
of over a hundred titles, from twenty-two countries of the
region and in the four main languages spoken there. The key
aspect, however, is that these texts will be treated with the
consideration until now reserved for the great Latin and
Greek classics. You will allow me, as a man of letters myself,
to say how much I rejoice in this new respect accorded to our
own writings, a respect which will be ensured by both the
geographic and the disciplinary diversity of the groups of
researchers (over five hundred specialists will be involved)
associated with this initiative.
Unaccustomed as they have always been to working
together, and consequently to knowing and appreciating one
another, despite a language, a history and a Weltanschauung
which ought to bring them closer together rather than
separate them, the Latin American countries are now em¬
barking, for a significant span of time, upon a series of ex¬
changes, a sharing of literary experiences and of cultural
messages which will be so many factors of integration, of real
rapprochement, less spectacular perhaps than the declara¬
tions of politicians, but far more significant and effective.
Another aspect of the Archives Agreement which seems to
me to be of capital importance is the participation of the four
Latin countries of Europe which, for reasons of con¬
sanguinity or history, are deeply and irreversibly bound to
Latin America. Just as the Latin American countries involv¬
ed have, as it were/rejected their traditional nationalism in
favour of a global, unifying vision of history and culture, so
the Latin countries of Europe are collaborating in an act of
solidarity towards a region with regard to which each of them
had formulated individual policies and jealously maintained
agreements, both covert and overt, often obtained at the ex¬
pense of their neighbours.
Under the Agreement, the Latin countries of Europe are
pledged to help each country of the region, by its own ef¬
forts, to rise above that level of communication, both inter¬
nal and external, below which it would be severely handicap¬
ped and prevented from taking its rightful place as a full
member of the cultural community to which it belongs.
The Archives Agreement means profound and practical
innovation both in Latin America and in the Latin countries
of Europe as well as in the interrelationships between them.
As proof of this may I cite Portugal's proposal to adopt the
methodology and structures of the Archives collection in
launching a collection of authors from the four Latin coun¬
tries of Europe concerned. This proposal brings a new
equilibrium and a new and important dimension to the scope
of the cultural dialogue envisaged. Since the proposal in¬
volves Fernando Pessoa, the greatest Portuguese poet of the
twentieth century, it confirms the will and the opportunity of
making the Archives Agreement the favoured instrument of
a real cultural exchange across the Atlantic.
Going further still, the delegates of the eight countries par¬
ty to the Archives Agreement, at my suggestion, are appeal¬
ing for a suitable technical and juridical instrument to be
placed before the twenty-third General Conference of
Unesco in which all aspects of the safeguard of and access to
authors' manuscripts as well as of their reproduction on
microfilm and the publication of critical editions would be
covered at national, regional and international levels. The
fact that a document similar to that which we propose, but
which was concerned with moving images, was adopted at
the General Conference of Unesco held in Belgrade, in 1981,
gives grounds for hope that a satisfactory solution will be
found for the written word, as yet unprotected or assured of
free communication by any convention.
It is high time, before the bulk of these riches is lost to us,
for an international debate to be engaged which would lay
down the broad outlines of an objective policy of preserva¬
tion and exchange.
17
