The Tale of the Heike
Japan's long-running medieval saga
by René Sieffert
The chief of the Heike clan clasps in his
arms the wife of his worst enemy... This
scene is from a television series made
in Japan during the 1970s and adapted
from a "cloak and dagger" novel, Shin
Heike Monogatari, which the author, Eijl
Yoshikawa (1892-1972) built around the
characters in the Tale of the Heike, one
of the most popular works in Japanese
literature.
IN the 1 320s, "monks with the biwa" began
to appear on the highways and byways
of Japan. (The biwa is a four-stringed lute
which reached Japan from the Middle East
by way of China.) Most of them blind, wearing
monks' robes, they travelled from village to
village, from castle to castle, chanting the
exploits of the heroes of the great conflict
which in the 1180s had opposed two impor¬
tant clans of the Imperial House, the Talra
and the Minamoto, in an implacable struggle
for power.
They were in many ways similar to the
rhapsodists, the reciters who spread the
Homeric epics through Greece, judging from
the countless variants and interpolated epi¬
sodes which feature in the hundreds of
known manuscripts of the chief of these epic
stories, the Heike Monogatari ("Tale of the
Heike"). The shortest version is in six
"books" (maki or rolls), the most extensive
in forty-eight.
The strange thing is, however, that this
epic, apparently a monument of oral liter¬
ature, emerged in Japan after some five cen¬
turies of highly developed written literature
which produced among other.masterpieces,
the Man yô-shû, an anthology of largely
scholarly poetry (8th century), and the Genji
Monogatari, a veritable psychological novel
which might be called "Proustian" had it not
been written almost a thousand years before
A La Recherche du Temps Perdu.
24

However, the paradox is only apparent.
It seems to be accepted that there was orig¬
inally a written text of the Tale of the Heike,
a kind of chronicle whose author is unknown
although various names have been proposed
over the centuries, usually those of monks.
This original Heike, in three books, was prob¬
ably the third part of a trilogy, the first two
parts of which have survived almost in their
original form.
This Is an original instance, In a country
with an advanced civilization, of the formation
of an oral, popular epic literature on the basis
of a written work. Furthermore, this came
about near the capital, in a part of Japan
where there was a high rate of literacy.
Courtiers, administrators and monks from
big monasteries displayed rare curiosity
about and interest in what we should today
call the "popular arts" or "folklore". In a pro¬
fusion of stories, chronicles, essays and diar¬
ies, they have left us descriptions of the way
in which the new culture developed and took
root, largely through the diffusion of epic sto¬
ries. They also recorded In writing the suc¬
cessive forms of the texts. Thus we can follow
more or less from the fourteenth to the end
of the sixteenth century the chequered fate
of what was to become the quintessential
Book of Japanese national culture until the
last century.
At the end of the sixteenth century, a
"definitive" printed version appeared of this
work which had until then been collective and
malleable. It circulated in a society in the
throes of explosive urbanization, becoming
the all-time best-seller of Japanese publish¬
ing, Japan's most imitated book and the one
best adapted to new forms of expression,
especially the theatre.
One of the first printed editions of the Tale
of the Heike was published at Nagasaki in
Latin characters to help Iberian missionaries
learn the Japanese language. The choice is
significant. What better model could be imag¬
ined for those wishing to preach the gospel
to the greatest number than this text known
to everyone, literate and illiterate.
For the "Heike monks" or Heiké-hôshi,
continued their itinerant activities as musi¬
cians and reciters, as they still do today. In
the last few years, recordings have been
made of stories told by the last chanters of
heikyoku (epic song), which are not more
or less arbitrary reconstitutions but reflect a
way of story-telling transmitted from master
to pupil since the Middle Ages.
And through a new paradox in its history,
this form which the modern media once
seemed to dismiss out of hand, is today expe¬
riencing thanks to the media and to Japan's
rapidly developing leisure civilization an
unexpected revival and extraordinary pop¬
ularity: a single singer, through a recording
or a TV performance can today reach an
The Tale of the Heike Is an epic based
on an actual historical struggle for power
in Japan between the Taira (Heike) and
Minamoto (Genji) families during the sec¬
ond half of the 12th century. After an irre¬
sistible rise to power, the Heike family
held absolute sway until the death in 1181
of their leader Taira no Kiyomori. The
Genji finally succeeded in crushing their
rivals and their leader, Minamoto no Yor-
itomo (1 147-1 199), established himself as
Shogun of Kamakura. Below right,
painted wood statue of Taira no Kiyomori
preserved in a Buddhist temple in Kyoto.
Below left, statue of Minamoto no Yori- x
tomo in a Shinto temple.
audience a hundred or a thousand times
bigger than that which his predecessors
could hope to reach in a lifetime.
Furthermore, these survivors of an art
thought to be moribund (thirty-odd years ago
there were only three or four singers left)
have not only found successors who will carry
on the tradition in far more satisfactory mate¬
rial conditions, but more and more young
people are studying under their supervision,
just as others attend schools run by rió actors
(some two million active amateurs at present)
or Indulge in the pleasures of haiku (ten mil¬
lion), flower arranging and other classical
Japanese arts.
This brief account of the extraordinary fate
of the Japanese epic and the continuous
exchanges between the written and the oral
of which it is the focus, may overlook the
essential fact that all forms of Japanese lit¬
erature and the performing arts have con¬
stantly borrowed from it for seven centuries.
The classical nô, jôruri (bunraku) and kabuki
theatre as well as the novel, with the very
recent vogue for cloak and dagger stories
draw on the epic cycle for themes, characters
and inspiration. More than anything else the
constant use of the epic in advertising in the
media is a sign of its unfading popularity.
	
RENE SIEFFERT, of France, is a professor at
the Institut National des Langues et Civilisations
Orientales, Paris, where he is director of the
Centre d'Etudes Japonaises. He has translated
and published several French translations of
the classics of Japanese Literature including
Le Dit des Heike (Tale of the Heike, 1976), La
Tradition Secrète du Nô et Une Journée de Nô
(The Secret Tradition ofNô Theatre and A Day
ofNô, 1960), Le Dit du Genji (The Tale of Genji,
1979, new edition 1985) and Les Contes des
Provinces de Saikaku (Tales from the Saikaku
Provinces, 1985).
25
