The birthplace
ofsubmarine archaeology
by Selim Morcos
THE waters of the Mediterranean
are the world's richest in terms of
the ancient artifacts and structures
that lie beneath them.
In ancient times, the Mediterranean
played a major role in communication
between its people, many of them sea¬
farers, throughout a succession of civili¬
zations, distinct from but influenced by
each other. Ships bearing cargoes and
passengers plied the sea lanes from port
to port. In the early days of navigation,
casualties were very high. As a result, the
shallow inshore waters are dotted with
shipwrecks. Moreover, in many places
the shoreline has been subjected to natu¬
ral processes such as subsidence and coas¬
tal erosion which have led to the sub¬
mergence of many of the ancient har¬
bours, and to the disappearance of fine
examples of old maritime structures and
buildings.
The presence of these extraordinary
riches combined with other factors to
make the Mediterranean the natural
birthplace of underwater archaeology, a
new field of investigation that was gra¬
dually opened up by the development of
diving techniques during the Second
World War, assisted by modern technol¬
ogy in submarine surveying, photography
and submersibles.
Underwater investigation is favoured
in the Mediterranean by the fact that the
water temperature makes diving agree¬
able during most of the year, while the
transparency of the water and the clear
sunny weather enhance the penetration
of sunlight and increase visibility in re¬
latively shallow depths.
Many of the early finds were made by
sponge divers or fishermen. In fact,
42

Left, submarine archaeologists photo¬
graph and map the wreck ofa Bronze Age
ship that sank off the southern coast of
Turkey In the 14th century BC or earlier.
The shipwreck Is the oldest ever exca¬
vated.
sponges are widespread in the warm wa¬
ters of the eastern Mediterranean, at
depths of less than sixty metres; and
sponge diving is one of the oldest profes¬
sions in the Aegean.
It was a fisherman who made one of the
first discoveries, in 1832, when he found
in his nets a beautiful bronze statue of
Apollo from 460 BC, while Turkish
sponge divers discovered one of the old¬
est shipwrecks ever investigated (1200
BC). The latter was excavated by Peter
Throckmorton and George Bass between
1958 and 1960. Its one-ton cargo of cop¬
per and bronze ingots shed new light on
Phoenician seafaring in the Bronze Age
and on trade and metallurgy in that
period.
Greek sponge divers discovered the
famous shipwreck at Mahdia, Tunis, in
1907. Five costly expeditions between
1908 and 1913 led to the most brilliant
early success in submarine archaeology,
resulting in the recovery of a cargo of
works of the finest Greek art. The trea¬
sures of Mahdia now occupy five rooms in
Alaoui Museum, Le Bardo, Tunis. Of
particular interest is a magnificent 1.25-
metre-high bronze statue of a young man
personifying Eros, the god of love, by the
sculptor Boethios the Chalcedonian.
Excavations at Mahdia continued until
after the Second World War, providing a
vivid demonstration of, and testing
ground for, diving techniques. It was at
Mahdia in 1948 that the newly invented
aqualung was applied for the first time in
submarine archaeology, by a French
team led by Jacques-Yves Cousteau and
Philippe Taillez who carried out scientific
investigations and raised more cargo to
the surface using a water jet to remove
mud. Later, members of the Tunisian
Club of Undersea Studies, using an air¬
lift, a kind of powerful underwater
vacuum cleaner they had designed for
themselves, removed mud and unco¬
vered the twenty-five-metre keel which
suggested the ship was about thirty
metres long. Other wooden parts offered
valuable information on Roman ship con¬
struction, and as a result a plan was made
of the ship.
When studying wrecks, archaeologists
seek to analyse the cargo and investigate
the construction of the hull, since this
contributes to our understanding of
trade, economy, ship-building and mari¬
time history. Two characteristics of
ancient wrecks are rarely encountered in
land archaeology: the collection in one
place of many objects that were in use at a
specific time and the fact that they suf¬
fered no alterations by human interfer¬
ence since the time of the wreck. Each
wreck is "a miniature Pompeii that
vanished tragically at a precise point in
time," pioneer submarine archaeologist
Honor Frost has said.
Submarine archaeology is, in fact, not
a search for souvenirs, but a scholarly
pursuit or search for knowledge. Many of
the wrecks discovered in the Mediterra¬
nean were carrying cargoes of amphorae,
the classical containers used for trans¬
porting fresh water, wine, olive oil, grain
and other commodities, The tonnage of
the ship can be estimated from the total
number of amphorae. The shape of and
inscriptions on amphorae provide clues
as to the date and place of manufacture.
Their position in the cargo, at the bottom
or on deck, may also cast light on the
route of the ship.
One interesting example of trade
emerged from an eleventh-century wreck
at Serçe Limani in Turkey, which was
excavated by George Bass between 1977
and 1979. The cargo included three tons
of broken Islamic glass representing the
remains of 10,000 glass vessels. Bass won¬
ders if this ship was Islamic because of the
contradictory evidence revealed by the
cargo. A secondary cargo of wine was
carried in amphorae marked with Byzan¬
tine Christian inscriptions. Islamic gold
coins were intermingled with Byzantine
copper coins. Official Islamic glass
weights were found side by side with offi¬
cial Byzantine lead seals.
Until the advent of submarine
archaeology, few examples of ancient
ships were known. They included a Ro¬
man ship (220-160 BC) found behind the
Stock Exchange in Marseilles and the
"solar boat" (2600 BC) discovered in
1954 in a pit near the Khufu (Cheops)
Pyramid, south of Cairo. Then awareness
that a large number of ancient wrecks lay
on the sea-bed suddenly heightened the
interest of specialists and the public in
wooden ship architecture, which had
faded when sailing ships were replaced by
steam ships. Many revealing lessons have
been learned from sunken hulls. From
thorough study of the hull of a ship at
Yassi Ada in Turkey, dating from the
time of the emperor Heraclius (610-641
AD), George Bass was able to conclude
that the hull was built partly by the mod¬
ern "skeleton first" method, and partly
by the Greco-Roman "shell-first"
method. From this he deduced that the
modern method of constructing carvel-
built hulls evolved from the older Greco-
Roman method at some point during the
late Roman period.
Five varieties of timber were used in
the construction of the Roman ship found
behind the Marseilles Stock Exchange.
The keel was of cypress and all the rib¬
bing of pine. Certain varieties of wood
were used for the longitudinal elements,
and others for the transversal elements,
thus confirming the texts of ancient wri¬
ters on the qualities, uses and sources of
different varieties of wood.
Another field in which submarine
archaeology is active is the discovery and
exploration of lost harbours and sub¬
merged cities. In 1910 Gaston Jondet dis¬
covered, west of Alexandria, completely
submerged at a depth of about 8.5metres,
the piers of an entire seaport of a colossal
scale which dwarfs many present-day har¬
bours. The find aroused considerable in¬
terest because of the massive size of the
submerged masonry and the skilful
method of its construction. This was the^
A huge statue of the Egyptian goddess
Isis (7 metres long and weighing 25 tons)
was discovered on the sea bed In the
harbour of Alexandria In 1961 and sal¬
vaged the following year. It Is thought to
have adorned one of the Seven Wonders
of the World, the ancient lighthouse of
Alexandria which was built In the 3rd
century BC. The statue can be seen today
In the gardens of the catacombs of
Kom-el-Chogafa In Alexandria (below).
43

gj jr;
The remains of a Roman ship were
discovered near the Marseilles Stock
Exchange In 1974. Photo shows workmen
preparing for the delicate operation of
transporting the wreck to the city's His¬
tory Museum.
first detailed survey of an ancient
harbour.
From 1931 to 1934, Père Antoine
Poidebard made an elaborate survey of
the Phoenician harbour of Tyre. Later,
Honor Frost and others studied several
old ports in the east Mediterranean such
as Arwad, Tyre, Sidon, Caesarea and
Athlit. In 1958-59, the British oceano-
grapher and marine archaeologist Nicho¬
las Hemming led a Cambridge University
expedition to the sunken Greek port of
Apollonia (Susah) on the Cyrenaican
coast of Libya. Built on a Phoenician
plan, the port was a two-harbour city.
The outer harbour received trading ships
while the inner harbour was fortified to
protect the city. The two harbours were
connected by a narrow channel flanked
with long walls to defend the inner har¬
bour against invaders.
The Romans made great progress in
harbour construction. Robert Günther,
an Oxford don, surveyed the elaborate
Roman ports of the Bay of Naples be¬
tween 1901 and 1903. Later, the French
diver Philippe Diolé visited many Roman
ports in North Africa, and devoted par¬
ticular study to Caesarea, the most im¬
portant military harbour between Carth¬
age and Gibraltar, which is now known as
Cherchel in Algeria.

Lighthouses were often constructed as
aids to navigation. When Alexander the
Great reached Alexandria, he con¬
structed the Eastern Harbour by linking
the island of Pharos to the mainland with
a narrow causeway, the Heptastadium.
The entrance to the Eastern Harbour was
so narrow that the lighthouse of Alexan¬
dria was constructed under Ptolemy II in
the third century BC. One of the seven
wonders of the world, the lighthouse was
a three-story structure probably rising to
a height of 120 metres. It survived until
the fourteenth century, when it was des¬
troyed by earthquakes. The coastal re¬
gion of Alexandria has also undergone
subsidence, and many buildings around
the old Eastern Harbour have been lost
to the sea. In 1961, an Alexandrian
amateur diver, Kamel Abu Al-Saadat,
discovered a massive statue of the god¬
dess Isis, weighing about twenty-five
tons. It was brought to the surface in
1963. In 1968, Honor Frost undertook a
Unesco mission to Alexandria on the in¬
vitation of the Egyptian Government.
After several d^ves on the site of Pharos,
she identified, with the help of Kamel
Abu Al-Saadat, seventeen different ob¬
jects. She believes that the large statue of
Isis and the other items are almost cer¬
tainly remains of the famous Pharos.
But underwater archaeology in the
Mediterranean today is not only con¬
cerned with such comparatively "recent"
monuments as the lighthouse of Alexan¬
dria. One of the most important new
developments is the study of very early
human settlements on the continental
shelf.
During the Ice Ages, huge ice sheets
covered Antarctica and large areas of the
northern hemisphere. Because a large
amount of seawater was frozen in the ice
caps, the sea level dropped by as much as
100 metres, thus exposing a wide area of
the continental shelf. This area, sloping
gradually beyond the present shoreline of
continents and islands, became available
as a living space for early man, and as
land bridges between continents and
islands.
The discovery of fossil bones and other
evidence by anthropologist Richard
Leakey and his colleagues has led to the
belief that manlike creatures (East Africa
man) existed in Africa around 1.5 million
years ago. These early men moved gra¬
dually into Asia and Europe over the land
bridges created during the Ice Age, and
particularly through the Isthmus of Suez,
the southern end of the Red Sea, between
Tunisia, Sicily and Italy, and between
Morocco and Spain. Until now there has
been no direct evidence from below the
sea of human use of these land bridges
(today sea straits), in spite of research
carried out on caves below sea level in
Gibraltar and Malta. However, in the last
ten years, research by Nicholas Hem¬
ming and other expeditions in the eastern
Mediterranean, have found for the first
time convincing evidence, mainly Stone
Age relics, on the continental shelf which
was inhabited and exploited by Stone
Age people to a depth of ten metres
44

below the present sea level, from at least
40,000 BC until the beginning of the
Bronze Age in the Middle East, about
6,000 years ago.
Today underwater archaeology is an
increasingly popular pursuit. But its very
popularity and success have brought
problems. The development of the
aqualung has given the professional
archaeologist a powerful tool; on the
other hand, it has also provided access to
amateur divers, many of whom admitted¬
ly are aware of the importance of the
great heritage lying beneath the sea.
However, some of these divers are also
fond of beautiful, rare objects and sou¬
venirs. Worse still, the existence of a
market for algae-encrusted antiques from
beneath the sea has attracted looters and
racketeers.
Even if objects of archaeological value
are presented to local museums, some of
their scientific value is lost, because they
are removed from their context. Old
stone or metal anchors, for example,
could give valuable information on mari¬
time routes if their distribution is proper¬
ly plotted. Souvenir hunters can disrupt
these studies.
The expansion and improvement of
harbours and old cities such as Alexan¬
dria, Athens and Naples have also re¬
sulted in severe losses. This man-made
destruction is intolerable and calls for
urgent remedy and an acceleration of
survey work, recording and study.
One big dilemma facing archaeologists
is what to do with the material they sal¬
vage, especially if they are dealing with a
bulky shipwreck or hundreds of amphorae.
Conventional museums tend to relegate
such material to their store-rooms or
backyards. A more innovative but costly
approach is to establish special museums
such as the Bodrum Museum of Under¬
water Archaeology in Turkey, which was
created in the late 1950s and now displays
the finds of five scientifically excavated
ancient shipwrecks.
SELIM MORCOS, Egyptian oceanographer, isa
senior programme specialist in Unesco's Divi¬
sion of Marine Sciences. Before joining Unesco
in 1973, he taught at the University ofAlexandria
where he carried out research on the exchange
of sea water between the Mediterranean and
Red Seas. He is interested in the history of
oceanography and in underwater archaeology,
on which he has written the only book in Arabic,
"Sunken Civilizations, the Story of Submarine
Archaeological Discoveries".
The ancient seaport of Apollonla on the
Libyan coast today lies half underwater,
either because of land subsidence or a
rise In sea level. While surveying a
submerged Roman Piscina or fish preser¬
vation tank atApollonla, divers found this
well-preserved marble torso and head of
a faun, now In the Archaeological Mu¬
seum at Cyrene, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
45
