Can we educate for world
peace ?
Extracts from the opening remarks by Archibald MacLeish
during a radio discussion with Dr. F. L. Schlagle, President of
the U. S. National Education Association, Mr. HerbertEmmer-
ich, Director of the Public Administration Clearing H ouse, and
Dr. Francis Bacon, member of the Educational Policies Com-
mission of the National Education Association, broadcast on 12
December 1945, one month after the establishment of Unesco.
"Of course we can educate for world peace.
l'd be willing to go a great deal farther than
that, l'd be willing, for my own part, to say
that there is no possible way of getting
world peace except through éducation.
Which means education of the peoples of
the worid. AU you can do by arrangements
between governments is to remove the
causes of disagreement which may become,
in time, causes ofwar. But peace, as we are
ail beginning to realize, is something a great
deal more than the absence of war. Peace is
positive and not negative. Peace is a way of
living together which excludes war, rather
than a period without war in which peoples
try to live together.
"But the difficulty with this kind of dis-
cussion is not the answers. The difficulty is
the questions. And the trouble with the
questions is that they are put-have to be
put-in words which have lost their fresh-
ness and their reality of meaning (,..)
"The real problem (,.,) is one that goes a
lot deeper. It has to do with the effect on the
human mind of words tike'international
understanding'and'éducation'and'cul-
ture' (..,)
"Before we can talk intelligently and
meaningfully, therefore, about questions
like education for peace, or the creation of
international understanding, we have got to
find the abrasives which will scrape these
words down to their living meanings again.
For some reason which 1 have never been
able to understand, people are quite willing
to believe that anything you caU'écono-
mies'is real and that you call'politics'is
US poet and Librarian of Congress Archi-
bald MacLeish (1892-1982) was Chairman
of the Committee which drafted the Pre-
amble to Unesco's Constitution.
exciting, but that anything you refer to
under the general words which describe the
life of the human mind is necessarily dull
and stale and unrealistic and fuzzy (..,),
"Actually, in the world we live in, which
is very different from the world we think we
live in, the relations of peoples to each
other in terms of the things they think and
the things they believe and the things they
hope, in terms, that is to say, of their mental
processes, of the things that distinguish
them as men, are far more vivid-make, to
be brief, far more sense than the economic
and political arrangements between gov-
ernments which capture the front pages of
our minds as weU as of our newspapers (,.,)
"I am not belittling the tremendous im-
portance of economic solutions for econo-
mie difficulties and political cures for poli-
tical mistakes. 1 am saying that thèse things,
important as they are, are far less important
than the creation of a world of words and
images and mutual knowledge within whieh
people may talk to each other.
"What we tried to do in London was to
invent an international instrument which
could help us aU to create that world by the
use of aU the channels of communication-
education and radio, press and scholarship,
motion pictures and music, journalism in ail
its forms and living, enduring arts. If the
question you are discussing is the question
whether our international instrument will
work, 1 am going to ask my cotleagues
Emmerich and Schlagle to put me down as
voting Yens."
27
M i
IQ-'
S.
I
I
