Bartolomé de Las Casas
The apostle of the Indians'
by Silvio Zavala
Scenes from dally life among the Aztecs
(fishing, weaving, collecting reeds, poun¬
ding maize and cooking tortillas) such as
Bartolomé de Las Casas must have
witnessed many times during his long
stay in Mexico. The drawings are from the
Codex Mendoza, a 16th-century Aztec
manuscript ordered by the first Viceroy of
New Spain, Don Antonio de Mendoza, for
the Emperor Charles V. Drawn by an
Aztec artist, with text by a Spanish priest,
the Codex never reached the Emperor. It
turned up a century later at the Bodleian
Library, Oxford where It has remained to
this day.
NOT long ago, I saw in the window
of a Spanish bookshop a work
entitled "European Anti-colonial¬
ism from Las Casas to Karl Marx".
"Good", I said to myself. "Our hero has
again been summoned to lend a hand, as
always when great causes are at stake".
At first sight it seems obvious that Fray
Bartolomé de Las Casas, the great critic of
Spanish colonialism in the New World,
should have been an opponent of col¬
onialism and that today's anti-colonialist
movement should count him among its
great precursors.
Although he accepted Pope Alexander
VI's bulls of 3 and 4 May 1493 granting the
kings of Spain authority over the West In¬
dies, he interpreted them as conferring
responsibility on the Spanish temporal
power to work for the religious conversion
of the recently discovered peoples while
safeguarding their sovereignty and posses¬
sions in a political structure which he
described as quasi-imperial, maintaining
their freedom and their right to property
and bringing them to the faith as Christ and
His Apostles had preached, by persuasion
and not by force.
After his controversy with the Cordobán
humanist Ginés de Sepúlveda at Valladolid
in 1550-1551, Las Casas was asked "what in
his view it would be legitimate and ex¬
pedient to do". He replied that in places
where there was no danger the appropriate
form of evangelization was that only
preachers, together with those who could
teach the indigenous people good customs
in conformity with the Christian faith, and
those who could speak to them of peace,
should enter such territories. In those places
where danger was to be feared a few for¬
tresses should be built on the frontiers from
which negotiations could be started and
religion would spread gradually and make
headway through peace, love and good
example.
Las Casas added that this and only this
was the intention of Alexander VI's bull
and that of Paul III, that once they became
Christians (the indigenous people) would be
subjected to His Majesty..., not enslaved
nor deprived of their land, but placed under
28

his supreme jurisdiction, with some
reasonable tribute being exacted from them
for the protection of the faith and instruc¬
tion in good customs and government.
In other words, notwithstanding the
religious purpose assigned by him to the
Spanish penetration of the New World, Las
Casas admitted that side by side with the
preachers were those who could teach good
customs to the indigenous population and
discuss peace with them and that instruction
in the faith, in good customs and in govern¬
ment went together. In his History of the
Indies (book III, chapter 102) he asked that
real settlers be sent, "industrious people
who would live by cultivating such happy
lands as these, which would be granted by
their own natural owners and occupiers, the
Indians, and that they would intermarry,
and together would become one of the best
and perhaps most Christian and peaceful
republics in the world, and not to send in¬
discriminately all kinds of profligates who
would rob and destroy them."
Thus, as the French historian Marcel
Bataillon has rightly remarked, Las Casas
did not entirely exclude the idea of coloniza¬
tion but stressed that it should be peaceful
and educational, and that in order to create
a better republic the colonists should be de¬
cent, kindly folk who would not refuse to
intermarry with the indigenous population.
Las Casas thus foresaw the union through
intermarriage which was to be a feature of
the Latin American peoples up to our own
time.
Las Casas assumed that the right to rule
the Indians conferred on the Spanish
monarchs by the Papal bulls became effec¬
tive when the Indians freely accepted the
faith. The former Indian rulers then ceased
to rule in their own right and became
ministers of the Spanish crown. However,
for Las Casas, this rule was not purely
political; it constituted a convenient and
necessary means of spreading the Christian
faith.
Moreover, in a petition of February 1543,
Las Casas proposed that "in order to
establish the royal rights over these peoples
and lands legally and securely, and to en¬
sure that they shall be perpetual and un¬
disturbed, it should be considered whether
the best way to achieve this might not be for
the religious, the king's officers, and learn¬
ed persons nominated by the authorities to
conclude an agreement between the
emperor on the one hand and the Indian
lords and chiefs on the other, so that all
agree freely and voluntarily to be subjects
of his majesty and agree upon the moderate
royal tributes, dues and taxes to be paid to
the king"
Las Casas was opposed not only to the
armed conquest of the Indians but also to
their subjection to the encomienda system
whereby the Spanish crown granted
numbers of Indians as workers to Spanish
settlers known as encomenderos. His ap¬
proach to this problem did not lead to the
abolition of the system but it did lead to its
restriction by royal power and consequently
to better protection for the Indians who
were the victims of it.
In a preliminary study for his treatise De
Regia Potestate, he laid down that "no
State, king or emperor may alienate ter¬
ritories or change their political regime
without the express consent of the in¬
habitants". Here Fray Bartolomé pro¬
claims the right to self-determination, that
the cession of peoples or territories is not
legally possible unless the free consent of
the people or citizens concerned has first
been obtained. Las Casas concluded in his
treatise De Thesauris that "as long as the
people of this world of the Indies and their
kings do not freely consent to the papal
grant in favour of our monarchs, do not
ratify it and surrender possession to them,
they have only a title, that is to say a reason
for obtaining primacy over the said world
and a right to the kingdoms and their
universal supremacy or dominion which is
derived from the title, but have no right
over them". In the absence of this consent,
the kings of Spain lack the most important
right.
Las Casas' doctrine on freedom and
slavery is one of those which has caused the
most controversy between his admirers and
his opponents.
Born in Seville about 1484, Bartolomé de
Las Casas must have been familiar from
childhood with captives brought back from
the Levant, the Barbary Coast, the Canary
Islands and West Africa, who included men
and women with white, black and copper-
coloured skins. In his early experience as a
colonist in the West Indies in the manioc
fields, in places where gold was washed and
livestock reared, he had to do with An-
In 1502, ten years after Christopher Col¬
umbus, Bartolomé de Las Casas, a young
man from Seville, arrived In the West In¬
dies where he became famous forhis pas¬
sionate defence of the Indians against the
excesses of the Spanish colonists. Yet
this man who was to go down In historyas
"The Apostle of the Indians" has also
been described by an eminent 20th-
century Spanish historian as a
psychopath and a fanatic. His strong op¬
position to colonialism was Indeed sur¬
prising at a time when other European
countries, following the example ofSpain
and Portugal, were setting out on the
roadofcolonial expansion, with complete
disregard for the rights of other peoples.
Above, this engraving of Las Casas was
made from his only known portrait, the
work of the Spanish artist Antonio Lara.
29

In 1544, at the age of 70, the controversial
Bartolomé de Las Casas received
recognition for his action on behalf of the
Indians when, on the recommendation of
Charles V, the Pope named him Bishop of
Chiapa, in the present-day Mexican State
of Chiapas. Under the terms of his ap¬
pointment this land was declared "pro¬
hibited to the conquistadors". Above,
Maya bas-relief from Chiapas depicts a
woman offering a helmet to the governor
of Yaxchilán. Right, a conchero or dan¬
zante de la conquista (dancer of the con¬
quest), one of a group of Indian dancers
who, during religious festivals at
Querétado, in Guanajuato State, Mexico,
commemorate a battle between Aztecs
and Spaniards which took place at the
time Las Casas was fighting desperately
to protect the Indians of New Spain.
tillean labour: Indian domestic servants and
workers, as well as with Caribs and other in¬
digenous people enslaved in wars and raids
by the colonists.
It was in this environment, after hearing
an uncompromising, courageous sermon
preached in Hispaniola in 1511 by the
Dominican Father Antón de Montesinos
that Las Casas was converted to the cause
of the Indians. The fundamental questions,
as recorded by Las Casas were: "Are these
not men? Should the precepts of charity and
justice not be observed towards them? Did
they not have their own lands and masters?
Have these people offended us in any
way?".
Las Casas campaigned against the
enslavement of the Indians because he did
not admit the justice of the wars waged
against them or the legitimacy of the so-
called ransom whereby Indian slaves seek¬
ing their freedom from their Spanish
masters were forced to enslave another In¬
dian to take their place, since there were
very few slaves among the Indians and the
word slave did not have the same
significance for the Indians as it did for
Europeans.
In Algunosprincipios, a document which
he included in the Tratados, or "Treatises"
published in Seville in 1552, Las Casas
asserted that every man is presumed to be
free unless the contrary is proved. All ra¬
tional creatures are born free, and freedom
is therefore a natural right. Slavery is an ac¬
cident which befalls a human being by
chance. It is a matter for the law of nations.
In the fifth "Treatise" he declares that
"after life itself, human freedom is the most
precious thing and consequently the most
worthy cause to defend, and whenever
anyone's freedom is in doubt, the decision
must be on the side of freedom". Thus, ac¬
cording to Las Casas "His Majesty'is oblig¬
ed by divine precept to order that all Indians
enslaved by the Spaniards be set free.
Bishops must be extremely solicitous and
diligent in seeking this. The religious should
agree amongst themselves in a learned and
saintly manner not to give absolution to any
Spaniard who holds Indian slaves unless he
30

first presents them for examination by the
Royal Tribunal (Audiencia) in conformity
with the New Laws, but they would do bet¬
ter still to resolve this without taking them
before the Audiencia, because of possible
sophistries in the legal proceedings".
As far as the slavery of Africans is con¬
cerned, it must be said that when Las Casas
was in the West Indies, he believed that the
precarious condition of the indigenous
population, who were close to extinction,
could be relieved if they were replaced by
manpower brought from Africa.
In her book Las Casas as a Bishop
(Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.,
1980) Helen Rand Parish confirms that
around 1543-1544 Las Casas was still think¬
ing of bringing two dozen African slaves to
his diocese of Chiapas to help the new
Spanish colonists and the religious by sow¬
ing cassava. She rightly believes that it was
only later, perhaps from 1546 and certainly
by 1552, that Las Casas came to realize the
utter injustice of black slavery and repented
of his earlier opinion.
On 30 June 1560, the archbishop of Mex¬
ico, Fray Alonso de Montúfar, wrote to the
king of Spain that "we do not see why
blacks should be captives any more than In¬
dians since, according to reports, they will¬
ingly accept the Holy Gospel and do not
make war on Christians".
In a famous passage in his History of the
Indies (book II, chapter 58), Las Casas
himself explains that he proposed the in¬
troduction of Blacks in order to alleviate the
condition of the Indians, but later repented
when he saw the injustices committed by the
Portuguese in seizing and enslaving them,
and from then on regarded them as unjustly
and tyrannically enslaved because "the
same reasoning should be applied to them
as to the Indians".
In his opposition both to the enslavement
of the indigenous peoples and of the
Africans, Las Casas has left us two ad¬
mirable definitions, one of his universal
concept of man, the other, which we have
' already quoted, of the fundamental value
of freedom.
In the History of the Indies (book II,
chapter 58), he repeats his famous conclu¬
sion that "all nations of the world are men
and are thus defined once and for all. All of
them possess understanding and will, all
have five external and four internal senses
(...), all take pleasure in what is good and
reject and detest evil, are disturbed by what
is disagreeable and harms them".
Furthermore, he believed in the aptitude
for civilization of all untutored peoples and
in their capacity to contribute to human
progress, because "just as uncultivated
land does not yield fruit but thistles and
thorns, yet contains inherent virtue which
enables it when cultivated to produce useful
and desirable domestic fruit, so there can be
no people in the world, however barbaric or
inhuman, nor any nation which, when
taught and instructed in the manner re¬
quired by the natural condition of man,
especially in the doctrine of the faith, can¬
not produce a plenitude of reasonable
men".
Las Casas' conversion to the anti-slavery
cause was a long and painful process, but
the conclusions he reached are just, and he
Las Casas has often been reproached
with having proposed the introduction of
Blackslaves to replace Indian labour. The
French historian Marcel Bataillon has
shown conclusively that Las Casas was
not the first to suggest this and that, in
any case, the suggestion was never
followed up in practice. Moreover, he
later bitterly regretted his words and in
his Historia de las Indias (Historyof the In¬
dies) he wrote that "the same reasoning
should be applied to them [the Blacks] as
to the Indians". Above, Portrait of a
Black, charcoal drawing by a contem¬
porary ofLas Casas, the great German ar¬
tist Albert Dürer.
left valuable seeds for those who would
later undertake similar campaigns.
When, influenced by the events of the
Napoleonic Wars, the Spanish colonies
began to revolt in 1808, the personality and
work of Las Casas again came to the fore.
His memory helped the insurgents to prove
that Spanish domination was harmful and
must be ended. His writings became bedside
reading for Fray Servando Teresa de Mier
in Mexico, for Simón Bolívar in Caracas
and Jamaica, and for Gregorio Funes in
Córdoba and Tucumán. And his memory
was revived by Juan Antonio Llórente, a
Spanish liberal in exile in France.
In his preface to the 1965 edition of the
Tratados of 1552, Lewis Hanke remarked
that it was topical to commemorate Las
Casas because the principles and ideas he
championed in the sixteenth century are still
being debated at a time when the world is
laboriously seeking an honourable basis for
lasting peace between peoples of different
cultures.
The critical examination conducted by
Las Casas not only led towards a repudia¬
tion of the use of force in subjecting other
peoples and of the evils of slavery and op¬
pression which accompany colonial rules, it
was also applied to his own thinking. This
is clear from the effort it cost him as he
came to insist on the consent of the Indians
as a prerequisite to their evangelization and
conversion and to their submission to the
temporal rule of the Spanish crown. The
same capacity for self-criticism is revealed
in the evolution of his thinking on the
enslavement of the Africans, to the point
where he applied to them the same doctrine
of freedom which he tirelessly defended in
the case of the Indians.
SILVIO ZAVALA, of Mexico, is a specialist in
the history of Latin America with a particular
interest in the Conquest and the Colonial
period. He was formerly director of Mexico's
National Museum of History, president of the
History Committee of the Panamerican Institu¬
te of Geography and History, president of the
International Institute of Philosophy and Hu¬
man Sciences, and a member of Unesco's
Executive Board. His many books on political
philosophy and the history of Latin America in¬
clude Sir Thomas Moore In New Spain, pub¬
lished in English translation.
31
