My life as an archaeologist
by Guo Zhan
WHEN I entered Beijing University
in 1973 to study archaeology, a
whole new world opened up for
me. I received a rigorous training in how to
excavate and carry out archaeological
surveys. Our teachers taught us not only
how to unearth specific parts of ancient
ruins but also principles of excavation work
on large archaeological sites. As fieldwork
I took part in the excavation of the Qin
Dynasty E-fang Palace Ruins in Shanxi, of
Stone Age ruins at Hong Hua Tao in the
middle reaches of the Yangtse River, and
worked on the site of the ancient capital of
Qi City State of the Spring and Autumn
period in Linzi, Shandong Province. Look¬
ing back now, I realize that these ruins
where we beginners were allowed to work
were not of the greatest importance, and yet
working on a real archaeological site gave
me practical experience and awakened in
me a deep interest in my studies.
Apart from fieldwork, we also studied
classical Chinese, ancient Chinese
characters, the ancient history of China,
major archaeological themes from each
period of Chinese history, photography,
cartography, the history of ancient ar¬
chitecture, the history of the different na¬
tionalities, philosophy and political science.
When I graduated in 1976, 1 was assigned
to work in the Science and Technology
Research Institute for Relics Protection af¬
filiated to the State Relics Administration
Bureau. The Institute is chiefly concerned
with the conservation of all kinds of
historical remains using modern
technology, and the preservation and
maintenance of ancient monuments. Along
with some other staff members I was given
the job of launching a brand-new subject:
seismological archaeology. (First of all, we
archaeologists working along the Yangtse
River provided hydrological data relating to
the last 2,000 years as reference material for
the construction of hydrological projects.
Chinese archaeologist Guo Zhan (second
from right) and his colleagues during a
survey of part of the Great Wall in 1976.
The 2,400-kilometre-long Wall is largely
the work of Qin Shihuang, the first
emperor of China (221-210 BC), although
parts of it date back to the 4th century BC.
It was substantially rebuilt later, especial¬
ly in the 15th and 16th centuries.
We thus opened up another new branch of
science, hydrological archaeology.)
In 1976, an earthquake in Hebei Province
literally flattened the city of Tangshan.
Hundreds of thousands of people were in¬
jured or lost their lives, and the after-shocks
threatened the safety of Beijing and another
great city, Tianjin. What were the
possibilities that Beijing would be
devastated by an earthquake in the very
near future? This was a question of nation¬
wide concern.
Research into earthquakes must be based
on an examination of the earliest possible
historical documents. In this respect China
is fortunate because all over the country
there are documents and steles from ancient
times bearing records of seismic activities.
Together with the many ancient
monuments which have survived earth¬
quakes, these were valuable materials for us
to study. The varying degrees of damage
sustained by ancient monuments in dif¬
ferent parts ofTangshan due to differences
in the magnitudes of the earthquakes pro¬
vided evidence which we were able to pro-
36

Photo © Unesco Courier, Chinese edition
This immense tomb in Qinghai province,
western China, Is that of a Turfan
aristocrat. During excavations which
began in 1983 a large amount of silk
fabrics, fragments of engraved bamboo
slips and other articles have been un¬
earthed. Situated in an oasis in the
Sinkiang Uighur Autonomous Region,
Turfan was an important staging post on
the northern branch of the Silk Road (see
the Unesco Courier, June 1984, issue on
"Great Trade Routes").
cess scientifically. Seismological ar¬
chaeology had begun.
Between 1976 and 1979, my colleagues
and I travelled extensively in disaster-hit
Tangshan, on both sides of the Great Wall
in northern China, in Beijing and Tianjin,
and completed our research. The results of
our efforts were compiled in a book entitled
"Seismic Archaeology in Beijing" which
has won wide acclaim from our fellow pro¬
fessionals. From this experience I learned
about the many-sidedness of archaeology
and its close links with other branches of
science.
In 1979 I took a graduate course in the
history of the Yuan Dynasty at the
Academy of Social Sciences. This opened a
new page in my archaeological career and
ended my work in seismic archaeology.
When I finished the course, only two places
really attracted me; one was the Institute of
Historical Research, the other was my
former place of work, the State Relics
Bureau. Here I could do both research and
conservation work. I decided to go back.
And so I joined the Relics Department,
which takes part in drawing up and enforc¬
ing laws concerning historical relics and in
administration related to relics and their
protection, and is involved in ar¬
chaeological work throughout the country.
I had developed a strong interest in ancient
religions during my post-graduate studies.
My new post provided me with oppor¬
tunities for contact with ancient religious
remains and was ideal for carrying out
research in this field.
I feel strongly that a patriotic ar¬
chaeologist should not only undertake
serious research into historical problems by
himself; he should help a wider audience
the whole nation to understand the im¬
portance of archaeological work so that
they can take part in the protection, study
and appreciation of our common historic
culture.
I am wholeheartedly devoted to my ad¬
ministrative work and research into sub¬
jects that interest me. In the past three years
I have visited ancient ruins on the three
gorges of the Yangtse river, surveyed the
Lama relics in Tibet, and visited Egypt.
This year I was appointed deputy director
of our Relics Department, a new honour
that spurs me to make greater efforts in my
work so as to fulfil the historic mission
bestowed on our generation.
Like myself, young archaeologists of my
generation are growing up. Before the
founding of the People's Republic, there
were few archaeologists in our country. In
the first years of the young republic, several
famous archaeologists, including some
from abroad, set up a training course for
future archaeologists. In 1955 an ar¬
chaeological department opened at Beijing
University. Its graduates became the main
force for undertaking archaeological work
in the new China. Now we of the next
generation have become pillars of ar¬
chaeological work throughout the country.
Many of us have been promoted to director¬
ships of museums and are leaders of ar¬
chaeological teams. Our modernization
drive is accelerating research and excava¬
tion work on ancient ruins. Heavy respon¬
sibilities have been placed on the shoulders
of young archaeologists.
Today many other universities are setting
up archaeology departments. With the
development of the economy and the rise in
living standards and levels of culture,
greater demands are being made on ar¬
chaeologists. Present numbers are insuffi¬
cient. The new situation also calls for
deeper professional knowledge. A course
run by the State Relics' Administration
Bureau to train leaders of archaeological
teams recruits only college graduates with
three years of working experience. Only
those who pass the examination at the end
of the course are qualified to lead excava¬
tion work.
The most professional archaeological
periodicals in China are "Archaeology"
(published by the Archaeological Research
Institute of the China Academy of Social
Sciences) and "Relics" (published by Relics
Publishing House). Other publications are
edited by local museums and research
institutes.
The scope for the study of archaeology is
widening. In the past, because of the lack of
professionals, the emphasis had been laid
on periods before the Qin and Han
dynasties. However, as China develops and
exchanges with other countries increase,
there is a growing interest in contemporary
relics and in the artifacts of our minority
nationalities.
GUO ZHAN, of the People's Republic of
China, is Deputy Director of the Relics Depart¬
ment of the State Relics Administration
Bureau. He was one of the compilers of
"Seismic Archaeology in Beijing", published
by Relics Publishing House, 1985, and is the
author of several historical studies.
37
