The Kalevala
and
the flowering
of Finnish art
by Heikki Kirkinen
THE Kalevala was born in the Euro¬
pean atmosphere of National
Romanticism stimulated by the
struggles for national autonomy. At the
time it was published Finland was a Grand
Duchy of the Russian Empire. The official
language was Swedish, a heritage of more
than six centuries of Swedish rule before
Russia invaded Finland in 1809. In none
of the schools was Finnish the language
of instruction and few educated people
understood Finnish. Over eighty per cent
of the population of one and a half million
were Finnish-speaking, but Finnish lit¬
erature consisted mainly of religious prose
and hymns.
At first the Kalevala was much admired
but little read. The 500 copies of the first
edition, published in 1835, took twelve
years to sell. During the nineteenth century
eight editions of the Kalevala were pub¬
lished, whereas in this century there have
been over sixty editions, including six in
the Soviet Union and four in the United
States.
The poetic beauty of the Kalevala, its
dramatic elements and its depiction of pop¬
ular yet mythical characters have always
been a source of inspiration to artists and
poets.
The themes most favoured by artists
have been the creation of the world, the
evidence of the magical powers of the great
sage Väinämöinen, the forging and theft
of the luck-bringing magical object the
Sampo, the adventures, death and revival
of the faithless lover Lemminkäinen, and
the tragic fate of Kullervo, who had been
raised as a slave.
During the 1850s, the first paintings and
sculptures on Kalevala themes were in the
Romantic style and were the work of Swed¬
ish artists. R.W. Ekman created idealized
images of Väinämöinen and other Kalevala
scenes, whereas J. Takanen used the
refined lyricism of neo-Classicism in his
sculptures. The stylistic schools of Italy and
France also had an effect on Finnish, which
began to shift from Classicism to Realism.
Up to the 1890s, then, Kalevala art, like
Finnish culture in general, was searching
for its own individual forms of expression.
The same search was also evident in
literature and music. Themes taken from
folk poems or the Kalevala were already
present in the Swedish-language literature
of the early nineteenth century, but full-
scale cultivation of the Kalevala spirit in
literature began later. The year 1869 saw
the performance of Z. Topelius' play Prin-
sessan av Cypern (The Princess of Cyprus),
which combined the adventures of the
Kalevala heroes and the world of ancient
Greece. The overture composed for it by
F. von Schantz is one of the first com¬
positions for an orchestra in the mood of
the Kalevala.
Aleksis Kivi, who was to become the
Finnish-language national writer, won the
best play award with his Kullervo, but con¬
servative critics demanded changes and it
was not performed until 1885. The lan¬
guage and metre of the Kalevala was a
stimulus to Kivi's poetry, although his
prose works are classed as Realism. H.J.
Erkko and many other poets favoured Kal¬
evala themes, but on the whole the rise
of political and language issues temporarily
weakened interest in the Kalevala.
A turn in the tide of cultural devel¬
opment occurred in 1885 at the time of
the fiftieth anniversary of the publication
of the Kalevala. That year saw the pub¬
lication of J. Krohn's Suomalaisen Kir-
jallisuuden Historia (History of Finnish Lit¬
erature) in which the Kalevala occupied
a central position.
After a period of maturation the Kal¬
evala and the cultural tradition behind it
reached a peak as sources of national cul¬
ture between the 1890s and the achieve¬
ment of independence in 1917. During this
period Finnish culture became interna¬
tionally known, both in Europe and Amer¬
ica, thanks largely to artist Akseli Gallen-
Kallela (1865-1933), composer Jean Sibel¬
ius (1865-1957) and poet Eino Leino (1878-
1926).
Gallen-Kallela, who had studied in
France, started out as a Realistic painter,
but after spending a long honeymoon in
Karelia in the traditional folk-song regions,
he developed a new style of depicting the
Kalevala, bringing decorative and sym¬
bolistic elements as well as monumental
ruggedness into a realistic representation
of Nature and the mythical heroes.
The Paris World Exhibition in 1900
brought Finnish culture and the Finns'
desire for independence to international
12

Photo-portrait of the blind kantele-player
Stefan Jänis, taken in 1915 in the village
of Hanhiselkä, to the north of Lake
Ladoga. The kantele, or Finnish harp, was
traditionally used to accompany Finnish
lyric poetry.
consciousness. Gallen-Kallela painted four
Kalevala-inspired frescoes for the Finnish
pavilion whose monumental art and ide¬
ological message created a world sensation.
Finland had created her own culture and
was defending it, as if it were the luck-
bringing Sampo, against the attacks of
Mother Russia on Finnish autonomy. This
message was further confirmed by Sibelius'
symphonic poem Finlandia, which was also
performed at the World Exhibition.
Sibelius studied in central Europe, but
he had early grown attached to the mood
of the Kalevala. He visited the great rune
singer Larin Paraske to learn the way the
traditional folk poems were sung. He also
made several trips to Karelia. In 1892 he
conducted the first public performance of
his Kullervo symphony, which demon¬
strated that he had penetrated deep into
the mythical spirit of the Kalevala with his
original tone language. This impression is
reinforced by his Karelia and Lemmin-
käinen suites.
Eino Leino was of Karelian origin and
had been inspired by the Kalevala when
still a student. He developed its themes
and stylistic devices in his poetry in the
spirit of neo-Romanticism, Symbolism and
hero-worship. One of his earliest poems,
Tarina Suuresta Tammesta (A Tale of the
Great Oak), was a symbolic description
of the growth of the Finnish nation from
the shade of a foreign power into light.
The Kalevala blossomed out in his col¬
lection Helkavirsia, published in 1903. In
a sophisticated adaptation of the folk poem
metre he depicts the mythical characters
in his ballads as reflections of the ideo¬
logical trends and goals of his own time.
The poems convey the bitterness of threat
and revenge but also the spirit of love. The
second Helkavirsia series expands the
themes to general humanistic and even
cosmic visions of the liberty of the human
spirit and the limits of life.
Finland won her independence in 1917
in the turmoil of the Russian revolution.
The great dream had come true and thus
began a new phase of material and cultural
reconstruction. Typical of the works of the
first young artists of the independent
nation to be inspired by the themes and
moods of the Kalevala were the sculptures
of W. Aaltonen, the lithographic illustra¬
tions of the Kalevala by M. Visanti, U.
Klami's orchestral suite Kalevala and L.
Madejota's composition Väinämöisen
Soitto (Väinämöinen Playing). The cele¬
bration of the centenary of the Kalevala,
in 1935 , was the climax of the consolidation
of the position of the national epic.
In the aftermath of the Second World ,
War Finland lost part of the Kalevala
regions of Karelia, settled the evacuees in
Finland and began developing a modern
industrialized society on a democratic
basis. Artists began to experiment with the
use of modern stylistic devices in the treat¬
ment of Kalevala themes. U. Alanko
painted a cubistic Aino figure and J. Sie-
vänen an abstract figure of Lemminkäi-
nen's mother. T. Sakki won a Kalevala
sculpture competition with his wave line
sculpture depicting the rhythmic metre of
the Kalevala.
Reading room in the Folklore Archives,
Helsinki. This Institution which special¬
izes in the collection, study and publi¬
cation of the oral heritage, contains over
3 million manuscripts and some 10,000
hours of sound recordings. The Archives
form part of the Finnish Literature Soci¬
ety, an extremely active research centre
founded in 1831. The Finnish folklorlst
Urpo Vento was director of the Folklore
Archives from 1964 to 1972.
I
M
hmiw; */f//..
I
¿
©
Photo-portrait of the famous woman
singer Larin Paraske, better known as
Paraskeva Nikitin, taken in 1892. Some
32,000 lines from her rich repertory of
verse were recorded.
In poetry the impact of the Kalevala
was at first an unfocused striving to find
the riches of the Finnish language through
new forms; there was the juxtaposing, of
the themes of the Kalevala with those of
modern times as well as the use of the
metre of the Kalevala in modern poems.
L. Viita introduced it into the rugged
rhythm of Betonimylläri (Concrete Mixer)
and S. Selja into her sensitively feminine
mood poems. M. Rossi wrote a delicate
lullaby in Kalevala metre and A. Tur-
tiainen used it in his idealistic social poems
Leivän Sampo (The Bread-bringing
Sampo), dedicated to metalworkers.
The renaissance of the Kalevala in the
arts culminated in the works of P. Haaviko.
His collection Kaksikymmentä ja Yksi
(One and Twenty, 1974) uses both the
Kalevala metre and modern verse forms
in portraying a phantasy of some Finns
journeying through Russia to Byzantium
to steal the Empress's money-making
machine, the Sampo. After concentrating
on modern themes for a while he created
Rauta-aika (The Iron Age, 1982), which
is a profound and individual analysis of
the main events in the Kalevala. Kalevala
themes have also been used in plays and,
this year, the one hundred and fiftieth anni¬
versary of the Kalevala, the whole epic will
be portrayed on stage in Karelia.
All in all, the Kalevala and Kalevala-
style folk poetry have undergone a revival
in Finnish cultural life. They have inspired
the Finns to express their own tradition
in a modern language in nearly all fields
of culture.
HEIKKI KIRKINEN, of Finland, is professor
of history at the University of Joensuu. His
research field is the cultural history of Karelia
and Russia. He was Rector of the University
of Joensuu from 1971 to 1981, and in 1984-
1 985 he is an associate professor at the Centre
of Finno-Ugrian Studies of the University of
Paris.
13
