Why war? A letter from Albert Einstein to Sigmund Freud
The text below is a slightly abridged version ofa letter written by Albert Einstein
to Sigmund Freud. Under the title Why War ?, the letter and Freud's reply to it
were published in 1933 by the International Institute of Intellectual Co¬
operation. Theyformedpart ofan international series ofopen letters, sponsored
by the Institute, in which leading intellectuals exchanged ideas on major ques¬
tions, the most crucial of which was the threat of war.
Caputh near Potsdam, 30 July, 1932
Dear Professor Freud,
...Is there any way of delivering mankind from the menace of
war? It is common knowledge that, with the advance of
modern science, this issue has come to mean a matter of life
and death for civilization as we know it; nevertheless, for all
the zeal displayed, every attempt at its solution has ended in
a lamentable breakdown.
I believe, moreover, that those whose duty it is to tackle the
problem professionally and practically are growing only too
aware of their impotence to deal with it, and have now a very
lively desire to learn the views of men who, absorbed in the
pursuit of science, can see world-problems in the perspective
distance lends. As- for me, the normal objective of my thought
affords no insight into the dark places of human will and feel¬
ing. Thus, in the enquiry now proposed, I can do little more
than seek to clarify the question at issue and, clearing the
ground of the more obvious solutions, enable you to bring the
light of your far-reaching knowledge of man's instinctive life
to bear upon the problem...
...As one immune from nationalist bias, I personally see a
simple way of dealing with the superficial (i.e. administrative)
aspect of the problem: the setting up, by international con¬
sent, of a legislative and judicial body to settle every conflict
arising between nations. Each nation would undertake to
abide by the orders issued by this legislative body, to invoke
its decision in every dispute, to accept its judgments
unreservedly and to carry out every measure the tribunal
deems necessary for the execution of its decrees. But here, at
the outset, I come up against a difficulty; a tribunal is a human
institution which, in proportion as the power at its disposal is
inadequate to enforce its verdicts, is all the more prone to suf¬
fer these to be deflected by extrajudicial pressure. This is a fact
with which we have to reckon; law and might inevitably go
hand in hand, and juridical decisions approach more nearly
the ideal justice demanded by the community (in whose name
and interests these verdicts are pronounced) in so far as the
community has effective power to compel respect of its
juridical ideal. But at present we are far from possessing any
supranational organization competent to render verdicts of in¬
contestable authority and enforce absolute submission to the
execution of its verdicts. Thus I am led to my first axiom: the
quest of international security involves the unconditional sur¬
render by every nation, in a certain measure, of its liberty of
action, its sovereignty that is to say, and it is clear beyond all
doubt that no other road can lead to such security.
The ill-success, despite their obvious sincerity, of all the ef¬
forts made during the last decade to reach this goal leaves us
no room to doubt that strong psychological factors are at
work, which paralyse these efforts. Some of these factors are
not far to seek. The craving for power which characterizes the
governing class in every nation is hostile to any limitation of
the national sovereignty. This political power-hunger is wont
to batten on the activities of another group, whose aspirations
are on purely mercenary, economic lines. I have specially in
mind that small but determined group, active in every nation,
composed of individuals who, indifferent to social considera¬
tions and restraints, regard warfare, the manufacture and sale
of arms, simply as an occasion to advance their personal in¬
terests and enlarge their personal authority.
But recognition of this obvious fact is merely the first step
towards an appreciation of the actual state of affairs. Another
question follows hard upon it: How is it possible for this small
clique to bend the will of the majority, who stand to lose and
suffer by a state of war, to the service of their ambitions? (In
speaking of the majority, I do not exclude soldiers of every
rank who have chosen war as their profession, in the belief
that they are serving to defend the highest interests of their
race, and that attack is often the best method of defence.) An
obvious answer to this question would seem to be that the
minority, the ruling class at present, has the schools and press,
usually the Church as well, under its thumb. This enables it to
organize and sway the emotions of the masses, and make its
tool of them.
Yet even this answer does not provide a complete solution.
Another question arises from it: How is it these devices suc¬
ceed so well in rousing men to such wild enthusiasm, even to
sacrifice their lives? Only one answer is possible. Because man
has within him a lust for hatred and destruction. In normal
times this passion exists in a latent state, it emerges only in
unusual circumstances; but it is a comparatively easy task to
call it into play and raise it to the power of a collective
psychosis. Here lies, perhaps, the crux of all the complex of
factors we are considering, an enigma that only the expert in
the lore of human instincts can resolve.
And so we come to our last question. Is it possible to control
man's mental evolution so as to make him proof against the
psychoses of hate and destructiveness? Here I am thinking by
no means only of the so-called uncultured masses. Experience
proves that it is rather the so-called "Intelligentzia" that is
most apt to yield to these disastrous collective suggestions,
since the intellectual has no direct contact with life in the raw,
but encounters it in its easiest, synthetic form upon the
printed page.
To conclude: I have so far been speaking only of wars bet¬
ween nations; what are known as international conflicts. But
I am well aware that the aggressive instinct operates under
other forms and in other circumstances. (I am thinking of civil
wars, for instance, due in earlier days to religious zeal, but
nowadays to social factors; or, again, the persecution of racial
minorities). But my insistence on what is the most typical,
most cruel and extravagant form of conflict between man and
man was deliberate, for here we have the best occasion of
discovering ways and means to render all armed conflicts
impossible.
Yours very sincerely, A. Einstein
Text © Copyright International Institute of Intellectual Co¬
operation, 1933
