Washing our dirty water
TODAY there is world-wide agree¬
ment, at least in principle, about
the need to reduce pollution so
that mankind can survive. It is now con¬
sidered necessary to treat all effluents
before they are discharged into water
bodies.
The following are the principal
substances and types of pollution which
the treatment processes are designed to
remove:
Suspended solids, such as silt (which
produce turbidity and form sludge
deposits).
Material that consumes oxygen.
Nutrients necessary for the creation of
new organisms.
Extremely important nutrients are the
phosphates and nitrates. In waste water,
phosphorus and nitrogen are mainly the
result of the domestic use of water. They
are also becoming a major problem as a
result of the excessive fertilization of
farmlands.
The role of phosphorus in waste water
pollution has been debated since it was
first recognized that synthetic washing
detergents (when first introduced) con¬
tained large amounts of this substance
which soon found its way into nearby sur¬
face waters.
Manufacturers have drastically reduc¬
ed the phosphorus content. But treatment
plants are still faced with large amounts of
phosphorus and nitrogen contained in the
waste water arriving at the plants.
The waste water from municipalities
also contains pathogenic bacteria,
viruses, and chemicals. Mercury, lead,
copper, zinc, and chromium (the so-called
"heavy metals") are waste products of
some industries.
Such substances can dramatically af¬
fect the health of many organisms which
inhabit streams and lakes. Certain ef¬
fluents also can change the pH (acidity) of
the water. The pH is an indication of the
acidic/basic nature of the liquid, running
from 0 to 14. Seven is neutral; the lower
the value the more acidic the liquid. Fish
regarded as desirable game species
(such as trout) need a pH of more than five
in order to survive. Too high a pH on the ,
other hand may be dangerous for fish.
The paper and pulp industry is mainly
responsible for effluents that cause low
pH values. Tanneries and textile mills
At this purification plant in Louisiana,
USA, industrial waste water is literally
being "washed". Highly oxygenated
water is pumped into the waste water
through hundreds of jets. The oxygen in
this water (it shows up white in the photo)
breaks down the organic matter In the
waste water which is then returned to the
Mississippi River.
discharge waste water with high pH
values.
Two other groups of pollutants which
can have major biological impacts are the
pesticides and the hydrocarbons which
escape from refineries, automobile ser¬
vice stations, garages, and streets.
The following four steps are used in
waste water treatment processes:
sludge separation
biological treatment
chemical treatment
complementary treatment,
filtering.
such as
The handling of waste water at a
sewage plant always begins with a pre-
treatment process that removes those
materials that float, are large in size, or
heavy. Sand and gravel also are removed
during this initial stage.
Following this initial screening process
the remaining materials move to a basin
where the velocity of the waste water flow
míimm*ñ4t
27

is purposely kept low. As a result, solid
material will then sink to the bottom where
it is removed by scrapers. This stage of
the process may take up to three hours.
This phase of the process can be per¬
formed in two ways. In the first method,
the aerated sludge process, the water
enters a basin where it is aerated,
together with a biological floe. The
bacteria in the floe metabolize the waste
solids. The air is introduced by air diffu¬
sion or a turbine aeration system, causing
the water to be set in motion. Floes of
sludge are formed and grow in size. After
one to three hours in the aeration basin
the suspension moves on to a sedimenta¬
tion basin where the sludge is allowed to
settle, and is recycled or removed.
The second method uses a biologically
active bed made up of layers of material,
often of coarse stones. Microorganisms in
a gel adhering to the stones remove and
decompose the organic material and
periodically slough off. As with the
previous process, the partially treated
sewage is then passed on to a sedimenta¬
tion basin where settling of the sludge
occurs.
The next step, when used, is chemical
in nature. Aluminium sulphate and iron
compounds are added to facilitate the
creation of floe. The phosphorus in the
sewage water is removed at this stage. As
a final step, filtering may be carried out to
remove the floes still present.
A troublesome by-product from waste
water treatment is the sludge. In earlier
days, the sludge would be dumped into
the sea in those countries located along
an ocean coast. That option now is not ac¬
ceptable because of the known harmful
effects on marine life.
Sludge can be treated in digestion
chambers where an oxygen-free condi¬
tion transforms the organic material to
more stable non-organic compounds.
This procedure takes about three weeks.
However, the digested sludge still must
be processed, because it contains con¬
siderable water, which may be removed
by the use of drying beds or by heating.
The latter method requires considerable
energy.
After the sludge has been dewatered.
There are several options for the final
disposal of the material:
It can be removed to a sanitary landfill.
There a new problem can be
encounteredleakage from the landfill. If
not properly constructed, precipitation
may percolate through the sludge to the
groundwater.
The sludge can be composted with
domestic solid waste products.
The sludge can be incinerated. Unfor¬
tunately, this process may transform
water pollution into air pollution. The ash,
which remains after the incineration, also
may contain hazardous heavy metals
which could be taken up by living
organisms.
The sludge can be used as a soil im¬
provement substance similar to cattle
manure. Still remaining, however, is the
problem of the heavy metals. In many
This sewage treatment plant at Lubbock,
Texas, uses a 1 ,200-hectare-farm as its
tertiary disposal facility. The nutrients
that are normally absorbed during this
stage of the treatment process are
applied to the land as fertilizer.
countries rotted sludge cannot legally be
used in vegetable gardens for fear that the
heavy metals will find their way into food
products.
It should be apparent that there are
serious difficulties in getting rid of the
harmful substances that man introduces
into the hydrological cycle. We are often
left withif not exactly those pollutants
which we originally added to the
systemsome degenerated pollutants
which can still be biologically hazardous.
The crucial point is that man continuously
adds pollutants to the hydrological cycle.
In the treatment plants these pollutants
are mostly transformed into solid wastes.
Something must then be done with the
solids. If contaminants in these materials
are allowed to reach the surface or
groundwater the pollution cycle is closed.
What happens then? Do we have any
alternatives? Unfortunately, not many.
We need new industrial processes that do
not cause water pollution, and we also
need improved recycling processes to
prevent polluted water from being
discharged into streams and lakes. It
needs stressing that all components of an
urban area's water environment must be
satisfactorily handled as a total system.
An adequate and potable supply must be
secured, the waste water must be effec¬
tively treated, and the leftover products
such as sludge must be safely disposed
of. A breakdown in any of these com¬
ponents of the system will place the entire
process and the city in a hazardous
position.
28
