'A shared destiny'
Women
of the Mediterranean
Two Turkish women whose different ap¬
proaches to life are reflected in their
dress
"Westernization has been associated
with a degradation of public morality, an
attack on women's honour; and the signs
of this degradation have always been
perceived in the transformation of
women's ways of dressing and the eman¬
cipation of their presence in the public
arena."
Nora Seni (Turkey)
by Nilüfer Gole
RUNNING in filigree through studies
on the situation of women in var¬
ious Mediterranean societies is a
common thread: a desire to seek out the
feminine presence wherever it lies hidden, in
the political and cultural as well as the
religious and urban context. Far from at¬
tempting to analyse the situation of "the
Mediterranean woman" as a stereotype
stamped with the seal of absolute sub¬
servience, they aim to identify the specific
tensions which arise from confrontation
between a particular cultural heritage and a
hegemonic cultural model.
The two dominant aspirations of feminist
movements in the industrialized
countriesthe equality of the sexes and the
search for a specifically feminine
identity find an echo in the perceptions of
women of the Mediterranean countries.
The first of these preoccupations gives rise
to calls for modernization, for removal of
the social, economic and juridical obstacles
that inhibit the expression of women's in¬
dividuality and militate against equality of
opportunity between men and women as far
as rights and career possibilities are con¬
cerned. Equality of the sexes forms part of
the liberal tradition (encompassed by the
rights of man and of the citizen) and enables
women to escape from the confinement of
a world apart, punctuated by childbirth,
and to aspire, like men, to the wider status
of "human beings".
The second aspiration arising from the
female experience, from the sexual
specificity of her body, has become the
ground of battle against male domination.
Here the purpose is not, as in the case of the
demand for equality of the sexes, the break¬
ing down of barriers that stand in the way
5

Drawing by the French artist Topor
"Over and above theoretical divergen¬
ces, it is clear that no egalitarian ideology
establishes the principle of equality bet¬
ween men and women as long as It does
not recognize the notion of individual
rights. Most of these ideologies have
restricted themselves to proclaiming
equality between men and denouncing
the forms of domination of which they are
the object, and have disregarded the
domination man Imposes on woman."
Judith Astelarra (Spain)
of the free participation of women in all
spheres of public life. It is above all the
recognition by women of their repressed
femininity, imprisoned by the one-way
language of man, and the desire to give
back to women "their own territory".
Rather than social integration and reform,
what is demanded is a transformation of the
psychological social climate, until now
dominated by male-oriented language; it is
a call for recognition of the difference bet¬
ween the sexes and a rejection of reduc¬
tionist destruction of specificity in the name
of universality.
In the industrialized countries these two
themes of the feminist movement, equality
of the sexes and affirmation of the female
identity, made headway only with difficul¬
ty. The difficulty arises from their very
nature: the dilemma is how to affirm the
female identity, the specificity of woman,
without leaving the way open to claims that
woman is inferior? At the same time, is
there not a danger that affirmation of
women's status as "human beings", of
their participation in "the universal", will
lead to an erosion of the notion of the
specificity of woman? Does not the demand
for both equality and recognition of a
specific identity leave women in a "Catch
22" situation?
This thorny problem also faces the
women of the Mediterranean. The societies
in which they live are exposed to the
onslaught of the hegemonic cultural model
of the industrialized countries, a
homogenizing model conceived in terms of
the Universal, of History, of Progress, as
opposed to regional, national and cultural
specificities. Yet, at the same time, Mediter¬
ranean women are subject to these
specificities which are the source of their
confined situation.
How, in Mediterranean cultures, does
this principle of the equality of the sexes,
which is alien to their cultural model, fit in
with the indigenous culture in which the
identity of and the relations between the

sexes are based on differentiation, a hierar¬
chical organization and segregation? In
other words, leaving aside national and
religious differences, to what extent is there
a specific Mediterranean culture?
The fact is that the unity of the Mediter¬
ranean is revealed in the broad sweep of its
history, a unity so profoundly experienced
that the peoples of every Mediterranean
shore share the same destiny, with the
Muslim and the Christian Mediterranean
sharing the same life rhythm.
Within this geo-cultural grouping, the
oppression of women is current in both
Christian and Islamic countries. This belies
the widespread misconception that the ser¬
vitude of women on the southern shores of
the Mediterranean springs from Islamic
doctrine; in fact it is a socio-geographical
rather than a religious phenomenon.
The veil and the harem pre-date the
Qur'an, which advocates according women
the rights due to all persons and is thus more
advanced than the code of custom in these
societies. If women are systematically
deprived of their rights in the Muslim and
Christian countries of the Mediterranean,
this is despite the Qur'an and the French
Revolution.
The distinction which designates coun¬
tries of Mediterranean culture as "kinship
societies" and those of "Western" culture
as "societies of citizens" highlights the
crucial importance of family structure in
the former as opposed to the concept of the
individual that characterizes the latter.
Modern culture is individualist in the sense
that the individual is of supreme impor¬
tance, whereas in anti-individualist societies
the highest value is society itself and the
community as a whole.
The norms which govern kinship struc¬
tures also control sexual relationships and
community groupings and are often the
basic cause of the constraints on women.
Some of those who see a direct link bet- ^
Algerian woman
"It is up to us to dismantle the
mechanisms of invisibility, all those pro¬
cesses which impoverish our relationship
with the world, impose silence on the ma¬
jority of women, and bring to the fore a
few of us, under certain conditions, to
legitimize the exclusion process as a
whole."
Fatma Oussedik (Algeria)

Portrait of a woman of the time of Lalla
Khenata, who was the effective ruler of
Morocco during the reign of her son
Moulay Abdallah (1729-1757)
"It is in the light of history that we can
judge whether the few women who have
managed to infiltrate into political life
constitute a break with the past, of
decisive importance because it is sym¬
bolic in a society in which the essence of
power is masculine, or, whether, on the
contrary, they simply perpetuate the
heritage of the past."
Fatima Mernissi (Morocco)
ween the kinship structure and the oppres¬
sion of Mediterranean women attribute this
not to the practice of endogamy, which is
characteristic of the kinship structure in
these regions, but to the weakening of this
practice due to contact between urban and
tribal societies. In a truly endogamous
group, a woman, in virtue of her status as
a "cousin", is treated with tenderness and
regard. In a "detribalized" society,
however, she ceases to be a "cousin" yet
fails to receive the regard due to a human
being, an individual.
An ethnological analysis of history
reveals the distortions that can arise when
differing social realities come face to face,
a confrontation that sometimes provokes a
defensive attitude on the part of peoples
subject to the hegemony of other cultures
and incites them to seek in the past an "un-
contaminated" cultural identity.
Mediterranean societies are not, by
nature, modern societies in the in¬
dividualistic, egalitarian, liberal sense.
Liberal ideology situates and defines
Western society both in the "public" area
(social relationships) and in the "private
area" (the relationship between the sexes);
when it intrudes on Mediterranean
societies, it not only meets strong resistance
with regard to matters concerning the
"private" area but also creates a duality in
the social sphere. Italy is an example of a
Mediterranean country in which these two
influences cohabit and even have the effect
of creating geographical dichotomy bet¬
ween the North and the South, with the nor¬
thern influence more and more gaining the
upper hand.
The Italian women's movement has thus
developed a new set of values in tune with
a new cultural background. These values in¬
clude: equality at all levels in the relations
between men and women, whether at work,
in politics, and in the home; acceptance of
the woman's identity and her right to make

her own decisions regarding sex and mater¬
nity; finally, the notion of the community
of women, the keystone of this cultural
project.
Certain "evolutionist" analysts maintain
that Mediterranean woman is apart, outside
the mainstream of emancipation, and is
destined to go through the same stages as
women of liberal societies as Mediterranean
societies relinquish their cultural heritage.
But this is to succumb to reductionism and
to fail to see the tensions provoked by the
introduction of phenomena related to a
liberal-type emancipation into societies
with more specific cultural backgrounds.
Turkey offers another good example.
Whilst it is an Islamic country and generally
classed as one of the developing countries,
following the modernist tradition of its rul¬
ing élite Turkey adopted the principle of the
equality of the sexeseven before there was
any pressure on it to do sogiving women
legal and political rights (such as the right to
vote, which was granted earlier in Turkey
than in many Western countries) and
established the principle of equal right to
education for boys and girls (the only non-
mixed schools in Turkey are the French
lycées).
The complexity of the situation in which
Mediterranean women find themselves
results, therefore, from the specificity of
their cultural heritage, the impact of a
hegemonic cultural model and the claims of
the feminist movement. The conflict bet¬
ween the sexes thus takes on a particular
coloration in each country as a result of the
interaction and the opposition between
these elements in the religious, political and
cultural fields.
In the political and religious context of
the Arab Mediterranean the question arises
as to whether or not the Islamic cultural
heritage constitutes an obstacle to equality
of the sexes. Must the Arabo-Islamic past
be "mutilated" in order to enable equality
Feminist demonstration in Milan, Italy
"The history of men is the history of a
form of bias. Women, once they realized
this, decided to take back the history, the
life, the space and time that had been
denied to them."
Gioia di Cristofaro Longo (Italy)
of the sexes to be established, or should this
past be sifted and analysed, in which case
might not a' measure of hidden political
power of women stand revealed?
In Morocco, women who have exercised
direct power have been given a dehumaniz¬
ed image, being represented either as
something "monstrous" or as pertaining to
the "sacred". However, the exercise of in¬
direct power via a husband or a son seems
to have been more acceptable to the extent
that it conjured up the image of the devoted
wife or mother.
Analysis of outward signs, such as
physical attributes and clothing, reveals the
extent of the influence that Ottoman rulers
exercised over sexual and ethnic differentia¬
tion. It shows how, in a hierarchical, non-
liberal society such as the Ottoman society,
this accentuation of sexual and ethnic dif¬
ferences, far from ceding to a process of
homogenization and egalitarianism, as was
the case in the "modern" countries, was in¬
stitutionalized and regulated down to
details of dress so that sexual, ethnic or
religious affiliation could be seen at a
glance.
In Spain, the historic partnership bet¬
ween Church and State, due to the strength
of the Catholic religion and the late
development of capitalism there, had
prevented the spread of liberal ideology and
delayed the development of feminism.
Contemporary Spanish feminism only
really took hold from 1975, after the death
of Franco, but without the fully-fledged
social mobilization that occurred in other
European countries. This absence of solidly
based feminism explains why Spanish
feminists associated themselves with certain
political parties so as to obtain a foothold in
a society that had a reserved attitude
towards women's rights. This alliance gave
rise to clashes within the feminist movement
and to debate on such questions as
feminism and political parties, militancy on
two fronts, feminism and the female identi¬
ty and feminism and equality.
Examination of the specific form
domination of women takes in Algeria
comes down to an examination of the
various aspects Algerian women's "in¬
visibility", that is to say, the various forms
of social rejection to which they are subject
as being "Other". It also involves study of
the struggle of those women who have at¬
tempted to escape from this cloak of "in¬
visibility" by acquiring a certain autonomy
in their private lives or by outright
militancy.
One aspect at least of the condition of
Mediterranean women can be defined.
From the situation of Algerian women to
that of Italian women there is a progression
from "silent" action towards conscious,
collective action by women. The "silent"
way is perhaps peculiar to Muslim societies;
nevertheless, outspoken, independent ex¬
pression by women is possible only within
the context of a lay society.
NILUFER GOLE is a Turkish sociologist and
the author of many articles and studies on
women's participation in public affairs, the
discrimination from which they suffer and the
solutions proposed by feminist movements.
This article is extracted from the introduction
she wrote to a study to be published shortly by
Unesco on the situation of women in Mediter¬
ranean countries. Other contributors to this
study are Fatma Oussedik (Algeria), Fatima
Mernissi (Morocco), Nora Seni (Turkey), Ju¬
dith Astelarra (Spain) and Gioia di Cristofaro
Longo (Italy).
