Art for children
A Unesco project
THE originality of the Arte para criança ("Art
for Children") project which was launched
by the Rio de Janeiro publishers Berlendis
and Vertecchia, with the collaboration of Un¬
esco's International Fund for the Promotion of
Culture, lies in the fact that the authors involved
use the work of a modern Brazilian artist as
inspiration for short imaginary letters, accounts
of dreams, poems and stories. The texts, which
do not refer directly to a given painting, are
intended to introduce young readers to the most
advanced and demanding forms of contempor¬
ary plastic art. In order to get as far away as
possible from the "cultural axis" of Rio and Säo
Paulo, artists and writers are selected to repre¬
sent each of Brazil's States. After publication of
their books, they go out and talk to schoolchil¬
dren about art and literature.
Notable among the works already published in
beautifully produced books with high-quality col¬
our reproductions, large type and heavy paper,
Figura (1964), one of 19 works by the Brazi¬
lian painter Milton Dacosta which pro¬
vided the inspiration for Era urna vez urna
menina ("Once upon a time there was a
little girl"), a fairy story by Walmir Ayala.
The story has appeared in a series of art
books for children published as part of a
project sponsored jointly by Unesco and
the Brazilian publishing house Berlendis
& Vertecchia Edltores of Rio de Janeiro.
are: Era urna vez, très... ("Once there were
Three ...") by Volpi, with texts by Ana Maria
Machado; O gato ("The Cat") by Claudio Zirotti
and Norma Freiré; and Sete cartas e dois sonhos
("Seven Letters and Two Dreams") by Tomie
Ohtake and Lygia Bojunga Nunes. One of the
biggest successes in the series is Capeta
Carybé ("Carybé the Devil"), which has repro¬
ductions of works by Carybé, one of the best-
known artists in Brazil today, and texts by the
equally famous writer Jorge Amado.
Among the many institutions collaborating on
this project are Brazil's Federal Cultural Coun¬
cils, the Ministry of Education and Culture, the
Museums of Modern Art of Rio de Janeiro and
Säo Paulo, Säo Paulo's Biennial Cultural Foun¬
dation, the Cultural Foundations of Brasilia and
Bahia, and the Culture Departments of the dif¬
ferent States.
In 1 986 and 1 987 the "Art for Children" series
is being shown at many international exhibitions
including the Children's Book Fair in Bologna,
the Paris Salon du Livre, the Triennial Festival of
Books and Newspapers in Belgrade, the
"World's Most Beautiful Books" exhibition in
Leipzig, and an exhibition being organized by the
Centre for Latin American Studies in Rome,
under the auspices of Unesco's International
Fund for the Promotion of Culture.
The sponsors of the project are currently trying
to arrange for the series to be distributed in
Portugal and the Portuguese-speaking countries
of Africa.
42
