Man, by Victor Bunak
the first walkie-talkie
SCIENTISTS have long speculated
about the origins of speech, and a
great many theories have been ad¬
vanced.
One of the earliest, already current in
Ancient Greece, held that the first words
were onomatopoeias imitations of the
sounds prehistoric man associated with
various activities. Another maintained that
words developed from inarticulate cries of
fear, alarm, delight and so on.
But none of these theories explains how
shouts or onomatopoeias could turn into
articulate syllables and words, or what fac¬
tors determined the development of mental
activity along with the faculty of speech so
closely connected with it. For it is man's
ability to speak that above all distinguishes
him from the animal.
Man finally left the animal world when he
was at last able to reproduce in his mind
coherent images of different objects and
actions, to distinguish between them and to
combine some with others. The mental im¬
ages of these linked percepts are what we
call concepts, and the capacity to form con¬
cepts was the first main feature distin¬
guishing Homo sapiens from the earlier
hominids.
The next stage in man's evolution was the
ability to combine and diversify these con¬
cepts, a process representing a considerable
development of the intellectual faculty.
The combination of percepts in a single
mental operation or concept becomes possi¬
ble because of its association with vocal
stimulations. The sound of the voice and
the corresponding movements in the mouth
and throat become, as it were, symbols of
concepts, a different set of vocal move¬
ments being associated with each one.
The vocal organs can produce a great
many sounds, but in each language only
some thirty, known as phonemes, are used.
There are, however, hundreds of phoneme-
combinations or syllables, and many
thousands of syllable combinations.
Modern man can produce hundreds of
syllables a minute, each of which requires a
different use of the vocal chords, a different
direction of air expelled from the lungs and
a different positioning of the tongue and the
mouth cavity. The whole system of articula¬
tion can switch from one position to the next
in a fraction of a second.
This mobility of the speech organs and
the extremely flexible link-up of concepts
are the result of a long evolution.
The first words, still few and mainly
monosyllabic, related to material objects
and basic facts in the lives of primitive peo¬
ples, particularly their food-gathering, and
perhaps some percepts with a magical
meaning. New words were formed by
doubling or inverting syllables or by
changes in the pitch of some sounds. First
mastered by one or several members of a
group, they were adopted by the group as a
whole if they supplied a need, and then
modified by practical use.
A major change took place at the end of
the Stone Age, at the time of the fourth and
final glacial period, when the direct ances¬
tors of modern man, (Homo sapiens)
appeared, some 50,000 to 30,000 years ago.
So far as their technology, economy and
arts were concerned, the Neolithic people
of the last glacial period in Europe had a
standard of living and way of life that were
by no means inferior to those of certain
hunting and food-gathering tribes still ex¬
isting today. There is no doubt that they
were able to form paired combinations of
concepts and words. In other words, they
had fully mastered articulate speech.
The periods that followed saw the ela¬
boration of different speech systems or lan¬
guages with their own phonetic, lexical and
grammatical structures.
According to historical, archaeological
and linguistic research, the great basic lan¬
guage systems emerged in the early Age of
Metals some 6,000 to 9,000 years ago, while
the formation of many contemporary lan¬
guages dates from historical times.
August-September 1972
VICTOR BUNAK of the USSR is one of the
world's leading authorities on the early develop¬
ment of speech.
©
"He said his first word today, 'pterodactyl'!" u
51
