Caribbean cousins
by Carlos Castilho
BRAZILIAN specialists in inter¬
national affairs such as Professor
Hélio Jaguaribe believe that rela¬
tions between Brazil and the Caribbean
are at a low ebb because of differences in
their colonial past, in their specific econo¬
mic characteristics, and in the diversity of
their geo-political interests, although
there are ethnic and cultural ties that
could bring them closer together.
It is true that most of the Black popu¬
lation of Brazil share the same African
origin as the vast majority of Caribbean
Blacks. However, as the slaves from the
West Coast of Africa were forced to
adapt to their new environment in the
New World, they underwent a variety of
fortunes. In Brazil, the Blacks were not
robbed of their culture, nor were their
"souls eaten away", as was the case in the
British colonies of the Caribbean.
This difference has its roots in history.
Whereas the British colonial system in
countries like Barbados, Jamaica and
Antigua even sought to stamp out the
Blacks' religion and to replace it with
another, in Brazil the Portuguese allowed
the slaves to keep their African customs.
The violence inflicted on their culture
was harsher in the Caribbean and, as a
result, the outlook of the Black popula¬
tion of the former British colonies there is
focused on London. (One Brazilian dip¬
lomat who served in an embassy in the
Caribbean claims that the only thing that
the region's English-speaking Blacks
know about Brazil is that Pelé is a great
footballer.)
The contacts that have been made in
recent years through reggae music are a
result of the distribution of records from
the United States, and consequently this
form of cultural expression reached Bra¬
zil stripped of its origins and its political
and cultural significance. Reggae and the
Rastafarian sect are manifestations of the
deep-rooted resistance of Caribbean
Blacks to oppressive Anglo-Saxon domi¬
nation, but in Brazil commercial plugging
and trendiness have overshadowed the
revolutionary content of each of these
phenomena.
Our links with those parts of the Carib¬
bean dominated by France and the
Netherlands are even more remote.
However, the opposite is true of our rela
tions with the former Spanish colonies
and in this context Cuba and Santo
Domingo are special cases. Cuba repre¬
sented a myth for the generation of the
1960s because of the nature of its revolu¬
tionary process, which captivated many
young people in Spanish-speaking Latin
America and later in Brazil. The pattern
of Cuban socialism and the romantic aura
surrounding the guerrillas of the Sierra
Maestra made a profound impression on
young Brazilians of that decade, but this
had more to do with ideological issues
than with cultural or economic affinities.
In Santo Domingo, the presence of Brazi¬
lian troops during the crisis of 1965
brought to the fore a conflict that was
virtually unintelligible to public opinion
in Brazil and whose only effect was to
trigger off an internal ideological pol¬
emic. However, the similarities of lan¬
guage and of a number of Latin customs
have always meant that the former Span¬
ish colonies are closer to the average
Brazilian than the rest.
The 1960s saw the start of a gradual
rapprochement between Cuba and Brazil
through cultural, touristic, artistic and,


Candido Portinari (1903-1962) holds a
similar position in Brazilian painting to
that of Heitor Villa-Lobos in Brazilian
music and Oscar Niemeyer in Brazilian
architecture. His country's most important
20th-century artist, Portinari took the
whole panorama of Brazilian life as his
material. Brazil has launched a Portinari
project which is currently documenting,
photographing and cataloguing the
artist's vast output of over 4,000 works in
which he painted with great feeling and
technical skill the peasants of his native
region of Säo Paulo, migrants from the
Nordeste, cowhands, labourers andpopu¬
lar musicians, as well as portraits and reli¬
gious and historical subjects. Two great
panels by Portinari, War and Peace, can be
seen in the entrance hall of the United
Nations building in New York. Brodowski
Landscape (1948), above, ¡s a lyrical
evocation of images and scenery associ¬
ated with his native village near Säo Paulo,
which was a constantsource ofinspiration
to the painter and a recurrent theme in his
work.
Pelé
Key:
pelé
the homeland
is the family
glorified
(by television)
finally prevails
In this work dating from 1964, Pelé, Décio
Pignatari, one of the leading exponents of
the Brazilian concrete poetry movement
(see page 28), makes a series of graphic
variations on the geometrical forms of the
Brazilian flag (above).
17

on occasion, technical exchanges. Here
again, the driving force behind the move¬
ment was ideological, with Cuba trying to
break out of the North American dip¬
lomatic straitjacket and the Brazilian
opposition, which had only recently
emerged from a long period of dictator¬
ship, trying to correct what was for the
Left "a historical mistake", and, for the
diplomats, "an anomaly". As a result of
this rapprochement, in which both par¬
ties proceeded with considerable caution
for fear of making a false move, Cuban
culture is now better known in Brazil than
that of any other country in the region.
Visits by musicians such as Pablo
Milanés, by ballet companies such as that
led by Alicia Alonso, and by volleyball,
basketball and athletics teams, have suc¬
ceeded in breaking the taboos nurtured
by conservative circles in Brazil.
Cuba also buys from Brazil far more
books, films, records and television pro¬
grammes than any other Caribbean coun
try. Writers of the stature of Graciliano
Ramos, Jorge Amado, Carlos Drum-
mond de Andrade and Clarice Lispector,
as well as such lesser known authors as
Jorge Franca Junior and Antonio Calla¬
do, were translated and published in
Cuba, in spite of the twenty-year break in
diplomatic relations. It is true that the
Cuban writers Alejo Carpentier and
Nicolas Guillen have long enjoyed a
reputation in Brazil. In the musical
sphere, Chico Buarque long regarded


as Brazil's cultural ambassador to the rest
of Latin America, especially to Cuba
was responsible for introducing Cuban
music to the Brazilian record market,
although the Cuban nueva trova has not
enjoyed the same commercial success as
Jamaican reggae. In the last three years
or so, Brazilian television serials have
been highly popular in Cuba, the most
noteworthy example being A escrava
¡saura ("The Slave Girl Isaura"), which is
based on a Brazilian historical novel ab¬
out the period of slavery.
The normalization of relations be¬
tween Brazil and Cuba was accompanied
by trade flows amounting to $5 million
shortly before diplomatic links were re¬
established. When the exchange of
ambassadors was announced, some ex¬
porters began to talk in terms of an over¬
all volume of trade amounting to as much
as $200 million, but more realistic
businessmen believe that it will be diffi¬
cult to achieve an annual level of more
than $50 million, representing only one-
quarter of Brazil's trade with Nigeria and
less than half its trade with Angola. The
limitations imposed by the relative com¬
plementarity of the two economies
both of which produce sugar and tobac¬
co and Cuba's difficulties in obtaining
hard currency to pay for Brazilian manu¬
factured goods, have prompted some
Brazilian political analysts to claim that
the move to re-establish relations with
Cuba had more to do with domestic poli
tical manoeuvring than with diplomatic
strategy.
Brazil has always had close economic
relations with Trinidad and Tobago be¬
cause of oil. However, the Caribbean
country with which trade has expanded
most in recent years is Suriname, where
Brazil has replaced the Netherlands as a
major trading partner, and has even been
an arms supplier. Even so, Brazilian eco¬
nomic strategists recognize that US
domination of the region cannot be over¬
come in the present circumstances.
Brazil's current attitude to the Carib¬
bean differs from that prevalent in the
Ministry of Foreign Relations and the
National Security Council in the twenty
years of military rule. Nowadays, Brasilia |
©
OsPassos
Perdidos
Alejo Carpenter
edicoes 70
The Cuban novelist Alejo Carpentier
(1904-1980) is an example ofa Latin Amer¬
ican author who wrote in Spanish and
whose works translated Into Portuguese
won a considerable reputation in Brazil.
Above, cover of the Portuguese edition of
his novel Los pasos perdidos (1953; The
Lost Steps, 1956).
The product of the rampant urbanization
which is sweeping through many develop¬
ing countries today, the shanty-towns
which proliferate around mushrooming
cities like Säo Paulo are the home of
densely packed populations stricken by
poverty, rarely able to attract attention to
their tragicplight. Carolina Maria de Jesus
is one of the few who have breached the
wall of poverty and made the voice of the
Brazilian shanty-town, or favela, heard in
the outside world. Her famous book
Quarto de despejo (published In English
as Child of the Dark; the Diary of Carolina
Maria de Jesus) Is a moving and realistic
chronicle of the hunger, poverty and de¬
spair of life in the Säo Paulo favela of
Canindé where she lived. Above, illustra¬
tion by Cyro del Nero from the first Brazi¬
lian edition of Quarto de despejo.
f®.
V.
uiiedu
I W J
Bernardo
Guimaräes
A recent Brazilian TV series based on A
escrava Isaura (1875; "The Slave Girl
Isaura"), Bernardo Guimaräes' famous
novel about slavery In Brazil, was also a
big success in other countries, especially
in Cuba. Above, the cover of an edition of
the novel illustrated with stills from the TV
series.
19

does not uphold the doctrine of ideologi¬
cal confrontation in the region. The new
republic's diplomacy gives priority to en¬
tente and negotiation, as illustrated by its
attitude towards Nicaragua.
The restoration of diplomatic relations
with Cuba follows this approach, in which
confrontation gives way to a more
pragmatic attitude. The Brazilian gov¬
ernment believes that both countries can
adopt joint positions on such issues as the
price of sugar and even on external debt
negotiations. Some optimistic exporters
think that the re-opening of the Cuban
market to Brazilian manufactured and
semi-manufactured goods could give
Brazil an important foothold in the
Caribbean. It would be advantageous for
Brazil to capture part of the export mar¬
ket of Argentina, which has hitherto been
Latin America's largest supplier of in¬
dustrial goods and agricultural products
to Cuba. However, it will be difficult for
the Brazilians to catch up with Japan,
which is currently Cuba's main trading
partner in the capitalist world.
The prospects for Brazilian trade else¬
where in the Caribbean are limited by the
policies of the United States and the
United Kingdom in the region. However,
Brazilian diplomatic strategists consider
that there will be far-reaching changes in
the Caribbean in the long run. The grow¬
ing number of new nations in the Carib¬
bean, as countries still under European
colonial domination gain independence,
could increase the membership of the
Organization of American States (OAS)
and repeat the pattern already observed
in the United Nations, whereby increased
African and Asian representation has
made inroads on the domination of the
major powers. Events such as the inva¬
sion of Grenada are viewed with scepti¬
cism by Brazilian specialists on Carib¬
bean issues, on the grounds that such
interventions are more likely to heighten
than relieve international tensions.
Many people quote the belief held by
the Colombian writer Germán Arci-
niegas that the Caribbean situation in the
sixteenth century was the prelude to far-
reaching economic changes at world
level. For the moment the Caribbean is
relatively calm, and the main areas of
tension are in Central America.
However, according to those who think
like Arciniegas, a slight change in the
Caribbean chessboard could trigger off
irreversible changes comparable to those
in the Middle East.
Until 1763 the capital of Brazil was San
Salvador de Bahía de Todos os Santos,
today (known simply as Salvador) the
capital of the State of Bahia. With almost 2
million inhabitants, Salvador Is one ofBra¬
zil's most populous cities, and also the
most African in spirit it was a major
centre of the African slave trade. Famed
for its carnival, Salvador lives to the
rhythm of music and dances which also
display a strong African influence. The
historic centre of Salvador with its
seemingly innumerable churches, con¬
vents, palaces and mansions, is a show¬
case ofBrazilian art. The Brazilian Govern¬
ment has asked Unesco for help in pre¬
serving and restoring this outstanding
complex of monuments which was in¬
cluded on Unesco's World Heritage List in
1985. Above, a view of Salvador's
Pelourinho district, a remarkable example
of Brazilian colonial architecture which
has now been totally restored.
CARLOS CASTILHO, a Brazilian journalist
specializing in African affairs and Third World
problems, is in charge of the Brazilian edition of
the bi-monthly magazine Third World, and contri¬
butes to several European publications. He has
published two books, one on the struggle for
independence in Zimbabwe, the other on Polish
socialism.
20
