Pilgrims of the Southern Cross
by Emile Gardaz
IN 1 81 7, in the villages of the undulating coun¬
tryside known as the Swiss plateau, barking
dogs and tolling funeral bells provided a grim
accompaniment to disease, harvest failures and
food shortages. The villagers were beginning to
experience the crises of industrial society. Some
of these reputedly sedentary people decided to
try to find a way out of adversity overseas, in
places which were coloured green on the map,
and where lettuce was said to grow five times a
year.
So the Swiss went to seek their fortune else¬
where. They became hotel managers in Manila,
Hong Kong and Singapore; cattle ranchers in
Argentina; farmers in Quebec; wine growers on
the Santa Monica hills in California, or in the
Ukraine. Wine cares little for ideologies.
A century and a half ago, the sound of the
recruiting drum brought a response from im¬
poverished small farmers, debtors dependent
upon their village, the homeless without civic
status, who eked out a living as basket weavers
and had virtually ceased to be peasants. Was
this a beggars' transhumance? Far from it, for
among those who "left for good" were aristocrats
dreaming of new domains over which they would
rule by the will of God, merchants who foresaw
the prospects of import-export trade and of in¬
vestment in the New World.
For all these people, the opportunity "to live
better elsewhere" was a powerful incentive to set
out across the world, through storms and catas¬
trophes, to shores where today their descen¬
dants lead the lives of peaceful Brazilian citizens
with exotic names: Thürler, Curty, Boéchat, Daf-
flon, Simon, Jordan, Ansermet ... Did they find a
Promised Land? Alas, it turned out to be as harsh
as the hills of the home they had left behind them.
The migration southwards was a grim, often
tragic experience. Embarking in pathetic craft,
ill-prepared for life at sea, most of them in pre¬
carious health, the voyagers to the South Atlantic
paid a heavy price. Out of 2,006 candidates for
happiness, 389 died before reaching their goal.
Many brief nocturnal funerals were held on board
the Urania, the Daphne, the Elisabeth-Marie and
the Heureux-Voyage. And on the stony earth
tracks leading out of Rio de Janeiro into the
green vault of the subtropical forest, death also
stalked the immigrants' wagons.
At the end of the exodus the immigrants built
towns and villages with names like Nova Fribur-
go, Cantagallo and Duas Barras. Their Eldorado
bore shades of poverty and failure. There was no
gold in the rivers they found, only mud. The
pilgrims of the Southern Cross were back with
their village quarrels, their domestic feuds, but at
the same time they hoped for a rebirth, a new
flowering.
In 1 820 the cartographers wrote on their maps:
Nova Friburgo22° 16' 42" latitude South, 42"
31' 54" longitude; altitude 847 metres. A Swiss
historian, Martin Nicoulin, has given a fully de¬
tailed description of this fabulous human adven¬
ture in his book La genèse de Nova Friburgo
("The Genesis of Nova Friburgo").
About ten years ago, a group of people from
the Swiss canton of Fribourg went in search of
the descendants of their former compatriots. I
was fortunate enough to go with them. We left a
European autumn and found a southern sum¬
mer. A fine but steady rain was falling over Rio,
as it does in the Swiss Jura between the
seasons. We crossed a gorge and then followed
for a time a yellow river on our left. Then the
valley widened. Small houses for pensioners
heralded the town. Their lawns, fenced in to
discourage stray dogs and travelling salesmen,
had been trimmed that same morning. Hôtel des
Alpes read the signboard on the first large build¬
ing. The proprietor was a Hungarian. Beyond
stretched Nova Fribourg, not unlike a little
French provincial town, except for its trolley¬
buses, and the laughing, coffee-coloured
children.
I discovered that the most flourishing industry
was not cheese and chocolate, as I had been
expecting, but women's underwear. Brass bands
were parading through the main street, deco¬
rated with flags. Everything was ready for the
procession, the ball at the Country Club and high
mass at the Cathedral. The bishop, the Prefect,
the shoeshine boy, the samba school were ready
for the fray. Even the Brazilian army cadets were
standing to attention. A pretty mestizo girl dres¬
sed in three passion-tree leaves followed us,
shouting "Tioulé"! No more than seventeen
years old, she was as beautiful as original sin.
Samba here we come! A local university teacher
with a droll moustache explained that the girl
simply wanted to say that her name was Thürler.
Her ancestors came from the Swiss region of
Singine, north of Fribourg. Sweet potatoes and
coffee produce beautiful children.
I got someone to translate for me the songs
which were being sung and danced to in the next
procession. Sung to the deafening sound and
rhythm of a brass band totally drunk with sun¬
shine and the festive spirit, the words were: "Be
proud and strong, like our fathers, those of our
original homeland ..." I thought I recognized the
patriotic, conventional style of our male-voice
choirs, singing themselves hoarse on the stage
of a village hall in winter.
A town councillor named Folly never left our
side: "Tell me, where is my country?" "Brazil,"
we replied. Obviously. "Switzerland too!" He
repeated his question again and again, until a
visitor keen on family and local history told him
that the Folly family originated from Villarepos, a
small farming village in Fribourg canton. We
drank to his health, and told him about the
orchards and hedges back home, mentioning
that Folly is a common name on the tombstones
of the village cemetery.
The great-grandparents of forty-five-year-old
Noël Boéchat, a teacher of English, emigrated
from Miécourt in the Swiss Jura. One day at table
he suddenly asked a serious question: "What do
you think of the battle of Villmergen?" Here was a
Brazilian who knew all about a distant conflict
that had once divided the Swiss people! Noël told
me that when he was a child, his father would
read at breakfast-time a page from the Bible and
a page of Swiss history.
The world consists of pioneers and those who
stay at home. Once immeasurable, it is now a
village. In Nova Friburgo they are about to open a
Swiss cheese factory which will provide jobs for
some and nourishment for others.
It is twenty minutes after midnight. There is a
silence "Un ange passe", as we say in
French an angel passes. An angel with the
features of Dom Hélder Cámara.1
1. Brazilian Roman Catholic archbishop of Olinda and
Recife (born 1 909) who advocates the reform of social
structures through non-violent methods, and plays an
important role in Brazilian political life. Editor.
EMILE GARDAZ, a Swiss writer, has published
collections of stories and poems entitled Saute-
saison, Passerelle des jours, and Le moulin à
sable. He is also a playwright and producer of
radio programmes for which he has written satir¬
ical sketches and many song lyrics.
8
