B
The restless currents
The waters of the ocean never stop moving. Most of us think of this
motion in terms of the waves and tidal movements that we can
observe for ourselves whenever we go to the coast. Less im¬
mediately apparent to the casual observer, however, are the great
ocean currents, well-defined streams that flow over parts of the
ocean in never-ending cycles.
Ocean currents are caused by a combination of three major
forces: the heat of the sun, the rotation of the earth and the
friction-force of the winds.
As the earth revolves round the sun it rotates on its own axis in
such a way that the direct rays of the sun strike the seas near the
equator, heating them up much more than the polar seas. As the
surface water at the equator heats up it expands, raising the sea
level at the equator almost imperceptibly but enough to create a
"slope". The water at the equator, therefore, tends to run
"downhill" towards the Poles.
Cold water is heavier than warm water, because water contracts
as it cools, and the colder water of the polar regions sinks beneath
the inflowing warm water from the equator and spreads slowly back
along the bottom towards the equator.
The rotation of the earth also has another curious effect on the
waters of the ocean and indeed on any moving object, such as a
ballistic missile, an artillery shell, or even a ball that is thrown,
although in the case of the ball its trajectory would be so short that
the effect would be imperceptible. This "Coriolis effect" as it is
called, after the French mathematician Gaspard Gustave de
Coriolis who first described it, causes such objects to be deflected
somewhat to the right in the northern hemisphere and to the left in
the southern hemisphere.
The winds too have a major influence on currents. The Trade
Winds, which blow steadily from the north-east, in the northern
hemisphere, and from the south-east, in the southern hemisphere,
towards the equatorial regions, are the force which powers the
great westward-moving currents just north and south of the
equator. But these winds too are subject to the Coriolis effect which
causes them to curve north and south away from the equator and
to circle back in the higher latitudes, driving the surface waters
before them from west to east.
The effect of all these factors combined is to set and keep in
motion the gigantic eddies of circling waters that make up the main
surface currents of the ocean.
Caused by the rotation of the earth, the
"Coriolis Effect" deflects winds and cur¬
rents to the right in the northern hemi¬
sphere and to the left in the southern hemi¬
sphere.
©
«J
CD
to
Ol
Ê
E
Also affected by the spin of the earth and
by heat from the sun, wind belts drive the
waters of the ocean; in the tropics the
Trade Windspush them westward towards
the equator, and in the higher latitudes the
Westerlies drive them in the opposite
direction.
A combination of three forces the heat of
the sun, the Coriolis Effect and the
winds causes the ocean currents to cir¬
culate clockwise in the northern hemi¬
sphere and anti-clockwise in the southern
hemisphere.
