Where gods
and men
have mingled
T
by Jorge Amado
HE culture of Brazil was formed in
the struggle against racism and was
born of the mingling of whites,
blacks and Amerindians. The black ele¬
ment in Brazilian society is inextricably
mingled with the white, and Africa is a
maternal presence in our midst.
Our outlook on life is fundamentally anti-
racist, based as it is on intermingling. The
vigorous "negro" art of the sculptor Agnal-
Photo René Bum © Magnum, Paris
do da Silva, without equal in Brazil today, is
not exclusively black. It bears traces of
white and Iberian influences in both form
and subject: Agnaldo's Oxossi is also St.
George.
It is all the more unfortunate, then, that a
distorted image of our way of life is some¬
times presented abroad. The African con¬
tribution, which is of fundamental import¬
ance to Brazilian culture, is glossed over or
pushed into the background.
This is a totally false approach. Through a
curious reversal of the colonial mentality,
there is a tendency to put the spotlight on
painters, writers and singers with the black¬
est possible skins. This attempt to prove the
absence of racial-prej udice in Brazil actually
indicates a preoccupation which is totally
alien to the Brazilian philosophy of life.
The blackest girls are chosen to sing, but
no attention is paid to the fact that they sing
songs more strongly marked by Iberian than
black influence, although Brazilian music
derives primarily from the atabiques of
Africa.
The paintings shown tend to be typical
examples of the Paris School the impor¬
tant thing is that the artists' skins are black.
Brazilian painters like Tarsila and Di Caval-
canti are neglected, although their work
displays the black African influences which,
along with white, Amerindian and Japanese
elements, have produced an art which is
uniquely Brazilian.
We must proclaim to the world at large
the tremendous importance of the African
presence in Brazil, in our life, culture and in
the faces of our people.
The black African has contributed to all
the great achievements of Brazil. The pre¬
sence of Africa with its sunlight and shadow
can be felt in the prophets, saints and angels
which the mestizo sculptor Aleijadinho
(1730-1814) carved in the mining region of
Minas Gerais.
Africa is present in the music of Villa-
Lobos and Dorival Caymi, in the Orixas
and Madonnas of Agnaldo, in the poetry of
Gregorio de Matos, Castro Alves and Vini-
cius de Moraes. It is present in the dancing,
and the singing, the gentleness, the friendli¬
ness and the expansive imagination of
everything great in Brazil.
For here in Brazil gods and men have,
happily , become inextricably mingled .
August-September 1977
JORGE AMADO, of Brazil, is one of Latin Amer¬
ica's most widely read novelists. Since the
appearance of his novel Mar Morto (Dead Sea,
1936), which won him a reputation throughout
Latin America, he has published many books
that have been translated into over 30 lan¬
guages. Among his works published in English
are Gabriela (1963) and Doña Flor and Her Two
Husbands (1970).
For four centuries, black Africa has exer¬
cised a strong influence in Brazil, along¬
side the Amerindians and the European
colonizers. Black African cultures and
peoplesplayeda majorpart In the develop¬
ment ofa new type of civilization, which is
neither European nor African, but distinc¬
tively Brazilian. Left, an Afro-Brazilian
family out for a stroll in Salvador de Bahía.
On the wall in background, scenes from
the conquest and colonization of Brazil.
25
