The nature andpurpose
ofmarine science
OCEAN science is concerned with
the investigation of the world
ocean, its biota and its physical
boundaries with the solid earth and
atmosphere. It is no different from any
other scientific field in its use of the scien¬
tific method, in which careful description
leads to the formulation of hypotheses
and their testing by experiment.
As in other earth sciences, the testing
of hypotheses can only occasionally be
accomplished by the conventional sort of
laboratory experiment where the impor¬
tant variables are under the ex¬
perimenter's control. More commonly a
"geophysical experiment" must be
undertaken, where the experiment is per¬
formed by nature and the scientist is
limited to observing its various phases at
different times and locations.
Scientific problems in the ocean tend to
involve more than one discipline, so that
their solution often calls for collaboration
among scientists with different experi¬
ence and skills. And because of the large
dimensions of many oceanic processes
and the fact that their occurrence and
location are seldom coincident with the
limits of national jurisdiction, ocean sci¬
ence depends heavily on international co¬
operation.
Different countries assign different de¬
grees of importance to marine research.
While the industrialized maritime coun¬
tries are generally the major investors in
these activities, some developing coun¬
tries have also assigned high priority to
ocean studies. In recent years the number
of marine scientists, institutions and re¬
search vessels has increased considerably
in many countries, including those of the
tropical and sub-tropical zones. Never¬
theless, ocean research continues to have
a low priority in many States, in part
because of the lack of awareness of the
need for, and benefits of, such research
for overall economic and cultural
development.
There appear to be compelling reasons
now for giving increased priority to the
support of basic marine science and its
application to ocean use and man¬
agement. The main reason is that an ever-
expanding world population is placing
increasing pressure on all the resources of
the planet and this growing need for food,
minerals and energy cannot be fully met
from the land. Thus demands on the
ocean will increase as land sources are
depleted and as their increased cost
makes ocean exploitation economically
feasible. But rational use of the ocean
and its resources will depend heavily on
scientific knowledge, which in many
cases does not at present exist.
There is a broad spectrum of kinds of
research, ranging from the most fun¬
damental with widespread relevance but
no obvious short-term application to that
with immediate, specific application but
with little relevance to other problems.
The time-scale of pay-off varies greatly
and it is usually difficult to predict just
when the application of research findings
will become feasible. It is important to
remember that applied research draws on
the reservoir of scientific knowledge, and
it is often the case that problems of im¬
mediate concern cannot be solved with¬
out additional research of a very fun¬
damental character.
For example, the growth in scientific
manpower and facilities and their exten¬
sions to new locations will in the long run
permit a better scientific coverage of
many regions previously neglected due to
their remoteness from traditional centres
of scientific activity. But it would be un¬
fortunate if this effort were to be limited
to specialized measurements for fisher¬
ies, or for petroleum or mineral develop¬
ment on the continental shelf. Until the
present gaps in our basic information on,
for example, ocean circulation and major
ecosystems are filled, it will be very diffi¬
cult to use these resources wisely or to
predict the consequences of harvesting
them.
The Convention on the Law of the Sea,
accepted by many countries in 1982,
assigns much of the world ocean to exclu¬
sive national economic zones where
coastal States have jurisdiction over the
exploitation of resources. The wise use of
these resources, both living and non¬
living, will require scientific knowledge
that is often not now available. Thus the
new Law of the Sea serves to increase the
need of coastal States for scientific re¬
search in these offshore regions.
This is true for all coastal States, re¬
gardless of their level of development,
but becomes particularly important when
their coastal inhabitants depend directly
on food from the sea and when alterna¬
tive sources of food and other resources
ashore are very limited. The need to
understand océanographie processes
within a few hundred kilometres of the
coast is thus widespread and provides
strong justification for enhanced interna¬
tional co-operation in ocean research.
Perhaps the most imperative reason for
such collaboration is the mismatch be¬
tween the dimensions and locations of
oceanic processes and phenomena and
the national boundaries that are imposed
on the ocean system. In some regions, for
example the Gulf of Guinea or the Carib¬
bean Sea, the ocean circulation and the
distribution of fish are common to the
several bordering countries and their in¬
vestigation can only be effectively accom¬
plished through regional collaboration.
Finally, it should be observed that the
dimensions of some ocean phenomena
vastly exceed the national domains of
affected countries and it is not uncom¬
mon for local events to be driven by
processes operating in distant parts of the
ocean. A classic example is El Niño, a
phenomenon in which the fisheries of the
coastal waters of Peru and Chile may be
affected by an ocean circulation pattern
across the entire equatorial Pacific and by
atmospheric conditions over the entire
planet. This emphasizes the need for col¬
laboration at the global level to provide
the necessary insights into the atmos¬
pheric and oceanic causes of changes in
both local and large-scale climate.
This article is extracted from Ocean Science for
the Year 2000, a report on an inquiry by the
Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research and
the Advisory Committee on Marine Resources
Research for the Intergovernmental Océanog¬
raphie Commission and Unesco, published by
Unesco in 1984.
