Music for all
by Miguel Angel Estrella
ONE of the most common prejudices
governing the division of labour in
music, as well as its marketing and
consumption, gives rise to the splitting of
music, musicians and their public into two
warring and apparently irreconcilable fac¬
tions: "popular" as opposed to "classical".
By "popular music" I mean the forms of
music created, sung or danced to by the
people of a country or a region. The word
popular refers to something that "originates
from the people", not something imposed
on it. Thus I exclude from the category of
popular music the soulless consumer pro¬
duct generally associated with the variety
show.
The reality underlying this sterile conflict
cannot be reduced to a mere question of
form. Few people are prepared to admit
that this prejudice springs from an urge to
segregate human beings into social categor¬
ies in defiance of that most universal of all
phenomena art.
This obsolete and snobbish attitude
stands revealed as particularly anachronis¬
tic and reactionary in this day and age when,
one might suppose, the mass media should
be bringing the highest forms of creative art
of all periods within reach of their vast
audience.
But this is not happening. Obscure com¬
mercial arguments, which conceal elitist
attitudes indefensible in other areas of cul¬
ture, separate consumers of music into
those who can choose judiciously what they
will listen to and those who are deprived of
that right and have to be content with
stereotyped works of inferior quality. Low
or non-existent purchasing power and low
standards of literacy or general education
are at the root of this restriction.
It is easy to picture a music-lover living in
a capital city: he buys tickets for concerts
and festivals at which he can appreciate the
performances of the best modern artists and
compare them with recordings made in the
past. He has access to information through
channels which do not necessarily coincide
with the selection that the media impose.
Both his education and the information
at his disposal enable him to choose, and
naturally he seeks out the highest-quality
producers of art and strives to be actively,
or at least passively, involved in the main¬
stream of events in the world of musical
creation, by taking part in the rituals of that
world concerts.
On the other hand, it is very difficult to
imagine one of the thousands or tens of
thousands of country-dwellers or labourers
in Romania, Bolivia, Afghanistan or the
Philippines to take examples from diffe¬
rent continents having any access to this
kind of choice. Such a choice, like all forms
of knowledge, would be one contribution to
a universal vision of human history. And
yet individuals such as these make up the
majority of a country's people.
These population groups, dispossessed of
their ethnic or folk styles of music and be¬
wildered by the bombardment to which
they are subjected by the media, very often
have no choice but to consume pseudo-
artistic products labelled "popular music"
by their main distributors.
This levelling down process now unites
14
most of the world's population. That which
in the past was specific to one area, the
industrialized countries, and to one popula¬
tion group, the city-dwellers, is now, on the
eve of the twenty-first century, interlinking
rural populations, factory-hands and office
workers all over the world. Advertising,
radio, television and records have spawned
this civilization of sound, which is even
threatening to oust written language. And
music is becoming the main vehicle of this
kind of communication. But what kind of
music?
Even in the "developed" countries, we
musicians are aware that disadvantaged au¬
diences believe themselves incapable of
understanding the music of Debussy, Mes¬
siaen, Mozart, Schubert, Krenek or Dutil-
leux (or Astor Piazzolla, Leo Brouwer,
Manolo Juárez, McLoughlin, or Charlie
Parker).
Nevertheless, once the barriers of con¬
vention have been broken down and pre¬
tentiousness and paternalism swept away,
such audiences are highly sensitive to the
essence of the message that these compos¬
ers wished to put across, miraculously trans¬
mitted by the performer. Hence the
tremendous responsibility that devolves on
us musicians as the fundamental negotiators
of this social change, which entails breaking
moulds and leaping over the barriers which
divide us and which cut us off at the same
time from our natural partners in dialogue:
the public.
It would be naive to suppose that
preaching along these lines could bring ab¬
out any radical shift in so entrenched a
structure. The prejudice must be attacked
at its roots. For it is undeniable that we
musicians are trained to fit into an elitist
system which sets itself up as the only possi¬
ble choice. This way of thinking is tanta-
"To take music to the most disadvantaged
audiences, to go to those whose social
and cultural background have hitherto de¬
prived them of this joy and would not nor¬
mallyset foot in a concerthall. " This is one
of the aims of "Musique Espérance", a
movement created by the Argentine pian¬
ist Miguel Angel Estrella. "Musique Espér¬
ance" organizes musical events in factor¬
ies, prisons and schools, and also for the
elderly, for the sick, and for handicapped
children. Left, Miguel Angel Estrella in
January 1983 during a "concert-talk" with
the children of workers at a factory in Bel-
fort in eastern France.

im
9- «¿a. i. "J,°3'"'fJ"-'
f.
ídA
ft
,r A
ê.ïi wies' l
r
,/*~" '"^"""^«w
1^ i ""W
N*
t
I \->*
t»l
4
'Jusf as it should be natural for the music
of Berio to be heard in juxtaposition with
that of CorelIi or Mussorgsky, there is no
reason why the music of Bach should not
be played during a religious service with
Negro spirituals and songs by Rubén
Blades, Leda Valladares, La Melchora
Abalos or ElNegro Mamani... ". Above, The
Song of Songs, an early 17th-century
Flemish engraving after a painting by Cor¬
nells De Vos. On the lectern is the score of
a motet for 5 voices by Daniel Raymond,
cantor at Liège around 1580. Right, Pan
piper in the region of Lake Titicaca, Boli¬
via, during the August festival in honour of
the Miraculous Virgin of the Lake. Left, a
harpistatCuzco, Peru. Below, a concert of
electronic music given by the French com¬
poser Jean-Michel Jarre in the Place de la
Concorde, Paris, on 14 July 1979.
t\\ . - ''"" (V¡i Jf) » »V . " t r 4
~¿^w^Ütt 't^k 're
V:V.^v;*-Ü "Jl \I ' " .1
Ü
¡J
\
«5r
wy

^ mount to the fatalistic belief that there will
always be rich and poor.
So first of all the performers must be
made aware of the falsity of this division
between "cultured", "serious" or "intellec¬
tual" music and the other kind. It is essen¬
tial to expose the perversity of this kind of
prejudice, which not only condemns to
mediocrity those who are not invited to the
feast of the elect, but also threatens with
sterility those performers who do not
understand that what gives music its life is
the dialectic between the simplest and most
vibrant forms and those which are most
elaborate and cerebral.
This is the story of our Western music,
and this is the story of music as it has
developed all over the world.
With the exception of a few well-in¬
formed musicologists and those artists who
intuitively realize the truth, few people are
aware of the steady influence of traditional
music on the works of the great composers
of all periods. Nor are they aware of the
social commitment made by many creators
of genius. Each musical era has had its own
reading of the concept of human justice and
solidarity in the development of society.
And each has made different uses of popu¬
lar traditions.
Luther and, later, Bach restored the peo¬
ple to their central place in worship,
through popular church choral music. Dur¬
ing the Enlightenment, music had its in¬
spired leaders with their vision of a society
of greater humanity and justice for all. Such
men as Mozart or Beethoven, each in his
own way, rejected all forms of slavery at a
time when the idea of the democratic State
was beginning to take root.
In the nineteenth century came the
romantic transition to nationalism. And in
our own century composers such as Stra¬
vinsky, Ravel, Bartok, Gian Francesco
Malipiero and Manuel de Falla all belong¬
ing to the so-called "new objectivity" move¬
ment drew inspiration from the spon¬
taneity and immediacy of popular music.
They were opposed to the sometimes over¬
whelming pessimism and density of other
post-Wagnerian trends. Finally, one need
scarcely draw attention to the role of popu-
Flutes made of reed, bone, wood, metal or
terra-cotta, have been a part of musical
tradition throughout the world ever since
prehistoric times. Below, bone flutes
adorned with the feathers of Amazonian
parrots and beetles' wings (Venezuela,
Orinoco basin).
©
16
lar music in the works of Hector Villa-
Lobos, George Gershwin and the Argen¬
tine composer Carlos Guastavino.
Conversely, and to an increasing extent,
musicians in all branches are exploring ways
of developing the technical side of classical
music, and finding in it a source of inspira¬
tion which need not conflict with their
popular calling.
In my country, Argentina, varied and
distinguished branches of popular music are
coming to grips with this influence. Ata-
hualpa Yupanqui is well versed in Creole
tradition but is also a performer of Bach.
Piazzolla, whose early training was similar
to that of Carlos Gardel and Aníbal Troilo,
later sought the counsel of the great French
pianist Nadia Boulanger. The Anacrusa
group, the specifically Argentine express¬
ion of that new syncretic music which ranges
from Chick Corea to Paco de Lucia. Many
more examples could be cited.
So why is there this enduring dichotomy
between classical and popular, when the
two should be inseparable parts of some¬
thing called simply Music, without any
hierarchical segregation? For the good of
music, which is so closely bound up with the
health of society, it is desirable that diffe¬
rent kinds of music should flourish side by
side, without any prejudice between diffe¬
rent genres.
Why should it not be acceptable to orga¬
nize concerts on a satisfactory aesthetic pat¬
tern combining Chico Buarque, Xenakis
and Mono Villegas, Jaime Torres, the
National Orchestra, Susana Rinaldi,
Michel Portal, Patrice Fontanarosa, or El
Cuchi Leguizamón, León Gieco and those
fine pianists Liliana Sáinz and Maurizio
Pollini?
This would at any rate break down the
tyranny of brand labels; for music is not a
commodity. It is a passion which fires its
apostles musicians with the desire to be
witnesses in sound to the spirit of the age.
Just as it should be quite natural for the
music of Berio to be heard in juxtaposition
with that of Corelli or Mussorgsky, I also
think there is no reason why the music of
Bach, during a religious service, should not
reverberate in the same air as Negro spir¬
ituals and songs by Rubén Blades, Leda
Valladares, La Melchora Abalos or El Neg¬
ro Mamani. These last, alas, are unknown
outside the Calchaqui Valleys of Argentina.
For the essence of music is communica¬
tion and communion, energy whose im¬
pulse is directed outwards. And the more
people there are who take pleasure in it, the
better it is for society and, ultimately, for
art.
MIGUEL ANGEL ESTRELLA, ofArgentina, is a
world famous pianist. As wellas giving recitals as
a concert pianist, he has always played to popu¬
lar audiences, including peasant farmers and
Indians in Latin America. Imprisoned and tor¬
tured in 1977, he was freed in 1980 after efforts
made on his behalf by musicians all over the
world, and has since continued his career as a
concert pianist. He is the founder of the Paris-
based association "Musique Espérance" which
aims to bring music and musicians into the ser¬
vice of human rights and to restore to music its
role as a form of social communication.
