Wandering
ANYONE who has looked at a world map must have noticed
how snugly the coastlines of Africa and the Americas
could be made to fit together, if the intervening ocean were
removed. Modern geophysics has established that all of the
Earth's landmasses were indeed joined together in one super-
continent, Pangaea, hundreds of millions of years ago, and that
this supercontinent was broken apart, with the land masses
drifting to their present positions on the globe.
This idea took many years to become established. Specula¬
tions about the fit of the continents go back to Francis Bacon
(1561-1626), but the acknowledged "father" of the idea of con¬
tinental drift was the German astronomer and meteorologist
Alfred Wegener, who published the first comprehensive state¬
ment of the theory in 1 91 2. Wegener thought that the continents
might move through the thinner crust of the ocean floor, like
icebergs ploughing through the sea, and he gathered a wealth of
evidence showing how well the continents could be fitted
together like some global jigsaw puzzle. But the idea of conti¬
nents moving through the rocks of the sea floor did not seem
feasible, and found little favour until the 1 950s, when the develop¬
ment of new geological techniques provided conclusive evidence
that the continents do move.
The key evidence came from magnetic studies of the ocean
floors. These showed that the crust of the Atlantic Ocean floor is
arranged symmetrically on either side of a great ridge of volcanic
activity which runs roughly down the centre of the ocean bed. The
interpretation of this discovery is that new oceanic crust is being
created at the mid-ocean ridge, where it wells up through a crack
in the Earth's crust and is pushing out on either side, steadily
widening the Atlantic.
Maps © Oxford University Press, Oxford
200 million years ago Present
135 million years ago In 50 million years' time
10

continents
Ocean spreading ridge. Plates are separating; molten rock rises,
adding new material to each plate.
In other parts of the world the reverse happens. The North
Pacific, for example, has no oceanic ridge, but there is a deep
trench running down the west of the ocean floor, next to the
Eurasian landmass. There the thin crust of the ocean floor is
being pushed under the continent, back down into the mantle
where It melts and is ultimately recycled. The net effect is that
there is no change in the surface area of the Earthspreading in
the Atlantic and at other sites is balanced by contraction of the
Pacific. A piece of the Earth's crust that is bounded by spreading
ridges and subduction zones is called a "plate", which gives the
concept of continental drift its modern name, "plate tectonics". In
some places, two pieces of crusttwo platesrub side by side,
with no net creation or destruction of sea floor. This happens
today along the notorious San Andreas fault in California.
The whole process of break-up and re-arrangement of the
continents may have happened several times in the Earth's his¬
tory, and is responsible for building mountain ranges, where
continents collide. India, moving northward into Eurasia, has
forced up the Himalayas, which are still growing. By contrast, the
line of the Red Sea marks a new (by geological standards) crack in
the Earth's crust, a spreading ridge which is splitting Africa off
from Arabia, and which may eventually cause this narrow sea to
expand into an ocean as large as the Atlantic is today.
Overwhelming evidence for the reality of continental drift, or
plate tectonics, was collected during the 1 960s and 1 970s. But the
"icing on the cake" has been provided only in the past few years.
Using laser beams bounced off artificial satellites in orbit around
the Earth, it is now possible to measure directly the steady
widening of the Atlantic, calculated at a couple of centimetres
every year.
Ocean subduction zone. One plate underthrusts another. The
edge of one plate is pushed down into the mantle where it melts
and is recycled. Some of the molten rock rises to form an island
arc.
Collision zone. An underthrusting plate rams two continents
together, forming a high mountain belt.
J
é
Transform fault. Two plates slide past one another with no addi¬
tion or destruction of plate material.
Illustration © The Sunday Times with the Geological Museum, London
Eurasian Plate
continental crust
volcanoes
earthquake zone
subduction zone
. uncertain plate boundary
, movement of plate
	" spreading ridge offset by transform faults
	 collision zone
11
