The candle of learning by Abdus Salam
Pakistaniphysicist Abdus Salam, founder
and director of the Unesco-sponsored In¬
ternational Centre for Theoretical Physics,
Trieste, and professor of theoretical phy¬
sics at the Imperial College ofScience and
Technology, London, was awarded the
1979 Nobel Prize for Physics. The prize,
which he shared with two American physi¬
cists, Sheldon Glashow and Steven Wein¬
berg of Harvard University, was awarded
for work in electromagnetic interaction be¬
tween elementary particles. Shortly after
the announcement of the award, Professor
Salam, who has had a long and fruitful
association with Unesco, was Invited to
the Organization's headquarters in Paris
to receive the congratulations of the Un¬
esco Executive Board. The article below
consists of extracts from his address.
THE question which I wish to lead up
to is, are we in the developing world
today firmly on the road to a re¬
naissance in the sciences, just as the
West was in the twelfth century at the time
of Michael the Scot?
For this renaissance to happen, there
are two prerequisites: one, the availability
of places like Toledo where international
concourse can take place, where one can
light a candle from a candle; secondly,
there has to be an interest in developing
societies to give the topmost priority to the
acquisition of knowledge, just as, for ex¬
ample, the Japanese did after the Meiji re¬
volution by enshrining the acquiring of
knowledge in their constitution.
Regretfully, if I may speak the truth and
if I look at the world of developing coun¬
tries as it is today, I see that neither of
these requirements is being met. The
opportunities for international concourse
are fast shrinking, with greater and greater
restrictions on acceptance of overseas
scholars from developing countries. It is
becoming increasingly clear that soon the
developing world will need internationally-
run, United Nations-run, Unesco-run, insti¬
tutions, universities of science, not just for
research as at the United Nations Universi¬
ty in Tokyo, but for high-level teaching of
traditional technology and science, both
pure and applied. The second prerequisite
which I mentioned, a passionate desire on
the part of the developing countries for sci¬
entific knowledge and the removal of all
barriers to its acquisition, is unfortunately
non-existent.
I would like to appeal, first, to the dele¬
gates from the developing countries, of
which I am one. I wish to make a personal
appeal. Science and technology are your
responsibility. Your men of science are
precious assets. Prize them; give them
opportunities to participate in the scientific
and technological development of your
countries. Do not leave them out. The goal
of increasing the 2 billion dollars which the
poorer countries currently spend on non-
military science and research, to the 20
billion they should be spending on the
basis of the norm established by the richer
countries, is ultimately your responsibility.
But having said this, I would also wish to
appeal to the international community, both
to governments and to scientists. A world
so divided where science and technology
are concerned cannot endure. What is one
to think when one sees that an internation¬
al centre for theoretical physics has a
budget of 1.5 million dollars to spend on
100 developing countries, while the great
organization CERN (European Organization
for Nuclear Research), at Geneva, which is
a joint organization of European nations,
has a budget of one-third of a billion dol¬
lars? That is the scale on which scientific
research has to be conducted in order to
be effective.
November 1979
38
