Two mediators of medieval
thought
by Mohammed Arkoun
	 'ijlfl »»lift * r ,^. .*!<** .:.-4
	,t»iV.*.
- . ^JU.'j^i'l^-l-l- 	 ^ - -.
- .. 	
.<^ . j ~. . - . - mi - - wLi
-, _*»-*-^»'*-. . .,. »i_.
: - . . , ^- p	»
-
M*<J| <fj¡qgW
	. <	ijji Wyu ..
	 .
Page from an Arabic manuscript of the
Great Commentary and Paraphrase on the
Posterior Analytics of Aristotle by Aver¬
roës, copied In Maghrebi script by an
anonymous 13th century scribe. The
manuscript is now in the State Library,
West Berlin.
IBN Rushd (1126-1198) and Müsa Ibn
Maymün( 1135-1204), more commonly
known in the West as Averroës and
Maimonides, dominated the twelfth cen¬
tury by the power of their thought, the vol¬
ume and the variety of their writings, their
intellectual commitment to the service of
their respective communities and, not least,
their wide influence in the Western
world.
Both were born in Córdoba, the brilliant
capital of what was then Muslim Andalusia,
into families of jurists (of qâdïs, for the
Muslim Averroës, of rabbis, for the Jewish
Maimonides). Both lived for a time in
Morocco Averroës at Marrakesh (where
he died in 1198), undcrthe patronage of the
Almohad ruler Abü Ya'qüb (1163-1184)
and of his successor Ya'qüb al-Mansür
(1 184-1 199), and Maimonides at Fez, where
he took refuge in 1160. In 1165 Maimonides
was obliged to seek refuge again, this time
in Cairo, where he became head of the Jew¬
ish community and physician to al-Fâdil,
vizier of the Sultan Saladin, and where he
died in 1204, just six years after Averroës.
To be born into a family of magistrates
whose task it was to apply the standards of
religious law within a society totally subject
to the dogmas of revealed religions, to be
oneself a judge or doctor of religious law
and yet at the same time to devote one's
energies to the secular sciences grouped
together under the name of philosophy
this was the mark of a certain society and a
certain age. Confrontation between the
revealed religions and the Greek philosophi¬
cal tradition went back to Philo of Alex¬
andria and the Fathers of the Church. In the
Islamic context, it became more intense
from the third century of the Hegira (ninth
century AD). Maimonides claimed intellec¬
tual kinship with the Muslim philosopher
al-Fârâbî (878-950) and held the philos¬
opher-scientist Ibn SInâ (Avicenna, 980-
1037) in great respect, whilst expressing
some reservations on his teachings. He also
acknowledged his debt to Averroës who,
with his critical re-examination of four cen¬
turies of Arab Muslim research, endowed
the twelfth century with the most faithful
expression of Aristotelian philosophy.
It is in this historical context that the work
of these two mediators should be consid¬
ered. I call them "mediators" because they
did much to reconcile rational philosophy
with revealed religion and also because they
created a meta-theological language which
made possible enduring communication
between the three great religious commu¬
nities stemming from the same initial phe¬
nomenon of revelation yet irremediably
opposed and divided by mutually exclusive
theological systems.
Even today, Christians and Jews are
reluctant to admit an intellectual and
cultural debt to classical Arab Islamic
thought. Certain Jewish thinkers take this
reluctance so far as failing to mention that a
large number of Maimonides' works were
conceived and written in Arabic. Some
biographers maintain that Maimonides may
even have been converted to Islam; even if
such a conversion was forced, it throws
some light on the possibilities of cultural
communication and the differences of rites
and dogma between the religious commu¬
nities of the Middle Ages.
At all events, it is important to stress that
the works of these two sages are concerned
both with philosophy and religion. In exam¬
ining Aristotle's rationalism in depth in his
closely-argued commentaries, Averroës
created a new intellectual climate which
Maimonides, for the Jews, and St. Thomas
Aquinas, for the Catholics, took advantage
of to elaborate theological theories which
are not wholly outdated even today.
To the Neoplatonism of the "oriental"
philosophers, the dialectical weakness of
the Ash'arite school'" and the simplistic,
legalistic dogmatism of the jurists, Aver¬
roës opposed the demonstrative (Analyti¬
cal) method, dialectical (Topical) reasoning
and persuasive (Rhetorical) argumenta¬
tion, the categories of logic (Organon)
which reflect Aristotle's philosophical prac¬
tice and approach. In this attempt at the
rationalization of knowledge Averroës does
not seem to have been aware of the contri¬
bution of the Mu'tazilites'2'. The teachings
of this important Islamic school, which, as
early as the second to the fourth century of
the Hegira (eighth to tenth century AD),
did so much to restore confidence in
rationalism, did not spread to the Muslim
West (Andalusia, the Maghreb) owing to
the opposition of the Malekite jurists'3'. It
was these same Malekites who succeeded in
obtaining the banishment of Averroës him¬
self towards the end of his life.
The political and social position of the
jurists (fiiqahäs) was an abiding factor in the
history of the intellectual activity and
14

Parchment manuscriptpage of the second
part of Maimonides' Guide of the Per¬
plexed, in the Hebrew translation com¬
pleted by Samuel ben Tibbon, a Jew from
Provence, in the lifetime of the author.
Maimonides, in a letter to his coreligionist,
advised him on the best way to translate.
This manuscript ¡s earlier than 1356 AD,
the date when it is known that the manu¬
script was used as security for a loan
(perhaps in the Spanish town of Huesca).
The title of the work here stands out
against a floral background, with an ani¬
mal motif on the lower part of the page.
religious thought of the Muslim West.
Strong ideological pressure had everywhere
established the teachings of the Malekite
school as the exclusive expression of Islam.
With the fall of the Caliphate of Córdoba
(1031), the break-up of Muslim Spain into
petty kingdoms and the growing pressure of
the Christian reconquest, the Reconquista,
Islam fostered an ideology of combat
(jihäd) so as to mobilize its forces; this gave
added importance to the role of the jurists
and, even more, of the popular preachers.
Thus, rather than deplore the fanaticism
of the Almoravids and the Almohads, the
historian would do better to examine the
social and ideological context of intellectual
activity in the Muslim West.
The difficulties Averroës encountered
and the conversion of Maimonides,
whether feigned or sincere, are indicative of
the general climate of the time and also,
going beyond the specific situation in
Andalusia, of the tension between the
"rational" or "intrusive" sciences ('aqliyya-
dakhïla) and the "religious" or "traditional"
sciences (dûnïyya-naqlïyya) throughout
Islam. The struggle between the Mu'taz¬
ilites and the Hanbalites14' in Baghdad in the
third century of the Hegira/ninth century
AD reflected both a socio-cultural split and
a philosophical difference regarding the
faculties, the paths and the seats of
knowledge.
Ghazâlï'5» (1058-1111 AD) had added a
speculative dimension to the argument
which, nearly a century later, captured the
attention of Averroës. In his lhyâ 'Ulum
al-din ("The Revival of the Religious Sci¬
ences"), Ghazâlï inveighed against the stul¬
tifying literalism of the jurists, the gnostic
constructs of the esotericists (al-Bätiniyya)
and the heretical deviations of the philos¬
ophers (falâsifa) all this in the name of a
spiritual religion open to rational knowl¬
edge but nevertheless with the strict limita¬
tion that the body of revealed knowledge
was not susceptible to critical investiga¬
tion.
Averroës chose to contest the views of
Ghazâlï as a means of furthering philosophi¬
cally (today we would say scientifically) the
crucial debate on the relationship between
philosophy and religion. In his Fasl
al-maqâl fïmâ bayn al sharVa wal-hikma
min alittisäl ("Decisive Treatise on the Har¬
mony of Religion and Philosophy") Aver¬
roës replied to Ghazâlî's Faysal al-tafriqa
o
CD
©
>ü»oSiÄ^r ù if A3-*7i'D>wtu¿n**'3 t** r¿i^ysv» *
^srr&nvm-A'&ri'ùf. ?Mew» «a
iiti:i -rOr ù frysi-iay^ ^^awap*' »pt**w3-*rà
-çrr\r<" BT" "öJ* '^*J
-¿svV-^v3 irr**«*'' w^v-m
¿rf *»M ^-O
^ m
©
Page from a paper manuscript of Mai¬
monides' Mishne Torah ("The Torah Re¬
viewed"), at the bottom of which can be
read this phrase In his own hand: "Fair
copy of my book made by myself, Moses,
son of Rabbi Maymün blessed be the
memory of this just man." This is the old¬
est known signature of Maimonides. The
Mishne Torah, Maimonides' major rabbi¬
nical work, is a vast and detailed codifica¬
tion, with an Aristotelian philosophical
base, of all the laws and rules characteriz¬
ing post-Biblical Judaism. It is the only
one of his master works that he wrote in
Hebrew.
15

"In examining Aristotle's rationalism in
depth in his closely-argued commentar¬
ies, Averroës created a new intellectual
climate which Maimonides, for the Jews,
and St. Thomas Aquinas, for the Catholics,
took advantage of to elaborate their theo¬
logical theories" (M. Arkoun). Mediator in
the fullest sense of the word, Ibn Rushd
made possible the attempt to reconcile
rational philosophy and revealed faith
which would characterize all Western
scholasticism, in particular that of St. Tho¬
mas Aquinas. Thus he exerted a consider¬
able influence on European philosophy of
the Middle Ages and succeeding centur¬
ies, even though the novelty and audacity
of his ideas often shocked the defenders
of Christian, as well as Islamic, tradition.
Below, A vermes is depicted at right in this
detail of The Triumph of St. Thomas
Aquinas, fresco by the 15th century Italian
painter Andrea de Firenze, in the "Spanish
Chapel" of the Church of Santa Maria
Novella, Florence. Part of this portrait of
the philosopher is reproduced on the front
cover of this issue.
^ bayn al-islâm wal zandaqa ("Distinction
Between Islam and Impiety"); and in Taha¬
fut al-tahäfut ("The Incoherence of the
Incoherence") he also refuted another work
of Ghazâlï entitled Tahâfut àlfalâsifa ("The
Incoherence of the Philosophers"). In more
general terms he exposed the weaknesses of
the methodology of the theologians (the
Mutakalliiiu'tn) in his Kashf 'an manâhij
al-adilla ("Examination of the Methods of
Proof Concerning the Doctrines of
Religion"), as well as writing an important
treatise on the basic sources of law (Bidäyat
al-Mujtahid).
All these works go to show how deeply
Averroës wanted to remain a Muslim
thinker and, with all his philosophical cul¬
ture (the scientific knowledge of his age), to
face up intellectually to all the problems
arising from the confrontation between the
Qur'anic revelation and the strictest philo¬
sophical standpoint. Latin commentators,
and later the French writer Ernest Renan,
distorted Averroës' thought by thinking of
him only in terms of his commentaries on
Aristotle. For their part, Muslims so dis¬
trusted him as a philosopher that they for¬
got that he was also a Muslim thinker.
Maimonides, for the Jews, and St.
Thomas Aquinas, for the Christians (the
Catholic Church of pre-Reformation days),
adopted Averroës' intellectual scheme for
the purposes of their own communities,
using the same philosophical approach, the
same conceptual guidelines and methodol¬
ogy to systematize the received corpus of
revealed knowledge of their different tradi¬
tions. For all three revealed religions the
great problem remained the harmonization
of faith and reason, the reconciliation of
religious law and the essential tenets or uni¬
versal of religion with Aristotle's logical
processes and categories. The Torah,
Canon Law and the Shari'a, which express
God's commandments as interpreted by
learned experts in the Law trained in the
exegesis of the Word of God, retain their
supremacy. The difficulties that arise are
not concerned with the norms thus deduced
from the revealed word, but with the dogma
on which the Law itself is based. Three
essential points are at the heart of the con¬
frontation with philosophy: the creation of
the world, causality, and the destiny of the
soul (immortality and the body/soul
duality).
This is not the place to enter into the
subtle discussions of these questions, which
modern science has shifted towards new
fields of research; of greater interest, it
seems to me, is to examine to what extent
Averroës and Maimonides were, and
remain today, mediators between three
communities and three historic destinies.

Thought and culture as expressed in Ara¬
bic reached full flower in the sixth century
of the Hegira/twelfth century AD thanks to
the great works written in the East and the
Muslim West from the second century of
the Hegira/eighth century AD onwards.
The intellectual and scientific supremacy of
the Arab world of that time is confirmed by
the many translations into Hebrew and
Latin of studies on philosophy, medicine
and the natural sciences written in Arabic
by authors not all of whom were Muslims.
Jews and Christians who lived in an Arab
cultural setting thought and wrote in Ara¬
bic, thus enriching a body of knowledge and
a range of intellectual activity that went
beyond the limits set by the creeds of each
of the three communities. Maimonides
ranks among the greatest Jewish thinkers
who conceived and wrote their works in
Arabic in that area of intellectual and
cultural convergence of which philosophy,
as understood and practised in the Middle
Ages, was largely representative.
His works were, however, very soon
translated into Hebrew. As early as 1204
AD, his Guide of the Perplexed had been
translated by Samuel ibn Tibbon, and this
led the Jews to forget the cultural values and
intellectual climate in which Maimonides
had lived, worked and written. Today, the
ideological tensions between Arabs and
Israelis is such that many Jews are unwilling
to take into account the great thinker's deep
links with the corpus of learned writing in
Arabic. Yet it was precisely the existence of
these links that made even more precious
Maimonides' historic role as a mediator.
The same could be said of St. Thomas
Aquinas, even though he wrote all his
works in Latin. His intellectual debt to
Averroës in particular marks him out also as
a leading light of a world of thought and
human existence based on an axiological
system common to that medieval intellec¬
tual milieu that I have elsewhere^6' referred
to as the "Societies of the Book". I call
"Societies of the Book" all those commu¬
nities whose existence, order and culture
are based on the phenomenon of Revela¬
tion (a unique living God, revealing himself
to men at a moment in history so as to
communicate to them his commandments
which then become the source of the Law)
and on a philosophical culture which
favours the search for a rational order of
things. These two great lines of approach
Revelation and scientific and philosophical
rationality imposed an educative tension
on all medieval thought, whatever its par¬
ticular religious attachment, in which at
times religion and the "orthodox" tradition,
at times reason, held sway. The whole of
medieval thought bore the mark of this
duality. The question remained: how could
revealed knowledge be reconciled and
brought into harmony with the necessary
constraints of reason?
Both Averroës and Maimonides suc¬
ceeded in achieving a real, personally satis¬
fying balance which they attempted to
express in elaborately thought out systems
in which they integrated rational knowledge
(philosophy) and religious Law, the Shari'a
with all its developments and the Torah and
the whole rabbinical tradition Mai-
V" A ^ inapt < k
wV ,-xq m |tó
*á» Jfcv
hi r>: -v
nr -.y;;. ..... . ->. -.
&Y
1: « :^
a
©
monides' Mishne Torah ("The Torah
Reviewed"), was a systematization of the
oral Law, Mishna, and the Talmud.
Rationalist commentators on the two
thinkers have attempted to claim them both
as supporters of "pure" reason and a phil¬
osophy which, if not entirely secular, was at
least distinct from religious ideas.
However, the functions they fulfilled as
judges in their respective religious commu¬
nities have to be disregarded and their writ¬
ings concerning the "religious sciences" of
their time have to be ignored, if they are to
be considered as "philosophers in dis¬
guise".
Like all the sages of his time, Maimonides
had a lofty view of his responsibility as an
intellectual capable of explaining to the
faithful the teachings of religious Law whilst
taking into account the fact that men had
not all attained the same level of learning.
In Book III of The Guide of the Perplexed,
with the aid of a rich parable, he explains
clearly the various stages and levels in any
true search for God. I quote this entire pas-
Another page from a parchment manu¬
script of Samuel ben Tibbon's Hebrew
translation of the Guide of the Perplexed. It
was copied in Barcelona in 1348 AD by
Levi ben Ishaq Fijo Caro (son of Caro), of
Salamanca, for the physician R. Menahem
Besalel, and illuminated shortly after¬
wards in the Catalan Gothic style, prob¬
ably by a Christian artist. The miniature
shows an astronomer with an astrolabe in
his hands speaking to his pupils. Accord¬
ing to one specialist, it depicts Aristotle
explaining the creation of the world.
sage, since it has not been contradicted by
Muslim thinkers and because it affords an
example of that climate of intellectual, spiri¬
tual and cultural convergence in which the
brightest Jewish, Christian and Muslim
minds were active under the double im¬
pulsion of Revelation and a philosophical
culture.
"I will begin the subject of this chapter
with a simile. A king is in his palace, and all
his subjects are partly in the country, and
CONTINUED PAGE 20
17

©
minn »no» n^D>7^
"JV3-D J3 rîTD "J^
CON S TITVTION ES
D C
F V N n A M B N T I S
L E C .1 S
RAltl JtlOSIS X OUJtiríilOX.
Ijtm¿ icddils per
C i) i L i r L w u h V o i i i i u >; CF.
Addimt]uii>u!.Í3in luHuli* , Se AbMvoncUs
' iésíé
liöllli
All t T t O D A U I(
ApOtl C U 1 M 1 L, ÎC IcWAKHlM BlAlit»
cía 1? c siJïTtiu
Tïf/e page oí* a /.af/n translation of the
Foundations of the Law (first section of the
fourth book of the Mishne Torah,}, pub¬
lished in Amsterdam in 1638.
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 17
p. partly abroad. Of the former, some have
their backs turned towards the king's pal¬
ace, and their faces in another direction;
and some are desirous and zealous to go to
the palace, seeking 'to inquire in his tem¬
ple', and to minister before him, but have
not yet seen even the face of the wall of the
house. Of those that desire to go to the
palace, some reach it , and go round about in
search of the entrance gate; others have
passed through the gate, and walk about in
the ante-chamber; and others have suc¬
ceeded in entering into the inner part of the
palace, and being in the same room with the
king in the royal palace. But even the latter
do not immediately on entering the palace
see the king, or speak to him; for, after
having entered the inner part of the palace,
another effort is required before they can
stand before the king at a distance or close
by hear his words or speak to him. I will
now explain the simile which I have made.
The people who are abroad are all those
that have no religion, neither one based on
speculation nor one received by tradition.
Such are the extreme Turks that wander
about in the north, the Kushites who live in
the south, and those in our country who are
like these. I consider these as irrational
beings and not as human beings; they are
below mankind, but above monkeys, since
they have the form and shape of man, and a
mental faculty above that of the monkey.
"Those who are in the country, but have
their backs turned towards the king's pal¬
ace, are those who possess religion, belief,
and thought, but happen to hold false doc¬
trines, which they either adopted in con¬
sequence of great mistakes made in their
own speculations, or received from others
who misled them. Because of these doc¬
trines they recede more and more from the
royal palace the more they seem to proceed.
These are worse than the first class, and
under certain circumstances it may become
necessary to slay them, and to extirpate
their doctrines, in order that others should
not be misled.
"Those who desire to arrive at the palace,
and to enter it, but have never yet seen it,
are the mass of religious people; the multi¬
tude that observe the divine command¬
ments, but are ignorant. Those who arrive
at the palace, but go round about it, are
those who devote themselves exclusively to
the study of the practical law; they believe
traditionally in true principles of faith, and
learn the practical worship of God, but are
not trained in philosophical treatment of
the principles of the Law," and do not
endeavour to establish the truth of their
faith by proof. Those who undertake to
investigate the principles of religion, have
come into the ante-chamber; and there is no
doubt that these can also be divided into
different grades. But those who have suc¬
ceeded in finding a proof for everything that
can be proved, who have a true knowledge
of God, so far as a true knowledge can be
attained, and are near the truth, wherever
an approach to the truth is possible, they
have reached the goal, and are in the palace
in which the king lives.
"My son, so long as you are engaged in
studying the Mathematical Sciences and
Logic, you belong to those who go round
about the palace in search of the gate. Thus
our Sages figuratively use the phrase: 'Ben-
zoma is still outside'. When you understand
Physics, you have entered the hall; and
when, after completing the study of Natural
Philosophy, you master Metaphysics, you
have entered the innermost court, and are
with the king in the same palace. You have
attained the degree of the wise men, who
include men of different grades of perfec¬
tion." (The Guide of the Perplexed, III,
51)
Averroës was even more insistent than
Maimonides on the importance of not
revealing "philosophical interpretations to
those who are not able to comprehend
them". This was not because he had an aris¬
tocratic or elitist attitude towards philos¬
ophy or because he wanted to protect his
reputation as a good Muslim; the fact is that
he shared with other experts of the Law
Ghazâlï held the same view with regard to
Kaläm (Muslim scholastic theology) the
specifically religious conviction that great
caution should be exercised by teachers so
as not "to lead the faithful away from the
divine Law", following in this the example
of "the divine legislator [who] cares for the
well-being of the soul as a doctor cares for
the health of the body".
It is true that Maimonides was much bet¬
ter received and respected within his com¬
munity than Averroës ever was by the Mus¬
lims. This is no doubt due to the fact that
Maimonides compiled "guides" to the
orthodox faith to help the faithful avoid
perdition and the loss of eternal salvation.
Thus, in his "Commentary on the Mishna",
he summarized the thirteen articles of faith
which every Jew must accept and which
have been used, in verse form, since the
fourteenth century in the daily ritual of
Sephardic communities. Religious commu¬
nities, especially when they are minorities,
need the cohesion provided by beliefs and
rituals that are valid for all and act as a
"safety net" for believers. Maimonides was
well aware of this need, whereas it was not
so vital a matter of concern for Averroës
who was a member of a broader and more
dominant Umma (community), especially
during the time of the Almohads.
At all events, the century of Averroës
and Maimonides, succeeded shortly by that
of St. Thomas Aquinas, is worthy of study
with a view to a reassessment of medieval
thought which goes beyond the claims of
supremacy of militant theologies or a his¬
tory of philosophy deprived of its medieval
dimension, such as the secularized, positiv¬
ist, anti-clerical West has long imposed.
In university courses as conceived and
followed in the West, Arab philosophy is
generally left to departments of Oriental
studies which themselves are considered of
only marginal importance within the uni¬
versities. If this state of affairs is to be rec¬
tified, a scientific revision must be under¬
taken of the overall history of the cultural
climate of the Mediterranean during the
Middle Ages, involving philosophy, theol¬
ogy and the history of the sciences. This is
the lesson that emerges from the works of
the two great mediators whom I have all too
briefly presented here.
1. The Ash'arite school: Followers of the Muslim theo¬
logian al-Ash'ari (873-935 AD) who reconciled a dialec¬
tic method with orthodox beliefs to create a new form of
scholasticism in Islam. Editor.
2. The Mu'tazilites: A Muslim philosophical school
founded in the eighth century AD emphasizing reason in
religious interpretation, free will in opposition to pre¬
destination and the unity and justice of Allah. Editor.
3. The Malekites: One of the four Sunni schools of law
founded in the eighth century AD. The Malekites pre¬
ferred traditional opinions and analogical reasoning to a
strict reliance on Iladïth (traditions concerning the
Prophet's life and utterances) as a basis for legal judge¬
ment. Editor.
4. The Hanbalites: School of religious law relying solely
on a literal reading of the Our'an and Iladïth in for¬
mulating legal decisions. Editor.
5. Part of the November 1986 issue of the Unesco Cou¬
rier will be devoted to this great Islamic thinker.
6. Pour une critique de la raison islamique, Maison-
ncuvc-Larosc, 1984, and Lectures du Coran, 1982.
MOHAMMED ARKOUN, born in Algeria, is pro¬
fessor ol the history of Islamic thought at the New
Sorbonne, University of Paris III, and director of
the University's Institute of Arabic and Islamic
Studies. He has previously taught at the Univer¬
sity of Lyon, the University of California at Los
Angeles, the Catholic University of Louvain, at
Princeton, and at the Pontifical Institute ofArabic
Studies, Rome. He has taught and lectured in
many academic and cultural centres around the
world. Among his many publications are La pen¬
sée arabe, ("Arab Thought", 1979), l'Islam,
religion et société, ("Islam, Religion and
Society", 1981), Lectures du Coran, ("Readings
from the Qur'an", 1982) and Essais sur la pen¬
sée islamique ("Essays on Islamic Thought",
1984).
20
