Unesco: 40 years of action
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
FORTY years ago, just a few weeks after the end of the
Second World War, the Conference of the Allied
Ministers of Education, which was to adopt the Con¬
stitution of Unesco, met in London.
To the terrible toll of six years of desolation and death that
the world had just experienced was now added the threat
foreshadowed by the explosion of the two atomic bombs at
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Over the ruins of the annihilated
cities, in the grief present everywhere, and confronted by the
prospect of new forms of mass destruction, the international
community became aware of the collective responsibilities
which it would have to shoulder in order to preserve the
future of the species.
Within the framework of the United Nations system that
had just been set up, Unesco was given the task of advancing
international peace and the common welfare of mankind
through "the educational and scientific and cultural relations
of the peoples of the world" in other words, international
intellectual co-operation.
In order to help to bring about "a condition in which the
incentives to war are neutralized by social, spiritual and
economic advances...", Unesco engaged in vigorous action
in many different fields the development of great standard-
setting concepts; the circulation of knowledge, ideas and
information; and operational activities to help the poorest
countries. This activity aimed among other things to foster
mutual knowledge and understanding among nations; to
facilitate by means of appropriate methods of co-operation
the access of all peoples to what each of them had already
produced and to what each was producing in all fields of
thought, artistic creativity and scientific and technical dis¬
covery and experiment; to bring about conditions under
which everyone should have equal opportunities of access to
education; and to allow the free exchange of ideas and
information.
Over the years, Unesco has constantly broadened the
basis of its representativity. Its action in this area has been
constantly gaining in scope and complexity especially with
the admission of nearly 100 countries which, during the late
1950s and the 1960s, acceded to national sovereignty.
These countries brought their historical and cultural ex¬
perience into the Organization; they expressed their particu¬
lar sensitivities; they evoked their own concerns. The de¬
veloping countries, in particular, raised questions related to
the difficult, sometimes even alarming, circumstances that
they were facing, to the manifold challenges confronting
them and to the various paths that they were exploring in
order to ensure a development that was authentic.
Unesco thus began to think about the reality of an in¬
creasingly interdependent world in which societies are in
contact with each other to a greater or lesser degree and are
part of a world system of reciprocal exchanges and relations.
On account of this development, Unesco, which had at
first focused its activities on certain parts of the world, was
gradually led to extend them worldwide.
During the past forty years, Unesco has thus made possi¬
ble the development of a host of communication, exchange,
co-operation and action networks, reaching into the most
diverse fields, leading to immense progress in knowledge
and know-how, and leading the peoples and the cultures of
the whole world to draw closer together.
Throughout these decades, Unesco has striven to draw on
three sources of energy the political reality of the govern¬
ments of Member States; the creative urge of spiritual,
intellectual and artistic communities; and the competence
and devotion of an international Secretariat that is called on
to encourage and co-ordinate the ideas, initiatives and pro¬
jects of all.
This is why Unesco is duty-bound to increase still further
the integration of the intellectual communities of the world
in the living tissue of its activities, so that constantly renewed
blood can flow through this tissue and so that the factors of
amalgamation and catalytic forces that give full strength to
the alchemy of intellectual co-operation can be brought into
every one of its great debates.
1 cannot conclude without adding that the world is today
encountering a number of grave difficulties that are reflected
in the functioning of the United Nations system and, conse¬
quently, in Unesco.
These difficulties no doubt provide a fresh opportunity for
re-examining some of the workings of the system with a view
to their democratization; they have, however, made some
people question the aims and purposes of the system and
even the very reason for its existence.
This is not the first time that the United Nations has faced
such challenges. It is therefore important that the heads of
the agencies of the system should shoulder their responsibili¬
ties in full measure.
It is no longer for them a case of merely expediting current
matters as best they can. Guided by their conscience, in
observance of the principles of the United Nations Charter
and of the Constitutions of their respective organizations, it
is also and perhaps especially for them to rise above the
contingent and the incidental in order to keep all chances for
the future intact.
In this year which marks the fortieth anniversary of Un¬
esco, it is with this conviction that once more I call on
intellectuals throughout the world to strengthen, through
our Organization, the ties of solidarity based on the forces of
freedom, creativity and progress themselves the very
forces of the spirit that Unesco exists to bring together.
This text is a slightly shortened version of an address given by the Director-General of
Unesco at the Organization's Paris Headquarters during a ceremony held on 12
December 1985 to commemorate Unesco's fortieth anniversary.
