My latest work-
a wall by Joan Miró
IN 1955 Unesco asked me to take part in
the decoration of its new headquarters
buildings, then under construction in
the Place de Fontenoy, Paris. Two perpen¬
dicular walls one fifteen metres long, the
other seven and a half metres long near
the Conference building were put at my
disposal. My idea was to decorate them with
ceramics, in collaboration with José
Llorens-Artigas.
The design and colouring for the walls I
was to decorate were suggested by the
shapes of the buildings themselves, their
Miró andArtigas set up full-sizedpaintings
of the ceramics in a dell beneath an im¬
mense circle of rocks and trees near Galli-
fa. Towering background enabled them to
visualize how works would look against
the great walls of the Unesco buildings.
spatial structure, and the play of light. As a
reaction to the huge concrete surfaces
around the larger wall came the idea of a
large, vivid red disc. Its counterpart on the
smaller wall would be a blue crescent to
accord with the more confined area it was to
occupy. ... I aimed at a crude and forceful
expression in the large wall and at some¬
thing more poetic in the smaller one. I also
wanted to provide an element of contrast
within each composition itself, and for this
reason I conceived harsh, dynamic outlines
side by side with restful coloured shapes, in
flat-tinted or in check design.
The second stage in the task was to study
with Artigas how my plan in ceramics was to
be carried out. No ceramist had ever before
been faced with an undertaking of this
scope. Besides this, as both walls were to be
in the open air and unprotected, we had to
keep in mind the extent to which the mate¬
rials used would resist differences in tem
perature, humidity, and the sun's rays.
There is no doubt that Artigas was the only
person capable of solving these extremely
difficult problems.
He sought, like an alchemist of old, the
type of earth, the sandstone enamels and
the colours that he would use. It was true
creative work.
It was then that we suddenly decided to
visit Santillana del Mar to have another
look at the famous cave paintings of Alta-
mira and gain inspiration from the world's
earliest mural art. While we were in the
"Collegiata", the old Romanesque church
at Santillana, we were deeply moved by the
extraordinary beauty of the material used
on an old wall, rotten with damp. Artigas
made notes about it for the purpose of his
backgrounds.
Having made our journey to the foun¬
tain-head, we thought we should also go
where we could feel the influence of the
Catalan Romanesque artists and of Gaudi.
The Barcelona Museum has wonderful
Romanesque frescoes, which have inspired
me since I first began to paint. Finally, we
visited Gaudi's work in the Guell park; and
here I was struck by the sight of an enor¬
mous disc set into the wall. It bore a strong
resemblance to the disc which I had in¬
tended to carve and paint on the larger wall
in Paris, and this coincidence I took both as
confirmation and as encouragement of my
purpose.
Artigas was not satisfied with the basic
material we were using and he feared that
the geometrical regularity of the tiles might
harm the feeling and "life" of the work.
Then he remembered the wall of the Col¬
legiata, and succeeded in reproducing in his
tests the wonderful depth of feeling we had
found there. In much the same way, the
sight of the walls of the old chapel at Gallifa
was a revelation to us. We saw that, in
deciding how to divide up the surface we
were to cover, we should think of "the
"throbbing" irregularity of the stones at
Gallifa. We had to begin again, using slabs
of different sizes.
Now that we had discovered how to
arrange the slabs and the base, the first
firing gave no trouble whatever. No matter
what precautions are taken, the firing is the
decisive factor; its action is unpredictable,
its decision final.
One more difficulty lay ahead the large
size of the surface I was to paint. If some of
the shapes and lines were to retain their
original form and spontaneity, they would
have to be made with single brush strokes.
For this purpose I used a long-handled
brush made of palm fibres. Artigas held his
breath when he saw me take the brush and
paint in shapes of five or six metres. One
mistake could have ruined the work of
several months.
November 1958
Reproduced from Derrière le Miroir, numbers 107, 108
and 109. © Maeght, Paris, 1958.
JOAN MIRO (1893-1983), Spanish painter, was
one of the great artists of the 20th century. As a
young man he took part in the Surrealist move¬
ment in Paris, where he lived for many years. He
was commissioned to create for Unesco's Paris
headquarters the two ceramics which he de¬
scribes in his article and which he named The
Wall of the Sun and The Wall of the Moon.
