Cover illustration o/Voyages d'lbn Battuta
("The Travels of Ibn Batutah") published in
the Collection in a bilingual (French-Arab)
edition in 1979. Ibn Batutah (1304-1377)
was the greatest Muslim traveller of the
Middle Ages. After long journeys through
Arabia, Asia Minor, Russia, India, China,
BlackAfrica, the Sahara and the Sudan, he
wrote his Rihla (Travels), an account of
exceptional documentary value in which
picturesque observations and fragments
ofpoetry are mingled with descriptions of
the countries he visited and of the cus¬
toms of their peoples.
e
0>
v>
<D
CC
Ü3
OÏ
be
<
©



The citadel ofAleppo
by Ibn Batutah
FROM Sermin we proceeded to Haleb (Aleppo), a
large city and splendid metropolis. This is how
Abulhossein the son of Jobeir described it: This city is
of enormous worth and its fame will last forever. Kings have
often sought to possess it and men have been impressed by its
importance. What a number of battles it has provoked, and
what a quantity of shining words have been unsheathed for
it! Its fortress is renowned for its power and its height is
clearly to be seen. No one dared attack it because of its
strength, or if they did they did not conquer it. The sides are
of freestone and its proportions are full of symmetry. It has
outlasted the days and the years and has seen nobles and
beggars carried to their last resting-places. Where are the
Hamdanite princes and their poets now? They are no more,
and only the buildings remain. Oh wonderful city! It en¬
dures, but its owners have passed on. They have perished but
its hour has not come. It was sought for after them and taken
without great difficulty. It was coveted and won at the
smallest cost. Such is this city of Aleppo. How many of its
kings has it not changed into a past tense (expression bor¬
rowed from grammar) and how many vicissitudes has it not
defied because of its position! Its name was made in the
feminine gender, it was adorned with the finery of a chaste
virgin, it succumbed to the victor as others have done. It
shone like a young bride after the sword (seif) of its dynasty,
Ibn Hamdan (a reference to Prince Seif eddaoulah). Alas! its
youth will pass, it will be no longer desired, only a short while
and it will be destroyed.
The fortress of Aleppo is called Ashshahba (the grey one).
Within it there are two wells from which water gushes, and
there is no fear of thirst there. The castle is surrounded by
two walls, there is a great moat from which water rises, and
its wall has many towers standing close together. This for¬
tress encloses marvellous chambers pierced with windows.
All the towers are occupied and in this fortified castle food is
not impaired by the passage of time.
There is a sanctuary which is visited by many people, and it
is said that Abraham prayed there to God. This fortress
resembles the one called Rahbet (square of) Malik Ibn
Thaouk, near the Euphrates, between Syria and Iraq. When
the Tartar tyrant Kazan marched against the city of Aleppo,
he besieged this fortress for many days. Then, frustrated in
his desire to take it, he withdrew.
Ibn Jozay says: Alkhalidy, the poet of Seif eddaoulah,
writes as follows about this fortress -
With its high belfry and invincible flanks, it is a vast, grim
place which rises up against him who would take it.
The atmosphere spreads a layer ofcloud over this place and
adorns the castle with a necklace of brilliant stars.
When lightning flashes in the night this fortress appears
through its interstices, shining like the constellation of the
Virgo through the openings in the clouds.
How many armies has this castle not destroyed and how
many conquerors has it not put to flight!
The same poet also speaks of the castle in the following
admirable verses:
It is a citadel whose base embraces the springs ofwater, and
its summit is higher than Orion's Belt.
It knows no rain, because for it the clouds are a ground,
whose sides are trodden by its cattle.
When the cloud has given water in abundance, he who lives
in the fortress uses all the water in his tanks before its summits
are moistened.
Its belvedere would be counted amongst the stars of the
heavens if it passed through their orbits.
The cunning of this fortress has repulsed the tricks of its
enemies and the evils it caused were greater than theirs.
Here is what Jemal eddin Ali, the son of Abulmansur, has
to say about this castle:
Because of its enormous height and the point which its
summit attains, this castle nearly stops the celestial sphere that
turns around the earth.
Its inhabitants have gone to the Milky Way as to a watering-
place and their horses have nibbled the stars as though grazing
on flowering plants.
The vicissitudes of time turn from it in fear, and for this
castle there is no change. ,
Extract from The Travels of Ibn Batutah, the French translation of
which, by C. Defremey and B.R. Sanguinetti (1854), was reissued,
with a preface by Vincent Monteil, in the Unesco Collection in 1 979.
19
