Painted manuscripts
ofpre-Columbian America
by Miguel Angel Asturias
THE Mexican, Maya and Peruvian In¬
dians discovered and cultivated
different "modes" of transmitting
their culture and ethics. Some of them still
amaze us with their plastic beauty and their
esoteric ingenuity, and in them all we dis¬
cern a fundamental and even obsessive urge
to preserve and transmit through original
forms of writing the profound meaning of
man and the universe.
For this reason writing became some¬
thing sacred and esoteric for the pre-Hispa-
nic peoples. Written signs, writing materials
and those who could handle them were
considered by the people as being con¬
nected with the divine. The writings them¬
selves, in their creation and their appear¬
ance, had a magical character, closely
linked to cosmogonie conceptions.
A page from the Codex Borbonicus
(named from the Palais Bourbon, seat of
the French National Assembly in Paris,
where it is preserved). It depicts children
dancing around a "maypole" decorated
with paper clothes on the occasion of an*
Aztec festival.
That is why the various systems of writing
that evolved among people with such a high
level of technical expertise bore no relation
to practical needs; they were symbols for
the sacred message concealed within.
We know that writing, its preservation
and interpretation, were the responsibility
of a special class of dignitaries with priest¬
like functions sometimes they even were
priests who used language, materials, col¬
ours and contents indissolubly related to the
archetypal situations of the Indian deities.
The pre-Columbian peoples possessed
several systems of writing (ideographic, |
tj , / ""V-r.-.V.Yv'V, -T/
i v. . /Jet, 'i".t .v/
E
o
Q
©
55

^ calendric, pictographic, numeral, phonetic)
with which they wrote on deerskins, stones
and strips of amatl paper. In their eyes,
however, the very fact of recording and of
keeping these records was of such vital im¬
portance that their loss or preservation was
identified with the destruction or continuity
cf the universe.
In fact, in order to make sure that the
world will continue to exist and that the loss
of the instruments of transmission does not
bring about the end of their lives and the
destruction of the universe, the ancient
Nahuas meet to reinvent or rediscover the
old knowledge and the old form of preserv¬
ing the past, the life and essence of their
people.
They are not concerned with the form
and various ways of recording the past
hence their infinite variety but with the
act of recording it so that its remembrance
may illuminate and give coherence to a
world filled with gods, conflicts and doubts.
Then they invented the count of the fates,
The annals and the count of the years,
The book of dreams;
They recorded the sequence and course of
events,
The time that passed
Under the lordship of the Toltecas,
The lordship of the Tepanecas,
The lordship of the Mexicas,
And all the lordships of the Chichimecas.
This is one reason not the most improb¬
able for the dearth of Maya texts and the
abundance of Náhuatl writings. The Span¬
ish conquest and the destruction that en¬
sued ... put an end to the various systems of
transmitting Indian culture.
In the final phase of the Mexican tragedy,
the missionaries attack the Indian religion
and way of thought and at this point one of
the Chiefs rises to express "with courtesy
and urbanity" his displeasure at this attack
on the customs and beliefs so dear to his
ancestors. It is not for him to defend them
since there are still some survivors of
Those who turn the rustling leaves of the
codices,
Those who have in their power the black
and red inks and the painting.
They lead us, guide us, show us the way.
They order how a year passes,
How it follows its course,
The account of the days
And each of the twenty-day months,
That is their business,
It is for them to speak of the gods.
There could be no more concise descrip¬
tion of the old Indian conception nor any
better expression of the loneliness, sadness
and helplessness of a bewildered, leaderless
people.
December 1972
MIGUEL ANGEL ASTURIAS (1899-1974), of
Guatemala, was one of the greatest modern
novelists in the Spanish language. In 1967, he
was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature.
Three of his most important novels have been
translated into English: The President (1963),
The Mulatta and Mister Fly (1970) and The
Green Pope (7977;.

