r\í-kí~llT*H f'lf^k'í^f" by Fernando Alves Cristóváo
The Brazilian arts make a 'come-back' to Portugal
THE discovery of Brazil in 1500 was
followed by the arrival in 1549 of
the Jesuits, who founded their
first college on the future site of Säo
Paulo, and it was then that the teaching of
the Portuguese language, and of the
European cultural models for which it
was a medium, first became established
on Brazilian soil.
Young Brazilians taught by the Jesuits
finished their education at the University
of Coimbra in Portugal. Only after 1808,
when the Portuguese Court was transfer¬
red to Rio de Janeiro, were liberalization
measures adopted, including the opening
of ports, the founding of printing houses
and the establishment of facilities for
higher education. These measures did
much to facilitate direct contacts with
"the other Europe" , and particularly with
France.
Accordingly, the process of defining
and asserting an authentically Brazilian
identity began only in the nineteenth cen¬
tury, inspired by the ideals of Romanti¬
cism and by the proclamation of Brazilian
independence its scope, however, re¬
mained limilcd. Only with the Modernist
movement of 1922 would the ideals of
cultural emancipation emerge victorious
(see page 38) . It is therefore instructive to
analyse the attitudes of Portuguese intel¬
lectuals to the cultural changes that took
place in the Romantic and Modernist
periods, and to examine their receptive-
ness to influences that originated in
Brazil.
Literature was the first field in which
these influences were felt. The great
figures of Portuguese Romanticism
favoured the literary independence of
Brazil, even to the point of urging Brazi¬
lian writers to break out of the European
and Portuguese moald and draw inspira¬
tion from local themes. It would be many
years before the Brazilian variant of the
Portuguese language was accepted, a de¬
lay largely due to the linguistic theories
prevalent at the time. Paradoxically, the
Portuguese writers who urged the Brazi¬
lians to opt for literary originality would
also mock or strongly resist any attempt
at linguistic innovation. Brazilian Portu¬
guese was considered comical, and when
Portuguese writers used it in their work,
they put it into the mouths of uncouth or
ridiculous characters.
As a result, Portuguese grammarians
and writers engaged in bitter con¬
troversies with their colleagues on the
other side of the Atlantic, the most
famous being conducted from 1835 on¬
wards in the Jornal do Comercio and the
Minerva Brasiliense.
The turn of the century marked the
start of Portuguese recognition of the
"Brazilian variant" by the distinguished
philologist Leite de Vasconcelos. Only
since the 1940s, however, has it been
truly recognized and accepted, and it was
not until the mid-1970s, when the first
Brazilian serial was shown on Portuguese
television, that it really won popular
acclaim and prestige. It was subsequently
used in specific fields of communication
such as advertising and sports commen¬
taries, for which Brazilian terms and pro¬
nunciation were used and Brazilian com¬
mentators recruited.
This movement towards "dignifica-
tion" reached its apogee in the 1950s,
when Portuguese linguistics began to be
taught at the Universities of Coimbra and
Lisbon by Brazilian specialists such as
Mattoso Cámara, Serafim de Silva Neto,
Silvio Elia and Gladstone Chaves de
Poet and diplomat, Vinicius de Moraes
(1913-1980) bridged the gap between
poetry and music, between the formal
world of academic culture and the more
casual world of pop. Ariana, a mulher
(1936) was the high point ofhis early work,
which had mystical overtones. Later, in
Cinco elegías (1938) and Poemas, sonetos
e baladas (1948), he moved towards sen¬
suous lyricism , notably In his poem Re-
ceita de Mulher. His play Orfeu da con-
ceicäo (1956), formed the basis of the col¬
ourful evocation of Brazil in the French
director Marcel Camus' film, Orfeu negro
(1959; Black Orpheus;. In the late 1950s
Vinicius de Moraes took up the guitar and
became a bossa nova star. Right, during a
performance in Paris In 1977.
Melo. Negotiations with a view to an
agreement on spelling, which took place
in Rio de Janeiro in May 1986 with the
participation of delegates from the seven
Portuguese-speaking countries, gave the
final accolade to the linguistic variant and
placed it on an equal footing with other
languages.
As we have seen, recognition of Brazi¬
lian authors in Portugal came more
quickly than official acknowledgement of
their language, and had even more im¬
portant consequences. The literary origi-
CONTINUED PAGE 40
v: v: z g
, . . , * * .
Masterpieces of the baroque style intro¬
duced to Brazil by the Portuguese can be
seen at Ouro Preto, the birthplace of the
mulatto architect and sculptor Antonio
Francisco Lisboa (1730-1814) known as o
Aleijadinho ("the Little Cripple") because
he suffered from a wasting disease of the
limbs. Late in life this master of Brazilian
baroque triumphed over increasing dis¬
ability to execute a series of lyrically ex¬
pressive wooden sculptures, the Way of
the Cross, in the sanctuary of Bom Jesus
de Matozinhos at Congonhas do Campo
near Ouro Preto (left, detail of the Last
Supper) as well as a remarkable group of
stone statues of the prophets which stand
in front of the sanctuary.
37

Left, poster design for Morte e vida Sever-
¡na (1956; "Death and Life Severina") a
play by Joäo Cabrai de Meló Neto (born
1920) which caused a sensation when it
was produced in Portugal in 1966. Meto
Neto belongs to "the generation of '45", a
group of post-war Brazilian writers and
poets who have dissociated themselves
from Modernism and returned to more
structured poetic forms. This poetic dra¬
ma, set to music by Chico Buarque, de¬
scribes with great verbal inventiveness
how people live in the poverty-stricken
Nordeste of Brazil.
Illustration © All Rights Reserved
, .JfP"
LlM»;;i.,:4ä
Above: "The Delirium", by Candido Porti¬
nari (1903-1962) is inspired by an impor-
tantepisodein the Memorias Postumas de
Brás Cubas (1881; Epitaph for a Small
Winner, 1952), a philosophical novel by
Joaquim Maria Machado de Assis (1839-
1908), one of the greatest figures of Brazi¬
lian Romanticism.
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 37
nality of these authors was consolidated
by the Modernist movement of 1922.
Later, the reputation of Brazilian authors
in Portugal made gradual, if irregular,
progress as a result of work by populariz¬
es writing in newspapers and magazines.
In the first quarter of the century, Olavo
Bilac and Coelho Neto were already
popular in Portugal, although, paradox¬
ically, Castro Alves and Machado de
Assis were virtually unknown.
The 1940s were the decisive years in
determining cultural relations between
the two countries. This was largely due to
the boom in Portuguese-language Brazi¬
lian magazines, which had begun in the
1930s, and above all to the prestige of
novelists such as Erico Verissimo, José
Luis do Rego, Jorge Amado and Graci-
liano Ramos, and of poets such as
Manuel Bandeira, Jorge de Lima, Cecilia
Meireles and Carlos Drummond de
Andrade.
Many Brazilian novelists and poets began
to win a reputation in Portugal with the
proliferation of Portuguese-language Bra¬
zilian magazines in the 1930s. One conspi¬
cuous example was the poet Manuel Ban¬
deira (1886-1968). In such poems as Vou-
me embora pra Pasárgada (1954; "I'm
going to Pasargadae"), this master of
colloquial language and irony created
myths which are nowpart of the collective
poetic heritage. An evocation of Pasarga¬
dae, the legendary city of Cyrus the Great,
forms a setting for this pen and inkportrait
of Bandeira (left) by the Brazilian artist
Cicero Dias.
Carlos Drummond de Andrade, right (born
Minas Gerais, 1902) is a leading contem¬
porary Brazilian poet. His work, which has
evolved from political commitment to iro¬
nic and disillusioned detachment, springs
from a close and penetrating scrutiny of
the texture of everyday life. He is a story¬
teller and chronicler as well as a poet.
Notable among his works are A rosa do
povo (1945; "People's Rose"), Fazendeiro
do ar (1954; "Farmer of the Air") and Liçâo
de coisas (1962; "A Lesson of Things").
40


Jorge Amado (born 1912, pictured here in
1970), the son ofa Bahian planter, is prob¬
ably the best-known Brazilian writer out¬
side Brazil. Written with a blendof fantasy,
realism and lyrical exuberance, his novels
are rooted in the Brazilian Nordeste, that
"violent land" of racial and cultural inter¬
mixture. Social and political commitment,
fundamental to his earlier novels such as
Jubiabá (1935), Mar Morto (1936; "Dead
Sea") and Terras do sem fin (1942; The
Violent Land, 1945), later gave way to a
more light-hearted vision of regional life
and to the creation of some extraordinary
female characters in Gabriela, cravo e
canela (1958; Gabriela, Clove and Cinna¬
mon, 1962), Dona Flor e seus dois maridos
(1966; Dona Flor and Her Two Husbands,
1969), Tereza Batista, cansada de guerra
(1972; "Tereza Batista, Weary of War") and
Tieta do Agreste (1977; Tieta, the Goat Girl,
1979).
The Portuguese critic Gaspar Simöes
was already wondering whether the influ¬
ence of the Brazilian Modernists was not
a reaction against that previously exer¬
cised from Portugal. But it was primarily
the novel of the Brazilian Northeast
which in the 1930s marked the historic
transition from a state of dependence to
the affirmation of cultural independence,
and must be given credit for turning the
tide of "influence" and altering the pat¬
tern of cultural interpénétration. With it,
for the first time, Brazilian literature
strongly influenced what was being writ¬
ten in Portugal. After 1940, such writers
as Jorge Amado, Graciliano Ramos and
José Lins do Regó contributed to the
emergence and development of Portu¬
guese Neorealism, both in the novel (par¬
ticularly in the work of Alves Redol and
Manuel da Fonseca) and in the poetry of
the novo cancioneiro. This Brazilian in¬
fluence recognized by critics, novelists
and poets had an early impact on ex¬
perimental poetry and concrete poetry in
Portugal.
This cultural backlash, or swing of the
pendulum, has been felt not only in lan¬
guage and literature but elsewhere in the
arts, although on a smaller scale. Admit¬
tedly, it has been of minor importance in
the plastic arts although there are paint¬
ings by Candido Portinari in Lisbon's
National Museum of Contemporary Art,
and other Brazilian painters such as
Cicero Dias, Moacir de Andrade and
Sérgio Telles regularly exhibit their work
in the Portuguese capital.
Brazilian influence has been stronger
in classical (Carlos Gómez, Heitor Villa-
Lobos) and popular music. So rapid was
the process of "tuning in" and adapting to
Brazilian music that in the 1930s the
Portuguese actress and singer Carmen
Miranda became an international symbol
of Brazilian rhythms. On Portuguese
radio Brazilian music has progressed
from the "Brazilian Half-hour" program¬
mes of 1942 to much longer periods on
the air, and today has a higher audience
rating than any other. Brazilian singing

S> stars such as Chico Buarque, Maria
Bethania, Gal Costa and Caetano Veloso
often appear on the Portuguese stage.
Television has transformed and inten¬
sified these exchanges, which reached
their peak with the broadcasting of Brazi¬
lian television serials. In the milestone
year of 1976, Portuguese television began
to show Gabriela, cravo e canela ("Gab¬
riela, Clove and Cinnamon"), based on a
novel by Jorge Amado. This was the start
of an uninterrupted flow of Brazilian
serials, which have been so popular with
viewers that Portuguese TV has begun to
produce programmes of the same kind
but, it is generally agreed, of inferior
quality.
In the cinema, relations between Brazil
and Portugal have followed a similar
course to that followed in literature.
Initially, Portuguese films were made on
Brazilian themes. Leitâo de Barros made
Vendaval maravilhoso, his film about the
life of the poet Castro Alves, as early as
1944. But Brazilian films proper were
virtually unknown except to a small pub¬
lic of film enthusiasts and specialists. In
1971, the first Brazilian Film Festival was
held in Lisbon, and since then similar
festivals have taken place at regular inter¬
vals, most of them organized by the Gul-
benkian Foundation.
In the theatre it has been the same
story. At first Portuguese plays such as
the anti-slavery works of such
nineteenth-century authors as Gomes de
Amorim and José Agostinho Macedo
were written on Brazilian themes. Portu¬
guese drama companies were already
touring Brazil during the Romantic
period, but it was not until much later
that Brazilian troupes visited Portugal.
In 1966, the production in Portugal of
Joäo Cabrai de Meló Neto's Morte e vida
Severina ("Death and Life Severina")
triggered off debates which had a wide¬
spread cultural and social impact. Nowa¬
days the arrival of Brazilian theatrical
companies such as those of Tónia Carrero
or Ruth Escobar are eagerly awaited in
Portugal, as well as appearances on the
Portuguese stage by Brazilian actors such
as Paulo Autran and others who, though
less well known, have won popularity by
acting in television serials.
For all these reasons we should now
talk in terms of cultural intercommunica¬
tion between Portugal and Brazil; the
days of Brazilian cultural dependence, or
even of mutual indifference between the
two countries , are over.
FERNANDO A. CRISTOVAO, of Portugal, is
professor of Brazilian literature at the University
of Lisbon. He is also head of the Institute of
Portuguese Culture and Language at the Portu¬
guese Ministry of Education, and of the Institute
of Brazilian Culture at the Lisbon Faculty of
Letters. Notable among many works reflecting
his interest in intercultural communication, with
particular reference to the culture of Brazil, is
Cruzeiro do Sul a Norte (Cruise from South to
North, 1983), which was awarded the Casa-
grande e senzala Prize by the Joaquim Nabuco
Foundation of Brazil.

