The International Year
of Peace
FORTY years ago, the Second World War came to an end. That
terrible conflict which, for the first time in the history of mankind,
had affected every continent, caused immeasurable destruction and
led to the death or mutilation of tens of millions of persons, ended in Asia
with an event which was in itself an unprecedented warning: the explosion
of the two atomic bombs at Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
It was immediately clear that the effects of the new weapons could extend
far beyond the field of hostilities themselves and that civilians as well as
military, women and children as well as combattants, would not be spared.
It was in this climate that the United Nations system was created and that
the Constitution of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization was adopted in London on 16 November 1945.
Unesco was assigned the task of contributing to the establishment of
international peace and the common prosperity of humanity through
co-operation between the nations in the fields of intellectual life. In Léon
Blum's fine words , it was called upon to become the "moral and intellectual
conscience of humanity."
The task was all the more important since the Second World War had
been far more ideological in character than its predecessor. As Unesco's
Constitution states, it had been made possible by "the denial of the
democratic principles of the dignity, equality and mutual respect of men,
and by the propagation, in their place, through ignorance and prejudice, of
the doctrine of the inequality of men and races".
Accordingly, one of the fundamental tasks assigned to Unesco was to
"develop and to increase the means of communication between... peoples
and to employ these means for the purposes of mutual understanding and a
truer and more perfect knowledge of each other's lives".
As well as its immediate goals reconciling states of mind that the war
had brought into conflict Unesco was pledged to call into being a veritable
"intellectual and moral solidarity", on a planetary scale, with the aim of
providing a lasting foundation for peace.
In the last four decades, Unesco has striven unremittingly to achieve this
goal. It is largely due to its efforts, and to those of all the organizations
belonging to the United Nations system, that humanity has in many fields
made real progress along the path to solidarity, mutual respect and
understanding.
This is why it is essential, on the occasion of the International Year of
Peace, that intellectuals from all over the world creators and researchers,
writers and artists, scientists and educators should co-operate more fully
with the aim of achieving a clearer perception of international problems
and of thereby helping to encourage all that may lead to a freer and more
peaceful future, in a world of greater solidarity and justice.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco
