From the waters of the Amazon
to the drought-stricken Northeast
by Thiago de Mello BRAZIL, a country the size of a
continent, covering an area of
more than 8.5 million square
kilometres, contains differences and con¬
trasts within its geographical frontiers
which shape the lives of its people and
leave their imprint on society in each of
its regions. An impressive variety of cli¬
mates conditions local customs and cul¬
tural practices. Foreign travellers even
Brazilians journeying through the
country are inevitably and disturbingly
struck with the impression that they are
entering a different country when they
move from one region to the next. This
impression is softened only by the fact
that a single language is shared by the
people of very different cultures and
ethnic groups who make up a nation
which, by some historical and political
miracle, has succeeded in remaining
unified, and even united, as a federal
republic.
The mountains of the Serra dos Orgäos
in Rio de Janeiro, with their gentle,
baroque contours, and the mineral-rich
Serra da Mantiqueira, in Minas Gerais
State (literally "General Mines"), in the
centrai southern area, bear no resem¬
blance to the flood-plains of the West or
the green grasslands of the South, where
the gently rolling pampas, swept by the
keen minuano wind, stretch as far as the
eye can see. Nor do they have anything in
common with the long valleys where the
coffee plantations abound, often deci¬
mated by frost since the temperature can
fall to several degrees below zero, but
where the fertile soil favours the develop¬
ment of the primary sector and the agri¬
cultural enterprises which play such an
important role in the Brazilian economy.
Left, aerial view of the sea-front at Rio de
Janeiro's Copacabana beach. With over 5
million inhabitants (1980) Rio ranks as
Brazil's second most populous city (after
Säo Paulo) and Latin America's third. (Its
total population, including the surround¬
ing metropolitan area or Baixada, is some
9 million.) Rio was the capital of Brazil
from 1763 until 1960, when its place was
taken by Brasilia, and since 1975 has been
the capital of the State which bears its
name. Situated on the Atlantic coast in the
Sudeste (Southeast), Rio plays a major
role in Brazil's economic life as a leading
industrial centre and busy port, but above
all through activities connected with trans¬
port, commerce and tourism, especially
during the annual Carnival.
Right, the Iguagu Falls, in the State of
Parana, southern Brazil. A major tourist
attraction, the falls are located on a stretch
of the Rio Iguagu (a Guaraní wordmeaning
"Great Water") which forms the frontier
between Brazil andArgentina, about20km 1
above the point where the Iguagu flows ¿
into the Paraná. The 275 cataracts, 60 to 80 1
metres high, are broken up by rocky ^
vegetation-covered islets which spread ®
out in the form ofa horseshoe almost 4 km I
wide. Two nationalparks, one on the Brazi- $
lian side (some 200,000 hectares), the s>
other on the Argentine side, constitute a J
vast reserve for the protection of the s
region's rich animal and plant life. ¿

A land ofcontrasts

Vttóna
Pono Alegre
600km
^ The cold, ash-laden drizzle of Säo
Paulo, which shrouds the largest indus¬
trial complex in Latin America and has
entered into the soul of Brazil's most
populous city, is a far cry from the gentle
breeze that blows in the central planalto
(tablelands), where stands the capital,
Brasilia. Around this city famed for the
beauty of its architecture and urban plan¬
ning stretch the chapadöes dos cerrados,
an area of flattened hills with stunted
vegetation and scrub, where soya-bean
plantations are steadily gaining ground.
In the Northeast, a seemingly infinite
green expanse of hemp-fields forms a
shimmering sea which contrasts with the
parched aridity of the stony badlands dot¬
ted with thorns; here, the heat is suddenly
transformed by the caressing force of the
wind that sweeps a coastline bathed by
the blue waters of the Atlantic. Totally
different again is the climate of the vast
Amazonian plain, covered by dense tro¬
pical forest and criss-crossed with a fan¬
tastic labyrinth of rivers, where the winds
can do little to moderate the damp heat
that rises, like a swaying body, from the
marshlands and the dry outcrops lit by the
glare of the equatorial sun.
Brazil has no snow-capped mountains,
no volcanoes, no deserts. But the multi¬
farious, almost overwhelming contrasts
created by nature make an even stronger
impact because the country is so im¬
mense. The most striking contrast of all is
undoubtedly that between the Amazon
Basin, which contains the world's largest
reserves of fresh water, and the sun¬
baked regions of the Northeast, where
people and animals die of thirst.
Drought is a calamity that since time
immemorial has closed its burning grip,
with implacable regularity, on the lives of
millions of Brazilians who live in what is
known as the "polygon of drought",
which includes parts of the States of
Minas Gerais, Bahia, Sergipe, Alagoas,
Pernambuco, Piauí, Parafba, Rio Grande
do Norte and Ceará. In this region
covering more than a million square
kilometres, 15 per cent of the area of
Brazil, live nearly 40 million people,
more than one-third of the country's
population.
The plight of the Sertäo has always
been a problem for rulers, scientists,
politicians and for all Brazilians who are
concerned with the lives of the people of
their country. A long and sinister chron¬
icle records the drought of the year 1710,

The Sertâo ¡s a semi-arid zone of Brazil's
northeastern region, the Nordeste, the in¬
habitants of which are known as Sertane-
jos. The Brazilian writerEuclides da Cunha
(1866- 1909) wrote a celebrated book about
this drought-ridden country, Os Sertöes
(1902; translated into English as Revolt in
the Backlands, 1944), which caused a
sensation when it was first published in
Brazil. In this epic he denounceda govern¬
ment military campaign waged in 1896-
1897 against a group of separatist reli¬
gious fanatics led by a messianic figure
known as Antonio "the Counsellor". Draw¬
ing right is from a notebook kept by da
Cunha during the campaign in which he
took part as official reporter. Below right,
illustrated cover of an edition of Grande
Sertâo: Veredas (1956; The Devil to Pay in
the Backlands, 1963), a work which won
international acclaim for the Brazilian wri¬
ter Joäo Guimaräes Rosa (1908-1967) and
which, like other stories and novels by the
same author, is set in the northeast high¬
lands of Brazil.
/% ._ ^ ^i *-. K>
which lasted for two consecutive sum¬
mers without a drop of rain, as one of the
worst ever known. Another "great"
drought in the hierarchy of misfortune
lasted for three years, from 1777 to 1779.
In the 1980s, when climatic changes
observed since the 1960s are growing
more severe, two long droughts have
already been recorded, each lasting for
more than two years. During the most
recent of them, on the dry, cracked earth,
among skeletons of cattle and the with¬
ered stumps of trees, starving children,
women and men fought for a mouse or
lizard. Drought does not only mean
thirst: it means, above all, hunger.
But is there no water? Are there no
rivers in the Northeast? Of course there
are, many of them, and even some with a
high flow-rate: the Säo Francisco, which
the Northeasterners call Pai Chico (Little
Father), the Paraiba, the Paranaiba and
the Jaguaribe in the State of Ceará
considered to be "the biggest dry river in
the world". But alas most of these rivers
dry up when disaster strikes this land
which "seers" believe is cursed and will
one day again be covered by the sea.
The gloomy prophecy in a sense comes
true. The plight of the Northeast is not
only due to drought, for after the long dry
periods the rain always comes. At first it
seems a miracle: in the space of a few days
the Sertâo turns green again, the red flow¬
ers of the mulungos open, the perfume of
the umburanas floats on the cool air,
'>' i C ' %
	 -- RfcSgsS*-*« «
JT -'. ,7^,fgBa«e.-f < ." .. _ « _
©
.
springs rise afresh, and the green foliage
of the umbuzeiro, the sacred tree of the
Sertâo, is reborn. But this apparent bless¬
ing soon becomes a curse. Suddenly the
rains become torrential, and the scourge
of drought is followed by the calamity of
flood. Overnight the dry riverbeds fill
with water and the rivers burst their
banks, flooding towns and villages,
wreaking death and destruction and bear¬
ing disease and despair. And yet the rainy
season does not last long: some six
months at most, a period that the people
of the Sertâo call the "green time". Then
the vegetation begins to shrivel up, the
bushes shed their leaves, the soil becomes
dry once more and the sun again beats
down in fiery strength on the Sertâo.
Drought repossesses its empire.
Long ago, scientists discovered the
causes of the phenomenon: the wind re¬
gime, the region's orography, the com¬
position of the soil and, above all, sun-
spot activity. We also know that in the
Sertâo, besides rivers, there are ground
water and rainfall. The solution, as Pinto
Aguiar has pointed out in his recent book
Nordeste o drama dos secas ("North¬
east the Drama of Drought"), would be
to locate the groundwater, channel the
river- and rain-water and irrigate the land
by building dams and regularizing river-
flow.
The serious effects of drought hit the
Brazilian economy as a whole, as well as
the people of the Sertâo. Fifty years ago,
the National Department for Action to
Combat Drought (DNOCS) was set up to
cope with natural disasters. In the past
few years a number of federal bodies
have been working on scientific program¬
mes, notably the National Space Re¬
search Institute, which is investigating
the possibilities of using artificial rainfall
on the Sertâo, but this is an immensely
expensive project and its implementation
poses many problems.
Euclides da Cunha says in Os Sertöes (a
classic of Brazilian literature which has
been translated into the world's major
languages, as have Graciliano Ramos's
Vidas secas and Joäo Guimaräes Rosa's
Grande Sertâo: Veredas, two novels
about life in the Sertâo), that "the Sertäo-
dweller is, first and foremost, robust".
Perhaps. Undernourished but strong,
primarily through his powers of enduran¬
ce: he stays for as long as possible in the
drought-stricken Sertâo. When he
reaches his last ounce of strength, he
gathers his family together and "re-
CONTINUED PAGE 9

The capital ofAmazonas State in northern
Brazil, Manaus (right) stands 2,000 km
from the sea on the Rio Negro, near its
confluence with the Amazon, whose main
tributary it is. From 1890 to 1920 the city
(which was known as Manaos until 1939)
enjoyed a boom generated by profits from
wild rubber collected in the surrounding
equatorial forest. Vast fortunes were
made, and a luxurious opera house built in
1896 (at left ofphoto) became a symbol of
the city's spectacular growth. With a
population of some 615,000 (1980), Man¬
aus is today a major administrative, com¬
mercial, industrial (electronics, chemicals,
textiles, engineering) and tourist centre.
Its free port is accessible to ocean-going
vessels.


"Brasilia is built on the horizon. Brasilia
is artificial. As artificial as the world must
have been at the creation. When the world
was created, a man had to be created espe¬
cially for It ... Brazil was born of a final
simplification of ruins. The ivy has not yet
grown Something else blows, as well as
the wind...". Brasilia, the city about which
Brazilian author Clarice Lispector (1925-
1977) wrote these evocative words In 1962,
stands on a high plateau in Brazil's Centre
West region. A striking example of avant-
garde architecture and urban planning de¬
signed by the Brazilian architects Lucio
Costa and Oscar Niemeyer, it was built in
response to the Brazilian people's desire
to occupy the vast and sparselypopulated
interior of their country. In 1980 the Inhabi¬
tants of the federal district of Brasilia
(5,800 km2) numbered around 1,180,000,
some 410,000 of whom lived in the city
itself. Below, the Square of Three Powers,
with statues of. the four Evangelists by
Alfredo Ceschiatti.
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 7
treats". The painter Candido Portinari
poignantly depicted those "retreating"
emigrants. The man of the Sertâo is
strong, too, in his love for the land: when
the green time comes, he returns again to
his Sertâo.
But not all return. Many depart, tread¬
ing the paths of exile, in search of more
favourable conditions. One destination is
the Amazon Basin, which, since the end
of the last century, with the increase in
rubber extraction ("gold" actually grow¬
ing on, or rather in, trees), down to our
own time, thanks to the bright lights of
the Manaus Free Zone, has become one
of the most attractive regions of Brazil for
Northeasterners.
The Sertâo and the Amazon. The dry
earth of the Sertâo. The moist, damp
earth of the Amazon. The Sertâo with its
sparse shrubs and solitary cacti. The
Amazon Basin with its thick forests of
lofty trees, the planet's biggest tropical
forest. The Sertâo, where year follows
year without a drop of rain. The Amazon,
one of the world's rainiest areas. Apart
from a short period in the summer, it
rains virtually every day in the Amazon
basin. In the Sertâo, the rivers dry up. In
the Amazon Basin, the riverbeds are
never seen, even at periods of very low
water. In the Sertâo, absence and abund¬
ance of water are both disasters. In the
Amazon Basin the great floods may dis¬
rupt the lives of the forest-dwellers (here,
as Leandro Tocantins has written, "the
river governs life") and be an obstacle to
farming, but they never cause as much
damage as in the Northeast. Here, when
the waters rise too high the Amazonian
water regime is invariable: six months
spate and six months low water the
bank-dwellers suffer. Their houses are
flooded, cobras lie in wait for children
and farm animals , the j ute plantations on
the alluvial banks are flooded before the
crops can be harvested, and livestock has
to be herded into floating pens and then
transported by barge to fields in drier
areas. To offset this, when the waters
recede the banks are covered with a layer
of organic material which increases the
fertility of the soil.
Amazon, water and forest. The river
which Vicente Pinzón called Mar Dulce
(freshwater sea) when he discovered its
estuary, contains a greater volume of
water than any other river. It is 6,500
kilometres long, or one and a half times
the breadth of Brazil itself. It is a Latin
American river: rising in Peru, in the
mountain range of La Raya, it is swelled
by the waters of the Ucayali; it is known
as the Solimöes when it reaches Brazil,
where it joins the Rio Negro and flows on
to the sea. When it reaches the sea it is
more than 300 kilometres wide and is
moving so rapidly that it flows over 50
kilometres out into the Atlantic. With its
powerful tributaries and all its intermin¬
able branches bends, zig-zags, me¬
anders, rivulets, lakes and marshes the

^ Amazon is the largest hydrographie basin
in the world and the most extensive river
network.
The forest contains over 4,000 species
of tree, scattered evenly throughout the
region. There are 350 million hectares of
forest, 70,000 million cubic metres of
standing timber, one-third of the world's
reserves. The National Institute for
Amazonian Research has set up a
"xylothèque" in which nearly 2,000
species have already been catalogued,
including such fine cabinet woods as
cedar, mahogany and curbaril.
Over this forest which has given so
much, with its oxygen and its wealth, not
only to the people of the region but also
to those living in the most distant parts of
the earth, hangs the sinister threat of
devastation, chiefly because of the ruth¬
less deforestation methods used by big
multinational companies to establish in¬
dustrialized farm complexes. But this is
not the place to discuss this serious ques¬
tion. As well as the forest, the lives of the
people who live in it must also be pre¬
served from the devastation of neglect
and homelessness.
In the Amazon Basin, there is no thirst,
as there is in the Sertâo. But during the
long period of floods, the caboclos the
Amazonian peasants experience
hunger. When the waters rise, the fish
abandon the rivers for the marshes, for
lakes hidden in the forest. When this
happens, in parts of the forest where
there is no organized food supply (in
other words, nearly everywhere) then the
invisible teeth of hunger begin, silently,
to gnaw. Here nobody starves to death,
as they do in the Sertâo. But, as I have
seen with my own eyes, many children go
to bed hungry.
In all parts of Brazil and in all its cities,
great and small, one finds the terrible
social inequalities which mark the lives of
my country's people. But it is in the
Northeast and in the interior of the Ama¬
zon forest that the most undernourished
and most poverty-stricken Brazilians are
to be found.
As a token of my clear-sighted love for
my brothers in the Northeast, I; a caboclo
from the Amazon Basin, a son of water
and forest, should like to conclude with
this acute observation made recently by
the economist Celso Furtado: "The
Northeast is, in fact, the mirror that re¬
flects Brazil with brutal clarity. There we
can see, starkly revealed, the major
deformities that are crippling our
development."
THIAGO DE MELLO, Brazilian poet and writer,
has published many poetry collections which
have been widely translated. His works include
Cançao do amor armado (Song ofArmed Love),
Horóscopo para os que estäo vivos (Horoscope
for Those who are Alive) and Vento geral (Gen¬
eral Wind). He was one of the participants in
"War on War", an international forum of poets
organized by Unesco in 1982.
