READERS who claim me for their
favourite writer often say that I
express the truth. This is exces¬
sive praise induced, no doubt, by their
very partiality. It is true that I do not
seek to deceive, but neither do I try to
recount all that is within me. What I ex¬
press is merely a few odds and ends, just
enough to hand in to the printer. It is
true that I often try to dissect other peo¬
ple, but I apply the scalpel even more
frequently to myself, and with far less
pity. When I lift only a corner of the
veil, sensitive spirits quail. What if I
were to reveal myself entirely, exactly as
I am?
It occurs to me from time to time to
use this method to drive people away, so
that those who even then did not aban¬
don me, "snakes and odious monsters"'1'
though they might be, would show them¬
selves to be my friends, true friends af¬
ter all. And if even they left me in the
lurch, then too bad, I'd walk alone. But
for the time being I refrain from putting
this idea into practice, partly because I
lack the courage to do so, and partly be¬
cause I want to go on living in this
society. But there is another reason, too,
which I have mentioned several times: it
gives me a certain satisfaction to create
for as long as I can a feeling of unease
among our "respectable and right-think¬
ing" fellow-citizens. This is why I shall
continue to gird myself with a few pieces
of armour and stand before them, dis¬
turbing their orderly world with my pre¬
sence, until I become tired of the whole
business and take off this armour.
To serve as a guide to others is all the
more difficult for me, since I myself do
not know which path to follow. There is
certainly no lack of "masters" and
"guides" in China, but I am not among
them and they do not inspire my con¬
fidence. There is only one outcome of
which I myself am certain, and that is
the tomb. But this is something every¬
body knows, without having to consult a
guide. The problem is that more than
one way leads to that ultimate destina¬
tion, and up to now I have been unable
to determine which of them to take. I
am still trying to find out, and I am very
much afraid that my still-gréen fruit
should poison those who appreciate me,
while those who detest me the "respec¬
table" and "right-thinking", for exam¬
ple all live to a ripe old age. It is thus
inevitable for me to clothe my words in
ambiguity, since it often occurs to me
that the best gift I can offer to readers
who are fond of me might well be "in¬
consistency".
Some people imagine that I write
spontaneously, that the words pour out
in total freedom. Nothing could be furth¬
er from the truth: I am inhibited by a
host of scruples and uncertainties, I have
known for a long time that I am not the
stuff that warriors and pioneers are
made of. Three or four years ago, I re¬
member, a student arrived to buy one of
my books. The money which he took
out of his pocket and pressed into my
hand was warm with the heat of his



Night thoughts,
November 1926
by Lu Xun
(1) In the original: "Xiao, snakes and revenants".
Xiao was an unpleasant mythical bird whose repel¬
lent attributes included devouring its own mother.
Lu Xun at the age of fifty
body. And that warmth penetrated me,
so much so that ever since then,
whenever I take up my pen, I am afraid
of poisoning people like that student; I
hesitate for a long time before putting a
single word on paper. I fear that the
time will never come again when I speak
without such reserve, and although I
sometimes think that in order to respond
to the expectations of the young genera¬
tion one should sweep every scruple
aside, I have not, as yet, managed to
bring myself to do so.
That is all I intended to say today, and it
may be taken as relatively sincere.
December 1982
This text, an extract from the afterword to "The Tomb",
the first compilation of Lu Xun's collected works, was
written in November 1926, shortly after the author had
left Beijing, where he faced the threat of imprisonment,
to teach at the University of Xiamen (Amoy). This
English version is based on the French translation from
the Chinese, carried out under the direction of Michelle
Loi and the Lu Xun Research Centre of the People's
Republic of China. This translation, La Tombe, was
published by Editions Acropole in 1981, and forms part
of the Unesco Collection of Representative Works.
French translation © Unesco, 1981
LU XUN (pseudonym of Zhou Shuren, 1881-
1936) is a major figure in Chinese literature.
He exercised considerable influence on his
times through his many essays, stories and
poems. Among his works translated into En¬
glish is "The True Story of Ah Q" (Chinese,
1921; Eng. trans. 1926).
21
