Volcanoes
by Haroun Tazieff
VOLCANISM plays a fundamental
role in the story of the Earth. The
crust we live on, the water in
oceans, rivers and lakes and most of the
atmosphere we breathe are derived ulti¬
mately from volcanic eruptions. Without
volcanism there would be no creation of
new oceanic crust through sea-floor
spreading, no subduction (the dragging
down of older crust into the mantle where
it is melted and recycled), no orogenesis
(mountain-building) and therefore no
erosion and no sedimentation.
Without volcanism the Earth would
lack the colossal, continual flow of sul¬
phides, oxides, halogens, hydroxides of
all existing metals, emitted in the form of
gases at high temperature by fumaroles
(volcanic vents) from the thousands of
active craters, whether dormant or in
eruption, whether submarine or on land,
scattered the length of the 100,000
kilometres of the belts that mark the fron¬
tiers between the Earth's tectonic plates
(see page 10) and the fractures occurring
within those plates.
Without the contribution of submarine
fumaroles there would be no mineral sul¬
phide deposits; without fumaroles the
marine environment, whose chemical
make-up made possible the emergence of
life and conditioned its evolution, would
not have existed; without fumaroles the
Earth would have lacked the elements to
form the atmosphere whose composition
made it possible for life forms emerging
from the ocean to colonize the land and
then to evolve to give rise to human
beings.
Like everyone else at that time, I was
unaware of all this when, in 1948, chance
brought me face to face for the first time
with the strange phenomenon of a volca¬
nic eruption. Like all my fellow geologists
of that generation, especially my Euro¬
pean colleagues, I had received from my
teachers, among whom were some of in¬
ternational renown, a course of instruc¬
tion in which volcanism was barely men¬
tioned, since, in their view, it represented
no more than "a skin disease of the
planet".
At all events, I knew practically no¬
thing at all about volcanism when, one
day in March 1948, to the north of Lake
Kivu in the Belgian Congo (now Zaire),
the first eruption I was privileged to see
not only opened the eyes of the naive
geologist I then was to the magnificence
of the spectacle but also to a phenomenon
which, because of my lack of knowledge,
raised more questions than it provided
answers.
In the forty or so years that have passed
since then, volcanology, moribund at the
close of the Second World War (barely
surviving in the United States and in New
Zealand, but extinct everywhere else),
gradually revived and finally, in parallel
with oceanography, came into full blos¬
som. The new knowledge these two disci¬
plines enabled us to garner soon revealed
the fundamental role played by volcan¬
ism both in the phenomenon of sea-floor
spreading and the genesis of life and its
evolution over the past 3,000 million
years.
More than a third of a century spent in
observing eruptions from as close as
possible and in measuring everything
there was to measure among other
things energy flows (mainly thermal) and
the flow of matter (mainly in the form of
gases) has enabled me to establish that,
rather than the liquid or lava phase, as
most people seem implicitly or explicitly
to imagine, it is the gaseous phase that
plays the active role in volcanism. Lava is
totally passive and, without its eruptive
gases, volcanism would simply not exist.
Furthermore, eruptions always involve
the emission of gas, but not always of
lava.
These considerations led me to the
conviction that, in order to understand
the mechanism of eruptions, it was essen¬
tial to know the chemical composition
and thermodynamic evolution of their
gaseous phase. It would seem that the
chemical composition of these gases
varies from one kind of eruption to
another and from one type of magma to
another, but in our present state of know¬
ledge it has not been possible to establish
a correlation between the chemical varia¬
tions detected and the variations in activ¬
ity observed.
It must be admitted that, up to now,
only an insignificant amount of data has
been acquired on the physico-chemical
composition of eruptive gases. By erup¬
tive gases I mean those that have not been
subject to much cooling, oxidation by the
air or hydration by groundwater, all of
which processes transform the gases to a
lesser or, more often, a greater extent.
Obviously, to measure the chemical
and physical properties of the eruptive
gases before they degrade into fumarole
gases, it is necessary to get close to the
vents from which they are being emitted.
This usually demands some physical
effort and, at times, a certain amount of
courage. What too many volcanologists
lack is not courage but a taste for muscu¬
lar effort. Between the ages of twenty and
thirty, some seem to possess it, but I have
noticed that, once they have attained a
certain academic standing, they usually
appear to lose it.
This would not be too serious were it
not for the fact that, in addition to the raw
data which will continue to be provided
by the young and still enthusiastic volca¬
nologists, a sine qua non of progress in
this field is experience of the actual event
of eruption, the complexity of which is
matched by its variability. This can only
be acquired by direct observation of the
phenomenon of eruption in all its succes¬
sive forms.
The competence of the volcanologist in
this respect, like that of a physician, de¬
pends both on proper knowledge of im¬
portant publications and on experience
gained through the examination of a max¬
imum number of subjects patients for
the doctor, volcanoes in eruption for the
volcanologist.
My first ten years of volcanological
research in the field were devoted exclu¬
sively to seeking an explanation of the
various aspects of the phenomenon of
eruption. I soon became convinced that
the maturation of dormant magma re¬
sulted from the release of the gases
formerly dissolved within it. The chemic¬
al properties, size and distribution of gas
bubbles within the viscous mass, their
growth in size either by two or more
bubbles joining up or by expansion dur¬
ing their ascension through the magma
and of the magma itself, all these factors
play their part in the maturation of the
magma before the eruption and in its
evolution during the eruption itself.
Whether they can be measured or
merely observed, when correctly inter-
27

^ preted the parameters of an eruption en¬
able us more or less to understand the
eruptive process and, consequently,
sometimes to predict it.
This understanding enabled me, from
1958 on, to answer accurately questions
put to me by the administrative or politic¬
al authorities of a number of cities, pro¬
vinces, even countries, where a volcano
appeared to pose a threat to public safety.
Thus I found myself gradually moving
from fundamental research to research
applied to the forecasting of possible
eruptions. Since 1981, when the French
Government decided to take an official
stand on the mitigation of catastrophic
events, my work in volcanology has been
limited to this area.
Over nearly thirty years I have found
myself in the position of having to answer
questions from the authorities in a dozen
or so different countries. And if my re¬
plies have not once been mistaken, this is
because, like a good doctor, I have based
my diagnosis on the information avail¬
able interpreted in the light of my ex¬
perience. Out of fifteen cases which I
recall, I was able to give nine reassuring
replies, to confirm the threat of danger
three times and, on three occasions, was
obliged to admit that I did not know.
Over this period, the questions put to
me were seldom in the form "Is there
going to be an eruption or not?" Usually I
was asked whether there was or was not
any danger from an eruption actually tak¬
ing place. While, under such circum¬
stances, the latter question is clearly the
most important, it is also the most diffi¬
cult one to answer.
It is, in fact, relatively easy to predict
an eruption when the volcano in question
is being properly watched over by
genuine experts with adequate equip¬
ment. With the exception of eruptions
resulting from a build-up of steam press¬
ure caused by overheating of under¬
ground water beneath a blocked vent
hole eruptions which emit no magma or
lava, but only steam, some fumarole
gases and fragments of the rock blocking
the vent all volcanic eruptions are the
result of the ascent to the surface of the
globe of a certain volume of magma.
This ascension of magma cannot occur
without some movement of the Earth's
crust in response to the pressure of the
magma; either the crust stretches and
becomes deformed, or it fractures. Sur¬
face deformations can be detected and
measured by such instruments as tilt-
meters, extensometers and geodimeters.
The opening of fractures, through which
magma can infiltrate into the crust and
rise to the surface, causes tremors which
can be recorded by seismometers.
These geophysical observations and
measurements, which can give warning of
an eruption, often several months but
sometimes only days or hours in advance
(depending, among other things, on the
depth at which the magma is situated
before it begins its ascension), are sup¬
plemented by other observations which
may help the volcanologist in making a
forecast. These include the temperature,
composition and pressure of fumarolic
gases, and changes in the magnetic field
of the Earth's crust. All these indications
enable experienced volcanologists to de¬
tect a coming eruption and to give a date
for its arrival, sometimes with very great
precision.
Unfortunately, from the point of view
of saving lives, such predictions are of
little importance. Magmatic eruptions,
whether they be explosive or effusive,
never start in disastrous fashion. The first
phase of an eruption is always (to my
knowledge no exception to this rule has
ever been observed) relatively moderate,
allowing inhabitants time to leave the
threatened area.
Evacuation, the only way to protect
people from major volcanic risk, is rarely
necessary, since it is quite exceptional for
an eruption, after its initial phase, to
deteriorate into a paroxysmal phase or to
become even slightly more dangerous.
Out of the average hundred eruptions
that occur year after year throughout the
world, scarcely one will develop in this
way and so justify special precautions.
The major problem that faces the vol¬
canologist is to forecast the evolution of
eruption while it is taking place a task
infinitely more difficult than predicting
an imminent eruption. Once an eruption
has begun, all the mechanical indica¬
tions deformation or fracturing of the
surface connected with the rise of the
magma through the Earth's crust will
have disappeared and the flow of magma
will be "fluid", that is, it will no longer
have to fracture the rock in the depths or
lift the flanks of the volcano to force its
way to the surface.
Deprived of these two indicators that
are fundamental to the forecasting of a
coming eruption (tremors and deforma¬
tion of the surface), the volcanologist is
obliged to establish his diagnosis on the
basis of his interpretation of the other
physical and chemical indications men¬
tioned above. Correlation of the various
factors involved and their interpretation ^
CONTINUED PAGE 31

Birth of an island
On 14 November 1963, a fiery eruption in
the Atlantic Ocean off the southern coast
of Iceland heralded the birth of a new
island. Named Surtsey, after Surtur, the
fire god of Icelandic myth, the new island
rose from the water in a convulsion of
flame and steam. A weekafter the eruption
Surtsey had a surface area of 70 square
metres and within three and a half years
had grown to its present size of two and a
half square kilometres with elevations of
up to 173 metres. When scientists visited
the island after it had cooled, they were
astonished to find that plant life had
alreadyestablisheda footing. Constituting
as it does the first "virgin" ecosystem
known to man, Surtsey is now the site
of a long-term ecological research pro¬
gramme.
29

Photo Jacques Huttin © Gamma, Paris
Cry havoc!
Although prediction of volcanic eruptions
can reduce orprevent loss of life, little can
be done to control damage to crops or
property once an eruption is under way.
The three major dangers arise from mud-
flow, lava-flow and ash.
Over the last few centuries mud-flows
(sometimes known as lahars^ have proved
to be the most dangerous, killing more
people and destroying more property than
any other type of volcanic activity. Mud-
flows often result from the rapidmelting of
ice or snow on the slope of a volcano or
maybe due to heavy rain orsnow falls after
an eruption on new volcanic ash. Mud-
flows have been known to attain speeds of
up to 70 kilometres an hourand to travelas
30

3fr
rar as Í80 kilometres. Left, the town of
Armero, Colombia, swallowed up by mud
following the eruption of the Nevado del
Ruiz volcano, in November 1985.
Thin lava-flows cool fairly quickly, but
thicker flows may take years to cool com¬
pletely. Various methods have been
attempted to check or divert lava-flows,
including the use of water hoses to create
a solid wall ofcooled lava andbombing the
sides of a flow to split it into many smaller
flows. Above left, lava-flow blocks a road
following the eruption of La Fournaise vol¬
cano on the French island of Réunion in
the Indian Ocean, on 18 March this year.
Despite its name, volcanic ash is not the
product of burning; it consists of pulver
ized lava and fragments of rock thrown
into the air by the sudden explosive
escape of volcanicgas. The eruption of the
Tambora volcano on the northern coast of
the island ofSumbawa, Indonesia, in 1815,
which killed 50,000 ¡slanders, is estimated
to have had an explosive force equivalent
to 16,000 megatons. The very fine ash from
such an eruption may travel huge dis¬
tances andaffect weatherpatterns. Above,
the village of Parentas, Indonesia, en¬
veloped in volcanic ash following the erup¬
tion, in 1982, of the Galunggung volcano.
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 28
^ is extremely difficult in view of our pre¬
sent lack of sufficient research data and
experience in this field. And without cor¬
relation to enable him to establish links of
cause and effect between what he has
been able to measure and observe, it is
virtually impossible for the volcanologist
to establish a serious diagnosis.
Finally, I would like to remind readers
of an article by me which appeared in the
October 1967 issue of the Unesco
Courier. In it I drew the attention both of
politicians and of the inhabitants of the
regions involved to the great danger of
so-called "extinct" volcanoes. These vol¬
canoes are often, in fact, only dormant,
which implies that they will one day be¬
come active again. This is a risk which
should be taken seriously and construc¬
tion should be avoided within the danger
zone surrounding such volcanoes.
The extent of the danger zone will de¬
pend on the nature of the volcanic activity
(whether it is effusive or explosive), the
size and altitude of the volcano con¬
cerned, and even the climate of the re¬
gion in which it is situated.
The importance of climate and altitude
was demonstrated in dramatic fashion on
13 November 1985 with the eruption of
the Nevado del Ruiz volcano in Col¬
ombia. Had it not been for the height of
the volcano and the climate of the region,
which made possible the formation of a
thick icecap on its summit, the upsurge of
lava at a temperature of 1,000 degrees
Centigrade would not have provoked the
melting of hundreds of thousands of cubic
metres of ice and the formation of "la-
hars", those terrible torrents of volcanic
mud which swallowed up the town of
Armero, claiming the lives of 23,000
victims.
What I wrote almost twenty years ago
about the danger represented by Vesu¬
vius (Italy) or the Campi Flegrei (the
Phlegraean Fields, Naples, Italy), Mount
Fuji (Japan) or Mount Rainier (USA),
remains true today, as witness what hap¬
pened at Mount St. Helens, a close neigh¬
bour of Mount Rainier, and at Helgafell
in Iceland. The authorities of countries
within whose borders potentially danger¬
ous volcanoes are situated those
thought to be extinct as well as those
known to be active, such as Merapi (In¬
donesia) or Etna (Italy), Sakurajima
(Japan), Vulcano (Italy) or Pichincha
(Ecuador), to name but a few should
take advantage of the "days of peace" to
consider the problems that will arise and
prepare' the action they will take when
these sleeping giants reawaken.
HAROUN TAZIEFF, eminent French volcanolo¬
gist, was formerly Director of Research at the
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique.
Until recently Secretary of State for the Preven¬
tion of Major Disasters, he is the author of many
books and studies on volcanology. He has also
produced a number of films and documentaries
including Les Rendez-vous du Diable (The De¬
vil's Rendezvous, 1958) which achieved world¬
wide acclaim.
31
