A fortune on the sea bed
MANGANESE nodules occur mainly as a deposit in the deep
sea. These potato-shaped concretions are rich in man¬
ganese oxides and are present on most of the floor of the
deep ocean. However, their composition varies widely from place
to place, and only in a few areas do they contain sufficient
manganese, nickel, copper and cobalt, and other metals of possi¬
ble economic value, to be of interest. A combination of about 1 3 per
cent nickel, cobalt and copper, the most valuable metals, is re¬
garded as making the nodules an economically viable resource.
The main area where nodules of this grade occur in good
abundance is the north-eastern equatorial Pacific; this area has
been the subject of most research work. However, nodules of
similar composition occur in parts of the southern and western
Pacific and also in the central Indian Ocean, where Indian research
scientists are undertaking much work on them.
For a long time, high-grade nodules were thought to occur only at
great distances from land, but exciting discoveries have been
made recently within the two hundred-mile Exclusive Economic
Zones of some of the small developing island nations of the South
Pacific. These deposits belong to the adjacent islands themselves
and, if they were commercially recoverable, the island peoples
would benefit. This possibility has prompted the United Nations to
set up a development programme to organize further exploration in
these areas on behalf of the islands.
Another deposit, similar to manganese nodules, which has been
receiving much attention recently in the Pacific, is the so-called
cobalt-rich manganese crusts. The crusts are similar in their
overall composition to manganese nodules but are richer In cobalt,
up to 2 per cent, and lower in nickel and copper than the highest
grade nodules. Cobalt is a strategically valuable metal and only a
limited supply is available from mines on land, so these marine
deposits may provide an alternative future source of the metal.
Unlike nodules, which lie loose on the sea floor, crusts occur as
coatings on rock outcrops and can be up to several centimetres
thick. They occur at much shallower depths than most nodules,
which are richest below 4,500 metres, and the highest grade
deposits are present at less than 2,000 metres deep. In the Pacific
Ocean, depths of 2,000 metres are usually associated with sea-
mounts, sunken mountains that rise from the deep ocean floor and
which are often grouped into chains. Sometimes, one or more of
these seamounts breaks the surface to become an island, and
where this happens the deposits on the submerged part of the
island and on adjacent seamounts within the two hundred-mile
Exclusive Economic Zone belong to that island.
This discovery, like that of high-grade nodules near some is¬
lands in the Pacific, is stimulating a lot of work on cobalt-rich crusts.
Nowhere is this more so than in the Hawaiian Islands, where the
islands themselves are just the peaks at one end of a long
submarine mountain chain stretching across more than 1,500
kilometres of ocean all the way west to Midway Island.
David Cronan
Reader in marine geochemistry
Imperial College of Science
and Technology, London
Reproduced from a longer study
by courtesy of New Scientist magazine, London
h>&Z®
w.
3 . "5
»
, I
)
i
8
« ' \s , s >
