1986: Year of Peace/ 9
In this article, Professor Jean Dausset
(Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine,
1980) highlights the benefits of bio¬
logical diversity, and stresses the
unavoidable incompatibility between
science and racism as an important fac¬
tor in efforts to establish peace.
FEAR of difference, sometimes going so far
as rejection, is a widespread reflex. Chil¬
dren are afraid of being different from
their peers. Adolescents are the first to follow
fashions. But, much more seriously, adults are
almost instinctively wary of all those who do not
belong to their group or community; this leads to
neighbourhood rivalry, argument between
administrative bodies, conflict between nations,
religious or racial hatred.
This reflex is however both a biological ab¬
surdity and a basic error where cultural life is
concerned. Three concepts from biology may
help to clarify the issue:
First, each living being is different, even
unique, since there are so many possible varia¬
tions in its chemical composition. It is the product
of a combination of paternal and maternal
characters, which themselves came from a mix¬
ture of the characters of four grandparents.
Moreover, these characters, or genes, show
multiple variations within populations. In man,
the number of possible combinations exceeds, it
has been said, the number of atoms in the known
universe. In each generation new beings thus
appear, fruits of the genetic lottery, unique
because formed from an entirely new combina¬
tion of genetic characters. Nature has taken
good care to ensure that this mixing happens at
regular intervals: sexual reproduction and death
repeat it for each generation.
Second, according to Darwinian natural selec¬
tion, those individuals which fortuitously receive
the combinations which render them best
adapted to live in a certain environment, survive
and produce most descendants, whereas the
least well adapted produce fewer descendants.
Thus, thanks to the diversity of the individuals of
which it is composed, a species will be able to
adapt to changes that may occur in the environ¬
ment or climate, or to the appearance of new
parasites or pathogenic agents. Difference
between individuals is thus an absolute neces¬
sity for the perpetuation of a species. It is basic to
all animal and plant life.
Third, the environment shapes varieties within
species: the North African swallow is not Identi¬
cal to the Norwegian swallow; the Italian poplar
differs from that of northern Europe; the Mediter¬
ranean human type is not the same as the Nordic
type. The influence of the environment on mod¬
ern man is perhaps less than it was, but it
remains a determining factor on his psychology.
Two identical twins, who do not differ genetically,
are subjected to different external influences,
especially if they are separated, and thus
become two different beings. Only man moves
from individuality to personality, because only
man appropriates a cultural heritage from his
social environment. . v
It is thus clear that the uniqueness of each
person confers on him or her an individual dignity
which is an additional reason, if any were neces¬
sary, for respecting that person; that this unique¬
ness should not make us forget that each person
belongs to the great human family, which is also
unique; that the concept of "racial purity" is
totally meaningless, since all standardization
leads to death. Thus, without losing its identity, a
people must encourage the introduction of new
genes from elsewhere. Finally, experience plays
a paramount role in the mental and spiritual
development of mankind.
In the melting pot of Western Europe, a human
community with a number of common genetic
traits has developed. The relative isolation of the
provinces over a long period, inter-village mar¬
riages, diversity of climate and origins have
favoured differences which modern means of
communication are tending to obliterate.
These biological truths can easily be trans¬
posed by analogy to the cultural level.
The diversity of living, authentic cultures,
which were even more plentiful in the last cen¬
tury, is a treasure of inestimable value. The dis¬
appearance of a culture is an irreparable loss,
comparable to the extinction of an animal or plant
species.
Each culture is characterized by its customs,
its conception of the place of mankind in the
universe, its beliefs. Each has its rituals, its
modes of dress, each contributes to the incredi¬
ble range of plastic arts or architecture, music,
song, dance and all the other manifestations of
mankind's creative imagination. Each has given
humanity scientific discoveries or new technol¬
ogies to ease the workload or relieve suffering.
These ideas, these dances, these techniques
are, as in the field of biology, the fruit of multiple
interactions between man and his surroundings.
This deep-seated adaptation of cultures to their
environment was striking before the intrusion of
western technology; it takes a long time for such
a symbiosis to develop.
Differences between cultures alone allow
comparisons, the confrontation of ideas, ideol¬
ogies and aspirations. They allow concepts to be
enlarged and enriched. They allow discoveries
and technologies to spread through the whole
body of humanity, in a word they allow evolution
through the choice of the highest values. In this
way, by stages, the cultural evolution of human¬
ity has progressed for thousands of years. No
animal has profited like man from the experience
of other groups; this is a unique feature of the
history of the evolution of life.
Diversity of cultures is thus a priceless trea¬
sure which must be jealously preserved. If diver¬
sity is to persist, cultures must remain alive, that
is, be capable of evolving through contact with
others. Folklore is fossilized culture.
Most Important of all, there should be harmo¬
nious co-existence between these diverse cul¬
tures, cohabitation accepted without discrimina¬
tion, without reservations, without preconceived
ideas. The most pernicious of the latter Is the
establishment of a cultural hierarchy in which
one's own culture is of course high on the list.
Just as there is no hierarchy between men and
womenthey are simply differentso there is
no hierarchy between cultures: they are for¬
tunately different.
We are today faced with two major risks: stan¬
dardization and intolerance.
The standardization of cultures, as in biology,
leads to the cessation of evolution, therefore to
death. We already have a bitter foretaste of
this.
Intolerance, more than indifference, secretes
internecine conflicts and leads ultimately
through incomprehension and the closing of
minds and frontiers, to the same result as stan¬
dardization: the end of evolution.
Wisdom lies in open-mindedness, In listening
to others, in a spirit of total equality.
The French writer Antoine de Saint-Exupéry
(1900-1944) magnificently encapsulated this
mental attitude when he wrote, "If you are dif¬
ferent from me, brother, far from harming me,
you enrich me." a
Jean Dausset
