Living treasures ofthe deep
Marineflora andfauna canprovidefood,
medicines and information about the origins oflife
by Vitali Voi'tov
Above, watercolour dating from around
1546 shows the 700-ton Mary Rosa, which
sank off the coast of southern England in
1545. The 40-metre vessel, Henry VIII's fa¬
vourite warship, was discovered by ma¬
rine archaeologists in 1967 and raised
from the sea-bed on 11 October 1982 after
15 years continuous work on what has
been describedas "the world's mostambi¬
tious underwater archaeological opera¬
tion."
BURIED in the silt of Vigo Bay, off
the Atlantic coast of Spain, lie a
dozen or more Spanish galleons
whose rotting timbers spill out gold, the
spoils of the conquistadores destined to
fill the coffers of the King of Spain. Gold
and silver ingots to a value of some three
hundred million dollars rest on the ocean
floor off the northeast coast of Brazil.
Untold treasures lie concealed beneath
the coastal waters of India, Sri Lanka and
that former hunting-ground of pirates,
the Caribbean Sea.
No one can estimate the total value of
this sunken treasure, nor of the pearls
that for centuries men have dived to re¬
cover from the waters of the Gulf to
embellish the robes of kings and
courtiers.
Yet these sunken, gleaming bars of
gold and silver, so many monuments to
human greed masquerading under a
cloak of romantic myth and adventure,
pale to insignificance when compared
with the fabulous living treasure that the
ocean has to offer. For the sea, in which
life first evolved, contains all the major
animal groupings, from simple protozoa
to highly complex mammals.
Of all the living resources of the ocean,
the one that has been exploited the
longest by man is its renewable treasure
of fish and other edible forms of marine
life. Today the total world catch of fish
amounts to some seventy million tonnes a
year and provides around 24 per cent of
the animal protein necessary for a ba¬
lanced diet (see box page 34). Until com¬
paratively recent times the supply
seemed to be virtually inexhaustible, but
with improvement in fishing techniques
and increasing pressure on food supplies
some species of fish have been over-ex¬
ploited to the point of virtual extinction.
If we are to preserve this living treasure
there must be planned exploitation of the
bounty of the ocean.
The exploitation of marine organisms
for their medical, curative properties also
has a long history. Records show that the
CONTINUED PAGE 36
32

<:. -^
h
	
P D
l'
ü
,.
^
Tne 6,300-ton Soviet research ship Acade¬
mician Mstislav Keldysh. Named after a
former president of the USSR Academy of
Sciences, it has a top speed of 16 knots
andan operating range of 20,000 nautical
miles.
The Soviet research mini-submarine
Pisces VII which, with its sister sub Pisces
XI, played an important role in extensive
Soviet océanographie expeditions in the
Pacific, Atlantic and Indian Oceans from
1982 to 1985.
The two-man research mini-submarine Al-
vin in which US researchers first investi¬
gated hydrothermal vent-hole communi¬
ties living on the ocean floornear the Gala¬
pagos Islands. At depths of around 2,700
metres, where sunlight cannot penetrate,
they found communities of giant tube
worms (some as much as 2.4 metres long)
clustered around the vent-holes and living
in symbiosis with strange bacteria that
convert the chemicals spewing out from
the vent-holes into a form of food on which
the worms live.
ï
z
©
33

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 32
Ancient Egyptians and the peoples of
Mesopotamia used extracts obtained
from seaweed, certain molluscs and the
tissue of venomous fish for medical pur¬
poses. Research into the possible medical
properties of marine organisms continues
throughout the world today. In the
USSR, for example, advanced research is
being carried out by the Institute of Sci¬
entific Research on Oceanography and
Marine Pisciculture.
The marine organisms that hold out the
greatest promise for medicine are mol¬
luscs (substances that can be used to reg¬
ulate the circulation of the blood have
been extracted from certain species), sea-
urchins, asteriidae (starfish), beroida
(comb-jellies), sea-anemones and certain
species of fish.
Already preparations extracted from
myxinii, a sub-order of fish (slime eels
and hagfish) found in the Pacific, are
being used as heart stimulants capable of
restoring normal functioning of the car¬
diac muscle, and a product obtained from
the tissues of the ostracion (box-fish or
coffer-fish) has proved its worth as a
powerful local anaesthetic. Study of cor¬
als seems likely to produce spectacular
results. Corals contain active substances
which can affect the functioning of the
heart and blood vessels, regulate metabo¬
lism, increase arterial pressure and pre¬
vent thrombosis and cerebral congestion.
The rarer creatures of the ocean also
form a living natural history museum, a
treasure-store of knowledge which we
have only begun to explore and which
holds the keys to the origins and evolu¬
tion of the flora and fauna of the oceans.
Imagine, for example, the astonish¬
ment of South African ichthyologist
J.B.L. Smith when, in 1938, asked to
identify from a sketch an unknown spe¬
cies of fish recently netted in the Indian
Ocean, he found himself looking at a
drawing of a "living fossil", a coelacanth,
a fish with large coarse scales and four
limb-like fins that is thought to be the
ancestor of four-legged terrestrial
vertebrates.
The fossil record shows that the coela¬
canth, a member of the crossopterygii
sub-order, dates back some 30U million
years and scientists had long believed it to
have been extinct for fifty to seventy mil¬
lion years. Smith began to search for
further specimens, but it was not until
1952 that other coelacanths were netted
off the Comoros Islands.
The discovery of the coelacanth
spurred scientists on to search for other,
perhaps unknown, creatures that might
exist in the ocean depths. Their efforts
were rewarded when, in 1952, the Danish
research ship Galatea fished up a neopili-
na from a depth of 3,580 metres in the
Pacific off the coast of Costa Rica. The
neopilina is a primitive marine mollusc
previously thought to have become ex¬
tinct some 350 million years ago. It forms
the link in the evolutionary chain be¬
tween marine worms and molluscs.
Also during the 1950s, Soviet scientists
aboard the research vessel Vityaz
brought up from the depths (10,500 met¬
res) of the Kuril-Kamchatka Trench a
number of worm-like creatures, one of
which proved to be of a hitherto unknown
type having no digestive tube.
To these remarkable discoveries must
be added those made in 1977 by United
States researchers on the floor of the
Pacific. Diving to depths of some two and
a half kilometres, near the Galapagos
Islands, in the mini-submarine Alvin,
they found themselves in an area where
the water temperature was as high as 17
degrees centigrade. When they returned
to the surface they found that the water
samples they had taken smelled strongly
of hydrogen sulphide. The water had
clearly seeped into cracks in the ocean
floor, circulating deep into hot rock and
leaching out chemicals from the rock be¬
fore emerging again heated up to an ex¬
tremely high temperature.
Hydrogen sulphides are toxic to higher
animals, but specific bacteria are immune
to its poisonous properties and, indeed,
base their metabolism upon it. Thus, in
the abyssal deeps of the ocean these bac¬
teria form the first link in a food chain
which supports thriving communities of
submarine creatures giant tube-worms,
clams, snails and sulphur-coloured
mussels.
Down in the almost total darkness of
the ocean depths, where the sun's rays do
not penetrate, life is based not on photo¬
synthesis which is powered by energy
from the sun, but on a process called
chemosynthesis which is fuelled by the
chemical energy in inorganic compounds.
Herein, perhaps, lies the secret of the
origin of life on this planet.
The ocean belongs to the whole of
humanity. It is the last frontier whose
exploration and exploitation is the con¬
cern of all the nations. It has already
yielded up many of its secrets, but many,
many more remain to be unveiled.
VITALI VOITOV, of the USSR, is a geographer
who has taken part in some forty research ex¬
peditions in the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian
Oceans. He is the author of 160 books and
scientific studies on oceanography, many of
which have been translated into English, French,
Italian and German. They include/The Research
Ship Vityaz; Prospects for Océanographie Re¬
search (written in collaboration with A. Monine,
corresponding member of the USSRAcademy of
Sciences); The Mystery of the Bermuda Tri¬
angle; and The Bounty of the Ocean.
V HT />
3 I
©
36
