Unesco
and the International
Year ofPeace
UNESCO'S activities during the Interna¬
tional Year of Peace form part of a
continuing effort which began forty
years ago. The Preamble to Unesco's Consti¬
tution, adopted on 16 November 1945,
pledges the Organization to advance,
"through the educational and scientific and
cultural relations of the peoples of the world,
the objectives of international peace and of
m m m m rr? m m
*%
n 3H
-1
SïU T+ï TTÏ f+ï Bï BT UT
ISiiiil
% t
a si mm m § t
©
First awarded in 1981, the annual Unesco
Prize for Peace Education was created to
reward outstanding examples of "activity
designed to alert public opinion and
mobilize the conscience of mankind in the
cause of peace". In 1985 the Prize went
jointly to General IndarJit Rikhye, of India,
President of the International Peace
Academy, and to the Georg-Eckert Insti¬
tute for International Textbook Research
(Fed. Rep. of Germany). The Institute
works forpeace by seeking to identify and
eliminate from textbooks factual errors,
prejudices and stereotyped ideas about
peoples, In order to encourage pupils'
readiness to understand and appreciate
different cultural systems. Its headquar¬
ters are In the Villa von Biilow, above, a
masterpiece of classical architecture
made available by the municipality of
Braunschweig.
the common welfare of mankind for which the
United Nations Organization was estab¬
lished", and states that "peace must therefore
be founded, if it is not to fail, upon the intellec¬
tual and moral solidarity of mankind".
Unesco's commitment to "international
peace" and "the common welfare of mankind"
is in a sense the keystone of all its work and
permeates every one of its activities without
exception, whether in education, science, cul¬
ture or communication. Its approach to these
issues is based on the conviction that they
cannot be dissociated from the wider canvas
of interrelated contemporary problems which
must be tackled globally by the international
community. More specifically, Unesco's
efforts to achieve and preserve peace are
today embodied in a wide range of pro¬
grammes relating to international understand¬
ing, human rights and the rights of peoples,
and to the elimination of prejudice, intoler¬
ance, racism and apartheid.
First of all, Unesco has sought to define the
very meaning of the word peace. A resolution
adopted at the 18th Session of Unesco's
General Conference in 1974 stressed that
peace "cannot consist solely in the absence of
armed conflict but implies principally a pro¬
cess of development, justice and mutual re¬
spect among peoples designed to secure the
building of an international society in which
everyone can find his true place and enjoy his
share of the world's intellectual and material
resources".
Two years later, at its 19th Session, the
General Conference went further, adopting a
resolution on "The Role of Unesco in Gener¬
ating a Climate of Public Opinion Conducive
to the Halting of the Arms Race and the Tran¬
sition to Disarmament". This resolution re¬
flected the conviction that disarmament would
make it possible to redistribute vast material
and intellectual resources for social and eco¬
nomic development and help to prepare the
ground for equitable political and economic
relations between the countries of the world.
In April 1978 Unesco organized an expert
meeting on "The Obstacles to Disarmament
and the Ways of Overcoming Them", as part
of its preparations for the United Nations First
Special Session on Disarmament held in the
I
At the end of the Second World War,
Unesco launched a majorproject aimed at
the elimination of racism, discrimination,
prejudice and tensions and the promotion
of international understanding. The need
for such a plan is no less urgent today.
Unesco's efforts are directed to analysing
and exposing the mechanisms of pre¬
judice, intolerance and racism as a first
step to mobilizing its own forces and those
of people everywhere against these phe¬
nomena and their most brutal manifesta¬
tion, apartheid. Above: "Their rightto
share a future without war" is the message
of this anti-apartheid poster from South
Africa.
same year. Participants stressed that the pur¬
pose of disarmament education was to pro¬
mote the goal of general and complete dis¬
armament, and recommended the holding of
a world congress to propose measures aimed
at the establishment of specialized education
in favour of disarmament.
This World Congress on Disarmament..
Education was duly organized by Unesco and
held in June 1 980, in Paris. Some'250 partici¬
pants and observers from all over the world
attended. The Congress set forth a number of
guidelines for an action plan to cover the
Second Disarmament Decade of the United
Nations, ending in 1989, and defined a series
of principles relating to disarmament educa¬
tion as an essential component of peace edu¬
cation. Unesco was asked to produce a
Teacher's Handbook on Disarmament
Education designed for secondary schools.
This book, now in preparation, gives a de¬
tailed presentation of the links between dis¬
armament and development education.
Unesco followed up the World Congress on
Disarmament Education by convening a
series of expert meetings and training semi¬
nars for teachers devoted to practical ques¬
tions of teaching about disarmament issues in
their relationship with peace; strengthening
international understanding and security; de-
20

WiW.W . n
The aim set forth In Unesco's Constitution
of "advancing ... the objectives of interna¬
tional peace and the common welfare of
mankind...." can never be achieved with¬
out a mobilization of world public opinion
in a united struggle against the continua¬
tion of the arms race, especially in the field
of nuclear -veapons. Above, peace march
in Romania.
Unesco encourages physical education
and sport as a means of bringing peoples
closer together on the basis of respect,
mutual understanding and disinterested
competition. It also honours the spirit of
sportsmanship through its long associa¬
tion with the International Pierre de
Coubertin Fair Play Trophy, first awarded
in 1965. Unesco is currently examining the
origins and forms of violence in sports
activities in a study which will focus on the
social and educational aspects of this
complex problem, as well as remedial
action. Photo of thejubilantjudoka, above,
featured in an international exhibition on
the theme of "Youth In the 1980s", orga¬
nized by Unesco on the occasion of Inter¬
national Youth Year (1985).
Article 10 of the Declaration of the Rights
of the Child adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations on 20
November 1959 stipulates that the child
"... shall be brought up in a spirit of under¬
standing, tolerance, friendship among
peoples, peace and universal
brotherhood. ..." Today there is a growing
awareness that in order to encourage this
spirit among young people all over the
world, action is called for at the earliest
possible age, during the years when a
child's fundamental outlook andpersonal¬
ity are formed. Unesco has encouraged
this interest in education for peace at pre¬
school age and in 1985 published Seeds
for Peace, a booklet presenting recent ex¬
periences in this field in the family context
and elsewhere. Photo showing 3 genera¬
tions of one family is an illustration from
the booklet.
velopment; a new international economic
order; respect for human rights and the rights
of peoples.
The Organization has also sponsored
meetings on the role of the media in increas¬
ing public awareness of the links between
disarmament and development. One such
meeting, held in Paris in November 1982,
examined different perceptions of threat and
conceptions of security. A study on "Media
Contribution to Worldwide Security and
Peace", carried out in 1984-85 in co-opera¬
tion with the International Social Science
Council, analysed among other topics cover¬
age of war and peace issues, effects of style,
vocabulary, and negative stereotypes.
Acknowledging the crucial role played by
science and technology in the debate on
peace, disarmament and development, Un¬
esco organized a joint symposium with the
Pugwash Conferences on Science and World
Affairs on the theme of "Scientists, the Arms
Race and Disarmament" in Ajaccio, France,
in February 1982. The Organization con¬
tinues to sponsor scientific research projects
and meetings such as the International Con¬
sultation on higher education, peace and re¬
spect for human rights and the rights of peo¬
ples held in Athens in January 1 986 (see page
18).
In 1980 a Unesco Prize for Peace Educa¬
tion was established to promote all forms of
action designed to "construct the defences of
peace in the minds of men". The annual prize,
worth $60,000, is financed by the interest from
a $1 million donation from the Japan Ship¬
building Industry Foundation. Among the
prizewinners are Evgeny Chazov of the
Soviet Union and Bernard Lown of the United
States, who jointly accepted the 1 984 award
on behalf of International Physicians for the
Prevention of Nuclear War (see page 19).
In the domain of culture, Unesco's pro¬
gramme is based on the conviction that de¬
velopment and peace are preconditions of the
cultural fulfilment of societies and individuals.
In this context Unesco has concentrated on
safeguarding the cultural heritage, streng¬
thening cultural identities and ¡ntercultural re¬
lations, promoting creativity and artistic
creation, and work in the field of cultural de¬
velopment and cultural policies. An interna¬
tional symposium currently being prepared on
the role of cultural workers and artists in work
for peace will "analyse ways in which co¬
ordinated action could be taken to place their
works, their creations and their talents in the
service of peace".
Of the fourteen Major Programmes featur¬
ing in Unesco's Second Medium-term Plan ^
21

À*&*
Unesco's cultural programme is based on
its constitutional obligation "to contribute
to peace and security" bypromoting inter¬
national collaboration through culture.
This basic tenet is defined in more specific
terms in the Declaration of the principles
of international cultural co-operation
(1966) which declares that "Cultural co¬
operation shall contribute to the establish¬
ment of stable, long-term relations be¬
tween peoples, which should be subjected
as little as possible to the strains which
may arise in international life". In this field
Unesco is today engaged in a broadprog¬
ramme of activities to protect the cultural
heritage, strengthen cultural Identity and
relations between cultures, encourage
creativity, and support Member States In
promoting cultural development. (1) A gor-
gon's head in the forum of Septimius
Sevetus at the ancient cityofLeptis Magna
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), which features
on the World Heritage List of cultural and
natural properties of outstanding univer¬
sal value. The List, which Unesco has
drawn up through the World Heritage
Committee, today includes 216 sites (27 In
Africa, 34 in the Arab States, 30 in Asia and
the Pacific, 25 in Latin America and the
Caribbean, and 100 in Europe and North
America) which enjoy special protective
measures both from the States in which
theyare locatedand from the international
community. (2) The inner courtyard of a
traditional house at Oualata, Mauritania.
(3) A staffmember of the National Museum
of Mall explains to a French boy how to
play the balaphon, a West African
xylophone, during a study tour in France
as part of the Museum's staff training
programme.
S
22

©
On a number of occasions, Unesco's
General Conference has drawn attention
to the links between peace, disarmament
and development education on the one
hand, and human rights education on the
other, considering notably that education
concerning human rights "Is capable of
making an essential contribution to the
maintenance and promotion of peace as
well as to economic development and so¬
cial progress in the world". Cartoons and
games were devised as part of one recent
Unesco-sponsored project to create hu¬
man rights teaching materials adapted to
the needs and interests ofyoungpeople in
Thailand. The project, carried out by the
Faculty of Law, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, focused largely on child pros¬
titution and human rights and child labour
and human rights. Left, cover of a set of
cartoons produced as part of the project.
^ (1984-1989), No. XIII, "Peace, International
Understanding, Human Rights and the Rights
of Peoples", includes the commitment to
maintain peace and international understand¬
ing, through studying the causes and the con¬
sequences of the arms race and the condi¬
tions favourable to disarmament.
The Plan highlights the responsibility of
education in creating awareness of the inter¬
dependence of global problems, particularly
between peace, the halting of the arms race,
disarmament, respect for human rights and
the rights of peoples, the elimination of col¬
onialism, racism and apartheid, and develop¬
ment. The international educational strategy
established as part of the Medium-term Plan
seeks to develop a climate of opinion condu¬
cive to the transition to disarmament, "by
providing support for youth activities, and by
encouraging young people to think and act in
support of peace, disarmament, respect for
human rights and the rights of peoples".
Today, Unesco's normative, educational
and informational activities relating to dis¬
armament and development can be
approached from four different angles.
The arms race creates a huge burden on
national economies and on societies' re¬
sources. Defence budgets can be seen to be
inflationary in industrialized countries, and a
source of external debts in the Third World.
The present international order, the nature
of societies and of political regimes, especial¬
ly their form of economic growth, are basic
factors in the continuation of the arms race.
The third approach explores future possi¬
ble alternatives to the present relationship
between disarmament and development, in¬
cluding the creation of an international fund to
administer the resources which could be
transferred to development, and the conver¬
sion of the arms industry to civilian activities.
The fourth approach advocates a new form
of international co-operation, emerging from
research into present forms of national and
international relations which generate least
tension, with the aim of creating a favourable
context for eventual disarmament. Such a
new international order implies the rejection of
conventional models of growth and moderni- 1
c
I
As part of its major programme "Commu¬
nication in the service of man", Unesco
has prepared, in collaboration with the
French Ministry of Education, a booklet
entitled Des médias pour la paix et les
hommes (The media for peace and man¬
kind). The booklet is a presentation, writ¬
ten for young people aged between 9 and
17, of the 1978 Unesco Declaration on fun¬
damental principles concerning the con¬
tribution of the mass media to strengthen¬
ing peace and international understand¬
ing, to the promotion of human rights and
to countering racialism, apartheid and in¬
citement to war. It will be distributed in
co-operation with the World Federation of
Unesco Clubs and other non-governmen¬
tal organizations. Before publication, a
draft of the booklet was sent to 1,500
young people, some of whom created
posters inspired by its contents. Above,
poster by a group of pupils at a school in
Mompiano, Italy. Left, an Illustration from
the booklet, which will also be published
eventually In English and Spanish.
23

zation, especially those imposed on develop¬
ing countries.
Finally, Unesco's publishing programme
also plays an important part in disarmament-
related activities. Relevant works include the
Unesco Yearbook on Peace and Conflict Stu¬
dies (published since 1980); World Directory
of Peace Research Institutions (5th edition,
1984); Obstacles to Disarmament and Ways
of Overcoming Them (1981); and Arm¬
aments, Arms Control and Disarmament; a
Unesco Reader for Disarmament Education
(1982). Other studies and publications which
seek to further knowledge and appreciation of
cultural values and mutual understanding
among peoples, include the History of Man¬
kind: Cultural and Scientific Development, a
new edition of which is currently being pre¬
pared, and the eight-volume General History
ofAfrica now in course of publication.
Two Moons, a poster designed by the Ja¬
panese master Kaii Higashiyama to mark
International Year of Peace (1986). The re¬
sult of collaboration between Unesco, the
Japanese Federation of Unesco Associa¬
tions and the International Association of
Art, the poster shows the moon, symbol of
truth in Asian tradition, reflected in peace¬
ful waters.

