Che Bandoneón, drawing by Ricardo CarpanI
That squall the tango, that devilry,
challenges the crowded years;
man made of dust and time
lasts less than the flighty tune,
which Is only time.
Jorge Luis Borges, El Tango



Tango Time
by Luis Bocaz
The Latin American song and dance
that swept the world onto its feet
ONE of the tango's many mysteries is
its mixed cultural parentage. To ex¬
plain its origins, its chroniclers have
had to investigate the aftermath of slavery
in a region of old Spanish colonies. Vicente
Rossi, for example, suggests that the tango
was bom in the African communities of
Montevideo, a view not always enthusiasti¬
cally shared on the western bank of the
estuary of the Rio de la Plata.
Apart from the inevitable wranglings
over paternity, there is no disagreement
about the influence of the candombe on this
dance in its early years, or about the con¬
tribution to its development made by the
two Rio de la Plata capitals, Buenos Aires
and Montevideo. The sprawling Argentine
metropoHs was, in the end, to monopolize
the sobriquet ''City of the Tango", but in
both ports (La Cumparsita, one of the best
known tangos, is Uruguayan) the inter¬
mingling of its African and mestizo ances¬
tors, together with other local and Euro¬
pean strains, gave birth, in the space of a
few decades, to one of the most distinctive
cultural creations of the American con¬
tinent.
Where did the name come from? In writ¬
ings and lectures on the subject, Jorge Luis
Borges pokes fun at those who bend over
backwards in their attempts to trace its
origins to a Latin root. The distinguished
writer's amusement is provoked by the
lowHness of its earliest surroundings, the
suburbs, and by the creature's undeniable
connections with disreputable ' establish¬
ments.
In Buenos Aires, the scale of the sub¬
urban fringe was a consequence of spec¬
tacular urban growth. This unpretentious
colonial town, founded twice in the six¬
teenth century, was chosen in 1880 as the
federal capital, and rapidly became a thriv¬
ing port. Thereafter, it absorbed wave upon
wave of immigrants, who disembarked with
their cargo of dreams and solitude and, on
the so-called orillas, estabHshed a sort of
frontier way of life. People were washed up
here by the tides of fortune, as they were on
the Pacific coast, in San Francisco of the
Gold Rush, or Valparaiso, with their nos¬
talgic atmosphere of turn-of-the-century
sailing ships.
In this murky urban quarter, lone men
fought one another over fortunes and brief
affairs of the heart. So it is not difficult to
understand how this branch of humanity
found in the cortes and quebradas (literally
"cuts and slashes") of the tango a means of
escape from the teeming solitude of the
tenements.
Those heroic times have left us with the
stereotyped image of the original dancing
couple. She, with her tight-fitting dress,
split skirt and scarcely concealed hint of
erotic aggressiveness; he, perched on high
heels and wearing a narrow-brimmed hat.
Even today, magazines and shows continue
to reproduce this vignette of a bygone age.
One thing is undeniable: in the last ten years
of the nineteenth century, the music to
which they danced was held in high esteem
10

in musical circles, and, at the turn of the
century, a whole galaxy of distinguished
composers ushered it out of the suburbs and
into the city centre.
By the time the Republic celebrated its
centenary, definite rules had taken shape
governing the instruments on which it was
played. Flutes and guitars had been
banished, making way for the ensemble that
would henceforth be known as the orquesta
típica, consisting of piano, violins, double
bass and a little-known instrument called
the bandoneón. This emigrant accordéon
from Central Europe came to symbolize the
essence of the tango. Why did it become so
prominent as a popular art form? After all,
as musicologists point out, it was very diffi¬
cult to play. There is no convincing answer
to this question, but the fact remains that
from the legendary Ramos Mejia to Astor
Piazzolla in our own time , the roll of honour
of those who played it includes such glamor-
ous names in tango history as Eduardo Aro-
las and Aníbal Troilo.
On a wave of popular creativity, this sub¬
urban adolescent rose irresistibly to fame.
Before the First World War, Paris (Tango-
ville, some historians would claim) had
given her the keys to Europe. From London
to Moscow, the great cities were held spell¬
bound by the mysterious creature. Her
triumph heralded that of jazz, another child
of miscegenation in the landfall cities of
America. The tango craze spread through
the ballrooms and fashionable watering
places. Handbooks on how to dance it
appeared by the dozen, and a certain shade
of orange came to be called "tango". In
February 1914, an engraving in the French
magazine L'Illustration showed the Pope
thoughtfully watching the circlings of a
dancing couple. The Holy See found itself
obHged to make a pronouncement, having
heard voices raised in condemnation of the
morals of this Latin-American upstart. Its
concern was justified. Some of the vitupera¬
tion came from Argentine circles. The poet
Leopoldo Lugones called the tango a "rep¬
tile from the brothel", and more than one
diplomat showed distaste for the discon¬
certing way in which this ignoble compatriot
had won general acceptance.
The international renown of this ambas¬
sador of working-class descent was decisive¬
ly heightened by a man of obscure extrac¬
tion with an extraordinary voice. His name
was Carlos Gardel. He came to the tango
when it had already acquired cosmopoHtan
status. Nevertheless, his indisputable artis¬
tic talent and and a modicum of publicity in
the media, combined with the strange cir¬
cumstances in which his life began and
ended, were enough to give him mythical
stature: the accident at the airport of
Medellin, which cost him his Hfe, and the
shadows which, for years, surrounded his
birth. More than one town boasted of being
his birthplace. After his death, in June
1935, conflicting evidence came to light. An
official document announced that his place
of birth was Tacuarembó, in the Republic of
Uruguay. Meanwhile, the Argentine Gar-
del cult reconstructed the childhood of its
idol in the market quarter of Buenos Aires
and exhibited a signed handwritten docu¬
ment referring to his birth in Toulouse,
France.
A reproduction of the birth certificate of
a baby boy, Charles Romuald Gardes, bom
in the maternity wing of the La Grave hos
pital at 2 a.m. on 11 December 1890, in
Toulouse, finally put an end to the
arguments. The singer was the illegitimate
son of an unknown father and a laundry
worker, Berthe Gardes. Like others from
southern France, she emigrated to the Rio
de la Plata region, taking her two-year-old
son with her. Moreover, on the occasion of
the fiftieth anniversary of the death of Car¬
los Gardel, the Toulouse municipal author¬
ities mobilised its cultural facilities to pay
him an impressive tribute. The programme,
which lasted for several weeks, included the
unveiling of a monument, public exhibi¬
tions and the first scienfific congress on the
tango. This was convened by the University
of Toulouse, a highly respected centre for
Hispanic and Latin-American studies, and
was attended by specialists from Latin
America, Europe and the United States.
The 1970s witnessed a partial revival of
the tango on the European scene as a form
of music for instruments and voice. Follow¬
ing a fairly long period of eclipse, this re¬
newal was foreseeable, in view of the
admiradon that it still commanded in the
cities of Latin America, and, indeed, in
such an unexpected country as Japan,
where a huge trade in recordings is to be
found, together with orquestas típicas, col¬
lectors and specialized magazines. Never¬
theless, some observers would point to a
paradox: while Cuba organizes tango festi¬
vals, and while Amsterdam and Paris are
enthralled by the classical rigour of Osvaldo
Pugliese, the formal audacity of Piazzolla or
the splendid voice of Susana Rinaldi, there
are signs in its cities of origin of a slackening
of the fervour that gripped them from the
1930s to the 1950s. The great tango orches¬
tras and soloists have watched their sources
of work drying up one by one, partly as a
result of changes in pubHc taste, which
seems less drawn to this art form than it was
in days gone by.
It can be argued that, since the "codifica¬
tion" by Julio de Caro, in the 1920s, the
structures which shaped the tango have
changed in ways comparable to the changes
occurring in the societies which produced it,
and in the various attitudes of mind and
. feeling which embraced it as their own.
Perhaps for this reason, following the tmce
between traditionalists and modernists,
creators and performers have come to agree
that the tango can change and develop.
Accordingly, such essential works as Re¬
cuerdo (1924) by Pugliese or Adlos, Nonino
(1959) by Piazzolla are valued in their con¬
temporary context as innovative land¬
marks, and the tango is seen to embody the
pathos prevailing in the painting, the films
or the poetry of the day.
Worth noting is the enthusiasm with
which, in the first few months of 1986, tango
demonstrations are being greeted in New
York. Will they, perhaps, provide the
necessary impetus for this complex Latin
American character to make a glorious and
majestic come-back to the international
stage?
LUIS BOCAZ, of Chile, is a specialist in Latin
American literature and culture. A lecturer at the
Sorbonne, he also directs a seminar on "Cultural
production and society in Latin America" at the
Institut des Hautes Etudes de l'Amérique Latine,
in Paris. He has served as a consultant with
Unesco's culture sector.
With the urbanization ofpopular culture at
the turn of the century, the tango appeared
In suburban bars around the cities of the
Rio de la Plata, In the so-called "low-life"
houses. In the districts near the abattoirs
and In the homes of the poor like these
photographed In Buenos Aires at the be¬
ginning of the century.
11
