The forbidden
dialogue
by Lewis Nkosi
EVEN the proponents of apartheid
cannot deny that the blacks suffer
untold hardships as a price for the
maintenance of the policy of apartheid.
What is not always noted is that, though
economically exploitative as a ruling class,
the whites are also subject to certain very
real deprivations as a result of their deter¬
mination to live by a policy which would
seem to all reasonable men not only un¬
realistic but insane.
To say the very least, South African
whites are the most culturally deprived
community in Africa. Emotionally they are
just as stunted.
They not only grow up denying their in¬
nermost dreams, they also learn to do with¬
out some of the best works of modern world
culture (in literature, music, painting and
intellectual discourse) either because such
works are considered subversive, or be¬
cause traffic in culture with the outside
world is rendered almost impossible by the
maintenance of the policy of apartheid.
We all know what happens to people who
cannot face up to the reality of their lives,
who must live by evasions and fantasies; a
greater burden is placed on writers or any
other kind of artist who belongs to such a
community. Before they go on to create
anything of value they must make an ex¬
traordinary effort to unlearn everything
they have been taught.
In South Africa they must, for instance,
unlearn what they are taught in schools:
that the whites, from their forefathers to the
present generation, are all heroes; that the
whites have the monopoly on moral wisdom
and intellectual enterprise; the pain and the
anguish which attend the creative efforts of
Afrikaans writers at the moment is not a
matter for cynical amusement. It is the
agony of creative artists who must break
through a sealed cocoon in order to see the
world in its variousness or even to say some¬
thing remotely relevant to their country.
Black writers do not have to make any
comparable moral choice; they do not have
to choose to oppose a system which is
patently contrary to all observable reality;
their colour makes the choice for them;
what they have to do is learn to survive the
system.
There are times when an affirmation of
certain traditional African values proves
exasperatingly difficult for black writers
since most of them are reacting to an ideolo
gy which asserts again and again that black
and white people are irreconcilably dif¬
ferent; that the African mind cannot grasp
certain nuances of European thought; and,
concluding from the foregoing, that apar¬
theid is justifiable, indeed the only realistic
policy to follow.
The result has been that black intellec¬
tuals in South Africa have had to bend over
backwards to prove that they can not only
master the modes of European thought but
that they can beat the South African whites
at their own game.
Urban African music seems to me to have
provided the only example of what South
Africa can offer culturally if she were left to
develop in a natural direction.
Music, because it is non-literal, is not
subject to the same limitations as literature;
it is hardly banned; also it is less self-con¬
scious in the modes it adopts to express the
agony of the South African situation. The
result has been that popular urban African
music has provided a glaring paradigm of
what is happening to the underground life
of the nation.
The music is predominantly African,
which is as it should be, considering the
dominant number of Africans in the coun¬
try; but it is also eclectic; it provides a
moving illustration of cultural diffusion in
that part of the continent which offers us the
best laboratory for the marriage of African
and European techniques and for the com¬
ing together of European and African
modes of expression.
While black literature from the Republic
offers us glimpses into an appalling situa¬
tion of rare brutality and anguish, the music
not only shows us this but goes further to
affirm what we should have known all
along; that the oppressed in South Africa
also display an amazing form of resilience,
emotional certitude and optimism. On the
other hand, apartheid deprives white South
Africans of any real participation in such
robust forms of cultural expression.
March 1967
LEWIS NKOSI, South African writer, was exiled
from his country in 1960, and later lived in Lon¬
don. He is the author of a play about racial
tensions in Johannesburg, The Rhythm of
Violence, and of an essay on contemporary
Black American and South African literature en¬
titled Home and Exile.
15
