A trilogy
of rocks
Igneous rocks
Igneous rocks form from molten material
(magma) that rises from the Earth's in¬
terior. Magma that solidifies before
reaching the surface forms intrusive rocks
like dolerite, gabbro and granite. Magma
that solidifies after reaching the surface
forms volcanic rocks like basalt (the most
common), obsidian and pumice. As it
cools and crystallizes, the magma's com¬
position changes, producing hundreds of
different types of igneous rock from re¬
latively few types of mineral. Rapid cool¬
ing may trap minerals formed at higher
temperatures.
Metamorphic rocks
"4 Metamorphic rocks are rocks that have
been transformed (metamorphosed) and
crystallized by heat and pressure. In this
process, the minerals of the original rock
either reform into larger crystals or react
together to form new minerals. The rocks
produced have a layered texture called
foliation, familiar to us in slate. Meta-
morphism occurs in two types of
situation: (i) around plumes of molten rock
that have risen in cool rock ("contact meta-
morphism"); and (ii) in the interiors of fold-
mountains where the heat flow is high, and
beneath ocean trenches where there are
high pressures ("regional metamor-
phism"). Metamorphic rocks include slate,
produced from clays at low temperatures
and pressures; schist and gneiss, formed
at higher temperatures and pressures;
and marble, formed from sandstone.
Sedimentary rocks
^ Sedimentary rocks have a layered struc¬
ture. They contain all the world's oil and
coal and all its fossils. The first step in their
formation is the weathering of existing
rock. The products are carried away as
fragments or in solution and deposited
elsewhere as layers of sediment. These
layers, subjected to pressure or cemented
together by other minerals, harden into
sedimentary rock. There are three main
types: (i) Fragmental. Made of pebbles
(breccia, conglomerates), sand (grits,
sandstones, siltstones), or mud (clays,
mudstones, shales), (ii) Organic. Consist¬
ing mainly of the fossil remains of plants
and animals (coal, fossil-bearing lime¬
stones), (iii) Chemically formed by pre¬
cipitation from salt water or hot springs
(rock salt, gypsum, ironstone, some lime¬
stones and siliceous cherts).
15
