Science and tradition
Two spokes of a single wheel'
by Basarab Nicolescu
1
ANY practising scientist knows from ex¬
perience that our representation of the
world is not wholly arbitrary. A scien¬
tific theoretical construction worthy of the
name may be rejected because it does not fit
the observed facts. There is something that
resists. What other name than "reality" can
we give to that something?
To date, two conceptions of "reality" have
dominated our representations of the world.
"Reality" has been seen either as "objective"
(with humanity cast in the role of "master" of
an external reality) or as "subjective", created
by humanity (humanity thus being the only
source of "reality"). These two conceptions of
reality stem, in my opinion, from a single
vainglorious attitude that of viewing human¬
ity as the static and absolute centre of
"reality". There is, however, a third possibility
which seems to me to be consistent with
modern scientific knowledge: "reality" is the
product of the interaction between the world
and humanity, which are two aspects of one
and the same reality. Modern scientists could
testify about this interaction.
The time may be ripe for us to incorporate
the most general ideas of modern science into
our culture. Is it going too far to suppose that
the discrepancy between an outmoded vision
of the world and an infinitely more subtle and
more complex reality (as revealed on the
quantum scale or on the cosmological scale)
is the source of many of the tensions and
conflicts that we witness every day, but on
which we are virtually powerless to act? Is it
not our attitude to reality that will determine, in
the final analysis, the fate of our world? Is
ignorance of fundamental science not one of
the causes of that anarchic technological pro¬
liferation which, although it has many ben¬
eficial effects, may also lead our species to
self-destruction?
Fundamental science is rooted in the
nourishing earth of questions that are com¬
mon to every field of human knowledge: What
is the meaning of life? What is man's role in
the cosmic process? What is nature's place in
knowledge? Fundamental science thus has
the same roots as religion, art or mythology.
It is true that such questions have gradually
Finely sculpted figure on the marble tomb¬
stone of a Greek (4th century BC) evokes
eternal questions of the meaning of life
and man's role in cosmic processes.
25

and increasingly come to be regarded as non-
scientific and have been cast into the outer
darkness of the irrational, the preserve of the
poet, the mystic, the artist or the philosopher.
The cause is probably the indisputable
triumph at the material level of analytical,
reductionist and mechanistic thought. Every¬
thing was, apparently, determined, even pre¬
determined. In this universe of false freedom it
was amazing that anything could actually
happen. As witnesses to an absolute, static
and immutable order, scientists could no lon¬
ger be, as in the past, "natural philosophers";
they were obliged to become "technicians of
the quantitative".
Modern science, starting with the advent of
quantum physics at the turn of the twentieth
century, reveals the fragility of such a para¬
digm. Quantum physics has demonstrated
the groundlessness of blind faith in continuity,
local causality and mechanistic determinism.
Discontinuity came in through the front door
that of scientific experiment. Local causality
gave way to a subtler concept of "global"
causality.- "Objects" were replaced by re¬
lationships, interactions and interconnections
among natural phenomena. Lastly, the clas¬
sical concept of matter was replaced by the
infinitely more subtle concept of matter-ener¬
gy. The omnipotence of substance, the touch
stone of reductionists from time immemorial,
was challenged: substance is simply one of
the possible facets of energy.
An unprecedented conceptual revolution
which logically should have led to a new sys¬
tem of values governing our everyday life in
the community began with Planck and Ein¬
stein. However, three-quarters of a century
after the emergence of the quantum image of
the world, nothing has really changed. We
continue to act, consciously or otherwise,
according to the concepts of earlier centuries.
The palpable, experimental discovery of a
scale invisible to the sense organs, the quan¬
tum scale on which the laws are completely
different from those of the visible scale of
everyday life, has probably been modern sci¬
ence's most important contribution to human
knowledge. The new concept which has thus
emerged that of levels of materiality is one
of those that could underpin a new vision of
the world.
The world of quantum events is completely
different from the world to which we are
accustomed.
The unity of opposites seems to reign in this
new world: quantum entities are particles and
waves at the same time. The quantum event is
not separable as an object: the new world is
that of universal interconnection, relationship
and interaction. Discontinuity and continuity
coexist harmoniously (that is to say, "contra¬
dictorily"): energy varies by jumps, but our
visible world nonetheless remains a world of
continuity. The void is "full" it contains,
potentially, all events. The new world is one of
perpetual effervescence, annihilation and
creation, and movement at lightning speeds
beyond comparison with those of rockets.
Energy concentrated on the scale of the in¬
finitely small reaches fantastic values that are
hardly imaginable on our own scale.
But over and above the inadequacy of im¬
ages there is also the inadequacy of logic and
language based on classical realism. Contra¬
diction, a concept that must be taken here in
its philosophical sense of reciprocal construc¬
tion through antagonistic struggle, does not
mean incoherence. It simply means that what
is unified at one level of reality appears con¬
tradictory at another level of reality.
Let us consider in this context the well-
known example of the concept of com¬
plementarity introduced by Niels Bohr in
1927: a quantum particle may be described
approximately in terms of either a classic
particle or a classic wave, but the quantum
particle is neither a particle nor a wave. Parti¬
cle and wave appear to be two com¬
plementary aspects of the quantum particle,
Physicists Max Planck (right, 1858-1947)
and Niels Bohr (1885-1962) were respec¬
tively pioneers in the development of the
quantum theory and quantum mechanics
in the early 20th century. The quantum
theory grew up around Planck's introduc¬
tion into physics of the concept of the
discontinuity of energy. According to this
concept light, which appears to be a
steady stream or a continuous flow, is
actually given off and absorbed in tiny
units called quanta. The theory was de¬
veloped by Bohr and other great physi¬
cists into a system of "quantum mecha¬
nics" which has come to be used to de¬
scribe physical phenomena occurring on
such a small scale that the system of
mechanics deriving from the work of the
17th-century English physicist Isaac New¬
ton breaks down.
26

The Buddhist tradition, like that of other
great world religions, enshrines doctrines
handed down over the centuries "by word
of mouth, ... through the science of sym¬
bols, through writings or works of art,
myths or rites. "Above, graceful hands ofa
moulded clay Bodhisattva or future Bud¬
dha, in the rock-cut caves of Mai-chi-shan,
a major Buddhist site in Kansu Province,
northern China.
Shamanism is the traditional religion of
the Tungus people ofSoviet eastern Siber¬
ia. The central figure is the clan shaman,
left, who is a mystical priest, singer,
prophet and healer. Found in many parts
of the worldbut especially in the Arctic and
central Asia, shamanism is based on the
belief that the world is pervaded by good
and evil spirits whom the shaman seeks to
influence or control by communicating
directly with them.
which is, in this sense, both a particle and a
wave.
Complementarity in this sense, then, in
contrast to the meaning of the word in every¬
day language, denotes the mutually exclusive
aspects of quantum phenomena.
The quantum particle defies representation
by forms in space and in time, for it is obvious¬
ly impossible to make a mental representation
(other than by mathematical equations) of
something which is at the same time both
particle and wave.
This was an unprecedented challenge
hurled by scientific experiment at the very
foundations of our everyday thinking. For ex¬
ample, light behaves experimentally either as
waves or as particles. But the results of scien¬
tific experiments are obtained, by definition,
on our own scale in an unavoidably classical
world that is incapable of conceiving of the
unity of opposites. This separation between
opposites is due to our logic, our language,
and our way of interpreting results on an
infinitely more complex scale than the quan¬
tum scale. On the quantum scale light is one: it
is both wave and particle.
Is there really a connection between sci¬
ence and Tradition? Tradition means all the
doctrines and religious or moral practices
handed down over the centuries, originally by
word of mouth or example, and the handing
down of more or less legendary information
about the past, also initially by word of mouth,
from one generation to another. According to
this definition, Tradition encompasses various
"traditions" Christian, Jewish, Islamic, Bud¬
dhist, Süfi and so on.
Tradition is thus primarily concerned with
the transmission of a body of knowledge
about the spiritual evolution of man, his posi¬
tion in different "worlds", and his relationship
with different "universes". This body of know¬
ledge is necessarily constant, stable and per¬
manent, despite the many forms through
which it is transmitted and despite the distor¬
tions wrought by time and history. Transmis¬
sion is usually by word of mouth, but it may
also be effected through the science of sym¬
bols, through writings or works of art, myths or
rites.
For an impartial researcher, there seems to
be every reason to separate science from
Tradition.
Traditional knowledge is based on revela¬
tion, contemplation and direct perception of
reality. In contrast, scientific knowledge (at
least in its contemporary form) is based on the
understanding of reality through mental pro¬
cesses, through logical and mathematical
constructions. Traditional knowledge presup¬
poses the non-involvement of mental proces¬
ses, through the suppression of ordinary
logical associations, whereas scientific know¬
ledge is possible precisely because the
mental faculty is activated as intensely as
possible.
Traditional research assigns great import¬
ance to the body, sensations, feelings and
faith, while scientific research excludes the
researcher's own body, sensations, feelings
and faith from the field of observation and the
formulation of laws. The only instrument be¬
longing to the human body that is tolerated by
science is the researcher's brain and its inhe¬
rent logical structures that are common to all
researchers. Experimental measuring de¬
vices are assumed to possess an intrinsic
objectivity and a quasi-absolute independ¬
ence of the researcher's own will.
Traditional thought has always claimed that
reality is not linked to time and space: it simply
is. The traditional researcher, through long
and unremitting effort, deliberately annihilates
his own spatio-temporal identity in order to
discover his true being, through dissolution in
that one, all-embracing reality which, to be
known, admits of no separation, no impurity
due to projection in space or time. At the other
extreme, the scientific researcher is obliged to
postulate the existence of a separate objec¬
tive reality which is necessarily defined in
terms of time and space.
Another important difference between sci¬
ence and Tradition resides in the communic¬
able or non-communicable nature of an ex¬
periment. Traditional research claims the right
to engage in experiments that cannot be com¬
municated through natural language. The tra¬
ditional experiment is unique and total, and
transcends ordinary logical categories. A sci¬
entific experiment, on the other hand, is com¬
municable and repeatable. The conditions of
scientific experimentation are defined in as
objective a manner as possible. A scientific
experiment can thus be repeated by any re¬
search team equipped with the appropriate
scientific instruments. Experiment is even
considered to be the supreme arbiter of sci¬
ence. The "argument from authority" does not
exist in science (save as a marginal and tran¬
sient sociological phenomenon). A theory,
27

I ^ v> \ y V A
Science and Tradition "differ in their
nature, methods and final purposes. But
they ... converge toward the same centre:
humanity and human progress." Above,
diagram from 16th-century French treatise
on navigation shows location of the points
of the compass in relation to the parts of
the human body.
"The only instrument belonging to the hu¬
man body that is tolerated by science is
the researcher's brain and its Inherent
logical structures that are common to all
researchers. Experimental measuring de¬
vices are assumed to possess an intrinsic
objectivity and a quasi-absolute inde¬
pendence of the researcher's own will. " In
this drawing by the artist Yôsai (1788-
1873), the Japanese astronomer Kasuga
Ason Manumaro is depicted from the
back, with a map of the heavens to evoke
his scientific calling.
even if it is of the greatest aesthetic beauty or
formulated by the greatest physicist of the
age, is unhesitatingly rejected if it is clearly in
conflict with experimental data.
Traditional knowledge therefore claims a
"right to ineffectiveness" on the level of spa¬
tio-temporal materiality and on the level of the
directly observable material world. Con¬
versely, science is interested essentially in
maximum effectiveness on the level of direct
materiality. It is precisely because of this
effectiveness that the material life of humanity
has been profoundly transformed by the tech¬
nological applications of the discoveries of
fundamental science.
Is there, then, any relationship between
science and Tradition?
Einstein's famous dictum: "The most in¬
comprehensible thing in the world is that the
world is comprehensible" is often quoted. Pa¬
raphrasing these words, it could be said that
the only "irrational" aspect of the world is its
rationality.
It is a constant source of wonder to scien¬
tists in their daily practice to see the harmony
between their abstract, logical and mathema¬
tical constructions and experimental data.
The conformity between human thought and
the intelligence concealed in natural laws acts
as a third factor in the man-nature relation¬
ship, making a ternary entity that exists as a
dynamic and inseparable unit. That confor¬
mity, an independent factor in the man-nature
relationship, explains Einstein's insistence on
the role of intuition as a form of immediate
knowledge in the genesis of great scientific
discoveries. Forgetfulness or ignorance of
this third factor seems to be the source of
contemporary reductionist schools of thought
that proclaim a vulgar, false and static duality.
Traditional experience is, indeed, incom¬
municable, but it is important to realize that
some traditional thinkers feel a need to analy¬
se and explain to others in an intelligible man¬
ner what they experienced at the time of the
experiment. Describing, analysing, ex¬
plaining: these constitute a procedure on
which science is also built.
Is not faith in the structural rationality of the
world the subtle link which binds traditional
thought to scientific thought?
The idea of the unity of opposites and the
role of discontinuity in the genesis of move¬
ment permeates traditional thought. For many
traditional approaches (in both East and
West), the outward manifestation is bound up
with a dynamic process of combat and co¬
operation, annihilation and creation, eternal
movement and eternal transformation, one
might even say "eternal genesis". Is this vi¬
sion of the world not surprisingly close to our
own?
Science and Tradition differ in their nature,
methods and final purposes. But they can be
viewed as two poles of a single contradiction, or
as two spokes of a single wheel, which although
different yet converge toward the same centre:
humanity and human progress.
BASARAB NICOLESCU is a French theoretical
physicist at the National Centre for Scientific
Research (CNRS), Paris. A specialist in the
theory of elementary particles, he is also in¬
terested in the relationship between art, science
and tradition and has published many articles on
this subject in French andAmericanjournals. He
is also the author of several published works,
including Nous, la particule et le monde (1985).
28
