Nuclear weapons
and world sanity
by Linus Pauling
fpi
DURING the Second World War there
were some massive bombing raids on
German cities. In one such raid, on
one night, one thousand aeroplanes each
carrying four tremendous one-ton blockbus¬
ters destroyed much of the city of Hamburg
and killed an estimated 75,000 people. If there
were to be such a raid on, say, Paris today,
and another such 1 ,000-plane raid tomorrow,
and then another the next day and so on day
after day for fourteen years, the explosives
delivered would have the power of one 20-
megaton bomb. (One megaton equals a mil¬
lion tons.)
Now, one 20-megaton bomb test in the
atmosphere or at the surface of the earth
liberates radioactive materials into the atmos¬
phere which will, according to the best esti¬
mates that we can make, cause gross dam¬
age or death to 550,000 unborn children. This
is the probable sacrifice of the testing of a
single H-bomb by any one nation. Everyone
must understand this.
The standard nuclear bomb today is the
20-megaton bomb. The Soviet Union has de¬
tonated a 60-megaton bomb, which was
apparently only the first two stages of a 1 00-
megaton bomb. A 100-megaton bomb in¬
volves only about three and a half tons of
explosive material and probably can be car¬
ried in a single large rocket from one continent
to another. But 100-megaton bombs don't
make.very much sense because a 20-mega¬
ton bomb can destroy any city on earth.
My estimate is that the stockpiles of the
world comprise about 16,000 of these 20-
megaton bombs or the equivalent of them.
Now, there aren't 16,000 large cities in the
world and one might well ask why this irra-
Of what was once a man, only a sha¬
dow on the wall Is left. For a single In¬
stant, on 6 August 1945 at Hiroshima,
the man's body absorbed the radiation
and heat from the atomic blast and
traced the outline on the building be¬
hind. The man vanished. The ladder re¬
mained.
tionally great amount of explosive material
has been produced.
If 10 per cent of the stockpiles were to be
used in a nuclear war with the bombs ex¬
ploded on the average within 150 kilometres
of the targets (you don't have to hit the target
in order to get the result) then 60 days after the
day on which the war was fought and we
assume that it would cover Europe as a
whole, all the Soviet Union and the United
States of the 800 million people living in
these regions, 720 million would be dead, 60
million severely injured, and there would be 20
million survivors with only minor injuries.
But these survivors would have to cope with
the problems of complete destruction of all
cities, metropolitan districts, and means of
communication and transportation, complete
disruption of society, death of all livestock,
and gross radioactive contamination of all
growing foods. This would be the end of this
part of the world, and how great the damage
would be to the rest of the world no one has
been able to estimate in a reliable way.
The partial test ban treaty signed at Mos¬
cow in 1 963 was a great step forward. I regret
very much that this treaty was not made three
years earlier.
I should like to see some action taken in the
meantime that would decrease the chance of
outbreak of a devastating nuclear war,
perhaps through some psychological or tech¬
nological accident or through some combina¬
tion of circumstances such that even the
wisest of national leaders could not prevent
catastrophe.
November 1964
LINUS PAULING, US chemist, achieved re¬
nown through his contributions to the under¬
standing of molecular structures, particularly
with regard to chemical bonding. In the late
1940s he discovered, with other scientists, a
"molecular defect" associated with haemoglo¬
bin formation. His most influential work is The
Nature of the Chemical Bond, and the Struc¬
ture of Molecules and Crystals (1939). He
was awarded the Nobel Prize for Chemistry
in 1954 and the Nobel Peace Prize in 1962.
r**r:
11
