'Gauderios'
by Concolorcorvo
THESE are youths born in Montevideo and the neigh¬
bouring districts. With ragged underclothes and
worse outer garments, they try to cover themselves
with one or two ponchos, from which, along with the sad¬
dlecloth of their horses, they make a bed, with the saddle
serving as a pillow. To the accompaniment of a guitar, which
they learn to play very badly, they sing, out of tune, many
ballads which they ruin, and many which they get out of their
own heads, usually treating of love. They wander over the
countryside at their will, and to the great pleasure of the
semi-civilized settlers, they eat at the latter's expense and
spend entire weeks stretched out on a hide, singing and
playing. If they lose a horse or it is stolen from them, another
is given to them, or they take one from the open country,
lassoing it with a very long rope which they call a rosario.
They also carry another, with two balls at its ends, the size of
those with which pool is played, often made of stone covered
with leather, so that the horse becomes entangled in them
just as it does in another which they call ramales, having
three balls, with which the horses are frequently injured and
of no further use; but they consider their usefulness very
lightly, as do the owners.
Frequently four or five, and sometimes more, of these
men get together under pretext of going to the country to
amuse themselves, taking no provisions for their sustenance
other than a lasso , bolas , and a knife . One day they will agree
to eat the rump of a cow or a calf; they lasso it, throw it down,
and with its four feet securely tied, they pull from it, almost
alive, the entire rear quarter with its hide, and making a few
punctures in the side of the meat, they roast it badly and
devour it half raw without any condiment except a little salt,
if by chance they are carrying some. Other times they kill a
cow or a calf merely to eat the matambre, the meat between
the ribs and the skin. Sometimes they kill only to eat the
tongue which they roast in embers. Another time they may
take a fancy to the caracuces, the bones containing the
marrow, which they turn over and over with a small stick,
and they feast upon that delightful substance; but the
greatest monstrosity is to see them kill a cow, extract the
tripe and all the fat which they pile together in the belly, and
with merely a live coal or a piece of dry cow dung they set fire
to that fat; as soon as it begins to burn and the fire spreads to
the fat meat and bones, it produces an extraordinary illumi¬
nation, and then they close up the belly again, allowing the
animal to breath fire through its mouth and nostrils, leaving
it all night or a considerable part of the day so that it will be
well roasted. In the morning or in the afternoon, the gauder¬
ios gather around it, and with his knife each cuts off the piece
which suits him and eats it unaccompanied by bread or any
other seasoning; when their appetites are satisfied, they
abandon the rest, with the exception of a few who take a
piece back to their rustic paramours.
And now let the London newsvendor try to amaze us by
recounting the size of the pieces of beef which are put on the
tables of state in that capital. There the largest is 200 pounds,
on which 200 milords dine, while here 500 pounds are served
up for seven or eight gauderios who occasionally invite the
owner of the cow or heifer, and consider themselves well
served. So much for the gauderios, for I see that my travelers
desire to leave for Buenos Aires.
Extract from El Lazarillo: A Guide for Inexperienced Travellers
between Buenos Aires and Lima, 1773 (Lazarillo de Ciegos Cami¬
nantes), by "Concolorcorvo" (Alonso Carrió de la Vandera).
Translated by Walter D. Kline. Bloomington (Ind.), Indiana Uni¬
versity Press, 1965. 315 pp. Also published in the Collection in
French under the title Itinéraire de Buenos Aires à Lima, 1962.
26
