The challenge
of the new ocean regime
IN considering the consequences of
the signature, by over 150 nations, of
the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, the words of the
Portuguese poet who said that "today is
the first day of the rest of your life" come
to my mind. Indeed, this historic event
marks the beginning of a new relationship
between mankind and the oceans. It rep¬
resents to some extent the culmination of
a long process of universal negotiation
among States. It is also the beginning of a
phase of international co-operation
aimed at the achievement of the objec¬
tives of the Convention, as well as the
dreams and aspirations behind its
provisions.
The new ocean regime is a develop¬
ment with far-reaching consequences for
the conduct of ocean affairs at the nation¬
al and international levels. It is also a
symbolic event in that it reflects the im¬
portant changes that have been shaping
the world community since the Second
World War (characterized mainly by the
process of decolonization and national
self-determination) as well as by the drive
for a more just and equitable economic
order built on a foundation of peaceful
and friendly relations between countries
regardless of their political and economic
systems.
Among the many features of the new
ocean charter that constitute innovations
with respect to the 1958 Convention on
the Law of the Sea, mention should be
made of the regime for marine scientific
research and the transfer of marine tech¬
nology. This innovation is derived from
the growing perception by States of the
value of science and technology, first to
economic and social development and
secondly as sources of power and an ele¬
ment of the independence of States in the
modern world. Science is a fundamental
component of a technological civiliza¬
tion. Scientific activities generate the in¬
formation required for many kinds of
economic activity. Without scientific
data, modern States, government admi¬
nistrations and industrial management
could not perform their functions effec¬
tively or achieve their goals.
The Convention includes a compre¬
hensive regime for the conduct of inter¬
national marine scientific research and
the transfer of knowledge and tech¬
nology. Some principles and rules estab¬
lish the duty of States to co-operate
directly with each other or through the
appropriate international, regional or
sub-regional organizations.
The rights accorded to coastal States
and the corresponding duties of States
engaged in research for granting or re¬
fusing their consent to research to be
conducted in their Exclusive Economic
Zones create favourable conditions for
the participation of local scientists in re¬
search activities, training, access to re¬
quired knowledge, and so on. It should
be noted in this context that, besides
references in the Convention to "regional
centres", to be established or reinforced
for the promotion of marine scientific
research and technology and related
training and transfer of knowledge, men¬
tion is also made of national centres to be
created at the local level for the same
purpose. The functions assigned to this
type of institution and the need for
further elaboration of the concept of re¬
gional centres reflect the concern for
participation by, and the aspiration for
real partnership among, developing
countries in scientific and technological
international marine programmes and
activities in the future.
Pending the ratification and entry into
force of the Convention, and to facilitate
the progressive implementation of the
new regime by States, a major require¬
ment is the improvement or the establish¬
ment of the necessary institutional
arrangements. During the Conference on
the Law of the Sea, a detailed discussion
on institutional aspects was deliberately
left aside and was only dealt with in
general terms in connexion with specific
articles. Neither was there any mention
by name of the appropriate inter¬
governmental organizations, except in a
few cases, so as to avoid extra difficulties
resulting from the definition of compe¬
tences in various aspects of oceanic
affairs within the United Nations system.
Steps have already been taken, or are
under way, by a number of organizations
to adapt themselves to the new demands
and to prepare themselves to be able to
fulfil the functions assigned to "compe¬
tent international organizations" in the
Convention.
Following this trend, Unesco, through
The headquarters of IOCARIBE, the Carib¬
bean Region branch of the inter¬
governmental Océanographie Commis¬
sion, in Cartagena, Colombia. It Is located
in the house of the Marquis of Valdehoyos,
a wealthy merchant of the 18th century.
Recently restored, it is one of the many
fine examples of colonial architecture In
the old town of Cartagena.
28

by Mario Ruivo
the Intergovernmental Océanographie
Commission (IOC), initiated a study of
the implications of the Convention in
which its articles were taken as indicators
of problems requiring solution through
international co-operation in the fields of
ocean science and services and related
training and education. The aim is to
strengthen the Commission's pro¬
grammes and undertake the structural
adjustments needed, including, eventual¬
ly, improvements in the statutes of the
Commission.
As an immediate step the IOC has
established a new category of regional
subsidiary bodies the regional Sub-
commissions the first of which has just
been created for the Caribbean and adja¬
cent regions (IOCARIBE) as a successor
to an association of the same name. It is
expected that such sub-commissions will
progressively replace the existing IOC
Regional Programme Groups responsi¬
ble for the promotion and co-ordination
of marine scientific research and related
activities, including the building up of
regional centres and the establishment of
co-operative networks.
Institutional adjustments can also be
observed at the national level. In fact,
traditional administrations, established
usually on a strictly sectoral basis (for
example, fisheries, the merchant navy)
are confronted with difficulties in coping
with the new problems resulting from the
multiple use of the oceans and their in¬
teractions. To deal with these difficulties,
two trends can be identified: one is to¬
wards the establishment of a sectoral
administration dealing with ocean affairs
as a whole (the establishment of Minis¬
tries of the Sea, in certain countries, falls
into this category); the other is based on
the full use of the existing sectoral admi¬
nistrations operating under a high-level
national body having the power to formu¬
late national policy in ocean affairs and to
co-ordinate its implementation (this is
the case, for example, of the Department
for Ocean Development established in
India).
In the more specialized field of marine
scientific research a general trend, which
has been encouraged by the IOC, is the
establishment or the strengthening of
marine science co-ordinating bodies,
namely National Océanographie Com¬
missions, formed by representatives of
departments of State, universities, and
other institutions deeply involved in
Built from a design and study carried out
under Unesco supervision, the research
vessel Mukhtabar Al-Bihar was first
commissioned in Doha, Qatar, on 9 No¬
vember 1982 (above). The same design
and study were used to build a sister ship
for Algeria, Benyahia (top) which recently
became active in the Mediterranean.
marine scientific research and applica¬
tions. Such bodies are intended to mobil¬
ize the available relevant national re¬
sources and to act as focal points for
international co-operation, including
liaison with the IOC.
The pre-eminence given in Unesco's
second Medium-Term Plan (1984 to
1989) to the activities of the Organization
and, in particular, of the IOC and Un¬
esco's Division of Marine Sciences with
respect to the oceans and their resources,
and the efforts to strengthen the Commis¬
sion as a major instrument for the realiza¬
tion of the programme especially in
connexion with the Comprehensive Plan
for a Major Assistance Programme to
Enhance the Marine Science Capabilities
of Developing Countries should be re¬
garded in the context of the broad institu¬
tional process under way.
It is therefore essential that non-Gov¬
ernmental scientific institutions con¬
cerned, such as the Scientific Committee
on Oceanic Research (SCOR), also
undertake a parallel effort of adjustment
to the new conditions in order to become,
as far as possible, universal and to reflect
the views and aspirations of the world
scientific community. For historical
reasons, many such organizations still
consist predominantly of representatives
or scientists of developed countries. In
fact, scientists too must learn to adapt to
the new rules of the ocean game. The new
ocean regime offers the potential for ex¬
pansion of scientific research in the ocean
through the active participation of scien¬
tists and institutions of all countries, both
developing and developed, in a spirit of
equal partnership.
MARIO RUIVO is Secretary of the Unesco-
based Intergovernmental Océanographie Com¬
mission. A marine scientist specializing in the
management of living resources, he was former¬
ly director of FAO's Division of Fisheries and
headed the Portuguese Delegation to the United
Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. This
article is based on a longer study first published
in the Unesco science magazine Impact of Sci¬
ence on Society.
29
