The hand of man
by Stephen Boyden and Malcolm Hadley
THE human species evolved late, very
late, in the history of our planet; but
during man's short time on Earth,
his hand has wrought pervasive change in
air, water and soils, in other living
creatures, in the whole tightly connected
system of interacting parts of which the
environment consists and this in but the
last instant of geological time.
The history of man's changing rela¬
tionship with his habitat in terms of both
the impact of human society on the natural
environment and the conditions of life of
human beings can, at the risk of over¬
simplification, be divided into four distinct
but overlapping ecological phases: the
Primeval Phase, the Early Farming Phase,
the Early Urban Phase and, finally, the
Modern Industrial Phase.
During the Primeval Phase sometimes
also called the pre-domestic or hunter-
gatherer phase human populations prob¬
ably differed little from those of other
omnivorous mammals in the extent and na¬
ture of their interaction with the ecosystems
of which they were a part. As hunter-
gatherers they had their natural place in the
food cycle, deriving their energy, in chemi¬
cal form, from natural foodstuffs of animal
and plant origin. They in turn provided food
for other predators and their remains were
returned to the soil through the processes of
decomposition. The amount of energy used
by an early hominid group in its natural
habitat would have been more or less
equivalent to the energy value of the food¬
stuffs consumed by members of the group.
In short, our ancestors fitted into their en¬
vironment in much the same way as any
other animal species.
Then, probably about half a million years
ago, in the volcanic lands of the East Afri¬
can rift valleys, man began to use fire,
deliberately and regularly, both for protec¬
tion and as a means of obtaining and cook¬
ing food. Fire was used to drive game out of
the undergrowth and to attract animals to
the fresh herbaceous growth that sprang up
on ground cleared by fire.
This was a highly significant development
with considerable ecological impact. Forest
and grass fires became much more frequent
events, bringing about important changes in
the plant cover of certain areas of the
Earth's surface. Suddenly, human societies
were using considerably more energy than
previously, since the flow of "somatic"
energy (the energy that flows through the
bodies of human beings for metabolism,
physical work and growth) was now sup¬
plemented by "extra-somatic" energy
(energy such as that derived from fuel,
which does not flow through living orga¬
nisms).
The use of fire thus brought about a
qualitative change in the relationship be¬
tween the human species and its environ¬
ment. The ecological consequences were
restricted to the destructive effects of fire
itself, and the chemical products of the
combustion of wood (mainly carbon diox
ide) were easily absorbed into the system as
a whole with negligible repercussions.
Nevertheless, the use of fire is an early and
clear example of man's potential as a modi¬
fier of the environment. Man had already
become a significant ecological force, and
human groups no longer fitted into their
local ecosystems in quite the same way as
other animals.
In addition to fire, the most significant
ecological effect of man on the environment
during the primeval phase was probably the
spread of the human species itself. Man
appears to have roamed the open African
savannah until about one million years ago,
when he fanned out into a great variety of
other habitatsarid steppes, high altitude
grasslands (in Ethiopia) and forest grass¬
lands. Following these initial excursions,
man ventured further out into a wide range
of different climatic and ecological settings
in all five continents of the world. ^
Rock painting dating from about 2000 BC,
from the Rusape area of Zimbabwe. The
way of life represented is that of Late
Stone Age hunters. Bushmen were still
making paintings like this in the 19th cen¬
tury, but some of the surviving examples
mayhave been the workofsouthern Bantu
peoples.
35

Engraving by the Swiss artist Aloys Fell-
mann (1855-1892) depicts men at work in a
typical 19th-century factory at a time when
the industrial revolution was gathering
momentum in Europe.
The Early Farming Phase began , in some
regions of the world, about 12,000 years
ago. With the domestication of animals and
plants, for the first time in the story of the
Earth, a living creature came, quite con¬
sciously and deliberately, to manipulate the
biological processes of nature for his own
purposes.
As domestication spread and farming
techniques advanced, the total impact of
human society on the environment in- .
creased significantly. The face of the Earth
was beginning to be changed by the hand of
man, to the extent that, in the northern
hemisphere, vast areas of forest land dis¬
appeared, to be replaced in some instances
by farming land and in others by less lux¬
uriant and more open vegetation. In some
cases, man's agricultural activities triggered
massive erosion. In eastern Fiji, for exam¬
ple, where man arrived some 3,000 years
ago, at least 50 centimetres of soil was lost in
a period of 150 years, from between 1,900
and 1,750 years ago.
Among other important implications of
farming practices was the introduction of
monoculture food crops, on which many
populations came to be almost entirely de¬
pendent for sustenance. This development
clearly had some practical advantages, but
it also involved serious risk, since, if the
monoculture crop failed for any reason,
then widespread starvation was virtually
inevitable.
One further consequence of mankind's
deliberate manipulation of biotic processes
is worthy of mention. Selective breeding of
animals and cultivation of plants for desir¬
able qualities relating to food production
brought into existence a range of forms of
life which would otherwise never have seen
the light of day.
Fire, of course, remained in use during
this second ecological phase and it came to
play an important role in the manufacture
of metal implements. With the invention of
such devices as watermills, windmills and
sailing ships, extra-somatic energy came to
be used for performing work of various
kinds. Compared with what was to happen
later, however, the ecological impact of
these machines was relatively slight, being
restricted mainly to the role that ships
played in the migratory movements of the
human species, the geographical spread of
technologies and the re-distribution of
some animal and plant species.
Human groups became much less no¬
madic than in the primeval phase, although
the length of time they remained in one
. place depended to some extent on the kind
of farming they practised. The new lifestyle
had significant consequences for the inter¬
relationships between human populations
and microbial and other parasites and
pathogens. In some areas, for example,
malaria and schistosomiasis became impor¬
tant causes of ill-health and death, partly
counteracting the reduced mortality result¬
ing from the protection which the new living
conditions gave against some of the hazards
of life experienced in the primeval phase.
Despite all the changes that agriculture
produced, the early farming phase shared
two important ecological characteristics
with the primeval phase which are not fea¬
tures of modern societies. First, the rate of
use of extra-somatic energy (mainly fire)
paralleled the rate of increase in the human
population. Second, man's activities did not
interfere significantly with the natural
biogeochemical cycles of the biosphere,
such as the carbon, nitrogen and phosphor¬
us cycles.
The Early Urban Phase started about
5,000 years ago, with the establishment of
the first cities in Mesopotamia and, not long
after, in China and India. These early cities
ushered in the third ecological phase of
human existence, which was marked by a
series of fundamental changes affecting the
organization of human society and the life
experience of its members. Some, but not
all, of these changes have persisted and
remain features of many urban settlements
in the modern world.
The most obvious changes were simply
the huge increase in the number of people
gathered together in one place and the fact
that the majority of their inhabitants were
not directly involved in such subsistence
activities as farming, fishing and hunting.
The urban populations were supported by
food surpluses produced by nearby farmers
who lived and worked beyond the city walls.
Because many urban populations came to
rely for their sustenance on a single staple
food, such as rice, maize, a cereal grain or
potatoes, there was a narrowing of the
range of foods consumed by individuals.
Specific deficiency diseases, including rick¬
ets, scurvy, beri-beri and pellagra, were
common in different parts of the world.
There was a constant threat and repeated
occurrence of famine, since urban popula¬
tions did not have a wide range of alterna¬
tive sources of food to turn to when one
supply failed.
Increased population density had a
marked effect on the interrelations between
human populations and potential parasitic
or pathogenic organisms. Pestilence be¬
came one of the major facts of life. Typhus,
cholera, typhoid, the plague, smallpox,
malaria, infant diarrhoea and many other
infectious diseases were a constant cause of
fear and alarm and were among the main
causes of death.
One of the most significant biosocial de¬
velopments which accompanied early urba¬
nization was the advent of job specializa¬
tion. Some degree of specialization existed
in the early farming and even in the hunter-
gatherer societies, but, apart from the sex-
based division of labour, most people were
jacks-of-all-trades. It was during the early
urban phase that specialization really came
into its own.
Part of the ecological importance of this
development lies in the fact that, for the
first time in human history, different groups
within a single society experienced quite
different conditions of life. Job specializa¬
tion led in turn to a reinforcement of the
tendency of human societies to establish
hierarchies. Instead of being relatively
spontaneous, transient and dependent
upon the nature of the task in hand, the
hierarchical structure of society became
much more rigid, more extreme and more
permanent. It frequently came to be deter¬
mined by heredity rather than by common
consent based on ability and personality.
Urbanization also introduced entirely
new concepts of ownership. In primeval
times, an individual "owned" only those
possessions he had made himself and no
more than could be easily carried when he
moved from one camp site to another. In
the early farming phase, animals, crops and
stored grain became the objects of own¬
ership, but, at least in the early stages, this
was usually communal ownership. In early
cities, individual and family ownership be-
36

Highway intersection at Villefranche, near
Lyon, France a typical construction of
our modern, energy-hungry, industrial
society.
came very important and has remained so
ever since in many parts of the world.
As in the preceding phases, the natural
biogeochemical cycles were still intact, and
the rate of energy use by society still par¬
alleled changes in population size. The bio¬
sphere as a whole and most of the eco¬
systems to which human populations be¬
longed were, despite some short-term fluc¬
tuations, still essentially in a state of dyna¬
mic equilibrium. The existence of cities did
not, of course, mean an end to self-suffi¬
cient subsistence agricultural societies,
which indeed continue to exist in some
areas of the world today.
Until very late in this period, few cities
contained many more than 100,000 inhabi¬
tants. One notable exception was Rome,
which, around the time of Jesus Christ, had
a population of about one million.
However, although cities have until very
recently contained only a very small percen¬
tage of the total human population, they
have had an ecological impact out of all
proportion to the number of people living in
them.
The Modern Industrial or Technological
Phase began with the so-called industrial
revolution. This industrial transition, as we
prefer to call it, started in Europe and in
North America some 150 to 200 years ago
and is still taking place in many parts of the
world. Though it began only seven or eight
generations ago, this phase has had an im¬
pact on the Earth and its workings quite
disproportionate to its duration. Its ecolo¬
gical characteristics are not shared with any
of the preceding phases of human existence.
This is most strikingly illustrated by the
present situation regarding population,
energy and the biogeochemical cycles.
While the early farming and early urban
stages provided protection from some of the
causes of death that characterized the
primeval stage, they were associated with
new causes of mortality in the form of mal¬
nutrition and pestilence. In the modern in¬
dustrial phase, greatly improved knowledge
of the nutritional requirements of our spe¬
cies, and new practices in public health and
medicine, including the pharmaceutical re¬
volution, have resulted in a remarkable
change in population dynamics. As a conse¬
quence, the human population is now
doubling at the rate of once every thirty-five
to forty years, in contrast to the overall rate
of once in 1 ,500 years during the early farm¬
ing and early urban phases.
Another outstanding feature of the mod¬
ern industrial phase, and one which deter¬
mines many of its other characteristics, has
been the massive introduction of machines
and manufacturing processes powered by
extra-somatic energy. The chief sources of
this energy have been the fossil fuels, begin¬
ning with coal, but with petroleum products
and natural gas now more important. In
some places, hydroelectric power makes a
significant contribution and nuclear power
is rapidly coming to the fore. In highly
industrialized countries like the United
States, the amount of power used on a per
capita basis is now thirty times greater than
it was prior to the industrial transition.
Thus, unlike the situation in the earlier
phases, the rate of increase in energy use in
the modern industrial phase no longer
matches the rate of increase in population,
and the ratio of extra-somatic energy used
by society is continually increasing. Global¬
ly, the amount of energy flowing through
human society is doubling about twice as
fast as the population.
In many areas the natural biogeochemic¬
al cycles are no longer intact. Interference
with the carbon and phosphorus cycles, for
example, may well give rise to very serious
ecological problems in the future. In the
case of the nitrogen cycle, vast amounts of
nitrogenous waste products of human com¬
munities, which in previous eras were re¬
turned to the soil, are now lost to rivers and
oceans, and industrial processes are dis¬
charging substantial quantities of nitrogen
oxide into the atmosphere.
A significant change of a qualitative na¬
ture has been the synthesis, often in very
large amounts, of thousands of new chemi¬
cal compounds, many of which have potent
effects in biotic systems. Vast quantities of
these synthetic chemical substances are
finding their way into the oceans, the soil
and the atmosphere and, of course, into
living organisms.
Complexity and unpredictability are two
other characteristics of the present phase of
human existence. Modern technology and
the economic web of interdependence of
countries are making problems of land use
and resource management much more com¬
plex than they were even a generation ago.
Machines are now available, for example,
for clearing large areas of forest in a very
short space of time. With modern com¬
munications technology, a decision taken
now in a financial centre in a temperate
zone can lead to the felling, within a week,
of a tropical forest tree 10,000 kilometres
away which has taken one hundred years to
grow.
If certain widely accepted predictions
about future increases in the level of energy
use turn out to be correct, by the year 2050
mankind will be using about as much energy
as is used by all other animals and plants put
together. One does not have to be a special¬
ist to see that this kind of growth in energy
use, and the concomitant increase in the use
of resources and the outpouring of wastes,
cannot go on indefinitely.
Opinions differ as to how much longer
the biosphere is likely to be able to tolerate
the ever-increasing load which human soci¬
ety is placing on it. There are some who
believe that mankind is incapable of bring¬
ing under control the accelerating processes
which threaten the collapse of the biosphere
and civilization and that the collapse of the
system will be total and will involve the
extinction of the human species. Others are
more optimistic, believing that man, with
his great ingenuity, will succeed in reaching
a new ecological equilibrium before it is too
late.
STEPHEN BOYDEN, ofAustralia, is a specialist
at the Centre for Resource and Environment
Studies, Australian National University, Canber¬
ra, and leader of the integrative research study
on the ecology of Hong Kong undertaken within
the framework of Unesco's Man and the Bio¬
sphere (MAB) Programme. The theme of this
article is treated in greater depth in a book to be
published later this year.
MALCOLM HADLEY is a staff member of Un¬
esco's Division of Ecological Sciences. A zoolo¬
gist, he is responsible for the co-ordination of
activities in the humid tropics within Unesco's
Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme.
37
