Ishi
the last of the Yana Indians
by Alfred Métraux
ONE night in the summer of
1911, a butcher in a small town
in California was woken up by
the furious barking of his dogs. He
went outside and found near his house
a "wild man" leaning against a wall,
quite clearly in the last stages of ex¬
haustion. The sheriff was called, and
after handcuffing the strange creature,
he took him off to the county gaol
where, as an extra precaution, he lock¬
ed him up in the cell reserved for
dangerous lunatics. Ishi, the Indian,
had made a lonely and painful entry
into civilization.
It is curious to note that Ishi did not
retain any unpleasant memories of his
first contact with white men. The pris¬
on had impressed him as a fine house
and he was grateful for the food he had
been given and the way in which he had
been treated. Ishi had, in fact, been
expecting to be killed. He could not
imagine any other fate at the hands of
the white men who had massacred his
own people. Towards 1872, when Ishi
must have been about ten years old, the
small tribe of the Yahis, belonging to
the Yana group of Indians, had been
virtually wiped off the ethnic map of
America. There was barely a handful of
them left.
It is difficult to imagine the existence
of a dozen Indians who have chosen to
live like hunted animals rather than
give themselves up to subjection. They
were forever on the move, taking the
utmost precautions to conceal every
trace of their passage and living only on
the animals they managed to kill or the
fruit and herbs they gathered. Gradual¬
ly, fatigue, age and illness took their
toll of the fugitives.
By 1906, Ishi was alone. For five
years he lived a solitary life in the
forests of his territory. When he was
discovered on the outskirts of one of
the white men's villages, he had made
up his mind to return to the community
of men, even though they might be his
worst enemies.
The American anthropologist Pro¬
fessor Alfred L. Kroeber had made a
life study of the Californian Indians, (1)
and his attention was attracted by the
newspaper reports of the capture of a
"wild man". He telegraphed the sher¬
iff, asking him to receive his colleague,
Professor Waterman. The latter went
to the prison equipped with vocabular¬
ies of the Indian languages of the Cali¬
fornian district, and read lists of these
words to Ishi. He listened patiently, but
his face did not betray the slightest sign
of comprehension.
Waterman was beginning to be dis¬
couraged and was about to give up his
attempt to communicate with the "sa¬
vage" when he pronounced the word
"siwini", at the same time touching the
wood of the bed on which the Indian
was sitting. Ishi's face suddenly lit up.
He repeated the word. The two men,
realizing the importance of the in¬
cident, went on striking the wood as
hard as they could, shouting "Siwini!
Siwini!" The mystery had, to some ex¬
tent, been solved. Ishi could now com¬
municate, after a fashion, with a white
man. He was no longer alone, and his
"hunted animal" look disappeared.
What was to be done with this "sa¬
vage" who could no longer be kept in
gaol? The sheriff consented to his pris¬
oner's transfer to the University of
California. ... Ishi had come out of the
prehistoric past. He seemed to be just
over fifty years old. Would he be able
to adapt himself to the industrial civi¬
lization of the twentieth century?
He showed no emotion or fear when
confronted with the novelties of San
Francisco. The strict Indian etiquette
which he invariably observed forbade
him to do so. He quickly adapted him¬
self to the white man's way of living.
Either out of natural kindness, or
gratitude, or even perhaps because he
realized that he was helping to perpetu¬
ate the memory of his people, Ishi
tried, as far as he could, to pass on his
knowledge to the ethnographers and
linguists who questioned him.
His greatest exploit was the expedi¬
tion on which he took his friends
through the valleys in which he had
lived with the last of the Yahis and
where he had eventually spent years of
wandering on his own.
It was a unique experience for the
ethnologists, and they learnt to see na¬
ture through the eyes of a Neolithic
hunter. As Ishi went further and furth¬
er into the woods which he knew so
well, old memories came surging into
his mind. ... But gradually, the plea¬
sure of finding himself back in his famil¬
iar surroundings gave way to a strange
impatience to be gone. It was with an
eager step that he climbed up into the
train which was to carry him away from
the lands of his ancestors.
Ishi had an iron constitution, but he
had not been immunized against the
white man's illnesses. In spite of the
best medical care, it proved impossible
to rid him of the devastating effects of
tuberculosis, which he contracted dur¬
ing the fourth year of his stay among
the white people. When his friends
judged that his end was near, respect¬
ing the Indian tradition according to
which a man should die in his own
house, they had him taken to the
Ethnological Museum, his "home".
Ishi died stoically, without a word of
complaint, like the members of his
race. His friends, the ethnologists, felt
that it was their duty to deal with his
body as his family would have done,
and accordingly burnt it, together with
his bow, his arrows and his shells. In¬
scribed on the urn which contains his
ashes are the words: "Ishi, the last
Yana Indian, 1916".
February 1963
(1) Ishi in Two Worlds was published by Theodora
Kroeber, widow of Alfred L. Kroeber (University of
California Press, 1961).
ALFRED METRAUX (1902-1963), French
anthropologist of Swiss origin, specialized in
the study of South American Indians. As a
member of the Bureau of American Ethnology
of the Smithsonian Institution, Washington,
D.C., he contributed extensively to the Hand¬
book of South American Indians (1946-1959).
From 1946 to 1962, he held posts with the
United Nations and Unesco. Notable among
his works translated into English are, Ethnolo¬
gy of Easter Island (1940), Myths of the Toba
and Pilagá Indians of the Gran Chaco (1946),
and Voodoo in Haiti (1959).
27
