Northern lights :
the writers of Scandinavia
by Jean-Clarence Lambert
Above, jacket Illustration orThe Bleaching
Yard (Bleikeplassen) a work by the Norwe¬
gian novelist Tarjei Vesaas (1897-1970) in
which the hero is driven by obscure inner
forces to commit irreparable acts. In addi¬
tion to this translation published in 1981,
two other novels by Vesaas have been
published in the Collection in English: The
Ice Palace (ls-slottet) and Spring Night.
One of the author's finest novels, Fuglane
(1957) appeared in the Collection in French
in 1975 under the title Les Oiseaux ("The
Birds").
Right, King Olaf triumphs over the Ogress
of the Seas, cover illustration of La Cloche
d'Islande. This French version of the novel
Islandsklukkan (1943) by Halldor Laxness
(Nobel Prize for Literature 1955) was pub¬
lished in the Unesco Collection in 1979. It
forms part of a trilogy set in the 17th cen¬
tury when Iceland was under Danish
domination and, in a style close to that of
the ancient sagas, evokes the coming of
independence.
SCANDINAVIAN literature is both
little-known and misunderstood. It
was written in minor languages
and for long it was read only by a handful
of specialists.
It was not until the second half of the
nineteenth century with the arrival of the
Ibsen/Strindberg generation that Scan¬
dinavian literature came to the forefront
of the European literary scene. Transla¬
tions of their works into the major lan¬
guages proliferated, although, as was
only to be expected, the selection of
works translated was haphazard. Many
inexplicable gaps remain which must at
all costs be filled.
A great deal more has still to be done.
Little Iceland has an impressive literature
dating back to the Middle- Ages. After a
period of decline starting in the fifteenth
century it has experienced a miraculous
renaissance in the twentieth century.
Norwegian literature, which dates back a
mere two centuries, nevertheless burst
upon the world with an immediate, strik¬
ing impact. Danish and Swedish litera¬
ture goes back a century further and
indeed includes a number of even older
works of considerable importance,
although these were mainly written in
Latin. The literature of Finland, which is
written in both Swedish and Finnish,
dates from the Romantic period. Here we
have five different literatures which
together form an imposing new mountain
range in the literary landscape. The more
we explore it the more we become aware
of its density, its complexity and its rich
originality.
20

The volumes published in translation
with the aid of Unesco seem to me, for
the most part, to be fitting staging-points
in this journey of exploration. The Un¬
esco Collection would, perhaps, benefit
from a more clearly mapped out route
which would make it possible to establish
the links between the various works that
have been translated. Among the works
translated into French one would like to
see Renauld-Krantz's invaluable Antho¬
logie de la Poésie Nordique Ancienne
("Anthology of Ancient Nordic Poetry",
Paris, 1 964) and my own Anthologie de
la Poésie Suédoise ("Anthology of
Swedish Poetry", Paris, 1971), which
head the list, followed up by translations
of anthologies of Danish and Finnish
poetry, since, at least until recent times,
poetry has been the most important com¬
ponent in Nordic literature.
Although Iceland has been relatively
well represented in the Collection, espe¬
cially as far as translations into English
are concerned, a major effort is still
needed with regard to Danish literature. It
is high time the world had access to Saxo
Grammaticus (c.1150-c.1206), the Dan
ish historian in whose Gesta Danorum
Shakespeare may well have found the
model for Hamlet, to Nikolai Frederik
Grundtvig (1783-1872), the architect of
the Scandinavian identity, to Johannes
V. Jensen (1873-1950; Nobel Prize for
literature, 1944), to the metaphysical
poet Paul La Cour (1902-1956), and to
Ole Sarvig (1921-1981), not to mention
living poets.
As far as Norwegian literature is con¬
cerned, we should be able to become
better acquainted with the majestic writ¬
ings of such men as Knut Hamsun (1 859-
1952; Nobel Prize 1920) and Hans Ernst
Kinck (1865-1926) through translations,
if not of their complete works, at least of
wide selections of them. The works of the
Swedish writer August Strindberg have
now been translated into French and
their translation into German will shortly
be completed. (Since Sweden is the
most powerful of the Scandinavian coun¬
tries, publishers' interest is more easily
attracted to Swedish writers).
Unesco should promote the translation
of writers who seem to have been left on
the sidelines, such as Carl Michael Bell
man, the great poet of European Rococo,
or Romantics such as Erik John Stagne-
lius (1783-1823) and Carl Jonas Love
Almquist (1793-1866), equals in genius
and in misfortune to the great German
writers. Coming closer to the present
day, an effort is needed to draw attention
to the universality of Gunnar Ekelöf
(1 907-1 968). With regard to Finland, new
translations are needed of the Kalevala
(See Unesco Courier, August 1985) and
of Johan Ludvig Runeberg. Finally, it is to
be hoped that there will be new editions
of certain works with which the Collection
was begun and which remain essential.
JEAN-CLARENCE LAMBERT is a French poet
and specialist in the literature of northern
Europe, on which he has written a number of
essays, as well as editing an anthology of Swed¬
ish poetry (Anthologie de la Poésie Suédoise des
Origines à Nos Jours, co-published with Unesco,
1971). With Roger Caillois, a former director of
the Unesco Programme for the Translation of
Literary Works, he produced another anthology
ofpoetry Trésor de la Poésie Universelle (1958).
He is also the author of La Poésie Pour Quoi
Faire? (1978) and a collection ofpoems Le Noir
et l'Azur (1980).

