In harmony with nature by Corneille Jest
THE traveller coming from the south who
ascends the Wong Chu valley in Bhutan is
captivated by a grandiose, rocky land¬
scape with many tumbling waterfalls. He cannot
fail to see, carved in huge letters on a bare
rockface, this maxim of the late King Jigme Dorji
Wangchuck: "Work with Nature". This exhorta¬
tion by the father of the present sovereign, King
Jigme Slngye Wangchuck, also holds good for
the engineers and planners of today, and reflects
the major concern of a man who, like his sub¬
jects, himself lived in harmony with nature, which
is here beautiful, generous and treated with re¬
spect.
The landscape, shaped by man, reveals a
sequence of surfaces which are often depicted in
Bhutanese religious painting and hold deep sig¬
nificance. At the lowest level flows the river, with
its corbelled bridges, and its water mills; on its
cultivated banks are fields dotted with farm¬
houses and their outbuildings; higher up stands
the temple or monastery, to which lead tracks
punctuated by chörten (religious constructions at
which offerings are made); higher still, the dzong
or fortress dominates these scattered set¬
tlements; finally, the mountain ridge with its
dense and sombre covering of larch and pine
stands out against the sky.
The dwelling house is unquestionably the
most remarkable element in this whole picture: a
massive construction in rammed earth on two or
three levels, it is so proportioned and decorated
that it fits harmoniously into the landscape; the
façade is adorned with wooden panels, often
carved and painted; the roof widely overhangs
the walls on each side, as if simply set down on
top of the building.
The feeling of harmony inspired by the sight of
these structures deepens as one comes to
understand their symbolism, in which a part is
played by the choice of site (which must not
offend the divinity which owns the ground) and by
the final consecration ceremony, which takes
place when the roof is put in place. The house in
its entirety is conceived as a microcosm of a
world which also has three storeys.
In terms of size, the dzong is the most impor¬
tant building in Bhutan. It combines defensive,
administrative and religious functions, and Is
occupied by monks and regional administration
officials. Its plan may vary depending on the
nature of the site, but the same features are
always found: high surrounding walls gradually
tapering Inwards, pierced by several loopholes;
large paved courtyards; a central tower; temples
and meeting halls for the monks.
Increasingly aware of the value of its
architectural heritage, the royal government of
Bhutan has laid down standards for new build-'
ings which attach particular importance to the
façades, which must be in the traditional style.
Restoration work is carried out along the same
lines, using local materials. New buildings such
as the hospital devoted to traditional medicine,
and the national library, are built in the purest
Bhutanesf style.
Closed to foreigners until a short time ago,
Bhutan is classed among the least developed
countries according to the criteria of a world in
which scientific and industrial development is
considered the most effective, if not the only,
motive force; but this is a world to which Bhutan
does not belong.
Bhutan's own values provide grounds for re¬
flection and much can be learned from them. The
wealth of Its traditions cannot be measured, still
less "exploited"; it is to be hoped that material
progress, desirable though it be, will leave these
traditions intact.
CORNEILLE JEST, of France, is Director of a
research programme on the Himalayas at the
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Paris. He has recently been involved in an United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) mis¬
sion responsible for preparing a master plan for
the development of tourism in Bhutan.
37
