Latin America, a world apart
by Jorge Enrique Adoum
SINCE the conquistadors did not
come with their wives but with
slaves, triple miscegenation must
have begun on the day the first Spa¬
niards landed in America. The Portu¬
guese arrived soon afterwards. Both
empires imposed their language and
their religion, superimposing them on
those of the indigenous population. Col¬
umbus discovered the marvels he had
wanted to discover: the estuary of one of
the rivers of paradise, Amazons, men
with dogs' heads. Bernai Diaz del Castil¬
lo, the Spanish chronicler who took part
in the conquest of Mexico with Cortes,
describes what he has seen as "like the
tales of enchantment in the book Amadis
of Gaul". (More than four centuries later,
Alejo Carpentier, "having fallen under
the spell of the land of Haiti" and "seen
the magic signs on the red roads of the
Central Plateau", found himself "im¬
pelled to bring the marvels of reality clos¬
er to the wearying task of striving to con
jure up the marvellous".) The Discoverer
and the chroniclers of the Indies were
also poets: they had to invent words for
things they had never seen, and to find
ways of spelling such words as cacique,
hamaca, guayaba and pina. And whether
with Caliban (a deformation of caribe) or
with the "noble savage" hopefully sought
on these shores, America came to be
Below, detail of cover design for the
French version of the "Songs of Nezahual-
coyotl"great lord and libertine, despot
and benefactor of the people of Anahuac
(ancient Mexico), enlightened legislator
and lyric poet. In a preface, the French
writer J.M.G. Le Clézio (who has translated
Into French "The Chronicle of Michoacán"
and such Maya texts as "The Prophecies
of Chilam Balam") notes how "...this poet¬
ry, with all the symbolic splendour of the
Náhuatl language, with this musical and
alliterative rhythm which made it the most
creative and melodious language of Indian
America, resounds in us with the disquiet¬
ing profundity of a prophecy."
part of the world map of the Europeans.
And nature began to take the leading role
in a literature which began with the letters
and the journal of the Discoverer.
In the preface to his Nueva crónica y
buen gobierno, Guarnan Poma de Ayala
announces that his material is taken from
some "unwritten stories", from "the
quipos ' and memories and narratives...
of the old eye-witnesses". A contempor¬
ary of his, the first eye-witness who had
learned how to write, was the Inca Garci-
laso de la Vega, the son of a Spanish
captain and an Indian princess: "I was
born eight years after the Spaniards set¬
tled in my country. I grew up there until
the age of twenty". In his Comentarios
Reales de Los Incas (1), which date from
the same period as the chronicle of Poma
de Ayala (c. 1 600), we find, as it were, the
first evidence of a hybrid form of writing,
' A system of coloured threads used by the Incas
tor writing and calculating.
/* -*-'*--
""* -.
- »^
k ^^i
~i* au.
-r*""" ifc^r- <- -" '<*-
_ ~*-~*%#
r^.
-r*.
!>-»* *t t
©
-^ *
23

Detail from the cover of the French transla¬
tion of Iracema, the novel or prose-poem
by the Brazilian writer José de Alencar
(1829-1877). This work published in 1865
describes the love between the Christian
Portuguese soldier Martim and the Indian
maiden Iracema ("lips of honey" in Guara¬
ni), keeper of the temple, who Is punished
by fate for violating the taboos other tribe.
This work by Alencar was Important less
for its subject (love between Indian and
white was a common theme in the 19th-
century Latin-American novel) than as
"the explosion of a new language of great
poetic wealth, subversive andsensual: the
Portuguese of Brazil".
since the language is adapted to the
details of the world it is describing, such
as the mythological lacustrine origin of
the Incas, and the feeling of human dread
at hearing for the first time the sound of
neighing beneath the cathedral-vault of
the forest. Thus the Comentarios are the>
first authentic account by a criolloa
non-indigenous person born in the New
World of his life and the lives of his
ancestors. (The other Inca, the author of
El Lazarillo de Ciegos Caminantes (2), is
The "Royal Commentaries on the Origin of
the Incas", by Garcilaso de la Vega (El
Inca) are one of the first major works writ¬
ten in Spanish bya mestizoa Latin Amer¬
ican of mixed race. In them the author
describes all aspects of Inca society, In¬
cluding laws, farming methods, sacred
rites, occupations, building techniques,
flora, fauna, clothing and nutrition, traces
the history of the ancient peoples of Peru
and describes the early days of the Con¬
quest. Below, an illustration produced by
another famous mestizo of the same
period, Guarnan Poma de Ayala, for his
work Nueva Crónica y Buen Gobierno. A
depiction of the "Coia Raiml" celebration,
"the solemn feast of queen Coia" which
tookplace in September, it was chosen as
the cover illustration for a French edition
of the "Commentaries".
SETIEMBRE
spurious since it is known that Don Calix¬
to Bustamente Inca, alias Concolorcor-
vo, was actually a Spanish postal inspec¬
tor, Alonso Carrió de la Vandera. (See
extract page 26).
In his famous Carta de Jamaica, dated
the 6th of September 1815 (3), Simón
Bolívar defined us as "a small human
race" in "a world apart", "neither Spanish
nor Indian". Nor negro. And just as Amer¬
ica, thanks to Columbus, gave the world
the total concept of the earth, so, thanks
to Bolivar, who at the head of his ragged
army liberated us from our colonial servi¬
tude, America also gave the world its first
concept of full independence.
But after the decisive battle of
Ayacucho in 1824 freedom had to be
improvised, groped towards. And Amer¬
ica was passing from viceroys to recalcit¬
rant chiefs, to military or theocratic dicta¬
tors, and they in their turn were followed
Atipa, published in 1885, is the first novel
written in the creóle of French Guyana. Its
author, Alfred Parépou (pseudonym of M.
Méteyrand) was the grandson of an Indian
chief, Cépérou. This work, recently repub¬
lished in the Collection with a condensed
translation in French, is a satire on
Guyanese life in the secondhalfof the 19th
by civilian presidents. This search for a
mode of being became acute when it
became a quest for a mode of express¬
ion. After centuries of poetry which had
been an extension of Spanish poetry
epics, eucharistie plays, epigramsthe
novel took its first faltering steps in 1816
with El Periquillo Sarniento by Fernán¬
dez de Lizardi, and even then it bore
traces of the picaresque. Then came
romanticism and the love between
brothers and sisters of different races
who are unaware of their kinship (Cu-
mandá by Juan León Mera, Cecilia
Valdès by Cirilo Méndez) or blighted love
(Maria by Jorge Isaacs (4)); the novel be¬
gan to assert itself as an art-form. The
first major novelist who wrote several
novels, unlike his predecessors, was
Joaquím María Machado de Assis (5).
With his Memorias Postumas de Braz
Cubas, Don Casmurro, Quincas Borba,
century and contains descriptions of bars
and markets, as well as accounts of poli¬
tical and religious events. The central
character, Atipa, is a philosopher gifted
with common sense and traditional popu¬
lar wisdom. Below, landing stage at Marl-
pasoula, a village on the river Maroni in
French Guyana.
24

The "Apostle ofAmerican Independence",
the Cuban José Marti (1853-1895), above,
is one of thegreat figures ofLatin America.
He is the author of a vast body of work
ranging from political essays (such as the
still topical Nuestra América ("Our Amer¬
ica"), to portraits ofLatin American heroes
and poets, criticism of art and literature,
popularpoems such as those in his collec¬
tion Versos Sencillos, and a children's
magazine, La Edad de Oro, entirely written
by him "so that children can learn how
people lived in the past and how they live
today in America and elsewhere in the
world". A selection ofhis works published
in the Collection in French (Pages
Choisies,) gives a good idea of Marti's ver¬
satility.
and Yaya Garcia, he broke with the
naturalism that was emerging in Europe
(which would find its finest heir in the
stories of Horacio Quiroga (6)) and with
romanticism that was dying in America.
And although the vision of the poets was
still a romantic one, José Hernández suc¬
ceeded, in Martín Fierro, in writing an
epic about a gaucho in the language of
the people.
At the beginning of the twentieth cen¬
tury, the great José Martí <7) established
the ethnic and cultural boundaries of our
mixed-race America, distinguishing it
from what had tended to be a mere geo¬
graphical concept. Looking back with an
all-encompassing sweep of vision, he
observed that the "discovery" was a "de¬
vastating civilization, two words which, in
their opposition to each other, constitute
a process". And another, parallel pro¬
cess was under way: the American's
search for himself, his questioning about
his destiny, his doubts about his defini¬
tion. José Enrique Rodó (8) found in
Arielrespectfully disagreeing with
Shakespeare the symbol of the Latin
spirit, which unites Hispano-America
with France and reconciles it with Spain.
In his biography of Facundo Quiroga,
Domingo Faustino Sarmiento (9) ex¬
pounded a whole programme: civilization
or barbarism, with the city pitted against
the country; the Seis Ensayos en Busca
de Nuestra Expresión, by Pedro Henrí-
quez Ureña, and the Siete Ensayos de
Interpretación de la Realidad Peruana,
by José Carlos Mariátegui, are searching
investigations of the American identity
and attempts to structure its destiny.
Even today, in some Latin American
countries, writing is an activity of the pri¬
vileged, of those who have been able to
learn to read, of those who have time to
think. The novelist, brought up in the city,
is astonished to discover the virgin forest,
plains, rivers and mountains and to see
men as the victims of nature. After pic¬
turesque romanticizing of the Creole,
and paternalistic accounts of local cus¬
toms and manners, realism (with La
Vorágine by José Eustacio Rivera, Don
Segundo Sombra by Ricardo Güiraldes,
Doña Barbara by Rómulo Gallegos) took
root so firmly in America that for a time it
was regarded as the only indigenous
literary "monoculture". But, given the un-
marvellous aspects of the Latin Amer¬
ican situation poverty, lice and the
lash to take the sordid realities of ev¬
eryday life as a literary theme was consi¬
dered intolerable, not only by official cul¬
ture but also by the authorities: Jorge
Icaza was labelled unpatriotic for his
Huasipungo, and Alcides Arguedas (10)
was called an enemy of his country for
Pueblo Enfermo. Judging them from the
point of view of the modern novel, Carlos
Fuentes has said: "... closer to geogra¬
phy than to literature, the Latin American
novel has been written by men who seem
to have been following the tradition of the
great sixteenth-century explorers". To
which one might reply that from within
literature, some of the best Latin Amer¬
ican novelists of the mid-twentieth cen¬
tury have drawn their literary material
from geography, in the tradition of the
explorers, and from history, in the tradi¬
tion of the chroniclers: in them Asturias
discovered "magical realism"; then
came Rulfo, Carpentier, García Már¬
quez, Roa Bastos. (Onetti and Cortázar
prefer to venture into the nooks and cran¬
nies of the city and its people).
n
©
A 3-part anthology of letters, speeches
and proclamations by Simón Bolívar the
Liberator (1783-1830), above, has been
published in the Unesco Collection in
French. It contains texts such as the
Angostura speech and the famous Letter
from Jamaica which reveal Bolivar's love
of liberty and the literary style of a man
who was said to "wield the pen as well as
he did the sword".
The Brazilians were perhaps the first to
proclaim the independence of the lan¬
guage: Graciliano Ramos <11) "reduced
expression to ellipsis, to minimal, almost
monosyllabic sentences, adjusting the
form to reflect minimum levels of survi¬
val"; Mario de Andrade had recourse to
verbal delirium when, in Macunaima (12),
he created a myth in search of its con¬
tinental definition, an Odyssey of the rain
forest; Joao Guimaraes Rosa(13)
violated the Portuguese of polite society
and even the syntax of the people of
Minas Gerais, especially in his Gran Ser-
tón: Veredas, "the most ambitious liter¬
ary adventure since Joyce's Ulysses".
With Rubén Darío (14) poetry begins to
display its prowess. Describing himself
as "a Chorotega Indian with the hands of
a marquis", he shook all poetry in Span¬
ish to its foundations, and established
modernity, if only for a time. Later César
Vallejo, almost an Indian, set fire to the
language and broke it up into particles of
suffering; Vicente Huidrobo took the lan¬
guage itself as the theme of his poetry;
with Pablo Neruda language and poetry
are born again, transformed; Nicolás
Guillen introduces Afro-Cuban reso¬
nances into the purest Castilian Spanish.
Jorge Luis Borges brings "a new way of
understanding the written word". So in
the mid-twentieth century the leading
figure in literature is not nature but lan¬
guage, and reality again spills over into
the world of the imagination. I
25

"America is the country of the future,"
wrote Hegel. "In times to come, its histor¬
ical importance will be made plain,
perhaps in the struggle between North
and South America.... but philosophers
do not make prophecies." Latin Amer¬
ican culture has achieved continental
stature; it forms a clearly defined, seam¬
less whole. We have moved from a litera¬
ture of experience to a literature of
thought, and both are the outcome of a
culture which is not a finished product but
is still in the process of becoming, watch¬
ing itself grow in its own mirror.
JORGE ENRIQUE ADOUNI, Ecuadorian poet
and writer, has taken part in Unesco's pro¬
gramme on Latin-American cultures and is cur¬
rently a member of the editorial staff of the Un¬
esco Courier. He has published several volumes
of poetry, and his play about the Spanish con¬
quest of the Inca empire, published in English as
The Sun Trampled Beneath the Horses' Hooves
(The Massachusetts Review, Winter-Spring
1974) has also been translated into French,
Swedish and Polish and performed in several
countries of Europe and Latin America.
The tragic life of the Uruguayan writer
Horacio Quiroga (1878-1937)from the
violent death of his father, the suicide ofa
close relation in his presence, the suicide
ofhis first wife andan accident in which he
killed his best friend while handling a pis¬
toltook him to "the frontiers of a special
condition, abyssal, luminous as hell", be¬
fore ending with his own suicide. After
1912 he lived in voluntary exile in the jun¬
gle province of Misiones in Argentina, and
described in his stories the innocent mon¬
strosity of childhood, the inclemency of
the virgin forest, man's confrontation with
his destiny, the boundaries of the unreal
and the inexplicable. Left, Illustration by
Felipe Herrera for the cover of a French
edition of Quiroga's famous anthology of
stories Cuentos de Amor, de Locura y de
Muerte ("Tales of Love, Madness and
Death", 1917).

