Black theatre, Black consciousness
by Ático Vilas-Boas da Mota
BLACK theatre in Brazil is deeply rooted in
the soil of Africa, where archaeologists,
historians, anthropologists and special¬
ists in folklore have in recent decades discovered
documentary evidence and other data which
reveal that continent as one of humanity's most
expressive "scenarios", a setting for drama
equalling in some respects achievements hailed
by the West as supreme. Naturally, the dynamics
of African theatre do not always coincide with
those of West European theatre, whose forms
and aesthetic profile were inherited by Brazil.
African drama, centred on the figure of the narra¬
tor, sets up an axiological chain in which speech
and gesture are so closely interlocked that it is
impossible to dissociate them. The audience,
eager to speak out, sometimes takes on the role
of a chorus echoing the action.
,ln Brazil and other parts of the world the prog¬
ress of Black creativity was halted and degraded
by the Diaspora of slavery. Enduring the greatest
material and spiritual hardship, Africans were
deprived of the most rudimentary means of per¬
forming the forms of spontaneous drama they
had inherited from their ancestors. Under the
oppressive burden of slavery, these forms of
expression were directed towards music and
dancing, or were transformed into substitute
rituals such as the candomblé, the macumba,
and the tambor-de-mina.
Black theatre did not really achieve expression
in Brazil until the 1940s, when Abdias do Nas-
cimento founded the Teatro Experimental do
Negro (TEN) (Experimental Black Theatre).
Nascimento, the son of manual labourers, was
born in 1914, and took part in the great protest
movement of the Brazilian Black Front in the
1930s. After graduating in economics from the
University of Rio de Janeiro, he rebelled against
the dictatorship of the Estado Novo (New State)
proclaimed in November 1 937, and in 1 938 orga¬
nized the Afro-Campineiro Congress (named
after Campinas, a town in the State of Säo
Paulo). Painter and poet but primarily a play¬
wright, he wrote Rapsodia negra ("Black Rhap¬
sody") and Sortilegio: Misterio negro ("Black
Mystery") for the TEN. After being proscribed for
six years by the censor, Sortilegio: Misterio neg¬
ro was finally performed by the TEN in the Muni¬
cipal Theatre of Rio de Janeiro in 1957.
The TEN was an authentic Black "con¬
sciousness" movement for people living in Brazi¬
lian society but unable to participate fully in it.
The lofty and generous ambitions of the TEN are
to help Blacks to reject their status as mere
spectators or exotic characters in Brazilian dra¬
ma, literature, music and the plástic arts, a form
of cultural exclusion of which other ethnic minor¬
ities such as gypsies are also victims. The TEN
also strives to improve the situation of Blacks in
Brazilian society by making them aware of issues
related to the defence of their fundamental hu¬
man rights. For this purpose it organizes intro¬
ductory and refresher courses in various bran¬
ches of culture and the arts, and since 1 945 has
held many conventions, conferences and nation¬
al congresses of Brazilian Blacks at which the
problems of Afro-Brazilian life have been discus¬
sed. In recent decades, the TEN has stepped up
its action on behalf of Black culture, working as a
catalyst to release the latent energies of this
large sector of the Brazilian population, and to
liberate the creative capacities of Brazilian
Blacks.
In all an,ti-racist action and in the efforts to
organize Black people in Brazil which led to the
founding of the Movimento Negro Unificado in
1978 and to the third Congress of Black Amer¬
ican Cultures (1 982), the theatre has done much
to promote the idea that Black people should not
be treated as culturally passive, and that, pre¬
cisely because they have so much to offer the
country, they should not remain on the sidelines
of cultural activity. The aim is to strengthen ethnic
roots weakened by the long years of slavery, to
co-ordinate the action of Black communities
scattered throughout Brazil, and whenever
possible to revitalize contacts with Africa and
with Black communities elsewhere in the Amer¬
ican continent.
The TEN is writing its name in the pages of
history as a living, dynamic movement, stimulat¬
ing and controversial. The story is far from over,
since the movement is still bearing fruit despite
the period of inertia that it has gone through since
the enforced exile of Abdias do Nascimento in
1968. It is still an active force among Black
people in the world of the theatre and has en¬
couraged the creation of new drama groups
throughout Brazil. The TEN has been for Black
awareness in the theatre what the 1 922 "Week of
Modern Art" was for the emancipation of Brazi¬
lian literature and art (see page 38).
In the past, "when a Black went to the theatre it
was to sweep the floor". As the legacy and
stigma of a terrible system of slavery, Black
people were not allowed to lake leading roles,
even when the characters were Black. Oral and
written accounts tell us that white actors black¬
ened their faces with coal and wore dark gloves
when they played Black roles.
The founding of the TEN led not only to the
establishment of a Black people's theatre but
also to a movement launched by Blacks with the
support of a few distinguished figures in the world
of art and culture who favoured this avant-garde
experiment. Despite its modest beginnings, the
TEN had ambitious targets training Black
actors, actresses and producers, creating the
structures necessary for the development of its
activities, and writing Afro-Brazilian dramatic
works that expressed the Black point of view.
The TEN, which is involved in the Museum of
Black Art, in the Institute of Afro-Brazilian Studies
and Research, and in the Brazilian Foundation of
Art, Education and Culture, has not yet run out of
steam. Other groups are today seeking to stimu¬
late activity among Black people. Although some
of them have lost their initial dynamism, and work
only intermittently, they are constantly being
joined by new groups of young people eager to
pursue their dream of art. The dream may turn
out to be impossible, but what counts is that
these groups are found throughout Brazil, weak¬
ly represented in some places, numerous and
active in others.
In any case, what Black people are seeking in
drama is not a way of climbing the social ladder,
but self-realization. In all their demands and
protests, including the use of drama as a means
of expression, Brazilian Blacks are struggling to
achieve fulfilment in a social context of freedom,
where the principles of social justice are both
taughtand practised.
ÁTICO VILAS-BOAS DA MOTA, of Brazil, is
professor of Ibero-American folklore and of oral
literature at the Federal University of Gotas, Bra¬
zil. He specializes in cultural planning applied to
the Third World and has devoted himself to the
defence of ethnic minorities, especially of the
Gypsies. He is a member of the Centre d'Etudes
Tsiganes (Centre of Gypsy Studies), Paris, the
Historical and Geographical Institute of Goiás,
and the Brazilian Geographical Society, Rio de
Janeiro.
18
