African voices
by Sophie Bessis
SINCE it was supposed to have no
history and, apart from a few in¬
teresting customs, scarcely any
civilization, Africa was long thought to
have no literature. But through contact
with "the white man's school" a number
of writers emerged during this century
and gradually imposed themselves. This
movement may perhaps be said to have
begun with Batouala, the "negro novel"
by the West Indian René Maran who won
the Goncourt Prize in 1921. It continued
with Leopold Sédar Senghor and Ama¬
dou Hampâté Bâ and expanded with the
coming of age of the post-independence
generations, leading to a flowering of
talent in poetry and the novel in the pre¬
sent decade. The existence in Africa of a
Admire the queen of beauty
Admire (Chorus)
Admire the fruit of beauty
Admire
Admire the eagle-like beauty
Admire
Admire the lady of beauty
Extract from an anthology of Igbo tradi¬
tional verse (eastern Nigeria) published in
the Collection in English under the title
Poetic Heritage. Igbo Traditional Verse
(1971). Photo shows a sculpture adorning
the façade of the National Museum, Lagos.
plentiful and varied literature in which
there is no lack of talent is now beyond
dispute.
While African literature was gaining its
letters of nobility and a degree of interna¬
tional recognition, its range was also
widening with the realization that the writ¬
ten word was not the only medium for
works of literature. Initially thanks to the
perseverance of a few, and later because
of a growing awareness of its extraordin¬
ary richness, oral literature began to be
collected, recorded in writing and in
some cases translated into major world
languages. Thus, entire civilizations with
their creation myths and epics made their
entry into world literature, from which
they had previously been excluded be-
Cover illustration for Anthem of the De¬
cades (A Zulu Epic Dedicated to the
Women of Africa), by Mazlsi Kunene
(1981). It depicts two women from the
harem of King Mpande. Another Zulu epic
by the same author, Emperor Shaka the
Great, published in English in 1979, also
features in the Unesco Collection of Rep¬
resentative Works. (See Unesco Courier,
August 1985).
*'"
15

cause of their oral form and because the
languages to which they belonged were
not widely known. The time will soon
come if it has not arrived already
when a person cannot claim to be culti¬
vated unless he or she is familiar with the
epics of the Mandingo or the Mvet.
In this context, the Unesco Collection
of Representative Works is playing a role
which it intends to develop further. In the
first place, an incomparable information
network enables it to identify from among
recently discovered epic and mythologic¬
al tales as well as from contemporary
writings those works which deserve to be
included in the world pantheon of liter¬
ature. Even more important, it can trans¬
mit them beyond the relatively limited
readerships of local languages by having
them translated into major world lan¬
guages.
Several translations have already
been produced, and French-speaking
readers now have access to the sacred
texts of Black Africa'1 >, accounts of their
African travels by a number of Mediterra¬
nean writers and, more recently, to the
Song of Lawino by the Ugandan poet
Okot P'Bitek (see extract below), which
has been translated from Acholi. For En¬
glish-speaking readers there is a series
of the great Zulu epics collected by Maz-
isi Kunene(2), as well as anthologies of
African prose and poetry(3). The Fan-
tang, a mystical poem of the Peul
shepherds and a masterpiece of the oral
tradition, and the Samba Gueladiegni,
translated from Wolof, will also soon be
available in French.
It is to be hoped that Unesco as it has
already done for other works will pro¬
duce translations of certain works from
their national languages into other, not
necessarily international, languages. By
doing so it would fulfil one of its purposes,
that of widening contacts between diffe¬
rent cultures.
SOPHIE BESSIS, who holds Tunisian and
French nationality, is assistant editor-in-chief of
the Paris-based magazine Jeune Afrique. After
teaching history at the University of Yaounde
(Cameroon), she became a journalist specializ¬
ing in the economic problems of the Third World.
A former director of the magazine Afrique-agri¬
culture, she has published a number of studies
including L'Arme Alimentaire (1979) and La Der¬
nière Frontière (1983).
"When an old man dies a whole library
disappears with him. " This famous remark
was made by Amadou Hampâté Bâ, above,
the great Malian scholar who has been a
pioneer in committing works of the African
oral tradition to writing and making them
more widely known. Hampâte Bâ wrote the
preface to Textes Sacrés d'Afrique Noire, a
collection of sacred writings from Black
Africa published in the Unesco Collection
in 1965.

