Matta
A new way of looking at the world
by Jean-Jacques Lebel
CULTURE has never been so much
discussed as it has since technocratic
societies have tried to get rid of it.
At major exhibitions in Paris, Milan, Mos¬
cow, Tokyo and New York, swarms of visi¬
tors file at top speed past ancient and mod¬
ern masterpieces on display. The success of
these exhibitions is not measured by the
rarity of the works displayed or by the
quality of the aesthetic pleasure they give,
but by the number of spectators they
attract.
The trend towards uniformity imposed by
the media and by cultural mass production
not only outlaws the works of a particular
artist, film-maker, writer, philosopher or
musician, but inhibits the very function of
culture and art as a means of expressing,
exploring and recording the world of the
imagination. The way is barred, not to mas-
terworks, superficial and furtive though our
perception of them may be, but to the im¬
aginative powers and the creative genius of
each one of us. Surely the total monopoliza¬
tion of communication technologies and the
media of creation for exclusively political or
commercial ends is having the crushing
effect, not only of controlling the behaviour
of ordinary citizens, but of preventing them
from seeing, feeling, imagining or desiring
anything except that which it is considered
appropriate for them to see, feel, imagine
or desire.
We may well wonder whether the in¬
creasingly harmful environment created by
the media will not bring about a retrogres¬
sion: in other words, the disappearance of
certain cultural activities that are regarded
as too subjective or too complex. Deserti¬
fication and the steady poisoning of the
environment have, as we know, resulted in
the extinction of many animal species. The
sole survivors are species which have
adapted by mutation to deleterious
changes. Does the same fate lie in store for
those artists, poets, philosophers, musi¬
cians and film-makers who refuse to adapt
to the equally harmful mediocrity and
money grubbing of the cultural industry?
These were the unanswered questions
raised by three recent exhibitions in Paris
which, simultaneously but from different
points of view, tested the ability of consum¬
ers to see anything but soap operas or pop
singers. These were the exhibitions of Rem¬
brandt's engravings at the Petit Palais, the
Bemard Saby retrospective at the Museum
of Modem Art of the city of Paris, and the
Matta retrospective at the Beaubourg Cen¬
tre. Three oases, three pockets of resistance
to cultural desertification.
Take Matta, for instance. Marcel
Duchamp said of him, as long ago as 1946,
28

k
Above, George and the Dragon, 1965. Wax
crayon and lead pencil on paper
(54.5x75.5 cm). Private collection, Paris.
Left, The Birth of Venus, 1965. Wax crayon
and leadpencil on paper (SO x 66 cm). Pri¬
vate collection, París.
that he was "the profoundest painter 


of his
generation", and yet he calls himself not a
painter but a seeker a seeker of himself
and of the Other. He is an archaeologist of
human desire and a reorganizer of ReaHty,
and has coined the term econography to
describe his work. Here we have one of the
most highly inventive minds to have ex¬
plored the problem of what it means to see.
For half a century, he has kept the social
and mental stmctures of the West perpe¬
tually shifting, and hence in danger of losing
their balance and finding, subsequently, a
new kind of balance. He is an architect who
started out working with Le Corbusier, but
whose Utopias have been built only in
mythical and Hnguistic space, transcending
the urban context in which the citizen of the
nuclear age is locked. He is an exceptional
person, a man who has crossed the Andes
and the Atlantic and travelled through sur-
reaHsm and communism; who was a friend
of Pablo Picasso, André Breton, Victor
Brauner, Max Ernst, Henri Michaux and
Salvador Allende; who studied with de
Sade, Marx and Lautréamont; who has
illustrated Cervantes, Shakespeare, Rim¬
baud and Jarry, and been acquainted with
Marat, Gramsci and Lao Zi; who was a
lover of Danaê, Penthesileia and the Scarlet
Empress, and dreamed of being Genghis
Khan, Leonardo de Vinci and Che
Guevara. Here is an artist who wanted to
paint what no one had painted before him:
the living being in the process of rethinking
the world and its place in the world. His was
one of the most important exhibitions to be
held in this last quarter of a century.
How can one "consume" this painting,
which defies market forces? What did the
endless crowds flowing through the
Beaubourg Centre find in this major re¬
trospective exhibition, by turns dazzling
and arcane? This polyglot Chilean nomad
clearly cannot be reduced to fit any school,
style or dogma he is neither abstract nor
figurative, neither an expressionist nor a
social realist, nor even wholly a surrealist
he refuses to align himself with a fixed idea
or specific doctrine. TTiis creates problems
for people who need an ideological "key" in
order to feel that they can appreciate a work
of art (thereby confusing art with a puzzle or
a locked door). Matta can be bewildering in
his playfulness and the youthful, quicksil¬
ver, changeable side of his nature. What he
offers us is an art of seeing.
"Potentiating space
space in Space
expanding space"
wrote Henri Michaux about Matta's paint¬
ing, which seizes on reaHty only in order to
transform it. Matta makes no secret of this.
Indeed he proclaims it: "Obviously! Art is
revolution".
JEAN-JACQUES LEBEL, French writer and
theatre and film director, is the author of several
books including La Poésie de la Beat Generation
(Poetry of the Beat Generation) 1965, Le Hap¬
pening, 1966 and L'Amour et l'Argent (Love and
Money), 1979.
29
