The building blocks of culture
by Cheikh Anta Diop
A people's cultural identity is related to
three major factors historical, ling¬
uistic and psychological (the last of
which may include the people's specific forms
of religious observance). These factors vary
in importance in different historical and social
situations; when they are not fully present in a
people or an individual, the cultural identity is
flawed.
Can these factors be classed in a hierarchy
of importance, or does each one play an equal
part in the constitution of the cultural
personality?
Awareness of a common history is the most
solid rampart a people can build against cultu¬
ral or any other form of aggression from out¬
side. Thus in contacts between civilizations
during the colonization process, for exam¬
ple the colonizer tries to weaken if not des¬
troy the historical consciousness of the colo¬
nized people.
The exercise of national sovereignty is by
far the best school for a people's mind and
soul, and the only way to keep alive its
greatest virtues.
It is hard to say whether or not the historical
factor is more important than language. For
the French philosopher Montesquieu lan¬
guage was the only common denominator,
the supreme mark of cultural identity. "As long
as a vanquished people has not lost its lan¬
guage," he wrote, "it still has hope."
But nowhere in the world does the phe¬
nomenon of linguistic unity exist on a con¬
tinental scale. Fragmentation and diversity
prevail until an official effort is made or a
Anthropomorphic Head Sections, a work
by the British sculptor Roy Adzak
Photo © Gérard Dufresne, Paris. Xavier Jeupitre Collection
political decision is taken to extend the use of
one language, if necessary by force.
This process, nevertheless, at first only
affects the vocabulary of a language, not its
grammar, i.e. its morphology and syntax.
The civilization with the most advanced
technology usually exercises a one-way influ¬
ence on the civilizations or societies with
which it comes into contact.
Creolization is a linguistic process which
began in a specific historical situation. Iso¬
lated individuals, deprived of their freedom,
were taken from their original environment
and cast brutally into another environment to
which they adapted as best they could. The
illiterate Africans thus deported to the West
Indies deformed the European languages
spoken there, creating new forms of speech in
which specialists have found distant echoes
of the syntactical and morphological struc¬
tures of African languages.
Finally, the psychological factor presup¬
poses a certain permanence within a diversity
of structures. A thorough analysis of this fac¬
tor would call for study of what might be called
cultural invariables.
The cultural environment may be regarded
as an assimilating structure which absorbs
material from outside and evolves while re¬
maining aware of its own identity. Assimilation
enriches it without affecting its destiny. Only
destruction by some external agency, disin¬
tegration (whatever the reason), or hardening
of the arteries because of excessive autarky
can be fatal to it.
Each civilization has two ways or levels of
handling concepts. The first is concerned with
all that is specific, with an area that is, so to
speak, protected by the people's unique
psychological barrier, an area which can only
be understood from within. This is also the
level of poetic expression; it is the core of all
living culture, of all civilization. The second
way or level is concerned with the universal,
with general ideas that everyone can grasp,
with the area in which one civilization can
influence another.
When the core perishes, the life of societies
and civilizations comes to an end. Hence the
widespread efforts today to safeguard this
productive uniqueness which is not isolation
nor withdrawal but the fundamental condition
of universality.
August-September 1982
CHEIKH ANTA DIOP (1923-1986) was a Sene¬
galese anthropologist and physicist who played
a leading role in inspiring the revival of interest in
African history. Professor of Egyptology at the
University of Dakar and director of the Radiocar¬
bon Laboratory at the University's Institut Fon¬
damental d'Afrique Noire (IFAN), he was also
one of the most active members of the Interna¬
tional Scientific Committee for the Drafting of a
General History of Africa, an 8-volume work
sponsored by Unesco and now in course of
publication.
58
