Towards a new way
of thinking
by Gennadi Ivanovitch Gerasimov OVER thirty years ago, Bertrand Russell
and Albert Einstein invited us to
"learn to think in a new way" and
pointed out that "if the issues between East
and West are to be decided ... then these
issues must not be decided by war". In what
became known as the Russell-Einstein Man¬
ifesto (see article page 13), the two philo-
1 sophers suggested that people should regard
^ themselves primarily as members of the hu-
1 man race, whether they be workers, shop-
% keepers, farmers, or property-owners on a
8 large or small scale: "Consider yourselves
@ only as members of a biological species."
§ Looking more deeply into the question, I
| discovered that Russell and Einstein were by
5 no means the first to put forward such views,
§ although they had extremely cogent reasons
£ for doing so at that time. As long ago as 1 928,
the French novelist Romain Rolland called for
the creation of a Peace International, which
would discount all the "political, social, re¬
ligious, philosophical and intellectual pre¬
occupations" which divide mankind, and
would be exclusively guided by a "clear and
direct awareness of the community of all living
beings".
Rolland was sickened by the lunacy of
trench warfare, which had systematized
butchery. Russell and Einstein were anxious
about the new danger represented by the
atomic bomb which indiscriminately mas¬
sacred the population at large as well as the
armed forces. Today, three decades later, the
dangers far exceed those which they de¬
nounced, and their message has acquired a
new dimension, especially with the establish¬
ment of the now well-documented hypothesis
of "nuclear winter" as the inevitable outcome
of a nuclear conflict.
Before the "nuclear winter" theory,
armchair strategists speculated at great
length about the stages of nuclear escalation,
about second strike capabilities and the pos¬
sibility, under certain conditions, of prevailing
over the enemy in a nuclear exchange. To
encourage plans for a "lightning" war to
amputate the political and military leadership
of an enemy power, a war unleashed from
behind an antimissile shield capable of ward¬
ing off a counter-attack from a weakened
adversary, is to foster a dangerous illusion. It
is now clear that the dust, soot and ash from
many nuclear explosions will obliterate the
"victor's" sun. Whoever lifts his sword will also
die by it. Does this not encourage us to "think
in a new way"?
This 2nd-century statue of Clio, the first of
the nine Muses of Greek mythology, was
discovered in 1774 in the ruins of a villa
south-east of Tivoli, a favourite summer
resort of the Romans 2, 000years ago. Clio,
whose name means "to celebrate" in
Greek, is the Muse of epic poetry and of
history. She is often depictedseated, hold¬
ing a roll of parchment in her hand.
27

The nuclear threat has taken on the dimen¬
sion of "cliocide" a word coined from Clio,
the Greek Muse whose task was to watch
over the course of human history. Today his¬
tory faces the risk of sudden termination, as
war, which formerly menaced only indi¬
viduals, now threatens the whole human
species.
Nuclear weapons sweep away the moral
problem of ends and means, because any
attempt to achieve a given end by using such
weapons nullifies that end, by liquidating the
two parties to the conflict. It would be like
burning down a house while trying to carry out
repairs on it, or killing a man in order to alter a
mean streak in his character. Nor can nuclear
war stand up to cost-benefit analysis.
The nuclear weapon, a creation of the hu¬
man intellect, threatens to arrest the march of
history through some act of political folly. Just
as the great wars of the ancient world razed
cities, sometimes wiped out entire peoples,
after nuclear war the chronicle of human his¬
tory would be ended. In any case, there would
be nobody left to read it.
Just as we inherited this planet from our
forebears, we have a responsibility towards
In a Moscow square, young Muscovites
anda visiting group ofIndian children take
part in a drawing contest organized on
Universal Children's Day, celebrated
annually on the first Monday in October.
"Peace for children" and "May the sun
always shine" were two of the themes
treated by the budding pavement artists.
future generations, each of which must hand
on the heritage to their successors. In other
words, we are all bound to Clio by a solemn
oath which commands us to carry on the
history of mankind.
If we want to preserve peace, it should be
given absolute priority; the general interest
must be seen to override the interests of
specific groups or classes. According to
Lenin, from the point of view of basic Marxist
ideas, the interests of general development
come before the Interests of the proletariat,
because when the workers gain power it is
taken not for its own sake, but rather to deliver
society from exploitation, establish social
equality, and create the conditions necessary
for balanced development of individual char¬
acteristics.
Karl Marx saw a major transformation in the
relation between capital and labour as a
necessary condition of world peace. In his
inaugural address to the International Work¬
ing Men's Association in 1864, he stressed
the necessity of creating conditions in which
the elementary laws of morality and justice
which ought to govern individual relations
should also be supreme in international
relations.
Disarmament is the only possible route to
the establishment of a new and just interna¬
tional order of world security. Only disarma¬
ment will allow us to use the vast material and
intellectual resources thus freed to promote
economic development and prosperity.
Humanity has reached a crucial point and
must choose which direction to take. It can
overcome the inertia of the past and abandon
the notion of security as based on the balance
of power and on recourse to military or tech¬
nological solutions; or it can continue to be
hostage to the arms race to nuclear and
chemical weapons, and to others no less
fearsome.
This choice between the dictates of reason
and the road to catastrophe can only be made
by mutual agreement between all States,
whatever their social system or level of econo¬
mic development. It will have to be bold and
responsible. Today we can no longer be con¬
tent with piecemeal solutions which slow
down the arms race in certain spheres only to
accelerate it in others.
It is time to remove for ever the sword of
Damocles which has been hanging over our
heads since the tragedy of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. It would be appropriate for the
Soviet Union and the United States, holders of
the largest nuclear stockpiles, to make a first
decisive step and for other nuclear powers to
follow them.
To encourage world opinion "to think in a
new way", is one of the main tasks of the
International Year of Peace. If United Nations
Member States, together with massed public
opinion, energetically support this effort, it
may help to prevent "cliocide".
GENNADI IVANOVITCH GERASIMOV, a well-
known Soviet journalist specializing in interna¬
tional relations, is currently chief editor of the
weekly Moscow News, which is published in
Russian, French, English, Spanish and Arabic.
He was awarded the Vorovski Prize (The Union
of Journalists of the USSR) and "The Golden
Pen" (Bulgaria) for his journalistic work.
»2
V 4L
-*e *
