Photo © Corneille Jest, Paris
34
Fortresses, monasteries and seats of
administration, dzongs were originally
built at strategic locations in order to de¬
fend Bhutan against invaders. Tongsa
dzong (above), one of the biggest In the
country, was built In the 17th century in the
heart of the region of which it bears the
name. It follows the elongated outline of
the rocky spur on which it stands. The
central tower accommodates three tem¬
ples at different levels, the highest being
dedicated to the divinity of the region.

Bhutan
The land
of the dragon
by Rigzin Dorji
DRUKYUL, "The Land of the Dra¬
gon", known to the outside world as
Bhutan, is a land-locked Himalayan
kingdom. The southern frontier with India
follows the line of the tropical foothills
overlooking the Indian plains, and is almost
at sea level. The northern frontier with the
Tibet region of China is formed by great
snowclad ranges in which numerous peaks
soar to above 6,000 metres.
Agricultural Bhutanese are valley-
dwellers and live beside the rapidly flowing
rivers that rise in the snowy heights. These
perennial rivers, once looked upon only as a
source of irrigation, are now being harnes¬
sed for hydro-electric power. They are fed
by hundreds of tributaries that keep the
fields green and productive.
Although closely linked to Tibet and In¬
dia culturally, Bhutan maintained its inde¬
pendence and individuality over the centu¬
ries by deliberately following a systematic
policy of isolationism which earned for the
country the reputation of being the world's
last "Forbidden Kingdom". This policy was
pursued until 1952, when the third heredi¬
tary monarch, the late King Jigme Dorji
Wangchuck, ascended the throne. He re¬
alized that the old policy of isolation was
causing Bhutan to remain socially, econo¬
mically and politically backward. Gradua¬
lly, so as not to upset old traditions, but
firmly in accordance with modern needs, he
introduced administrative reforms, and in
1961 launched the first of a series of Five
Year Plans.
In a country where there had been no
wheel other than the continuously-turning
prayer wheel, no electricity, no post offices,
no modern schools or hospitals, and little
other sign of the twentieth century, traditio¬
nal barriers suddenly began to collapse.
Roads began to be built, and up them came
the carefully sifted benefits of the modern
outside world. Today, under the leadership
of the young king Jigme Singye Wang-
chuck, crowned in 1974, the country is all
set to achieve a happy co-existence of tra¬
dition and progress in the best interests of
its particular genius.
There are three distinct ethnic elements
in the population. The first comprises the
descendants of the original inhabitants,
who live in the eastern part of the country.
The second ethnic element consists of the
descendants of immigrants from Tibet, who
occupy the western region. The third com¬
prises the Nepalese settlers who began to
immigrate to Bhutan at the turn of the
twentieth century. They are found exclu¬
sively in the hot and humid southern dis¬
tricts of the country adjoining India.
The State religion is Buddhism, which
was introduced into Bhutan towards the
second half of the eighth century AD. The
first monastic body was established in the
seventeenth century with thirty monks
only. There are now about 6,000 State-sup¬
ported monks. No account of the religious
life of the country would be complete with¬
out mentioning the mask dances. At various
festivals, both monks and laity expert in the
art of dramatic dance and music, don rich
robes of China silk and brocade and fantas¬
tic masks representing deities, legendary
personages and demons. As the day of the
festival draws near, large crowds of people
flock in from the countryside to see the
sacred mask dance which represents the
Buddha in various manifestations. It is be¬
lieved that the very act of watching the
dance helps people to acquire spiritual
merit and to achieve liberation from world¬
ly suffering.
Bhutan is a friendly and hospitable coun¬
try. Meetings are generally acknowledged
with an exchange of silk or cotton scarves.
Butter, tea and saffron-coloured rice are
served as a gesture of hospitality. When
Bhutanese pass each other at a distance on
their travels they call and yodel to each
other. Dzongkha is the country's national
language. In official correspondence both
English and Dzongkha are used.
The Bhutanese build imposingly large
houses of hand-tamped earth, generally two
or three storeys high, with shingled roofs.
The ground floor is used for stabling cows,
pigs and poultry; the first floor for living
apartments, the best room always being a
35

Padmasambhava, an Indian saint who in
the 9th century introduced Tantric Buddh¬
ism to Bhutan and other Himalayan re¬
gions, is honouredbymanyTshechu festi¬
vals, so called because the 12 great epi¬
sodes by which he is rememberedall took
place on the tenth day (tshechu) of the
month at different periods of his life. One
of Bhutan's most renowned Tshechu fes¬
tivals is that ofParo, a valley in the western
part of the country. During the festival
religious and folk dances are performed
for five consecutive days. The dancers,
above, wear sumptuous costumes and
fantastic masks representing deities,
legendary personages and demons.
^. private shrine; and the loft for storing grain
and odds and ends. The houses are cons¬
tructed in a distinctive architectural style;
the windows, doors and roof beams are
painted in glowing earth colours. All
government buildings, both official and re¬
sidential, are required to adhere to traditio¬
nal Bhutanese style on the exterior, though
every modern convenience may be em¬
ployed within.
The Bhutanese are experts in arts and
crafts. Artists excel in mural and scroll
painting, and craftsmen create master¬
pieces in silver, gold, copper and brass.
Bronze-casting, used largely in image-ma¬
king, is an ancient art form, as is wood-
carving, to be seen at its best in the gilded
chapels of monasteries and castles. Bhuta¬
nese craftsmen also make temple-bells,
swords and daggers.
Handloom weaving of woollen, silk and
cotton textiles is practised in almost every
home. Women wear small fortunes in hand-
woven cloths and take pride in outfitting
their men. Basket- and bamboo-weaving is
commonplace and is used for making food
baskets, water containers, hats, quivers and
other attractive items of everyday use.
Archery is the national sport of Bhutan
and a favourite pastime ofyoung and old.
Competitions between villages are impor¬
tant events during which the local divini¬
ties confront one another through the
medium of opposing teams. Each team is
advised by an astrologer, and backed by
supporters and dancers who try hard to
encourage their own side and dishearten
their opponents.
Archery is the national sport in a country
whose people are extremely sports-minded.
Other major sports-are soccer, basketball,
volleyball, badminton, tennis and table
tennis.
The great bulk of Bhutan's trade is with
India and with other neighbouring coun¬
tries. The main exports are timber, min¬
erals and agricultural products. Other ex¬
port commodities include liquor and can¬
ned fruit products. Cardamom and Bhuta¬
nese handicrafts are also exported to the
Middle East and Western Europe.
The population is increasing rapidly
every year as a result of effective health
measures taken by the government. Most of
the diseases which used to take a heavy toll
of human lives have been controlled. As a
result of this demographic growth more and
more fallow land is being brought under
cultivation and forests are being cleared for
new settlements. There is no unemploy¬
ment, and in fact, there is an acute shortage
of both skilled and unskilled labour. Due to
the heavy demand for such labour, wages
are increasing every year. To meet the la¬
bour shortage, manpower is being imported
from neighbouring countries.
RIGZIN DORJI, of Bhutan, is Director of his
country's Department of Information and Com¬
munication, and an executive member of its
National Religious Committee, its National
Council forSocialand CulturalPromotion, and its
Dzongkha Advisory Committee. This article is
based on a radio programme devoted to "The
Little Countries", produced in December 1984 by
Unesco to mark the entry ofnew Member States
into the Organization.
