IT was the year 1825, ten years after the
fall of Napoleon and the restoration of
the monarchy in France, and all Cairo
was buzzing with excitement. Muker Bey, a
Sudanese nobleman, had sent two giraffes
as a gift to the viceroy of Egypt, Muham¬
mad AH Pasha.
No one was more excited than the French
Consul-General in Cairo, an engaging if
somewhat eccentric Piedmontese called
Bernardino Drovetti. Drovetti was a great
connoisseur of Egyptian antiquities and his
collections were later to form the nucleus of
the Egyptian departments of the museums
of Berlin, Turin and the Louvre.
Relations between France and Egypt at
that time were stormy. Aroused by the
writings of Victor Hugo and the paintings of
Delacroix, the youth of France was fired
with enthusiasm for Greek independence.
In 1822, however, Egyptian troops had
assisted their Turkish allies in the massacre
of Greek revolutionaries on the island of
Chios.
Considering it to be the primary duty of
any true diplomat to do all in his power to
reduce tension between countries, Drovetti
saw in the arrival of two giraffes in Cairo an
opportunity which he was quick to seize.
Remembering that it was an ancient tradi¬
tion among Egyptian sovereigns to present
one of these fabulous beasts to other
monarchs whom they wished to honour,
Drovetti requested that one of the two new¬
comers from Sudan be offered to the king of
France, Charles X. An exceptional gift it
would indeed be, since no giraffe had ever
before been seen in France.
Muhammad AH Pasha readily gave his
consent, but, alerted by the mysterious
bush telegraph that operates within the dip¬
lomatic corps, the British consul, almost
simultaneously, put forward a similar re¬
quest on behalf of his own royal master. His
reasons for doing so were similar the de¬
plorable state of relations between Britain
and Egypt.
Appreciating the advantages to be gained
from this double proposition, the viceroy
decreed in a Solomon-like judgement that
one giraffe should go to each country, the
choice between the two beasts to be made
by the two consuls drawing lots.
A few days later, Drovetti wrote trium¬
phantly to his superior, the lugubrious
Baron de Damas: "I am happy to inform
Your Excellency that fate has been kind to
us. Our giraffe is strong and vigorous,
whereas the one destined for the King of
England is sickly and will not last long."
And indeed, the "English" giraffe was to
die a few months later. Not, perhaps, a
complete revenge for Waterloo but all the
same...!!
Then came the problem of transporting
the animal to France. Drovetti prepared the
journey with painstaking care. In Alexan¬
dria he found a Sardinian brig, I Due Fratelli
(The Two Brothers), whose captain under¬
took to treat the creature like his own
daughter. Since the space between decks
was not high enough, a hole had to be cut in
the upper deck. The giraffe was installed
below with her head (for she was a female)
In 1984, the Musée de l'Ile de France organized an
exhibition entitled Une Girafe pour le Roi (A Giraffe for
the King) which attracted several thousand visitors. Gab¬
riel Dardaud, who made a major contribution to the
preparation of the exhibition, gave its title to his book
about the story of the Charles X's giraffe. Une Girafe
pour le Roi, Dumerchez-Naoum publishers, Creit
(France), 1985.



Home by a neck
A giraffe's epic journey
from Cairo to Paris by Georges Poisson
Engraving above depicts the firstgiraffe to
have been brought to France alive. The
two-and-a-half-year-old, 12-foot-tall anim¬
al was sent as a gift to King Charles X by
the ruler of Egypt. The engraving shows
the giraffe in the "King's Garden''(now the
Jardin des Plantes) in Paris, in July 1827,
shortly after its arrival.
protruding into the open. The edges of the
hole in the deck were lined with straw to
protect her from bumps caused by the roll of
the ship. A tarpaulin was rigged overhead
to shield her from the rain.
The next problem that arose was how to
feed an animal that consumed twenty-five
litres of milk a day. Drovetti decided to
embark three milch cows and, for good
measure, put aboard two antelopes, a
cowhand to do the milking and three
Sudanese to make the giraffe feel at home.
As a final talisman to ensure that provi¬
dence would be on his side, he hung about
the animal's neck a parchment inscribed
with verses from the Qur'an to protect her
from the powers of evil. Preparations were
completed with a letter addressed to his
colleague M. Bottu, an agent of the French
Foreign Office in Marseille, advising him of
the arrangements to be made for the giraffe
on her arrival in France.
Off sailed the brig, and on 13 October
1826 it dropped anchor at Marseille after an
uneventful journey, the only casualty one
cow suffering from seasickness. Passengers,
both two-legged and four-legged, were
placed in quarantine in a hospital near the
port, this respite giving M. de Villeneuve-
Bargemon, Prefect of the Département des
Bouches-du-Rhône, time to prepare a wel¬
come fit for a present for a king.
This was the first time that such a task had
been entrusted to a member of the corps of
Prefects and M. de Villeneuve-Bargemon
devoted himself to it with conscientiousness
and enthusiasm. Naturally, the only place
that an immigrant of such distinction could
be housed was at the Prefecture itself. An
enclosure was erected in the courtyard as
well as a heated stall with direct access from
both floors of the building.
There the giraffe wintered, her transfer
to Paris awaiting a more clement period of

the year. Meanwhile, the Prefect kept the
Minister of the Interior regularly informed
of all the arrangements made. ..and also
raised the delicate question of the reim¬
bursement of the expenses incurred.
For fear of provoking a riot, the creature
from the tropics was transferred from the
quarantine centre to the Prefecture at dead
of night on 14 November. For seven months
M. de Villeneuve-Bargemon watched
tenderly over his lodger, even allowing a
touch of lyricism to creep into his adminis¬
trative correspondence in which he referred
to her as "my ward", or "this beautiful child
of the tropics".
For her part, his wife gave a series of
receptions, or "routs" as they were called in
those days, to display the animal to the
upper-crust of Provençal society. Day and
night a constant stream of members of the
Academy of Marseille came to gaze upon
the beast, noting every detail of her be¬
haviour and marvelling at her silence, only
to discover later that the long-necked crea¬
ture possessed no vocal chords.
Meanwhile, to keep her in good con¬
dition, the Prefect decided that his protégée
should be exercised, thus providing a choice
spectacle for the people of Marseille . Every
day, preceded by mounted gendarmes with
sabres drawn, the giraffe calmly ambled
through the streets of the city, to the great
joy of the citizenry and to the great terror of
the horses.
The king, however, was eager to receive
"his" giraffe and, the following spring, the
question arose of how she should make the
journey from Marseille to Paris. Should she
go by sea, circumnavigate Spain and then
sail up the Seine? This would be as long a
journey as that which had brought her
across the Mediterranean. Should she
travel on the internal waterways, the
Rhône, the Saône and the Seine? In the
end, since the animal had become accus¬
tomed to walking, it was decided that she
should go to Paris on foot, in short stages.
Clearly, an experienced man was needed to
supervise the convoy and the choice fell on
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, an illustrious natur¬
alist noted for his theory of the "compensa¬
tion of organs", and, moreover, a veteran
of Napoleon's Egyptian expedition and
perhaps the only man in France who had
ever been anywhere near a giraffe.
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire was fifty-five
years old and suffered from rheumatism
and other ailments. Nevertheless, he
accepted the mission with enthusiasm.
"Throwing a few essentials into a bag, he
took the next stage-coach and within six and
a half days had covered the itinerary he was
later to retrace with the giraffe," writes
Gabriel Dardaud in his book Une Girafe
pour le Roi (1985). At a meeting of the
Academy of Marseille, on lOMay 1827, one
of the members, a certain M. Jauffret,
announced the arrival of his eminent col¬
league, and read out three fables he had
written on the giraffe.
Each stage of the journey to Paris was
prepared down to the last detail. The cara¬
van included the giraffe, the cows, one of
the antelopes the other one had died in
Marseille two moufflons, the cowhand,
the Sudanese, an interpreter and. a cart
loaded with forage, seeds and a variety of
other impedimenta, all ordered by the
illustrious leader of the expedition.
To protect her from the spring rains, a
Two days t>efore the giraffe's arrival In
Paris, the French naturalist Georges
Cuvler (1769-1832) made the above draw¬
ing during a session of the Council of
State. He hadneverseen a living specimen
and his not very realistic representation
was Inspired by depletions of giraffes
made In earlier times.
A giraffe-craze swept France and led to the
creation of many objects Inspired by the
giraffe's distinctive silhouette. The clavl-
harp (Ijelow), a musical Instrument in¬
vented In 1819, was renamed the "piano-
glrafe" after the animal's arrival In Paris.
two-piece set of Hned oilskins with a hood
was made to measure for the giraffe. On it
were emblazoned the arms of the King of
France and of the Pasha of Egypt. Vil¬
leneuve-Bargemon had provided for an
escort of mounted gendarmes and took care
to write to all the mayors of the communes
within his jurisdiction through which the
caravan would pass, as well as to his col¬
leagues in the other Départements, giving
them instructions and advice.
At dawn on 20 May 1827, the caravan
sallied forth with Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire at
its head. In the open country he would rest
his rheumaticky joints beside the driver of
the cart, but when the cortège passed
through a town, or arrived at a staging-post,
he was usually to be found at the side of the
giraffe, reinvigorated by the enthusiastic
welcome of the populace and the local
authorities.
Aix, Avignon, Orange, MontéHmar,
Vienne and then, on 6 June, they arrived
at Lyon, having achieved the respectable
average rate of progress of twenty-seven
kilometres a day. At Lyon, Geoffroy Saint-
Hilaire wrote to Villeneuve-Bargemon to
give him the latest news. An incident had
occurred which had slowed their progress.
"The giraffe had picked up a nail in the
membrane of a hoof; she seemed weary of
the continual walking and was somewhat
fatigued yet "very obedient". A period of
rest was needed and, for five days, installed
8

The giraffe as It Is today, preserved In the
Natural History Museum at La Rochelle, In
France.
in the Place Bellecour, the giraffe happily
stripped the lime trees of their leaves and
accepted titbits from the onlookers.
Then they were on the road again, wend¬
ing their way through ever-larger crowds.
"In 1827," writes Gabriel Dardaud, "some
thirty or more inns, shops and staging-posts
adopted the sign of the giraffe to com¬
memorate her passage".
When the cortège was within fifty
kilometres of Paris, excursions were orga¬
nized to go and meet it. The crowds
streamed out in charabancs, four-wheelers
and gigs. Even Stendhal did not disdain to
join the ranks of the sightseers and, at the
Court, it was only with the greatest of diffi¬
culty that the Duchess of Berry was res¬
trained from doing as much. As for the
great scientist Georges Cuvier, instead of
giving his attention to the discussions of the
Council of State, of which he was a mem¬
ber, he spent his time covering his papers
with drawings of a giraffe based on what
little he knew of the animal and coming up
with some bizarre results.
After a journey of 880 kilometres in for¬
ty-one days, most of it on foot, Geoffroy
Saint-Hilaire arrived in Paris at the head of
the caravan on 30 June, thoroughly exhaus¬
ted. He installed the giraffe in its enclosure
at the Jardin des Plantes (the Zoological
Gardens of Paris). But scarcely had he re¬
gained the comfort of his armchair, his slip¬
pers and his own fireside than he was
obliged to forsake them again. The king,
who was spending the summer at his
château at Saint-Cloud, demanded to see
"his" giraffe the very next day.
The cortège made a fine sight as it
wended its way along the bank of the Seine.
Troops from the garrison of Paris lined the
route; plume-bedecked generals caracolled
at its head; among the robed ranks of pro¬
fessors from the Museum and university
dignitaries, ermine-lined hoods vied for
attention with medals and decorations; and
the mace-bearers of the faculties sweated
under the weight of their insignia of office.
For Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, decked out in
ceremonial dress and walking at the side of
the giraffe, these last fifteen kilometres
were sheer martyrdom.
At Saint-Cloud, in front of the orangery
where, twenty-eight years earlier. Napo¬
leon had seized power a memory it was
wiser not to recall under the Restoration
the dignitaries in all their finery were drawn
up in strict order of precedence, with the
giraffe in pride of place. After a few
minutes, as the soldiers presented arms, the
king arrived wearing a blue sash and, as
usual, cutting a fine figure. He was followed
by his son the heir to the throne, the Duke
of Angoulême; with him were his wife the
duchess, and the petite Duchess of Berry,
gracious, elegant and holding the hands of
the two royal children who had eyes only for
the strange beast that peered at them with
no trace of emotion. The king was his usual
amiable self, courteously attentive to
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, whom he congratu¬
lated and questioned at length, and to the
giraffe, to whom he did the honour of offer¬
ing some rose petals in the royal hand.
"Once the audience was over," says Gabriel
Dardaud, "Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire jumped
into a carriage and drove off to the hospital
for a check-up. The giraffe went back to the
Jardin des Plantes without him, passing be¬
tween two rows of spectators held back with
some difficulty by the armed soldiers of the
garrison."
The occasion gave rise to the production
of innumerable 


"giraffe" objects that were
hawked the length and breadth of the land.
First came chinaware on which figured
more or less diagrammatic representations
of the animal's characteristic profile. But
the image of the giraffe also featured on
printed cloth, in popular drawings, on
smoothing irons,.warming-pans, ink-wells,
fans, snuff-boxes and almanachs and pub-
Hcations of every sort. Women wore "giraf¬
fe" hair-styles and the claviharp invented in
1819, was re-named the "giraffe-piano".
The giraffe was installed at first in the
great greenhouse of the Jardin des Plantes.
Later she took possession of the "apart¬
ment" specially prepared for her in the
rotunda. There was one room for her which
was lined with mattresses and heated by a
stove as well as by the cows and other
animals who, throughout the winter, main¬
tained the temperature at -the fifteen de¬
grees necessary for the health of this native
of Africa. Above was a room for her Egyp¬
tian keeper.
Between July and December 1827, the
Jardin des Plantes did a roaring trade, with
600,000 Parisians going to visit the new
inmate. Curiosity died down a little the
following year, but the giraffe remained the
star attraction at the Jardin, where she
could be seen out walking when the weather
permitted. In about 1835, plans were made
to find her a mate, but the husband ear¬
marked for her never left Italy. She grew
old peacefully and died in 1845 in her twen¬
ty-first year, outliving both Charles X and
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire.
She was stuffed, and her motionless
silhouette long graced the zoological gallery
of the museum, until, one day between the
two World Wars, the curator of the
museum of La Rochelle succeeded in get¬
ting her ceded to him. And so it came about
that this creature, which had been born near
the source of the Nile, which had travelled
across part of Africa, the Mediterranean
and France to delight Parisians for eighteen
years, set out again to the ocean
shore, where now she savours a kind of
immortality.
GEORGES POISSON has been curator of the
Museum of the lie de France forSOyears. He is a
specialist in the history of architecture, which he
has taught in a number of institutions of higher
education. He has published some 40 historical
works on the architecture of Paris and the
surrounding region. Several of them have been
awarded prizes by the Académie Française or
the Académie des Beaux-Arts.
