The cradle of
Polynesian culture
by 'Ana Maui Taufe'ulungaki
Late 18th-century engraving of a Tongan
double-hulled vessel made of two dugout
canoes, surmounted bya centralplatform.
In such robust craft, capable of carrying a
considerable number of passengers and
provisions and of covering very great dis¬
tances, the early inhabitants of Oceania
set out to conquer the Pacific, a tre¬
mendous adventure which began around
3,000years ago. These vessels werestillin
use in Polynesia when Europeans under¬
took their own exploration of the Pacific
Ocean in the 16th and 17th centuries.
THE indigenous cultures of Fiji,
Samoa and Tonga were
homogeneous and shared a common
origin. The Fijians are usually classified,
using racial, linguistic and cultural criteria,
as Melanesians, a term which literally
means "the black islands". There is,
however, a considerable Polynesian influ¬
ence on the physical characteristics of Fi¬
jians and on their language and culture; this
came about through historical and geo¬
graphical associations. Archaeological evi¬
dence from carbon dating of Lapita pottery
and linguistic reconstruction of the proto-
Polynesian language point to Fiji as the
original home of the Polynesians where
they arrived 3,000 years ago. Shortly after
this period they settled Tonga and then, at
the beginning of our era, Samoa.
The triangle thus formed by Fiji, Samoa
and Tonga is the cradle from which the
Polynesian language and culture sprang.
The contacts between the three groups were
maintained throughout the pre-European
period and thus although they differ in the
finer details, their cultures are essentially
Polynesian. Fiji, however, received later
waves of migrations from Melanesia, which
did have some influence on Tonga and to a
lesser extent on Samoa.
All these societies demonstrated to
varying degrees an elegant and advanced
political and social organization based on a
pyramidal kinship system, which defined
rank, political and social roles in terms of
blood ties. Genealogical ranking is its dis¬
tinctive feature. The head of the secular
system also claimed divine origin and a
complementary religious system acted as a
validating and support system to the politi¬
cal structure. The "kava" ceremony, prac¬
tised in all three groups, with its elaborate
rituals expressive of rank, and the chiefly
language ofTonga and Samoa, illustrate the
Polynesians' preoccupation with rank and
chieftainship.
They were essentially a seafaring people.
Their great ocean-going canoes, skilfully
fashioned using only crude stone axes,
shells and bones, were capable of carrying
up to 250 men and testified to their skills as
craftsmen and navigators. But they also
practised agriculture, and cultivated the
same crops of yams, taro, bread-fruit, bana¬
nas and coconuts with similar techniques, as
well as keeping pigs and chickens. They
cooked their food in earth ovens and in¬
dulged in gargantuan feasts. Their women
wove fine mats and baskets and made tapa-
cloths decorated with intricate designs.
15

^ Their houses, thatched and walled with
woven coconut or sugar-cane leaves, were
characterized by rounded ends and parallel
rafters and were supported by king posts.
They were fond of group singing and danc¬
ing in which hundreds could participate.
Their musical instruments included nose
flutes, wooden slit gongs and pan-pipes,
and their exhibition games included fighting
with clubs, wrestling and boxing. They dres¬
sed in mats, leaves and tapa-cloths.
These were the societies that the Euro¬
peans found. The group of Europeans re¬
sponsible for bringing the greatest changes
to the cultures of these peoples were the
missionaries. Their aim was not only to
bring Christianity but Western civilization.
The religious practices of these societies
were not the only cultural features con¬
sidered heathenish by the missionaries:
everything that did not conform with their
notion of Western civilized habits was con¬
demned from political and social systems
to arts and dances, from games and recrea¬
tions to eating habits, ways of dressing,
sexual mores and languages. Conversion to
Christianity required the new recruit to re¬
nounce not only his gods but much of his
3
©

Left, performance of an ancient Tongan
dance. Like all Polynesians, Tongans are
renowned for their love of music and it is
assumed that everyone in the community
can sing and dance.
FIJI
367 islands of which 97 are inhabited
Principal islands: Viti Levu, Vanua Levu,
Taveuni, Kandavu, Ovalau, Ngau, Koro
Date of independence
10 October 1970
Unesco date of entry
14 July 1983
Capital
Suva (Viti Levu)
Area
18,274 km2
Population
679,000(1984)
Gross national product (per capita)
(US$ 1983)
1,790
Economic activities
Agriculture: sugar cane; rice; manioc; coconuts;
bananas; ginger
Industry: sugar; coconut oil; copra; soap;
cement; beer; cigarettes; wood; matches; fish
canning
Mines: gold, silver
Tourism: 215,000 arrivals (1982)
Languages
Fijian; Hindi; English
THE KINGDOM OF TONGA
7 72 islands of which 36 are inhabited
Principal groups: Vava'u, Ha'apai, Tongatapu
Date of independence
4 July 1970
Unesco date of entry
29 September 1 980
Capital
Nuku'alofa (Tongatapu)
Area
699 km2
Population
105,000 (1984)
Gross national product (per capita)
(US$ 1983)
780
Economic activities
Agriculture: coconuts; bananas; vanilla
Industry: copra; coconut oil
Fishing
Tourism: 12,000 arrivals (1982)
Languages
Tongan; English
The potter's traditional craft provides the
main chronological and cultural evidence
of Oceanic prehistory. These fragments of
ancient pottery unearthed on Watom
Island, New Britain, in 1909, belong to a
type of ware known as "Lapita" from the
site in New Caledonia where it was first
found. Similar fragments from a nearby
site on Watom Island have recently been
scientifically dated to around 550 BC.
Below, modern buildings at Appia, West¬
ern Samoa, preserve the form of the tradi¬
tional Samoan village dwelling. There are
no walls, and matting is unrolled to keep
out the rain.
culture as well and instead acquire Western
values and manners.
In less than a hundred years these coun¬
tries had adopted Christianity and Western-
style educational, political and economic
systems, and with these many manifesta¬
tions of the superior technology of the
West, from satellite telecommunication
links to breweries and canning factories,
and from institutions of higher education to
disco dance halls.
Samoa and Tonga have become literate
bilingual societies, with English sharing
with Samoan and Tongan the role of official
languages. Samoa was a German colony
from 1900, a New Zealand colony from
1914 and a United Nations trustee adminis¬
tered by New Zealand until full independ¬
ence in 1962. Tonga was a British Protec¬
torate from 1900 to 1970.
Fiji, already with a legacy of multiling-
ualism, became even more multilingual as
well as multiracial and multicultural as a
result of her colonial experience. She was
ceded to Britain in 1874, and in 1879 the
British introduced the indentured labour
system under which labourers from India
were brought over to work in the coconut
and sugar plantations. When the scheme
ended in 1916, 40,000 of the Indians elected
to remain in Fiji and by 1956 had outnum¬
bered the indigenous Fijians. Fiji also has a
substantial population of Europeans,
Chinese and Polynesians. English is the
official language. The Bau dialect is the
most widely used of the Fijian dialects and
Hindustani is spoken by the majority of the
Indians.
But despite the changes, each cultural
group has evolved a distinct culture unique
to its members. The process of cultural
amalgamation has been a shared experience
common to all members of the group, and
throughout the changes the basic unit of the
social structure that of the "matai" (head¬
man) system in Samoa, the "mataqali"
(land-holding unit) in Fiji, and the "kainga"
(extended kinship unit) in Tonga remained
intact. Most of the populations remained in
villages, fully sharing the obligations and
rewards of community life led by a chief.
They have retained their languages, given
them written form, use them as media of
instruction at the primary level and teach
THE INDEPENDENT STATE OF WESTERN
SAMOA
Principal islands: Savaii, Upolu
Date of independence
1 January 1962
Unesco date of entry
3 April 1981
Capital
Apia (Upolu)
Area
2,842 km2
Population
161,000(1984)
Gross national product (per capita)
(US$1982)
425
Economic activities
Agriculture: coconuts; taro; bananas; cocoa;
wood
Industry: soap; beer; matches; cigarettes
Tourism: 23,000 arrivals (1982)
Languages
Samoan; English
17

yrm
Ta
The ritual preparation of kava, a drink
made from the green root of the pepper
plant, is one of many traditional cere¬
monies which give meaning to the lives of
Tongans, Samoans andFijians. The root is
pounded to a powder which is then mixed
with water in a large hand-carved wooden
bowl. When the kava reaches the right
consistency, it is drunk from half a coco¬
nut shell by the officiants, who are decked
out in garlands of leaves and flowers.

them as subjects at the higher levels. And
despite the missionaries and advanced tech¬
nology most aspects of their Polynesian
heritages have survived and are flourishing.
But greatly improved transport and com¬
munication links with metropolitan centres
are bringing unprecedented numbers of
tourists to these countries and not even the
remotest areas have escaped penetration.
The improved education systems and in¬
creasingly complex economic systems have
created their own demands and expecta¬
tions which in turn are affecting the very
fabric of the social structures at the most
basic levels. The repercussions on rural life
have led to mass exodus to the urban areas
and to metropolitan countries in search of
educational and economic opportunities.
The question that arises today is how long
the vernacular languages and social struc¬
tures can survive the tremendous social and
economic changes taking place within these
societies. The Fijian situation is perhaps the
most difficult. With its now multiracial,
multilingual and multicultural heritages, it
has to decide on whether or not to pursue an
integrated cultural policy aiming ultimately
at creating an amalgamation of the dispar¬
ate cultural elements within its society or to
continue to pursue an informal policy of
segregated cultural development with all its
implications.
The problem for Tonga and Samoa re¬
lates more to the development and main
tenance of their vernacular languages as the
vehicles of cultural preservation. Both
countries are very much aware of the dan¬
ger and are now implementing through
their education systems language and cul¬
tural programmes at all levels aimed at both
development and maintenance.
Tourism, although it is often severely
censured for introducing undesirable cul¬
tural traits, has in fact helped to revive
interest in many cultural features, particu¬
larly in the creative and expressive arts, that
were in danger of being lost. Similarly,
overseas migration has made the islanders
more conscious of their national identities
and their communities have become strong¬
ly nationalistic and highly aware of their
cultural heritages.
In recent years, efforts at cultural main¬
tenance have become formalized and in¬
corporated into national development
plans, which is perhaps an indication of the
importance these countries attach to the
role of their cultural heritage in creating
positive national identities for all their
members. Such moves augur well for the
continuing survival of these cultures.
'ANA MAUI TAUFE'ULUNGAKI, of the King¬
dom of Tonga, is studying for a Doctorate in
Applied Linguistics at the University of Birming¬
ham, United Kingdom. She was formerly Senior
Education Officer for Policy and Planning in the
Ministry of Education, Tonga.
