Arrival of the first Spaniards in
Michoacán. In his residence at Tzint-
zuntzán, the Cazonci (sovereign) orders
gifts to be taken to the strangers who
were thought to be gods.



The Chronicle
of Michoacán
by J.M.G. Le Clézio
In the sixteenth century, Michoacán, which in the Náhuatl
language means "the place of fish", was the name of the
Indian town of Tzintzuntzán, the capital of the
Porhepecha. We should know nothing about this vanished
civilization of Central America were it not for the Chroni¬
cle of Michoacán, which can rightly be said to be its tes¬
tament. The book was written in Spanish around 1540; it
describes the history of the Porhepecha people, their beliefs
and their faith, and gives the names of their gods and
heroes. The French writer J.M.G. Le Clézio has published
a French translation of the Chronicle of Michoacán (La
Relation de Michoacán, Gallimard, Paris, 1984). In the
following text he evokes this legendary tale of the one-time
glory of the Indians.
THE great stories of history tell us
about beginnings: the creation of
the earth, its first inhabitants, and
the coming of the gods and of the beings
they created.
The Chronicle of Michoacán is one of
the few texts the books of the Chilam
Balam of the Mayas of Yucután and the
Popol Vuh of the Quiche Mayas are
others which tell us about these begin¬
nings. Thanks to the Western system of
writing, it catches the verbal magic of
the fabled past of the people of
Michoacán when, after centuries of
wandering amid tribal warfare, there
came the first signs of the destiny of a
nation which played a vital part in the
civilizations of Central America.
Stricken in its vitals, with its temples
in ruins, its gods overthrown and, worst
of all, the one incarnation of the god
Curicaueri, the Cazonci Tangaxoan
Tzintzicha, fallen and enslaved by the
Conquistador Ñuño de Guzman, the
Porhepecha Kingdom was unable to put
up a fight. The men of this warlike peo¬
ple were struck motionless by a holy
dread, and fighting was out of the ques¬
tion.
The Indians sent these new gods offer¬
ings by way of greeting. But they were
soon to realize that these terrifying mes¬
sengers from the other world had not
come to bring the answer to their
prayers and receive their offerings; they
had come to fulfil the doom-laden
sayings of the oracles.
The news of the destruction of the
opposing empire of Tenochtitlán brought
no solace to the Cazonci; it perturbed
him even more. "Who are you?" he
asked Montano, the first Spaniard to set
foot on his territory. "Where are you
from? What are you seeking? For we
have never heard tell of men such as
you, nor seen such men. Why have you
come from such distant lands? Is there
neither food nor drink in your native
land, that you have come to make the
acquaintance of peoples unknown to
you? And what had the Mexicans done
to you, that you annihilated them when
you were in their city?"
The apprehensive questions of the
Porhepecha people were soon to be
answered. ... The newcomers wanted
gold, the "excrement of the sun", the
symbol of divine power. Their lust for
gold was not sated by the spoils of war
handed over to them by the Cazonci;
they wanted more and more, so they
sacked the temples and profaned the
tombs of the most illustrious kings.
Everything vanished when these con¬
querors approached, everything grew
silent, as the soothsayers had prophesied.
On the banks of a river, at the ford of
Nuestra Señora de la Purificación in the
year 1530, the last Cazonci was tortured and
slain by Ñuño de Guzman, after a parody of
a trial. So ended the glorious line of the
Uacusecha, the Eagles, who had built up
the empire, and also the reign of the god
Curicaueri, whose last incarnation on earth
the Cazonci had been. Another form of
speech, another conquest, were about to
begin, covering over the silence of the
Indians.
All that is left today as a legacy, thanks to
the anonymous Chronicle, is the memory of
that greatness, the legend, both touching
and true, of a past era, when poetry and
history were one, and when the kingdom of
men was like the dwelling place of the gods.
August 1985
JEAN MARIE G. LE CLEZIO is an essayist
and novelist of Franco-Mauritian origin. In
addition to his translation from Spanish into
French of the Relación de Michoacán (The
Chronicle of Michoacán, 1984), his many
published works include French translations
of Mayan texts, such as The Prophecies of
Chilam Balam (1976), and novels such as Le
chercheur d'or (The Gold-seeker, 1985).
31
