A Third World view of human rights
by Radhika Coomaraswamy
TO a great extent, the Third World has
not played a creative part in the for¬
mulation and implementation of human
rights. Though human rights embody many
tenets found in all the world's cultures, the
theoretical origins of the human rights move¬
ment are distinctively Western. The pillar con¬
cepts of the movement liberty, equality,
material welfare and self-determination are
formulated in the manner envisioned by the
modern movements of nationalism, liberalism
and socialism. These movements originated
in the West but have influenced political,
values throughout the world.
These historical origins alone have made
many cultural nationalists advocate the rejec¬
tion of the human rights movement as a uni¬
versal norm. Violations of human rights are
justified in terms of the illegitimacy of certain
human rights values in the Third World con¬
text. This remains a major crisis for the human
rights movement in the latter half of the twen¬
tieth century.
What approach should be adopted to re¬
concile the tension between the inherited
tradition of human rights and major develop¬
ments in the non-Western world? It is inevit¬
able that any such reappraisal must begin
with a view of history as a collective ex¬
perience, a synthetic process of human rights
learning and growth. At present there is a
need for Third World insights into human
rights protection, but the process must be a
creative one and not a denial of the very
concept of human rights; a process of supple¬
mentation and not of derogation.
The problem posed by this polemic be¬
tween North and South has two aspects. The
first is the reconciliation of non-Western cultu¬
ral values with the basic concepts of human
rights. The second is the integration of the
"development" experience into the norms and
structures of human rights protection. One
method of moving towards resolution of these
problems would be to regard human rights not
as ends in themselves but as a process which
implies a certain approach to law, politics and
economics. It should be seen as an approach
which accentuates the human dilemma above
other considerations.
The human rights movement cannot im¬
mediately be removed from the context of its
own history and structures. To do so would be
to deny it content and increase ambiguity.
The success, of the human rights movement
in the future of developing societies is greatly
dependent on its ability to convince the youth
of these nations that human rights must be an
important, if not primary, concern of any poli¬
tical ideology. It is therefore imperative that
teaching human rights be considered a fun¬
damental aspect of the school curriculum.
RADHIKA COOMARASWAMY is a Sri Lank¬
an lawyer who has specialized in human
rights research and education.
Though women's rights have received
much attention in the Western world, the
dilemma is more fundamental and complex in
developing societies. On the one hand, the
problem is political, legal and economic, espe¬
cially in relation to the so-called "modern"
sector. The human rights approach to
women's rights has most relevance to this
sector where the structure and style of the
industrial establishment are based on those
either in Western Europe or the Communist
countries of Eastern Europe.
The "techno-rational" principles of man¬
agement and policy-making are especially re¬
levant to the structures of protection formu¬
lated and implemented by the human rights
Resting in the shade, India.
movement. As the organizations in the mod¬
ern sector are prototypes of their European
counterparts, the human rights issues greatly
resemble those which are present in the de¬
veloped societies. The issues are, never¬
theless, accentuated because of a limited
sharing of resources.
On another level, the problem of women's
rights in developing societies has enormous
social and psychological dimensions. In many
ways, the issues of women's rights have ac¬
centuated the constant tension between tradi¬
tion and modernity. There is an important and
fundamental need to extricate women's rights
from the constraint of traditional ideas and
institutions, while acknowledging the creative
role that such concepts may play in other
areas of social and political life.
August-September 1982
