The blacks in Latin America
by Alejo Carpentier
THE apparent loss of feeling for
their original plastic arts among
displaced Africans transported to
the Americas can be explained by the fact
that sculpture, carving and decorative
painting required free time, which the
slave-holder was not prepared to grant.
He was not going to place workshops
and tools at the disposal of men who were
there to increase his wealth, simply so
that they could have the pleasure of carv¬
ing figures that he considered barbaric
idols and repositories of ancestral beliefs.
On the contrary, any such recollections
had to be wiped from the black man's
memory with the help of the overseer's
lash. "Civilized man" in the West did not
yet have the slightest interest in what he
would later come to value as "folk art".
While the black man's paintings or
carvings were considered works of the
Devil, music, on the other hand, did not
cause much inconvenience. The planta¬
tion owners in Cuba, for example,
allowed their slaves to beat their drums
and dance every evening because this
showed that they were in good health and
that their "ebony flesh" was fit for hard
labour.
Meanwhile, the slaves listened to what
they heard around them. During the six¬
teenth century, when they were first
taken to America, they assimilated Span¬
ish ballads, songs from Portugal and even
French square dancing. They discovered
musical instruments unknown in their
own lands and learned to play them.
If one of them succeeded in being freed
by a master who was more benevolent
than others, he might well turn to music
as a way of earning his living, mingling
with white people in an occupational
freemasonry.
Far removed from his African roots,
the black man in Latin America became a
basic constituent, together with the Indi¬
an, of the creóle class that was to affect
the destiny of a whole continent with its
aspirations, its struggles and its protest.
As the centuries went by, the blacks were
slowly incorporated into the society of
their new homelands and, little by little,
they recovered their poetic sense and the
feeling for the plastic arts which they
seemed to have lost.
Observing ancestral traditions that no
longer bore any relation to their sur¬
roundings was now out of the question.
The black peoples had forgotten their
African dialects by this time and spoke
only the major languages of the New
World. They felt no need to revive old
Yoruba tales, to recall ancient legends or
return to the sources of an oral culture
they were alienated from, but rather to
"make poetry" in the full sense of the
term.
The same thing happened in painting.
Black artists in the New World were com¬
pletely out of touch with art forms that in
Africa were related to religious cults now
left far behind (even though some ves¬
tiges can still be found on altars ostensibly
consecrated to Christian saints).
On the contrary, they had to solve the
same technical problems that face artists
everywhere in any period. It is obvious
then that the work of the black and mesti¬
zo painters and sculptors active in Latin
America in the nineteenth century bore
no resemblance whatsoever to the forms
and stylizations of African art.
This was also true of poetry at that
time. And one may add that there were
many "white" writers the word "white"
has always been quite relative in Latin
America who published novels with
"negro" settings, denouncing the loath¬
some aspects of slavery in the Americas.
It is only in the last fifty years that a
new generation of poets and painters has
appeared, whose works are marked by
the symbiosis of cultures fostered by the
New World. There has been much talk,
for example, of "black poetry", referring
to a resonant, percussive, onomatopoeic
type of poetry which, despite a prevalent
assumption, has often been written by
perfectly "white" poets.
In point of fact, this is an exotic view of
"négritude". The truth is that if "black
poetry" as such ever existed, it would
have had to be a protest on behalf of the
black people oppressed by centuries of
slavery and racial discrimination.
First and foremost, it would have had
to be a revolutionary cry because, since
the sixteenth century, the blacks have
always been in revolt against their over¬
lords in some part of the hemisphere, and
even formed small independent States in
Brazil, the Guyanas and Jamaica States
that sometimes survived for many years.
Never during their long history in the
New World did the blacks give up their
quest for freedom, a quest furthered by
the creóles of all classes and stations who,
after much struggling, finally threw off
the yoke of Spanish, Portuguese, French
and English colonialism.
In short, there exists in the Antilles,
where Spanish, English and French are
spoken, literature and painting with a
markedly creóle character, and it would
be difficult to say just what can be attri¬
buted to their various ethnic com¬
ponents.
August-September 1977
ALEJO CARPENTIER (1904-1980), of Cuba,
was one ofLatin America 's leading novelists. His
many books have been translated into 22 lan¬
guages and include, in English editions: The
Kingdom of this World (1957), The Lost Steps
(1957) published by Knopf, New York, Explosion
in a Cathedral (Gollancz, London, 1963) and
Reasons of State (Partridge, London, 1976). A
musicologist, Carpentier wrote A History of
Cuban Music (1949).
African slaves and the caravels that trans¬
ported them to the New World dominate a
huge mural in an office in Bahia (Brazil).
Along with the Iberian conquistadors, the
blacks were to create a new form ofculture
in the Caribbean, Brazil and other parts of
Latin America. Black artists in the New
World lost touch with purely African art
forms, but family resemblances to the Afri¬
can tradition have survived.
28

t
