Cover illustration of David de Sassoun, a
French version of a medieval Armenian
epic comprising anonymous popular
poems transmitted by the oral tradition. It
was published in the Collection in 1964. A
version of the epic in English, entitled
Daredevils of Sassoun, has also been pub¬
lished in the Collection (see below).



Jalali meets his master
<D
L avid, after your father died I would not let his fiery
horse out of the stable for fear Misra Melik would
know about it and want him for himself. We have
been feeding and watering him from the roof. I don't dare go
near that horse. If you can lead him out of the stable, Jalali is
yours. "
David entered the secret stable through a little inside door
no one had opened for twenty years. He had his father's
armour on him and the horse smelled him with tears in his
eyes, taking him for Meherr. David caressed his mane,
stroked his neck and back, and the horse kept nuzzling him.
David led him out of the stable. The horse kicked, with fiery
sparks blazing out from his hooves, when he saw it wasn't
Meherr. The horse spoke by God's order:
"Earthborn, what do you want to do with me?"
"I want to ride you to war," David said.
"Ride me? I will take you up to the clouds and burn you to
ashes against the sun."
"I can ride under your belly."
"I will smash you to pieces against rocks and trees. I will
hurl you against the winds. Throw you into bottomless seas.
My name is Colt Jalali. If I just breathe on you you will be
blown off like so much dust, you earthborn fool."
David said: "I can ride on your back, under your belly, on
your right side, your left side. I can hang on to your tail. I can
even ride in your mouth if I want to."
"Some rider," Jalali said. "From now on you are my
master and I am your horse."
David kissed him on the head and said:
"You had no master, I am your master
No one to groom you, to hold your halter
No one to feed you, to give you water
To look after you, Ó Colt Jalali."
(...) "Uncle Ohan, give me his silver saddle with the gold
stirrups."
Ohan brought him the silver saddle with the gold stirrups
and watched him saddle the horse, thinking to himself:
"When Meherr mounted him Jalali reared up on his hind
legs. If he will do that with David, I will let him go fight Misra
Melik." All four feet of the horse were off the ground when
David seized the silver saddle and put his feet in the gold
stirrups. He rode up and down a few times and had Barav
also enjoy a ride with him. Jalali had found his new master.
Extract from Daredevils of Sassoun, The Armenian National Epic,
by Leon Surmelian, published by George Allen & Unwin Ltd.,
London, 1966.
29
