
Above, computerized photograph re¬
ceived from the European Space Agency's
spacecraft Giotto when It ertcountered
Helley's comet early In the morning of 14
Uarch 1986. Picture was sent from about
1,500 km from the nucleus of the comet.


n
Rendezvous with Halley's comet
A major international venture
to study a visitor from space by Howard Brabyn
LIKE courtiers dancing a stately quad¬
rille, eight instrument-packed space
probes (one launched by the Euro¬
pean Space Agency, two by the USSR, two
by Japan, and three by the USA) are weav¬
ing intricate patterns in space in the biggest
international astronomic co-operative ven¬
ture ever mounted the investigation of
Halley's comet.
Two space shuttle missions are also being
in part devoted to observation of the comet,
the trajectory of which will be continuously
monitored by the world's most powerful
land-based telescopes. Altogether some
900 professional astronomers from forty-
seven countries are taking part in the
investigation.
Why all this interest in what veteran US
astronomer Fred Whipple has described as
"a large, dirty snowball"?
The answer is that astronomers believe
that comets consist of the remnants of the
building blocks left over from the birth of
the solar system some 4,500 million years
ago. The history of the solar system is re¬
corded, so it is thought, within their frozen
hearts.
Today, for the first time ever, thanks to
the genius of two seventeenth-century En¬
glish scientists, Isaac Newton and Edmond
Halley, and the achievements of modern
space technology, we have in our hands an
entrance ticket to one of these refrigerated,
flying museums. For Halley's comet is the
only vigorously active comet whose orbit
brings it relatively close to the earth (this
time round, its thirtieth recorded appar¬
ition, it is coming to within 62 million
kilometres of our planet) and has been de¬
termined precisely enough to allow of de¬
tailed scientiñc planning for investigation
well in advance; and for the very first time
space technology is sufficiently advanced to
enable us to go out and meet a comet
beyond the blanket of the earth's atmos¬
phere instead of waiting for it to come to us,
to penetrate its coma (the fuzzy gaseous
cloud, up to 100,000 kilometres across, that
shields the nucleus from our sight), to have
a close up view of its nucleus and to analyse
the components of its tail, in short, to
understand the elements from which our
solar system was constructed.
In 1950, the Dutch astronomer Jan Hen¬
drik Oort postulated that comets originate
from a vast cloud of hundreds of millions of
small bodies (now known as the Oort
Cloud) that orbits the solar system at a
distance of one light-year. The nucleus, or
core, of a comet is thought to consist of
about 25 per cent dust and lumps of rock or
metallic matter and 75 per cent of ice, in
which are mixed compounds containing
ammonia, methane and carbon dioxide
radicals. The 700 or so comets that have
been scientifically recorded so far have had
nuclei ranging in size from 0.5 to 70
kilometres in diameter.
From time to time a passing star sends a
gravitational ripple through the Oort Cloud
sending a flurry of these "dirty snowballs"
hurtling off into space. Some of them, the
"short-period" comets, like Halley's comet,
are projected towards the solar system and,
influenced by its gravitational pull, become
members of the inner solar system, com¬
pleting their orbits around the sun in less
than 200 years. The "long-period" comets
can take millions of years to complete their
orbital cycles. An average of five new com¬
ets are discovered every year.
The outer surface of a comet nucleus is
thought to consist mainly of dust. As a
comet approaches to within three astrono¬
mical units of the sun (one astronomical
unit equals the distance between the earth
and the sun, roughly 150 million
kilometres) this outer crust heats up and the
sub-surface ice begins to sublimate (a pro¬
cess by which a solid is converted directly
into vapour without going through the liq¬
uid stage). The resulting gas streams out
from the comet carrying dust particles with
it to form the coma.
As it gets closer to the sun a comet de¬
velops two tails, a yellowish curved tail K

The EngHsh Astronom» Royal Edmond
tWIey (1656-1742). He calculated the
orltlta of many comets and correctly pre¬
dicted the return of Ote comet of 1682
Halley's comet wMch this year Is again
^tproachlng relatively e/ose to the earOi
(tor the 30th recorded tíme).

^ composed of dust particles released during
the process of sublimation, and a blueish
stream of gas called the plasma tail which is
formed when the gases released from the
comet's nucleus become charged by solar
radiation.
In a few months' time, when all the data
have been gathered in, we shall have made a
tremendous leap forward in our knowledge
of the nature of comets and of the origins of
the solar system. We should not, however,
forget that this will be due not only to the
brilliance of modern astronomers but also
to a quite unprecedented effort of interna¬
tional co-operation.
Launched on 15 December 1984, the
Soviet space probe Vega 1 flew through
Halley's coma on 6 March 1986, at a dis¬
tance of about 9,600 kilometres from the
nucleus, and photographed and analysed
the gases around it. Sister satellite Vega 2
encountered Halley's comet on 9 March
1986 and analysed its coma.
The Japanese probe Sakigake (pioneer),
launched on 7 January 1985, rendezvoused
with Halley's comet on 9 March 1986 and
measured the speed and temperature of the
solar wind blowing against the comet , whilst
on 8 March 1986 its companion satellite
Suisei (comet) flew past Halley's comet at a
distance of 144,000 kilometres and studied
the enormous cloud of hydrogen gas sur¬
rounding the comet.
Playing supporting roles are the veteran
US space probes Pioneer 12, Solar Max and
ICE (International Cometary Explorer).
Pioneer 12 is turning its attention away from
its long-term task of observing the effects of
the solar wind on planet Venus to focus its
spectrometer on Halley's comet during and
after the perihelion (the period of the com¬
et's closest approach to the sun). At the
Schematic drawing above shows
trajectories of the European Space Agen¬
cy's (ESA) spacecraft Giotto (see caption
page 18) and one of two Soviet Vega
spacecraft which flew through Halley's
comet in March 1986. To enable Giotto to
pass near the comet's nucleus, which Is
disguised by coma dust and gas, the
Soviet astronomers agreed to provide
ESA with information derived from camer¬
as on board the Vega probes, the first to fly
through the comet. The US National Aero¬
nautics and Space Administration (NASA)
also supported this three-agency "Pathfin¬
der Concept" to reduce Giotto targeting
uncertainty.
same time Solar Max is studying the comet's
dust and plasma tails for comparison with
observations made by ICE last September
on the nature of the tail of comet Giacobini-
Zinner.
Last in the field is the European Space
Agency's satellite Giotto. Named after the
famous fourteenth-century Florentine pain¬
ter Giotto di Bondone, who included Hal¬
ley's comet in his Paduan fresco The Adora¬
tion of the Magi (see colour page 19) after
witnessing its apparition in 1301, space
probe Giotto was launched on 2 July 1985.
Basing its trajectory on data supplied by the
two Soviet Vega probes, Giotto's mission
was to pass near the comet's nucleus, ex¬
amining the material streaming from it and
transmitting photographs to earth every
four seconds.
This might well have been a suicide mis¬
sion. The slightest error in calculation of its
trajectory could have sent Giotto crashing
into the surface of the comet. As a precau¬
tion against the particles which surround
the comet, some of them large enough to
have inflicted fatal damage, the satellite was
fitted with an outer aluminium skin and an
inner casing made of Kelvar, the material
from which bullet-proof vests are made. As
it happened, the spacecraft functioned per¬
fectly until 2 seconds before the scheduled
time of closest approach when the telemetry
signal was lost owing to dust impacts on the
spacecraft. Just over half an hour later,
however, the signal was recovered at
ground stations in Australia, and data from
all experiments was again being received.
The results will take months to analyse
fully but first impressions are that they are
spectacular. The Halley Multicolour
Camera on board Giotto, appears to have
determined the size of the nucleus as appro¬
ximately fifteen by eight kilometres, and
the spacecraft has contributed a mass of
other information to the International Hal¬
ley Watch, perhaps the most complex inter¬
national astronomical project ever under¬
taken. And as scientists sit down to assess
the information as it comes flooding in from
the space Armada, they will surely sense
the presence of two great figures from the
past peering eagerly over their shoulders
Isaac Newton, the man who first prop¬
ounded a workable theory of the orbits of
comets, and Edmond Halley who applied
this theory to the comet named after him,
which he had seen in 1682 and which he
accurately predicted would return at regu¬
lar seventy-six-year intervals, thus blazing
the trail for the amazing adventure we are
living through today.
HOWARD BRABYN is a Paris-based British
writer andjournalist with a special interest in the
popularization ofscience. He was formerly editor
in charge of the English-language edition of the
Unesco Courier.
