I*
Saintly sons and daughters
-r
Ancient China's
enduring cult of filial piety
Drawings show the evolution of3 Chinese
characters from pictorial representation.
Left to right, ideograms signifying "old",
"child" and "filial piety". The latter is a
combination of the first two.
Calligraphy © Hsuing Ping Ming, Paris. Drawings from L'origine
des caractères © Yong Bao Zai, Beijing. 1979
by Donald Holzman
THE desire to reach out beyond our
everyday lives to find some kind of
permanence or absolute meaning
for them seems to be universal, but each
civilization reaches out in a different way.
To study one of the methods the Chinese
have employed to attain to this heightened
meaning of life may teach us something
about the bases of Chinese civilization and
also something about our own.
The Chinese have espoused various
forms of religiosity throughout their long
history. Filial piety is possibly the most
enduring of all these forms. Archaeologists
believe that the burial sites in Banshan,
eastern Gansu, which date from the begin¬
ning of the third millennium BC, show that
the Chinese already celebrated an ancestor
cult at that time. Whether or not we accept
their hypothesis, it is clear that filial piety
was the cornerstone of the most ancient
Chinese royal religion. The worship of the
supreme deity, God on High (Shangdi)
could only be carried out through the
worship of the king's own ancestors who
served as "go-betweens" (peí) to the deity.
Evidence of filial piety is also found
throughout the earliest period of Chinese
history, even though the character for filial
piety, xiao, strangely enough, does not
appear in the earliest writings, the oracle
bone inscriptions. On bronze vessels dating
from as early as 1000 BC, a Chinese scholar
writing in 1974 counted sixty-four inscrip¬
tions containing the word for filial piety, in
contexts showing that the sentiment con¬
cerned living members of the family (pa¬
rents and brothers) as well as ancestors.
16

It is hard to appreciate today what it
meant to be "filial" in ancient China; too
few texts dealing with everyday life have
survived to enable us to reconstruct in detail
what it was like to live in a Chinese family
in, say, 1000 BC. However, some ancient
texts do give us glimpses of what Chinese in
that distant past thought of their parents,
providing a picture not entirely different
from that presented by Chinese family life
today. Poem no. 202 in the "Minor Odes" of
the "Book of Poetry" (Shijing), for exam¬
ple, contains a very moving description of
an orphan lamenting the death of his
parents, and the "Book of Documents"
(Shangshu) contains a number of references
to filial piety, the most important (and
probably one of the oldest) being in the
"Announcement to Kang" (Kanggao). The
passage in question not only equates unfilial
children with "the worst criminals", it also
describes unfilial behaviour in emotive
terms, saying that an unfilial son "wounds
his father's heart grievously".
Yet in the earliest stories told about filial
sons and daughters there is something that
non-Chinese find hard to believe or under¬
stand. A story in a very late section of the
"Book of Documents" about the early cul¬
ture hero, Shun, and his barely credible
filial conduct towards his blind father and
his wicked stepmother, is typical of the
stories of filial sons. In one of the very few
works of Antiquity that tell us much about
everyday life, the Zuozhuan ("Zuo's Com¬
mentary" on the Chunqiu), a work that is
generally thought to have been recorded in
written form in the mid fourth century BC
but may contain genuine material from as
early as the end of the eighth century, are
other stories which it is equally difficult to
believe.
It is surely not a coincidence that the very
first story in the Zuozhuan concerns filial
piety. It describes the actions taken by
Duke Zhuang of the state of Zheng who has
done everything in his power to remain filial
to his mother whose treacherous behaviour
towards him would seem rather to merit the
strictest punishment. Yet the commenta¬
tors, beginning with the author of the
Zuozhuan himself, find that his behaviour
-MCW^m zzw&
i%7tt
mt >!*
i
.» l\ I ii' ! J	 WW
II
föS&M :,i£Zíí
hty, . jjyii if. rjjr a «ftTTT
<^Z¿JS^ShA. J | \|VU
was not filial enough! The stories of Jizi
(695 BC) and of Shensheng (659 and 655
BC) both of whom prefer to die rather than
to deny their fathers' exorbitant demands,
are similarly hard to take. In all these stories
filial piety seems to require absolute obedi¬
ence to one's parents.
These earliest examples of the import¬
ance of filial piety are more than confirmed
in the Golden Age of the philosophers.
Every single school of philosophy without
exception, even the iconoclastic Daoists
and the anti-traditional Legalists, accepted
filial piety as a natural, inevitable human
sentiment. The Legalists, indeed, coupled
the virtue with "loyalty" (zhong) and gave it
an importance in the government of the
State that it had never had previously but
that it was to keep until our own day.
Illustration depicts an episode in the life of
a model son, Xue Bao. "His father remar¬
ried and his new wife, taking an intense
aversion to Xue Bao, had him sent away
from the house. Buthe criednightandday,
unable to leave, until they took a stick to
him and he was obliged to lodge in a hut
outside the house. In the mornings he
would go In to sprinkle and sweep, which
angered his father, who chased him out
again. "
Photo from an 1 8th century Korean work on virtuous people from
Chinese history © Musée Guimet, Paris
17

m
^O z H
BK
Drawing of Cao E., a Chinese heroine cele¬
brated for her filial devotion. Her father
was a shaman who drowned while celeb¬
rating the cult of the God of the Waves.
"His body was not recovered, and his 13-
year-old daughter, Cao £., went along the
river wailing and crying night and day
without stopping. Seven days later she
threw herself into the river and drowned. "
Confucius makes filial piety a corner¬
stone of his philosophy, but his remarks on
the subject show that for him this quality
transcends ordinary rationality and should
be treated as something inviolable. It is
generally agreed that Confucius, in his
"Analects" or "Conversations", provided
China, and the world, with some of the
loftiest, most deeply human and appealing
moral insights ever pronounced. But his
dicta on filial piety seem so stiff and doctri¬
naire that they might almost have been
made by someone else, a follower so intent
on keeping the letter of Confucius' teaching
that he lost its spirit.
But I am by no means sure that this is the
case; is it not rather that the very special
role played by filial piety in Chinese
thought in general, and in Confucian
thought in particular, gives to his pro¬
nouncements on the subject a stiff, absolut¬
ist tone quite absent from the rest of his
work? Precisely because the Chinese have
considered filial piety as something "abso¬
lute", something universally recognized as
beyond question, a distinctive form of mor¬
al hero or saint has come into being. De¬
tailed study of this "saint" may reveal some¬
thing important about the Chinese way of
thinking.
The three examples already cited from
the Zuozhuan show men doing very strange
things, leading to suicide for two of them, in
order to respect blindly the sometimes irra¬
tional wills of their parents. Many similar
sacrifices must have been made in the
ancient period, but it is only under the
Empire [after the unification of China in
221 BC] that stories of filial sons and daugh-
Scene from the life of St. Mary Magdalen
de Pazzi (1566-1606), patron Saint of Flor¬
ence who was canonized in 1669. In spite
of a fragile constitution, she lived in great
austerity and attained a high degree of
mysticism. She is shown below at the age
ofeleven when, wearing a crown of thorns,
she spent entire nights flagellating
herself.
2
Photo from an 18th century Korean work on virtuous people from
Chinese history © Musée Guimet, Paris u
©
18

ters become commonplace and are re¬
corded in detail. A chapter is reserved for
them in twenty of the twenty-four dynastic
histories and countless separate collections
are devoted to them, much like the "Lives
of the Saints" that were so popular in
Europe almost until modern times. It may
be that filial piety only became noteworthy
under the Empire when it was institutional¬
ized as an "imperial" virtue, rewarded by
the State with stipends and titles that could
lead to high official posts in the civil service.
The earliest examples of filial extrava¬
gances I have been able to find in the dynas¬
tic histories are taken from the Hou Hon¬
shu, principally from Chapter 39, which is
entirely devoted to filial sons and daughters
and probably dates from the middle of the
fourth century AD.
The Preface to Chapter 39 tells two stor¬
ies about sons who showed filial piety. The
first describes a man who serves as an offi¬
cial only to be able to take care of his
mother, who has no personal interest in the
glory such service might procure for him.
The second tells a story that is so typical that
I shall quote the beginning of it in full:
"At the time of Emperor An [who
reigned from AD 107 to 126] there lived a
man from Runan [southern Henan] named
Xue Bao. ... Studious and sincere, when his
mother died he was renowned for his per¬
fect filial piety during the mourning period.
His father remarried and his new wife, tak¬
ing an intense aversion to Xue Bao, had him
sent away from the house. But he cried
night and day, unable to leave, until they
took a stick to him and he was obliged to
lodge in a hut outside the house. Mornings
Two edifying cases of filial piety are de¬
scribed in a 14th-century collection of
Chinese poems by Gui Ju Jing entitled
Twenty-four Examples of Chinese Piety.
Drawing this page, left shows the Emperor
Wu of the Han dynasty (standing) and his
mother (seated at left). After becoming
Emperor, Wu continued to treathis mother
with the same filial devotion as before.
Whenever she took a medicinalpotion the
Emperor tasted it himself before giving it
to her. Drawing right evokes the story of
another model son. The family of 8-year-
old Wu Weng lived in a region infested with
mosquitoes. Because his parents were so
poor that they could not afford to buy a
mosquito net, Wu Weng slept in their bed¬
room and let himself be bitten by the mos¬
quitoes so that his parents could sleep
undisturbed.
he would go in to sprinkle and sweep, which
angered his father, who chased him out
again. Then he set himself up in a hut next
to the gate of their ward, but never failed to
greet his parents in the evening and in the
morning. After a year or so his parents felt
ashamed and had him come back."
Later, when his father and stepmother
died, he doubled or tripled the mourning
period. Xue Bao is typical of the filial sons
we read about in texts of this time. In fact
his actions seem almost normal when you
compare them with some of the other filial
sons and daughters that fill the pages of the
Hou Honshu.
We learn of four-year-old children who
refused to eat and drink when their parents
fell ill, and of a man who "ate no meat and
drank no wine for over ten years after the
death of his father, and commemorated the
anniversary of his death by fasting for three
days". Some of the stories, such as that of
Yang Zhen (died AD 124), are even more
amazing. A scion of one of the founding
families of the Han dynasty, Yang Zhen
taught school early in life to keep aloof from
politics:
"Fatherless when young and poor, he
lived alone with his mother. He rented
some land to cultivate and thus provide for
their sustenance. Once one of his pupils
tried to help him plant cabbages, but Yang
Zhen pulled them up each time, and re¬
planted them a little further on. The neigh¬
bours called him 'filial'."
Yang Zhen, believe it or not, is here
proving his filial piety by insisting that his
mother's cabbages were planted by her
son's own fingers!
Moving cabbage plants around is a harm¬
less enough demonstration of filial feelings,
but there are many examples of deaths
caused by a desire to give irrefutable proof
of filial piety. The most famous example is
the story of Cao E, who lived near what is
now Shaoxing in Zhejiang. Her father was a
shaman (wu) who drowned on the fifth day
of the fifth lunar month (6 June) in AD 143,
while he was celebrating the cult of the God
of the Waves (perhaps a deification of the |
19

^ tidal bore). "His body was not recovered,
and his thirteen-year-old daughter, Cao E,
went along the river wailing and crying
night and day without stopping. Seven days
later she threw herself into the river and
drowned."
Another filial daughter, Shuxian Xiong
(or Shu Xianluo), drowned herself in
Sichuan, on the other side of China, on the
spot where her father had drowned, and
was found floating in the water with her
father in her arms six days later. Jiang Shi
drowned because he ventured too far out
into the river to fetch drinking water for his
mother who preferred river water to well
water.
The stories showing self-sacrifice, mira¬
cles, cruel persecutions (usually by
mothers-in-law or stepmothers) greeted
with forbearance, useless suicides, extraor¬
dinary examples of brothers who refuse to
leave one another even to sleep with their
wives, except to produce offspring, fill the
pages of the Hou Honshu and are in fact
found throughout Chinese history.
How can these astonishing actions be
accounted for? They are strongly reminis¬
cent of the behaviour of the Christian saints
of late Antiquity and the Middle Ages.
Mortifications, leper-licking, holy anorexia
and other excessive actions were never
deemed excessive enough to prove the
saints' love for and adoration of their
Creator. Is this not a similar phenomenon
to that of Chinese filial piety?
The Chinese woi Id-view, as has often
been remarked, is much more earthbound
than the world-view of the West; imman¬
ence has always been preferred to trans¬
cendence in China, and when the Chinese
reach out towards their "creator" they re¬
fuse to take the metaphysical leap the Wes¬
terner finds normal and look toward those
they know are their true creators, their
parents. "The Book of Filial Piety" (Xiao-
jing), a mediocre document that probably
dates from the very end of Antiquity or
from the beginning of the Imperial era and
has been extraordinarily popular through¬
out Chinese history, says this in almost so
many words. In Chapter 9 we read: "there
can be no greater veneration of the father
than to make him the go-between with
Heaven." The word used for "go-between",
pei, and the context, show that the authors
of the Xiaojing here are referring to the very
earliest Chinese religious practices known
to us, according to which sacrifices were
presented to royal ancestors who, as go-
betweens, interceded and presented to
Heaven their descendants' requests. This is
to give the father a mystical role and to
identify him, if not as God, at least as a
stepping-stone toward God. Thus in this
respect the Chinese are not far from making
gods of their parents, and their actions show
them, like their Western counterparts,
attempting to reach out beyond themselves
to glorify their creators, who are literally
their fathers and mothers.
DONALD HOLZMAN, born in Chicago, USA, is
head of the Institute of Advanced Chinese Stu¬
dies in Paris, and director ofstudies at the School
of Advanced Studies in Social Sciences, also in
Paris, where he is professor of Institutions of
Imperial China.

