Aleksandr Ostrovsky
Founding father of Russian theatre
by Nelly Kornienko
SOMETIME in the autumn of 1849, in
the famous Moscow literary salon of
Countess Rostopchin, an elegant,
fair-haired man of twenty-six read his play
Bankrot ("The Bankrupt") to an audience
of distinguished literary figures including
the great Nikolai Gogol. More readings of
this work, which had opened the doors of
Moscow's salons to its author, were soon
delighting the evening patrons of the city's
cafés and taverns, but the imperial theatres
remained immune to the enthusiasm felt by
the new playwright's first admirers. Tsar
Nicolas I banned the play and had its au¬
thor, Aleksandr Nicolaevich Ostrovsky
(1823-1886) watched by the police. His sixth
play was the first to be staged and all its
successors had problems with the censor.
The author of some fifty plays, Ostrovsky
is the creator of the Russian "comedy of
manners" and the founder of the repertory
of the Russian theatre. He was born and
grew up in the Zamoskvorechye commer¬
cial district of Moscow, away from the city's
major thoroughfares. Destined by his
father for a career in commerce, the young
Ostrovsky's first employment was with the
Moscow civil court. His youthful observa¬
tions of different types of merchants and the
setting in which they lived were to provide
him with material for most of his plays.
In face of obstinate, ignorant, despotic
money-grubbers respectful of the estab¬
lished order, conformists such as Podkha-
liuzin, Bolshov and Kabanikha, he sets
figures on a par with such great characters
of the European drama as Hamlet, Karl
Moor or Laurencia, the creations of
Shakespeare, Schiller and Lope de Vega.
In Dokhodnoe Mesto (1857, "A Profit¬
able Post"), Zhadov champions those who
go "against social customs and conditions. . .
The struggle is arduous and often fatal, but
the glory for those who win through and the
gratitude of later generations is all the
greater. . . . Without them lies and evil would
have proliferated to hide the sun's light
from men". In Les (1871 ; The Forest, 1926),
the tragedian Neschaslivtsev proclaims that
"honour is boundless", and Parasha, in
Gorzhacheiya serdce (1869, "A Yearning
Heart"), asserts for all to hear, "You can
take away all I have but I shall never give up
my freedom	 For my freedom I would go
to the scaffold."
The tragic end of Ostrovsky's finest char¬
acters always springs from their rectitude,
their purity, their nobility of spirit, their
moral integrity and their conviction that
love is the ultimate meaning of life. In this
respect Ostrovsky echoes the preoccupa¬
tions of Dostoyevsky, for whom beauty will
save the world, or the law of love and the
vocation of goodness dear to Tolstoy.
Ostrovsky wished "to put the people on
the right path without harming them". Be¬
cause of the logic of the plot, people who
make their mark in life through hypocrisy
and duplicity often triumph in his plays. But
the real victors are losers like Katerina, who
is incapable of living dishonestly and throws
herself into the Volga, or Larissa, the girl
without a dowry whose fine talent has been
brought to nothing by the vulgarity of life
and who murmurs "Thank you" to Karan-
dychev, her murderer and saviour, before
she dies. Ostrovsky wants a person who
rebels against oppression and arbitrariness,
a free spirit, to become the "law of life".
It should thus come as no surprise that
circles close to the court of the Tsar, suspi¬
cious of culture and the theatre and
apprehensive of new ideas, stopped at noth¬
ing to prevent Ostrovsky's heroes from
being portrayed in the theatre, even though
they might admit that Ostrovsky himself
was not without talent. It was said contemp-
"You alone have completed the edifice
whose foundations were laid by Fonvizin,
Griboyedov and Gogol. It is because of
you alone that we Russians can proudly
say that we have our national theatre. In all
justice, it should be called the Ostrovsky
theatre." This tribute to Aleksandr N.
Ostrovsky was made by the writer Ivan A.
Goncharov, seated at extreme left of this
photo taken in the editorial offices of the
magazine Sovremennik. Seated with him
(left to right) are Ivan S. Turgenev, Alek¬
sandr V. Druzhinin, and Ostrovsky. Stand¬
ing behind them are Leo N. Tolstoy and
Dim¡tri V. Grigorovich.

Scene from a production of The Forest at
Moscow's Maly Theatre where this and
otherplays by Ostrovsky still have an hon¬
oured place in the repertoire. The Forest,
written in 1871, describes the decline of
the Russian aristocracy and the rise of a
new class of merchants, who buy up the
large estates at rock bottom prices and
ruthlessly clear their forests.
With his general's uniform, narrow-
minded outlook and generally decrepit
appearance, Krutinsky, a character in
Ostrovsky's comedy Even a Wise Man
Stumbles, symbolizes the decadent in¬
stitutions of the old Russia. Above, Kru¬
tinsky played in a 1910 production by the
greatactoranddirectorKonstantin Stanis¬
lavsky.
tuously of his plays that they "stank of
sheepskin".
Nevertheless, under the pressure of pub¬
lic opinion , Ostrovsky was elected a Corres¬
ponding Member of the Academy of Scien¬
ces in 1863. Shortly before, on the new
ceiling of St. Petersburg's Maryinsky the¬
atre, his portrait had been added to those of
the classics of Russian satire, Fonvizin, Gri-
boyedov and Gogol.
"The existence of a national theatre is the
sign that a nation has reached its majority,"
wrote Ostrovsky, "just like that of
academies, universities and museums." In
addition to his creative work as a dramatist,
he gave many years of his life to other
activities connected with the theatre. Mos¬
cow's "Little Theatre" (or "Maly") where
he staged many of his plays, was dubbed
"the Ostrovsky house". And only six
months before his death he was appointed
director of the repertory of Moscow's impe¬
rial theatres where in face of considerable
obstruction he nevertheless succeeded in
introducing reforms. His influence on the
history of the theatre was in every respect
enormous.
Ostrovsky's horizons broadened as the
years went by and came to include other
social classes as well as the merchants. In
the 1870s he created a new type of charac¬
ter, the cold, ambitious bourgeois, the Rus¬
sian equivalent of Balzac's Rastignac.
Ostrovsky analyses certain forms of Rus¬
sian behaviour and patterns of thought with
such originality and authenticity that this
"Russianness" slowed down the introduc¬
tion of his work to other countries. In
France, for example, the first performance
of Groza (1859; The Storm, 1898) possibly
his masterpiece, did not take place until
1889.
Around the middle of the nineteenth cen¬
tury the Russian novel of Tolstoy, Dos-
toyevsky and Turgenev conquered Western
Europe, but Ostrovsky's plays remained
unknown there because of the exceptional
translation difficulties involved. In the East
too, interest in his plays only began to
appear much later. In adapted form, his
work enjoyed a certain success in China in
the 1920s, but did not achieve world fame
until the 1960s and 1970s, when plays by
Ostrovsky were performed in over forty
theatres in Delhi, London, New York,
Paris, Milan, Hamburg, Basle and else¬
where. Since then their author's literary
reputation and stature have continued to
grow.
In Ostrovsky's own country, the greatest
directors of the twentieth century have been
attracted to his work. Konstantin Stanis¬
lavsky staged Snegurochka ("The Snow
Maiden", 1872) a poetic masterpiece made
famous by Rimski-Korsakov's operatic
adaptation of it, and "A Yearning Heart".
Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko, author
and drama teacher who founded the Mos¬
cow Art Theatre with Stanislavsky, staged
Na vsyakogo mudretsa dovolno prostoty
(1868; Even a Wise Man Stumbles, 1944),
and the great Vsevolod Meyerhold pre¬
sented The Forest and "A Profitable Post".
Two other avant-garde directors, Alek¬
sandr Tai'rov and Yuri Zavadsky, staged
respectively Bese viny vinovatye ("The In
nocent Guilty") and Bespridannitsa (1879;
"The Girl without a Dowry"). Musical
adaptations and experimental versions have
also been performed in the present decade.
Some of Ostrovsky's plays have also been
adapted for the cinema and television.
Among them are Yakov Protazanov's ver¬
sion of The Poor Bride, Vladimir Petrov's
The Storm, and, more recently, Eldar
Riazanov's Gestoki romanse ("The Cruel
Romance"), which was a great success with
the public.
All these productions have made known
a new Ostrovsky who sings a hymn to love
and fidelity.
A man of wide culture, Ostrovsky did
much to bring to the Russian stage dramat¬
ists from other literatures. Among the
works he translated into Russian are the
Asinaria of Plautus, Terence's Hecyra,
Shakespeare's The Taming of the Shrew and
Antony and Cleopatra, Machiavelli's The
Mandrake, and works by Seneca and Cer¬
vantes.
With Nikolai Rubinstein, director of the
Moscow Conservatory, and the actor Piotr
Sadovsky, Ostrovsky created in 1865 the
"Artistic Circle" the first society of artists
in Russia whose members included
actors, writers, musicians and painters. Im¬
pressed by the teachings of the Russian
physiologist and naturalist Ivan Sechenov,
he worked out a theory of acting based on
the idea of reciprocal conditioning between
the actor and his environment.
In the last years of his life, Ostrovsky
spent much of his time on his estate at
Chtchelykovo, in the region of Kostroma,
10

**
T
4 1
The actress Alice Koonen as Katerina in a
1924 production ofOstrovsky's The Storm
(1859). In this interpretation oftheplayas a
"peasant tragedy" Katerina is the per¬
sonification of pride and purity, ready to
lay down her life for the right to be free.
which became for him what Boldino was for
Pushkin, Yasnaya Polyana for Tolstoy, and
Bougival for Turgenev.In this country re¬
treat he wrote more than a dozen of his
finest plays. And it was there, in June 1886,
in his house built high on a hill in the midst
of the countryside he loved, where even the
storms seemed more beautiful than else¬
where, that Ostrovsky passed away. Borne
by peasants on long pieces of drapery
embroidered with traditional motifs,
escorted by faithful friends, Ostrovsky's
coffin was carried through the places from
which he had drawn inspiration to the
cemetery of Nikolo Berezhki.
Today the house at Chtchelykovo is an
Ostrovsky Museum, a place of pilgrimage.
Nothing neither the setting nor the wel¬
come has changed. The visitor almost ex¬
pects to see the master of the house appear
in the clothes he loved to wear in the coun¬
try Russian shirt, wide trousers and high
boots, short grey doublet and wide-brim¬
med hat ready to sit down at his work
table.
NELLY NICOLAEVNA KORNIENKO, of the
Soviet Union, is a specialist in dramatic art and in
the sociology of culture, subjects on which she
has written some 40 works published in her own
country and elsewhere. A former member of the
sociology of culture sector at the Soviet Institute
of Scientific Research into Art, she is currently a
staff member of the Russian language edition of
the Unesco Courier.

