Apartheid: the shameful
record
by Basil Davidson
THE history of apartheid is the record
of a racism conceived and used by
small white minorities in South Afri¬
ca in order to dominate a large black ma¬
jority, deprive this majority of its land, and
maximize the exploitation of its labour for
the benefit of the whites and their foreign
partners. Apartheid is colonial racism car¬
ried to an extreme.
Up to 1899 the white politics of all the
lands south of the Limpopo river the
lands that form modern South Africa
were largely those of military power used to
defeat black resistance. Broadly, those poli¬
tics were contained within two areas of com¬
petition. As soon as the British were estab¬
lished securely at the Cape of Good Hope,
following victory over the French fleet at
Trafalgar in 1805, they embarked on a long
scries of what were euphemistically called
"frontier wars". Against continuous black
resistance, not always defeated, British
forces pushed east and northeastward from
their little colony at the Cape, invading and
dispossessing one African community after
another until their final conquest of the
Zulu kingdom in 1879.
The descendants of the Dutch settlers
(enlarged by immigration from Holland but
still more by unadmitted unions with black
women) had meanwhile gone some way
towards forming themselves into a distinc¬
tive nation, the Afrikaner volk, and by this
time spoke a variant of Dutch which was
already beginning to be a distinctive lan¬
guage, Afrikaans. They were far too weak
in numbers and technology to tackle strong
African communities such as the Xhosa and
the Zulu, whose destruction as independent
entities was left to the British, but were
strong enough to dispossess a wide range of
small African communities. These lived to
the west of the areas of British conquest,
and were duly enclosed in the Afrikaner (or
Boer, a term meaning simply "farmer")
republics of the Orange Free State and the
Transvaal.
By the 1880s there were four white poli¬
tical units: the two British colonics of the
Cape and of Natal, and the two Afrikaner
republics in the north and west. Diamonds
had been discovered in quantity at Kimbcr-
ley as early as 1867, and in 1871 the British
duly annexed these diamond fields which
became, a little later, the scene of a verit¬
able "diamond rush", with a railway com¬
pleted from the Cape to Kimberley in 1885.
But even this new source of wealth could
change little in the general picture. What
changed everything, with violent drama,
was the proving in 1884-18S6 of the great
goldfields of the Witwatersrand in the
Transvaal Republic.
For reasons imperialist and narrowly eco¬
nomic, major British interests now saw that
they must secure political control of a
Transvaal governed by farmers who had
little or no interest in large-scale capitalist
development. After many skirmishes there
followed the Anglo-Afrikaner war of 1899,
provoked by the British and won by the
British, though at a sorry cost in lives, two
years later.
Having won the war, the British were
quick to reassure their Afrikaner opponents
that systematic discrimination against the
black majority would be written into the
foundation of the Union of South Africa
(that is, the union of Cape Colony, Natal,
Transvaal, and the Orange Free State)
which followed in 1910. For thirty-eight
years after that, the English-speaking
minority generally dominated the all-white
parliament of a now-independent Union,
but invariably on apartheid lines.
This new parliament lost no time in
guaranteeing a systematic racism. In 1911, a
Native Labour Regulation Act provided for
the legalization much elaborated and
tightened up in later years of an all-
embracing discrimination against black
wage-earners. In 1913 the parliament went
much further. It passed a Land Act which
reserved some 90 per cent of the total land
surface of the Union for white ownership,
and reduced the area available for black
ownership to the remaining 10 per cent (less
at the beginning, today about 13 per cent).
These small areas where Africans could
own land were named Native Reserves, and
rapidly became what they were intended to
be: destitute reservoirs of black labour for
the "white areas".
In 1923 came the Natives (Urban Areas)
Act which was to remain, with the Land Act
of 1913, the foundation of all white policy
towards blacks, and so remains to this day.
Essentially, it was a weapon of physical
segregation with the "white areas"; and the
policy which was held to justify it was called
"separate development".
In 1948 the English-speaking minority
lost control of parliament, and were never
to regain it. That control passed to the
Purified Afrikaner National Party; and
"separate development" was followed by
apartheid.
Meanwhile the Second World War had
done much to exacerbate English-Afrikan¬
er hostility. Nearly all the leaders of the
Purified National Party had openly hoped
and worked for a Nazi victory; and some of
The face of hunger
/ counted ribs on his concertina chest
bones protruding as if chiselled
by a sculptor's hand of famine.
He looked with glazed pupils
seeing only a bun on some sky-high shelf.
The skin was pale and taut
like a glove on a doctor's hand.
His tongue darted in and out
like a chameleon's
snatching a confetti of flies.
Ol child,
your stomach is a den of lions
roaring day and night.
Oswald Mbuyiseni Mtshali
them had been gaoled for pro-Nazi sabo¬
tage. Their electoral triumph of 1948 was
therefore accompanied by a determination
to succeed where Hitler had failed: and put
an end, once and for all, to English-speak¬
ing supremacy.
The system in no way changed in sub¬
stance. Laws were passed to identify any
black protest, however peaceful or other¬
wise legal in nature, with a "Communism"
which was equated, however ludicrously,
with some kind of foreign-promoted
attempt to overturn the State.
In this Republic of South Africa, all
"safety valves" were now scaled off, so that
explosion had become the only possible
alternative to continued submission. And in
1980, through its action-wing, Umkonto wa
Sizwe, the African National Congress of
South Africa duly embarked on the begin¬
nings of a war of resistance.
By 1981 the South African régime was
virtually at war with Angola and Mozam¬
bique as well as in its colony of Namibia,
and was threatening invasive action against
the newly-independent Republic of Zim¬
babwe. But this régime was also at war, in
save the name of war and its
formal declaration, within its own frontiers.
Today that war continues.
November 1983
BASIL DAVIDSON, British writer and historian,
is an authority on African history and current
affairs. His many books on Africa include Libera¬
tion of Guiñé (1969) and In the Eye of the Storm:
Angola's People (1972).
12

~ '
^
,
, *« '
- u * » * s r i.
V
<
