Lenin
and the physical sciences
by Mstislav Keldysh
ALL of Lenin's work as a politician,
statesman and public figure is in¬
separable from science.
The turn of the century, as we know,
was marked by a series of discoveries
which were to lead to a complete revolu¬
tion in physics, and eventually to the de¬
velopment of the physics of today. Thus,
the advances in electrodynamics opened
the way to the theory of relativity and
the discovery of new and more precise
space-time relationships. Research into
the theory of opaque bodies and the
photo-electric effect made possible the
formation of the quantum theory.
These new ideas and theories, to
which were soon to be added the discov¬
ery of radioactivity and radium, could no
longer be fitted into the nineteenth -
Lenin, photographed in Paris in 1910.
century concept of physics or into the
electromagnetic concept of the universe
that had succeeded the mechanical con¬
cept.
Serious difficulties arose. In particular,
the conclusion of the classic electron
theory, according to which electrons had
mass and electromagnetic characteristics,
was interpreted by many mechanistic and
positivist physicists of the time as a verit¬
able "disappearance of matter". Re
search scientists spoke heatedly of "the
big crisis in physics".
In 1909, Lenin entered the scene with
his work Materialism and Empirio-Criti-
cism. This was his reply to the philo¬
sophical problems raised by the latest
scientific discoveries. Lenin pointed out
that the crisis in physics perceptible at
the beginning of the century was just the
first step challenging "the old laws and
basic principles", and that the change
affected the postulates of physics that
had been thought unalterable. The crisis,
Lenin said, marked the beginning of a
complete revolution in physics.
"To say that matter has disappeared,"
Lenin wrote, "is merely to state that the
limits of our knowledge of matter have
disappeared and that our understanding
has deepened. The properties of matter
that formerly appeared absolute, unalter¬
able and immutable ... have disappeared
and are now recognized as being relative
and inherent only in certain states of
matter."
He stressed that "the one and only
property of matter that philosophical
materialism recognized is that it is an
objective reality, existing apart from our
consciousness". Here he pronounced his
famous philosophical dictum: "the elec¬
tron is as inexhaustible as the atom; na¬
ture is infinite ..."
The discovery that electrons were cap¬
able of behaving as waves opened up a
fantastic new world to physicists. In the
1930s the positron was identified. The
electron revealed a new property: united
with a positron, it was transformed into
a photon. There followed the discovery
that the electron is an active protagonist
in the phenomenon known as weak in¬
teractions and so is also a bearer of a
specific charge of these interactions.
Thus Lenin's thesis has shown itself to
be a great deal more than a mere
prophecy. It has become a philosophical
postulate of the investigation of the in¬
finitely small. All the later developments
of physics have corroborated the validity
of this principle, confirming the "inex¬
haustibility" of the electron, and, more
generally, the inexhaustible physical
properties of matter itself.
June 1970
MSTISLAV KELDYSH was President of the
Academy of Sciences of the USSR in 1970.
Portrait
62
