Highlights of the Convention
on the Law of the Sea
Adopted on 30 April 1982 by the United Nations Con¬
ference on the Law of the Sea (by 130 votes to 4, with 17
abstentions) after more than eight years of preparatory
work, the Convention on the Law of the Sea lays down
rules for all parts and virtually all uses of the oceans. While
a large part of the Convention deals with the international
areas of the sea, there are important provisions recog¬
nizing the jurisdiction of States in a number of areas. The
Convention will come into force when it has been ratified
by sixty States, but a number of States have already altered
their own national legislations to bring them into line with
its provisions. Below, some of the key features of the
Convention.
Coastal States would exercise sov¬
ereignty over their territorial sea of up to
twelve miles in breadth, but foreign vessels
would be allowed "innocent passage"
through these waters for purposes of
peaceful navigation.
Ships and aircraft of all countries would
be allowed "transit passage" through
straits used for international navigation, as
long as they proceeded without delay and
without threatening the bordering States.
States alongside the straits would be able
to regulate navigation and other aspects of
passage.
Archipelagic States, made up of a group
or groups of closely related islands and
interconnecting waters, would have sov¬
ereignty over a sea area enclosed by
straight lines drawn between the outermost
points of the islands. They would have
sovereignty over these archipelagic
waters, while ships of all other States would
enjoy the right of passage through sea
lanes designated by the archipelagic State.
Coastal States would have sovereign
rights in a 200-mile exclusive economic
zone with respect to natural resources and
certain economic activities, and would also
have certain types of jurisdiction over sci¬
entific research and environmental preser¬
vation. All other States would have freedom
of navigation and overflight in the zone, as
well as freedom to lay submarine cables
and pipelines. Land-locked States and
"States with special geographical charac¬
teristics" would have the right to participate
in exploiting part of the zone's fisheries
when the coastal State could not harvest
them all itself. Delimitation of overlapping
economic zones would be "effected by
agreement on the basis of international
law.. .in order to achieve an equitable solu¬
tion". Highly migratory species of fish and
marine mammals would be afforded spe¬
cial protection.
Coastal States would have sovereign
rights over the continental shelf (the na¬
tional area of the sea bed) for the purpose
The scene at United Nations headquarters
in the afternoon of Friday 30 April 1982,
when the Convention on the Lawofthe Sea
was adopted by 130 votes to 4, with 17
abstentions.
tsn
of exploring and exploiting it without affect¬
ing the legal status of the water or the air
space above. The shelf would extend at
least to 200 miles from shore, and out to
350 miles or even beyond under specified
circumstances. Coastal States would share
with the international community part of the
revenue they derive from exploiting oil and
other resources from any part of their shelf
beyond 200 miles. Delimitation of overlap¬
ping shelves would be on the same basis
as for the exclusive economic zone. A
Commission on the Limits of the Continen¬
tal Shelf would make recommendations to
States on the shelf's outer boundaries.
All States would enjoy the traditional free¬
doms of navigation, overflight, scientific re¬
search and fishing on the high seas. They
would be obliged to adopt, or co-operate
with other States in adopting, measures to
manage and conserve living resources.
The territorial sea, exclusive economic
zone and continental shelf of islands would
be determined in accordance with rules
applicable to land territory, but rocks which
could not sustain human habitation or eco¬
nomic life would have no economic zone or
continental shelf.
States bordering enclosed or semi-
enclosed seas would be expected to co¬
operate on management of living resources
and on environmental and research poli¬
cies and activities. Land-locked States
would have the right of access to and from
the sea, and would enjoy freedom of transit
through the territory of transit States by all
means of transport.
States would be bound to use "the best
practical means at their disposal" to pre¬
vent and control marine pollution from any
30

source. The text defines which categories
of States (coastal States, port States and
flag States) would be responsible for pre¬
venting pollution and punishing polluters,
particularly when pollution originated on
board vessels, and what kinds of enforce¬
ment action were allowable. States would
be liable for damage caused by violation of
their international obligations to combat
marine pollution. They would be bound to
co-operate globally and regionally in formu¬
lating rules and standards of environmental
protection, and would commit themselves
to promote technical assistance to develop¬
ing countries in this area.
All marine scientific research in the ex¬
clusive economic zone and on the con¬
tinental shelf would be subject to the con
sent of the coastal State, but those States
would be obliged to grant consent to foreign
States when the research was to be con¬
ducted for peaceful purposes and fulfilled
other criteria laid down in the Convention. A
coastal State could deny permission for
such research or insist on its cessation, but
only under circumstances defined in the
Convention; in the event of a dispute, the
researching State could require the coastal
State to submit to international conciliation
on the ground that it was not acting in a
manner compatible with the Convention.
States would be bound to promote the
development and transfer of marine tech¬
nology "on fair and reasonable terms and
conditions". This would be done with
proper regard for all legitimate interests,
including the rights and duties of holders,
suppliers and recipients of technology.
States would be obliged to settle by
peaceful means their disputes over the in¬
terpretation or application of the Conven¬
tion. When they could not agree on the
means of settlement, they would have to
submit most types of disputes to a compul¬
sory procedure entailing decisions binding
on all parties. They would have four
options: an International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea, to be established under the
Convention, the existing International
Court of Justice, arbitration and special
arbitration procedures. Certain types of dis¬
pute would have to be submitted to con¬
ciliation, a procedure whose outcome is not
binding on the parties.
/
/
\
\
/
\
/ International
l Sea-Bed Area
:':/ Limit of territorial sea
~:\ over which a coastal State
has sovereign powers
\
\
\
\
The International Sea-Bed Area
The longest part of the Convention concerns the future regime
for exploring and exploiting the bottom of the deep ocean in
areas beyond the continental shelf of any State.
Of main economic interest in this area at present are polymetal-
lic nodules lying on or just below the sea-bed at great depths,
composed of manganese, copper, cobalt and nickel, although
the Convention extends to all resources of the area, including
any which may be discovered or which may become economi¬
cally exploitable in the future.
The Convention would establish a "parallel" system for explor¬
ing and exploiting the deep sea-bed. Under this system, all
activities in the area would be under the control of the Interna¬
tional Sea-Bed Authority, which would be authorized to conduct
its own mining operations through an organ called Enterprise.
At the same time, the Authority would contract with private and
State ventures to give them mining rights in the area so that
they could operate in parallel with the Authority. The resources
of the area would be managed as a "common heritage of
mankind".
Limit of Exclusive i
Economic Zone
/
\
/
Of all the minerals known to exist in and
under the seas the most valuable at the
moment is oil. About one fifth of total pro¬
duction comes from the continental shelf
within 200 miles of the coast of about 75
countries and under relatively shallow
water. Many such areas have not yet been
tapped and vast reserves are suspected
under much deeper water.
Nodules rich in nickel, manganese, copper
and cobalt are the most valuable resource
now known in the International Sea-Bed
Area.
31
