Winds
by Sei Shonagon
A stormy wind. At dawn, when one is lying in bed with
the lattices and panelled doors wide open, the wind
suddenly blows into the room and stings one's face
most delightful.
A cold, wintry wind.
In the Third Month the moist, gentle wind that blows in
the evenings moves me greatly.
Also moving is the cool, rainy wind in the Eighth and
Ninth Months. Streaks of rain are blown violently from the
side, and I enjoy watching people cover their stiff robes of
unlined silk with the padded coats that they put away after
the summer rains. In this season they would like to dispense
even with their unlined robes, which have become quite
sweltering; instead they are caught off guard by the sudden
change in weather and have to dress still more warmly than
before.
Towards the end of the Ninth Month and the beginning of
the Tenth the sky is clouded over, there is a strong wind , and
the yellow leaves fall gently to the ground, especially from
the cherry trees and the elms. All this produces a most
pleasant sense of melancholy. In the Tenth Month I love
gardens that are full of trees.
On the day after a fierce autumn wind everything moves
one deeply. The garden is in a pitiful state with all the
bamboo and lattice fence knocked over and lying next to
each other on the ground. It is bad enough if the branches of
one of the great trees have been broken by the wind; but it is
a really painful surprise to find that the tree itself has fallen
down and is now lying flat over the bush-clover and the
valerians. As one sits in one's room looking out, the wind, as
though on purpose, gently blows the leaves one by one
through the chinks of the lattice-window, and one finds it
hard to believe that this is the same wind which yesterday
raged so violently.
On one such morning I caught sight of a woman creeping
out from the main hall and emerging a few feet on to the
veranda. I could see that she was a natural beauty. Over a
dress of dull purple she wore an unlined robe of tawny cloth
and a formal robe of some light material. The noise of the
wind must have kept her awake during the night and she had
just got up after sleeping late. Now she knelt on the veranda
and looked into her mirror. With her long hair being blown
about and gently puffed up by the wind, she was a truly
splendid sight. As she gazed at the scene of desolation in the
garden, a girl of about seventeen not a small girl, but still
not big enough to be called grown-up joined her on the
veranda. She wore a night-dress of light violet and over that a
faded blue robe of stiff silk, which was badly coming apart at
the seams and wet from the rain. Her hair, which was cut
evenly at the ends like miscanthus in a field, reached all the
way down to her feet, falling on to the veranda beyond the
bottom of her robe. Looking at her from the side, I could
make out the scarlet of her trouser-skirt, the only bright
touch in her costume.
In the garden a group of maids and young girls were
collecting the flowers and plants that the wind had torn up by
the roots and were propping up some that were less
damaged. Several women were gathered in front of me by
the blind, and I enjoyed seeing how envious they looked as
they watched the young people outside and wished that they
might join them.
Extractfrom The Pillow Book (Makura no Soshi) by Sei Shonagon.
Translated from the Japanese and edited by Ivan Morris, Columbia
University Press and Oxford University Press, 1967.
14
