The sting
in the
fairy
tale
by Jorge Enrique Adoum
'A1
T one time or another," says
Bruno Bettelheim, "every child
dreams of being a prince or a
princess." Yet what child of the tropical
plains or plateaux of Latin America would
ever have dreamed of such a thing if these
(fairy tale) images had not been imposed
upon him, images made much more con¬
crete by Gustave Doré's at times gruesome
engravings and Walt Disney's cloying car¬
toons, and made superficially more real by
the stage versions of these tales in which
schoolchildren are obliged to take part?
Given the authors and the immediate
audience for whom they were writing, the
kings and queens, princes and princesses
who figure in these tales were inevitably
generous and charitable, beloved of their
subjects and respected by their peers. They
had neither armies nor police forces (at
most a few kind-hearted gamekeepers) and
they never declared war. Only rarely were
their subjects sent to prison or to the execu¬
tioner's block, and then only through the
spiteful machinations of a wicked step¬
mother. The queens and princesses,
moreover, were all remarkable for their
beauty. The young Latin American was not
slow in recognizing that, in comparison with
the realities of his life, all this was nothing
more than a huge adult lie.
In European fairy tales, which draw on
Scandinavian, German and Slav traditions,
the characters are naturally white-skinned,
blue-eyed and fair-haired (with the sole ex¬
ception of Snow White whose hair was "as
black as ebony"). Yet in Latin American
society, where economic discrimination
almost always goes hand in hand with discri¬
mination of a racial nature, the tacit identi¬
fication of this type of beauty with goodness
may have undesirable repercussions.
Young indigenous and mixed-race Latin
Americans who, quite naturally, reject this
discrimination may tend to develop a sense
of inferiority, especially since at school and
in daily life they are already set apart by the
more or less white children whose servants
they often are.
In the Grimm brothers' version of Cin¬
derella this identification is quite deliber¬
ate: "This woman (the stepmother) had
brought with her two daughters who,
though beautiful and fair of complexion,
were nevertheless evil and black-hearted."
In establishing the exceptional nature of
this case, the "nevertheless" betrays the
ideological content of the sentence. If we
were to turn the sentence round and say that
"the daughters, though ugly and black-
skinned, were nevertheless good and pure
in heart", the racist implication, however
involuntary it may be, would become bru¬
tally apparent. It is easy to see why, for
Latin American children, the most comfort¬
ing, or at any rate the least cruel, of these
stories is Hans Andersen's Ugly Duckling.
A vital element in this literature, this
ideology, is the solution of problems not by
human endeavour but by providential
means which constitute, moreover, the re¬
ward for submission. A king's son trans¬
forms Cinderella's life, other princes do the
same for Snow White and Sleeping Beauty,
and a dragon and a soldier arrive'in the nick
of time to save Bluebeard's third wife. Two
centuries later the situation is brought up to
date. At closing time, a humble washer-up
in a bar sings at her work and a film director
seated in a corner "discovers" her and
makes her a film star. Unfortunately there
are very few Marilyn Monroes; millions of
young Latin American match-sellers,
goose-girls and Cinderellas are destined
only to become adult Cinderellas. They
have no fairy godmother with a magic wand
to free them from their toil and change their
rags into silken robes and their sandals into
glass slippers. They have no prince to come
to their rescue, not even a more prosaic
modern equivalent the son of a president,
of an industrial magnate or of a banker. For
most women the dream of Cinderella be¬
comes the harsh reality of Snow White; if
she wants a roof over her head she can stay
and be provided for so long as she is pre¬
pared to "make the beds, cook, wash, sew,
spin and keep everything clean and tidy" for
the dwarfs.
January 1979
JORGE ENRIQUE ADOUM, Ecuadorian writer,
has published several volumes ofpoetry, includ¬
ing an anthology, No son todos los que están -
Poemas (1949-1979), a novel, Entre Marx y una
mujer desnuda, and two plays, La subida a los
infiernos and El sol bajo las patas de los cabal¬
los, the latter of which has been published in
English as The Sun Trampled Beneath the
Horses' Hooves.
42
