Quaternary. Large mammals like mastodons (A), sabre-tooth cats (B), and blue
whales (C) are at first dominant. For the last million years, ice intermittently covers
most of the northern hemisphere. Some animals migrate; some, like woolly
rhinoceroses (D), adapt to the cold. Early man (E), using stone tools and making fire,
is succeeded by modern man.
m
Tertiary. Mammals evolve rapidly, producing such specialized types as the lemur
Plesiadapis (A), ancestor of the primates, five-toed Phenacodus (B) and horned
Titanotherium (C). Birds evolve, including giant flightless forms like Diatryma (D).
Fish, reptiles and invertebrates now resemble those of today; for example, the sand
shark (E) has hardly changed.
Cretaceous. On land, flowering plants like magnolia (A) appear. In the sea, modern
bony fishes evolve alongside sea-urchins (B) and bivalve molluscs (C). At the end of
the period, giant dinosaurs, like Stegosaurus (D), and large flying pterodactyls (E)
suddenly die out. New types of small mammal, such as the shrew-like Phascolother-
ium (F), evolve.
Jurassic. The sea shelters brachiopods, cephalods called ammonites (A), belem-
nites (B) and fossil oysters such as Gryphaea (C). There are bony fishes, sharks and
two groups of marine reptiles: ichthyosaurs (D) and plesiosaurs. Great dinosaurs like
Brontosaurus (E) share the land with small mammals. Archaeopteryx (F), the ances¬
tral bird, takes wing.
Triassic. Such mammal-like reptiles as Cynognathus (A), ancestors of the mammals,
are succeeded by small animals, dinosaur-ancestors like Omothosuchus (B). Club-
mosses, horsetails and seed ferns become rarer; they are replaced by cycads,
ginkgoes (C) and conifers. In the sea, new invertebrate groups evolve. Sea-lilies (D)
and reef-building corals are numerous.
Permian. Mammal-like reptiles like Dimetrodon (A) rule the land. Large amphibians
are scarce. In the sea, cephalods (B), two-valved molluscs (C) and primitive bony fish
(D) continue to thrive; corals and sea-urchins grow scarcer, and most of the sharks die
out. A forest of seed ferns covers the southern land mass. More varied plant life
flourishes in the north.
°Y'
.MM
Carboniferous. The amphibians (A) become a large and important group; they
eventually give rise to the reptiles, the first full-time land vertebrates. Conifers and tree
ferns (B) evolve, and dragonflies (C) and other insects appear. Sharks (D) dominate
the sea. In shallow water, brachiopods (E), corals (F), cephalopods, sponges and
sea-lilies are common.
-
II
Devonian. Armoured fish (A) and bony and scaly fish (B) flourish in fresh water.
Sharks and spiny fish colonize the sea. Brachiopods (C) and molluscs called cephalo¬
pods (D) continue to evolve; trilobites grow scarce and graptolites die out. On land,
simple vascular plants (E) are followed by clubmosses, horsetails and ferns. The first
amphibians evolve from scaly fish.
Silurian. The land is conquered, first by colonies of seedless vascular plants and later
by scorpion-like arthropods. In fresh water, small fish and large eurypterids or
water-scorpions abound. The sea ¡s teeming with invertebrates, especially trilobites
(A), crinoids or sea-lilies (B), corals (C), horny-coated eurypterids (D), brachiopods (E)
and graptolites (F).
Ordovician. Shelly invertebrates flourish, especially trilobites (A), brachiopods (B),
cephalopods (C) and gastropods or sea-snails (D). Corals, two-valved molluscs and
branchy or mossy colonies of bryozoans appear. Graptolites (E, F), some looking like
hard spider webs, spread. In fresh water the first fish (known only from scale
fragments) evolve.
Cambrian. At the dawn of this period a number of animal groups develop shells and
hard parts of calcite and horn. These include trilobites (A, B), brachiopods (C, D),
sponges (E) and crustaceans. The trilobites, so called from their three-lobed bodies,
evolve into a large and varied group of crawlers and swimmers that dominates the sea
for the next 100 million years.
U
Precambrian. During this period, which goes back to the beginning of geological time,
complex organic compounds evolve from simple inorganic chemical substances.
Bacteria (A, B) and algae (C, D) appear early in the period. By its close, soft-bodied
marine and freshwater animals like worms (E, F), jellyfish and sponges have evolved. Oil
32
