*»
v á
< ~~,/S-The mystery
of
£k.
¿ry Anthony Burgess
«
Text © Anthony Burgess 1986
melody
ANYBODY can write a sort of
melody. Give, as the Chinese do,
each note of the musical scale a
number. Do re mi fa so la ti do : 1 2 3 4 5 6
7 8. You can turn your telephone number
or car registration number into a se¬
quence of notes. This is perhaps not long
enough for a true melody, but it will yield
a theme. A theme may be defined as a
scrap of melody crying out to be de¬
veloped not just into a true melody but
into a whole symphonic movement, into a
whole opera. All music begins with a
germ like that, and it may lie sleeping in a
passport number.
But we all know that the great melodies
of the world are not made in that manner.
The great melodies of the world arrive
without warning. They spring out of no¬
where, and they are only given to the
great musical geniuses.
Perhaps there is an analogy between
the language of speech and the language
of music. In every spoken phrase, even in
a single word, a melody may be lurking.
Take the phrase that comes in a poem by
Edgar Allan Poe "the tintinnabulation
of the bells". Recite that often enough,
and the sheer rhythm regardless of
meaning will generate a musical
phrase.
"La ci darem la mano". Da Ponte gave
that phrase to Mozart in the opera Don
Giovanni, and Mozart heard in it the
melody which begins an exquisite duet.
In one of Beethoven's last string quartets
we hear the question "Muss es sein?"
(Must it be?) and the answer "£5 muss
sein" (It must be!). Beethoven goes to the
trouble of placing the words under the
notes. They are not intended to be sung,
since the musicians are string-players, not
Front cover by Picasso for the first (1919)
edition of Stravinsky's piano arrangement
of his "Rag-time".

¿i«
I i
5 LU
II
CD
II
OJ-Q
"Animated Music", a drawing by the French artist Grandville (1803-1847)
which appeared in the illustrated periodical Le Magasin Pittoresque In 1840.
vocalists; the composer is merely being
honest enough to disclose the inspiration
of his theme.
But great melodies are not often bound
to words. Bach's Air on the G String or
the marvellous theme of the Choral Pre¬
lude Wachet Auf are clearly pure sound
which owes nothing to verbal inspiration.
Where did they come from? Anyone
who, like myself, has composed music
may give some sort of an answer. A
melody arrives in the mind. It seems to be
something remembered, something that
has always existed but been long forgot¬
ten. Then it suddenly appears. Occa¬
sionally this melody is genuinely some¬
thing remembered something written
by somebody else. This can cause trou¬
ble lawsuits for plagiarism. There was a
popular song in the 1920s called "Yes,
We Have No Bananas". This is made up
out of Handel's "Hallelujah" chorus, the
folksong "My Bonny Lies Over the
Ocean", and the aria "I dreamt that I
dwelt in marble halls" from Balfe's opera
The Bohemian Girl. Plagiarism? Possib¬
ly. Popular song-writers used to plagia¬
rize all the time. Sheer memory? Possibly
again. Who knows? These things are dif¬
ficult to prove in a court of law.
The truly great tune resembles no
other. It has certainly come from heaven,
or from nowhere, and it usually comes
when unexpected. But it sometimes
comes when it is needed. Imagine that
you are commissioned to compose a sym¬
phony. This is to be performed in two
months' time by a great symphony
orchestra. The least difficult work will be
the orchestration, which will come last.
The most difficult will be finding themes
for the first movement. Here you will
require two main groups of themes, one
aggressively masculine, the other de¬
licately feminine. These themes must be
capable of development that is, turning
into other themes, combining in counter¬
point with other themes, turning into
great soaring melodies. The urgency of
the commission will sometimes force
your unconscious mind into producing
melodic germs full of potential. Or some
little melody composed in childhood will
suddenly present symphonic possibilities.
For another great mystery about melody
is that it is more likely to come to you
when you are seven than when you are
seventy.
The mystery remains. But in an age
like ours, which doesn't approve of mys¬
teries , the production of great melodies is
no longer regarded as one of the jobs of
the composer. Be honest, and consider
which pop or rock song of the last twenty
years contains a genuine melody. You
will hear fine melodies in, say, George
Gershwin or the Beatles, but few in the
music of the Rolling Stones. The sexual
impulse in the rhythm, or the content of
social protest in the words, will seem to
the new generation more important than
sheer melody.
What applies to popular music applies
even more to the music termed serious.
The dodecaphonic composers,' led by
Arnold Schoenberg, showed the way to a
mechanical mode of composition very
popular with the young products of the
music academies. You make a theme out
of the twelve notes of the chromatic
scale a theme of just twelve notes, for
one of the rules is that no note may come
more than once and then you play this
theme backwards or upside down or up¬
side down and backwards. Your musical
skill will lie in the management of tone
colour, of dynamics and climax, but not
in the creation of melody as we used to
know it. You will find such music damn¬
ably hard to sing.
There are people around who say that
there can be no more great melodies.
They say that, with so few notes in the
musical scale, all the original themes
must already have been written and there
is no point in looking for new ones. This is
nonsense. There is still an infinitude of
books to be written out of the twenty-six
letters of the alphabet, and there is still an
infinitude of melodies to be generated
out of twelve notes and the innumerable
rhythmical combinations of these which
wait to be exploited. We have just got out
of the habit of thinking melodically. This
is very bad for us, since there is nothing in
the world more heartening than a great
tune.
Where would the French Revolution
have been without the Marseillaise, a
tune written by a soldier named Rouget
de Lisle, who was suddenly touched by
inspiration? Where would the communist
revolution have been without the Interna¬
tionale (a far inferior tune to the Marseil¬
laise)? But greater than tunes are those
fifty-minute streams of melodic invention
we call symphonies and concertos. These
are always the products of conscious skill
and ingenuity, like works of engineering,
but they could not exist without those
spurts of melodic inspiration from the
unconscious mind. We do not know what
strange inner force is at work spinning
away at themes and tunes, but we bow
down to the results. The great mystery of
music remains.
ANTHONY BURGESS, the British novelist, critic
and man of letters, has devoted much of his
creative energy to music and has composed
many full-scale orchestral works including three
symphonies, as well as The Blooms of Dublin, a
musical version of James Joyce's Ulysses, the
libretto of which is to be published shortly.
Among his most recent published works are
Flame into Being, a study of D.H. Lawrence
(1985), and Homage to Qwertyuiop, a collection
of his essays (1986).
