The land-locked island
of Paraguay
by Augusto Roa Bastos
ONE cannot hope to understand Pa¬
raguay without taking into account
its linguistic problem. For four hun¬
dred years now, two languages have coex¬
isted in the country: Spanish and Guarani
the language of the conquerors and the
language of the conquered. These two lan¬
guages are used as parallel, though not com¬
plementary, means of expression for a
whole society. In this, Paraguay is unique in
Latin America.
For the child with a European father and
an Indian mother, the natural mother
tongue was Guarani, and Spanish was a
language imposed as a symbol of authority.
It was the " language which the mestizo
would in turn use to impose his own author¬
ity on the Indians.
Mestizos and Indians felt that the lan¬
guage of their father or master, as the case
happened to be, was a more integral part of
his dominance than the arms, tools, food,
houses and customs which were the trap¬
pings of his power.
Paraguay has a large rural population,
amounting to some 70per cent of the total.
Almost all are Indians, who communicate
among themselves in Guarani, a language
which is spoken in Paraguay's towns and
cities as well as in rural areas.
In the missionary settlements of the
Jesuits, however, sermons and prayers were
in Guarani. There, the Indian was not
forced to change his language. He did,
however, have to change his rituals, his
liturgy, his gods, and his conception of
nature, of the world and of the universe
although the embers of all these still glow
brightly today in Indian myths about the
universe.
Governor Lázaro de Ribera was mis¬
taken when he complained, at the end of the
eighteenth century, that the language of the
conquered peoples had become dominant.
Guarani was not, and could not be, the
dominant language. It retreated into the
depths of the collective memory, settled
there like a sediment, and came to domin¬
ate/row within the self-expression of Para¬
guay, whether it be bilingual or not.
The use of Guarani or Spanish in Para¬
guay is governed by social and regional
factors. Even people who think of them¬
selves as bilingual will never discuss certain
topics in the indigenous language: it would
be simply impossible because social cir¬
cumstances do not allow it. The Guarani
speaker thus finds in fact that he is excluded
from a whole range of fields because he
cannot make himself heard in them. Worse
still, he cannot even conceptualize them
because he lacks adequate linguistic means
of self-expression.
If, for example, someone speaking
Guarani had access to the world of ad¬
vanced technology, he would find that he
would have to use so many neologisms that
his language would be practically
annihilated.
It is clear that the future of Guarani like
that of Spanish is closely linked to the
historical destiny of the country itself.
Although Guarani has been relegated to
the status of a vehicle for communicating
emotions, it will continue to modulate the
expression of a whole people's deepest and
most vital feelings. Herein lies its strength.
Linked to the mysteries of blood, instinct
and collective memory, the survival of
Guarani is guaranteed by the density of the
linguistic sediment that forms the founda¬
tions of the bilingual island of Paraguay.
August-September 1977
AUGUSTO ROA BASTOS, ofParaguay, won an
international reputation with his book Hijo de
hombre, published in English as Son of Man by
Victor Gollancz, London, 1965. His novel Yo el
supremo is required reading for students ofLatin
American literature in a number of European
universities.
