The spiritual quest
of al-Ghazâlï
by Abdurrahman Badawi
ABU Hamid al-Ghazâlï, a great
theologian, a penetrating and sub¬
tle-critic of rationalist philosophy
and a mystic with great gifts of psychologic¬
al and moral analysis, was born in 1058 in
Tüs, today called Meshhed, in eastern Iran,
and died in 1 1 1 1 . One of the greatest think¬
ers humanity has ever known, he was hon¬
oured with the title hujjat-al-isläm (Proof of
Islam) for his role as a defender of religion
against the rationalist atheism of the philo¬
sophers and of orthodox Islam against sects
preaching heresy and subversion. The
lucidity of his writings and the beauty of his
prose were such that his works were widely
circulated and won a very extensive reader¬
ship. His masterpiece, entitled Ihyä' 'ulüm
al-dïn ("The Revival of the Religious Sci¬
ences"), was, and is still, a reference work
on the principles and practice of the Muslim
religion.
There were three stages in al-Ghazâlï's
spiritual development: a stage of practical
involvement and political commitment, a
stage of doubt and criticism, and a mystical
stage.
Having received a sound training in case
law and theology from the great masters of
his time, and primarily from the Imam al-
Haramayn (al-Djuwainï), al-Ghazâlï went
to seek favour with the great vizir Nizäm
al-Mulk in Naysäbür. The latter was im¬
pressed by al-Ghazâlï's learning and cogen-
The decorative qualities of the angularand
geometric Küfic style ofArabic calligraphy
has led to its widespread use for religious
inscriptions carved in stone. Above, re¬
production of a Küfic inscription inside a
mausoleum at Isfahan (Islamic Republic of
Iran). Highly stylized into square and rec¬
tangular forms, the calligraphy of this in¬
scription dating from the early 14th cen¬
tury seems to evoke certain trends in mod¬
ern graphic design.
cy in debate, and, as an earnest of his admir¬
ation, he apppointed him in 1091 to teach at
the Nizämiyyah school in Baghdad. One
year later, Nizäm al-Mulk was murdered by
a young Bätinite. The Bätiniyya was a Shi-
'ite sect, the militant branch of the Ismä'ili
sect. During and after the crusades, its
members were known by the name of
hashishi. The activities of the Bätinites
posed a serious threat to the Abbasid
caliphate in Baghdad.
The Caliph al-Mustazhir accordingly in¬
structed al-Ghazâlï to wage war with his pen
against the Bätinite sect. Al-Ghazâlï wrote
a book entitled the Mustazhirt, or The De¬
pravity of the Bätiniyya, in which he re¬
vealed its impostures and unmasked its evil
designs against Islam and its great conspira¬
cy against the State. This work analyses in

detail the sect's stratagems to attract well-
wishers and rally them to its cause, for the
Bätinites were skilled at making converts.
At the age of thirty-four, al-Ghazâlï be¬
gan to study philosophy. He then entered a
period of profound spiritual crisis in which
he came to doubt his faith. That doubt was
transient and lasted for only two or three
months. It was more a "dark night of the
soul" than the methodical type of doubt
practised by Descartes, as some scholars
have mistakenly suggested. But that doubt
was a goad which spurred him to subject his
beliefs to unrestricted scrutiny. In Mlzan
al-amal, he asserts the usefulness of such
doubt, for "he who does not doubt, does
not think; he who does not think, does not
see; he who does not see remains in a state
of blindness, perplexity and error".
Being blessed with a positive attitude of
mind, he could not remain in a state of
doubt for very long. Thus we see him enter¬
ing a new phase: that of certainty based on
reason. He had found a new vocation,
which drove him to defend the great articles
of faith against the rationalism of the Isla¬
mic philosophers, including al-Färäbi and in
particular Ibn Sïna (Avicenna).
By way of a prologue to his diatribe
against the philosophers, he wrote for the
layman a clear and easily grasped summary
of the three principles of philosophy: logic,
physics and metaphysics. That summary is
entitled Maqäsid al-Faläsifah ("The Aims
of the Philosophers"). It is a brief and lim¬
pid exposé, unclouded by polemic or per¬
sonal opinions.
This was the prelude to his philosophical
masterpiece, Tahäfut al-Faläsifah ("The In¬
coherence of the Philosophers"), in which
he launches a sustained attack on the
rationalist philosophers. As he states in the
prologue, this book is a refutation of the
ancient philosophers, designed to prove the
falsity of their doctrines, to expose their
contradictions in the sphere of philosophic¬
al theology (metaphysics) and to reveal the
dangers inherent in their opinions.
In this work, he claims that between the
different philosophers there are huge di¬
vergences, and bitter conflicts between the
different systems. He therefore confines
himself as he says to a refutation of the
philosophy professed by the greatest of
them, namely, Aristotle.
According to al-Ghazâlï, Aristotle and
philosophers in general "judge by conjec¬
ture and presumption, and not by verifica¬
tion and certainty" in the field of meta¬
physical theology. He therefore sets out to
In 1095, afterbeing embroiledin a religious
controversy with the Islamic philo¬
sophers, al-Ghazâlï experienced a period
ofdoubt. He wenton apilgrimage to Mecca
and visited Jérusalem, where he began to
write his masterwork Ihyä' 'ulüm al-dln
("The Revival of the Religious Sciences"),
which he completed during a two-year
stay at Damascus. Above, elaborate
mosaics on a golden background adorn
the cupola of the Dome of the Rock, the
shrine built in Jerusalem in AD 691 by the
Umayyad caliph 'Abd al-Malik. The shrine
is built over a flat sacred rock which many
traditions connect with Abraham and
Muhammad. Right, the Great Mosque of
Damascus (Syria) was built in AD 705, also
under the Umayyads, on the site of the
Byzantine church of St. John the Baptist
and of a Roman temple once dedicated to
Jupiter.

i
111 '
s
©

0flagra.
The modem town of Meshhed, near the
eastern border of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, is an offshoot of the ancient city of
Tüs, the birthplace of al-Ghazâlï, which
was destroyed by the Timurids in 1389. As
the site of the mausoleum of the Imäm AH
Reza, eighth Imam of the Shi'ites (died AD
818), and of the adjoining mosque of Ga-
whar Shäd (15th century), Meshhed is the
Holy City of the Shi'ites and a major pil¬
grimage centre. Above, enamelled tiles
cover minaret and porch of the Shäh
Mosque (14th century).
Below, the four minarets of the Käzimayn
Mosque, one ofthe mostbeautiful in Bagh¬
dad, which became the seat of the 'Abbä-
sid caliphate in AD 750, and was the
greatest religious and economic centre of
the Near East until it was sacked by the
Mongols in 1258. Al-Ghazâlï taught law in
this prestigious city before applying him¬
self to the study of philosophy, then
embarking on the path of Sufi mysticism.
prove the falsity of their ideas in the follow¬
ing fields:
The eternity of the world.
The creation of the world.
The proof of the existence of God.
The attributes of God.
Divine knowledge.
The movement and the prime mover of the
Heavens.
The possibility of miracles.
The immortality of the human soul.
Resurrection and life after death.
After a disputation with the philosophers
on these topics, he concludes with a con¬
demnation of the following three theses:
their assertion that the world is eternal;
their assertion that God does not know
particulars, i.e. the acts of human beings;
their denial of resurrection and eternal life.
"These three theses are wholly incom¬
patible with Islam. Anyone who professes
belief in them is thereby claiming that the
prophets are liars and that they made their
pronouncements only for utilitarian pur¬
poses, using parables for the sake of clarity.
But this is a manifest heterodoxy (kufr)."
{Tahäfut)
As regards the remaining theses, al-Gha¬
zâlï finds similar tenets in the various Mus¬
lim sects; they are therefore not incompati¬
ble with Islam.
Some scholars have claimed that al-Gha¬
zâlï's attacks on the philosophers who had
upheld these three theses struck a mortal
blow to philosophy in the Islamic world.
This allegation is quite false since, during
the century which followed al-Ghazâlï's
death, Muslim philosophy reached its
apogee in Muslim Spain with Ibn Bäjja, Ibn
Tufayl and Ibn Rushd (Averroës), and con¬
tinued to advance in the East with Suhra-
Wardi, Bawwânï and Mulla Sadrá.
Al-Ghazâlï argued with the philosophers
"using their own method, that is, a logical,
rational and rigorous method". But in the
depths of his soul he felt that reason was not
enough to attain the supreme truths of re¬
ligion. He realized that he needed to use
quite another faculty in order to penetrate
directly to the heart of the mystery of being.
In 1095 he experienced another crisis, much
more acute than the first, whereupon he
abandoned his teaching at the Nizämiyyah
school in Baghdad and set out on the pil¬
grimage to Mecca. After (or before) that
pilgrimage, he visited Damascus and Jeru¬
salem. In Jerusalem he began to write his
masterpiece, the Ihyä' ("The Revival of the
Religious Sciences"), which he completed
in Damascus during the two years that he
spent in that city.
After Damascus he returned, in 1097, to
his native town of Tüs, where he had re¬
solved to end his days in mystical retreat.
But the vizir of Koräsän, Fakhr al-Mulk,
son of Nizäm al-Mulk mentioned earlier,
invited al-Ghazâlï to take up teaching once
more. Al-Ghazâlï demurred, but the vizir
was insistent. Al-Ghazâlï therefore began
to teach again, not at the Nizämiyyah of
Baghdad, but at that of Naysäbür, after an
eight-year retreat. However, one year later,
in approximately 1106, he returned to Tüs
in order to devote his time to writing several
mystical treatises, including the Mishkätal-
anwär ("The Niche for Lights"). He also
wrote his autobiography there, Al-Mun-
qidh min al-daläl ("The Deliverer from
Error").
In the Mishkät, al-Ghazâlï draws inspira¬
tion from a verse of the Qur'an which pro¬
claims that "God is the light of the heavens
and the earth", and reveals a vision of a
world structured around the concept of
light. He shows how that divine light suf¬
fuses and sustains the world with its count¬
less rays. The world is accordingly repre¬
sented as a pure crystalline sphere, scat¬
tered with opaque points of matter.
The Munqidh, his autobiography, is a
masterpiece of remarkable psychological
insight. It retraces his spiritual development
and uncompromisingly dismisses jurists,
theologians, Bätinites and philosophers
alike, reaching the conclusion that the only
true Way is that of the mystics. Compared
with the Confessions of St. Augustine, the
Munqidh is more concentrated, but more
precise and structured. It is free of the
grandiloquence and prolixity that we find in
the Bishop of Hippo.
The influence of al-Ghazäli was
tremendous, both in the Muslim world and
in medieval Europe.
Six of his works were translated into Heb¬
rew in the thirteenth century. Some, includ¬
ing the Maqâsid, were even translated
several times. Jewish philosophers influ¬
enced by al-Ghazâlï include Isaac Albalag,
who translated the Maqäsid, Moses of Nar-
bonne, who wrote a major commentary on
the same work, and Jehudah Halevi, who
makes abundant references to the treatise
entitled "The Grounds of Belief" (later in¬
corporated into the Ihyä'). David Yehuda
Léon even goes so far as to claim that
Maimonides drew on the works of al-Gha¬
zâlï as his main source of inspiration.
The Maqäsid was translated into Latin in
the twelfth century by Domingo Gundisal-
vo, a well-known translator of the Toledo
school. The Tahäfut (Destructio philo-
sophorum) was likewise translated into
Latin, together with its refutation (Destruc¬
tio destruction^) by Averroës in about
1325.
What influence did the works of al-Gha¬
zâlï exert over the thinkers of the late Mid¬
dle Ages and the Renaissance? This has still
to be determined. However, we reject the
parallels that have been drawn wrongly,
in our opinion between the method of
approach of al-Ghazâlï and that of certain
modern European philosophers: between
the doubt of al-Ghazâlï and that of Des¬
cartes, for example, and between the con¬
ceptions of causality found in al-Ghazâlï
and in David Hume. These are empty
hypotheses , totally without foundation .
ABDURRAHMAN BADAWI, of Egypt, is a philo¬
sopher and an historian of philosophy. Former
head of the departments ofphilosophy at a num¬
ber of universities in Egypt, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Kuwait, and a visiting professor
at the Sorbonne, Paris, he is author of over a
hundred publications in French and Arabic,
mainly concerned with existentialism, Greek and
Arab philosophy and contemporary German phi¬
losophy.
8
