Al-Ghazäh:
From philosophy to mystical experience
/
í
¿**
á1 j&FT *í iff-'* i%
m .
<
©
Portrait of al-Ghazäli by the Lebanese
writer, mystic thinker and poet Gibran
Khalil Gibran (1883-1931), who emigrated
to the United States at the turn of the
century. Gibran's most noted work, The
Prophet (1923), was widelysuccessfuland
has been translated into 34 languages.
AL-GHAZÄLI's whole life seems to
have been guided by his determina¬
tion to restore the faith of the Mus¬
lims to its original purity and vigour. This he
attempted to do by taking up one by one the
challenges with which Islam was then faced,
deriving strength for his great work, which
he entitled "The Revival of the Religious
Sciences", from those challenges themsel¬
ves. In writing this work, he drew most
admirably on all the intellectual resources
provided by the accumulated intellectual
knowledge of his time.
He began by making an exhaustive
study which was to take him ten years of
all the intellectual traditions established
over the previous period, systematically
subjecting them to critical analysis but ack¬
nowledging that each one contained some
measure of wisdom and validity.
The development of his thinking at this
stage seems to have brought him to that
critical point in his life where, having
attained the summit of contemporary learn¬
ing, he began to reflect on the possibility of
acceding to a realm beyond all rational
knowledge leading, through the teachings
of Süfism, to a state of receptivity to the
ultimate divine truth.
He felt that he was invested with one last
mission in life to show his contemporaries
the light which he had so long and so
arduously sought and which had at last been
so fully bestowed upon him. In his eyes, the
mystical experience gave an overall mean¬
ing to the truest intuitions contained in the
various schools of thought of his time, while
breaking through the boundaries within
which each of them was confined.
He thus left us a work of rare breadth and
generosity, testimony to an exacting faith
served by an exceptional intelligence and
dedicated to the teaching of men of his own
generation as well as to the teaching of
generations to follow. In the development
of his thought, knowledge was always
directed towards serving the faith, and con¬
viction was constantly reinvigorated by a
critical spirit.
His influence was and still is very great in
the Muslim world, where he is seen by the
most erudite as one of those exceptional
Muslims whose thinking retains its vitality
and who have fully harmonized their
teaching with their own personal ex¬
perience.
In the West, his influence was consider¬
able although it was some time before the
entire significance of his work was fully
perceived. He was one of the first Arab
authors to be translated into Latin in
medieval Europe, and was first known
there through his book Maqäsid al-Faläsi-
fah ("The Aims of the Philosophers"). This
treatise was translated in Toledo by one
Master Johannes in the second half of the
twelfth century.
His account of Aristotelian logic,
metaphysics and physics, which he based on
an abridged version of Ibn Sïna's "Great

Encyclopaedia", circulated widely in
Europe during the thirteenth century. By
contrast, his refutation, contained in the
masterly Tahafut al-Faläsifah (translated by
some as "destruction" and by others as the
"incoherence" of the philosophers), was
not known until much later, and even then
only indirectly through the criticism made
of it by Ibn Rushd in Tahäfut al-Tahäfut
(translated in the Middle Ages under the
title "Destructio Destructionis").
In the second half of the thirteenth cen¬
tury, a Catalan preaching friar, Ramón
Martí, who devoted himself to the study of
oriental languages, became acquainted with
several Arabic works by al-Ghazäli and
quoted in particular the Tahäfut and the
Munqidh min al-daläl ("The Deliverer from
Error"). Here, at last, al-Ghazâlï's thinking
appears to have been faithfully reproduced;
but Ramón Martí's works seem to have
been reserved mainly for the use of his
fellow friars.
In 1328, Robert of Anjou, King of Na¬
ples, requested a scholar from Aries, Carlo
Calonymos, to translate the Tahäfut al-
Tahäfut in which Ibn Rushd began by giving
an objective account of al-Ghazâlï's main
ideas and then proceeded to criticize them.
This gave Europe a fresh opportunity to
become acquainted with the real thinking of
al-Ghazäli but for a long time Calonymos'
translation remained practically unknown.
Not until the end of the fifteenth century
and the Renaissance was a new version of
Ibn Rushd's book printed and widely circu¬
lated in Italy. Only then did al-Ghazâlï's
work, and the full significance of his think¬
ing, begin to be known in Europe.
What, today, in general terms, are the
lessons to be learned from his thinking,
even outside the Islamic world? First of all
that al-Ghazâlï can be seen as a unique
witness of an age distinguished by great
intellectual turmoil and by much question¬
ing about ultimate aims in relation to the
realities of social life.
This is certainly where the evolution of
al-Ghazâlï's thinking, which played so im¬
portant a role in the development of West¬
ern thought, can still be a source of inspira¬
tion today.
Al-Ghazâlï reacted to the challenges of
unprecedented intellectual, scientific and
technological development and to its
psychological and social consequences,
both per se and in regard to the faith, by
adopting an approach that was exemplary
in its scrupulousness. Enlightened by the
most progressive knowledge of his time, he
embarked on the path of luminous spiritual¬
ity and intellectual revival which gave to
culture its most creative stimulus.
This article is a slightly shortened version of an address
given by the Director-General of Unesco on 9 Decem¬
ber 1985 at Unesco Headquarters in Paris, during a
symposium on al-Ghazäli.
¡ftp
IssSäDälllüllE
©
* i

