The truth behind the veil of facts
Text © Reproduction prohibited by José Ortega y Gasset
FOR centuries the sidereal facts of this
world were set clear before the eyes of
humans; yet what those facts meant,
what they presented to man, what they made
evident to him, was by no means a reality, but
quite the opposite an enigma, a profound
secret, a problem before which man trembled
in terror.
Facts, then, come to be like the figures in
hieroglyphic writing. Have you ever noted the
paradoxical character of such figures? There
they are, holding up their clean profiles to us
so ostentatiously; but that very appearance of
clarity is there for the purpose of presenting us
with an enigma, of producing in us not clarity,
but confusion. The hieroglyphic figure says to
us: "You see me clearly? Good now what
you see of me is not my true being. I am here
to warn you that I am not my own essential
reality. My reality, my meaning, lies behind me
and is hidden by me. In order to arrive at it, you
must not fix your attention on me, nor take me
for reality; on the contrary, you will have to
interpret me, and this means that in order to
arrive at the true and inward meaning of this
hieroglyph, you must search for something
very different from the aspect which its figures
offer."
Science is the interpretation of facts. By
themselves, facts do not give us reality; on the
contrary, they hide it, which is to say that they
present us with the problem of reality. If there
were no facts, there would be no problem,
there would be no enigma, there would be
nothing hidden which it is necessary to de-
hide, to dis-cover. The word which the Greeks
used for truth is aletheia, which means dis¬
covery, taking away the veil that covers and
hides a thing. Facts cover up reality; while we
are in the midst of their innumerable swarm-
ings we are in chaos and confusion. In order to
discover reality we must for a moment lay
aside the facts that surge about us, and re¬
main alone with our minds. Then, on our own
risk and account, we imagine a reality, or to
put it another way, we construct an imaginary
reality, a pure invention of our own; then,
following in solitude the guidance of our own
personal imagining, we find what aspect, what
visible shapes, in short, what facts would be
produced by that imaginary reality. It is then
that we come out of our imaginative solitude,
out from our pure and isolated mental state,
and compare those facts which the imagined
reality would produce with the actual facts that
surround us. If they mate happily one with
another, this means that we have deciphered
the hieroglyph, that we have discovered the
reality which the facts covered and kept
secret.
That labour is what science is. As you see, it
consists of two different operations: one pure¬
ly imaginative and creative, which man pro¬
duces out of his own most free substance; the
other a confronting of that which is not man, of
that which surrounds him, the facts, the data.
Reality is not a datum, not something given or
bestowed, but a construction which man
makes out of the given material.
May 1964
JOSE ORTEGA Y GASSET (1883-1953), inter¬
nationally known Spanish philosopher and
essayist, exercised a strong intellectual influ¬
ence throughout Europe and the Spanish-speak¬
ing world. Among his many works translated into
English are La Rebelión de las masas (The
Revolt of the Masses) and España invertebrada
(Invertebrate Spain). The text on this page is
taken from Man and Crisis (published by W. W.
Nonon and Company, Inc., New York, 1958).

