The roots of a
Extracts from a collective text by:
YOSHIO ABE, Professor, University of Tokyo;
SAMIR AMIN, Director, African Institute for Eco¬
nomic Development and Planning, Dakar;
MARGARET J. ANSTEE, Deputy Regional
Director, Bureau for Latin America, United Na¬
tions Development Programme, New York;
BECHIR BENYAHMED, Director of Jeune
Afrique magazine, Paris;
WILBERT CHAGULA, Minister for Economic
Affairs and Development Planning, United Re¬
public of Tanzania;
JEAN-MARIE DOMENACH, Director of Esprit
magazine, Paris;
MARION DÖNHOFF, Chief Editor of the weekly
Die Zeit, Hamburg;
ABDUL-RAZZAK KADDOURA, former Rector,
University of Damascus; Assistant Director-
General, Science Sector, Unesco, April 1976- );
ALFRED KASTLER, Member of the French
Academy of Sciences, Nobel Prize for Physics;
M.G.K. MENON, Secretary, Department of Elec¬
tronics, Government of India;
YEHUDI MENUHIN, Former President, Interna¬
tional Music Council, Unesco, Paris;
CHARLES MORAZE, Director, Institute of Stu¬
dies for Social and Economic Development, Uni¬
versity of Paris;
AURELIO PECCEI, Chairman of the Club of
Rome, Italy;
RAUL PREBISCH, Former Special Representa¬
tive of the Secretary General, United Nations
Emergency Operation, New York;
RADOVAN RICHTA, Director, Institute of Phi¬
losophy and Sociology of the Czechoslovak
Academy of Sciences, Prague;
JOAQUIN RUIZ-JIMENEZ, Professor, Universi¬
ty of Madrid;
ABDUL AZIZ EL SAYED, Former Director-
General, The Arab Educational, Cultural and
Scientific Organization, Paris;
VADIM SOBAKIN, Professor of International
Law, Moscow.
WE are now undergoing a period of
profound and rapid, though uneven,
and not infrequently crisis-ridden,
change. This change is largely connected
with the ever-increasing power available to
man through the development of science and
technology.
Technology is ambivalent. On the one hand
it has brought immense benefits to mankind.
On the other, it has resulted in an incredible
accumulation of destructive devices. Fur¬
thermore, the contradictions inherent in the
transfer of technology from the industrial cen¬
tres to the developing areas of the world have
brought very serious maladjustments and dis¬
ruptions. Inequalities have been accentuated
and an extraordinary demographic growth is
taking place.
One thing is beyond doubt: none of the
urgent problems facing mankind today and
tomorrow can be solved successfully if the
conditions of peace are not ensured, if the
relaxation of international tension is not trans¬
formed into an irreversible process and if the
enormous resources today still tied up with
armaments are not gradually released for hu¬
man development.
Photo Dominique Roger - Unesco

growing world crisis
Efforts for the consolidation of peace, which
is to be understood as a just and democratic
system of international relations based on the
principles of peaceful coexistence and not
simply as the absence of war, should be ex¬
panded in all spheres, from economics to
science, from diplomacy to culture.
Annual expenditure on the arms race is
probably around 200 to 250 billion dollars a
sum equal to the total national income of
those countries in which the majority of man¬
kind is living. At the same time 2,500 million
men and women live a largely precarious
existence at levels of nutrition below the
acceptable minimum.
The present growth-rate of these popula¬
tions is such that their number is expected to
double in 25 years.
The currently accessible resources of the
earth have their limits. Within the space of a
few generations we are frittering away re¬
serves of energy below the ground which
nature has taken thousands of millions of
years to accumulate. In the immediate future
there is a danger that we shall destroy, without
a thought for future generations, the plants ^
Illustrations to this article symbolize the
evolution of the human outlook from that
of the small community and the region to a
trulyglobalperspective. Photo far left Is of
a statue by the Swiss sculptor Alberto
Giacometti which stands in a patio at Un¬
esco's headquarters in Paris.
», ' *A -^r

and trees produced over the ages. In the last
fifty years, nine-tenths of the forests of some
tropical islands have disappeared.
Under the pressure of either justified or
artificial imperatives designed to maintain
economic growth, increase consumption or
satisfy it without heeding the consequences,
today's generations are plundering and pollut¬
ing nature.
Thus the very fact that our resources
(whether renewable or not) are limited would
indicate that the "Western model" of develop¬
ment cannot be applied everywhere or at all
times.
In some societies where they are firmly
established, industrialization and technology
deprive individuals and groups of the possibil¬
ity of influencing their living conditions, and
hence their own destiny.
Human rights and freedoms are threatened
by multiple intrusions into private life. As a
result of the spread of computer science and
communication techniques, life is being con¬
ditioned on the basis of surveys whose aims in
some cases are to a certain extent inquisitor¬
ial. Thus some of the industrialized countries
must undertake a new kind of struggle to
defend human rights, the very notion of which
is an empty promise for the masses of the
developing countries who are deprived of the
most elementary means of satisfying their
needs.
These considerations emphasize the close
interdependence of the problems facing the
modern world. We are not faced with distinct
problems, each of which we may try to solve
separately and in isolation. A global view must
therefore be a prerequisite to any attempt to
solve the different problems of today. The
United Nations declaration on a New Interna¬
tional Economic Order can be regarded as an
event of world-wide significance.
We must give up thinking of the centres of
economic power as the sole repositories of
truth, civilization and universality. It has been
held in certain quarters that industrial growth,
modelled on that of certain European or North
American centres, would itself bring about a
general improvement in human conditions,
each nation being free to reproduce the pro¬
posed pattern for itself. We must face the fact
that this is not so.
Once it is seen as global, development can
no longer be the direct extension to the whole
world of the knowledge, ways of thought, life
styles or experiences specific to a single re¬
gion of the world; each local development
must be related to its own values and culture.
It is not enough to transfer the sum total of
the knowledge available in developed coun¬
tries to the developing countries; to do this
excludes the possibility of any genuine im¬
plantation of science and technology in the
countries at the receiving end. It favours the
"brain drain" and even slows down the gener¬
al advancement of knowledge.
The immediate problem facing the develop¬
ing countries is that of establishing an infra¬
structure for science. As long as this does not
exist, there can be no authentic scientific de¬
velopment, but only transplantation of im¬
ported science, which does not correspond to
the true needs of the country.
The kind of scientific development which
does correspond to the needs of a country can
only be based on an awareness of its civiliza¬
tion, traditions and values.
Whilst science has been concerned with
discovering knowledge and understanding
nature, its applications have been largely gov¬
erned by the profit motive to the benefit of
small sections of human society groups or
countries.
We should also like to draw attention to the
huge sums spent on scientific research, half
of which at least are spent on armaments. In
actual fact, science is one of the great creative
manifestations of human genius. What is
needed is a new concept and long-range in¬
ternational strategy for the development of
science and technology which reflects overall
global social needs.
With the headlong progress of science and
technology, there are new developments in
the offing whose implications are of a global
nature for human society as a whole such as
interference with the genetic code, deliberate
efforts to modify climate, mass employment of
information systems and storage devices with
permanent memories, industrial utilization of
micro-organisms, creation of closed man-
nature metabolism cycles, and so on. Con¬
cerning questions of so far-reaching a charac¬
ter, there is need for a widely based discus¬
sion leading to a global concept and in this
Unesco should play an important role.
Culture is not a luxury reserved for those
whose elementary needs are satisfied; it is
linked with the organization of society, and to it
society owes its dynamic force. It is made up
of the wisdom of the illiterate or the experience
handed down through generations of manual
workers as well as of the highest scholarship.
Traditions which have been forgotten or des¬
troyed by inconsiderate modernization are
irreparable losses to the understanding of our
destiny.
-
Pans

To over-assert cultural particularities is just
as dangerous as to underrate them. It is
another way of running the same risks. We
must maintain a constant equilibrium between
sciences and cultures, although this is not
enough. It must be matched by an equilibrium
in mutual efforts at comprehension, and by
incessant adjustments between what different
cultures have to learn from one another.
It is not to be taken for granted that men will
escape the course of events which has led
them to the present dangers; the survival of
the planet is at stake. Is it not high time to
display a certain modesty, a wisdom which at
times our ancestors possessed and which
could constitute the basis of a new morality?
What is at stake, indeed, is not merely the
survival of the human race, but the survival of
all living things. If man really wants to live in
harmony with the natural environment, as he
claims he does today, he must show respect
not only for human rights but also for the rights
of life in its widest sense.
March 1976
H
KflB :-V..-.. (¿SR.
TAB HI ¡"^«S
[H i^HH ml w MÊ
