The United Nations
World
Disarmament
Campaign
by Jan Martenson
THE World Disarmament Campaign
to inform, to educate and to gener¬
ate public understanding and sup¬
port for the objectives of the United Na¬
tions in the field of arms limitation and
disarmament represents a unique aspect of
the role of the United Nations. As an inter¬
national organization consisting of
sovereign States, the United Nations essen¬
tially deals with member governments. In
deciding to launch a world disarmament
campaign, these member governments
have provided the United Nations with an
instrument of communication with the pub¬
lic at large.
The Campaign was launched, by consen¬
sus, in June 1982 at the Twelfth Special
Session of the General Assembly devoted
to disarmament. By the time it was in¬
itiated, the process of negotiating disarma¬
ment had acquired a great complexity with
regard to the issues under consideration,
the results attained, and the status of agree¬
ments actually arrived at. At the same time,
The United Nations Postal Administration
issued a series of six stamps on 20 June
1986 to commemorate the International
Year of Peace. Designed by artists from
various countries, the stamps depict sym¬
bolic motifs (from top to bottom): doves
flying and nesting in a tree (Akira Iriguchi,
Japan); the word "peace" in several lan¬
guages encircling the United Nations
emblem (Henryk Chylinski, Poland); multi¬
coloured stylized dove (Renato Ferrini,
Italy); the word "peace" and an olive
branch (Salahattin Kanldinc, USA); olive
branch describing a rainbow above the
curve of the earth (Milo Schor, Israel);
doves within the United Nations emblem
(Mohammad Sardar, Pakistan).
there was a growing public debate over the
causes and consequences of a continuing
arms race and the problems and prospects
of disarmament, particularly of nuclear dis¬
armament. While the themes highlighted in
this debate continued to bear the imprint of
regional and local concerns, there was also
an increasing trend towards greater interna¬
tional interaction, a process facilitated by
the availability of modern means of com¬
munication which permit wide public parti¬
cipation.
United Nations objectives in the field of
arms limitation and disarmament underline
commonly shared goals which transcend
national, geographical and political dif¬
ferences'. As evolved in response to the
changing international situation, these
objectives could be attained through a
lowering of the present levels of military
build-ups in a balanced and verifiable man¬
ner and in accordance with the need for
undiminished security for all States, large
and small. Also, in a world of increasing
interdependence, not only States but issues
are becoming interlinked. As such, the
themes supported by the World Disarma¬
ment Campaign are those which emphasize
our common human destiny.
The most comprehensive statement of
United Nations objectives in this field is
given in the unanimously adopted Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of
the General Assembly devoted to dis¬
armament: "while the efforts of all States
should continue to be general and complete
disarmament under effective international
control, the immediate goal is that of the
elimination of the danger of nuclear war
and the implementation of measures to halt
and reverse the arms race and clear the path
towards lasting peace."
These issues have been the subject of
considerable public interest in all regions of
25

the world. In providing objective, factual
and balanced information pertaining to
these questions, the Campaign primarily
relies upon the priorities and measures set
out in the Final Document; the decisions
taken at the Twelfth Special Session of the
General Assembly devoted to dis¬
armament; the views expressed by Member
States; the recommendations in the declara¬
tion of the 1980s as the Second Disarma¬
ment Decade; and the unanimous conclu¬
sions of the various expert groups nomin¬
ated by the Secretary-General to study spe¬
cific aspects of arms limitation and dis¬
armament. Within this broad framework,
the Campaign places emphasis on the in¬
teraction between the issues of disarma¬
ment and international security as well as
disarmament and development.
In order to reach the largest number of
people in all parts of the world, a consti¬
tuency-related approach is required. Such
constituencies lead to a multiplier effect in
educating, informing and generating public
understanding and support for the objec¬
tives of the United Nations in the field of
arms limitation and disarmament, where
the issues involved are often complex and
need to be explained in an easily compre¬
hensible manner.
Elected representatives, media, non-gov¬
ernmental organizations, educational com¬
munities and research institutes from diffe¬
rent political and geographical backgrounds
are thus the primary constituencies of the
World Disarmament Campaign, which en¬
courages bilateral and multilateral ex¬
changes, interpersonal communications,
and gives the widest possible dissemination
to contacts, for example, between
government officials, experts, academics,
non-governmental organizations and
journalists.
Having been entrusted with the responsi¬
bility of carrying out this Campaign on a
universal basis in a factual, objective and
balanced manner, the Department for Dis¬
armament Affairs realizes that the Cam¬
paign is a vehicle not only for informing but
also for learning/1* Our experience in the
last four years of preparing and distributing
information materials and organizing con¬
ferences, symposia and other activities in
different parts of the world has led us to the
unmistakable conclusion that, cutting
across ideological and political boundaries,
there is a universal constituency for dis¬
armament bound by concern for human
survival and well-being in the nuclear age.
Within this growing and increasingly know¬
ledgeable community, each of the primary
constituencies of the World Disarmament
Campaign has a role to play.
At this point, two observations should be
made.
First, it is unrealistic to expect disarma¬
ment to be achieved overnight. After all,
concern about security and otir resort to
some form of weaponry to achieve that end
is as old as the human race, whereas the
process of bringing about mutually accept¬
able disarmament agreements among
sovereign States is a rather recent concept.
Yet at the same time human rationality
inspires us not to accept defeat in the face of
a formidable challenge. I, for one, believe
that it is well within the reach of the human
intellect to turn a challenge to the survival
of mankind into an opportunity for human
betterment. The same ingenuity which has
produced deadly arsenals of destruction
might indeed become capable of using sci¬
ence and technology for peaceful purposes.
We need to accept the notion of common
survival in the nuclear age and thus the
indivisibility of mankind's destiny.
Second, the World Disarmament Cam¬
paign is an instrument which the interna¬
tional community has unanimously and
voluntarily devised to further its common
objectives in the field of arms limitation and
disarmament. The full potential of this
unique endeavour can be realized only
through ensuring the principles of univer¬
sality and objectivity. Unimpeded access to
a wide range of information for all sectors of
the public is a necessary condition for the
creation of the confidence and trust badly
needed to generate widespread support for
halting and eventually reversing the arms
race.
The programmes and activities under¬
taken for the World Disarmament Cam¬
paign have reached hundreds of thousands
of people in all parts of the globe through
the dissemination of information materials
and publications, the holding of regional
conferences and seminars, as well as
through the media and personal contacts. In
the last few years, such regional events have
been organized in Mexico, Kenya,
Thailand, Romania, India, Venezuela,
USSR, Egypt, Sweden, Togo, Italy and, in
May 1986, Tbilisi (Georgian SSR).
Leading representatives of non-gov¬
ernmental organizations, media, research
institutes and educational communities are
invited from various countries within a re¬
gion to participate in the discussions on
disarmament issues of specific and general
concern. The objective of these confer¬
ences is not to apportion blame or to issue
communiqués, but to facilitate a construc¬
tive exchange of views and opinion, to im¬
prove dialogue and thus further under¬
standing and communication among people
throughout the world on issues of arms
limitation and disarmament. Indeed, a well-
informed public opinion stands a much bet¬
ter chance of playing a positive, construc¬
tive and realistic role in the search for solu¬
tions to these issues.
All these contacts, in turn, have made it
possible for the United Nations to ascertain
the impact of the Campaign. Growing num¬
bers of people have manifested their in¬
terest in disarmament matters, while better
understanding the complex realities of the
arms race, on the one hand, and the difficul¬
ties surrounding the issues, on the other.
The impact made so far can perhaps be
assessed at several levels, one of them being
the generation of new ideas. As the Secre¬
tary-General of the United Nations has
said: "All the speeches made there (in the
United Nations), all the information emerg¬
ing .therefrom, all the studies undertaken
there, perhaps have no immediate effect on
national policies, although very often they
provide inspiration. But they definitely do
influence world public opinion and contri¬
bute to the way in which thinking and mor¬
als evolve. And it is ideas which transform
the world."
JAN MARTENSON, of Sweden, has been
Under-Secretary-General, Department for Dis¬
armament Affairs, at the United Nations since
1983. He was previously UN Assistant Secret¬
ary-General, Centre for Disarmament, Depart¬
ment of Political and Security Council Affairs
(1979-1982). A former head of the Information
Department of the Swedish Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, he has also served as Deputy Director of
the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute.
(1) A detailed description of the Department's activities
can be found in the yearly report of the Secretary-
General on the activities of the World Disarmament
Campaign, which can be obtained by writing to The
Department for Disarmament Affairs, United Nations,
New York 10017, USA. The Department also publishes
a newsletter with updated information on the activities
of the Campaign throughout the world.
The University for Peace
The University for Peace, the creation of
which was approved by the UN General
Assembly on 5 December 1980, is an interna¬
tional institution located In Costa Rica. For¬
mally outside the organizational framework
of the United Nations, it is established on the
basis of an international agreement and a
charter which came into force on 7 April 1 981 .
Its activities, devoted to the promotion of
peace through education and research, are
rooted in the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights.
The University is a multidisciplinar
academic institution which focuses on
education for peace and human rights perse
but also studies problems related to the en¬
vironment, natural resources, technology,
communications and other Issues in terms of
their impact on the attainment of peace.
Tapio Varis (Finland)
Rector of the University for Peace
26
