Reflections onpeace
A Unesco-sponsored international symposium on the theme
'Philosophical Reflections on the Foundations ofPeace in the Present World Situation'
was held at Unesco's Paris headquarters from 3 to 6 December 1985.
We publish below extracts from papers presented by four of the participants.
1. Peace as
an absolute
value
by Claude Lefort
"It Is certainly true that the closer men
come together the more they seem to
touch each other's sensitive spots. But
this is only a half truth. Is it not rather
because contacts and relationships are
not frequent enough that theyarouse such
apprehension?" Right, The Ship of Fools,
by the Dutch painter Hiëronymus Bosch
(c. 1450-1516), now in the Louvre Museum,
Paris.

"Peace as an absolute value can only be
based on the notion that relations between
men are relations between equals." Right,
Totonac earthenware statuette In the Jala-
pa Museum, State of Veracruz, Mexico.
The civilization of the Totonacs, a pre-
Columbian Mexican people, flourished
from the 7th to the 14th centuries on the
west coast of the Gulf of Mexico.
THE great German philosopher Im¬
manuel Kant (1724-1804) outlined
the idea of a code of law for mankind
emerging from the bitter experience of war
and necessitated by the increasing proxim¬
ity of men due to the growth of populations
on the limited surface of the globe.
Kant's foresight was astonishing when we
consider how heterogeneous and scattered
was the world he knew in comparison with
our own. He was not alone in his prediction;
most of the great thinkers of the early
nineteenth century, whatever their beliefs,
from Saint-Simon or Chateaubriand, in
France, to Karl Marx, were aware of the
new and incredibly rapidly accelerating
rhythm of population growth and of the
inescapable evidence, on every hand, that
space was finite.
Such predictions, which have constantly
been repeated up to our own times, con¬
tinue to amaze us, so far are they out¬
stripped by the actual speed of change. The
words of the French poet and essayist Paul
Valéry, written in 1931 in his book Regards
sur le monde actuel (Reflections on the
World Today), which sounded so excitingly
original to his contemporaries, seem to us
today as no more than a statement of the
obvious.
. "All the habitable regions of the Earth,"
he wrote, "have today been discovered,
mapped and divided amongst the nations.
The era of no man's lands, of free territor¬
ies, of unexplored regions, of areas to which
no one lays claim, is over, and with it has
gone the era of unlimited expansion. There
is now not a rock on which a flag has not
been planted, not an empty space on a map,
not a region without its laws and its customs
officers, not a tribe whose affairs have not
been filed and classified and which, through
the evil magic of writing, is not under the
tutelage of a varied host of 'humanists' in
far-distant offices. The era ofthefinite world
has begun."
He went on: "A new, excessive and in¬
stant interdependence between regions and
events is the perceptible consequence of
this important phenomenon. Now every
political happening must be considered in
the light of this new condition of universa¬
lity." And he spoke of "a closer and closer
interdependence in human actions."
It must be said that Paul Valéry, imbued
with the heritage of the Greek spirit with its
love ofclear-cut boundaries, did not consid¬
er this new situation in which the world
found itself to be a happy one. In the same
passage his anxiety shows through: "This
complexity will be the undoing of all
prudence, wisdom, genius, since in this uni¬
verse of multiple relationships and contacts
there is neither permanence nor continuity
nor discernible causality."
<
©
This is a judgement which cannot be
ignored. It is certainly true that the closer
men come together the more they seem to
touch each other's sensitive spots. But this
is only a half truth. Is it not rather because
contacts and relationships are not frequent
enough that they arouse such
apprehension? Is it not because the growing
interdependence of human actions has not
been matched by a genuine propagation of
human rights or by the establishment of a
public domain, on a world-wide scale, in
which divisions could find a form of express¬
ion other than war? Is it not also because
the movement towards the erosion of
ancient particularisms, which all are now
agreed is irreversible, comes up against con¬
siderable resistance and provokes estab¬
lished hierarchies to invent new methods of
excluding all those who, despite their differ¬
ing condition, might otherwise appear to be
"equals"?
Peace as an absolute value can, in fact,
only be based on the notion that relations
between men are relations between equals.
In other words, this value is indissociable
from that of liberty. It also means that it
would be hypocritical to sanction, in the
name of peace, any form of exploitation of
peoples who find themselves, under the
pretext of the play of market forces, dep¬
rived of the resources of their territory and
subjected to overt or covert dictatorship; it
would be equally hypocritical to sanction
any form of totalitarianism which denies
individuals and minorities their elementary
rights.
Since, in this discussion, we have been
cautioned not to fall into a facile utopianism
but to take due account of the constraints of
the contemporary world, we must not con¬
fuse the cause of peace with unreasoned
pacifism. Nor should we, in respecting the
realities, surrender to the delirium that the
spectacle of current conflicts gives rise to.
Rather we should admit that sovereigns do
not, as Rousseau supposed, alone decide
the fate of humanity. The laborious task of
bringing men closer together can only be
achieved through a better mutual know¬
ledge of customs and mental attitudes,
through progress in education, the diffusion
of information and the propagation of hu¬
man rights; far from being a vain task, this
can spark off decisive political moves to¬
wards peace.
Are these hopes doomed to remain unful¬
filled? The question clearly has yet to be
answered. Yet rather than concur with
Rousseau that it would be madness to want
to be sane in the midst of madmen, we
would do better to recognize calmly, with
Freud, that in the unceasing struggle be¬
tween Eros and the instinct of death, the
latter has shown itself to be decidedly the
stronger.
CLAUDE LEFORT, French philosopher, is
Director of Studies at the School of Advanced
Studies in the Social Sciences, Paris, where he
divides his time between teaching and research.
Hispublished works include Eléments d'une criti¬
que de la bureaucratie (Gallimard, revised edi¬
tion 1979) and L'invention démocratique
(Fayard, 1981).
