Year of peace: 2
^^^^^^
The fortress of the Slovenes
Slovenj Gradee, a little Slovenian town of
8,000 people in northwest Yugoslavia, lies
at the crossroads of Central Europe, the
Baikans and the Mediterranean. It has a
long history. A Celtic, then a Roman colony
in ancient times, it owes its name "the
fortress of the Slovenes" to the presence
of Slavs there since the tenth century. Dur¬
ing the Second World War, this moun¬
tainous, forested site was the scene of
fierce fighting between partisans and the
Nazi occupying forces. The last battle in the
European theatre actually took place at
nearby Poljana on 15 May 1945, a week
after the armistice had been signed.
As a result of all its sufferings, Slovenj
Gradee today wishes to be a centre of
peace and understanding between cul¬
tures. Among its honorary citizens are two
internationally renowned sculptors, Henry
Moore (born 1898) and Ossip Zadkine
(1890-1967).
In 1965, the United Nations sponsored a
series of international exhibitions in the
vast modern gallery at Slovenj Gradee, and
in 1985 the little town organized an exhibi¬
tion of woodcuts to celebrate the fortieth
anniversary of the foundation of the United
Nations. One of the most striking exhibits
was the work of a local naive painter, J.
Tisnikar, an employee at the municipal hos¬
pital. The director of the hospital, a commit¬
ted pacifist, also took part in the event by
sponsoring a round table of specialists on
medicine for peace.
From 11 to 14 November 1985, a meet¬
ing of writers and journalists from nine
countries was held at Slovenj Gradee
Pi
under the auspices of Unesco and the Un¬
ited Nations. At the end of the symposium,
entitled "Pen for Peace", all the participants
stressed that real solidarity can exist be¬
tween nations, transcending simplistic poli¬
tical divergences, and that the writer in all
circumstances should seek the truth, which
is not the exclusive apanage of any indi¬
vidual, society, or State. Unesco was also
asked to encourage the translation and
publication, in the major world languages,
of anti-war literary works from small
countries.
Bogdan Pogachnik
The PEN Club and peace
The PEN Club groups between 10,000 and
1 1 ,000 writers from all over the world and
has 83 Centres in 57 countries. In 1983 it
created a Writers for Peace Committee to
define the responsibilities of writers and
decided that each year 3 March would be
celebrated as Writers for Peace Day. All
PEN Centres pledge to hold a meeting on
that day and to examine the problems that
arise in their respective countries. A meet¬
ing of this kind was held last year at Tel Aviv
in which Israeli and Arab writers took part. It
gave rise to lively exchanges of opinion, but
was also highly constructive.
Under the aegis of the chairman of this
special Committee, a meeting was also
held at Bled in Yugoslavia on the theme of
the myth of the hereditary enemy. It cannot
be denied that literature has created or
contributed to the creation of myths of this
type. The participants considered that it
was time to react and to explode this myth
once and for all by studying how it has been
formed through literature which remains
one of the great vehicles of contemporary
sensibility. The work of this meeting was
considered to be so important that the
Committee has suggested that the United
Nations publish a book on this theme in
1986 on the occasion of the International
Year of Peace.
The theme of the 48th International PEN
Congress, held in New York from 1 1 to 17
January was imagination of the State, im¬
agination of the writer. Later this year, a
meeting will be held in Hamburg on the
theme of contemporary history and its
image in literature.
