Year of peace: 5
Takashi Nagai, professor at the
Nagasaki Faculty of Medicine,
died in 1951 at the age of 43 from
the effects of the atom bomb ex¬
plosion which destroyed his town
in 1945. His eyewitness account
is extracted from a book pub¬
lished in the Federal Republic of
Germany in 1961. Entitled Die
Stimme des Menschen (The Voice
of Mankind) by Hans Walter Bahr
(R. Piper and Co. publishers,
Munich), it is an anthology of let¬
ters from all parts of the world
written between 1939 and 1945 by
men and women who lost their
lives as a result of the Second
World War.
by Takashi Nagai
Letter from Nagasaki
Text © Reproduction prohibited
DIRECTLY after the bomb exploded, the
reaction of those who could still move
was either to remain where they had
been at the time of the explosion or to flee
immediately. Those who stayed where they
were either to help injured friends or to try to
save their apartment, office or factory were
quickly hemmed in by the flames and
perished along with those they had wanted to
save. When the fire came closer, we took
refuge on the hill near our hospital. In this way
my neighbours and I escaped death by a
hair's-breadth.
Here and there we came across medical
students and nurses lying on the ground. We
picked them up and carried them a little further
up the hill, out of reach of the fire. All the time I
was urging those around me to move faster.
I had a gash on the right temple and was
losing a lot of blood. Eventually I collapsed.
When I came to, I found that I was lying in the
grass beneath the billowing eddies of the
atomic cloud. I was suffering terribly from my
wound and had to grit my teeth to overcome
the pain. Then I began to think about my wife.
If she were still alive, I told myself, she would
have already joined me.
Next day, looking down from the hill behind
the clinic, I could see the ruins of my house.
Nothing remained of Urakami but a great pile
of white ashes. Nothing moved, wherever one
looked, in the clear morning light.
I had seen my beloved faculty and all the
students to whom I was so attached engulfed
in a flash by the flames. My wife was now
nothing but a little heap of charred bones
which I collected one by one in the ruins of our
house. Her remains weighed no heavier than
a parcel you might send through the post. She
had died in the kitchen.
As for me, "atomic sickness" in its most
acute form now added its effects to those of
the long-standing illness caused by my re¬
search into X-rays. This, along with the injury
to my right side, completely disabled me. By
an extraordinary piece of luck, three days
earlier our two children had been sent to their
grandmother in the mountains and were thus
safe and sound.
Never before had I found my work as a
scientist such a painful burden. Leaning on a
stick, my body covered with wounds which
hampered my movements, I began with great
effort to climb mountains and cross rivers in
order to visit my patients. I kept this up for two
months. Then I was struck down by a violent
attack of atomic sickness and had to give up
my medical work altogether.
Those of us who suffered the bombing had
no idea at all of what an atomic bomb could
be. I myself never thought for a moment that
the bomb meant anything so cataclysmic,
even though I was right underneath the
mushroom cloud. I thought it was just a super¬
bomb, or something similar. It was only when
the cloud began to spread out and disperse
and the sunlight (which it had completely blot¬
ted out) began to filter through again until it
was bright enough for me to see something,
that I looked around and said to myself: "It's
the end of the world."
The rest of the world cried out in horror:
"The atomic bomb must never be used
again."
And yet I hear that some people do not think
the bomb is as terrible as all that, or that it
must never be used in any circumstances: "A
city is never entirely destroyed...," they say.
"There are always some survivors. ... Radio¬
activity disappears in time. ... It's only a new
weapon, more effective than any used before.
..." More effective! ... What do they know
about it, the people who talk like this?
November 1975
