The restless
Earth
The uncertain art
of earthquake prediction
by EM. Fournier d'Albe

IT is often said that one cannot claim to
understand a natural phenomenon un¬
less one can accurately predict its
occurrence. If this is true, then the ability to
predict earthquakes must be one of the
principal goals of the science of seismology.
The scientist who ventures into this field,
however, incurs an unusual degree of per¬
sonal and social responsibility. Prediction
of a potentially destructive earthquake may
have serious disruptive effects on the social
and economic life of a community, whether
or not it eventually proves to be correct.
Many lives were saved, for example, by the
correct prediction of the Haicheng earth¬
quake in China in 1975, but against this
must be set many cases of erroneous predic¬
tions which have not only damaged the
reputations of the scientists concerned but
have also had considerable economic and
even political consequences.
In the present state of knowledge it is not
possible to determine, by observation and
calculation, precisely where and when an
earthquake will take place. This is because,
in order to make a prediction with the re¬
quired pinpoint accuracy, detailed informa¬
tion is needed on the stress fields and the
mechanical properties of the Earth's crust
over wide areas and down to depths of
several tens of kilometres. Even if it were to
become technically possible to obtain such
information, the cost of doing so would
probably remain prohibitive, and might in¬
deed be greater than that of repairing the
damage caused by the earthquake itself.
The few successful predictions that have
been made were based on the observation
of precursory phenomena of various kinds
generated by the same deep-seated process
which leads to earthquakes yet not causally
related to the earthquakes themselves.
Such phenomena might include sudden
changes in the level of minor seismic ac¬
tivity, slight deformations of the Earth's
surface, changes in magnetic or electrical
fields, unusual rise or fall of water levels in
wells, changes in the gravity field or abnor¬
mal behaviourof animals. Howevernoneof
these precursory . phenomena has yet
proved to be a reliable indicator of a forth¬
coming earthquake. The methods so suc- ^
Thousands of lives were saved when
Chinese experts successfully predicted
the Haicheng earthquake of 1975 (see
map). Following a severe earthquake at
Xingtai, in 1966, scientists noted that the
epicentres of subsequent tremors and
shocks, including that of the earthquake in
the Bo Hai gulf in 1969, seemed to be
moving in a north-easterly direction to¬
wards the heavilypopulated Liaoning Pro¬
vince. By June 1974, scientists were pre¬
dicting that there would be a major earth¬
quake to the north of Bo Hai within one or
two years. On 1 February 1975, a series of
minor tremors was correctly identified as
the foreshock heralding a major shock in
the area of the city ofHaicheng, and on the
following day more than a million people
were evacuated to temporary outdoor
shelter. Early in the evening of 4 February
the main shock (magnitude 7.3) occurred.
Although 90 per cent of the houses in the
area were damaged or destroyed, there
was very little loss of life.
©
23

^ cessfully employed at Haicheng failed to
predict the terrible Tangshan earthquake in
the following year.
New data are constantly being accumu¬
lated and there is hope that the accuracy of
predictions will gradually improve,
although they will of necessity remain prob¬
abilistic in nature. They will not state, for
instance, that "an earthquake of magnitude
X will take place in area Y on a certain
date"; rather they will take the form of a
statement on the probability of an earth¬
quake of a certain magnitude occurring in a
given area during a specified period of time.
So much for the scientific side of the
problem. The next question is: What will be
the effects of the predicted earthquake, if it
actually occurs? How many buildings will
be damaged or destroyed, and how many
people will be killed, injured or rendered
homeless? Will telephone networks con¬
tinue to function? Will streets be blocked by
debris?
In preparing to face an impending earth¬
quake emergency, civil defence services
need answers to these questions. They need
information on the expected strength of the
seismic ground motion and on the vulner¬
ability of buildings and urban lifelines to
this motion. They will need to prepare
"scenarios" of the probable effects of the
predicted earthquake.
For this to be done, seismologists and
geologists have first to estimate what will be
the intensity of the ground motion caused
by the expected earthquake and how this
intensity will vary from one part to another
of the area round the earthquake focus.
This they do on the basis of previous experi¬
ence and of knowledge of the local charac¬
teristics of the soil and sub-soil.
Then an inventory of buildings in the area
has to be compiled and an assessment made
of how each building is likely to react to the
expected ground motion, according to its
structural type and to the materials of which
it is built. This is where the greatest difficul¬
ty lies, since it is almost impossible to pre¬
dict exactly how any individual building will
behave in an earthquake. The best one can
do is to base the assessment on information
as to how similar buildings have behaved in
recent earthquakes elsewhere. Hence the
importance of carrying out detailed studies
of the damage caused each time an earth¬
quake occurs. Already some extremely
valuable information has come from the
studies made in Romania and Yugoslavia of
the damage caused in those countries by the
earthquakes of 1977 and 1979.
Clearly, all this work takes time and
should preferably not be left until an earth¬
quake is impending. For this reason civil
defence services in many earthquake-prone
countries are already collecting such in¬
formation and preparing scenarios, so as to
be ready to deal more effectively with poss¬
ible earthquake disasters, whether or not
they are predicted in advance.
Earthquake scenarios are invaluable not
only for planning the mobilization of rescue
teams, medical and fire-fighting services,
and the stockpiling of emergency supplies
of food and shelter against a possible earth¬
quake, but also for planning the various
temporary measures of protection that can
be taken in response to a prediction. For
instance, inflammable or toxic substances
can be moved into safe storage, vulnerable
systems in chemical plants can be shut down
for a time, water levels in reservoirs can be
lowered and schools and theatres can be
temporarily closed. In the final stage of an
alert, people can be evacuated from their
homes or places of work in vulnerable
buildings.
Such measures are costly and disruptive
of individual and social life. They may be
resisted and cannot be prolonged for more
than a few days, and they will probably be
abandoned after one or more false alarms.
They are therefore likely to be applied in
response to an earthquake prediction only
if the responsible authorities are convinced
that the prediction satisfies certain criteria
of accuracy and reliability.
As we have seen, scientific predictions
are likely to be expressed in terms of prob¬
ability. Public authorities, on the other
The world's first seismometer
The first known instrument capable of
sensing earth motion was invented in AD
132 by the Chinese philosopher Chang
Heng. It consistedofa large bronze vessel,
some two metres In diameter, around
which were spaced eight dragon heads
with pivotingjaws In which were held eight
balls. Inside the vessel was a pendulum
with eight arms each of which was con¬
nected to one of the dragon heads. When
an earthquake shock caused the pendu¬
lum to vibrate, the arm connected to the
dragon head facing the direction of the
shock caused its jaws to open allowing the
ball they held to fall into the open mouth of
one of the eight toads positioned around
the base of the vessel. The Instrument was
sensitive enough to detect an earthquake
whose epicentre was over 600 kilometres
away. It was not until 1856 that a seismo¬
graph capable of recording the passage of
seismic waves and giving their amplitude,
time ofonsetanddirection was installedat
the observatory at Vesuvius. Opposite
page, a modern reconstruction of Chang
Heng's apparatus and, above left, Its mode
of operation. Since the founding, In the
early 1960s, of the Worldwide Standar¬
dized Seismograph Network (WWSSN),
seismic observatories with standard
equipment and synchronized time-keep¬
ing have been established virtually
throughout the world. Map above shows
distribution of the WWSSNandassociated
observatories.
24

hand, have to make decisions on a "yes or
no" basis. It is therefore of crucial import¬
ance to develop an effective dialogue be¬
tween scientists and public authorities. The
latter need to acquire, through discussions
with the scientists, insight into the reason¬
ing that leads to the formulation of predic¬
tions in a particular form. For their part,
scientists need to familiarize themselves
with the problems faced by public author¬
ities, so that they will understand the
responses of the latter to predictions and
the reasons behind those responses.
It is essential that any earthquake predic¬
tion that is communicated to the public
should be accompanied by a verifiable esti¬
mate of the probability of occurrence of the
predicted event within the specified limits
of time and space. If it is to be useful in
practice, the prediction must also meet the
following criteria:
(a) its lead time (the interval between the
issue of the prediction and the expected
occurrence of the event) should be longer
than the time required for putting into
effect the appropriate protective measures
and for mobilizing the resources needed to
deal with the emergency;
(b) its time window (the duration of the
period during which the event is predicted
to occur) should be shorter than the max¬
imum acceptable duration of protective
measures such as the evacuation of build
ings, the temporary closure of plants and
the mobilization of rescue services.
The above criteria are, of course, very
difficult to satisfy given the present state of
scientific knowledge, but experience has
shown that predictions that fail to meet
them can cause severe social and economic
disturbance without being of any great use
to the community concerned. Earthquake
prediction is not only a scientific problem
but one which concerns the community as a
whole.
The development of techniques of earth¬
quake-resistant design and construction
offers the hope that in the course of time
death and destruction in earthquakes will
become a thing of the past. The phenomena
accompanying some volcanic eruptions,
however, are of such violence that there are
no means of protection against them. The
only hope of survival lies in flight from the
threatened area. Accurate prediction of
eruptions is therefore of vital importance
for the safety of people living on or near
active volcanoes.
Fortunately, the problem of predicting
eruptions is slightly less difficult than that of
predicting earthquakes. This is because the
possible sites of volcanic eruptions are
usually known. It is rare for an eruption to
occur anywhere but from an existing volca¬
nic structure, although eruptions do some¬
times occur at volcanoes that have been
dormant for so long that they are thought to
be extinct. By careful geological study it is
possible to identify and map the areas
around a volcano that have been affected in
the past by one or more of the destructive
phenomena that accompany eruptions
glowing avalanches, mudflows, lava flows,
heavy ash falls, and so on.
A census can be made of the people who
live or work in these hazardous areas,
together with an inventory of movable
property and livestock. Evacuation routes
to safe refuge zones can be identified and
plans made for rapid evacuation in the
event of an eruption. Arrangements can be
planned for the emergency shelter and
housing of evacuees in the refuge zones. If
worked out in detail beforehand, such plans
can be instrumental in saving many lives
when an eruption occurs.
As in the case of earthquakes, predic¬
tions based on the observation of precur¬
sory phenomena are necessarily expressed
in terms of probabilities of eruption. There
will always remain, therefore, the problem
of making "yes or no" decisions in situations
of uncertainty. The risk of a possible catas¬
trophe has to be weighed against the cer¬
tainty of the inconvenience, hardship and
cost of removing people from their homes,
perhaps for periods as long as weeks or
months.
Here again it is of crucial importance that ^

^ an effective dialogue be developed between
scientists, civil authorities, the news media
and the public before any emergency arises.
The threat of an imminent earthquake or
volcanic eruption is a great revealer of the
strengths and weaknesses of any com¬
munity.
"Success stories" in dealing with such
threats are still few, but they do demon¬
strate that, if scientific predictions are pre¬
cise and reliable, if the civil authorities are
prepared and have the means to take
appropriate protective action, and if the
public is kept fully informed of the situation
and of the action being taken to meet it, the
losses inflicted by these violent manifesta¬
tions of nature can be reduced and may in
time become a thing of the past.
E.M. FOURNIER D'ALBE, of the United King¬
dom, is a specialist on earthquake risk man¬
agement. Until 1979 he was head of Unesco's
Division of Earth Sciences and was responsible
for the initiation and development of the Organi¬
zation's programme related to natural disasters
and their prevention.
//
Mechanism of earthquakes
Fault stuck after
last movement
Stress builds up
rocks bend
like a bow
Focus
Earthquake! Rocks
spring back
and vibrate
When the Earth shakes
ALTHOUGH some minor earthquakes
have been triggered by human acti¬
vities, such as underground nuc¬
lear testing and the construction of reser¬
voirs and dams, the principal cause of all
major earthquakes and most minor ones Is
the fracturing of rocks following the gra¬
dual accumulation of stress during geolo¬
gical processes.
The Earth's surface Is made up of a
series of plates (see page 10) and the
severest earthquakes tend to occur at the
plate margins, where plates slide past
each other as, for example, along the San
Andreas "fault" region of California. Dia¬
gram above offers a simplified illustration
of the mechanism of an earthquake. Rock
has a certain elasticity and where adjacent
areas of rock are subjected to the push/
pull forces of plate movement stress gra¬
dually accumulates. When the strain be
comes too great, the rock ruptures and
tension is released as the rocks on either
side of the fault spring back violently. The
point at which the rupture originates is
called the focus and the point on the
Earth's surface directly above the focus is
called the epicentre.
The energy released is emitted in waves
which cause the ground to oscillate. It is
these seismic waves that are picked up
and recorded by seismographs, instru¬
ments which enable scientists to pinpoint
the epicentre of an earthquake and to mea¬
sure Its magnitude.
Two scales are commonly used to mea¬
sure the size of an earthquake. The magni¬
tude of an earthquakethe total amount of
energy released or dissipatedis ex¬
pressed In terms of the Richter Scale and
is based on seismograph recordings of
the amplitude of seismic waves. To cover
the huge size range of earthquakes, the
Richter scale of magnitude is logarithmic
rather than arithmetic, that is to say, the
scale is so arranged that each increase in
magnitude of one unit represents a thirty-
fold increase in earthquake size. Thus an
earthquake of magnitude 8 on the Richter
scale is 810,000 times as large as one of
magnitude 4.
The intensity of an earthquake classifies
the degree of shaking and is based on
inspection of damage and on information
supplied by people involved in the earth¬
quake. The scale most commonly used is
called the Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale
(see below). Since this scale is based pure¬
ly on observation of earthquake effects,
the points on the scale are stated in Roman
numerals, from I to XII, rather than in ordin¬
ary numbers, which might be interpreted
as indicating some kind of measurement.
Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale
I Not felt by people.
II Felt by people at rest on upper floors of buildings.
III Felt indoors; vibrations like a light truck passing outside. Hanging
objects swing.
IV Vibration like passing of heavy truck; windows, dishes and doors rattle.
V Felt outdoors; sleepers wakened and liquids spilt.
VI Felt by all; many frightened and run outdoors; plaster and masonry
cracked; furniture moved or overturned; windows, glassware and
dishes broken.
VII Difficult to stand up; noticed by drivers of moving vehicles; plaster,
loose bricks, tiles, etc. fall; large bells ring; waves on ponds.
VIII Difficult to steer vehicles; fall of stucco and some masonry walls; fall of
chimney stacks, towers, monuments; branches broken from trees;
cracks to be seen in wet ground.
IX General panic; frame structures cracked and underground pipes
broken; conspicuous cracks in ground; sand craters.
X Most masonry and frame structures and foundations destroyed; se¬
rious damage to dams and embankments; some bridges destroyed;
large landslides.
XI Railway lines badly bent; underground pipes completely out of service.
XII Damage nearly total; lines of sight and level distorted; objects thrown
up into the air.
26
