The modern soundscape
and noise pollution
by Nils Lennart Wallin
THE demographic explosion in the
modern world, combined with the in¬
creasingly dense network of urban,
industrial, agricultural and air traffic sys¬
tems, has generated such by-products as
pollution and the disappearance of some
animal species.
Another by-product, the nature of which
has not yet been fully explored, is the new
soundscape, created largely by the enor¬
mous increase in non-organic and uninten¬
tional sounds.
When such sounds become positively
disturbing, noise limitation regulations are
established. In this fie|d, governments
often have to balance conflicting rights and
interests. To take one example, reducing
the speed of commuter trains in order to
bring down noise levels must be reconciled
with the need to maintain an efficient transit
system. The problem becomes compli¬
cated when intentional, organic sounds are
objected to: limitations imposed on public
address systems could, for example, be
considered a violation of the right to free
speech.
Attempts to define what is harmful in the
new soundscape inevitably raise questions
of human values and human rights. To
dispel the vague prejudices which often
bedevil such discussions, let us first ex¬
amine, independently of political, ideologi¬
cal, ethical and socio-economic consider¬
ations, the precise effects of sound on the
hearing system.
Auditory loss may affect the system at
two points: the peripheral point (that is, the
ear) and the central point (that is, the re-
Many young people today use portable
tape-recorders to cut themselves off from
the clamour of the streetsometimes in
protestagainst aspects ofurban life which
they find repugnantand listen undis¬
turbed to the music they love. Above, be¬
side the grave of the American pop idol
Jim Morrison at Père Lachaise cemetery in
Paris a young man listens to the famous
singer's voice.
31

(fi
f !)
levant parts of the central nervous system,
mainly the brain-stem and the neo-cortex).
The consequences of damage are quite
different in each case.
Most auditory injuries consist of peripher¬
al loss, in other words reduced hearing
capacity with respect to frequency range
and intensity. Changes in this capacity can
be measured and diagnosed, and norms
for different age groups are generally
accepted and form the basis for most leg¬
islative regulation and industrial injury
claims. Peripheral loss depends upon two
different kinds of pathological change: con¬
ductive loss (or deafness) is an impairment
of one or more of the sound conductors and
is often caused by otosclerosis. Sensoneu-
ral loss occurs within the cochlea. One
example of this is Meniere's disease;
another is loudness recruitment, the prob¬
able cause of the deafness of Beethoven,
who complained that he could not hear
people speaking and that when they
shouted at him it became unbearable. The
By the 4th month after conception the hu¬
man foetus can hear. During the 5 months
before birth the foetus hears the heart-beat
of the mother and from the 7th month ex¬
ternal sound stimuli are registered. The
mmm development of the child's auditory capa-
cities in the first months after birth are



32 clearly Influenced by the soundscape and
the child's early perceptions of music,
often In the cradle. Right, a Vietnamese
mother rocks her baby.
disease with which we are concerned here
is the sensoneural disorder known as
tinnitus.
Tinnitus is noise-induced hearing loss. It
normally occurs among the elderly but is
increasingly found among younger people.
By the early 1 960s, 35 out of every 1 ,000
Americans suffered from tinnitus to the ex¬
tent that it interfered with their work. Most
lost the ability to hear high frequencies (the
highest notes of the piano).
Noise-induced hearing loss is affected by
a combination of sound intensity (mea¬
sured logarithmically in decibels) and
length of time exposed. The British otolog¬
ist D.R. Hanson recommends one hour as
the maximum permissible exposure to 99
decibels, and 88 seconds for exposure to
1 35 decibels. The average sound level dur¬
ing a two-hour symphony concert can
range from 95 to 97 decibels on the
podium. According to this recommenda¬
tion, orchestral players should never ex¬
ceed one hour's work per day. This of
course is unrealistic, but it does support the
claim of most orchestras that working time
should not exceed five hours, especially in
view of the high attention levels required

The sonar environment or "soundscape"
influences the development of the audi¬
tory sensibility from childhood on. Far left,
tranquility reigns on the shores of Lake
Titicaca in the Andes, where the only
sounds are made by the water, the wind,
insects and birds. The boat, a tortora,
takes Its name from the lakeside reeds of
which it is made. Left, a totally different
soundscape in a modern city, where life is
dominated by the deafening noise of
traffic.
which can cause both auditory and emo¬
tional stress.
Dr. Hanson has compiled data on noise-
induced hearing loss in young people who
have attended pop concerts and disco¬
thèques or used Walkman devices. There
are clinical cases of deafness being caused
by a sound shock, as when entering a
discothèque.
Tinnitus is a failure of the haircells lining
the basilar membrane of the cochlea. It is
the movement of these cells, in response to
incoming sound waves, which converts the
signals to electrical impulses. The size of
the movement is proportional to the ampli¬
tude of the sound. Haircells in the chinchilla
show irreversible damage after exposure to
pop music at 1 20 decibels for 1 2 minutes or
90 decibels for 3 hours. Different haircells
respond to different frequencies and tinni¬
tus occurs at those frequencies at which the
corresponding haircell has been damaged.
The high-pitched whistle which sufferers
from this disorder often hear is probably a
subjective sound produced by the brain
itself when registering the lack of neuronal
spontaneous background noise from that
part of the basilar membrane where the
haircells are damaged, as a signal to which
the brain must respond.
If the central brain processes are dam¬
aged (perhaps as the result of a stroke) the
perception of sounds and music may be
affected. The resulting disabilities may in¬
clude loss of spatial perception, raised
threshold of attention, inability to define
pitch and co-ordinate movements, and loss
of memory. So far as we know, brain dam¬
age cannot be caused by too much or too
strong sound. However, a complete lack of
auditory stimulation can cause such
damage, especially early in life. Sensory
deprivation leads to the non-development
of neuronal pathways and synapses which
can inhibit sensitivity and the ability to reg¬
ister experience later in life.
On the other hand, while excessive sti¬
mulation may not cause direct physical
damage it can, if not appropriate, create
stress, lack of attention, poor socialization
and the inability to form values. There is
disharmony between neurophysiological
brain patterns and the surrounding social
and biospheric conditions at crucial points
in the development of the personality. As
the physiologist Rainer Sinz, of the Federal
Republic of Germany, has pointed out:
" Early and permanent exposure to music in
the form of a sound level background leads
to the premature practice of ignoring the
noise level in overcrowded urban areas.
This not only raises the threshold of audibi¬
lity, it also reduces the differentiated emo¬
tional processing of music nuances of mod¬
erate intensity. Acoustical stress leads to a
switch-off reaction from attention to frustra¬
tion and, furthermore, to deficit sensitivity
and rudimentary musicality."
Bearing in mind the relationship between
music as a stimulus and the inner neuro¬
physiological clocks, it would appear that
the perfected (and thus quite artificial)
pulse of much synthesized pop music does
not coincide with what mankind, regardless
of culture, has developed as music
breathing and developing in close interac¬
tion with our inner rhythmic pulses. Its
merciless regularity and simplified sonority
are inhuman. The effect of this music in¬
jected directly into the ears through a Walk¬
man may cause other possibly negative
effects. The Walkman enables a young
person to become isolated from the throb¬
bing life of the street in all its complexity.
Such deliberate isolation is of course in
itself a protest at overcrowded and deindivi-
dualizing conditions. However, the con¬
sequence will be a loss of part of the multi¬
modal perception and observation which is
the purpose of our senses in daily life: what
is listened to does not correspond to what is
seen.
The enormous and increasing amounts
of sound which characterize today's sound¬
scape are a physical threat to the auditory
system, when exposure is long and fre¬
quent, and a source of mental and emotion¬
al fatigue which inhibits the development of
ethical, social and intellectual values.
Among the changes to be expected from
such processes is a trend towards strongly
standardized and simplified musical struc¬
tures. The fact that new soundscapes affect
the small child and possibly even the foetus
means that the process of change will
accelerate.
It is easier to prevent physical damage to
the cochlea than it is to prevent tiredness,
poor attention span, stereotyped emotional
patterns and lowered sensitivity to sophisti¬
cated intellectual products. Hence many
countries have enacted legislation which
regulates exposure to high intensity levels
and long continuous noise levels in indust¬
rial work.
In spite of all this, I would go along with
Hanson and Sinz in advising against leg¬
islation affecting pop music, discothèques
and the Walkman. There are strong
sociological reasons why (mainly) young
people engage in these activities: the de¬
sire for solidarity, the desire to belong to a
community, to overcome loneliness, to
escape from and forget reality. These are
good reasons for society not to legislate but
to try, in spite of all the difficulties, whether
from powerful commercial interests, mass
media propaganda, or elsewhere, to meet
the needs of young people by modifying
some aspects of pop music, to offer them
challenging alternatives, to convince
musicians in the pop industry of the need to
modify the music (as some musicians have
already done) and also the industry itself.
Let us not forget that one of the reasons
why people like music is their need to break
silence. We need to make noise but pre¬
ferably below 90 decibels.
NILS LENNART WALLIN, of Sweden, studied
musicology, philosophy and ethno-anthropology
at the Universities of Uppsala and Stockholm
and music at the Schola Cantorum, Bale. A "^"
teacher of music, the history of music and music o o
criticism, he is a former director-general of the
Swedish National Concerts Institute, (1963-
1970), of the Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra,
and of Stockholm's concert hall (1970-1976).
