"The essential nature of the role of the poet and the writerwhich is to communi¬
cate and in so doing to bring us all closer togethercan never be over-emphasized.
The Unesco Collection of Representative Works is the focal point at which their
works converge so that, after translation, they can be made available to the widest
possible audience."
A library of world classics
by Edouard J. Maunick
AMONG Unesco's fourteen Major Programmes there
is one that affects each one of us in both the most
humdrum aspects of our daily lives and in the most
private recesses of our being. Culture and the Future, as this
programme is called, encompasses every facet of culture and
our cultural heritage, of creation and creativity, and of the
concept today more relevant than ever before of cultural
identity and cultural interrelationships.
The Argentinian writer Julio Cortázar once said that
"what we call culture is basically nothing other than the
presence and the exercise of our identity in all its power".
This presence is rooted in history, knowledge of which is the
point of departure for any consideration of identity. "Know
thyself" remains the golden rule and it is only through
history, through the examination of our roots, that we can
reach down into the depths of our being and discover the
fundaments of our existence in the world.
The subsequent "exercise" or assumption of our identity ^

^ involves the evaluation and re-evaluation of each of those
elements which we recognize as component parts of our
culture. Among those components we could list, our pur¬
pose here is to examine more closely the literary element and
to list and describe what Unesco has achieved in this field
since 1948 through the Unesco Collection of Representative
Works.
This project, whose purpose is to make available in trans¬
lation in two international languages, English and French,
the masterpieces ofworld literature, is a godsend to those for
whom reading is a passion; and for those for whom reading is
a lively interest, what a tempting display it offers of books
whose quality and content can open up hitherto unsuspected
horizons.
There is, however, far more to the Unesco Collection of
Representative Works than these few introductory remarks
suggest. The Collection is central to Unesco's action in
favour of the strengthening of cultural identity and inter-
cultural relations. For there can be no doubt that the peoples
of the world long to reach out beyond the events of their
history of yesterday and today and to discover, behind their
ways and customs, their traditions, beliefs and values, some¬
thing that will better confirm their existence in the world and
consolidate their place in the universal concert.
This should not, however, be taken as indicating a hanker¬
ing after the past, or a rejection of the present and of what
the outside world has to offer. On the contrary, every human
group needs to seek out its roots the better to understand and
to come to terms with the changing contemporary world and
to accept with open arms the riches that stem from rela¬
tionships and exchanges with others. Yet these activities, of
cardinal importance as they are, cannot bear fruit in a
context of conflict. Only peaceful contact between cultures
equally confident of their worth and importance can be
mutually enriching. At a time in history when the atomic
menace hangs over us all and when we run the terrible risk of
seeing the age-old heritage built up by human genius dis¬
appear for ever, this is the objective that Unesco is working
constantly to achieve.
Among the accumulated riches of the past, to which the
present is continuously adding, must be counted the diffe¬
rent literatures from every corner of the globe, an ever-
CONTINUED PAGE 8

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 6
^ growing treasure that defies quantification. It includes oral
and written literatures covering a broad spectrum: narratives
of all kinds, poems, novels, plays, short stories and other
forms of expression that are often difficult to categorize.
The essential nature of the role of the poet and the
writer which is to communicate and in so doing to bring us
all closer together can never be over-emphasized. The
Unesco Collection of Representative Works is the focal
point at which their works converge so that, after trans¬
lation, they can be made available to the widest possible
audience. For the Collection is not confined to the trans¬
lation, as mentioned above, of originals into English and
French; it also handles translation from one less widely
known language into another. Looking at random through
the catalogue of the Collection we find listed, for example,
translations of the Upanishads (1) from Sanskrit into Ger¬
man, of the writings of the Japanese Yasunari Kawabata (2)
into Indonesian, of the Pakistani poet Ahmed Faïz ^3) from
Urdu into Hungarian and Aristotle's The Constitution of
Athens (4) into Arabic.
One of the objectives of the Collection is to offer the
widest possible range both of works and of languages. At
present it comprises nearly 900 titles from over sixty-five
different literatures and representing around fifty Oriental
languages, twenty European languages as well as a number
of African and Oceanian literatures and languages.
Clearly, the choice of works to appear in the Collection is a
delicate matter. Some literatures have a centuries-old tradi¬
tion, whilst others have emerged only comparatively recent¬
ly. Even if we limit ourselves to listing the works of fun¬
damental value that the countries of the world have to offer,
we are faced with an impressive total of varied titles from
which at times it seems virtually impossible to make a
selection. A number of principles on the basis of which a
choice could be made had to be adopted and rigorously
respected, leaving, nevertheless, a small margin of liberty to
allow for exceptional cases. Generally speaking, new ver¬
sions of translations already published are not undertaken
and it is rare for a budding, little-known contemporary
author with only a small output to his name to be considered
for inclusion. This is because the Collection aims to offer a
representative sample of .works the quality and content of
which meet a number of readily understandable criteria.
Nevertheless, the Collection can claim to have made some
astonishing revelations. Among the authors it has published
in translation are a number who were later to receive the
high distinction of being awarded the Nobel Prize for Liter¬
ature, including the Greek poet George Seferis (5), the
Japanese novelist Yasunari Kawabata (6% and the Spanish
poet Vicente Aleixandre (7).
In practical terms the selection procedure operates as
follows. First of all, the National Commissions for Unesco
established by Member States suggest lists of works which
they consider to be representative of the values of their
cultures. Internationally renowned cultural organizations,
such as the PEN Federation and the International Council
for Philosophy and Humanistic Studies are also called upon
for advice in the establishment of these lists. In addition,
suggestions are received from publishers who are willing to
undertake the translation of particular works which they
consider worthy of a place in the Collection.
Collaboration between publishers and Unesco is of prime
importance. Although, in most cases, it bears the costs of
translation, Unesco is not, strictly speaking, a publisher in
the usual sense, and without this collaboration would find it
difficult to achieve its publishing objectives. Moreover, col¬
laboration of this kind is not easy to establish involving as it
does the publication of works from literatures whose type,
style, form of expression and content are unusual if not
entirely unknown to the English- and French-speaking
public.
Two years ago, it was agreed that Unesco's name should
appear alongside that of its publisher partner on the cover of
each volume published. Previously, with the exception of the
Connaissance de l'Orient series, published by Gallimard
under the direction of Professor Etiemble (see article oppo¬
site page), Unesco's financial and technical contribution had
been indicated only by a brief formula of association printed
on the back of the title page.
Year after year, new publishers come to swell the ranks of
those who have for long collaborated in producing the
Collection. New projects are born and must be fostered,
mobilizing goodwill wherever it can be found. Each new
work added to the catalogue brings its reward the satisfac¬
tion of knowing that a wider public will have a greater
opportunity to read what the "other" has written, to discover
that "other" through the pages of a book, to get closer to
him, to know him better, even to become his friend. Each
project that succeeds such as the recent creation of a new,
Gallimard-Unesco paperback series of reprinted titles from
the Connaissance de l'Orient series is one step further
towards encounter and dialogue.
International, multilingual, and pluricultural, the Unesco
Collection of Representative Works is, in effect, a library of
libraries. Yet it has another distinguishing feature a special
concern for poetry. As everyone is aware, poetry is in¬
creasingly becoming the poor relation of the publishing
world. With the aim of redressing the balance the Collection
has given pride of place to poetry. It includes over a hundred
anthologies and selections of diverse and varied inspiration.
These include: classical Chinese poetry (8); Persian poetry of
the eleventh to the twentieth century (9); the Thai popular
poem The Woman, the Hero and the Villain (10); the poems
of the Honduran poet Roberto Sosa (11); the selected poems
of Octavio Paz ( ^ ; Words ofParadise (Poetry ofPapua New
Guinea) (13); The Life and Songs of the Yoga Brug-pa Kun-
legs le Yogin ^14), translated from Tibetan; Three Contem¬
porary Japanese Poets: Anzai Hitoshi, Shiraishi Kazuko,
Tanikawa Shuntaro (15); Bengali mystic poems ^16); the
poems of the Aztecs ^17); The Beautiful Scarecrow, poetry
for children by the Bulgarian Leda Mileva (18); works of the
Finnish poet Markku Lahtela (19); an Anthology ofAncient
Nordic Poetry (from the Beginnings up to the Middle
Ages) (20)- Vita Nova (21), by Dante Alighieri; the
Lusiadas <-2T>, by the Portuguese national poet Luis de
Camoes; an anthology of Arabic poetry (23:); a selection of
Korean poetry (24) (translated into both English and
French); Volumes III, IV, V and VI of Half a Century of
Poetry, (25) an anthology of poetic creation from 1900 to
1950, published in collaboration with La Maison du Poète,
Belgium, comprising a selection from the works of 300 poets
from over 150 countries.
This introduction to the Unesco Collection of Representa¬
tive Works would not be complete without grateful mention
of the special financial contributions made by Japan, the
Republic of Korea and the Gulbenkian Foundation to the
Collection's translation programme, and of Unesco's fruitful
collaboration with the International Federation of Trans¬
lators and the International Association of Literary Critics.
Translation, of course, is the cornerstone of all the activi¬
ties described above and its vital role can, perhaps, best be
summed up by quoting these words by Jean Cocteau: "It is
supremely difficult to achieve mutual understanding on our
earth, where languages erect insurmountable barriers be¬
tween works. Translation is something more than a mar¬
riage. It should be a love-match."
EDOUARD J. MAUNICK, Mauritian poet, is chief of the section for the
dissemination of cultures at Unesco and director of the Unesco Collection
of Representative Works. He is the author of several books of poetry
including Ensoleillé Vif (preface by LS. Senghor; Apollinaire Prize, 1976),
En Mémoire du Mémorable (1979) and Désert-Archipel, followed by Can¬
tate Païenne pour Jésus-Fleuve (1983).
8
