Maimonides the humanist
by Angel Sáenz-Badillos WHEN we cast our twentieth-cen¬
tury minds back to the work of a
medieval thinker, we must look
not so much for objective facts or accurate
theories which may have associations or
implications for our own period as for gen¬
eral attitudes.
A twelfth-century philosopher such as
Moses ben Maymün, or Maimonides, was
wholly a man of his time. He was influenced
by his personal circumstances he was an
emigrant and an exile for much of his life; by
the categories which shaped the evolution
of thought in the Jewish community; and by
the assumptions and problems which pre¬
occupied philosophy in his time. To this
extent, his thought reflects the peculiarities
of a minority religious community im¬
mersed in the main currents of predominant
Islamic thought in the Middle East, North
Africa and the greater part of Spain.
A superficial glance at the work of any
medieval philosopher may only reveal his
responses to problems arising from histor- ^
Two portraits of Maimonides: right, the
first known graphic representation of the
Hispano-Jewish philosopher appeared in
a book by Biagio Ugolini, Thesaurus anti-
quitatum sacrarum, published in Venice,
1744. Maimonides' name is written in Heb¬
rew in a banderole. Above, white marble
bas relief by Brenda Putnam dates from
1949. It is one of23 medallions which com¬
memorate the great legislators of human¬
ity and can be seen in the House of Repre¬
sentatives, Washington, D.C.
ccclxxxili 1' K é / Jt.l I O cccIxjmv
I I
- w On
llur<in:m i- I ^ '
;
I
norttr .
in tu
.
:
ra. pal
Cur hue Own
al Mtrçilliili l mm Onuiiffin
, H. fern. H
I
I
I
INDI X .1
A XIV.
liU-|rilr.n »
'
©
CON
29

f
v
GRERADHJa
!-
<
©
Three oí many postage stamps com¬
memorating Maimonides from different
countries. From left to right, 1967 Spanish
stamp depicting his statue in Córdoba;
1953 stamp from Israel; stamp issued by
Grenada In 1970.
Fragment of a holograph manuscript on
paper of the "Commentary on the Mishna ",
written in Arabic with Hebrew characters,
as was Maimonides' custom. A commen¬
tary on the first "Order" of the Mishna, it
was written around 1 168 AD, shortly after
its author's arrival in Cairo.
k , t f oJ>
01 ¿r-; £-* rU"o:
,.,.r- . , . .
>;J i;:3
j>Jp' i,'Ka "ù- -n}hyt K'Jihi -»i-Uv** .'ü* A)> 3*f
¿."fu ^?i ^'f<ji,tvj ,
->/i" riiu i.i^s-'.i fcJ/^ V
,T1>V ou> .vu "fßflfifj tve £ ""*"* Wj* » r'-' '
v. n,v yy V» fr)*"1 JJ Vfh -ai *nf«r<í>
-: > v 'hi -oVM I- -oO/»
' {wv>r**~ ripiy> pjrrjJi ivjt'v ,.jt^
irr ;Jí i,w tJ'^jf-'^r
<ZXjy?> vjtiüfa 5J<*» »ft*»,f» W 'Miff 1ÖP
&lí
. Si fil
V
. >v>
.i i-
tío n# y
i .
-j^.
o
m
©
30

ical circumstances, and may thus overlook a
much deeper dimension. It seldom happens
that great thinkers radically overturn the
categories of their time; instead they usually
take such categories as their starting point
and go on to open up new possibilities and
directions for human thought and conduct
to explore, so that giant strides forward may
be made, untrammelled by the spider web
of current ideas. This attitude of transcend¬
ing time, of standing poised at a turning
point, distinguishes the great thinkers of the
past. We would venture to suggest that
Maimonides was undoubtedly one of the
great medieval thinkers and one of those
who most successfully broke new ground.
While most of his fellow Jews saw a radi¬
cal opposition between the universe of their
faith, the Torah or Law of Moses, and the
universe of human knowledge, science and
philosophy inherited from the Greeks,
Maimonides was one of the masters of
Judaic learning who clearly understood that
such a dichotomy was spurious. In his view,
the human sciences cannot be diametrically
opposed to faith; instead, they must com¬
plement it and help to make it more pro¬
found.
Ultimately, the contents of Aristotelian
philosophy and those of the Jewish faith
share the same essence. For Maimonides,
the religious ideal is attainable only by
someone who is capable of assimilating
knowledge of both the human and the
divine. Moses and Aristotle join hands to
help humanity to the summit of perfection,
namely the knowledge and love of God. We
should remember that the society in which
he lived, and especially his own Jewish com¬
munity, held a totally religious and God-
centred view of the universe. Maimonides
did not break with this position, but he insis¬
ted that room must be made for another,
more specifically human, component: rea¬
son or philosophy. Few medieval thinkers
did more than he to end the conflict
between faith and reason.
Maimonides' rationalism is a facet of his
humanism. To be a rationalist in the Middle
Ages meant casting out ontological horror
of the supernatural and the unknown, put¬
ting an end to irrational human fears, com¬
bating all kinds of alienation and refusing to
accept any of the moral imperatives
imposed on humanity by some arbitrary
Will: in other words, it meant humanizing
the faith of the believer. Medieval man was
fundamentally a believer, as was Mai¬
monides. His efforts, however, were
directed towards building a much more
human universe, albeit still with God at its
centre. Man, the being who aspires to a
loving union with God, will attain this ulti¬
mate aim only by fully realizing his human
potential, by leading a more worthy life and
by casting out ignorance in order to improve
his conduct.
Maimonides wished to help his contem¬
poraries to free themselves from their per¬
plexities, from all kinds of superstitions
which enslaved them and even from the
passions which dragged them down and pre¬
vented them from becoming fully human.
To emphasize the rational aspect was not,
as he saw it, to reject the theocentric pattern
of his universe, but to readjust the focus on
©
Twelfth century miniature depicting Mai¬
monides examining a flask of urine. As
well as a philosopher and religious think¬
er, Moses ben Maymün was, like Ibn
Rushd, one of the greatest physicians of
his time, and in his numerous medical
works (Commentary on the Aphorisms of
Hippocrates, Compendium of the Books of
Galen, Treatise on Asthma, Guide to Good
Health ...) he summarized and developed
contemporary knowledge in this field.
reality so that everything was in its proper
place. Man does not accede to divine love
through false mysticism, on the paths of
irrationality where he can disguise his igno¬
rance, but on the highroad to knowledge,
wisdom and learning in the human sciences,
complemented by theology. As man
advances along this highroad, he must
never renounce the use of his own intel¬
ligence or be lured away by the irrational
and unknown. Likewise in the field of eth¬
ics, man is not the plaything of an arbitrary
Supreme Being; the commandments con¬
tained in the Law of Moses all have a reason
for their existence and are not obligations
capriciously imposed on the human will.
Maimonides thus constructed a style of
humanism which was still religious, but
which was primarily human.
This humanism led him to combat the
alienation of man and everything which
diverted him from his true purpose in the
universe. Maimonides opposed all kinds of
idolatry, because he considered it to be one
of the most dangerous forms of alienation:
to worship the spheres, the stars or graven
images, to become a slave to superstition, to
believe in astrology or to practise any kind
of primitive religious rites, prevents man
from realizing his full potential. Even fever¬
ish involvement in an economic activity that
is not necessary for the fulfilment of one's
own needs he regarded as another form of
alienation, comparable to becoming a slave
to the basest passions. For Maimonides,
reason and knowledge represent true liber¬
ation for humanity.
The evil that exists in the universe is not
the work of God, but the consequence of
what some human beings do to others, or
the harm that man does to himself. And
nearly always, it is a consequence of ig¬
norance. Only knowledge, which for the
human being is akin to the gift of sight, is
capable of driving out enmity and hatred.
Someone without knowledge is like a blind
man stumbling against walls and blundering
into other people. One of the evils that
people can inflict on one another is tyranny.
True knowledge is the necessary
condition for the historical redemption of
humanity.
Such is Maimonides' breadth of spirit that
it transcends the narrow bounds of the
majority of his fellow worshippers, and he
thinks not so much in Jewish categories as in
a new and universal dimension. The way to
God is not reserved for the chosen people,
but is open to all humankind. The great
Greek philosophers had travelled far along
the road to true knowledge, just as the
promises in the Bible were made not only to
Jewish people but to all humanity.
Thus Maimonides remains loyal to the
faith of his ancestors, but at the same time
he embraces all peoples with his genuinely
universal outlook. Despite having suffered
from it personally, he never gives way to the
temptation of fanaticism. He believes that
the other monotheistic religions have
played a positive role in preparing the world
for knowledge of the one true God and his
Law. And although he sees all problems
from the point of view of a devout Jew, his
interpretation of the Law of Moses points
the way towards better human understand¬
ing and a greater sense of the brotherhood
of man. In this respect he was ahead of his
time.
Maimonides has been criticized for fail¬
ing to condemn slavery, for speaking con¬
temptuously of half-savage peoples and for
taking a very negative view of women and
their role in society. It is true that he did not
radically break out of the categories of his
time on these issues, but he did succeed in
pointing out new directions through his con¬
ception of human dignity.
He saw the individual hidden behind the
outward façade of the slave, he pleaded for
the redemption of the oppressed through
education and fairer working conditions,
and he placed women on an equal spiritual
footing with men. He did not break with the
past, but endeavoured to change the system
of values and the attitudes of his day in
order to build a more truly humane society.
Herein, I believe, lies the source of his rele¬
vance to the present and his ability to influ¬
ence modern thought. a
ANGEL SAENZ-BADILLOS, of Spain, teaches
Hebrew language and literature at the University
of Granada and formerly taught at the Com-
plutensian University, Madrid. He has published
a number of studies on medieval Hebrew-Span¬
ish philology and poetry and on the history of
biblical exegesis in Spain.
31
