MAIMONIDES
Maimonides tells how he spends his working
day at Cairo
I live at Fostat whereas the king resides in
Cairo; the two towns are two sabbatical
days apart [each equivalent to a league]. My
obligations towards the king are very time
consuming. I must pay him a visit each
morning; when he is not well, or if his chil¬
dren and his wives fall ill, I dare not nor¬
mally go far from Cairo, being constrained
to stay at the palace almost all day. It is also
usual for me to have to look after one or
another of his officials. Thus, I go to Cairo
every day at dawn and do not return to
Fostat, even if something unexpected does
not arise which forces me to stay in Cairo,
until the early hours of the afternoon at
best, racked by hunger.
I find the waiting rooms of my home full
of people: Jews and Gentiles, dignitaries
and ordinary people, judges and officials,
friends and enemies, a whole multitude who
are impatiently waiting for me. I get down
from my mount, wash my hands and go into
the antechamber, praying to God that they
will not be impatient while I quickly take a
light refreshment: the sole meal worthy of
the name which I have throughout the day.
Then I receive them, I write prescriptions
and advise them on the treatment corre¬
sponding to their ailments, and the people
do not cease coming in and going out of the
house until dusk, indeed until two hours
after nightfall, I swear on the Law, and it
may be that I have eaten or drunk nothing.
When it is pitch dark, I am so weary that I go
to bed without even having been able to say
goodnight.
Only on Saturdays can I speak in private
with a Jew, or meditate alone. Then, the
whole community or at least a substantial
number of its members, gathers in my house
after the morning religious service; so I
advise them on the best thing to do the
following week, and we meditate together
for a while until noon, the hour at which
they leave. Some of them come back [in the
afternoon] to study with me until the eve¬
ning prayer. Thus I pass my days.
Letter to Samuel ben Tibbon, September 1199
Photo © Diodoro Urquía, Salduero, Soria, Spain
Man is naturally a social being
It has already been fully explained that
man is naturally a social being, that by vir¬
tue of his nature he seeks to form commu¬
nities; man is therefore different from other
living beings that are not compelled to com¬
bine into communities. He is, as you know,
the highest form in the creation, and he
therefore includes the largest number of
constituent elements; this is the reason why
the human race contains such a great variety
of individuals, that we cannot discover two
persons exactly alike in any moral quality,
or in external appearance. The cause of this
is the variety in man's temperament . . . Such
a variety among the individuals of a class
does not exist in any other class of living
beings ; for the variety in any other species is.
limited; only man forms an exception; two
persons may be so different from each other
in every respect that they appear to belong
to two different classes. ... This great vari¬
ety and the necessity of social life are essen¬
tial elements in man's nature. But the well-
being of society demands that there should
be a leader able to regulate the actions of
man.
The Guide for the Perplexed, translated by
M. Friedländer, Dover Publications, New York,
1956, Part II, Chapter XL, pp. 232-3
Ignorance is the cause of all evils
All the great evils which men cause to
each other because of certain intentions,
desires, opinions, or religious principles,
are likewise due to non-existence, because
they originate in ignorance, which is
absence of wisdom. ... In the same manner
various classes of men, each man in propor¬
tion to his ignorance, bring great evils upon
themselves and upon other individual mem¬
bers of the species. If men possessed
wisdom ... they would not cause any injury
to themselves or to others.
The Guidefor the Perplexed, idem, Part III,
Chapter XL, p. 267
Intellectual perfection is the highest level of
true human perfection
The ancient and the modern philosophers
have shown that man can acquire four kinds
of perfection. The first kind, the lowest, in
the acquisition of which people spend their
days, is perfection as regards property; the
possession of money, garments, furniture,
servants, land and the like; ... The second
kind is more closely related to man's body
than the first. It includes the perfection of
the shape, constitution and form of man's
body; ... The third kind of perfection is
more closely connected with man himself
than the second perfection. It includes
moral perfection, the highest degree of
excellency in man's character. ... The
fourth kind of perfection is the true perfec¬
tion of man; the possession of the highest
intellectual faculties ... With this perfection
man has obtained his final object; it gives
him true human perfection; it remains to
him alone; it gives him immortality, and on
its account he is called man.
The Guide for the Perplexed, idem, Part III,
Chapter LIV, pp; 394-5
The difficulties encountered in writing "The
Commentary on the Mishna"
I have finished this work in accordance
with what I promised [when I began it],
praying fervently to the Ail-Powerful that
he should preserve me from error. But if
anyone were to discover some error in this
commentary or to know of some better
explanation, I will readily accept them, and
my only excuse will be that I have done my
best to apply myself much more than some¬
one who writes expecting a reward or who is
moved by self-interest. I have worked in
very difficult conditions, as heaven desired
that I live in exile and wandering from place
to place; thus I have been obliged to do this
work while I was travelling on land or sea.
Suffice it to recall that during all this period
other tasks also occupied my time, but I
prefer the former explanation, in order to
stimulate those who wish to criticize or gloss
over this commentary, and supply at the
same time [the reason] for the long process
of compiling this work. I, Moses ben May¬
mün, began this work when I was twenty-
three years old, and I have finished it in
Egypt at the age of thirty-three, in the year
1479 of the Seleucid era (1168 AD).
The Commentary on the Mishna
18

A miniature
anthology
On the condition of women in medieval
Islamic society
And we say that women, in so far as they
are of one kind with men, necessarily share
in the end of man. They will differ only in
less or more ... If the nature of men and
women is of one kind, and the [nature] that
is of one kind [turns] to only one activity in
the city, then it is evident that the women in
this city will practice the [same] activities as
the men ... Similarly, too, since some
women are formed with eminence and a
praiseworthy disposition, it is not imposs¬
ible that there be philosophers and rulers
among them. . . . The competence of women
is unknown, however, in these cities since
they are only taken [in them] for procrea¬
tion and hence are placed at the service of
their husbands and confined to procreation,
upbringing, and suckling. Since women in
these cities are not prepared with respect to
any of the human virtues, they frequently
resemble plants in these cities. Their being a
burden upon the men [in these cities] is one
of the causes of the poverty of these cities.
This is because they are to be found there in
double the number of men, while not
understanding through [their] upbringing
any of the necessary actions except for the
few actions like the art of spinning and
weaving that they undertake mostly at a
time when they have need of them to make
up for their lack of spending [power].
Averroës on Plato's "Republic", translated
by Ralph Lerner © Cornell University Press,
New York, 1974. The First Treatise, pp. 57-9
Necessity for social cohesion
Now there is no greater evil in the gov¬
ernance of the city than that governance
which converts a single city into many cities,
just as there is no greater good in cities than
that which joins them together and makes
them one. This being so, it is clear that
community in advantages and damages will
lead them to be bound to the city and
befriend it. ... That is why it is said that
people's being near other people is advan¬
tageous. In general, there is nothing more
productive of evil and confusion to the city
than its citizens saying of some particular
thing: "This is mine and this is not mine."
Averroës on Plato's "Republic", idem
The First Treatise, p. 64
Photo © Scala, Florence
The psychology of sight
Sight has the property of capturing the col¬
ours of material reality, and so it must adapt
itself adequately to matter. Thanks to this
adequation, it can be abstracted by cogita¬
tion and understanding. ... The sense of
sight [also] receives the forms of objects in
the following manner: first, the air receives
the [sensible] forms by means of light, con¬
ducting them straight to the tissue; then, the
common sense receives the forms of the
objects. The tissue contains the vitreous
humour, which resembles a mirror the
nature of which is between air and water,
thanks to which it can capture the image
from the air, which functions [also] as a
mirror, and transmits it to the aqueous
humour which, through its very condition,
can communicate with the two natures. ...
From this the common sense receives the
forms which it transmits to the imaginative
faculty where their reception, totally
dematerialized, takes place. And so it is
said that the received form shows three
degrees: the first is the sensible [in the eye] ,
the second is dematerialized in the common
sense, and the third is immaterial in the
imaginative faculty. From these degrees,
one then passes to others, more elevated
and more noble [in the memory and in the
understanding].
Book of the General Principles of Medicine
The prime mover is devoid of movement and
eternal
If a prime mover exists, which precedes
all movements, whether temporally or
essentially, then that movement will take
place either in a generable and corruptible
moving body, or in an eternal moving body.
Thus [Aristotle] says that if it were a gener¬
able moving body, it would not be the prime
mover, either by nature or temporally,
because it cannot be asserted that the prime
mover is a form generated in a moving
body.
Treatise on Physics
The most elevated knowledge alone brings
happiness
Just as hunger and thirst are an emptying
of the body and an emptiness that befalls it,
so are ignorance and absence of knowledge
an emptying of the soul and an emptiness
for it. This being so, there are two people
who are filled i.e., he who takes food and
he who acquires knowledge. But the true
fullness is only through the thing that has
the noblest existence. ... Now if, in general,
fullness in what one apprehends is pleasant,
whatever [he apprehends of what] is essen¬
tially nobler and [participates] more in truth
and is more enduring, is necessarily a more
choiceworthy pleasure. Such is the case of
the pleasure of the intellect relative to the
other pleasures.
Averroës on Plato's "Republic", idem
The Third Treatise, pp. 146-7
The virtues of the use of olive oil
When it is derived from ripe and healthy
olives and if its properties have not been
adulterated in an artificial manner, the oil
can be assimilated [perfectly] by the human
organism. ... Foodstuffs seasoned with the
oil are nourishing, so long as the oil is fresh
and not very acidic. ... Generally, the entire
substance of the oil agrees with man, and so
at home [in al-Andalus] meat is seasoned
only with this oil, because it is the best way
to prepare it, while cooking it slowly. This is
how it is done: place the meat in a casserole
into which some oil has been poured, then
add water and heat it on a low flame, with¬
out allowing it to boil.
Book of the General Principles of Medicine
The base condition of the tyrant
This is necessarily the situation of the
tyrant: he is detained among a class such as
this, filled with hunger and fear. Moreover,
he has great hunger [within] himself and
cannot rule himself. Hence he cannot go
wherever he wishes nor look at whatever he
wishes. ... One of the worst dispositions of
such an individual is that he is unable to
restrain and overcome himself, yet he
attempts to lead other people at some level.
. . . The tyrant is the most enslaved of people
and has no device by which to put an end to
his desires, but rather is forever in continual
sorrow and mourning. The soul of one who
is of this description is an impoverished
soul; hence he is envious, violent and
friendless. ... Without any doubt, he is of
necessity troubled and unlucky.
Averroës on Plato's "Republic", idem
The Third Treatise, pp. 142-3
19
