The originality of Japanese
literature
Awhole series of paradoxes has
given Japanese literature a
unique place in the history of
world culture. But its distinctiveness does
not isolate it: we need only consider Lady
Murasaki's The Tale of Genji,w which
dates from the beginning of the eleventh
century and which is a delight to read, not
only for specialists in classical Japanese
literature or even just for lovers of things
Japanese, but also for all who are in¬
terested in the structure of the novel, and,
more generally, in psychological rela¬
tionships as these can be depicted by a
novelist.
The Tale ofGenji, which is surprisingly
modern in its style of narration, has two
altogether remarkable features. Firstly,
although it appeared at the dawn of writ¬
ten Japanese culture, it is a novel;
secondly, its author is a woman. These
two characteristics in themselves reveal
the amazing originality of Japanese liter¬
ature: it starts with the genre which, in all
other cultures, is a late development,
and, moreover, women are not only im¬
mediately accepted in literature, but are
in the vanguard. This novel was pre¬
ceded by collections of poetry, historical
and mythological chronicles and folk
tales, but there is no comparable exam¬
ple of such an early emergence of the
novel genre in literary history.
The "court diaries" of the Heian period
(794-1185) herald or echo this
achievement, in which another special
feature should be noted: the drifting of
the story between poetry and prose, with
many waka (poems of thirty-one sylla¬
bles) breaking up the steady pace of the
narrative. Although classical Japanese
Woodcut below, by Masakazu Kuwata, is
an Illustration from Modern Japanese
Stories: an Anthology, first published in
the Collection in 1961.
12

by René de Ceccatty
Above, cover illustration ofan English ver¬
sion of Natsume Soseki's second novel,
Botchan, published in the Unesco Collec¬
tion in 1973. Outstandingly popular with
Japanese readers ever since it was first
published in 1906, Botchan is the humor¬
ously told story of the son of a well-to-do
family who is obliged by misfortune to
become a teacher in a remote country
school. French and English translations of
other novels by Soseki, including I am a
Cat (Wagahai Wa Neko De Aru), 1905, and
Kokoro also feature in the Collection.
©
Left, cover illustration of volume I (Prin¬
temps - Eté) of a two-volume anthology of
medieval Japanese drama published in
the Collection in 1979. The anthology com¬
prises French translations of5 No texts (of
some 240 that constitute the modern re¬
pertoire of this highly refined form of
dramatic art) as well as a selection of
kyogen, comic interludes designed to re¬
lieve the tension that builds up during No
performances.
presents difficulties for twentieth-century
Japanese readers, and although these
diaries require translation into modern
parlance, it is astonishing how close this
world of "court ladies" seems to us. Why
do we recognize ourselves in Izumi Shiki-
bu, in Michitsuna's mother and in Sei
Shonagon? Why do the notions of the
ephemeral, the world's inconstancy, and
nostalgic longing still touch a nerve in us?
These earliest introspective narratives,
in their sumptuous setting and in the
hierarchical world of the court, also
speak with a personal voice that is
timeless.
The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon
(c.966-early eleventh century; see ex¬
tract overleaf) or, later, in the Kamakura
period (1 185-1333), the Hôjôki, still have
a sort of transparency and self-evidence
that enable their authors to show us
ourselves whether the character is an
abandoned woman or a hermit lost in the
mountains. This intimacy, which spans
Cover illustration, below, for Journaux de
Voyage ("Travel Diaries") by Matsuo
Munefusa, known as Bashô, published In
the Collection in French in 1976. Bashô
was one of the greatpoets of 1 7th-century
Japan and the peerless master of haiku,
3-line poems with a total of 17 syllables
which encapsulate moments of height¬
ened emotion or reflection and which
Bashô often inserted In his narrative texts
or travelogues. The haiku poetic form is
still practiced in Japan.
13

The Tale of the Lady Ochikubo (Ochikubo-
monogatari), Is one of the earliest novels
of the Heian period (794-1185), the golden
age of Japanese literature. Written by an
anonymous 10th-century author, the
novel Is a precursor of the Cinderella
story. Above, cover illustration of an
English-language translation published in
the Unesco Collection In 1971.
the centuries, will continue to be found in
the most modern works of literature. The
introspective novels of the early twen¬
tieth century, despite major historical and
linguistic upheavals, undoubtedly bear
witness to that rare homogeneity. We
read the masterpieces of Natsumé Sôse-
ki (1867-1 91 6)(2) or Nagai Kafû (1879-
1959)<3) as a natural continuation of
those which went before. Moreover,
these two authors, like the later Tanizaki
Junichiro (1 886-1 965)(4) are constantly
inquiring into their relations with the past,
not because of a backward-looking or
traditionalist frame of mind, which would
threaten to cast a blight of sterility on their
writing, but out of a desire to discover the
roots of their unity of inspiration.
Post-war writers such as Abe Kôbô(5)
have, indeed, invented a new language
that they use to express the rich patterns
of historical change; but I do not believe
that there will ever be a renunciation of
the past, since the seeds of modernity
were already there in the early writings,
irrespective of the genre to which they
belonged.
From whatever angle we approach
Japanese literature, and whichever
genre we find immediately attractive,
whether No plays orjôruri, haiku or waka,
tales or religious writings, adventure stor¬
ies or chronicles of war, and whichever
literary personality we find fascinating,
Basho(6) or Saikaku(7), Dôgen or
Zeami(8), one thing is certain: no choice
is ever exclusive for those who are in¬
terested in this literature, and the "narrow
road" of the poet leads leads through a
thousand years of wonders.
RENE DE CECCATTY, French novelist and
translator, is literary advisor to the Paris pub¬
lishing house of Gallimard and a contributor to
many literary magazines. He has edited an
anthology, Mille Ans de Littérature Japonaise
(1982) and translated numerous works from
Japanese into French.

