On wings of song
The lute and the crane in Chinese tradition
by Robert Hans van Gulik THE crane is one of the traditional
Chinese symbols of longevity. Just
like the tortoise, it is said to live
more than a thousand years. The express¬
ion "crane age", is a much-used metaphor
for advanced years.
The dark crane is especially credited with
a fabulously long life. The Gu jing zhu
("The Encyclopaedia of the Past and Pre¬
sent") written by Cui Biao in the Jin period
says: "When a crane has reached the age of
oi)
\
?r i
SS-i
s *
«J
fa
o
Ik1
18
i
T
$L
X2P&
one thousand years, it turns a dark blue
colour; after another thousand years it turns
black, and then it is called a dark crane."
Ever since olden times the dark crane has
been closely associated with music. The Rui
ying tu ji (attributed to Sun rou chi of the
Liang period) says: "A dark crane shall
appear at a time when there is a Ruler who
understands music. When in olden times
Huangdi executed music on the Kunlun
mountain for all the Spirits to dance, on his
right side there flew sixteen dark cranes."
Sixteen dark cranes also appear in a story
related by the great historian Sima qian:
"When Duke Ling of the Wei dynasty (534-
493 BC) was travelling to Jin, he halted on
the bank of the river Bu. In the middle of
the night he heard the sounds of a lute being
played. He asked the members of his suite,
but all respectfully said that no one had
heard the sounds. Then the Duke sum¬
moned Master Juan, and said to him: T
have heard the sounds of a lute being
played, but when I asked my suite no one
had heard it. Thus it seems that it is caused
by a spirit or a ghost. Write this tune down
for me.' Master Juan assented and, seating
himself in the correct position, having
placed his lute before him, he listened and
noted down the tune. The next morning he
said: T have obtained the tune now, but I
have not yet learned it. I beg you for one
more night to learn it thoroughly.' The
Duke agreed, and yet another night passed.
On the following morning he reported that
he had mastered the tune. Then they left
that place, and proceeded to Jin. They were
received by Duke Ping (557-532 BC) who
gave a banquet for them on a terrace.
"When all had come under the influence
of the wine, Duke Ling said: 'When on my
way here I heard a new tune; permit me to
let you hear it.' When Duke Ping agreed,
Duke Ling made Master Juan sit down by
the side of Master Kuang, place his lute
before him and play it. But before he was
half through, Master Kuang put his hand on
the strings (to deaden the sounds), and said:
'That is the music of a doomed State; one
must not listen to it.' Duke Ping asked:
'What is the origin of this tune?' Master
Kuang answered: 'It was made by Master
Yan, to please the tyrant Zhou. When king
Wu defeated Zhou, Master Yan fled to the
east, and drowned himself in the river Bu.
Therefore it must have been on the bank of
that river that this tune was heard. Who first
hears this tune, his State will be divided.'
Illustration from a Ming dynasty encyclo¬
paedia shows a musician playing the lute
out of doors with the instrument on his
knees. An incense burner stands on a
small rustic table nearby. Lute playing was
always accompanied by the burning of
fragrant incense.

Duke Ping said: T have a great love for
music. I wish to hear this tune to the end.'
Then Master Juan played the entire tune.
Then Duke Ping said: 'Are there no tunes
that are still more sinister than this one?'
Master Kuang said: 'There are.' 'Could you
play them for me?' The Master answered:
'My lord's virtue and righteousness are not
great enough for that. I may not play them
for you.' But the Duke said again: T have a
great love for music; I wish to hear them.'
Then Master Kuang could not but draw his
lute unto him, and play.
"When he had played once, sixteen dark
cranes appeared and alighted on the gate of
the hall. When he played the second time,
they stretched their necks and cried, they
spread out their wings and started to dance.
Duke Ping was overcome with joy, and
leaving his seat he drank the health of Mas¬
ter Kuang. Having returned to his seat, he
asked: 'Are there no other tunes that are
still more sinister than this one?' Master
Kuang said: 'Yes, there are those by which
in olden times Huangdi effected a great
reunion of ghosts and spirits. But my lord's
virtue and righteousness are not great
enough to allow you to hear this music. And
if you hear it, you will perish.' Duke Ping
said: T am advanced in years, and I have a
great love of music. I want to hear these
tunes.' Then Master Kuang could not but
draw his lute unto him, and play. When he
had played one, white clouds rose in the
northwest. And when he played another,
there was a storm wind, followed by a tor¬
rent, that made the tiles fly from the roof.
All that were present fled, and Duke Ping,
in a great fright, threw himself down near
the entrance of the hall. Thereafter, Jin was
beset by a drought that scorched the earth
for three years in succession."
This story, which is extremely archaic,
not only furnishes a good example of the
relation of the dark crane to lute music, but
also illustrates in a striking way the awe-
inspiring qualities which the ancient
Chinese attributed to this music. Something
of the ominous atmosphere of this old tale
has been preserved in a number of later
ghost stories connected with the lute.
It is only occasionally, however, that we
find faint echos of the magical nature of the
association between lute and crane. In later
times literary tradition replaced this old
belief with purely aesthetic considerations.
When the scholar is playing the lute in his
garden pavilion, a couple of cranes should
be leisurely stalking about. Their graceful
movements should inspire the rhythm of the
finger technique, and their occasional cries
direct the thoughts of the player to unearth¬
ly things. For even the cry of the crane has a
special meaning. It is said to penetrate unto
Heaven: "The crane cries in the marshes, its
sound is heard in the skies," and the female
crane conceives when it hears the cry of the
male.
Detail from an ancient Chinese lute manu¬
al showing the fingerpositions required to
produce notes similar to the sounds made
by animals. Illustration shows "the posi¬
tion of the right thumb to obtain the crying
of a crane about to soar".
The crane is described as having a great
love for lute music. The Qing lian fang qin
ya ("Elegance of the Lute, from the Blue-
Lotus Boat") relates that "Lin Bu greatly
enjoyed playing the lute; whenever he
played, his two cranes would start dancing."
And the same source says about Ye Meng-
de: "Ye Mengde loved the lute, and would
play for a whole day without resting, the
tones of the lute mingling with the sounds of
a brook. Later Ye returned to mount Lu
and sang songs, accompanying himself on
his lute. On one occasion there suddenly
appeared a pair of cranes that gamboled
about and danced in his garden. Ye kept
them, and they did not go away, but started
to dance every time he played."
Several lute tunes hymn the excellent
qualities of the crane. One treatise that
describes cranes in a scholar's garden is
entitled "Song of a pair of cranes listening
to the babbling of a brook". Another tune,
"Cranes dancing in the sky", celebrates the
soaring flight of the crane. The Tian wen ge
qin pu ji cheng ("Collection of Tunes Heard
from the Sky") contains a tune entitled "A
pair of cranes bathing in a brook". The
introductory note added to this tune is not
without interest. "Late in spring I visited a
friend in Sichuan province. A pair of cranes
were dancing in a clear rivulet. I observed
their feathers white as snow, and the top of
their heads red like vermilion. They flut¬
tered up and down, and took their bath
while dancing. Then they spread their wings
and flew high up in the sky, and cried in
harmony in the azure vault, making me
doubt whether they were not Immortals.
Then I drew my lute unto me, and com¬
posed this tune."
The Ming handbook Shen qi bi pu ("Al¬
bum of the Strange and Mysterious") con-
%MKm% ft -k f £
& ft Wf 4M
& n\ & &
& ft 9V « t!r $
ïi& di 4 if ft
cj $( £ & -t. y
¡fe & \V t*7
éî
it
¿7
.»\í->
G=7
19
I

20
^ tains a tune entitled "Cranes crying in the
marshes". The second half of the introduc¬
tory text says: "The crane is a sacred bird.
Its cries are most clear; they are heard at a
distance of more than eight miles. The pur¬
pose of this tune is to compare the tones of
the lute with the cries of the crane. I kept
two cranes in the bamboo grove surround¬
ing my lute hall. Sometimes, in a shadowy
place, they would dance together, other
times they would fly up and cry in unison.
But they would always wait for the
appropriate time: they did not dance unless
there was a cool breeze to shake their feath¬
ers, and they did not cry unless they could
look up at the Milky Way as if they saw the
gods. When the time was not propitious
they would neither sing nor dance. Recog¬
nizing the spiritual quality of these cranes , I
composed this tune."
Various books give directions about how
to rear cranes and to recognize birds of
' superior qualities. The qualities and outer
marks of good cranes are described in the
Xiang he jing ("The Book of Cranes"), a
book which, though of doubtful authenti¬
city, seems fairly old, and is found in many
compilations of ancient books. Ming trea¬
tises especially abound in discussions about
keeping and rearing cranes, and about how
to make them dance: they may, for in¬
stance, be trained to dance to the clapping
of hands. Chen fu yao (born 1612) says that
excellent flutes can be made from the thigh
bone of a crane: their sound is clear, and in
harmony with the sonorous tubes.
Let me quote one final observation about
the crane: "When staying in a country house
in an empty wood, how could one let a
single day go by without the company of this
refined friend that makes one forget all
worldly things?"
ROBERT HANS VAN GULIK (1910-1967),
Dutch writer and diplomat, was a distinguished
Orientalist with a special interest in Chinese
history. An authority on the Chinese language,
he was also a skilled calligrapher. His scholarly
works include: Sexual Life in Ancient China
(1962) and The Lore of the Chinese Lute (1968)
from which the present article has been extrac¬
ted. He was also the prolific author of detective
stories set in 7th-century China, whose hero,
Judge Dee, ranks with such great fictional detec¬
tives as Sherlock Holmes.
"Take your lute with you and play before
an oldplum tree, " says an ancient Chinese
poem, and according to tradition plum
blossoms appreciate the sounds of the
lute just as much as cranes. The pine tree
is also often associated with the lute, and
when a lute-player is not depictedsitting in
a plum grove he may be shown, as here,
seated on a moss-covered stone beneath
two spreading pines. In left foreground a
man is tuning a four-stringed guitar.
Below, page from a lute handbook show¬
ing a position of the right hand. Legend
above the picture reads, "The right hand,
suggesting a flying dragon grasping the
clouds." Written underneath is "The way
to produce a chord with thumb and middle
finger". Illustrations of finger positions
were usually accompanied by a brief ex¬
planatory note, known as hsing. The hsing
on this page reads: "The dragon is a holy
animal, a pond cannot contain it. Its head
and horns show a noble shape, its trans¬
mutations are inexhaustible. Having
ascended to the throne (an allusion to the
fact that 'Dragon' is a fixed epithet for the
Emperor), the world is prosperous. It
ascends in the air grasping with its claws,
the floating clouds follow it."
sf m * i » £
m m w të f a
L r£*
¿ft Ä
$î ÜB
4&Ä
^
$rft
^
i*
o <b
= Q)
«j o
o o>
©?'
o .ro
? =
ÊE
