The African heritage
IN the aesthetic field Brazilians have special
African connections which differentiate them
from other Latin Americans even from
those tropical American regions where the Afri¬
can influence is strong. In Nigeria, for example,
there is a Brazilian style in both architecture and
in interior design; it even makes use of typically
Brazilian animals and plants. A special Brazilian
flavour has also crept into Nigerian cooking,
dance, recreation, worship and folklore.
Some art critics see links between the works of
the Spanish painter Joan Miró and those of the
young Nigerian sculptor Jacob Afolabi. One
good turn deserves another: was it not another
giant of Spanish painting, Picasso, who de¬
veloped African art forms and transmitted them
to artists in Europe and elsewhere in the world?
Jacob Afolabi and other African artists have affi¬
nities not only with Picasso, but with Brazilian
artists who are themselves Picassian in their
sensitivity to Black African forms of expression. It
seems clear that Nigerian artists today find
something familiar in much authentically Brazi¬
lian art, something fraternally related to what
they themselves consider to be art.
The Brazilian heritage explains why African
artists like Afolabi are linked more closely to such
Brazilian artists as Ciceros dos Santos Dias,
Emiliano di Cavalcanti and Lulas Cardoso Ayres,
than to artists like Miró. It also explains why the
work of Nigerian craftsmen like Adebisi who
deliberately cultivates the so-called Brazilian-
Nigerian style in his art shows similarities with
the painted pottery of a Brazilian artist like Fran¬
cisco Brennand.
Does modern Brazilian artists' sensitivity to the
African roots of their painting, sculpture and
music reflect an exclusive attachment to "négri¬
tude"? If so, then Brazilians of African descent
would tend to draw away from Brazilians of diffe¬
rent descent. Would this make for a "black Brazi¬
lian" like the black North American? Not at all.
Only in a handful of cases, and in a purely
theoretical sense.
Gilberto Freyre
Taken from "The Afro-Brazilian Experiment",
Unesco Courier, August/September 1977.
16
