Year of Peace: 4
Olof Palme, the Prime Minister of
Sweden, was assassinated on 28
February 1986. The text below con¬
sists of extracts from a speech he
made on 21 October 1985 at United
Nations headquarters in New York
during the fortieth session of the UN
General Assembly. We publish this
text as a tribute to Olof Palme's life¬
long dedication to the ideals of the
United Nations.
... Peace is, of course, the fundamental aim
of the United Nations. We have come to
recognize that peace is certainly more than
the absence of military violence. It is also
stability in relations between States, based
on the observance of legal principles. One
field where co-operation between States is
absolutely necessary is the fight against
terrorism in all its forms, these cruel
slayings of innocent civilians.
The rule of law is of vital importance to
peaceful international relations. In particu¬
lar, this is strongly felt in the smaller coun¬
tries. When the integrity and independence
of one small country is violated, it often
sends a vibration of anger and anxiety
through the hearts and minds of the citizens
in other small countries. For them, the rule
of law and the observance of our common
commitments under the Charter are seen
as imperatives for a future in peace and
security. (...)
In our era of growing international inter¬
dependence we have to recognize that
threats to peace frequently originate from
conditions inside the countries. Misery,
hunger, denial of basic human rights, are
the causes of political and social upheaval.
(...)
Brutal violations of human rights occur in
many countries, but in South Africa they are
written into the very laws of the country. In
this way the policy of apartheid is unique in
all its moral abomination. Apartheid is
doomed, as is South Africa's illegal occupa¬
tion of Namibia. While fearing that it will end
in a chaos of destruction and bloodshed for
which the white régime will bear full respon¬
sibility, we should not abandon the hope
that a peaceful transition to a non-racial
democratic society may still be possible
through dialogue and agreement. It is the
duty of the outside world to assist this strug¬
gle for freedom (...).
We are witnessing massive migrations
on an unprecedented scale between States
and between continents. The reasons are
many, among them hunger, war, natural
disasters, persecution. The cultural
clashes that are inevitable in this process
have led in many countries to a renewal of
chauvinism and racism. It is time we be¬
came more attentive to this particular
danger. We are helped in this task by the
rising anger, enthusiasm and readiness to
act demonstrated by some people of the
younger generations. It does honour to
them (...) that they have adopted the watch¬
word "Don't touch my pal". There are many
adults, in and out of Government, who
would do well to listen and take notice.
For many people around the world the
United Nations stands for something very
concrete, a significant element in their per¬
sonal everyday life.
A child in Africa learns to read in a school
financed by Unesco. A farmer in Asia re¬
ceives a sack of seed labelled "FAO" the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations or "WFP" World Food
Programme. The United Nations Develop¬
ment Programme (UNDP), with its technic¬
al projects, touches almost every develop¬
ing country in the world. Refugees in all
continents are protected by the activities of
the High Commissioner for Refugees.
Women fighting for equality and dignity are
encouraged by discussions in United Na¬
tions forums such as the recent Nairobi
Conference. Many civilians in many coun¬
tries have felt more secure because of the
presence of United Nations peace-keeping
forces. If, as we sincerely hope, the initia¬
tive taken by the World Health Organization
(WHO) and the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF) to immunize all children in
the world against serious infectious dis¬
eases by 1990 is crowned with success,
innumerable families will think of the United
Nations as a benefactor.
