sunlight
Almost all life In the sea is dependent on
sunlight, which Is directly converted Into
food by microscopic plant-like floating or¬
ganisms (phytoplankton). Phytoplankton
In turn Is eaten by animal-like plankton
(Zooplankton). The plankton supports a
succession of actively swimming preda¬
tors (nekton). Organic debris rains down
(dots) and provides food for animals at
lower depths. Near-shore organisms are
supported by land drainage. Coastal
upwelling (upward arrows) provides the
phytoplankton with nutrients released by
decomposition of organic matter on the
bottom. (Organisms not drawn to scale.)
subtidal zona



World fisheries
face growing demand
Most traditionally acceptable species of fish are now fully exploited
and many are over-exploited. As a result, the rapid growth in the
world catch witnessed in the 1950s and 1960s has given way to a
much slower rate of increase. The total catch has averaged around
seventy-one million tonnes during the past decade, although the
catch of food fish has continued to increase by about 1 per cent per
annum. Excluding aquaculture, the final yield from currently ex¬
ploited species is unlikely to be much more than 1 1 0 million tonnes.
Production could eventually be increased above this limit,
however, by catching so-called unconventional species such as
the shrimp-like Atlantic krill, lantern fish, oceanic squid and small
pelagic (open sea) fish.
Fisheries in many developing countries are already a vital
source of food, employment and income. The changed circum¬
stances of marine fisheries and advances in aquaculture and
inland fisheries make it essential, however, to persuade countries
accustomed to devoting the bulk of their national resources to
agricultural development and the pursuit of industrialization that
fisheries are also of considerable value to them.
Fisheries contribute about 6 per cent of the world supply of
protein and about 24 per cent of its animal protein, if allowance is
made for the use of fishmeal in animal feeds. On a regional basis,
the percentage contribution of fish to animal protein in the diet is
greatest in Asia. In southeast Asia, for example, 55 per cent of the
animal protein consumed is derived from fish. In Africa, the figure is
1 9 per cent. Such regional statistics reveal little of the true contribu¬
tion made by fish to food supplies in developing countries; in some
communities, often the poorest, it may be the only source of
"meat". This dependence on fish is made all the more important
because the growth in demand, which is expected to double by the
turn of the century, is likely to be greatest in the developing world.
It has been estimated that the fisheries provide employment,
some of it part-time, for about sixteen million fishermen in develop¬
ing countries. Many more people are engaged in associated
activities, such as processing and marketing. The greater part of
this work force is associated with small-scale or artisanal fisheries.
Taking into account dependents, tens of millions in the Third World
must rely completely, or in a major way, on fisheries for their
livelihood. H
phytoplankton Zooplankton
Coral of the Great Barrier Reef, off Cairns,
Queensland, Australia
Excerpted from: Fisheries Development in the 1 980s,
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome
34

flying fish
dolphinfish
r^*^
lantern fish
<^<2^g^
toothed shark
^f, j-* *zl-J~ hatchetfish
¿^ /anglerfish
V
_^
>^wj^ 'éç?
r/^. fci- JmÊM
w& ^^^J