Will deserts drink icebergs?
EVERY attempt has to be made to find
further supplies of fresh water. There
are two viable methods of doing this,
and two only: the desalination of sea water,
and the tapping of the only existing reserves
of fresh water the ice of the polar regions,
formed by the accumulation and compression
of snowfall over many thousands of years.
The desalination of sea water is expensive,
whereas the production of fresh water by the
transportation of icebergs is both economical¬
ly competitive and feasible.
Icebergs are composed of fresh water so
pure that it often approaches the characteris¬
tics of distilled water.
It has been estimated that the Antarctic
icecap loses more than 1 0 million million cubic
metres of ice every year in the form of
icebergs, which eventually melt and dis¬
appear.
Why go to the South Pole to get icebergs?
Why not the North Pole?
There are two reasons for this. First, most
Arctic icebergs are irregularly shaped and
dangerously unstable. Secondly, Arctic bergs
come from mountain glaciers (from Green¬
land, for example) which precludes their ever
being large enough. The "tabular" icebergs
from Antarctica, on the other hand, are often
big and regular in shape.
A "suitable" iceberg should be large
enough (100 million tonnes) to provide the
required amount of water by the time it arrives
at its destination. It should be tabular, as
regularly shaped as possible, and, to make
towing easier, much longer than it is wide.
Icebergs of this type, always supposing that
no internal or invisible cracks and stresses are
subsequently detected, are formed in the
Pacific sector, in the Atlantic sector, and in the
Indian sector.
The most important problem will be to pro¬
tect the icebergs against all types of erosion,
such as melting, evaporation, mechanical
erosion by waves, and friction caused by
movement through the sea.
It would, for instance, take eight to nine
months to cover 6,000 nautical miles at opti¬
mum towing speed (about one knot or roughly
two kilometres per hour).
Various solutions have been suggested.
One of them involves the protection of the
sides of the icebergs by strips (similar to those
of a Venetian blind) made of a reflective
material.
The submerged portion of the sides would
be protected by a similar curtain (or skirt)
made of insulating material, while the insula¬
tion itself would be provided by a pool of cold
fresh water between the skirt and the sides of
the iceberg. The underside of the berg would
also be protected by a kind of wrap held
against the bottom by inflatable floats.
The manufacture and assembling of such
units in Antarctic waters will involve various
problems that are not yet solved.
The actual towing operation should, in
theory, cause no problems at all, as the
largest modern tugs have a tractive force of
125 tonnes. The tractive force needed to shift
an iceberg of 100 million tonnes is in the
region of 600 to 700 tonnes, so five or six large
tugs could do the job.
Once the iceberg arrived at its destination it
might have to remain a certain distance
offshore, depending on the shallowness of the
continental shelf. Melting water would then
have to be pumped by pipeline to the coast.
The production of fresh water by the trans¬
portation of icebergs is undoubtedly one of the
most original and exciting ventures of our
time. It is also one of the most useful: the most
urgent problem soon to face mankind will be
how to obtain fresh water.
February 1978
PAUL-EMILE VICTOR is a noted French explor¬
er who has organized and led many French
expeditions to the Arctic and Antarctic. He was
headof the international glaciological expedition
to Greenland from 1967 to 1970. His achieve¬
ments as an explorer and scientist have brought
him international recognition, including the
award of the gold medal of the Royal Geog¬
raphical Society, London.
W
r.
h*w«».--
hi
^K.:
