When opera
takes to the screen
by Dominique Jameux ALTHOUGH opera and cinema may,
at first glance, appear to be unlikely
bedfellows, these two art forms
have much in common.
Both offer us dramatic representations
which come close to earning the epithet of
"total art", uniting as they do around a
literary text (a scenario or a libretto) and in
a given setting, the combined glories of
light, colour, objects and costumes, and of
the voice and the actor's art. And if, today,
the cinema dominates the field of the audio
visual spectacle, opera can claim to be its
oldest manifestation. Cross-breeding be¬
tween the two is therefore both natural and
frequent, if at times problematic.
The film industry's takeover bid for opera
has a long history. In recent years we have
been offered such opera-films as "Losey's"
Don Giovanni, "Bergman's" The Magic
Flute, "Zeffirelli's" La Traviata and "Ro-
si's" Carmen. The quotation marks seem to
imply some kind of usurpation; and quite
rightly and logically so, since the reality of
the opera-film lies in the adoption by a great
film director of one of the best-known
works of the lyric repertoire and his im¬
pression on it of a vision that is virtually that
of an entirely different author, a phe¬
nomenon to which we shall return later.
In an excellent study published a few
years ago(1), Emmanuel Decaux recalled
the distant origins of this cross-fertilization
between the two art forms. Starting at the
beginning of the century, directors of silent
film days made films based on the libretti of
famous operas, altered or transformed in
varying degrees. In 1909, Regina Badet and
Max Dearly starred in a version of Carmen;
in 1915, in the United States, the famous
vamp, Theda Bara, took the lead in another
Carmen, while, that same year, Géraldine
Farrar played the same role in a Cecil B. de
Mille production.
These early examples of this new genre,
from the age of the silent screen, teach us
that, from the beginning, the makers of
opera-films were quite happy with a situa¬
tion in which music was, to say the least,
placed firmly in the background. Thus, un¬
wittingly, the infancy of the new genre gave
us a foretaste of what it would be in its
maturity. In 1943, for example, Viviane
Romance and Jean Marais were to star in
what was literally a "talking" version of
Carmen, directed by Christian-Jaque.
1 . Fascination de l'Irréel (The Fascination of the
Unreal), by Emmanuel Decaux, Cinématog¬
raphe, November, 1979.
The earliest filmed versions ofoperas took
many liberties with libretti and even with
the musical score. Left, the great Russian
bass singer Fedor Ivanovich Chaliapin
(1873-1938), who created the role of Don
Guixote in Massenet's Don Quichotte in
1910 and sang the same part in a screen
version of the opera made in 1933 by the
German director G.W. Pabst. The film fea¬
tured episodes sung to music specially
composed for the occasion.

One method of bringing opera to the
screen is simply to film a live performance,
providing "an eyewitness account of an
event and a record for the archives" and
striking "a balance between the quality
one has the right to demand from any
artistic presentation and the touching pre-
cariousness of an operatic performance".
A striking example of this kind of film is
that made of Mozart's Don Giovanni at the
Salzburg Festival in 1953 (above).
"Since television has become part of our
daily lives the opera film has more often
than notbeen designed forshowing on the
small screen." One of the most famous
examples ofan opera film produced for TV
in the studio is the Swedish director Ing-
mar Bergman's version of Mozart's The
Magic Flute (1975) later adapted for the
cinema. Right, Josef Kostlinger in the role
of Tamino.
The filming of opera in a studio with a
brilliant cast anda setting similar to that of
an opera stage has become particularly
widespread in the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many. Right, Mirella Frenl (Suzanne),
Maria Ewing (Chérubin) and Kiri Te Kana-
wa (the Countess) in Mozart's opera The
Marriage of Figaro, brought to the screen
in 1976 by the French director Jean-Pierre
Ponnelle.
At the same time, famous singers were
being invited by the cinema world to leave
an enduring record of their art. One spec¬
tacular example was that of the great bass
Chaliapin who, in 1933, appeared in a film
version of Don Quixote, directed by G.W.
Pabst. The film was designed to capitalize
on his public image (in 1910, he had created
the title role in this opera by Massenet, and
had sung it again countless times), yet, pa¬
radoxically, in the film he neither sang to
Massenet's music nor followed the libretto
by Henri Cain (based on Cervantes' book).
Instead, against a natural setting in Pro¬
vence, Pabst recreated a new story consist¬
ing of episodes sung to music specially com¬
posed for the film by Jacques Ibert.
In this manner, the opera-film hesitantly
groped its way forward. It was as if the film
directors were aware that, even if opera
offered them raw material of high dramatic
potential (and which was sure to have an
impact on the public), its very nature (im¬
possible libretti, the unattractive physiques
of many singers, the artificial nature of op¬
eratic canto and other technical constraints)
made the production of a true opera-film an
extremely doubtful undertaking.
At the same time, and even before the
opera-film industry proper had developed,
its major prerequisites, ingredients which
are still in use today, were falling into
place location filming for greater realism;
the use of playback, essential for exterior
filming and having the additional advantage
of enabling singers to concentrate more on
their acting; the right assumed by directors
to modify original libretti and to make of
them what they considered to be proper
scenarios.
And what of the music in all this? One is
tempted to utter the paradoxical assertion
that, but for the music, the problem of the
opera-film would have been resolved long
ago!
The great value of the opera-film is that it
introduces famous singers to an infinitely
larger public than that which frequents the
opera houses and at the same time creates a
permanent record of their fragile, ephemer¬
al art. But is the opera-film necessary to the
achievement of these goals? We have film
footage of famous singers singing their
favourite arias, set within the framework of
purpose-built and often rather vacuous
stories which generally adopt the style of
the romanticized biography. But does this
matter? Richard Tauber, Jan Kiepura, Lily
Pons, Georges Thill, André Baugé, Maria
Cebotari, Enrico Caruso and many others,
have in this way left behind them film and
sound-track which, with clever editing,
could become commercially viable today.
Thus the stage had been reached in the saga
of the relations between the two art forms at
which the opera-film remained both a fasci¬
nating vision and an inaccessible goal.
It would seem that the first real opera-
film was a version of Leoncavallo's Pagliac-
ci. which was made in 1930 during a tour of
the United States by the company of the
San Carlo Theatre of Naples. In the years
following the end of the Second World War
the practice of filming opera became more
widespread. In these productions three
names frequently recurred: Verdi as com-
27

28
^ poser, Gallone as director and Tito Gobbi
as the singing star. In 1948, a new version of
Pagliacci was shot in the open air, with the
actor/singer Tito Gobbi and the actress
Gina Lollobrigida, with the dubbed voice of
a singer. The film stated the problem and
offered the solution film stars, unlike
most singers, act well and are credible even
in close-up, whereas opera singers usually
sing better than actors. Dubbing, therefore,
provides the solution, and this was the
method adopted in 1983 by Syberberg for
his Parsifal.
At this point we should, perhaps, ex¬
amine more closely the three types of pro¬
duction that today constitute the corpus of
opera-films and the problems faced, and
sometimes in part resolved, by each of
them.
First of all there is the straightforward
filming of a live performance; that is, the
film which is both, as it were, an eye-witness
account of an event and a record for the
archives. The most striking example of this
type of film is that made at the Salzburg
Festival of 1953 of Mozart's Don Giovanni,
under the baton of Wilhelm Furtwängler.
Its great success was due first to the musical
quality of the production and also to the
discreet manner in which the director, Paul
Czinner, handled his subject. The camera, a
privileged, well-placed spectator, is virtual¬
ly neutral. The orchestra the Vienna
Philharmonic is not, as is often the case,
effaced in the filming. The décor and the
costumes are traditional but beautiful. The
singers, well-rehearsed in their roles, do not
take on the airs of cinema actors. The
sound, in this purpose-built setting, is of
admirable quality.
Of the three types of opera-film, this one
seems to me to be the most satisfactory. It
respects the essential, that is to say the
music; it enables the music-lover, to some
extent, for a modest sum and with no major
loss of quality, to keep abreast of the music¬
al happenings of his time; and, for the nos¬
talgies amongst us, it provides an example
of the art of Mozartian singing of that
period. Live recording also preserves the
balance between the quality one has the
right to demand from any artistic presenta¬
tion and the touching precariousness of an
operatic performance which is, in fact, part
of its magic.
The second category of opera-films are
those made in the studio setting. This has
become an institution in the Federal Re¬
public of Germany, where large, special¬
ized production companies have developed
a veritable "canned opera" industry. It is
usually a by-product of a normal production
of an opera company. A well-established
production, with a brilliant, if not outstand¬
ing, cast, is filmed in a studio in a décor
similar to that of an opera stage but where
the acoustics are better for the initial re¬
cording as well as for the final production of
the sound-track. The mobility of the camer¬
as varies. Sometimes they give the view as
seen from a seat in the stalls, sometimes
they appear to be moving around on the
"stage". The result is a product of a very
definite type, in which the direction is of
fairly limited importance and which is not
without a certain touch of artificiality.
Although they are very professional pro¬
ductions, the films produced at Hamburg at
the instigation of Rolf Liebermann and The
Marriage of Figaro directed by Jean-Pierre
In recent years a number of major opera-
films by talented directors have exploited
all the technical and financial possibilities
of cinema and have made a bid to stand as
artistic creations in their own right. Shown
here are stills from Franco Zeffirelli's La
Traviata (above), Francesco Rosi's Car¬
men (above right), and Joseph Losey's
Don Giovanni (opposite). These recent
productions perhaps mark the start of a
form which can offer the widest public the
most satisfactory "substitute" for the rep¬
resentation of traditional opera.
Ponnelle nevertheless give the impression
of being "opera on the cheap". One of the
problems of opera-films is that aesthetic
considerations are closely bound up with
financial, cultural and sociological factors.
And this, perhaps, is a suitable point at
which to open a parenthesis to consider
exactly what is at stake in the opera-film
"industry".
First of all, opera-films are aimed at a
non-public (people who do not go to the
opera) or at a public delighted to have the
opportunity of seeing again the opera stars
they like to hear singing certain arias, and
this for a modest sum and without going to
an opera house.
Secondly, the enormous increase in the
cost of putting on a opera that has occurred
over the past twenty years has made neces¬
sary growing support from public funds.
This has created a new situation in Europe,
and particularly in France the taxpayer,
who may derive no pleasure from opera,
finds himself paying in part for the opera-
goer's seat. The opera is no longer merely
"elitist", it has also become a tax burden.

The scandalous aspect of this ransom de¬
manded by the operatic institutions from
the non-public modifies somewhat our view
of the opera-film , the justification for which
is that it enables members of this tax-paying
non-public also to have access to the world
of opera. Nevertheless, despite the pay¬
ments they have already made as taxpayers,
they are asked in addition to contribute, no
matter how modestly, to the costs of filming
by paying for their seats in the cinema.
The problem has still not been resolved.
On the contrary, the gap is widening be¬
tween the privileged minority that has ac¬
cess to operatic performances paying a
high price, it is true, but one which repre¬
sents only a portion of the real cost of a seat,
the remainder being paid by taxpayers who
are excluded from these delights and the
non-public which is offered instead, at the
true cost price even if this is lower, a by¬
product of real opera. Far from contribut¬
ing to the reduction of social and cultural
injustice, the opera-film merely emphasizes
its intractable nature.
The advent of television has modified
some of the factors involved but has not
altered the basic problem of the opera-film.
In fact, since television became part of our
daily lives, the opera-film has more often
than not been designed for showing on the
small screen. Ingmar Bergman's The Magic
Flute is a famous example.
The opera-film destined for television
showing has its own aesthetic, cultural and
economic characteristics. The small size of
the screen encourages close-ups and inti¬
mate scenes; the sound is of mediocre qual¬
ity; sub-titling presents difficulties; and the
lighting appears flat and artificial. It is true
29

V
8 '> '.SNv > F
that the entry of opera into tens of
thousands of homes, sometimes more, is to
its credit, particularly since entertainment
in the home is perceived, wrongly, as being
free. But it cannot be denied that the "ma¬
gic" engendered by the gathering of the
public in front of the big screen in a
darkened cinema already less than that
experienced in an opera house is totally
absent from the home. It is well known that
the mere fact of being in the domestic en¬
vironment is enough to remove all sense of
enchantment from a spectacle already lack¬
ing the glitter which has traditionally been
an integral part of it.
Under these conditions, how can televi¬
sion avoid the charge of being associated
with the degradation of the original operatic
experience, which relegates the televiewer,
like the person who sees an opera-film in
One approach to bringing opera to the
screen is to use film actors and dub them
on the sound-track with the voices of
opera singers. This method was adopted
by H.J. Syberberg of the Federal Republic
of Germany when he filmed Wagner's
opera Parsifal in 1981. Above, on set dur¬
ing filming.
the dark of the cinema, to the rank of a
second-class citizen in the world of opera?
The only way in which the opera-film can
be presented to the consumer in such a
manner as to make him forget that he is
being offered only ersatz opera is to devise a
form of filming which provides a "plus fac¬
tor" unique to the cinema, so that the spec¬
tator sees something that is not a lesser
version of the original opera, but something
else, perhaps something better.
This can be achieved by our third categ¬
ory of opera-films the director's film. A
great film director is invited to take in hand
a great operatic score. There will be no lack
of resources, since once we leave the opera
house for the film set we leave behind the
world of public subsidies to enter the realm
where profit is king.
Everything is done to make the opera-
film an original work, an artistic creation in
its own right, standing side by side with the
original and worthy of being called, for
example, "Losey's" Don Giovanni. There
are fantastic décors, sumptuous costumes,
operatic stars duly promoted by press and
show-bizz. The director himself feels free to
do what he will with libretto and score, and
displays a daredevil insouciance that is justi¬
fied as the new approach of an artist of
today to a work of art of the past. The music
may often suffer, to the benefit of the spec¬
tacle, but the filmed work will be able to
compete on equal terms with the original.
And in this way the gap between the élite
and the masses, between a real and simu¬
lated experience, between the genuine and
the imitation, can at last be reduced.
It is only fair to point out that this kind of
opera-film is still in its infancy. Productions
such as Bergman's The Magic Flute (which,
to be sure, has something of both the first
and the third of the three categories of
opera-film we have defined above) have
shown that they can offer us true musical
and dramatic emotion and that those who
have access to the privileged world of opera
should not look down their aristocratic
noses at productions that have given so
much pleasure to so many. Nothing need
stand in the way of further progress .
DOMINIQUE JAMEUX is a French musicologist,
writer and radio producer. Among his published
works are Richard Strauss (1980, new edition
1986), Alban Berg (1980) and Boulez (1984). His
book Lulu (d'Alban Berg) will appear later this
year. With the composer Michel Fano he co-
authored a series of introductory programmes to
contemporary music that were broadcast on
French television in 1981.
A world history of music
30
