Unesco's General Conference
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
THE 23rd Session of Unesco's General Conference, which
met in Sofia from 8 October to 8 November 1 985, was
attended by 154 delegations from Member States, in¬
cluding 98 ministers and 47 persons of ministerial rank. Also
represented were 8 United Nations bodies, 21 international
governmental organizations and 80 non-governmental orga¬
nizations^ a total of almost 1 ,900 participants.
During the Session, notable for intensive and purposeful
activity taking place in a spirit of dialogue and mutual compre¬
hension, the General Conference accomplished the unpre¬
cedented task of approving a programme and budget subject to
a priority system by virtue of which three-quarters of scheduled
activities have been accorded first priority, whilst the remainder
have had to be accorded second priority owing to lack of
financial provision. The budgetary ceiling, defined on these
bases, was unanimously adopted by the States present.
The General Conference also enabled a consensus to be
reached in all the fields of Unesco's activities, notably in those
which, while considered extremely important by the internation¬
al community, had until then aroused certain reservations on
the part of some Member States.
All the major programmes are now the subject of unanimous
agreement, including Major Programme I (Reflection on World
Problems and Future-Oriented Studies), Major Programme III
(Communication in the Service of Man), Major Programme VIII
(Principles, Methods and Strategies of Action for Develop¬
ment), Major Programme XII (The Elimination of Prejudice,
Intolerance, Racism and Apartheid), and Major Programme
XIII (Peace, International Understanding, Human Rights and
the Rights of Peoples).
But Unesco must in the coming years not only continue the
main thrust of its action in all its fields of competence; it must
also break new ground in several increasingly important areas.
Thus the General Conference .decided to draw up as part of
the next Medium-Term Plan, a plan of action to help Member
States to eradicate illiteracy between now and the year 2000.
Agreement was reached on the main lines of a programme for
World Culture Decade.
The General Conference also decided to create an inter¬
governmental programme in informatics, to launch a major new
regional project on the rational use and conservation of water
resources in rural Asia and in the Pacific, and to prepare a
special aid programme for Africa in the fields of scientific and
technological research and of research and development.
The attachment of Member States, and of their educational,
scientific and cultural communities, to multilateral co-operation
was forcefully reaffirmed. Unesco's specific vocation cover¬
ing all aspects of intellectual co-operation was given particu¬
lar endorsement by the Conference. And this vocation was
outstandingly illustrated by the essential role played in the work
of the specialized commissions by experts from different de¬
legations who found constructive and mutually satisfactory
solutions to all the questions they examined.
Finally, the participating delegations emphasized the import¬
ance that should be attached to the preparation of the third
Medium-Term Plan, which will cover the first half of the last
decade of the second millennium. In this perspective, they
stressed the urgent need to engage in fundamental reflection
and, with this in mind, to increase the involvement of the
international intellectual community in all the Organization's
activities.
The results obtained at the Sofia Conference, thanks to
efforts made by all concerned, revealed the great vitality of
Unesco. In spite of the extent of the difficulties which the
Organization must face, the General Conference took up the
challenge and showed itself equal to the situation. It further
enriched the content of a consensus which is one of the golden
rules of international co-operation. And it vigorously expressed
the determination voiced by virtually all Unesco's Member
States to envisage a future in which the Organization's achieve¬
ments will be maintained and its prospects will be renewed.
