The Week of Modern Art, 1 922
Seven days that shook Brazilian culture
The "Week of Modern Art" held in Säo
Paulo in 1922 was a cultural gathering
which showed a desire to break away from
a colonial past that was felt to be alien to
the Brazilian situation. Below, The Rus¬
sian Student (1917) by Anita Malfatti, a
leading figure in the Modernist movement,
whose fauvist style caused a furore. Her
work was championed by an enthusiastic
group of artists and writers whose col¬
laboration illustrated the dialogue be¬
tween literature and the visual arts which
developed in Brazil during the first two
decades of the century and prepared the
ground for the Week of Modern Art.
THE idea of a new, contemporary Brazil was
launched during the "Week of Modern Art"
held in Sao Paulo from 13 to 17 February
1922. The impact of this event on Brazilian liter¬
ature, art and culture generally was so great that
it could be said to have lasted for the next thirty-
eight years, beginning with the lecture given by
the essayist and thinker José Pereira da Graça
Aranha in Sao Paulo on 13 February 1922, and
ending with the speech delivered by President
Juscelino Kubitschek when he proclaimed Brasi¬
lia capital of the Republic on 21 April 1960.
The "Week of Modern Art" was organized by
Brazilian artists, writers and composers in a bid
to instil a new spirit into artistic creation in Brazil
on the centenary of the country's independence.
Speaking at the Säo Paulo Municipal Theatre on
13 February 1922, Graça Aranha explained the
nature of the idéias novas, the new ideas that
were in the air: "The works presented here may
seem horrifying to many of you, but these out¬
landish paintings, this bewitching music and this
disjointed poetry all herald a marvellous dawn.
They represent the birth of art in Brazil."
The "Week of Modern Art" was an attempt to
break with a colonial past that was alien to the
Brazilian situation. While official academic paint¬
ing and sculpture were bogged down in natural¬
ism and idealism, and continued to deal with
historical, mythological and religious themes
reflecting the aesthetic values of nineteenth-
century Europe, literature was being stifled by
the language of the Parnassian movement.
Oswald and Mario de Andrade, on their return
from Europe, fought a courageous battle against
slavish adherence to the literary models of the
past, and in painting Anita Malfatti scandalized
the conformists who were blithely content with
imported forms of dull and pretentious art.
Above all, the break with the past entailed a
search for national identity. The memory of the
Amerindian and Afro-American past was re¬
vived, and roots that were both Brazilian and
American were uncovered. (During this period,
the architects Moya and Przyrembel were pro¬
ducing work that was Aztec in inspiration.)
Secondly, an attempt was made to bring Brazi¬
lian art up to date or rather to "modernize" it by
relating it to avant-garde movements in other
countries. Combining those apparently conflict¬
ing features meant engaging in "cannibalism".
The literary movement known as Antropofagia
("Cannibalism") that subsequently emerged was
based on the principle that Brazil should "gobble
up foreign avant-garde movements and adapt
them to Brazilian realities."
The "Week of Modern Art" thus ushered in the
new conception of creativity which is still a dis¬
tinctive feature of Brazilian art and literature
today. In poetry, Modernism was to put an end to
metre and rhyme and introduce free verse, collo¬
quial language and humour. Although it asserted
its own indigenous personality, it had no hesita¬
tion in adopting all the new literary techniques.
Thus, paradoxically, European avant-garde
movements began to play a decisive role in the
discovery of the New Brazil. In some cases these
movements had a direct influence Oswald de
Andrade introduced to Brazil the ideas of the
Futurist movement founded by Filippo Marinetti.
They also had more indirect effects, attracting
attention to everything that could be regarded as
specifically Brazilian it was in the studios of
Picasso and Brancusi and in the company of
Tristan Tzara and Blaise Cendrars that Mario de
Andrade discovered "primitivism". Fascinated
by the colonial past of Minas Gerais and by the
sculptures of o Aleijadinho ("the Little Cripple")
during a visit to Brazil in 1 924, Cendrars encour¬
aged the writers Oswald and Mario de Andrade
and the painter Tarsila do Amaral to seek the
roots of their own culture in their country's folk
traditions.
These new principles were affirmed through¬
out the 1 920s in the writings of Graça Aranha and
in Tarsila do Amaral's "tubist-tropical" paintings.
In 1924, the Pau-Brasil ("Brazilian Redwood")
literary manifesto drafted by Oswald de Andrade,
with its slogan "tupy or not tupy",1 marked the
beginning of an "exploratory poetry" which
38

looked to popular traditions and attempted to
create a synthesis between traditional culture
and modern technological society. This spirit
continued to flourish in the "Cannibalism"
movement, which published manifestos in 1928
and 1929 and set out to identify the origins of
pre-colonial Brazilian traditions by conducting
sociological studies on the Black and Indian
population and on forms of folklore and folk art.
In 1927-1928, the Russian-born architect
Gregori Warchavchick built Brazil's first Art Deco
house, the Villa Mariana in Säo Paulo. The new
architectural trend was stimulated by the visits to
Brazil of Le Corbusier in 1 929 and of Frank Lloyd
Wright in 1 931 , when Wright met Warchavchik
and his partner, the urban planner Lucio Costa.
Two years later an Exhibition of Tropical
Architecture was held in Rio de Janeiro and, in
1937, the design for the Ministry of Education
and Health building was commissioned from a
group of architects belonging to the new
movement. Among the collaborators on this pro¬
ject, directed by Le Corbusier, were Lucio Costa
and Oscar Niemeyer who, some twenty years
later, would create Brasilia, the first city of the
twenty-first century.
The aesthetic positions championed by the
"Week of Modern Art" fully corresponded to the
realities of the Brazilian situation. They reflected
the rapid industrialization that was transforming
this provincial society and sweeping away the
few remaining vestiges of the colonial ethic. The
impact of the population explosion in Rio de
Janeiro and Säo Paulo and of the waves of
immigrants who were changing the dynamics of
Brazilian society could be felt in the ferment of
artistic creation. The New ArtArte novo
would take up the challenges of a new society
and new cities whose emergence it would actu¬
ally anticipate and prefigure. It would merge into
a single stream the currents of internal migration
that would create twentieth-century Brazil; it
would blend into a single national identity Brazil's
historical roots and the ideas of modern Europe.
This was the "New Brazil", of which Brasilia
sought to be the expression.
Revista de Antropofagia
MANIFESTO ANTROPÓFAGO
1 . Tupf is the language spoken by the Tupian Indians,
one of the four main indigenous nations of Brazil, who
were settled all along the seaboard at the time the
country was discovered. Editor.
Right, opening page of the "Manifesto of
Anthropophagy", as it appeared in the
Brazilian avant-garde magazine Revista
de Antropofagia in 1928. This proclama¬
tion of Modernism was a metaphorical ap¬
plication to Brazilian art and literature of
the theory of cannibalism whereby the
cannibaleats his enemy in order to acquire
his powers, while at the same time rituaily
freeing himself from them. The Manifesto,
which contains the famous slogan "tupy
or not tupy that is the question ", was writ¬
ten by the poet, novelist and playwright
Oswald de Andrade, high priest of the
Modernist movement. Two series of the
Revista were published in 1928 and 1929,
containing illustrations by outstanding
modern artists of Brazil and work by the
leading writers of the Modernist
movement Illustration set within the text
of the Manifesto is by Tarsila do Amaral
(1897-1973), who later painted works such
as Pau-Brasil and Antropofagia in which
folklore mingled with surrealism. Right,
illustration from an issue of the Revista by
Emiliano Augusto di Cavalcanti (1897-
1976). Far right, illustration by Cicero Dias
(born 1908), a figurative painter who later
turned to abstraction and produced
geometric compositions notable for the
"tropical" vivacity of their colours.
Só > antropofagia no* unr. Social*
mente. Económicamente, Philoso-
phtramente.
Única lei do mundo. Expresólo
mascarada de todo» o« individualis¬
mos, de todos os collectivisme. De
todas as relie ¡oes. De ludo» os trata¬
dos de paz.
Tupy, or not tupy that ¡s the
question.
Contra toda as cathechesc*. E
contra a mie do» Graccho*.
So me intéressa o que nlo c in eu.
Lei do hörnern. Let do antropófago.
Estamos fatigados de todos os tni-
Tidos catholteos suspeítosos post« s
em drama. I;reud acabuu com o
enigma mulher e com out ros
sustos da psychologia im-
pressa.
O que atrópela va a verdad«
era a roupa. o ímpermeaveí
entre o mundo interior c o
mundo exterior. A reacciío
contra o hörnern
vestido. O cinema
americano in forma¬
rá.
Filhos do sol,
míe dos vívenles.
Encontrados e ama¬
dos ferozmente, com
toda a hypocrma
da saudade, pelos im-
migrados, pelos tra¬
ficados e pelos tou¬
ristes. No piii da
cobra grande.
Foi porque nun¬
ca lívemos gram^
míticas, nem "col*
Jecçoes de velhos
vegetaes. E nunca soubemos o que
era urbano, suburbano, fronteiriço e
continental. Preguiçosos no inappa
m und i do Brasil.
Urna consciencia participarte,
ana cythmka religiosa.
Contra lodos os importadores de
consciencia rnlaiada, A existencia
palpavel da vida. £ a mentaltdadc
prelogica para o St. Levy Brühl
eatudar.
Queremos a rcvoluçio Carahiba.
Maior que a revoluçio Francesa- A
unificacio de tudas as révoltai ef-
(icazes na dtreccio do hörnern. Sem
nés a Europa, nao lerii siquer a sua
pobre declaraçâo dos direitos do
hörnern.
A edade de ouro annunciada pela
America. A edade de ouro. E todas
as girls.
Filiaçio. O contacto com o Brasil
Caraiik. Ou Villcranhon print ter¬
ra. Montaigne. O hörnern natural.
Rousseau. Ha Revolucáo Francesa
ao Romantismo. á Kcvolueio Bol¬
chevista, á Revoluc.au surrealista e
ao bárbaro technizado de Keyserl¬
ing. Caminhamos.
NYnca tomos cathechisados. Vive¬
mos atravez tie um «¡ireito sonam¬
bulo, l-'izcmos Christo natter na Ba¬
hía. Ou em Beîem do Para.
Mas nunca admitt irnos o nasci¬
mento da lógica entre nos.
So podemos artender ao mundo
orecular.
Tinhamos a jusiiça codificaçao da
Wngança A sciencia codificaçio da
Magi*. Antropofagia. A transfor¬
mado permanente do Tabú em to¬
tem.
Contra o mundo reversive! e as
ideas objectivadas. Cadaverizada«.
O stop do pensamento que ë dyna¬
mic©. O individuo victima do syste-
ma. Fonte das injustices classicas.
Das injusticias románticas. E o es-
queemiento das conquistas interio¬
res.
Roteiros. Roteiros. Roteiros. Ro-
teiros. Roteiros. Roteiros. Roteiros.
O instincto Carahiba.
Morte e vida das hypothe-
ses. Da equaçio en parte do
\ Kosmos ao axioma Kosmos
pane do eu. Subsistencia. Co-
uhccimenio. Antropofagia.
Contra as elites vegetaes.
Em commurïieaçioacom o sólo.
Nunca fomos cathechisados.
Fizemos foi Carnaval. O indio
vestido de senador do Imperio.
Fingindo de Pitt. Ou figuran¬
do ñas operas de Alencar cheio
de bons sentimental portugue
sa tinhamos o
communisme. Ja ti¬
nhamos a lingua
surrealista. A eda¬
de de ouro.
Catiti Catiti
Imara Notiá
Notiá Imara
Ipejú
Contra o Padre Vieira. Autor do
nosso primeiro empreslimo, para
ganhar commissio. O rei analpha-
hclo dissera-lhr : pooha isso no papel
mas sem muita labia. Fez-se o citi-
prestimo. Gravou-sc o assucar bra¬
sileiro. Vieira deixou o dinheiro em
Portugal c nos trou« a labia,
O espirito recusa-se a conceber o
espirito Km corpo. O «uttropomor-
fismo. Kecesstdade da vaccina an-
tropofagica. Para a equilibrio contra
as religiôes de meridiano. E as in-
quisitoes, exteriores.
A magia e a vida. Tinhamos a re-
laçlo e a distribuicio dos bens phy-
sicos. dos bens moraes, dos bens di¬
gnarlos. E sabíamos Iranspor o mys-
terio e a morte corn o auxilio de al-
gumas formas grammaticaes.
Pergunteî "a um hörnern o que era
o Direíto. Elle me respondeu que
era a garantía do exercicio da pos-
sibiltdade. Esse hörnern chamava-se
Galli Mathias. Comi-o
Só nlo ha déterminisme - onde ha
misterio. Mas que temos nos com
isso?
Continua ma Puffin* 7
<
©
39
