Latin America
in European painting
One continent seen
through the T of another
by Miguel Rojas Mix
¿rpi| HE people are blue-skinned and
have square heads." The Euro¬
peans were still disembarking in
the New World when John of Hollywood, a
cosmographer with the name of a film-star,
penned this azure-tinted, geometrical por¬
trait of its inhabitants. At the time when he
wrote or even earlier, with the publication
of the letters of Christopher Columbus an
"imaginary America" began to take shape
through images in which people and the
natural world were continually transmogri¬
fied into the most unusual and fanciful
forms.
Over the centuries, works of art depicting
America were coloured by the spirit of the
age in which they were created. The earliest
of them encompass the entire continent,
but from the eighteenth century onwards
the United States has a separate image.
After that date, we shall refer exclusively to
Latin America.
The first image of America, coinciding
with the classical aesthetic of the Renais¬
sance, was a "fantastic" one. The "Dis¬
covery" (although to avoid Eurocentrism it
would be preferable to talk of "the arrival of
the Spaniards") does not seem to have
made a great impression on Europe. Apart
from travellers' tales and the engravings
illustrating them, there are few contempor¬
ary accounts of the impact made by this
event on the European continent. We are
left with three major literary works: "Des
cannibales", a chapter of Montaigne's
Essays; Thomas More's Utopia; and
Shakespeare's The Tempest.
There are also a handful of allusions and
exotic details in paintings by the great
artists: a name on a map by Leonardo da
Vinci, a plump agave cactus in The Garden
of Earthly Delights by Hiëronymus Bosch
and a sunflower lurking somewhere among
his sketches; a Saimirí squirrel monkey in
St. John on Patmos by Hans Burgkmair the
Elder; and a strange figure of Apollonian
physique, clothed in feathers, used by
Dürer to decorate the prayer-book of Maxi¬
milian I.
And yet newly-discovered America
seemed to be tailored to fit European
dreams. In the New World, all myths found
concrete expression. The "newest of the
new" walked hand in hand with the old.
There, merging and overlapping, were to
be found Eden, the country of Ophir and El
Dorado. Columbus believed that he had
discovered Paradise, and Dürer and
Rubens followed current taste by placing
between Adam and Eve a parrot a bird
which, though undeniably beautiful, seems
to symbolize a sin of frivolity which has
been imputed to America ever since.
Through the landscapes of the New
World wandered creatures from the classic¬
al and medieval bestiaries: giants cohabited
with basilisks, and Amazons, with one
breast slashed off, encountered ster-
nocephaloids, creatures with heads beneath
their shoulders. In addition to these figures
were plants and animals the evocation of
which inspired artists to create a world
where miracles could happen, unhampered
by the mundane restrictions of daily life.
America was to exert an influence, even
if indirect, on the emergence of a series of
themes in European painting. Did the en¬
counter with its pristine natural world con¬
tribute to the discovery of landscape paint¬
ing as a genre? (Dürer was the first Euro¬
pean artist to paint pure landscapes.) We
cannot be sure. What is certain, however, is
that in reawakening the classical opposition
between "techne" (art and technique) and
"physis" (nature), America raised once
again the question of the origins of human¬
ity and fostered in painters a certain taste
for the primitive. And not only for biblical
primitivism many painters have worked
on the theme of Paradise: Cranach, Jan
Brueghel, Titian, etc. but also for classical
primitivism, Orphism and nostalgia for the
Golden Age, which influenced the style of
Piero di Cosimo's works.
Nevertheless, there is little reference in
European painting to the primitive lives of
the inhabitants of America, for the simple
reason that Europe never managed to de¬
cide whether they were barbarians or "no¬
ble savages". Were the indigenous people
of America human beings or animals?
Europeans wondered. Did they have souls?
Should they be enslaved? Should they be
exterminated? And although Bartolomé de
las Casas maintained as long ago as the
mid-sixteenth century that all the nations of
the world consist of human beings, the Puri¬
tan colonizers had very different ideas.
Even in the nineteenth century the poet
James Russell Lowell had a Yankee soldier
in the Mexican War confess that before he
left home he was convinced that Mexicans
were not human beings but a nation of
orang-outangs that could be slaughtered
without a second thought.
In 1637, John Maurice of Nassau, Gov-
11

THEODORE GERICAULT (Rouen, 1791 -
Paris, 1824). The Battle of Maipú, gouache,
around 1818. Paris, Bibliothèque
Nationale. This little-known work by Gérl-
cault depicts the meeting between José de
San Martín and Bernardo O'Higgins after
their army had defeated the Spanish
forces at Maipú (8 April 1818) and brought
independence to Chile. Géricault, who
painted his famous Raft of the "Medusa" in
the following year, epitomizes the spirit of
the Romantic painters who championed
"modernity" and the new freedoms, and
closely followed contemporary events in
Spanish America and elsewhere.
ALBRECHTDÜRER (Nuremberg, 1471 -id.
1528). This figure (below) drawn in the
margin of the prayer-book of the Emperor
Maximilian I (1515) is an example of the
way in which the non-European was en¬
visioned by early 16th-century Europe as
radically different from the European, in¬
corporating features from India, Africa and
America.
©
id -. .-ii» . .» miyti
« courts umi>i » W»1»0M«II MM
12
THE MAP OF TEMIXTIAN (Mexico City),
known as the "Cortés Map", incorporates
a schematic map of the Gulf of Mexico (at
left of document), and is the oldest known
map of the island of Tenochtitlán, the site
ofpresent-day Mexico City. It Is attributed
to Hernán Cortés since it appears in the
first Latin edition of the conquistador's
second letter to Charles V, published In
Nuremberg In 1524. This highly Imagina¬
tive piece of work with Its European-style
city buildings may have been a source of
inspiration for Utopian thought. (Its influ¬
ence may be seen in a plan for a Utopian
city dating from around the same time and
attributed to Dürer.) The link between
America and Utopia seems to have been
close; in his book Utopia (1516), Thomas
More learns of the existence of Utopia
from a certain Hitlodeo, who is presented
as a former companion of the Italian navi¬
gator Amerigo Vespucci, from whom the
American continent takes its name.

^ ernor and Representative of the Dutch
West India Company, took up residence in
Pernambuco. In his entourage were Frans
Post and Albert van der Eeckhout, two
artists who had been instructed to paint
everything that lived and moved and had its
being there. While they were in Brazil, they
produced works that were true to life.
When they returned to Europe, however,
buyers considered their paintings to be in¬
sufficiently exotic and decorative, and to
comply with the taste of the age they were
obliged to invent a Brazil of gaudy jungle
scenes and improbable animals. Such was
the "Baroque image" of America.
This new style loved exuberance and an
exoticism that gave short shrift to geo¬
graphical precision. America now became a
set of decorative motifs and competed in the
salons with "Chinoiseries". Some of the
finest depictions of exotic America date
from this period: the "tapestries of the In¬
dies", large canvases into which are woven
images of Indians, llamas, tapirs, etc. in
short, all the animals and plants with which
America astonished the Old World all
jumbled together with animals and plants
from Asia and Africa. For Baroque, the
exotic has no geographical location, but is
simply "outside Europe".
But America became fashionable for
allegory as well as for decorative exoticism:
she is one of the matrons representing the
"Four Quarters of the Globe". These
female figures were a favourite motif of the
time, because on ceilings and at the heads of
staircases they could give solid expression
to the limitless power-hungry aspirations of
Absolutism and the no less ambitious mis¬
sionary pretensions of the Counter-Refor¬
mation. Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, the un¬
disputed master of this art, produced the
finest representation of America as an
Amazon, with the horn of, plenty in one
hand and a skull at her feet. Rich and
barbaric. Rich, and thus promising bound
less wealth to kings; barbaric, and thus open
to legitimate conquest. The country must
be converted to Christianity and civilized:
profit and its justification fused in a single
image.
This image of America changed in the
nineteenth century with the advent of
Romanticism. The Romantics brought a
spirit of liberalism, and their art expresses
the values of a nascent middle class. Their
themes included the new freedoms, revolu¬
tion, the abolition of slavery, the people,
progress, nature and travel. In America the
Romantics found plenty of grist to their
mill. A series of engravings by William
Blake denounces slavery in Suriname; a
watercolour by Géricault celebrates a deci¬
sive battle for the independence of Chile.
But, above all, such concerns find express¬
ion in the taste for the picturesque to be
found through travel and in the feeling of
wonderment before the rich profusion of
the natural world.
Romantic exoticism is nevertheless dis¬
tinct from that of the Baroque period. It
prides itself on being scientific and attempts
to reproduce the landscapes, animals and
people of the New World with total veri¬
similitude. It is the exoticism of exploration
in the travels of Alexander von Humboldt,
and the literary exoticism of Chateau¬
briand, who describes the Niagara Falls
with a geographer's scrupulous attention to
detail. Humboldt attempts to marry art and
science in "treu und lebendig" (faithful and
lively) representation of reality. This com¬
bination was to be of benefit to both: to art,
since contact with such magnificence in na¬
ture would revitalize landscape painting,
and to science, which was thus able to en¬
rich its stock of images (photography was
still unknown). The spirit of Humboldt im¬
bues most of the German artists who
travelled to America in the nineteenth cen¬
tury: Johann Moritz Rugendas, who jour¬
neyed throughout the continent; Ferdinand
Bellermann, who visited Venezuela;
Eduard Hildebrandt, to whom we owe one
of the most vivid depictions of Brazil in the
mid-nineteenth century; and many others,
including Pissarro.
This great French painter, born in the
West Indies, arrived in Venezuela under
the name of Pizarro. He was twenty-two
years old. His style was in keeping with the
naturalism favoured by Humboldt, but
even at this early date he was determined to
capture the intensity of the light. Was this
naturalism, bathed in the sunlight of the
Caribbean, the first stage of the quest that
would make him one of the founders of
Impressionism? Whistler, another artist
obsessed with light, would leave in one of
his paintings a fleeting record of his brief
contact with South America. At anchor one
night in the world's remotest harbour, he
painted Valparaiso: Nocturne in Blue and
Gold.
Three outstanding painters of the end of
the century had intermittent connections
with America: Manet, who produced a
number of versions of The Execution of
Maximilian; Henri (Le Douanier) Rous¬
seau, of whom it is claimed, on scanty
evidence, that he was in Mexico with the
French army and there discovered the
"tropical" landscape that is unmistakably
his own; and Gauguin, the great master of
modern exoticism, which he portrays as à
refuge from civilization. Gauguin was influ¬
enced by his childhood in Peru. Both in his
pottery and in some of his paintings we find
the shapes of Mochica vases: head-shaped
jars which are self-portraits, and terra-cotta
vases with the uplifted faces of Breton
women, just as in Inca society, where there
were no tables, the clay faces must have
gazed upwards to meet the eyes of their
owners and masters.
At the beginning of the twentieth cen¬
tury, the image of America becomes Janus-
faced. One face is that of the mass media;
~
:>.-
V
\
THEODORE DE BRY (Liège, 1528 - Frank-
furt-am-Main, 1598). Engraver famed for
his 13-part Travels in America published
between 1590 and 1634. The Amazon and
the sternocephalic figure were two of
many fantastic creatures which European
travellers and chroniclers claimed to have
found in Brazil and Guyana, and show how
European myths were projected onto
America. The Amazon is a figure from clas¬
sical mythology and the headless man
appears in a legend associated with im¬
aginary journeys. Headlessness is also a
feature associated with such figures as
Gog and Magog and Antichrist. The
monstrous creature here epitomizes the
Indian's diabolical nature.
13

DE BRY, El Dorado. The engraving below
depicts the original myth ofEldorado ("the
glided one"), a name first applied to the
chief of a rich country who according to
legendplastered his naked body with gold
dust before plunging into a sacred lake.
Eldorado later came to mean a whole fabu¬
lous country ofgold which was described
in the 18th century by Voltaire : "Near to a
certain Parima, whose sand was ofgold. ...
There was a city with gilded roofs. ..."
WILLIAM BLAKE (London, 1757- id.
1827). Poet, painter and illustrator of Dan¬
te. Blake also expressed his humanist
vision in his illustrations for John Gabriel
Stedman's Narrative of a Five Years' Ex¬
pedition against the Revolted Negroes of
Surinam (London, 1796). Blake shows In
atrocious detail (right) how slaves were
tortured to death. His work and that of
painters who followed him anticipated the
struggle for the abolition of slavery.
ae-v ,s l
.
-1"" -ö*ä*s»v
m&.
HENRY MOORE (Castleford, 1898 - Much
Hadham, 1986). Like many European
artists, the great English sculptor drew
inspiration from pre-Columbian art. The
Reclining Figure, below, outside the main
building of Unesco Headquarters in Paris,
and other works bearing the same title,
have a strong affinity with effigies of the
Aztec divinity Chac Moot. Opposite page
below, statue of Chac Mool in the Temple
of the Warriors, Chichén Itza, Yucatán,
Mexico.
I
»T
'
\
II I
1 IT t
1 1* J
0-
rr
©
14

m
m
PAUL GAUGUIN (Paris, 1848 - Atuona,
Marquesas Islands, 1903). Above left, Self-
Portrait, stoneware, 1889, Copenhagen
Museum ofDecorativeArts. The same ves¬
sel features in apicture Gauguinpainted in
the same year, Still-life with Japanese
Woodcut (Ittleson Collection, New York).
Like Gauguin's other ceramics, this self-
portrait is strongly inspired by pre-
Columbian Peruvian pottery such as the
anthropomorphic Mochica vase (above
right). Gauguin may have sought self-
realization In exoticism through memories
ofhis childhood in Peru or because of the
Peruvian blood he inherited from his
maternal grandmother.
the other, that of art. The media have
accumulated all the stereotypes that have
represented America throughout history,
together with new clichés born of specific
historical events. The image of parrot-like
frivolity, human degradation in hot cli¬
mates, sloth and childishness has been com¬
pounded by that of machismo, corruption,
the siesta and lust for revolution. Such is the
image put across by the cinema, advertising
and light novels, and often, too, by more
serious literature. The comic strip is largely
responsible for projecting this image,
although it is true that comics are now be¬
ginning to change. The Indian is regarded
with less contempt, and the Western hero
has doubts about his moral superiority. This
may be to some extent due to the influence
of the French social anthropologist Claude
Lévi-Strauss, who altered the concept of
"the savage mind".
The image found in art is quite different.
In the early twentieth century it sought
renewal through the discovery of new rules
of formal expression. When Picasso,
Braque and Matisse drew on African aes¬
thetics to creat modern art, all non-Euro¬
pean art was seen with new respect as a
source of inspiration for the avant-garde.
Many artists became interested in pre-Col¬
umbian art. One was Henry Moore, whose
Reclining Figures irresistibly evoke the sta¬
tue of the Aztec divinity Chac Mool. The
image of twentieth-century art thus came
into being, not merely as a prolongation of
Greek classicism of the aesthetics of Phi¬
dias and Praxiteles but also as the syn¬
thesis' of the creative abilities of all huma¬
nity. Cubism, abstract art, expressionism
and other schools of art owe much to the
sensibility of these "foreign cultures".
Thus over the centuries America has
been depicted in images which do not al¬
ways correspond to reality but tend instead
to reflect European interests and changes in
Europe's idea of itself from one period to
the next. In this context, the non-European
is little more than a mirror. Europe has
projected its own vision of itself whether
classical, Baroque or Romantic onto "the
other". As this vision changed, "the other"
changed too. And so we see an America
that is imaginary in two senses both be¬
cause its story is told in images and because
it is more imaginary than real. As an Indian
says to a European in an illustrated story by
the Italian author Milo Manara: "Everyone
knows that Indians cannot really exist in
your world."
afeé - ' -' -
v..,,. _. . t . ._,. ...
MIGUEL ROJAS MIX, of Chile, is the founder
and former director of the Chilean Institute of
Latin American Art. A former professor at the
Sorbonne, he is currently teaching at the Uni¬
versity of Vincennes, Paris. He is the author of
several published works, including Vera historia
natural de Indias (The True Natural History of the
Indies) and a short history of Latin America for
children.
15
