Science,
technology
and man
Nobel
Prize¬
winners'
Round
Table
Seated at a "Round Table" set up
under the immense shell of reinforced
concrete housing Unesco's
Conference Hall, eight world-famous
scientists, five of them Nobel Prize
winners, took part in a succession of
scientific and cultural events
organized in November 1958 on the
occasion of the inauguration of
Unesco's new Headquarters and its
Tenth General Conference. Vital
questions arising from the impact of
science and technology on human life
were discussed by members of the
Round Table. We present here
significant passages from these
debates.
Bernardo Alberto Houssay (Argentina)
Nobel Prize for Physiology and Medicine,
1947
IT is a mistake to talk of pure and applied
science. There are not two kinds of science
but only one, and there are the applications
of that science. The public in general and
governments, too, think that only applied sci¬
ence is useful. They are very much mistaken.
People should realize that all the knowledge
on which applied science is based comes
from theoretical or pure science. If theoretical
or pure science is brought to a halt or loses its
impetus, then application, too, becomes slug¬
gish or stops. So we should make no distinc¬
tion between these two aspects of science.
Pasteur said: "It is not the long and involved
political discussions we may read about in the
newspapers that help mankind to progress,
but only the great discoveries of science, of
human thought, and the uses to which they
are put."
P.M.S. Blackett (United Kingdom)
Nobel Prize for Physics, 1948
IT is very important to realize that science,
although it has achieved marvellous
things, is not a magic wand to wave over a
poor country and make it into a rich one.
Science textbooks are cheap; it is reasonably
cheap to train scientists; but it is extremely
expensive to embody the science in the fac¬
tories, the steel works, the transport systems,
the power stations, the mines and the chemic¬
al plants. They all cost an enormous amount
of capital, and the poor countries are very
hard put to find capital. And that simple econo¬
mic reason is why science is so very unevenly
applied over the world today.
I agree that the most important thing for
mankind is not to blow itself up. But I am,
curiously, an optimist about this matter. ... And
assuming that we won't blow ourselves up,
what is the next main problem?
I think the next main problem is to do some¬
thing about the widening gap between the rich
and the poor parts of the world, the rich coun¬
tries which have successfully used science
and obtained all the benefits, and the poor
ones which have not. Now, if we don't do
something about this widening gap, in a few
decades, if the standard of life in the West
goes up at the present rate, we may end up
with a large part of the world poverty-stricken,
as for centuries past, while the advanced
countries of the West are enjoying (if "en¬
joying" is the right term) what has been called
a "five-day weekend".
36

John Boyd Orr (United Kingdom)
Nobel Peace Prize, 1949
IT is the advance of science, leading to
technology and to the birth of new ideas,
which has guided the full evolution of our
civilization.
The problem of the present day, however, is
that in our generation science has advanced
at an accelerating rate. In the last fifty years
science has advanced more than in the 2,000
previous years and in this advance has given
man enormous new powers.
In the past, hunger and disease limited the
growth of population. Today hunger can be
abolished, disease is rapidly being defeated
and we are undergoing an explosive rise in
population. This is one of the problems we
shall need to deal with. Thus, you see, the
advance of science has driven us into an
entirely new age an age where war is impos¬
sible. That is the biggest revolution which has
ever taken place since the beginning of civi¬
lization.
Can we adjust human society to these great
changes? Some people think we cannot. I
believe we can. But it depends upon whether
the people of the world realize what it is we
have to face up to, and make it possible for our
governments to lead us to a new golden age.
Nikolai Semenov (USSR)
Nobel Prize for Chemistry, 1956
WHAT is the situation facing us today?
Science has the means to bring
happiness and contentment to the
world. But should a new war break out (it
would inevitably be an atomic one) then man¬
kind would experience the most dreadful fate
it has ever known.
Which road will humanity take? The deci¬
sion rests with us, on our goodwill, our efforts
and our determination. What we can and must
do is to put an end, once and for all, to the
testing of nuclear weapons. Though this is
perhaps not the main problem it is of primary
importance, for the first effect of prohibiting
nuclear tests would be to prevent any further
development of devastating nuclear
weapons, and would help to re-establish inter¬
national confidence.
This would do much to dispel the present
worldwide fears and depression caused by
the "cold war". It would hasten the next and
most decisive action a banning of the pro¬
duction and use of nuclear weapons, the des¬
truction of all existing stocks of such weapons,
general disarmament, and the renunciation of
war as a means of settling international
disputes.
Daniel Bovet (Italy)
Nobel Prize for Physiology and
Medicine, 1957
WE must see to it that university
teaching is not impoverished; that
humanistic teaching is not impover¬
ished. We must see to it that, where science is
concerned, authority is not transferred from
the university to politics. We must do every¬
thing to avoid the militarization of our en¬
deavours and our culture.
The question of the degree of responsibility
of the scientist, and particularly the physicist,
for all our weapons, all our wars, has some¬
times been raised. Let me take up his de-
fen' a task which is easier for me as I am
not a physicist.
Science is innocent of the crimes of which it
is accused. The only guilty party is society a
society insufficiently permeated with the sci¬
entific spirit.
l--> 0~rv\*_4«. O v¿«-*
-Af ^fy / ¿W^ S^t Oc*¿*~*^*J
February 1959
37
