Maimonides,
a guide for the perplexed
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
In December 1985 Unesco organizedat its Paris Headquarters an international symposium to mark the 850th anniversary
ofthe birth in Córdoba ofthe great Jewish thinker Moses ben Mayrnun (Maimonides) . We publish below salientpassages
from an address given on this occasion by Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, Director-General of Unesco. At another
symposium held at Unesco Headquarters last December, the life and work ofthe Islamicphilosopher al-Ghazäli (Algacel)
were also commemorated. Extracts from the address given by Mr. M'Bow during the al-Ghazäli symposium will be
published in the November issue of the Unesco Courier.
MAIMONIDES was at one and the
same time one of the greatest
exponents of Jewish law, one of
the authorities of medieval philosophy of
Greek inspiration and one of the main con¬
tributors to the extraordinary blossoming of
philosophic and scientific thinking which
occurred in the Arab world in the eleventh
and twelfth centuries.
The Maimonides of The Guide of the Per¬
plexed is a thinker at the height of his
powers who brings together into a meaning¬
ful whole Arab science, Greek philosophy
and Jewish theology. In a letter to Samuel
ibn Tibbon, who in France was embarking
on the Hebrew translation of his work,
Maimonides wrote as follows:
"Take good care to study the works of
Aristotle only with the help of his com¬
mentators Alexander of Aphrodisias,
Themistus or Averroës. The writings of
Aristotle's master, Plato, are parables and
difficult to understand, and there is no need
for recourse to them, as Aristotle's work is
sufficient; nor, is it necessary to concern
oneself with works written by his pre¬
decessors, for his intellect represents the
acme of the human intellect, with the excep¬
tion of those who have received divine
inspiration. ... As for logic, it is necessary to
study only the works of Al-Färäbl. All his
writings are excellent. ... as are those of Ibn
Bäjja."
It would be a mistake, however, to see in
the approach adopted by Maimonides an
exclusively philosophical orientation. He
considered philosophy, including, be it
said, the science of his time, as an essential
preliminary to defining the ideal society and
to pondering such fundamental questions
as: Where do I come from? Where am I
going? What meaning can be attributed to
the order of the world? What can be known
about its creation?
In Maimonides' view the elucidation of-
these questions should be the goal of all
intellectual striving. In his own words: "...
that perfection in which man can truly take
pride lies in his having acquired, in a degree
commensurate with his capacity, knowl¬
edge of God."
Maimonides was in fact addressing the
undecided, the "perplexed" throughout the
ages who are already virtuous in their
religion and conduct, who are already con¬
versant with the philosophical sciences-and
who are already inclined to exercise human
reason and to apply it as widely as possible
but who are nevertheless troubled in their
minds, for they are unable to reconcile the
JQK
<
©

findings of science and philosophy with the
literal meaning of the Scriptures. The per¬
plexed are, in sum, those who know that
discursive reason cannot fully account for
the mysteries of human existence and who,
at the same time, do not intend to forgo the
inexhaustible resources of reason.
Logic and mathematics are tools that help
the human mind to exercise its faculty of
demonstration. But can demonstrative dis¬
course exhaust all our questions? Clearly
not, in Maimonides' view. He did not claim,
any more than did his contemporary Ibn
Rushd, that faith in reason exhausts the
reasons for faith, even though some theo¬
logians criticized both men for having
unduly magnified the power of reason.
Concerning the limits of demonstrative
science and, concomitantly, the meaning to
be assigned to the interpretation of the
Scriptures, one example among others
throws light on the approach adopted by
Maimonides. Aristotle is known to have
distinguished the world of living, corrupt¬
ible beings the "sublunar world" from
the world of the heavenly spheres, actu¬
ated, so he felt, by a necessary being from
Statues commemorate Maimonides and
Averroës in their native city of Córdoba.
Far left, bronze statue of Maimonides by
Amadeo Ruiz Olmos stands on Plaza
Tiberiades in the old Jewish quarter of the
city. Left, white marble statue of Averroës
near the city walls and the Alcázar gar¬
dens.
Below, map showing the extent of Islamic
domination in the Mediterranean basin
around the middle of the 11th century.
Also shown are cities connected with the
lives of Maimonides and Averroës.
time immemorial. Down the centuries,
many theologians of the three revealed
religions have set in opposition to this con¬
ception that of the creation of the entire
world by a free act of divine will. They
defied the philosophers to account for the
doubts concealed by Aristotle's system.
Al-Ghazäll's famous critique of the "phil¬
osophers" is an example of this attitude.
What does Maimonides say? "All that
Aristotle has said regarding that which
exists beneath the sphere of the moon all
the way down to the centre of the earth is
undoubtedly true and no one can claim
otherwise, save him who has not under¬
stood. ... However, concerning that which
lies above the sphere of the moon, what
Aristotle has to say seems little more
than conjecture."
As regards the limits of Aristotelian sci¬
ence i.e., in his time, science tout court
Maimonides adds: "As for all that is in the
heavens, man knows nothing except this
small portion of mathematics. ... I would
say, borrowing from poetry: 'the heavens
belong to the Lord; but He has given the
earth to the sons of Adam. ..'. As for what is
beneath the heavens, he has given man the
ability to know it, for it is Man's world and
his abode, where he has been placed and of
which he forms a part...".
Maimonides does not, however, dismiss
out of hand a possible science or knowledge
of the heavens. He repeats that he is per¬
fectly willing to hear a demonstration on
this subject, if any such exists. In the mean¬
time, it is best to adopt an attitude which he
describes as follows: "... To weary men's
minds with what they cannot grasp, not
even possessing the wherewithal to do so,
would go against common sense and be a
kind of madness. Let us confine ourselves to
what is within our power; let us leave that
which cannot be grasped by reason to him
who has been visited by divine inspira¬
tion...".
He therefore introduces certain qualifica¬
tions into his interpretation of the Scrip¬
tures. When science has established a truth,
there is nothing to be gained by setting it in
opposition to the literal meaning of God's
word; preference should be given to the
allegorical meaning, the ta'wil of the Mus¬
lim theologians. However, the wisdom then
required is even greater than that of the
scientists although it should include it.
Of these men, who would need to be at
one and the same time scientists, lawgivers
and defenders of a religion both demanding
and enlightened, Maimonides draws a
poetic portrait at the end of his "Guide":
"Those who have understood the demon¬
stration of all that is demonstrable; who
have achieved certainty in metaphysical
matters, wherever this is possible; or who
have approached certainty, there where it
can only be approached; they are the ones
who 'have attained the innermost abode
where dwells the Lord'...".
Does not this description apply to Mai¬
monides himself, just as much as to the most
brilliant minds of the great epoch that was
his? And is it not because he attained such
heights that he was able to clarify the think¬
ing and guide the faith of so many who came
after him from the researchers of Islam, to
the commentators of the Mishna, from theo¬
logians of Christianity such as St. Thomas
Aquinas and Meister Eckhart to such mod¬
ern philosophers as Leibniz and Spinoza?
