'There is no peace because there is no justice'
Desmond Mpilo Tutu, Anglican Bishop
of Johannesburg since 1985, was
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1984
for his role in the opposition to apar¬
theid. As General Secretary of the
South African Council of Churches,
Bishop Tutu is a leading spokesman for
the rights of black South Africans. He
has always emphasized non-violent
means of protest. Below is an extract
from his Nobel Lecture on the occasion
of the Prize-giving ceremony held in
Oslo on 11 December 1984.
... We see before us a land bereft of much
justice, and therefore without peace and
security. Unrest is endemic, and will remain
an unchanging feature of the South African
scene until apartheid, the root cause of it
all, is finally dismantled. ... There is no
peace in Southern Africa. There is no peace
because there is no justice. There can be no
real peace and security until there be first
justice enjoyed by all the inhabitants of that
beautiful land.
I have spoken extensively about South
Africa, first because it is the land I know
best, but because it is also a microcosm of
the world and an example of what is to be
found in other lands in differing degree
when there is injustice, invariably peace
becomes a casualty.
Because there is global insecurity, na¬
tions are engaged in a mad arms race,
spending billions of dollars wastefully on
instruments of destruction, when millions
are starving. ... We have the capacity to
feed ourselves several times over, but we
are daily haunted by the spectacle of the
gaunt dregs of humanity shuffling along in
endless queues, with bowls to collect what
the charity of the world has provided, too
little too late. When will we learn, when will
the people of the world get up and say.
Enough is enough? ... When will we learn
that an escalated arms race merely escalates
global insecurity? We are now much closer
to a nuclear holocaust than when our tech¬
nology and our spending were less.
Let us work to be peacemakers. If we
want peace, let us work for justice. Let us
beat our swords into ploughshares.
Text ©The Nobel Foundation, 1985
11
