Miniature anthology of works by
Al-Biruni
Selections from works written a thousand years ago
Intelligence and reasoning
Some believe that science is of recent ori¬
gin, others that it is as old as the world. The
former affirm that its techniques were
taught by "initiation" and go so far as to
maintain that every technique was revealed
and implanted by a particular prophet. But
there are others who think that man discov¬
ers techniques with the help of intelligence
and that it is reasoning which enables the
mind to acquire understanding.
When one discovers, by reasoning, a law
or principle, one must proceed from the
general to the particular. At the same time,
experiment and reflection allow us to com¬
pare one thing with another and so obtain
knowledge in detail.
Time is limitless and successive genera¬
tions traverse only stages. Each passes on its
heritage to the next, which develops and
enriches it.
Bibliography of the Works of al-Razi
Smart scholars
Once a sage was asked why scholars always
flock to the doors of the rich, whilst the rich
are not inclined to call at the doors of
scholars. "The scholars," he answered, "are
well aware of the use of money, but the rich
are ignorant of the nobility of science."
India
Why the Earth is round
As concerns the curvature of the Earth in
the directions between longitude and lati¬
tude, it may be ascertained by means of the
longest days in the towns we have men¬
tioned. Let us consider, for instance, the
town of Bulgar, in the far north, and the
town of Aden, lying far to the south of it. In
and around Aden, the length of the longest
day is little more than twelve hours, whilst
in Bulgar it is little less than seventeen
hours. There is a difference of two hours
between the hours of sunrise and sunset in
those two towns. Consequently, at the time
of sunrise over Aden, the Sun has already
risen to a height of two hours' travel in the
sky over Bulgar.
This being the case, we may assert that a
line traced on the Earth in the direction of
latitude, that is to say a meridian, must of
necessity be either straight, or a concave or
convex curve.
The Mas'udic Canon on Astronomy
Astronomer, mathematician, physicist,
geographer, historian, linguist, ethnolo¬
gist, pharmacologist as well as poet,
novelist, philosopher, and humanist,
Abu al-Rayhan Mohammed ibn Ahmad
al-Biruni was born just over a thousand
years ago near Kath in what is today
Soviet Uzbekistan. He was one of the
most outstanding scholars of the Isla¬
mic world and many specialists rank
him even higher than Avicenna (Ibn
Sina). An early proponent of fruitful
cultural and scientific exchange be¬
tween the East and the West, al-Biruni
had a spirit of tolerance and open-
mindedness rare for his time. Above,
portrait of al-Biruni executed by Iranian
artist Azarguin to mark the thousandth
anniversary of the great thinker's birth.
'Speak the truth'
That man only is praiseworthy who shrinks
from a lie and always adheres to the truth,
enjoying credit even among liars, not to
mention others.
It has been said in the Qur'an, "Speak the
truth, even if it were against yourselves"
(Sura 4, 134); and the Messiah expresses
himself in the Gospel to this effect: "Do not
mind the fury of kings in speaking the truth
before them. They only possess your body,
but they have no power over your soul." In
these words the Messiah orders us to exer¬
cise moral courage.
India
On Hindu religions
I have written this book on the doctrines of
the Hindus, never making any unfounded
imputations against those, our religious
antagonists, and at the same time not con¬
sidering it inconsistent with my duties as a
Muslim to quote their own words at full
length when I thought they would contri¬
bute to elucidate a subject. If the contents
of these quotations happen to be utterly
heathenish, and the followers of the truth,
i.e. the Muslims, find them objectionable,
we can only say that such is the belief of the
Hindus, and that they themselves are best
qualified to defend it.
India
Witchcraft and science
We understand by witchcraft, making by
some kind of delusion a thing appear to the
senses as something different from what it is
in reality. Taken in this sense , it is far spread
among people. Understood, however, as
common people understand it, as the pro¬
ducing of something which is impossible, it
is a thing which does not lie within the limits
of reality. For as that which is impossible
cannot be produced, the whole affair is
nothing but a gross deception. Therefore
witchcraft in this sense has nothing what¬
ever to do with science.
One of the species of witchcraft is
alchemy, though it is generally not called by
this name. But if a man takes a bit of cotton
and makes it appear as a piece of gold, what
would you call this but a piece of witchcraft?
India
June 1974
61
