Is the international
by René-Jean Dupuy
community a myth}
THE concept of "international com¬
munity" is widely used today. But
we live in an age when interna¬
tional law is increasingly flouted and
when the world, thrown off balance by
unequal development, torn apart by vio¬
lence and approaching the end of a cen¬
tury whose problems it has failed to solve,
is now preparing to plunge chaotically
into the next. In these circumstances it
seems difficult to understand how a no¬
tion so cruelly belied by history can have
met with so much success.
Since the Second World War, in view
of the great disparities between peoples
in a world where States are increasingly
numerous and where force continues to
reign supreme, this concept has been the
subject of critical examination, as a study
of the different doctrines regarding it will
show.
The schools of thought that we call
"harmonist" have a common feature:
they acknowledge, expressed in varying
forms, the existence of an international
community. "Strategist" doctrines, on
the other hand, emphasize the essentially
conflictual character of the international
system and find the concept of interna¬
tional community unacceptable.
An error common to writers who sub¬
scribe to both schools is that they seek to
impose an all-embracing legal frame¬
work, whereas each theory is capable of
explaining only certain features of the
phenomena in question.
Thus, the harmonists are right to stress
the broad areas of co-operation among
nations, but they are wrong to disregard
the permanence of conflict; the strat¬
egists are right to emphasize antagonism
and struggle, but it is unfortunate that
this conflictual aspect occupies their
whole field of vision.
In fact, both sides make the same mis¬
take. They have an equally false concep¬
tion of the international community,
since they can imagine it only as a whole
whose parts are reconciled. The harmon¬
ists anticipate a fraternal community
which, perhaps, will never exist. The
strategists, on the other hand, mistakenly
believe that community presupposes ab¬
sence of conflict; it does not occur to
them that conflict and community are not
incompatible.
And yet the two go together. It may
even be said that unity and conflict are
the two poles of a tragedy which is all the
more overwhelming in that it is part of
our immediate experience. A couple is a
source of conflicts; so is a neigh¬
bourhood, a province or an association;
The First International Poster Salon was
held at the Grand Palais, Paris, in July
1986. It was organized by the International
Association ofArt/Unesco, the Jury of the
French Grand Prix of the Poster and the
NationalAcademy ofStreetArts ofFrance.
The exhibition comprised 600 posters
from 40 countries, from which the
thousands of visitors voted for those they
thought were the best. Firstprize went to a
poster entitled Peace by the U.S. artist
McRay Magleby (left). Reproduced on the
followingpages are otherposters from the
exhibition.
Right, Hiroshima Appeals 1983, by the
Japanese graphic designer Yusaku Kame-
kura, which won second prize in the First
International Poster Salon.
and a nation is an arena for conflicts of
many kinds. How, then, can the interna¬
tional community, if it is to exist, be
conflict-free? Not only can community
and conflict coexist, but it may be argued
that one implies the other. We must
therefore reintroduce the permanence of
interdependence and antagonism into
our analysis. Our method can only be
dialectical.
Let there be no misunderstanding,
however. Our purpose is to study the
opposing and antagonistic forces at work
in the international fabric, without con¬
sidering the possible or desirable out¬
come of those contradictory trends.
There are two ways of using dialectical
reasoning: firstly the finalist dialectic of
Hegel and Marx, which places the thesis
and the antithesis in opposition to pro¬
duce the synthesis. The synthesis carries
with it the promise of progress: this is a
comforting, prophetic form of dialectic,
heralding the dawn of a brighter
tomorrow.
With all due respect to those who pro¬
fess such a dialectic, we do not consider it
a useful exercise to anticipate the future.
It is conceivable that the contradictions of
the modern world are leading humanity
to a higher level of greater reason and
justice, but it is also possible that we are
now teaching the international law of the
days of the apocalypse. For this reason
we shall keep to what I shall term "open-
ended" dialectic.
This dialectic does not yield a syn-

HIROSHIMA APPEALS
1983
4
U
\ï
w.
t*
M -*>
w
%
\
s
m
%,
I L
<: m

thesis: it remains open-ended because it
leaves each person free to produce a
synthesis if impelled by a moral or scien¬
tific need to do so. Our purpose, mean¬
while, is to study the antagonisms for
their own sake. We accordingly reject
any kind of system, and use dialectic only
as a method, a means of grasping and
understanding present reality and seek¬
ing diversity in all its manifestations. In
short, when we use this method we are
continually challenging systems and re¬
newing our approach to problems.
Dialectic does not necessarily lead
either to salvation or to despair. It does
not claim that humanity will succeed in
achieving inner reconciliation, nor does it
assert that perdition is at the end of the
road; rather, it concurs with the structur¬
alist approach of those who do not be¬
lieve that the line ofprogress runs straight
ahead without any setbacks or U-turns.
We are with those who see the path of
progress as winding through a landscape
of ruins, with fresh obstacles arising all
the time. Factors of progress and factors
of recession cruelly coexist. Whenever
we learn that a new State has ratified a
United Nations' covenant on human
rights, the newspapers tell us that simul¬
taneously, elsewhere, those same rights
have been atrociously violated.
We learn that, in a particular region or
country, a major effort towards develop¬
ment has been accomplished, and that
the people of that country are beginning
to glimpse the possibility of economic and
social liberation. Meanwhile it is revealed
that elsewhere drought, famine and
epidemics are laying waste the region and
destroying the peoples who live there. All
progress is accompanied by a parallel re¬
gress, and when we focus our attention on
the former, we must not close our eyes to
the latter.
If we examine the aspects of law which
constitute evidence for or against the ex-
"While the developing countries are
asserting their sovereignty and their
identity in a great movement of political
individualism, they are at the same time
appealing to the international community,
in the absence of which the rich countries
could shrug off any positive obligations
towards them." This triptych of posters
(right) exhibited at the International Poster
Salon is the work of a Swedish artist.
istence of the international community,
what does our method reveal? Two series
of observations can be made, the first
concerning the structure of the collective
grouping of nations, and the second con¬
cerning the situations created for States
and peoples in the international system
today.
From the structural point of view, we
find the well-known opposition between
infrastructure and superstructure. Nowa¬
days, it is hardly necessary to be a Marxist
to acknowledge the fact that law belongs
to superstructure, and that the antagon¬
isms which develop at the economic and
social levels are concerned with the
foundations on which law is built. Super¬
structures also act on one another,
however; this is true of political ideas and
cultural phenomena whose influence on
law cannot be ignored. Thus internation¬
al organizations, by their sheer number
and by virtue of the role that they assume,
have introduced a new set of factors into
the system which impinge on the system
of relations between States.
Several strategist writers concentrate
their attention on the law of relations
between States. They see the internation¬
al organization as an entity that is both
secondary and dangerous. Secondary be¬
cause it has no sovereignty, yet danger¬
ous, not so much because it aspires to
dominate its Member States, but because
it is manipulated by great powers.
This view is no longer such a straight¬
forward reflection of reality; it cannot be
claimed that United Nations agencies are
a threat to the sovereignty of States which
have acquired or recovered their
sovereignty in recent decades with UN
support. That fear, which springs from
formal theory, may not have been
groundless in the early days of the United
Nations, when the United States auto¬
matically had a majority in the General
Assembly; but for many years now the
developing countries have been finding
strength in numbers in that forum.
For example, the Group of 77 (which
actually has 121 members) has taken on
the role of interpellant in the Assembly;
its members take the wealthy countries to
task and denounce the inadequacy of
their efforts to establish a new economic
order. They are thus able to ensure that
the General Assembly adopts resolutions
proclaiming principles in which they ex¬
press their desires, their aspirations and
their view of the truth. Admittedly, their
authority in the Organization suffers
from some limitations, but they have
given a new sense of direction and ideolo¬
gical vigour to the United Nations.
In consequence, the institutional
sphere impinges strongly on the sphere of
relations, with the developing countries
striving to extend to the latter the influ¬
ence they have gained in the former.
Over and above these structural
strategies a crucial debate is taking place
on the relations between power and
justice.
For the countries of the Third World
^

the United Nations is an incomparable
means of pressing their case vis-à-vis the
wealthy. For Nietzsche, the indispens¬
able weapon of the weak lies in exploiting
the guilty conscience of the strong. In the
General Assembly the votes of the de¬
veloping countries ensure the adoption
year in year out of the same resolutions,
whose object is to make an impact on
consciences. And so it would be simplistic
to present the UN as a reactionary entity
today when on the contrary it offers the
poor nations a platform from which to
proclaim their destitution.
Power is the expression of a force aspir¬
ing to domination. In the nineteenth cen¬
tury the word "powers" was used to de¬
signate the strongest States which made
up the European concert and which,
when they reached agreement among
themselves, dictated their common will
to the other States. Power is always the
characteristic of the large, strong States,
but a coalition of weak, developing States
can, in some circumstances, constitute a
power to be reckoned with.
The rule of law always emanates from a
dominant social force. According to posi¬
tivist thinking, a rule emanates from com¬
petent bodies and is adopted through reg¬
ular channels. But this does not make it
necessarily equitable. Admittedly, law is
supposed to coincide with justice, but
that coincidence is often open to dispute
and is, in fact, disputed.
Positivism has thus found itself in
league with imperialism, colonialism and
I I
von Sergei Eisenstein
E
©
©i
	;
^^
iedaV^ore
eVes^see-

various forms of domination, in the ab¬
sence of any legal rules that might have
proscribed them. There can be no deny¬
ing the fact that the overwhelming
triumph of positivism is the triumph of
Creon, with Antigone condemned to
silence.
At present, in the international con¬
text, a number of rules are being re¬
viewed at the prompting of certain coun¬
tries. Classical law is still largely con¬
cerned with form and process, but to an
increasing extent it is becoming regula¬
tory, and is called upon to prescribe rules
for the conduct of States. Inherent in this
development, which the new political
forces are striving to impose on the
powerful States, and for which they have
in many cases already succeeded in win¬
ning acceptance or tolerance, are new
conceptions of international relations.
These new conceptions tend to imply
recognition of the existence of an interna¬
tional community which postulates
obligations for the well-endowed. The
nature of such a community is twofold:
internationalists often refer to a historical
community resulting from real, material
bonds which draw peoples closer
together, and especially from advances in
communications.
But we would put forward another ver¬
sion, a mythical and prophetic interpreta¬
tion which enables the poor to denounce
the power of the rich and the injustice of
the law whose rules they have imposed.
The international community then tends
to take on the dynamic force of a political
myth, in the sense intended by the French
social philosopher Georges Sorel in
other words, an idée force capable of
mobilizing the reserves of strength avail¬
able to fight for change.
The major upheaval occurring today
on the international scene is a result of
the fact that technological development is
making nations interdependent. That
objective solidarity which, on the one
hand, brings peoples closer together on
the material plane, also, on the other,
renders the contradictions between them
more acute. Such solidarity did not exist
in the classical international grouping,
when the nations had little need to be
concerned with what was happening in
distant parts and paid attention only to
their immediate neighbours.
We find, then, that the community
emerging today is not the outcome of
harmonist phenomena arising from new¬
ly discovered bonds of brotherhood, still
less from the settlement of differences.
On the contrary, its contradictory path is
mapped out by forces of repulsion, com¬
petition, refusal and demand, and yet
simultaneously by the influence of soli¬
darity, reciprocal needs and mutual re¬
sponsibilities. Moreover, it is because
they are backed by the existence of a
certain community that the least pri¬
vileged peoples feel that they can chal¬
lenge the wealthier nations and demand
their assistance and support not as a
charitable hand-out, but as a duty and an
obligation.
So, while the developing countries are
asserting their sovereignty and their
identity in a great movement of political
individualism, they are at the same time
appealing to the international com
munity, in the absence of which the rich
countries could shrug off any positive
obligations towards them. The driving
force of history in the making is at the
heart of this tension between individual¬
ity and solidarity. This means that the
international community is not a harmon¬
ist concept, based on a universal con¬
sensus, but a reality of conflict, of perma¬
nent tension between power and justice.
The myth of community, encompassing
both, should not be unfamiliar to legal
experts. The French writer Paul Valéry
foresaw this with admirable clarity: "It
may be said that the world of society, the
world of law and the world of politics are
essentially mythical worlds whose laws . . .
owe to us their existence, their strength
and their patterns of impulsion and
constraint."
RENE-JEAN DUPUY, of France, has been pro¬
fessor of international law at the Collège de
France since 1979. Notable among hispublished
works is Communauté internationale et dispa¬
rités de développement (1981; "International
Community and Disparities in Development").
He has edited and contributed to a number of
collective works, including Le règlement des dif¬
férends sur les nouvelles ressources naturelles
(1983; "The Settling ofDifferences on New Natu¬
ral Resources") and'L'avenir du droit internation¬
al dans un monde multiculturel (1984; "The Fu¬
ture of International Law in a Multicultural
World"). The above article has been extracted
from La communauté internationale entre le
mythe et l'histoire (1986; "The International
Community between Myth and History"), co-
publishedby Unesco and Económica publishers,
Paris.
8
"The major upheaval occurring today on
the international scene is a result of the
fact that technological development is
making nations interdependent. That
objective solidarity which, on the one
hand, brings peoples closer together on
the material plane, also, on the other, ren¬
ders the contradictions between them
more acute." Left, a Polish poster.
