Does wealth equal health?
by Denis-Clair Lambert

An estimated 60 per cent of the world's women
have no adequate medical assistance, either
during pregnancy or in childbirth. Above, tradi¬
tional birth attendants being trained in Ecuador.
Even short training courses can bring a sharp
drop in perinatal mortality.
SINCE the Second World War, pro¬
duction in the developing world has
grown at a much faster pace than in
countries which were industrialized long
ago. With an average growth rate of 5 per
cent per annum during the past thirty years,
the developing countries have quadrupled
their output and increased their share of
world production. Over the same period,
they have experienced galloping population
growth, without confirming the Malthusian
hypothesis according to which a growing
population will inevitably get poorer.
The countries whose population has
increased most rapidly (such as Brazil or
Mexico, where it has doubled in twenty-five
years) have achieved much faster economic
growth than those, such as India or Argen¬
tina, where demographic growth has been
slower. Per capita income has risen by 3.5
per cent a year, and is three times higher
than it was in 1960. And although average
incomes have been declining since 1980 in
regions such as the oil-producing Middle
East, Latin America and Africa south of the
Sahara, they are still rising very steeply in
Asia.
The health situation is also on the whole
encouraging, although the progress
observed must be qualified in two respects.
Firstly, the toll taken by wars and violence
remains concealed and does not appear in
the statistics. Secondly, the accuracy of the
figures depends on the size and modernity
of statistical services, and on the objectivity
of the information provided. Extremely
unsystematic registration of deaths can pro¬
duce a false impression of an improvement
in general health. Nevertheless, in the past
three decades, the infant mortality rate has
fallen by 60 per cent it is now half of what
it was in Brazil, one-third in China and one-
tenth in Hong Kong and overall mortality
risk has rarely increased, even in the
poorest countries.
The developing world is by no means
homogeneous. In a survey conducted in
1982 on ninety-nine developing countries,
1 1 the American demographer John Caldwell
£ drew attention to the diversity of conditions
in those countries where a steep decline in
mortality rates has been observed. He sin¬
gled out ten factors which he compared with
mortality indicators in order to find out
whether there was any correlation between
them. Whereas the correlation between per
capita income and infant mortality was not
statistically significant, two other factors
appeared to be crucial: education,
especially of girls, and the prevalence of
family planning. Caldwell concluded that
there are two contrasting groups of coun¬
tries, which he called "superior health
achievers" and "poor health achievers"
respectively. In each group, there are poor
countries and rich countries. What is the
reason for these divergencies?
The most rapid gains in life expectancy-
appear in regions where average food sup¬
plies exceed the minimum norms laid down
by the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO). In the past
two decades, the per capita food supply has
increased. This trend is particularly appar¬
ent in Asia, where the benefits of the Green
Revolution (see the Unesco Courier, March
1987) appeared earlier than in Latin Amer¬
ica. In Central America, the Caribbean and
the Andean countries, precarious food sit¬
uations have been to some extent instru¬
mental in maintaining higher death rates.
However, the most densely populated
countries of the region, such as Brazil and
Mexico, have achieved notable improve¬
ments in life expectancy.
Standards of living in countries where
there has been a rapid improvement in the
health situation are twice as high in Latin
America and Southern Europe and four
times higher in Eastern Asia than they were
twenty years ago. The density of medical
and hospital coverage has greatly increased.
The ten or more semi-industrialized coun¬
tries in these three regions consume far
more pharmaceutical products than the rest
of the developing world. Immunization, the
availability of antibiotics and access to med¬
ical care all make for efficient treatment and
prevention of disease.
Action to reduce the death rate in a popu¬
lation which is in the early stages of a demo¬
graphic revolution must be taken in the first
few years of life. In this demographic situa¬
tion , where on average 45 per cent of deaths
are of children under the age of five, infant
and juvenile mortality can be reduced with¬
out substantial investment. It is here that
densely populated and easily accessible
areas enjoy a considerable advantage.
Poor islands such as Sri Lanka, and
relatively rich ones such as Trinidad, have
succeeded in less than a generation in
achieving the kind of mortality rates found
in European countries. So have cities such
as Hong Kong and Singapore, where the
male death rate is comparable to that of
Sweden. The excessively high death rates
recorded over very extensive areas, in Bra¬
zil or in Mexico, for example, are a result of
imbalances in land-use planning pockets
of poverty in the Brazilian Nordeste, demo¬
graphic vacuums in the interior and in¬
equalities in the density of medical
coverage.
As Caldwell shows, there is a close cor¬
relation between female education and fam¬
ily planning, and a reduction in the infant
mortality rate. Advances in education and
falling death and birth rates are also associ¬
ated with the employment situation. One
out of every two or three adults in the cities
of Latin America and Africa is unem¬
ployed, and it is abundantly clear that
unemployment goes hand in hand with the
disintegration of the family and the pre¬
carious living conditions which make for
high rates of mortality and disease.
Health and preventive care policies
The economic and social systems of coun¬
tries whose health situation has rapidly
improved are so diverse that few analogies
can be drawn. Wealthy Kuwait has
achieved a very rapid decrease in its mor¬
tality rate by deploying substantial medical
resources and providing free health care.
Sri Lanka has won equally impressive
results with a medical coverage density

A "nutrition magician" is a central character in a
new reading primer produced as part of an
experimental project to incorporate nutrition
education into the Jamaican primary school
reading syllabus. Left, cover design of the pri¬
mer, prepared by the International Nutrition
Consultant Service (INCS) in association with
the Jamaican Ministry of Education and with
support from Unesco and the United States
Agency for International Development (USAID).
Lecture on birth control at Ban Sankamphang
(Thailand)
three times less than that of India where,
incidentally, the province of Kerala has
achieved remarkable improvements which
are not commensurate with its standard of
living, health budget or number of doctors.
In Central America, the health indicators of
Costa Rica have puzzled observers for some
time.
The most spectacular results, however,
are those of East Asian countries. The
American economist Harvey Leibenstein
has suggested that these baffling exceptions
could be interpreted by reference to an
"efficiency factor X" resulting from the
spirit of enterprise and initiative shown by
the people who live in these countries.
More recently, another economist, Thomas
Sowell, has looked closely at international
migrations. The speed of assimilation of dis¬
placed Asian communities, for example,
may be due partly to family cohesion,
eagerness to learn and foresight.
It is noteworthy that recourse to social
security or national health services is
relatively low in Eastern Asia. Household
saving rates are high (the average Sin¬
gaporean saves more than the average
Swiss). Hygiene, education and general
precautions help to prevent accidents and
illness. Advice about prevention is effective
only if the family unit functions as a preven¬
tion centre.
"Poor health achievers"
These are countries whose health indicators
are much worse than their economic indica¬
tors. Some oil-producing countries, for
example, have the same health indicators as
African countries ten or twenty times
poorer than themselves. The same situation
arises in Central and South America,
where, in countries which have shown good
medical results for many years, gains in
health have become minimal. Poor health
achievements are related to factors which
are at variance with those mentioned
above.
If we take infant mortality rates greater
than 100 to 150 per thousand in 1985 (and if
we exclude the wealthy oil-producing coun¬
tries), in most cases per capita income has
fallen sharply over the past twenty years. In
Africa, this decline has nearly always been
accompanied by a reduction in food sup¬
plies. These very poor countries usually
have only a veneer of industrialization and
an agriculture based on a single crop which
is incapable of producing a surplus. Their
health systems are inevitably restricted by
the scarcity economy. Lack of foreign cur¬
rency precludes the purchase of the medi¬
cines and equipment needed to prevent and
cure costly diseases.
The "poor health achievers" are coun¬
tries where adult women are practically
excluded from education. Only half as
many women as men are educated in Zaire
and in Mozambique, one-sixth as many in
Afghanistan and Nepal and one-eighteenth
as many in Yemen: this goes some way
towards explaining the difficulty of reduc¬
ing infant mortality rates. It is not surprising
that, in the same countries, very high fer¬
tility rates persist and the birth rate has
scarcely changed.
Insofar as high infant mortality rates and
the prevalence of infectious diseases can be
traced back beyond health systems, poor
achievements on the health front cannot be
dissociated from poor economic achieve¬
ment. All too often, primary health care
networks mask an inefficient bureaucracy,
and the bulk of a country's resources is
absorbed by hospitals to the detriment of
rural dispensaries. And it is impossible to
overlook excessive arms spending, debt ser¬
vicing, shaky economic policies and the mis¬
use of internal and external resources. In an
age of famine and permanent warfare,
authoritarian political and military systems
can hardly be expected to eradicate pov¬
erty, hunger, ignorance and disease.
The most precarious states of health in
traditional agrarian societies are often cou¬
pled with the absence of modern medicine.
There are no medical supplies, doctors or
hospitals. These health care vacuums still
prevail in vast underpopulated areas, nota¬
bly in Africa. However, it is important not
to underestimate the consequences of the
population shift away from the countryside,
which has sent two-thirds of the population
pouring into the towns in the countries
10

around the Mediterranean, in Latin Amer¬
ica and in Eastern Asia. Uprooted families
disintegrate in the shanty towns. The causes
of the unduly high death and disease rates
that the West is discovering in new forms of
urban poverty (see the Unesco Courier,
January 1987) inevitably exist in more acute
form in the developing world. But social
groups living in precarious conditions,
whether or not they receive assistance from
the authorities, are improvident and do not
of their own accord adopt the preventive
behaviour patterns which are the most
effective weapon in the war on alcoholism,
drug abuse and sexually transmitted
diseases.
Some countries, following a long eco¬
nomic decline, are experiencing a gradual
erosion of their former health achieve¬
ments. In Argentina, for example, the den¬
sity of medical coverage today is still twice
that of the Republic of Korea; there are
more hospital beds and life expectancy is
higher. But the infant mortality rate is lower
in the Republic of Korea, and even in Chile
and Costa Rica, than it is in Argentina. And
yet in 1950 the health indicators for Argen¬
tina were better than those for France,
while male life expectancy in Korea was
comparable to that of Bangladesh today.
New causes of mortality
As infectious diseases and infant mortality
take a diminishing toll, gains in life expec¬
tancy must be obtained by overcoming the
risks that threaten adolescents and adults.
The increase in life expectancy and the
change in the age composition of the
population bring new priorities for health
policy.
Falling death rates are due primarily to
the decrease in infectious diseases.
Attempts to tackle the causes of infant and
juvenile mortality produce appreciable
gains in life expectancy for a relatively small
investment. But once infant mortality has
been lowered by health and nutrition edu¬
cation and by the distribution of vaccines
and antibiotics, health action becomes less
efficient. Gains against mortality now have
to be won in a high risk area.
The primary causes of rising death rates
are road accidents and violence. As in the
old European countries and in North Amer¬
ica, accidental death has become the main
contributor to mortality figures for young
people in the developing world. The cost in
human lives of the increase in road traffic in
the cities of developing countries is seldom
appreciated. There are many serious acci¬
dents, and emergency treatment and after¬
care facilities are limited. For a young adult
in Säo Paulo, the probability of dying in a
road accident increased tenfold between
1940 and 1980. The same is true of homi¬
cide. Dependence on alcohol and drugs can
increase these risks.
The second trend in mortality rates is due
to the rise of chronic degenerative diseases.
Today, countries such as Brazil have a small
proportion of elderly people but in the next
generation there will be a rapid increase in
the number of over-sixties. Already, car¬
diovascular diseases and cancer have
become the main causes of mortality. Con-
In co-operation with the World Health Organiza¬
tion (WHO), Unesco encourages the use of the
media in health and nutrition education.
Spacing births reduces death Illiteracy
Nearly two out of every three illiterate people
are women. Yet an educated woman not only
enjoys better health herselfshe has a positive
influence on the health and well-being of her
entire family.
Births intervals in years Number of infant deaths
(before age one)
per 1,000 live births
H
{^-4
> t
\\ 2-3 ¡|\
L L
* 9
\\ ¡h
LJ I
200
145
100
80 Europe Latin Asia
America
Africa World
Source: WHO survey of 6,000 women in a developing country Source: UNICEF News
11

"As In the old European countries and in North
America, accidental death has become the main
contributor to mortality figures for young people
in the developing world. ... There are many
serious accidents, and emergency treatment
and after-care facilities are limited."
sequently, the future increase in life expec¬
tancy will depend on the resources allocated
to treat these costly diseases. When the
human life-span attains and exceeds sev¬
enty years, the survival of cardiac patients,
cancer sufferers, diabetics or kidney
patients cannot be guaranteed without
medicines, specialized services and
qualified doctors.
The crisis in health systems in the West
should be a warning to authorities in other
world regions. The Japanese, for example,
by mobilizing only half the resources
deployed by the North Americans, have
achieved the world's highest life expectancy
and lowest death rate.
Health systems, like political systems,
tend by a process of imitation to reproduce
existing health models. Following the domi¬
nant trend, developing countries have
transposed Soviet, Chinese, North Amer¬
ican or European systems, but these have
seldom proved appropriate to local condi¬
tions. The results are often less encouraging
than they were for the original model.
Recourse to medical solutions is often
premature. It is preferable to do everything
possible to preserve family and community
structures which can provide routine care.
In this way, the very high cost of hospitaliza¬
tion of the mentally ill, children, expectant
mothers, the elderly and invalids can be to
some extent deferred.
Lastly, "hospitalocentrism" is the most
common pitfall for Western systems trans¬
posed to other countries. The cost of a hos¬
pital is always underestimated. It tends to
become the pivot of the system and to suck
in all its resources. Today, public health
budgets are frozen, and resources for prim¬
ary health care networks in the form of
manpower and funds have been reduced.
In conclusion, it seems that an improve¬
ment in general health is within the reach of
the poorest countries, and more par¬
ticularly the semi-industrialized developing
countries. However, these are transitional
improvements. In order to overcome new
causes of morbidity and mortality, these
countries must in future devote more
money to their health systems. As they
often have to cope with a difficult interna¬
tional climate and continue their economic
development efforts at the same time, a
variety of ways of financing health care
seems the best approach. It is noteworthy
that the most spectacular successes in this
respect, in the industrialized countries of
Eastern Asia, are due to a judicious com¬
bination of public expenditure and private
financing.
DENIS-CLAIR LAMBERT, of France, is
professor of political economy at the University
of Lyon III andpresident of the Medical Econom¬
ics Society of Lyon. Among his published works
are 1 9 amériques latines: du déclin au décollage
(1984; "19 Latin Americas: From Decline to
Takeoff") and Lexique d'économie de la santé
(1985; "Dictionary of Health Economies"). This
article has been extracted from an address given
at a symposium on the theme "Health, Medicine
and Development", organized by the Fondation
Liberté Sans Frontières in Paris, February 1987.
Makeshift shower-bath in a crowded city street
in South-East Asia. Attitudes to hygiene have a
direct bearing on health. Studies on living condi¬
tions and health in urban areas have been car¬
ried out as part of Unesco's Programme on Man
and the Biosphere (MAB). A major MAB study on
Hong Kong revealed the importance of such fac¬
tors as cultural background and family structure
in contributing to well-being and good health.
o
s
12
