Reflections on the potato
ACCORDING to the German wri¬
ter Günter Grass, the introduc¬
tion of the potato was a more
important event in the history of the Ger¬
man people than all the martial victories
of King Frederick the Great. Indeed,
Grass considers the potato a crucial fac¬
tor in the development of Europe. It was
the potato, he believes, that made possi¬
ble the industrialization of Europe and
the rise of the proletariat.
We can see what he means. The potato
is a highly nourishing food that is also
very cheap because it can be grown so
quickly and easily. The coming of this
"fast food" liberated the masses of
Europe from age-old hunger. It de¬
veloped a sturdier working class. It re¬
leased more and more people from farm
work and made them available for factory
labour.
The factories in turn led to the develop¬
ment of a strong labouring class that
democratized Europe, and to a science
and technology that made Western cul¬
ture supreme in the modern world.
It can be argued therefore that the
by Nick M. Joaquin
identity of the modern European as a
highly civilized, cultured and progressive
individual can be traced back, partly at
least, to the coming of the potato.
But now let us bring in a counter¬
argument. Let us imagine, say, a Euro¬
pean who is rabidly anti-potato because
the potato is not indigenous to Europe.
As this chauvinist argues, the potato
should never have been allowed to
change Europe because it, the potato, is
so foreign and exotic. By eating the pota¬
to, the European lost something of his
original nature, with the result that Euro¬
pean culture today is a deviation from a
pristine original. The true European is
the European before the introduction of
the potato.
But how can that uncorrupted original
be restored?
Our imaginary European chauvinist
demands the abolition of the potato.
At once, of course, we see the flaw in
his proposal. Abolishing the potato will
not restore European man to his pre-
potato condition. Why not? Because
from the potato have come such develop
ments as industrialization, democratiza¬
tion, modernization, and so forth. And
these developments have so radically
altered European man that he would still
remain what he has become even if he
stopped eating potatoes altogether.
In other words, potatoes are the cul¬
ture and history that cannot be cancelled
in a desire to recover a former innocence.
You may smile at my potato story,
which seems to make the potato like the
forbidden fruit in the Garden of Eden.
But I think that some such story would
illustrate the problem of nationalism to¬
day in my country, the Philippines and
not only in my country but also in most of
Asia, and Third World countries in
general. When Adam and Eve ate of the
apple, they lost innocence, they lost para¬
dise. And I would say that among the
peoples of the Orient, certainly among us
Filipinos, there is a feeling that, by tasting
of Western science and technology, we
lost innocence, we lost a primordial
paradise.
Our feelings towards Western culture
are therefore ambivalent. We are fascin-
14

A family meal on Luzon Island, the Philip¬
pines
ated by it and we are also repelled. We
fear and resist it even as we hanker for it.
And though we crave to progress in the
Western manner, we wonder at the same
time if we should not rather go back
back to the culture we had before we
were "corrupted" by the West.
Not long ago I had dinner with a Filipi¬
no family whom I admire for their
nationalism, although they rather tend to
make a display of it. At this dinner, the
display consisted of a round grey stone
about the size of a baseball. This stone
it was actually a piece of rock salt was
passed around instead of salt because,
said my host, that was how the ancient
Filipinos salted their food. You pressed
the stone on your rice and fish, you
rubbed it against your meat, you soaked
it in your broth, to obtain the desired
saltiness.
I'm afraid they all looked down on me
when I said I'd rather have ordinary table
salt. That piece of rock salt reminded me
of the stones we used in the old days,
when bathing, to scrub our bodies with.
And I was putting no such stone into
anything I was going to eat! Still, I was
charmed by the sentiment behind the dis¬
play, the nationalist nostalgia. What
bothered me were the implications be¬
hind the sentiment.
In effect, my hosts were saying: "See
how truly Filipino we are. Instead of us¬
ing a saltcellar, which is foreign, we use a
salt stone, which is native." The implica¬
tion therefore is that the more we return
to what is native and the more we abolish
what is foreign, the more truly Filipino
we become.
This may be true but what I couldn't
help noticing then was the inconsistency.
Why pick ön the poor saltcellar? On the
table were fork and spoon, which are not
native; and beef and cabbage, which are
also not originally Filipino, and I knew
that the food had been prepared using the
sauté method, which is foreign, and
cooked in a saucepan or kettle, both also
foreign. To retain these, while abolishing
the saltcellar, is tantamount to saying that
the saltcellar is a bigger hindrance to
becoming truly Filipino than cabbages
and kettles.
Of course I know what question was
supposedly being answered at that dinner
table with the abolition of the saltcellar:
the question of identity.
Identity, I would say, is like the river in
philosophy. You remember the saying:
"You can never step into the same river
Needy children eating potatoes. Detail
from "St. Diego of Alcalá and the Poor" by
the Spanish painter Bartolomé Esteban
Murillo (1618-1682).
twice." The river has changed even as you
step into it. Nevertheless, the Sumida
River remains the Sumida River, though
from one moment to the next it is no
longer the same river.
This is the dynamic view of identity.
I'm afraid that we in the Orient or
anyway we Filipinos have a different
idea of identity, different because we re¬
gard identity as static: something given
once and for all, something to which
things happen but is itself never a hap¬
pening, never becoming. We ourselves
are, or were, a fixed original identity to
which certain things alien cultures,
alien histories have been added, layer
upon layer. Therefore, if such cultures
and histories are addition, identity is sub¬
traction. All we have to do is to remove
all those superimposed layers and we
shall end up with the true basic Filipino
identity.
That is the static view of identity.
But culture is not simple addition. Cul¬
ture is not a stew to which you can add
anything and it will still remain a stew.
Instead, culture is like those laboratory
experiments in physics where the mo¬
ment you add a new ingredient the orig¬
inal mixture becomes completely
transformed into something different.
When history added the saltcellar, the
fork and spoon, beef and cabbage to our
culture, the identity of the Filipino was so
completely transformed that there can be
no going back to a pristine original even if
we abolished the saltcellar, the fork and
spoon, and so on. Culture and history are
the flowing waters that make it impossi¬
ble to step into the same river of identity
twice.
NICK M. JOAQUIN is a Philippine novelist, jour¬
nalist and playwright. Among his published
works are The Woman who had Two Navels
(novel), Tropical Gothic (short stories) and a
volume of poetry, El Camino Real and Other
Rimes.
A cereal chronology
BC
10000 Jordan: einkorn and emmer wheat
and two-rowed barley
8000 France: wild grasses
7500 Japan: buckwheat, barley and
various wild cereals
6500 Romania: various grasses
6000 Crete: emmer wheat
Mexico: maize
Central Europe and Western
Hungary: large-seeded grasses
Mauritania: wild millet
Balkans: wild millet, einkorn and
emmer wheat
5000 Japan: millet
Southern Europe: einkorn wheat
Spain: tour varieties of wheat and
two of barley
4500 Northern China: millet then sorghum
4000 Denmark: varieties of small cereal
Egypt: wheat
Siberia: millet
Southern China: rice
3000 India: millet, rice
Babylonia: barley, millet, sesame,
emmer wheat
Africa: millet (from east to west)
Ethiopia: "great millet", barley and
wheat
2000 Central Europe: rye
Mauritania: cultivated millet
500 Persia: wheat
400 Italy/Greece: soft wheat then hard
wheat
300 Northern China: soft spring wheat
(from west to east)
Japan: rice
AD
100 Sudan: barley, sorghum
Europe: rye (from east to west) and
cultivated oats
Sahel-Chad: sorghum
1400 Italy: rice
1520 America: wheat
Europe: maize
1640 France: rice
c. 1800 Australia: wheat
Source: Histoire naturelle et morale de la nourriture by
Maguelonne Toussaint-Samat, Bordas, Paris, 1987.
15
