Underwater
archaeology,
a new scientific
discipline with a wide
popular following
Plunging into
THE origins of underwater archaeolo¬
gy can be traced back to the time,
about a century ago, when a handful
of intrepid archaeologists began to use hel¬
met diving methods or employ sponge di¬
vers to look at submerged ruins and wrecks.
These methods were used on perhaps a
dozen sites in all until the end of the Second
World War, when the aqualung, a self-
contained underwater breathing device in¬
vented by the French explorer Jacques-
Yves Cousteau and the engineer Emile
Gagnan, made it possible for scientists and
explorers to work cheaply and easily in
waters up to 50 metres deep.
Hundreds of books and magazine articles
have now been written about underwater
archaeology. In particular, in the last thirty
years a number of underwater excavations
have received massive publicity (see page
12). These finds, surveys and excavations
have been vitally important, and have
furthered the art and discipline of underwa¬
ter surveying, stratigraphy, and the inter¬
pretation of ancient seafaring. Such major
wreck excavations which have produced
well-preserved artefacts form the high
points of underwater archaeology.
However, to present another review of
the high points of the last thirty years might
suggest that underwater archaeology has
become intellectually and spiritually dead,
living off the grandeur of its achievements.
The truth is that underwater archaeology
has been spreading like wildfire. There are
now many thousands of underwater sites

the past by Nicholas Flemming and Mark Redknap
known throughout the world, ranging in
age from 45,000 years to a few decades,
from Stone Age quarry sites in Tasmania to
American War of Independence gunboats;
from the floor of the Mediterranean to
Alpine lakes and sinkholes in Mexico and
Florida. Hundreds of professional
archaeologists spend at least part of their
time supervising underwater sites, whilst
thousands of amateur diving archaeologists
assist the professionals in many dozens of
countries.
Many developing countries now support
scientific work on underwater archaeologic¬
al sites ranging from the seventeenth-cen¬
tury Portuguese vessel off Mombasa
(Kenya), and trade centres dating from the
ninth to the twelfth century off Malaysia, to
pre-European craft off Korea and
Thailand, and early ports and wrecks off the
southeast coast of Sri Lanka (see page 37).
This increasing awareness of the cultural
importance of archaeological sites in the
maritime zone by governments and institu¬
tions is extremely encouraging.
The vast number of sites which are now
known provide professional archaeologists
with vital new opportunities. Whilst the
sites are not all of equal value, and some are
mundane, the accumulation of data means
that experts can search for correlations,
evolution and trends through time, spatial
patterns and differences, links and causes.
Instead of treating artefacts only as objects
of beauty or technical achievement, the
archaeologist can start to interpret them as
parts of culture, trade, economics, politics,
and patterns of living. Obviously the
archaeologists working on the earlier ex¬
cavations used comparisons with land sites
to make such tentative deductions, but the
sheer accumulation of information now
means that much more sophisticated analy¬
sis can be attempted on the basis of com¬
parison between underwater sites.
These vast assemblages of similar under¬
water sites of similar ages mean that we can
start to understand how peoples and cul¬
tures related to the sea or lakes in each
millennium and century. That is a grand
objective. As the number and variety of
sites has increased, the age barrier has been
pushed further back in time.
In the 1950s the earliest known shipwreck
was the Gelidonya Bronze Age ship at 1200
BC (some others were earlier than about
200 BC), and the earliest known harbours
about 600 BC. The age of ship finds has only
been pushed a little way back, with the
discovery in 1982 of the fourteenth-century
BC ship near Kas off the coast of southern
Turkey (see page 12), but the number of
known ships older than 2,200 years has
increased significantly, filling the gaps.
The age of known harbours and coastal
occupation sites has been extended drama¬
tically, first with Bronze Age harbours
(1500 BC) found in the late 1960s and early
1970s in Greece and Israel; then with
Neolithic and Mesolithic settlements
(5,000-10,000 years old) found in the Baltic,
and off the coasts of Greece, Turkey, Israel
and the United States; and most recently
Palaeolithic artefacts, found in the North
Sea, and off the coast of France, Italy and
Greece, ranging in age from 10,000 to
45,000 years. We are now in a position to
consider studying the whole sweep of the
evolution of human culture in its relation to
the sea over the last 40,000 years.
During the last Ice Age, from approx¬
imately 120,000 to 5,000 years ago, the sea
level was lowered as much as 150 metres, as
so much water was locked up in the form of
ice in the great ice caps on the continents.
As a result, most of the continental shelves
of the world were dry, and Palaeolithic
tribes could walk from Siberia to Alaska,
from continental Europe to Britain, from
the Soviet Union to Japan, and most of the
way from Asia to Australia. Today under¬
water archaeology is contributing to
our knowledge about these prehistoric
migrations.
f
m»

High standards of stratigraphie recording
are now considered routine underwater. In
the 1950s, Professor George Bass
pioneered the techniques which enabled di¬
vers to maintain the same standards of re¬
cording as would be expected on land, pro¬
ducing accurate descriptions of deposits and
using grids to produce precise site plans.
Over the decades, improvements in electro¬
nic positioning, sonar imaging, and the use
of underwater survey equipment and tape-
recorders for fast on-site data collection,
have improved the procedures, and made
work faster. But the objective is always the
same: to record the three-dimensional
structure of a deposit, whether a wreck or
an occupation site, so that the sequence of
accumulation of artefacts and natural debris
can be understood. This time-sequenced
accumulation can then be unscrambled in
reverse, so as to get as close as possible to
the conditions and mode of use of the arte¬
facts at the moment before deposition.
The stories presented on the following
pages are a small selection of the many
hundreds of underwater archaeological re¬
search projects at present underway in
many countries. They range from large ex¬
cavations centred on major museums to the
excavations of modest wrecks by amateurs.
They are typical of projects in the 1980s.
Above all, they show a healthy level of
energy, dedication to detail, and stimulat¬
ing response to new ideas.
Where does underwater archaeology go
from here? Firstly, we should perhaps be
cautious and cast doubt on the theory that
underwater archaeology has reached
maturity. Conflicts between amateurs and
professionals, between souvenir hunters
and archaeologists, between treasure-sal¬
vors and those concerned with presenting
and preserving the past for the benefit of
present and future generations still create
continuous problems. Nor have legislation
and attitudes really evolved to contain the
conflict. A great deal of educational effort,
in the broadest sense, is needed to bring
order.
The World Confederation of Underwa¬
ter Activities (CMAS) is currently carrying
out a survey of the underwater cultural
heritage in an attempt to meet the need for
an overall assessment of the present state of
underwater archaeology and for greater ex¬
change of this information (see box). Ques¬
tionnaires on both marine cultural re¬
sources and inland underwater sites have
been sent out by CMAS to 151 countries.
Information on national inventories de¬
scribing the numbers of underwater and
marine artefacts in various countries, have
been received from Europe, Africa, Asia
and the entire Mediterranean littoral. The
survey aims to produce a consultative docu¬
ment including specific recommendations
for increased support for research.
There is a growing awareness that the
underwater archaeological heritage belongs
to the population at large, to the nation, to
the community and that nobody has the
right to destroy it or exploit it for private
gain. If a wreck or city is too expensive to
excavate and preserve in the dry, then it
should be left and protected underwater. In
parallel with principles applied on land in
many countries, if social priorities demand
the construction of a harbour, motorway,
barrage, or oil well, then preventive
archaeology should be carried out first.
Another important trend in underwater
archaeology today relates to co-operation
between amateurs and professionals. It has
been suggested that tens of millions of peo¬
ple have an interest in archaeology, that
there are two million or so sports divers, a
few hundred professional archaeologists,
and a few tens of professional treasure hun¬
ters. Many professional underwater
archaeologists stress that their work would
be impossible without amateur assistance.
Since there are now sports diving federa¬
tions in over sixty-five countries, and most
Photography is an essential tool for the
underwater archaeologist who, like the ex¬
cavator of any archaeological site, must
record the locations of finds and make an
accurate survey of the site. Stereophotog-
rammetry is today widely used to produce
accurate site-plans from stereoscopic
photos taken at different points along a
frame. Right, a diving archaeologist sets
up a camera mounted on a boom ready for
stereophotogrammetry. Since it is gener¬
ally impossible to encompass the whole
area being excavated in a single photo,
archaeologists fit a number of photos
together like a jigsaw puzzle to give a
general impression of the site. Below,
photomosaic of the wreck of the 1 7th-cen-
tury Swedish vessel Kronan in the Baltic
(see article page 26). The main problems in
photography under water are that light,
colour and contrast are lost with increas¬
ing depth.
of them show serious interest in underwater
archaeology, it is not surprising that the
number of new sites reported to the author¬
ities should be increasing rapidly. In the
Mediterranean, for example, most known
ancient wrecks are from areas where there
are the most sports divers, in the south of
France. Similarly, most Neolithic sites have
been discovered off the coasts of Denmark,
Israel and Florida, where sports divers and
professionals have combined to search for
them. Since sports diving is rather expen¬
sive as a hobby, it tends to spread progres¬
sively to more and more of the developing
countries as they increase their level of
technology and raise the economic standard
of living. We can therefore expect a steady
increase of new data from the coasts of Asia
and Africa in the coming years.
NICHOLAS C. FLEMMING, of the UK, is presi¬
dent of the Scientific Committee of the World
Confederation of Underwater Activities. He has
many years experience in archaeological diving
on submerged terrestrial sites, and is the author
of many articles and books on the subject. He is
the co-editor (with P.M. Masters) of Quaternary
Coastlines and Marine Archaeology, Towards
the Prehistory of Land Bridges and Continental
Shelves, published by Academic Press, London
(1983).
MARK REDKNAP, British archaeologist spe¬
cializing in Roman and medieval pottery, is
secretary of the Archaeological Committee of the
World Confederation of Underwater Activities.
He has excavated widely both under water and
on land.
te
a
m
o
©

pHH
i^^B
^¿
5
a-
E
n
©
An international
survey of
the underwater
heritage
The Scientific Committee of the
World Confederation of
Underwater Activities
(CMAS) is currently carrying out an
international survey of the underwa¬
ter cultural heritage. The survey,
which is being prepared with Unesco
support, will review marine cultural
resources and inland underwater
sites, mechanisms for their protec¬
tion, shipwreck data bases and under¬
water cultural heritage inventories,
ways of disseminating results, and the
priorities for underwater archaeolo¬
gical research. The survey is designed
to record submerged archaeological
remains without giving away their
locations.
CMAS, which has also produced an
International Code ofPractice for Sci¬
entific Diving, is an international non¬
governmental organization which
groups national bodies concerned
with the training and safety of non-
military and non-commercial divers
involved in the fields of sport, photo¬
graphy, science, conservation, medi¬
cine, and the technology of diving
equipment. Its Scientific Committee,
established in 1970, includes repre¬
sentatives from bodies concerned with
professional diving and has Commis¬
sions on biology and conservation,
technology, geology and archaeology.
Already a number of sites of im¬
portance for marine archaeology have
been included on Unesco's World
Heritage List of properties of out¬
standing universal value. These sites
are covered by the system of protec¬
tion and international co-operation
organized by the World Heritage
Convention adopted by the General
Conference of Unesco in 1972 (see the
Unesco Courier, October 1987). They
include the Great Barrier Reef (Aus¬
tralia), where a number of shipwrecks
of historical interest are known, in¬
cluding that oiHMS Pandora (see col¬
our pages) which ran aground there in
1791. Also on the List are the island of
Gorée (Senegal), the great classical
cities ofCarthage (Tunisia) and Leptis
Magna (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
and the ruins of Kilwa Kisiwani and
Songo Mnara (United Republic of
Tanzania), whence merchants once
controlled a large proportion of trade
in the Indian Ocean.
