Ancient Caesarea, now submerged beneath the Mediterranean,
was an amazing feat of engineering
by Avner Raban Herod's great harbour
30
/ tOW King Herod observed a
* f^^l place near the sea, which was
A. ^ very proper for containing a
city, and was before called Strato's Tower.
... and what was the greatest and most
laborious work of all, he adorned it with a
haven that was always free from the waves
of the sea. ... The king, by the expenses he
was at, and the liberal disposal of them,
overcame nature and built the haven larger
than at Piraeus and it had towards the city a
double station for the ships. It was of excel¬
lent workmanship: and this was more re¬
markable for its being built in a place that of
itself was not suitable to such noble struc¬
tures, but was brought to perfection by
materials from other places, and at very
great expense. This city is situated in
Phoenicia, in the passage to Egypt, between
Jaffo and Dor, which are lesser maritime
cities and not fit for havens, on account of
the impetuous south-west winds that beat
upon them, which rolling the sands that
come from the sea gainst the shores do not
admit of ships lying in their station; but the
merchants are generally forced there to ride
at their anchors in the sea itself. So Herod
endeavoured to rectify this inconvenience,
and laid out a compass towards the land as
might be sufficient for a haven, wherein the
great ships might lie down in safety; and this
he effected by letting down vast stones into
twenty fathoms of water, most of them
being fifty feet in length, and nine in height
and ten in breadth, and some still larger.
But when the haven was filled up to that
length, he enlarged that wall which was thus
already extant above the sea, till it was two
hundred feet wide; one hundred of which
had buildings before it, in order to break the
force of the waves; but the rest of the space
was under a stone wall that ran around it.
The name of Pilatus (Pontius Pilate), the e
Roman procurator who tried Jesus Christ, |
is carved on this stone found at Caesarea, g
It may once have been affixed to a temple. J
On this wall were very large towers. ...
There was also a great number of arches
where mariners dwelt. There was also be¬
fore them, a quay (or landing place), which
ran round the entire haven, and was a most
agreeable walk to such as had a mind to that
exercise; but the entrance or mouth of the
port was made on the north quarter, on
which side was the stillest of the winds of all
this place. ... At the mouth of the haven
were on each side three great Colossi sup¬
ported by pillars, where those Colossi that
are on your left hand as you sail into the port
are supported by a solid tower; but those on
the right hand are supported by two upright
stones joined together, which stones were
larger than that tower which was on the
other side of the entrance."
These words were written almost 2,000
years ago by the Jewish historian Josephus
Flavius and constitute what may be the most
detailed description of an ancient harbour.
In 1975 this hidden wonder of ancient hyd¬
raulic technology began to be studied by the
Centre for Maritime Studies of the Uni¬
versity of Haifa, and since 1980 the project
has been carried out by the Caesarea
Ancient Harbour Excavations Project, with
the participation of the universities of Col¬
orado, Maryland and Victoria (British Col¬
umbia). Every summer, over one hundred
diving volunteers from all over the world,
directed by a large staff of marine

3**
-w**&
Opposite page: artist's reconstruction of
the ancient harbour of Caesarea. Above:
highly ingenious techniques were used to
construct the reinforced parts of the
breakwaters, which were anchored with
concrete blocks, some weighing 50 tons.
Wooden forms were towed into position
(centre), then sunk (above right) and pack¬
ed with waterproof mortar (above left) be¬
fore being paved with stone. A rubble bar¬
rier (far left) protected the seawall.
archaeologists, diving technicians, marine
engineers and architects take part in what
may be the largest underwater excavation
of its kind.
Though the work is far from being com¬
pleted, it has already yielded scores of data
that not only verify Josephus' testimony but
add surprising facts about the standards of
harbour technology of that time. Not only
was this the first protected basin to be artifi¬
cially encompassed by free-standing
breakwaters not based on any headland,
natural bay or off-shore reefs, but those
structures were so designed that their inter¬
nal side was properly protected from the
splash of breaking storm waves to
accommodate mooring facilities for their
entire length.
The main breakwaters were built in a
unique combination of carefully laid huge
ashlar blocks fastened with iron clamps
(held by molten lead that was poured into
grooves at the edges of the ashlar blocks
when they were already in place under the
water) and artificial hydraulic conglomer¬
ate that slowly solidified within double
walled wooden caissons that were lowered
to their proper position by the careful addi¬
tion of a specially blended mixture of hyd
raulic concrete made of lime, red soil, and
volcanic pumice, in between the double
wooden walls.
In order to save building material in the
construction of the submerged part of the
breakwater (the total volume of the under¬
water base must have been around 200,000
cubic metres) the caissoned blocks and the
ashlar walls were installed only at the exter¬
nal, internal, midsection and cross-sections
of the breakwaters, with hollowed compart¬
ments of 20 x 30 metres left for the sea to fill
with wave-carried sand. In this way, after a
few years, the filled sections could be paved
and built on.
Other sophisticated measures were taken
in order to prevent what seems to be the
constant problem of all modern protected
basins along this coastline, silting up and
the deposition of sand. This natural process
was prevented by the creation of a constant
current through the harbour entrance. This
current was initiated by a series of channels
through the stem of the main breakwater.
These channels would have an opening just
above the highest tide, so there would be
only an inflow of silt-free water generated
by each incoming wave-front. The flow in
the channels could be controlled by sluice
gates to satisfy the demand for an efficient
washing current.
The archaeological proof that this system
was properly working was deduced from the
thin layer of fine silt with Herodian pottery
sherds all over the harbour bottom which
represents a sandfree basin during the time
when the harbour was intact and func¬
tioning. The same kind of layer, with an
abundance of clay vessels and other small
finds dating from the Roman period, was
found just outside the harbour entrance. It
was over 1.5 metres thick and had been
swept there by the outflowing current.
Technologically, the Caesarea project is
the culmination of twenty-five years of
marine archaeological exploration and re¬
search. It encompasses land and underwa¬
ter excavations and includes sampling of
bio-species, minerals and sediments for
laboratory analysis. The results will contri¬
bute to knowledge of ancient environ¬
mental changes, land-sea relations,
ancient marine engineering and harbour
technologies.
AVNER RABAN is Executive Chairman of the
Centre for Maritime Studies at the University of
Haifa. 31
