Rabindranath Tagore


An Indian poet
visits an English
parson
by Rabindranath Tagore
The most celebratedfigure in modern
Indian literature, the great Bengali writer
Rabindranath Tagore (Nobel Prize for
Literature 1913), was a prodigious
traveller as well as a prolific writer. In the
second half ofhis life, he visited England
and the United States several times, and
toured Europe and Asia, making contact
with writers and scholars, giving lectures
on Indian civilization, working to bring
together East and West and expounding
his beliefs on the universalism of cultures.
In 1912 Tagore was in England. During
his visit, the Irish poet and playwright
William Butler Yeats read to him and a
group of Western writers Tagore's
translation into English of his most
famous collection, Gítañjali (1910, "Song
Offering"). Tagore spent part of the
summer of 1912 at the home of a
Staffordshire parson.
Rural England, from A Tagore Reader, edited by Amiya
Chakravarty. Macmillan, London and New York, 1961.
Unesco Collection of Representative Works.
IT is August, high summer in England; townsmen are longing to visit the
countryside. People rush to parks and open fields; whenever they can get a
few more hours they go out of town. Joining the flock of flying townsmen, we
also got away.
When we reached the house, our hostess took us to the warm drawing room
where a fire had been lit. The house was not an old parsonage but a new one; the
garden was also new, perhaps they had themselves cultivated it. Clusters of many
coloured flowers fringed the deep lawn. I had never seen such profusion, such
freshness of foliage. It is unbelievable, unless one has seen it, how richly green and
thick the grass can be.
The rooms of the house were neat and tidy, the library full of books on many
subjects; there was not the least trace of negligence. Furniture, decoration and
comfort are of a much higher standard than in our country; every object is kept
spotlessly clean with vigilant care. Slackness would not be tolerated by these
people.
In the late afternoon my host Mr. Outram took us on a walk; the rain had
stopped, but there was no gap in the clouds. On all sides was the deep green of
undulating meadows divided by low hedges. Though hilly, the landscape had
nowhere the roughness of hills; earth's exuberance was held in a beautiful har¬
mony.
While walking, Mr. Outram met an acquaintance and discussed some business.
I learned that a rural committee had been appointed for encouraging farmers to
do some gardening of their own ; some days ago a competition had taken place and
this stranger had received the first prize for flowers. Mr. Outram took me to the
houses of a few farm-holders. Everyone had a flower garden around their cottage
and a kitchen garden, and there was an atmosphere of homely toil leading to
happiness and simplicity. After the day's labour in the fields they returned to their
homes and did gardening in the evening. I had occasion to see many other proofs
of the human fellowship developed through services and welfare work that existed
between Mr. Outram and the village people who were under his care.
Institutional religion may occasionally hamper the progress of people but in
spite of it the spirit of religion works in this country and there is no doubt that the
clergy have kept the inner standards fairly high in the life of the village people. In
our country this was the work of the Brahmins but being based on varna the
system led to inevitable neglect of individual responsibility. I do not believe that
all clergymen have accepted the ideal of Christ in their lives, but they are not
clergymen by birth, and have to be responsible to society. It would be difficult for
them to allow their character or behaviour to be debased, and they have on the
whole held up the pursuit of pure character as an ideal of religion.
The religious orders have arranged for a generalized provision of religion for
the communities. But this is not enough the great problems of humanity that
present themselves to the country from time to time demand spiritual power and
inspiration which institutionalism cannot provide. Such problems should be faced
by clergymen with the inner music of Christ's own words in their hearts, by
establishing Him in their lives. But how rarely this happens.
32
