Pirates, parasites
and population

SMALL islands throughout the world
have experienced cycles of rapid
demographic change. This may be
due to the Impact of outside forces beyond
their control or to the fact that their econo¬
mies are based on a single specialized crop
at the mercy of disease and the caprices of
the market.
Pirates and parasites were the cause of
the vicissitudes of Salina, a small island
lying to the north of Sicily in the Aeolian
Archipelago. ^
For centuries, fear of pirates in the Archi¬
pelago was such that only Lipari, with its
powerful fortifications, had a stable popula¬
tion, while Salina and the other Aeolian
islands remained virtually uninhabited.
Even Lipari finally succumbed. In the
Aeolian islands they still commemorate the
terrible siege of July 1544, when Khayr-
ad-Din, the Barbary pirate better known as
Barbarossa (Red-beard), seized the for¬
tress and carried off into slavery some
9,000 inhabitants, almost the entire popula¬
tion of the island.
Salina remained largely unsettled until
the arrival of the French and British fleets in
the Mediterranean, and a campaign by
Admiral Nelson, finally eliminated the pirate
scourge.
Already ¡n the mid-eighteenth century, as
pirate power started to decline, the Bene¬
dictine order, a considerable landowner in
the area, had begun leasing its lands on
Salina on favourable terms to a number of
private entrepreneurs. The latter brought in
landless immigrants from other islands of
the archipelago, as well as from Genoa,
Naples and Sicily, to work the vineyards
that had been established on terraces on
the volcanic formation, about 900 metres
above sea level.
The vineyards of Salina specialized in
Malmsey, a wine much in demand in
England. Trade prospered and the farmers
were able to buy their lands. By 1860,
Salina boasted 8,000 Inhabitants, most of
them engaged ¡n the cultivation of grapes
and the production and shipping of wine.
At the end of the century, however, an
infestation of the Phylloxera parasite des¬
troyed the vineyards on Salina. Earnings on
the island dropped sharply and, lacking the
capital to survive during the period required
to restore the vineyards, local families
began to emigrate in large numbers to
Argentina, the United States and, later, to
Australia. In a relatively short time, the
population fell to under 2,000.
Although the vineyards were rehabilita¬
ted prior to the Second World War, the
population has only recently risen to a total
of 2,300.
Salina's period of economic develop¬
ment lasted only about sixty years. Its rapid
settlement was based on a specific oppor¬
tunity to take advantage of an existing mar¬
ket to earn a good living.
Rapid emigration followed the Phylloxera
infestation. In the absence of long-term cre¬
dit with which to restore their vineyards, and
in view of inducements offered to emigrate
to other areas where land was made availa¬
ble at low cost, many farmers took the easy
way out, even though it meant leaving their
native island and, in some cases, their fami¬
lies as well.
For Salina, dependence upon a single
product led first to rapid population growth
and then, following a natural disaster, to
rapid emigration a clear example of the
risk involved for a small Island of basing its
economy on a single specialized crop.
l-Z^-j- - .
