The new world
ofartificial intelligence
THE days may soon be past when a pes¬
simist could say that a computer, for all
its capacity for rapid calculation, was a
"high-speed idiot" because it could not "rea¬
son". We are now moving into the age of
"intelligent machines" and of "artificial intel¬
ligence" a discipline that has an important
place in informatics.
Artificial intelligence is a branch of informa¬
tics which studies the theoretical bases, meth¬
odologies and techniques which make it pos¬
sible to design hardware and software
systems capable of performing tasks which to
the non-expert would seem to belong
exclusively to human intelligence. The aim of
artificial intelligence research is to produce
systems which behave intelligently and inter¬
act with the world outside them just as human
beings do.
In practice, the results of research into artifi¬
cial intelligence are now becoming part of our
everyday lives. Artificial intelligence systems
are acting as advisers and experts in such
fields as lexicological analysis, medical diag¬
nosis and genetic engineering. There are
robots which have the power of perception
and visual recognition and the ability to
behave rationally in unfamiliar circumstances,
terminals which converse in natural lan¬
guages, either in speech or writing (though
there are limits to their abilities in this sphere),
systems that solve problems and demon¬
strate theorems.
Every two years, specialists meet to
exchange information at the International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI), which is usually held in a leading
world centre for study in this field. The first
conference was held in Washington, D.C., in
1 969, and since then conferences have taken
place in London, Stanford, Tbilisi, Cambridge,
Tokyo, Vancouver, Karlsruhe and Los
Angeles. This year the Conference is being
held in Milan, in recognition of work done in
Italy in this field of advanced research. It will
take place from 23 to 28 August, in the Centro
CongressLMirafori.
The philosophy of IJCAI is based on the
belief that contemporary thought has suc¬
ceeded in unifying the concept of culture; the
old idea that scientific culture and humanistic
culture are two different things has been dis¬
carded. The culture of our day should there¬
fore be characterized by the synthesis of
these two forms of mental activity.
Artificial intelligence is thus claimed to be
the supreme example of an interdisciplinary
subject, as was made clear at a symposium to
prepare for the IJCAI Conference in Milan,
held at the St. Vincent Cultural Centre (Italy)
on 21 February last. The work of the sym¬
posium, entitled in an allusion to Beckett's
play, "Waiting for Robots: the immediate
future of artificial intelligence", could perhaps
be summarized by saying that two fundamen¬
tal questions are being asked in this field: how
far and how soon will robotics be able to take
the place of man; and will man ultimately be
rivalled, if not completely outstripped, by
machines.
Mr. Basilio Catania, the director of the Turin
Telecommunications Research Centre and
Laboratories, a leading Italian research
institution in the field of artificial intelligence,
pointed out that man possesses muscle
power, faculties of perception, and intel¬
ligence. Over the centuries, man has con¬
stantly aimed to extend these capacities. His
first success in enhancing his muscle power,
the invention of the wheel, was followed by
many others and culminated in the harnessing
of the atom. He enhanced his faculties of per¬
ception by inventing increasingly efficient
tools, leading to the development of the elec¬
tron microscope, the radio telescope, and
television.
In the sphere of human intelligence, one of
the most significant steps forward was the
invention of the pocket calculator, the pro¬
totype of the complex modern machines
which make it possible to increase man's
mental capacity and will do so to a still greater
degree in the future. Artificial intelligence sim-
Some key words in artificial intelligence
The expression artificial intelligence was formulated for the first time in 1956 by John McCarthy of
Stanford University (United States).
This new discipline proposes to overcome the current limits of informatics in certain areas, improving
and extending the performance of computers. Its purpose is not to "simulate" human intelligence but to
"emulate" it, since there is no basis for excluding the possibility that some manifestations of human
intelligence, problem-solving, for example, can also be provided by adopting methodological approa¬
ches that are not necessarily anthropomorphic.
Within artificial intelligence, an Expert System is a system capable of automatically solving problems
of a certain type, proposed by the users of the system. An Expert System is the result of the collaboration
of two designers, the "knowledge engineer" who develops the algorithms (the sequences of instructions
for solving a particular problem) necessary to construct the solution and the structures suitable for
receiving the base information, and the "problem expert" who furnishes the body of facts and deductive
rules, called the knowledge base of the Expert System.
Industrial exploitation of Expert Systems will Increase with the use of fifth generation machines (see
article page 16) which are currently the subiect of intensive research. The Expert System is directly
embedded In the electronic architecture of these machines, which are created with the most advanced
technologies of microelectronics, such as Very Large Scale Integration circuits, which present a million
transistors on a single silicon chip.
14

by Domenico de Gregorio
ply enables man to "extend" his own intel¬
ligence, as It were, by providing a "prosthesis"
to help him perform various functions.
We must, however, beware of thinking of
the future of these "prostheses of intel¬
ligence" as a collection of anthropomorphic
robots: a car may be regarded as a prosthesis
of legs, but it is not the same thing.
One of the most advanced fields of artificial
intelligence research has led to the con¬
struction of what are known as "connection
machines", in which a large number of tiny
calculators, instead of working sequentially,
work on various pieces of information at the
same time which is what happens in the
human brain and combine the results. This
was the field selected for the EEC project on
"Basic research in adaptive intelligence and
neurocomputing".
The great scientific discoveries of the twen¬
tieth century, such as the splitting of the atom
and, more recently, genetic engineering, have
conferred on man enormous powers which
can be used for good or ill. Artificial intel¬
ligence, too, may be used for good or ill. The
availability of vast amounts of information
which can be analysed in a fraction of a sec¬
ond can be a source of financial and political
power and can thus be open to all kinds of
abuse. But artificial intelligence can also bring
many advantages. It may help to provide more
rewarding occupations for millions of people,
increase productivity and take some of the
drudgery out of work.
Advances in the field of artificial intelligence
will soon produce "fall-out" which may have
surprising and awe-inspiring consequences
such as giving sight to the blind. A project now
underway at Rockville, Maryland, Is currently
examining the possibility of using about a hun¬
dred thousand micro-electrodes, associated
with nerve cells In the embryonic phase of the
visual cortex, to connect with the visual struc¬
tures of the brain and give sight even if only
rudimentary sight thanks to a microscopic
telecamera implanted in a pair of spectacles,
completely by-passing the eyeballs and the
optic nerve.
While the opportunities opened up by artifi¬
cial intelligence can be expected to create
new and more satisfying kinds of work, prob¬
lems are bound to arise, ranging from the
revaluation of certain categories of work and
those who do it, to problems connected with
privacy and the security of information, which
may have Important legal implications.
©
:
'
1
1
-
1
. Vr;A/. - ';
0^H
i wÄu^Sk
rJjMre& H
¿$ËA h?
W
WmÊ
**Áta¿ «*#**' vv I HÔk
£.: 2»
i m __
t : ^m
5 mtm f!
*--i H !T B * M H#^H
ft a
*
DOMENICO DE GREGORIO, Italian journalist
and specialist in mass communication, is man¬
aging editor of the Italian edition of the Unesco
Courier. He has taught at the Italian Advertising
Institute (University of Rome) and is the author of
a number of studies on information science,
notably Metodología del periodismo (1966,
"Methodology of Journalism") and L'lnforma-
zione, teoha ed evoluzione storlca (1981, "Infor¬
mation, Theory and Historical Evolution").
15
