Les
Kurbas,
¡founder of
lUkrainian
theatre
Portrait ofLes Kurbas taken in 1913
32

by Nelly Nicolaevna
Kornienko
THE worldwide interest currently
being shown in Les Kurbas (1887-
1942) is by no means fortuitous. As
the end of the twentieth century
approaches, people are beginning to feel
the need for a "Renaissance personality", a
leader in the arts and a philosopher. Kurbas
was such a personality. He was an actor,
playwright, translator, stage and cinema
director with original ideas about the func¬
tion of the theatre. A disciple of
Melpomene, the Muse of Tragedy, his
greatest claim to fame is that he evolved a
strategy of culture. That is why his ideas on
aesthetics continue to interest people nearly
half a century after his death.
The name of Les Kurbas, founder of
Soviet Ukrainian theatre, figures among
the greatest in the history of dramatic art
Konstantin Stanislavsky, Vsevolod
Meyerhold and Yevgeny Vakhtangov,
Max Reinhardt, Edward Gordon Craig
and Bertolt Brecht.
Kurbas was born in Galicia (then part of
the Austro-Hungarian empire), into a fam¬
ily of well-known Ukrainian actors, the
Yanovichs. Educated at the universities of
Vienna and Lvov, he studied several lan¬
guages, including English, so that he could
read Shakespeare in the original; Nor¬
wegian, in order to understand Ibsen; and
Sanskrit, because he was particularly inter¬
ested in the East. Thus he came to his
national culture in the spirit of a
reformer.
He established a Youth Theatre in 1917,
with the intention of producing plays drawn
from different cultures throughout the
world. This quite exceptional and successful
experiment in theatre work lasted until
1919. Enthusiastic audiences wearing
sweaters and leg-warmers (it was the time of
the Civil War and the country was in a state
of economic dislocation) saw various
plays a brilliant production of Oedipus
Rex, the first of Sophocles' works to be
performed on the Soviet stage; Zhulavsky's
fanciful, impressionistic Yola; Shev-
chenko's expressionistic masterpiece Jan
Huss; intellectual plays such as Lesya
Ukrainka's In the Thicket; one of the
national folklore theatre's colourful Christ¬
mas productions; and, later on, plays by
Shakespeare, Molière, Schiller, Hugo,
Crommelynck and Grillparzer.
Kurbas brought Ukrainian theatre to the
forefront of Soviet and European cultural
life. As early as 1925, at the World Fair in
Paris, the design for one of his productions
won a gold medal for the Soviet Union.
Osip Mandelstam, major Soviet poet and
literary critic, who was anything but compli¬
mentary about the theatre, showed great
insight when he said that Kurbas would be
renowned as the founder of Ukrainian
theatre.
Much of Kurbas' work in the theatre was
based on the idea that "man is a micro¬
cosm", as postulated by the eighteenth-cen¬
tury Ukrainian philosopher Grigori
Skovoroda. Skovoroda's teaching on the
"inner man", the value of the spirit and the
worth of the human personality, had a
marked influence on productions at the
Berezil Theatre in Kharkov, where Kurbas
did most of his work. In many of his produc¬
tions, images inspired by Skovoroda were
used to symbolize the unending search for
spiritual truth.
Kurbas, like Vakhtangov, was an artist of
the Revolution. He regarded the theatre as
a model of society and a forum for the dis¬
cussion of public questions. His vision of a
theatre of "transfiguration", in which the
world could be, as it were, re-created, was
profound and idealistic. A firm believer in
the ethical power of art and the insight it
provides, he thought it was possible to
change society through the artistic and
moral life of the theatre.
But it is unorthodox ideas of this kind that
leave their mark on history, especially when
they are put forward by someone who is
completely disinterested. Thanks to Kur¬
bas, something of Craig's dream about a
school to study the art of the theatre was
realized. He established the Berezil Artists'
Society comprising an extensive network of
theatrical workshops, the prototype of the
new Soviet Ukrainian theatre which pro¬
duced shows ranging from drama and opera
to variety, circus, reviews and musicals as
well of the many theatre research institutes.
The political plays produced by Kurbas at
the Berezil Theatre between 1922 and 1926
included Keiser's Gas, Shevchenko's Haid-
amaks ("Ukrainian Soldiers"), Sinclair's
Jimmy Higgins and Shakespeare's Mac¬
beth. These performances were vivid,
striking studies of extreme psychological
and social experiences, very avant-garde
compared with other contemporary
productions.
Much can be learned from Kurbas' con¬
ception of the theatre. What was true in his
time is true today. The Polish experimental
theatre director Jerzy. Grotowski's search
for the "sacral life of the human spirit", the
British director Peter Brook's vision of a
new kind of culture, the subtle combination
of irony, farce and insight found in the films
of the Italian director Federico Fellini, the
tragic symbolism of the Swedish director
Ingmar Bergman all these recall the
Soviet experiments and, in particular, Kur¬
bas' theatre of "transfiguration". The mys¬
terious nature of his productions gives a
feeling of timelessness to his conception of
humanity. Their interplay of the serious and
the farcical, the eternal and the mortal, the
lofty and the base, is reminiscent of baroque
art; everyday life is interpreted by reference
to the fantastic. Kurbas' aesthetic ideas
brought to theatre a new and dynamic form
of realism based on fantasy, with an infinite
capacity to reveal the complexities of the
world and the absurdities of daily life.
NELLY NICOLAEVNA KORNIENKO, of the
Soviet Union, is a specialist in dramatic art and in
the sociology of culture, subjects on which she
has written some 40 works published in her own
country and elsewhere. A former member of the
sociology of culture sector at the Soviet Institute
of Scientific Research into An, she is currently a
staff member of the Russian language edition of
the Unesco Courier.
Scenefrom Jimmy Higgins, a strikingly inno¬
vative stage version of the American writer
Upton Sinclair's anti-war, humanist novel
(1919), produced by Les Kurbas in 1923.
33
