Reportsfrom 6 countries
SPAIN
Exploring a 'ships' graveyard'
In August 1987, during an extensive under¬
water archaeological operation off the
"Coast of Death", Galicia, a team of 20
archaeologists discovered the wreck of a
ship which had taken part in a naval expedi¬
tion sent by King Philip II of Spain against
England. Many of the ships, which set sail
from Seville and Lisbon, were wrecked in
October 1586 during a violent storm off
Cape Finisterre. The archaeologists made
600 individual dives and spent a total of 800
hours under water at a maximum depth of
25 metres. The excavation and recovery of
some of the remains, which were located
with the aid of magnetometers and un¬
covered by airlifts, was no easy task since
the artefacts had fused together and were
covered with concretion. The wooden
wreckage had distintegrated, but it proved
possible to recover a large anchor, some
stone projectiles, a large quantity of small
arms ammunition, and numerous coins
(left), as well as pottery and personal acces¬
sories. Work in this veritable "ships'
graveyard" is to continue for several years.
Manuel Martín-Bueno
Professor of archaeology,
University of Saragossa.
Director of the "Finisterre 87" expedition
THE NETHERLANDS
Archaeology
in muddy waters
If beauty is in the eye of the beholder,
maritime archaeology in The Netherlands
cannot be called beautiful. Eyesight is often
superfluous to the diver, who is confronted
with absolute darkness or a shimmering
opaque green micro-world in which the
shapes and features of structural remains
and differences in soil texture can be felt but
can hardly ever be seen. Practically blinded,
the diver feels his way and digs like a mole
although his method of excavation differs
greatly from the one followed by that des¬
tructive creature.
The survey of a shipwreck discovered
near the harbour of the medieval town of
Medemblik illustrates how underwater
archaeologists in The Netherlands work in
such conditions. Maximum visibility on the
©
site was about 0.5 metres. An accurate
drawing of the remains protruding from the
bottom was prepared in the following way.
Pins were set out in a rectangle, the longitu¬
dinal side of which was parallel to the main
axis of the ship. The pins were spaced exact¬
ly 3 metres apart. They were connected by
strings, thus forming a grid. This grid was
simply an aid for orientation, no measure¬
ments being taken from the lines. Trilatera-
tion measurements were taken from each
set of two pins (see drawing bottom right).
The measurements and all other data were
recorded by speaking into a tape recorder.
A pencil was only used to note certain speci¬
fic details. In this way trilateration was car¬
ried out in confined areas, approximately
square in shape and the resulting drawings
were fitted into a general plan which pro¬
vided an "overview" of this barely visible
site.
Next, three trial trenches were dug per¬
pendicular to the main axis in order to
establish the midships, forward and aft sec¬
tions of the hull, and to provide a relatively
clear picture of the construction of the ship.
With little work done on site a maximum of
information was retrieved.
The find is of great interest from the point
of view of shipbuilding techniques and tra¬
ditions. It combines features of the mediev¬
al cog with distinct differences in construc¬
tion. The underwater survey and trial ex¬
cavation have shown that the ship dates
Left, plan ofthe wreck-site, with (below) sections
ofthe trial trenches.
z
from between the Middle Ages and modern
times a transitional period for the building
of big ships.
There are no plans for extended excava¬
tion of the site. Its importance has been
assessed and it can and will be kept as it is,
an object for scientific research in the dis¬
tant future. Why, it might be asked, wait so
long if the site is so interesting? There are
good reasons for this.
Firstly, much of the scientific research on
sites in the reclaimed land of the Zuiderzee
and on ships such as the Bremen Cog has
not yet been published. Only when it is shall
we get a clear picture of what is known and
of the gaps in our knowledge. Only then will
it be possible to formulate up-to-date
hypotheses which can be tested on sites that
have been preserved and protected.
Another reason is that there are many
more sites than can be tackled scientifically
at present. Whenever protection is feasible
we should thus limit our curiosity to a good
survey.
Thijs J. Maarleveld,
Co-ordinator of underwater archaeology,
Government of The Netherlands
Below, trilateration measurements being carried
out on the Medemblik wreck. All information was
spoken into a tape recorder.

Top, detail of coin bag with 4th-century-
AD Roman coin.
Above, fishbones preserved in resin.
Photos © C.R.A.S.A., Sardinia, Italy
ITALY
The Lazzaretto wreck,
Sardinia
The Underwater Archaeology Research
Centre of Sassari and Alghero (CRASA) in
Sardinia is an association of scuba divers
which works in close collaboration with the
Sardinian archaeological authorities and
employs the scientific expertise of a profes¬
sional underwater archaeologist during ex¬
cavations.
Its most important operation has been the
complete excavation of the remains of a
small Roman round ship which sank in the
fourth century AD at Lazzaretto cove near
Alghero. The wreck lay about 40 metres
offshore at a depth of only 2.5 metres. Ex¬
cavations were carried out for 2 seasons in
June 1985 and June 1986.
Although the archaeological work has
only just finished, we may already begin to
draw some conclusions. The ship was
loaded with preserved fish (in brine or
dried) and garum (fish sauce) stowed in
amphoras produced in northern Africa or
southern Spain. One important find was a
number of coins in a leather or cloth bag
completely transformed by concretions.
This small bag must have been affixed to its
possessor's waist. One of the coins became
detached from the rest and left a perfect
impression on the concretion , enabling us to
conclude that it is afollis, struck during the
reign of the Emperor Licinius and issued in
AD 315-316. The shipwreck was caused by a
southwesterly gale, but we cannot exclude
an act of piracy.
Edoardo Riccardi
Scientific Director, Lazzaretto project
	 ZT
A diver positions a measuring scale during
excavation of the wreck of an 18th-century
Dutch freighterfound by sports divers offthe
coast of Norway. Each year sports divers
locate many new archaeological sites.
NORWAY
Amateurs are welcome
Ever since its birth in the early 1960s,
Norwegian marine archaeology has de¬
pended heavily on the participation of
amateur divers, and the museums co-oper¬
ate closely with the Norwegian Diving
Association. Local diving clubs have
formed marine archaeology groups whose
members specialize in such fields as under¬
water photography, drawing, and sur¬
veying. The museums contact the groups
when they need assistance. Projects are
usually carried out during the summer holi¬
days and the divers are unpaid, although
they receive compensation for the use of
their personal diving equipment as well as
travel and lodging expenses.
One important wreck that has been sur¬
veyed and worked on by amateur divers is a
medieval hulk dating from about AD 1450 ,
which has been found in southern Norway.
Its cargo seems to have consisted of flag
stones, sarcophagus lids, and round copper
ingots. Fossils in the limestone flag-stones
indicate that they came from a quarry out¬
side the town of Tallin in Estonia. The
wreck was excavated by sports divers under
the supervision of the Norway Maritime
Museum during 1986 and 1987.
Torstein Ormoy,
Norwegian Diving Association
MEXICO
Sacred wells
and Spanish galleons
Although objects were being recovered
from the sacred well of Chichén Itzá as early
as the end of the 19th century (see page 12),
it is only relatively recently that systematic
exploration began of Mexico's important
underwater heritage of pre-Hispanic votive
offerings and other objects in inland waters
and its maritime colonial heritage of Span¬
ish vessels and their cargoes. In 1980 a
Department of Underwater Archaeology
was created as part of the National Institute
of Anthropology and History (INAH), the
federal institution with responsibility for the
Hauling aboard a 16th-century iron cannon,
Bay of Campeche, Mexico
protection, investigation and conservation
of the country's archaeological heritage.
One important project undertaken by the
Department began when a group of U.S.
sports divers who were exploring the Cayo
Nuevo reef in the Bay of Campeche disco¬
vered several iron cannon and an anchor, as
well as a bronze cannon with 16th-century
inscriptions and emblems which particularly
attracted their attention. In 1979 the INAH
began work on the site with the Institute of
Nautical Archaeology at Texas A & M Uni¬
versity, and since then other objects have
been retrieved from this 16th-century ship¬
wreck and the remains of an 18th-century
wreck have been located. The 16th-century
bronze cannon is today preserved in a
museum in the city of Campeche.
Half Moon Spring in San Luis Potosí
State, a spring into which offerings were
thrown in pre-Hispanic times (above all be¬
tween AD 600 and 900) is the site of another
project sponsored by the Department. Un¬
fortunately, the spring's popularity with di¬
vers has encouraged looting, and thousands
of objects have been removed without any
control or record.
In 1984 the Department launched a pro¬
ject on "Aids to pre-Hispanic navigation on
the east coast of the Yucatán peninsula".
The aim is to locate and analyse offshore
structures such as lighthouses which might
have aided navigation in pre-Hispanic
times.
Finally, the Department has embarked
on the preparation of an atlas of all Mexico's
submerged sites of archaeological interest,
both inland and at sea.
Pilar Luna Erreguerena,
Department of Underwater Archaeology,
National Museum of Anthropology,
Mexico City

SRI LANKA
Coins and cannon
Owing to its geographical position in the
Indian Ocean, centrally situated in the sea
lanes linking the Near East and the East
Indies, Sri Lanka has been an important
landfall for seafarers ever since ancient
times, when it was known as Taprobane to
the Greeks and Romans, Serendib to the
sea-farers of old Arabia, and the "land with¬
out sorrow" to the Chinese. The great
Chinese traveller Cheng Ho made several
visits to the island in the early years of the
fifteenth century as part of his explorations
of the "Western Oceans".
There is no doubt that there are wrecks in
Sri Lankan coastal waters dating from the
period of European expansion into South
Asia. An expedition to the Great Basses
reef in the early 1960s, the first real attempt
at the archaeological exploration of a wreck
off southern Sri Lanka, produced finds in¬
cluding some 350 pounds of silver coin, a
bronze cannon and flintlock pistols. Post-
X
expedition analysis established that the
coins came from Surat, the cannon may
have been British, and the ship may have
been built in Southeast Asia. More recent¬
ly, important studies have taken place on
the traditional Model Paruwa or sewn
boats, drawing attention to the need for
research on the ethnographic material relat¬
ing to the Sri Lankan maritime heritage.
In late 1986 an exploration of two re¬
ported wreck sites was organized as part of a
feasibility study on the marine archaeolo¬
gical potential of Sri Lanka. The first took
place in Galle harbour, 115 km south of
Colombo. Galle, dominated by the massive
ramparts of the Portuguese and Dutch fort
in which the city is contained, is bounded on
the east by Mount Rummaswela, which has
a perennial fresh water spring. Folklore re¬
lates that this fresh water source was used by
vessels in Antiquity. A scatter of artefacts
including local and imported pottery was
found. The second site, approximately 2 km
west of Colombo, was identified by local
divers some years ago, at a depth of 20
metres, and was assumed to be the location
of two jettisoned cannon. The 1986 survey
identified two more cannon and it has been
suggested that they are probably of a seven-
lili
m
pasaos *
A sea-going vessel of a kind which would
have plied the Indian Ocean in the 8th or 9th
century AD. Detail from a low-reliefcarving
at the Buddhist temple-sanctuary ofBorobu-
dur (Indonesia).
teenth-century type used for merchant ser¬
vice. These limited explorations showed
that a coherent maritime archaeology prog¬
ramme is called for, and as a result a joint
"Sri Lanka Maritime Heritage Project" be¬
tween the Sri Lanka Department of
Archaeology and the University of London
has been prepared.
Prasanna Weerawardane
Department ofArchaeology,
Sri Lanka
The Bodrum Museum of Underwater
Archaeology, Turkey, houses important
displays of the remains of five scientifical¬
ly excavated shipwrecks from Antiquity.
Below, 1 :20 scale diorama of the excava¬
tion of a 4th-century-AD Roman shipwreck
at Yassi Ada (near Bodrum, in south-west
Turkey), carried out during the late 1960s.
Several modern underwater search tech¬
niques were used for the first time during
this excavation.
Below right, this Chinese celadon jar
(Ch'ing-pai lype) with carved dragon hand¬
les is thought to date from the 14th cen¬
tury. It comes from a shipwreck off Shinan
(Republic of Korea) that has been exca¬
vated and studied since 1976 by
archaeologists from the Cultural Prop¬
erties Preservation Bureau, Seoul. Ex¬
amination of artefacts found on the wreck,
notably almost 9,000 pieces of celadon
and around 4,500 porcelain objects,
should throw light on the history of
Chinese porcelains and of international
sea trade in the Middle Ages. Right,
Chinese coins (Chi-dai T'ung-bao) found
at the Shinan site. They were minted in the
early 14th century and were legal tender in
Japan and other countries in the region, as
well as in China. The finds confirm that this
ancient Far Eastern shipwreck is perhaps
the richest ever found, both in terms of the
value of the cargo as well as for the in¬
formation it provides on traditional naval
construction techniques in this region.
©
