Food aid andfood habits
by Jeremy Shoham and Bruno Stainier
A cloud of locusts almost blots out the African sky.
DROUGHT, floods, locust plagues
and other disasters can dramati¬
cally dislocate families from their
normal environment. Households may
then be forced to rely on donations of
food to survive, and as a result changes in
food consumption habits may occur. A
number of questions have been raised
about food aid of this kind. Is it likely to
alter food habits? If it does, will such
changes be to the benefit or detriment of
individuals? How will such changes sub¬
sequently affect local and national econo¬
mies? Might they establish a dependence
on imports if local agriculture proves un¬
able to adapt to altered tastes?
Questions about the potential effects
of emergency food aid programmes are
particularly pertinent at this time, in view
of the possibility of increasingly frequent
food emergencies in many parts of
drought-prone and war-affected Africa.
The beneficiaries of emergency food aid
are likely to become increasingly depen¬
dent on the food ration they receive, and
in some cases may have to endure the
situation for several years. Most major
donors make every effort to supply foods
traditionally used by intended benefi¬
ciaries, but this may not always be possi¬
ble if such foods are not available among
the surplus food commodities stored in
donor countries. Local purchases may
also be problematic in food emergency
situations as food scarcity causes
inflation.
It is convenient to distinguish between
emergency programmes which bring food
aid to indigenous populations, and refu¬
gee feeding programmes (although refu¬
gee aid is also usually described in the
early stages as emergency aid). The dis¬
tinction may be important in its implica¬
tions for food habits, since emergency
programmes are generally of shorter
duration than refugee feeding pro¬
grammes and receive more traditionally
consumed foods, as donors have a greater
chance of finding suitable short-term
stocks.
Also, emergency food aid recipients
will not necessarily receive a full subsist¬
ence ration and may well continue to
consume some local foods, while refu¬
gees are likely to be totally dependent on
the ration for some time. While these
factors may make food habit changes less
likely among emergency programme re¬
cipients than among refugees, the fact
that such populations may be consider¬
ably larger than refugee populations sug¬
gests that if food habit changes did occur,
their effects on local agriculture would be
far more significant and diffusion to other
population groups more probable.
The World Food Programme (WFP)
supplies the bulk of refugee food aid.
Generally, at least three commodities are
provided: cereal (400 grams), either
maize, rice or wheat; oil or another fat
(30 grams); and a protein source such as
pulses or dry skimmed milk. In some
programmes WFP also provides fish,
meat or cheese. The total ration usually
supplies upwards of 1,800 kilocalories* a
head. However, in emergency rations the
WFP may not be the only major donor, so
that such rations are limited both in terms
of the number of commodities and quan¬
tities. The main commodity is a staple
food, cereal, associated if possible and if
necessary with fat. The average ration
provides about 1,400 kilocalories, and 40
grams of protein are recommended.
Many factors influence food habits,
and people never eat simply to satisfy
their physiological needs for various nut¬
rients. They eat to achieve satiety and
they eat foods with certain textures which
they like. Colours also play an important
role, as do cultural, social, economic and
demographic factors. Some of these fac¬
tors may dictate that certain foods are
prohibited, and in some situations a
radical change in food habits, externally
imposed, may amount to a symbolic
breaking with society. Hence, in the 1944
The prefix kilo is commonly omitted from the term
kilocalorie, and the "calories" counted by dieters are in
fact kilocalories.
32

Bengal famine, many rice-eating Benga¬
lis preferred to starve rather than eat
wheat flour provided by an aid pro¬
gramme.
The provision of food aid could affect
food habits in many ways. It may, for
example, cause a reduction in the price of
locally produced substitutes and a subse¬
quent fall in agricultural production in
response to the low price. Increased
quantities of food aid would then be re¬
quested to fill the resulting agricultural
deficit and the increased availability of
the food aid commodity would gradually
encourage altered food habits. In many
cases the change in food habits would
probably require little encouragement.
For example, the availability of wheat
and rice food aid allows rural as well as
urban consumers access to staples which
are considered by many to be better
foods. However, in spite of many studies,
particularly in India, there is no firm evi¬
dence that long-term food aid is a disin¬
centive to local agriculture.
In contrast there have been no studies
on the effect of bulk emergency food aid
on agricultural production and food
habits. Recent evidence from emergency
programmes in sub-Saharan Africa sug¬
gests that this may be an important omis¬
sion. In Sudan, for example, dramatic
price deflation of the staple grains millet
and sorghum in 1985 and 1986 closely
mirrored patterns of food aid flow. Prices
were actually lower than in 1982, in spite
of an annual inflation rate of 30 per cent.
Wages were also affected and labour
costs on two irrigation schemes tripled
over 1984 levels. Food aid appeared to be
acting as a work disincentive, with the
resulting labour scarcity causing wage in¬
flation. Many large farms around
Gedaref were reportedly left unhar-
vested in 1986 because of the squeezing of
agricultural profit margins. It seems
probable that as a result of this a signifi¬
cant proportion of Sudanese farmers sub¬
sequently cut back production of the nor¬
mal staple and changed their cropping
patterns to reduce future risks. Clearly,
this has implications for food habits.
Food aid may of course have a more
direct impact on food habits. Recipients
may react quickly to factors such as taste,
ease of preparation and the status
attached to certain donated foodstuffs.
Some reports on mother/child health,
food-for-work and school feeding pro¬
grammes have revealed the rapid accept¬
ance of new food items. In Sri Lanka a
previously untried weaning mixture in¬
troduced through mother/child health
clinics caught on so quickly that it stimu¬
lated local production of vegetables con¬
tained in the mixture to the point of self-
sufficiency within two years. There are
also examples of foodstuffs which have
proved unacceptable. For example, the
unfamiliarity, texture and odour of fish
protein concentrate have caused it to be
withdrawn from a number of program-
V
,
> 4 I J i
' * % . .
.- : sa*- *
i
%
mes. Other reports describe situations in
which new foods are tolerated rather than
wholeheartedly accepted or rejected, as
with sorghum-grits in Bangladesh.
Overall, it seems probable that a num¬
ber of factors militate against enduring or
widespread changes in food habits from
food aid provided by this type of project,
most of which are small-scale with limited
national coverage. In India, for example,
only 1.5 per cent of pre-school children
are reached by the mother/child health
programme. Most beneficiaries are only
attached to such projects for short or
A refugee family in an African camp. It is
Increasingly felt that measures to develop
sound nutrition habits should be an indis¬
pensable part of food aid and other relief
programmes.
33

intermittent periods. World Food Prog¬
ramme mother/child health programmes
only encourage attendance for one to two
years, while food-for-work projects
attempt to offer employment at a time
when there is seasonal slack in labour
demand. Most projects also provide only
a proportion of food subsistence needs,
so that participants consume traditional
foods concurrently.
It might be expected that refugee feed¬
ing programmes would be more likely to
encourage changes in food habits, since
many of these programmes are long-term
and involve total dependence on food
aid. In Asia and Latin America,
however, refugee food aid items have
been the same as, or very similar to,
normally consumed foods. This contrasts
with Africa where, for example, the main
refugee food aid staple items have been
wheat" and maize, which have therefore
substituted for the more traditional sor¬
ghum, millet and teff used by the Somali
and Ethiopian peoples. While these don¬
ated staples have generally been accepted
in the camps, largely because of their
convenience and ease of preparation, it is
not clear whether long-term use of these
staples and other unfamiliar food items
will lead to an eventual change in food
habits, should these refugees return
home.
Some refugee settlements have been
allowed to cultivate areas of land, and
have therefore managed to grow a prop¬
ortion of their former staple. Other
camps have allowed refugees individual
or community gardens where traditional
spices, vegetables and other items are
grown. But even if refugees learn to grow
and process new staples and other foods
in the settlements, it may prove difficult
for them to do so on their return. Furth¬
ermore, as surveys have shown, agricul¬
turalists, who comprise the bulk of refu¬
gee populations, are notoriously con¬
servative with regard to certain food
habits. This is borne out to some extent
by the number of food aid items which
end up in local markets as refugees ex¬
change them for preferred traditional
foodstuffs.
On the other hand, many refugee
populations tend towards a younger than
normal age distribution (as vulnerable
older segments of the population may
have died in the period of hardship lead¬
ing up to the refugee exodus, or may have
been abandoned), and may therefore
adapt more readily to changed food cir¬
cumstances. Indeed, in many camps, chil¬
dren under five will have known no other
source of nutrition than refugee food aid.
At present it is impossible to say with
certainty whether food aid, and in particu¬
lar emergency and refugee aid, affects
long-term food habits. What is certain,
however, is that some changes in food
habits, such as greater use of appropriate
weaning foods, may be very desirable
while others such as those that may create
dependence on expensive imports, are
fions expand and as emergency pro¬
grammes recur with greater frequency in
those countries increasingly vulnerable to
food crises, the need to link food aid
distribution with educational and produc¬
tive activities must be recognized, in
order that relief operations of a certain
duration may be used as an opportunity
to protect and develop sound nutrition
habits.
JEREMY SHOHAM is a nutritionist anda consul¬
tant on food aid matters with FAO.
BRUNO STAINIER is headofthe Nutrition Prog¬
rammes Service of FAO, based in Rome.
Social Structures and Food Deficiency, a
book based on the proceedings of an interna¬
tional seminar organized by Unesco in 1985,
will be published later this year in English and
Spanish editions. (English edition published
by the Unesco Regional Office, Bangkok.)
£L 17
