Treasuresfrom an ancient Chinese tomb *>y w Ruuang
FOR years archaeologists working
in China's Shaanxi Province had
tried to deduce the location of a
2,500-year-old royal cemetery from clues
scattered in an ancient historical chron¬
icle, the Shi Ji. They mounted no less
than five expeditions in search of the
cemetery, the burial ground of the lead¬
ers of the Qin family which ruled in north¬
western China during what is known as
the "Spring and Autumn Period" and the
"Warring States Period" of Chinese his¬
tory (770-221 BC). During the last of
these expeditions, in 1976, they dis¬
covered a large tomb, investigation of
which convinced them that they had not
only located the cemetery but the site of
the Qin capital itself, the magnificent and
mysterious city of Yongcheng,
The tomb, which the archaeologists
called the "Duke of Qin Tomb No. 1"
(the head of a state at that time being
known as a "duke") is situated some 160
kilometres west of Xian. It was about 25
kilometres east of this ancient Chinese
capital that a fabulous army of life-size
terra-cotta statues of soldiers and horses
was discovered in 1974 (see the Unesco
Courier, December 1979). These re¬
markable statues accompanied the tomb
of a later member of the family and
founder of the Qin dynasty, Qin Shi
Huang, the first emperor of a united
China, who lived from 259 to 210 BC.
The Duke of Qin's tomb sheds light on an
earlier period of Chinese history it
dates from several centuries earlier than
that of Qin Shi Huang.
Yongcheng was the political, econo¬
mic, military and cultural hub of the Qin
State for almost 300 years, during which it
became known as a magnificent and gran¬
diose State capital.
Excavations have shown that the site is
divided into two major sections the
cemetery, and a cluster of palace build¬
ings which lay within city walls. Remains
of the walls indicate that the palace area
measured 3,300 metres from east to west
and 3,200 metres from north to south, an
area of 11 square kilometres.
Four main groups of buildings dating
from the Spring and Autumn Period have
been located in the south of the city. One
group, a complex of earth and timber
temples used for ancestor-worship, cov¬
ers more than 7,000 square metres and is
the largest and best-preserved example of
Qin temple architecture yet found.
Another group (covering 21,800
square metres) comprises five palace
courtyards which extended from south to
north and are regarded as the most com¬
plete example of early Qin State
architecture. Comparison of this site with
data from contemporary writings has
convinced archaeologists that heads of
state during the Spring and Autumn
Period administered public affairs in the
open air in such palace courtyards, thus
continuing the tradition of an earlier
tribal society.
The buildings of Yongcheng were of a
sophisticated double-pillar construction,
ornamented with delicately engraved
bronzework, some sixty fragments of
Archaeologists and sightseers are
dwarfed by the size of the first major tomb
to be excavated in the cemetery of Yong¬
cheng, the capital from which Dukes of the
Qin family ruled part of China some 2,500
years ago, before the country was united
under its first Emperor, Qin Shi Huang
(259-210 BC).
which have been unearthed. Archaeolog¬
ists have also found specimens of roof
tiles decorated with graceful human and
animal motifs such as a young deer with
its mother, a jumping frog, a hunter and a
tiger. One interesting feature of the
palace is an underground cold store, the
oldest known icebox, which could hold
some 190 cubic metres of ice.
Yongcheng's cemetery, which extends
7 kilometres from east to west and 3
kilometres from north to south, com¬
prises thirteen graveyards of various
shapes and sizes, each ringed by a moat.
The total length of the moats, which were
formerly linked together, is 35
kilometres.
There are eighteen large tombs with
two symmetrical aisles. These are known
as "tp"-shaped tombs since their layout
viewed from above looks like the Chinese
character "*f". There are also three
tombs with one aisle. These are known as
"^"-shaped tombs since their layout is
similar to the Chinese character "^" . The
number of small and medium-sized
tombs has not yet been calculated. Each
32

large tomb is accompanied by pits in
which sacrifices, such as wagons -and
horses, were buried. The largest pit is 116
metres long and 25 metres wide.
The Duke of Qin Tomb No. 1 is "tp-
shaped" and resembles an inverted pyra¬
mid built into the ground. It extends 59.4
metres from east to west, 38.8 metres
from north to south, and is 24 metres
deep from ground level to the bottom of
the tomb. The two aisles, 7 to 19 metres
wide and with a total length of 270
metres, form a deep valley which leads to
the coffin chamber, which has three
levels and measures 40 metres by 20
metres at the base. Some 160 containers
of human sacrifices were found around
and above the lowest level, arranged
according to their social status in life. In
addition, the bodies of twenty slaves,
their limbs bent, were buried in the dirt
close to the surface.
Each human sacrifice container is
labelled with characters and numbers
carved on cinnabar. Objects found in the
containers with the bodies tools, pig¬
ments, bronze mirrors or strings of
pearls suggest that these men and
women were intended to serve the Duke
in the "other world" as labourers, craft-
workers, or entertainers. Little imagina¬
tion is required to picture their sufferings
when they were buried, and to conceive
of the cruelty and barbarity of the Qin
regime.
The main coffin was placed in a struc¬
ture 15 metres long and 6 metres wide,
built with three layers of square timbers
joined without a single metal nail. The
top layer consisted of 56 timbers, prob¬
ably high quality pine, each 20 cms
square, some 6 metres long, and weighing
about 300 kilograms. All knots in the
timber had been replaced with cast metal,
often in blocks as big as a fist, to prevent
the wood from rotting away. We do not
know how metal was cast in wood at this
early period, when even iron tools were
rare. The timbers were painted and fur¬
ther preserved by a layer of charcoal, up
to 3 metres thick in some places, which
covered the whole structure.
Two long wooden logs , which had been
used to lay the main coffin to rest during
the funeral, were found lying at an angle
in the soil on either side of it. These logs
are the earliest "tombstones" ever found
in China. In later times the tomb owner's
name and his funeral elegy were carved
on such wooden "tombstones", and later
still the practice of placing a stone tablet
in front of a tomb was adopted.
Although the Duke of Qin Tomb had
often been robbed in ancient times,
archaeologists have discovered some
2,600 funeral objects made of such mate¬
rials as stone, jade, iron, bronze, pottery,
lacquer, bamboo, wood, silk, and clay.
The most valuable finds are twenty ex¬
quisitely crafted and highly polished
musical stones or chimes, many of which
are complete and can still produce clear
and melodious sounds. Carved on the
chimes are 190 superbly calligraphed
characters executed in a similar style to
the inscriptions found on drum-shaped
stone blocks from the "Warring States"
Period (475-221 BC).
Several iron artefacts such as shovels
have also been excavated, providing the
earliest evidence of metal technology yet
found in northern China.
Unfortunately, not many precious
metal artefacts are left. Those which have
survived include gold animal figures,
rings, beads, bronze swords with gold
handles, gold decorations for carts and
horses, and gold wire springs. Pieces of
jade, often of high quality with still-clear
designs, have also been found.
Not all of these gold and jade objects
belonged to the tomb owner. Many hu¬
man sacrifices also wore jewellery, such
as strings of gold or turquoise beads.
Even the sacrificial wagons and horses
were decorated with gold, most of the
highly-imaginative designs showing hu¬
man or animal figures of varying shapes.
Such finds, manifestations of a highly
diverse culture, are invaluable for
anthropological studies on the arts and
the forms of entertainment in Qin
society.
Small pieces of silk found in the tomb
illustrate the high standard of weaving
techniques at that time, and their designs,
though faded, still give some idea of the
brightness of the original colours.
Archaeologists and natural scientists
are collaborating closely in the conserva¬
tion of objects from the Duke of Qin
Tomb No. 1, which is still being ex¬
cavated. (The other major tombs are also
to be excavated.) For some time my col¬
leagues and I have been studying the
applications of laser technology and
other modern scientific processes to the
conservation of cultural relics. We have
been successful in using our laser equip¬
ment to remove rust, contaminant and
mildew, and have so far completed the
surface cleaning of twenty-six objects
made of such materials as iron, bronze,
stone, pottery and silk, as well as ancient
paintings and calligraphy.
The most remarkable advantage of the
laser-cleaning technique is that it does
not damage the surface of the object,
including any vestiges of designs or in¬
scriptions. Moreover, when a layer of
rust is removed by laser, the artefact does
not readily rust again.
The application of this technique was
costly at first, but now the expense has
come down to a level acceptable to the
departments responsible for the pre¬
servation of cultural relics. We are
however trying to further reduce the cost
of our service, to ensure that the salvage
and conservation of our cultural heritage
from this ancient civilization will
continue.
WEN RUITANG, Chinese engineer, is a special¬
ist in the conservation ofarchaeological relics by
means of laser technology.
m *
w
nC_ rp
-.; 'v
The ruler buried in the newly-excavated
tomb was surroundedbyhuman sacrifices
and various objects for use in the next
world. Crafted In materials such as jade,
iron, bronze, pottery, wood and silk, the
mass of finds so far unearthed àt Yong¬
cheng shed light on tastes and technolo¬
gies in an obscure period of early Chinese
history. From top to bottom: a jade arte¬
fact, a stone fish, two stone statues andan
eaves tile with an animal design.
33
