The
Walser
by Paul Zinsli
Migrant farmers who settled in high places
THE Walser were peaceful moun¬
tain farmers who in the late Mid¬
dle Ages left their homeland in
the Upper Rhône valley, in what is now
the Swiss canton of Valais, and founded
new, widely scattered settlements in high
valleys where they lived in seclusion
among groups of earlier settlers who,
unlike them, spoke a Romance language.
To a certain extent they have managed to
preserve their identity and especially
their language, a distinctive old German
dialect, up to the present day.
For centuries scholars argued about
the origin of these "Alpine Germans".
Some thought that they were the original
inhabitants of the region. Others main¬
tained that they were descended from the
guards posted at the Alpine passes by the
powerful German Hohenstaufen family.
According to other hypotheses, they
were the descendants of the Cimbri, the
Carrying his implements and provisions
on his back, a Walser mountain farmer
sets out for his Alpine hut in the Graubün¬
den highlands.
Teutoni, the Saxons, the Frisians, the
Swedes, the Huns or even of the
Mongolian prince Genghis Khan! They
have also been referred to as Burgun-
dian, Goth or Lombard peoples.
Scientific research long ago showed
that the original home of the Walser peo¬
ple was in the Rhône valley. Early four¬
teenth-century documents refer to them
as Uli de Wallis or "those from the Val¬
ais". Feudal charters and documents of
enfranchisement granted to the inhabi¬
tants of the Rheinwald valley (now in the
Swiss canton of Graubünden), in the late
thirteenth century, specify the origin of
these immigrants. After leaving the
Conches valley (now in the Swiss Valais),
most of them passed through Val For-
mazza in Italy on their way to the Raetian
area of the Central Alps.
This migration, which took place
within a short space of time, was a curious
event. With great boldness, this small
group of farmers from the Upper Valais
scattered in all directions, despite the
obstacles of the rugged terrain, and set¬
tled over an exceptionally wide area.
The Walser have accumulated long experi¬
ence of farming at high altitudes in places
where the rugged Alpine terrain might
have discouraged a less tenacious people.
Lett, a typical Walser barn perched on a
hillside in the Swiss canton of Ticino.
In the south, some of them settled in
Val Formazza. They built new villages on
the upper reaches of nearly all the valleys
on the southern flanks of the Alps
between the Simplón and Theodul
passes. In the far west, in Savoy, there
were once two small Walser settlements,
significantly known as Les Allamands. In
the north they settled in the catchment
area of the upper Aare River and, still
further afield, their settlements extended
into the Bernese lowlands. Their exodus
eastwards took them beyond the present
frontiers of Switzerland, to the slopes of
Liechtenstein until, finally, they spread
into the Vorarlberg region.
Initially it is probable that only small
groups of families and their modest
herds, consisting mainly of goats, left to
set up new homesteads far away. The
vitality of these emigrants must have been
considerable, enabling them to survive
the losses that they suffered. It is
recorded that each family had many
children.
Why was this small group of farmers
seized by a sudden compulsion to mig¬
rate? Several hypotheses have been put
forward: overpopulation of their original
homeland, climatic changes or invasions.
However, recent research has established
that the Walser were forced to move by
feudal landlords. In the Bernese Ober¬
land the people of Lötsch were even sold
as serfs to the monastery of Interlaken.
On the Italian slopes of the Alps, heredi¬
tary rulers with estates on both sides of
the mountains installed their solid Ger-
14

manic farmers to defend the passes and
the pasturelands.
In return the landowners often had to
grant certain freedoms to their subjects.
Those who had emigrated to Val For-
mazza, for example, obtained highly
favourable conditions for settling and
cultivating the land. The Rheinwalder
who emigrated further afield expressly
cited these time-honoured "customs"
when, like the Walser of Davos
(Graubünden), they secured not only full
individual freedom of movement based
on contracts of hereditary fief, but also
the right to have their own independent
judicial bodies.
As they settled on still uninhabited or
sparsely colonized Alpine lands, the Wal¬
ser acquired new territory. With the
tenacity of those bred to mountain life,
they cleared the forests, built new home¬
steads and worked the higher pastures to
obtain winter fodder, living exclusively
by cattle raising and dairy farming.
Naturally the Walser colonies changed
in the course of time. Entire districts once
settled by the Walser again became
Romanized, many communities were
unable to cope with the hardship of living
at rugged heights and disappeared, while
others were submerged by the social
upheavals of modern life and lost their
originality.
The Walser had rarely been allowed
to settle anywhere except at high alti¬
tudes where the land could not be culti¬
vated permanently. It was in such areas
that the bright mountain sun, healthy air
and winter snow came to attract moun¬
taineers and winter sports enthusiasts
from the lowlands. No wonder, then, that
world-famous resorts developed on Wal¬
ser soil.
fc ¿/
One example is Davos, where owner¬
ship of the land was confirmed by charter
in 1289 to a Walser, "Wilhelm dem
amann [William the Bailiff] and his com¬
panions in fair tenure". In today's busy
holiday town only some 200 of the 10,000
inhabitants still speak the pure local Wal¬
ser dialect.
Everywhere, but especially on its most
easterly borders, the old, robust Walser
speech is dying out, and with it the
heritage of a vigorous, dynamic people.
PAUL ZINSLI, of Switzerland, is a professor
emeritus at the University of Berne, where he
formerly taught the language, literature and folk-
studies of German-speaking Switzerland. He is
the author olWalser Volktum ("Walser Folk Heri¬
tage", 5th edition, 1985).
The village well at Alagna, on the Italian
slopes of the Alps, a region settled by the
Walser.
The challenge of living in rugged, isolated
surroundings schooled the Walser in
resourcefulness and self-reliance. Above,
an elderly couple in Graubünden.
A mountain village in the eastern Swiss
canton of Graubünden. Migrant groups
belonging to the Walser, a people whose
original home was in the upper Rhône
valley, settled in the high, secluded val¬
leys of this region from the 13th to the 15th
centuries.
15
