IS Paradise an Island? The ancient
Greeks believed that the spirits of their
dead heroes inhabited the Elyslan
Fields in the Isles of the Blest, far away to
the west beyond Calpe and Abyla, the Pil¬
lars of Hercules.
Centuries later, searching for Paradise,
the Irish monk Saint Brendan (484-578)
sailed far Into the Atlantic Ocean, where he
came upon an island of unsurpassed
beauty and fertility which he believed to be
the "Promised Land of the Saints". Saint
Brendan's sacred Island remained clearly
marked upon most maps for over a thou¬
sand years. Even today most travel agents
have at least one "island paradise" on their
books with which to tempt clients anxious
"to get away from it all".
Is Hell an Island? For millions of Africans
sold Into slavery, the Island of Gorée off the
coast of Senegal, near Dakar, where they
were held before being transported across
the Atlantic, was the gateway to Hell, and
few names so readily evoke the notion of
Hell on earth as that of Devil's Island.
Paradise or Purgatory, Heaven or Hell,
islands leave no one indifferent, least of all
scientists. It was no accident that Darwin's
momentous The Origin of Species was the
outcome of a voyage to the Galapagos, the
Islas Encantadas, the "Enchanted Isles" as
they were also called, for by their nature
islands offer the scientist special oppor¬
tunities for research. As Darwin wrote of the
Galapagos in his Journal on 8 October
1835, "The archipelago is a little world
within itself...", and 'The natural history of
these islands is eminently curious and well
deserves attention".
Echoes of these words can be heard in
those written almost a hundred and forty
years later by a group of experts gathered
in Paris, in 1973, to outline the scientific
content of the MAB project on The Ecology
and Rational Use of Island Ecosystems:
"Islands offer an exceptional opportunity to
study, under relatively controlled condi¬
tions, the entire spectrum of ecological,
demographic, economic and social factors
that influence population/environment rela¬
tionships. This is particularly true as popu¬
lation/environment systems on islands are
small and easily modelled, and can at the
same time be representative of larger sys¬
tems." The final sentence of the above dec¬
laration not only re-introduced the notion of
the Island as a microcosm, Darwin's "little
world within itself", it also explains why
MAB Island research is concentrated on
small islands. The 1973 meeting of experts
defined "small" as meaning having a sur¬
face area of 1 0,000 square kilometres or
less.
Briefly stated, the objective of MAB
island research is to promote sustainable
20

at risk
development of small islands and rational
management of their natural resources.
A number of primary research themes
have been selected as being necessary for
the achievement of this objective:
the management of environmental
resources by Island populations;
the Impact of external forces on islands,
in particular the effects of tourism;
the impact of the introduction of alien
plants and animals on island ecosystems;
the impact of migration;
the impact of agrochemicals on island
environments and societies;
the ¡slander's perception of his or her
special social and natural environment.
Implementation of these general lines of
island research within MAB has been
largely shaped by the situation and prob¬
lems of each specific island or island group.
The South Pacific was the focus of initial
island research work in MAB, followed by
studies in the Caribbean, Mediterranean
and other regions.
Experience from a selection of these
projects provided one of the basic Inputs to
an inter-oceanlc workshop on sustainable
development and management of small
islands, held in Puerto Rico in November
1986.
Organized by the US-MAB Directorate
on Caribbean Islands, the workshop was
sponsored by the MAB Committees of the
United States and Canada, Unesco, UNEP
and UNCTAD.
The thirty invited specialists who took
part came from five ocean basins and nine¬
teen countries, from cultures as diverse as
those of Australia, Barbados, China, Fiji,
France, Hawaii, Japan, Malta, St. Lucia and
Yugoslavia, and from disciplinary back¬
grounds ranging from anthropology, ecol¬
ogy and economics to geography and
sociology.
This diversity among the participants
attending the workshop mirrored the very
wide diversity to be found amongst Islands.
Quite apart from the major division between
continental islands (those that are unsub-
merged parts of the continental shelf) and
oceanic islands (those that rise from the
floors of the ocean basins), there is a world
of difference between the very small
Islands of the eastern Caribbean, the
Pacific and the Atlantic, and, for example,
Puerto Rico (8,897 square kilometres),
Jamaica and Fiji.
Islands are to be found in every latitude
and in all climates. They occur singly, in
groups, in archipelagos and in island arcs.
There are high islands of continental rock,
high. volcanic islands, raised limestone
islands, coral atolls and sand cays. They
may be populous or uninhabited, indepen¬
dent States or politically part of a conti¬
nental State, richly or poorly endowed by
nature.
Underlying this diversity, however, is the
fundamental fact that small islands are in
several respects specialized and rather
fragile environments. They have a much
higher proportion of endemic species than
most continental regions, are subject to the
action of the sea on all sides, and have only
small fresh water catchments so that rain¬
fall and eroded material are constantly
being lost to the sea.
Island peoples have often evolved cul¬
tures that are distinct from those of conti¬
nental peoples and to which they feel a
©
Tahiti, the largest island of the Windward
Group of the Society Islands, French
Polynesia
21

strong allegiance. At the same time they
are very vulnerable to the effects of outside
economic, technological and social forces
which can disrupt both their natural and
cultural environment.
Because small islands have only a lim¬
ited range of exploitable resources, the
options for ecologically and economically
sustainable development are restricted.
Ultimately an island's natural
resources its water supply, soil, wildlife,
forests and fisheries will determine its
capacity to accept and sustain develop¬
ment.
Moreover, on a small island the margin
for error is small. Even a comparatively
minor miscalculation over the acceptable
level of forest exploitation, for example,
could seriously endanger the water supply,
diminish animal wildlife, and result in
excessive soil erosion and sedimentation
with , consequent adverse impacts on
estuarine and marine resources. Even
quite a small upswing in population can
have devastating ecological and social
effects.
Much is still unknown or unclear regard¬
ing the mechanisms that regulate the rela¬
tionships between man and a limited
environment, yet without a thorough under¬
standing of the resources available for
development and the vulnerability of island
resource systems to human activities, sus¬
tainable development will remain a hit-
or-mlss affair.
Furthermore, ecological change can
both cause and result from economic and
. cultural changes. Effective resource man¬
agement must therefore strive to establish
an equilibrium between economic con¬
straints, ecological imperatives and the
social and cultural dimensions of each
island society.
Poster by the French designerA ndré François
for the exhibition lies (Islands), held at the
Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris, from 24
June to 23 September, 1987
