How Buddhism
came to
Karnasuvarna
by Xuan Zang
The most famous Chinese pilgrim who
visited India was Xuan Zang (602-664), a
Buddhist monk with encyclopaedic
religious knowledge. Unhappy about the
doctrinal errors and divergences he had
noted in the Chinese versions of the '
sacred Buddhist scriptures, he decided to
go to India in search of the original texts
and to study with Indian masters. After a
stay lasting several years, he returned to
China with over 600 works, relics and
souvenirs. He spent the rest of his life
translating philosophical texts and
teaching. His Ta-T'ang Hsi-yü-chi
("Records of the Western Regions of the
Great Tang Dynasty") describes his
journey.
Illustration from Sun Wukong becomes a
Buddhist (1984), a Chinese book ofchildren's
stories adapted from Xiyouji (The Monkey
King or Pilgrimage to the West), an epic novel
based on Xuan Zang'sjourney to India. The
Monkey King, Sun Wukong, protects Xuan
Zang (on horseback) from a tiger.
KARNASUVARNA was 4,400 or 4,500 li in circumference and its capital
was over 20 li in circumference. It was a prosperous state with a large
population. Its land was low and moist and farming operations there were
conducted regularly in accordance with the seasons. Everywhere in the state,
there were blooming flowers and trees laden with rare fruits. The climate was
temperate and the people were of good character. They were patrons of learning
and believed in both Buddhism and other religions. There were more than ten
Buddhist monasteries and over two thousand Brethren who were all adherents of
the Sammatiya School. There were also fifty Deva-Temples and the followers of
the various religions were very numerous. There were another three Buddhist
monasteries where the Brethren did not eat milk products in accordance with the
teaching of Devadatta.
Near the capital was the Luoduoweizhi Monastery (or Red Mud Monastery in
the language of the T'ang Dynasty). With its spacious rooms and courtyards and
lofty pavilions and platforms, it was a magnificent and famous establishment, the
resort of illustrious Brethren and scholars from throughout the state. They
gathered there to exchange ideas and discuss theories and philosophies.
In earlier years, no one in the state believed in Buddhism. Once, a person of
another religion from South India strutted into the capital with a walking stick in
his hand, with his stomach girded by a copper sheathing and bearing on his head a
light.
Someone asked this person: "Why are you putting such odd things around your
stomach and on your head?"
The man answered: "I have too much learning and my stomach would burst out
(if not protected by the copper sheathing) and I pity those stupid and ignorant
masses, so I bear a light on my head to enlighten them." ,
He was beating a drum and challenging anyone to debate with him. Ten days
went by, and no one dared to ask the man any questions. Even a search through all
the elites in the state proved vain.
The King said: "Why is it that we can't find a wise and illustrious person in the
whole state? It's a galling shame that when a guest here asks a question, no one in
the state can answer it. Try again among those hermits."
Then someone came forward and told the King: "There is a stranger in the
forest who calls himself Sramana. He has been living in solitude for a long time
and devoting himself to study. If he is not a learned and highly moral person , how
could he behave in this way?"
After hearing the story, the King himself went to the forest to invite the stranger
to take part in the debate.
Sramana told the King: "I am from South India and staying here as a guest. I do
not have much learning and probably cannot live up to your expectations. I am
grateful for your invitation and cannot persist in declining it. If I win the debate, I
wish you would found a Buddhist monastery and invite the Brethren to spread the
doctrines of Buddhism."
The King answered: "I promise and we will never forget your great kindness."
Sramana accepted the King's invitation and went to meet the braggart. The
latter made a speech of more than 30,000 words on the doctrines of his religion.
The speech, imbued with profound meaning and a wide range of knowledge,
touched on almost everything under the sun, from theories created by famous
persons to his own experiences.
However, after listening to the speech no more than a moment, Sramana saw all
the meaning in it. He used only a few hundred words in his reply and interpreta¬
tion, making not a single mistake, and then asked some hard questions about his
opponent's doctrines. The braggart realized that he had been defeated in the
argument, and fell silent. He was totally discredited and retreated in disgrace. The
King deeply respected the talent of Sramana and founded the Luoduoweizhi
Monastery to begin spreading the doctrines of Buddhism.
24
