AGRICULTURAL scientists have re¬
cently begun to recognize that many
farming systems that have persisted
for millennia exemplify careful management
of soil, water, and nutrients, precisely the
methods required to make high-input farming
practices sustainable. This overdue reap¬
praisal stems in part from the need to use
inputs more efficiently, and in part from the
growing interest in biological technologies.
Traditional farming systems face real
agronomic limits, and can rarely compete
tonne for harvested tonne with high-input
modern methods. It is important to recognize
these limitations, for they determine both how
traditional practices can be modified and what
such practices can contribute to the effort to
raise agricultural productivity.
First, most traditional crop varieties have
limited genetic potential for high grain yields.
They are often large-leaved and tall, for exam¬
ple. These traits help farmers meet non-food
needs, supplying thatch, fuel and fodder as
well as food to farm households. Traditional
varieties respond poorly to the two elements
of agronomic management that make high
grain yields possible: dense planting and
artificial fertilizer. Despite these limitations,
traditional varieties also contain genetic diver¬
sity that is invaluable to breeders in search of
genes for disease- and pest-resistance and
for other traits.
Second, peasant farmers often have to
plant in soils with serious nutrient deficiencies,
where crop combinations and rotations are
needed to help offset the limitations. Many
tropical soils, for instance, lack sufficient nitro¬
gen to sustain a robust crop. Soils in vast
areas of semi-arid Africa are deficient in phos¬
phorus. High-yielding varieties, more efficient
in converting available nutrients into edible
grain, can rapidly deplete soil nutrients if they
are planted by peasant farmers who cannot
purchase supplemental fertilizers.
Nonetheless, traditional methods can make
an important contribution to efforts to raise
agricultural productivity. They offer what have
been called "principles of permanence".
"Neither modern Western agriculture nor in¬
digenous traditional agriculture, in their pres¬
ent forms, are exactly what will be needed by
most small-scale farmers," says one'
researcher, Gerald Marten of the East-West
Center in Hawaii. "The challenge for agri¬
cultural research is to improve agriculture in
ways that retain the strengths of traditional
agriculture while meeting the needs of chang¬
ing times."
Harvest home. A Mauritanian woman fills
her bowl from a heap of millet near the
family tent. Research in recent years has
contributed to a reappraisal of the ecolo¬
gical and agronomic strengths of tradi¬
tional farming techniques such as those
practiced by West Africa's millet and sor¬
ghum growers. Joining biotechnologies
with the ecological insights of traditional
farming may lead to innovative solutions
to economic and environmental problems
in agriculture.

The rediscovery of traditional agriculture
Intercropping, agroforestry, shifting cultiva¬
tion, and other traditional farming methods
mimic natural ecological processes, and the
sustainability of many traditional practices lies
in the ecological models they follow. This use
of natural analogies suggests principles for
the design of agricultural systems to make the
most of sunlight, soil nutrients and rainfall.
Shifting cultivation practices, such as bush-
fallow methods in Africa, demonstrate how
farmers can harness the land's natural re¬
generation. Farmers using bush-fallow sys¬
tems clear fields by burning off the shrubs and
woody vegetation. Ashes fertilize the first
crop. After a couple of seasons, as nutrients
are depleted, harvests begin to decline, so
farmers abandon the fields and move on to
clear new land. Natural regeneration takes
over; shrubs and trees gradually reseed the
land, returning nutrients to the topsoil and
restoring the land's inherent fertility. After fif
teen to twenty years, the land can be burned
and cultivated again.
The bush-fallow system has obvious limita¬
tions. But even disintegrating systems offer a
basis for designing productive and sustai¬
nable farming practices. Researchers at the
Nigeria-based International Institute of Tropi¬
cal Agriculture, for instance, have adapted the
principles of natural regeneration in bush-
fallow systems to a continuous-cultivation
agroforestry system called alley cropping.
Field crops are grown between rows of nitro¬
gen-fixing trees; foliage from the trees
enhances the soil organic matter, while nitro¬
gen fixed in root nodules increases soil fertil¬
ity. A high level of crop production is possible
without a fallow interval. Traditional shifting
cultivation provided the model for this
system.
Conventional research tools can also be
used to overcome the agronomic constraints
that have limited traditional systems to low
productivity. For decades, crop breeders have
tailored varieties to respond to high levels of
artificial fertilizers, assured water supplies,
and dense monoculture plantings. Working
with the genetic diversity available in tradi¬
tional crop varieties, they can apply breeding
methods to produce varieties better matched
to the conditions faced by subsistence
farmers.
As the African examples described here
show, researchers can use traditional princi¬
ples to develop new techniques that preserve
the land's stability and productivity even as
populations increase. Though traditional
methods have limitations, they are not archaic
practices to be swept aside. Traditional
farming constitutes a foundation on which
scientific improvements in agriculture can
build.
&* s
-ar?
- r-v
