by Mario Müller
Song without words
The art of yodeling
TOURISTS visiting Alpine lands,
especially Austria and Switzer¬
land, tend to regard yodeling as a
uniquely Alpine phenomenon.
However, although this special kind of
singing is strongly developed in the Tirol
and the Swiss Alps, it is also practised
elsewhere. It can be heard in Poland,
Lapland, Romania, the Caucasus, China,
Democratic Kampuchea, Thailand, Java,
Melanesia and Polynesia, and among the
African Pygmies.
Yodeling is a form of singing without
words in which the performer vocalizes
syllables and changes frequently from
low chest notes to high falsetto notes over
a wide range. In the Alps, yodeling is
performed solo or by up to five voices and
exists in different forms such as the
Jauchzer (cry of joy), and the Lockrub
(birdcall), folksongs with a yodel refrain
and quite recently even yodel masses.
There is much evidence to suggest that
yodeling was widely practised in pre¬
historic times. Among the variety of
theories put forward to explain its origin,
some see it as a search for echo effects or
as a way of expressing emotions, others as
a reflection of the landscape in which its
devotees live.
Whatever the true explanation may be,
yodeling seems undeniably to be of very
ancient origin; its archaic character is
strikingly apparent in the so-called Natur-
jodel with its F natural lying between F
and F sharp, which is still sung today in
the Swiss valley of Muotathal (canton of
Schwyz).
|r J.krrir^
At one time, yodeling was a part of
everyday life and tradition, developing as
it was transmitted from one generation to
the next. Today, in a more artificial form,
it has become part of the urban cultural
repertoire. Yodeling now has its authors,
its composers and its public.
MARIO MÜLLER, ol Switzerland, teaches Ita¬
lian and French language and literature at the
cantonal school, Schaffhausen. From 1976 to
1984 he was Secretary-General of the Swiss
National Commission for Unesco. He was a
co-founder in 1979 of the Société pour la
Musique Populaire en Suisse, of which he is
president. He contributed to a collective work,
Volksmusik in der Schweiz ("Folk Music in Swit¬
zerland"), published in 1985.
In many parts of Switzerland festivals are
held each summer to celebrate the cultural
heritage. Right, a group of yodelers from
the Bernese Mittelland wearing traditional
costume.
31
