Tomatomation
Japan's high-tech food factories
by Koichibara Hiroshi
THE harnessing of high technology to
vegetable farming may be about to
trigger a new agricultural revolu¬
tion in Japan, where some large manufac¬
turers are already offering fully automatic
"factories" in which vegetables are grown in
a computer-controlled artificial environ¬
ment. In their use of automation and high
technology these facilities resemble auto¬
mobile or electronics plants, but instead of
automobiles or video tape recorders their
mass production lines produce fresh vegeta¬
bles, regardless of season or climate.
Strictly speaking, today's factory farming
technology is based not on biotechnology
but on applying industrial production man¬
agement techniques to conventional agri¬
cultural engineering. The aim is to use
artificially controlled environments to grow
plants rapidly and efficiently rather than
improve the adaptation of plants to natural
conditions. Such ideas have already been
applied to poultry farming, egg production
systems, and even the production of foie
gras. Factory farms may thus make a big
impact on conventional agriculture since
they provide planned cultivation regardless
of weather, season, climate or soil.
The essential element in this new
Light, temperature and humidity are com¬
puter controlled in this vegetable factory
in a Tokyo suburb. High electricity con¬
sumption is a drawback.
development is hydroponics, the cultivation
of plants in nutritive solutions. Factory
farms are air-conditioned, and high-pres¬
sure sodium lamps provide twenty-four-
hour-a-day illumination. The density of car¬
bon dioxide, oxygen, temperature and
humidity are controlled by a computer to
maintain an optimum growing environ¬
ment.
The hardware used in this process is not
new. It is readily available from manufac¬
turers of electrical consumer goods, and this
may be the reason why Japanese electrical
conglomerates are active in this field. Com¬
panies in Denmark, the United States and
Austria are also experimenting with vegeta¬
ble factories but for the moment the Jap¬
anese seem to be leading the field.
In 1985, a "supertomato" plant was dis¬
played in the Japanese government-
sponsored pavilion at an international
exhibition held in Japan, Tsukuba Expo.
'85 (see the Unesco Courier, March 1985).
This was a major success for a hydroponic
culture system developed after many years
of research by a Japanese agronomist,
Nozawa Shigeo. The growth of the plant
was accelerated in a nutritive solution which
replaced soil and in an artificially controlled
environment. As a result the plant pro¬
duced more than 13,000 tomatoes during
the six months of the Expo.
Daiei, Japan's biggest supermarket
chain , has installed a factory farm next to its
store in the Tokyo suburb of Fanabashi.
This experimental facility, constructed in
co-operation with Hitachi Ltd. to grow let¬
tuce for sale in the adjoining supermarket,
may be the world's first commercial factory
farm using full automatic hydroponic cul¬
ture technology. The system produces some
130 heads of lettuce and other green vegeta¬
bles per day (some 47,000 per year) on a
floor space of no more than 66 square
metres. Grown from seed, the lettuce is big
enough for harvesting in only five weeks,
3.5 times faster than plants cultivated using
conventional methods.
In this futuristic factory, the sun is
replaced by artificial twenty-four-hour
lighting, soil with nutritive solution and
17

Trays of growing lettuce were rotated up
and down on chain conveyors in this
vegetable factory installation shown in the
Japanese Government pavilion at Expo
'85, an international exhibition held at Tsu-
kuba (Japan) in 1985. The lettuce were
grown in liquid nutrients, using the tech¬
nique known as hydroponics. The 24-
hour-a-day lighting, carbon-dioxide-rich
atmosphere and constant temperature
helped the lettuce to reach maturity in 20
days, 4 to 5 times faster than normal. The
moving conveyor belts ensured that every
plant was exposed to the same amount of
heat and light.
farmers with a micro-computer. The crop is
tasty and free from pesticides and her¬
bicides, and is in great demand, regardless
of the price tag, which is double that of
conventionally grown lettuce.
In Mitsubishi Electric's Amagasaki labo¬
ratory, a prototype food factory assembly
line succeeded in growing lettuce seedlings
from 2 grams to 130 grams in 15 days 6
times faster than the natural growth rate.
With specially developed fluorescent
lamps, the photosynthetic ratio is said to be
better than that of the sun. Sprouts cloned
from the tissues of mature plants start at one
end of a conveyor and move along at the
rate of 20 centimetres a day.
In March 1986 Japanese National Rail¬
ways (JNR) built two experimental vegeta¬
ble factories, each with a size of 50 square
metres and a construction cost of $60,000.
Since May, each factory has been producing
120 heads of lettuce a day. Experiments are
being carried out on the cultivation of other
vegetables such as tomatoes, cabbage,
asparagus, melon and green peppers. In the
case of JNR, electric power supplied by its
own power plants can be efficiently used at
night when demand is low, and open spaces
beneath the overhead railway or aban¬
doned tunnels can be utilized as sites.
Artificial lighting and computers are not
essential elements in factory farming.
Hydroponic food factories can be installed
in developing countries where food facto¬
ries may be most needed. Matsushita Elec¬
tric has, for example, installed a vegetable
factory with minimal automation in the
Maldives. The system, which has a plastic
18

Photos © AFP, Paris
roof that keeps out harmful sunlight rays,
produces 50 tonnes of vegetables a year,
using about one-fifth of the water needed by
field-grown plants.
Vegetable factories can offer various
advantages: planned production, quality
control, low labour costs, clean products.
They use space efficiently and provide sta¬
ble production regardless of climatic and
seasonal variations. However, high elec¬
tricity costs are a severe drawback. Artifi¬
cial lighting is said to account for 90 per cent
of the Mitsubishi system's operating costs.
On the other hand, there can be no doubt
that research will continue in the search for
breakthroughs in the development of
energy-efficient lighting systems, the
achievement of a higher photosynthetic
ratio than in the natural environment, and
in the applications of biotechnologies to fac¬
tory farming.
It is to be hoped that food factory tech¬
nology will not be monopolized by a group
of industrialized countries and that it will be
applied in those countries which need it
most.
One of the star attractions at Expo '85 was
a gigantic tomato plant, above, which pro¬
duced over 13,000 tomatoes during the 6
months of the exhibition. Fed by a special
nutritive solution, the plant grew in a con¬
trolled environment, with optimum light¬
ing and temperature.
Below, inspecting tomato plants at a
Japanese-made hydroponic food factory
in the Maldives. The technology was
adapted to conditions in this tropical de¬
veloping country in the Indian Ocean.
KOICHIBARA HIROSHI, Japanese economist,
is a member of the Unesco secretariat.
19
