The triumph of O Aleijadinho
BY AUGUSTO C. DA SILVA TELLES
ARCHITECTURE and the other arts
practised in Brazil in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries or
imported there from Europe were merely
the transposition of what was then being
done in Portugal.
Early buildings such as the parish church
of Olinda, in the State of Pernambuco,
which later became a cathedral, the Jesuit
Church of Grace in the same city, and the
many religious houses, chapels, churches,
colleges, monasteries and convents built by
the Jesuits, Franciscans, Benedictines and
Carmelites along the coast, all shared a styl¬
istic sobriety and simplicity in the decora¬
tion of façades and other architectural ele¬
ments.
These features were still found in seven¬
teenth-century architecture and in the build¬
ings erected as part of the reconstruction
campaign that took place at the end of the
Above, façade of the Carmelite church in the
Pelourinho district ofSalvador (State ofBahia),
a major centre of Brazilian colonial art (now
included on Unesco's World Heritage List).
Left, fresco painted on the wooden ceiling ofthe
church ofNossa Senhora do Rosario, Persepolis,
State of Goias.
Dutch occupation of the Northeast (1630-
1653), although in the second half of the
century volutes, pinnacles and other decora¬
tive features, in some cases large, bold and
elegant, began to appear on porches, pedi¬
ments and bell-towers. These were the first
signs of the coming of the Baroque. Exam¬
ples can be seen in the Franciscan monas¬
teries at Olinda and Igarassú (State of Per¬
nambuco), and in the church of the Jesuit
College, now the cathedral, at Salvador
(State of Bahia).
But the most notable form of baroque
expression in Brazil was the art of talha,
decorative gilded and polychromed wood
carving, which was practised on altarpieces
in chapels and churches, and spread to the
walls and ceilings of high altars and to trans¬
epts, and in many cases to the nave and side-
chapels as well. Gilded and polychromed
decorative carving thus covered most of the
interior of the churches; surfaces were
ornate, full of movement, and colourful.
The first distinctively baroque carvings in
Brazil date from the end of the seventeenth
century. The columns of concentric arches
were executed in spiral or "Solomonic" form
and covered with vine-leaves, pelicans or fig¬
ures of angels, while walls and roofs were
intersected by carvings that framed painted
or low-relief panels. Notable examples are
39

Ouro Preto, an old city in the Brazilian State of
Minas Gerais (now included on Unesco's World
Heritage List), is a showcase of Brazilian ba¬
roque art. Outstanding among the city's many
baroque monuments is the church ofSt. Francis
ofAssisi, the work of the great mulatto sculptor,
architect and designer Antonio Francisco Lis¬
boa, known as O Aleijadinho (1730-1814), who
was born in Ouro Preto. Right, view ofthe nave.
Far right, the stairway, terrace andfaçade ofthe
sanctuary ofBom Jesus de Matozinhos, at Con-
gonhas do Campo, Minas Gerais, Aleijadinho's
masterpiece. For the sanctuary, built between
1796 and 1799, he created a series of
polychromed wood carvings representing the
Last Supper and the Stations of the Cross (see
also the head of the thief reproduced on colour
page 23) and the soapstone statues of the twelve
Old Testament prophets which line the stair¬
way.
the carvings in the monastery of Sao Bento
(Rio de Janeiro), in the main side-chapel of
the Cathedral (Salvador), and in the Gilded
Chapel of the Third Order of St. Francis at
Recife (Pernambuco).
Later, however, in the 1730s, altarpieces
and other decorative carving in churches
underwent a definite change. The aim was to
create a sense of movement by breaking up
lines and surfaces. Canopies, massive carved
figures and voluted pilasters appeared, of the
kind which can be seen in the church of Sao
Francisco da Penitencia in Rio de Janeiro.
From then on, as in Portugal, the new
forms evolved by the Borrominian school
(which took its name from the Italian archi¬
tect Borromini) began to influence plan and
volume. Walls were given a sense of move¬
ment through the use of elongated polygonal
plans, oval plans, or plans formed of over¬
lapping ovals, while a strong vertical thrust
was the dominant feature of the façades.
Among the churches built in this style are
the Gloria do Outeiro (Rio de Janeiro),
which stands on a hill beside the bay and
whose plan is based on two elongated and
juxtaposed octagons, the church of Säo
Pedro dos Clérigos in Recife, the high façade
of which is an exceptionally powerful exam¬
ple of baroque movement, and the church of
Conceicäo da Praia, in Salvador.
Another church in the same style is the
parish church of Our Lady of Pilar, in Ouro
Preto (State of Minas Gerais), which is
unique in that its polygonal nave is an auton¬
omous structure of carved and gilded wood
inserted into a building whose plan is rec¬
tangular.
The church of the Third Order of St.
Francis, in Salvador, which dates from the
first half of the eighteenth century, is an
outstanding example of baroque art. With
its façade entirely covered with sandstone
carvings, in the manner of Spanish
American churches, it is unique in Brazilian
architecture.
In the second half of the eighteenth cen-
40

&j/,.
tury both architecture and decorative wood
carving began to be influenced by the rococo
style. In Bahia and Rio de Janeiro States,
Rococo appears notably in highly ornamen¬
tal gilded carvings, such as the sculptures in
the nave of the church of the Third Order
Carmelites in Cachoeira and the sacristy of
the Carmelite convent in Salvador and, in
Rio de Janeiro, the sculptures in the chapels
of the Santissimo Sacramento, and the
shrines in the Benedictine monastery and in
the chapel adjoining the church of the Third
Order Carmelites. This chapel was built by
Mestre Valentim (Valentim da Fonseca e
Silva), the outstanding architect, wood-car¬
ver and sculptor in Rio de Janeiro of that
time.
In the Northeast, around Recife and
Olinda, baroque and rococo influence
brought animation to the structure of
façades. The church of the monastery of Säo
Bento, in Olinda, and the Carmelite basilica
in Recife are notable examples of the archi¬
tecture of this period in northeastern Brazil.
But it was in the State of Minas Gerais that
the baroque and rococo movement in Brazil
had the most comprehensive impact on arch¬
itecture, especially in the work of the great
architect and sculptor Antonio Francisco
Lisboa (1730-1814), known as O Alei-
jadinho (the Little Cripple) in church
façades, plans, volumes, carvings, and the
use of space. Because of the geographical
situation of Minas Gerais and because there
were no convents or monasteries of the regu¬
lar orders in the region, architects building
parish churches and churches for fraternities
and tertiary orders were not directly exposed
to Portuguese influence and could thus
produce forms of architecture, sculpture
and decoration which were to some extent
original.
Of special interest in this period are the
Franciscan churches in Ouro Preto and Säo
Joäo del Rei and the Carmelite church in
Ouro Preto. These buildings share certain
common features. Their plans consist of
curves and straight lines which are not
arranged in series but create lines and points
of tension, while porches carved in steatite
(soapstone) bring dynamism to their façades
and constitute the focal point of the com¬
position.
In the Franciscan church at Ouro Preto,
the transept, with carved soapstone pulpits,
opens on to the high altar whose retable of
polychrome and gilded wood echoes the
dynamics of the façade and joins with the
vault and sides to form a unhy.
The supreme example of Brazilian
Baroque is Aleijadinho's masterpiece, the
sanctuary of Bom Jesus de Matozinhos, in
Congonhas do Campo, also in Minas
Gerais. This magnificent example of the arts
of architecture, sculpture and landscape,
now included on Unesco's World Heritage
List, stands on a hill-top overlooking broad
valleys. Life-size soapstone statues of the
twelve Old Testament prophets stand on
parapets lining the stairway leading to the
church, creating an extraordinary impres¬
sion of rhythm and movement. On the slope
in front of the church, preserved in chapels
of more recent construction, are the poly¬
chromed wood carvings, also by Alei-
jadinho, which are known as "The Way of
the Cross", and include seven impressive
figures of Christ.
AUGUSTO C. DA SILVA TELLES, Brazilian
architect and historian, is a professor in the Faculty
ofArchitecture and Town Planning at the Federal
University, Rio de Janeiro, and technical consul¬
tant to Brazil's Ministry of the National Historical
and Artistic Heritage. He is vice-president of the
International Council of Monuments and Sites
(ICOMOS) and consultant to the International
Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Res¬
toration of Cultural Property; Rome (ICCROM).
Among his published works are an atlas ofhistoric
and artistic monuments in Brazil, and many arti¬
cles which have appeared in Brazilian and Portu¬
guese periodicals.
41
