6A perverse logic'

by Jean Baudrillard
DRUGS in general no longer form
part of the shared values and sym¬
bolic rituals of modern industrial
societies, which are dedicated to deferred
gratification and ulterior purposes which
call for a calculated sacrifice of time and
energy. The use of drugs, on the other
hand, always implies an immediate mental
process and the attainment of a kind of
utopia. All schools of thought (including
religious thought) which have favoured the
immediate attainment of utopia have been
declared heretical and condemned as such
through the ages.
Traces of this long-standing condemna¬
tion linger on in our own vision of modern
drugs and of the occult power they derive
from their ancient symbolic virtues. They
simultaneously fascinate, repel and terrify,
and their ambivalence is virtually definitive,
posing a problem that Western reason finds
insoluble; they "dope" bodies and brains
and have the same effect on our judgment
of what they are.
Drugs were long held and are still held
in current analytical thinking to be "ano-
mic", in Durkheim's sense of the term,1 like
a certain type of suicide which is itself char¬
acteristic of the social structures of indus¬
trialized countries. Such phenomena are
residual, marginal, beyond the pale of the
law, outside the overall pattern of organiza¬
tion and the value-system of the group.
Peripheral though they are, they do not call
in question the principle of law and values
as such, and it is not unknown for laws and
values to absorb and integrate them.
Today, the status of drugs seems to me to
be totally different, along with other speci¬
fically contemporary phenomena which I
shall call, not anomic, but anomalous. By
this I do not mean something marginal, the
expression of an imbalance or the organic
deficiency of a system, but the result of an
excess of organization, of an excessive con-
1. The term anomie, as coined by the French social
scientist Emile Durkheim (1858-1917), denotes the con¬
dition of a society or a social group which results when its
members are deprived of norms or standards of be¬
haviour and of ideals which give meaning to their aspir¬
ations. Editor
cern with balance, regulation and rationa¬
lization in a given system. Such a phe¬
nomenon, seemingly extraneous, conflicts
with the workings of the system, for no
apparent reason, but in fact it is a conse¬
quence of the very logic of the system , of the
excessive logic and rationality of a system
in this case society in the industrialized
countries which, having reached a certain
level of saturation, secretes antibodies
which express its internal diseases, its
strange malfunctions, its unforeseeable and
incurable breakdowns in a word, its
anomalies.
In such systems this is not the result of
society's inability to integrate its marginal
phenomena; on the contrary, it stems from
an overcapacity for integration and standar¬
dization. When this happens, societies
which seem all-powerful are destabilized
from within, with serious consequences, for
the more efforts the system makes to orga¬
nize itself in order to get rid of its anoma¬
lies, the further it will take its logic of
over-organization, and the more it will
nourish the outgrowth of those anomalies.
A Finnish poster in favour of "Good
human relations without drugs"

JA ;
© ".'i, . - ». -.A
' - -- '-* '.
v ..-r
"AI/ drugs, hard or soft, including tobacco,
alcohol and all modern variants, are a
means of exorcism: they exorcise reality,
the social order and callous indifference."
is
I©
A naively rationalist (educational and
therapeutic) conception of these systems
must be discarded (and this applies not only
to social systems but also to cybernetic and
computerized systems). In the past, the ex¬
istence of anomic peripheries prompted the
system to become even more rationalized,
but today it is the over-rationalization of the
system which causes and strengthens ano¬
malous developments.
This "perverse" logic must be taken into
account and a distinction must be made
between drug-taking connected with econo¬
mic and social underdevelopment (as it still
is in developing countries or, in the case of
alcohol, in underprivileged classes) and
drug-taking linked to the saturation of the
consumer society. The latter type began to
emerge in the 1960s in the industrialized
countries, as both the apogee of consump¬
tion and a parody of it, as an anomaly which
challenged a world that had to be escaped
from because it was too full, not because it
lacked something. Perhaps there is a lesson
here for developing societies, which are still
ambivalent in terms of their organization.
In these countries, then, we are dealing
with drug use of what might be called a
"second order" which should not be con¬
fused with the other type, for neither its
limits, nor its characteristics nor, obviously,
its prevention, will be the same. In particu¬
lar, we must consider the problem of drugs
in connection with all the "second order"
phenomena which are contemporary with it
and which follow the same "anomalous"
logic. We must look at the various types of
"second order" violence, which do not stem
from straightforward delinquency or
aggression, but from a reaction against the
excessive tolerance of industrialized society
and the over-protectiveness of the social
fabric. Terrorism certainly belongs to this
type. It is a form of response to the omnipo¬
tence of modern States, which secrete it no
longer as historical violence, but as anoma¬
lous violence, which, moreover, they can¬
not suppress, except by turning themselves
into States which are even more powerful,
more controlled and more coercive, there¬
by perpetuating the vicious circle.
We must take account of such types of
"second order" pathological phenomena as
AIDS and cancer, which are not traditional
diseases due to the organic deficiency of
bodies exposed to an attack from outside,
but a consequence of the destabilization of
over-protected bodies (over-protected by
all our hygienic, chemical, medical, social
and psychological prostheses), which there¬
by lose their immunity and become a prey to
any virus. Just as there is apparently no
"political" solution to the problem of ter¬
rorism, for the time being there seems to be
no biomedical solution to the problem of
AIDS and cancer and for the same
reason. These are, in fact, anomalous
occurrences, turning with savage, reactive
violence against the political or biological
over-control of the body, whether it be the
social or the individual organism.
Such phenomena spring from a "darker
side" of human experience. Drug use and
abuse form part of this syndrome. The exist¬
ence of this darker side and the behaviour
resulting from it may be deplored but its
symbolic necessity cannot be denied . As the
French writer Georges Bataille has shown,
the darker side ("La part maudite") plays a
fundamental role in most societies, in ways
which may be more or less explicit.
One thing is certain: a society that
attempts to purge itself entirely of this dar¬
ker side runs a very great risk. Such a desire
nevertheless forms part of the rationalist
paranoia of the social systems of industrial¬
ized countries. The negative aspects of this
darker side are, admittedly, important and
should not be ignored, but they should be
set against the far more serious loss that
might result from its destruction. Such an
act would generate cancers and viruses that
would be far more malignant and would not
even have the charm of malediction to re¬
commend them.
This is the crux of the ambiguity and the
paradox of drugs: in some countries drug-
taking is a symptom of the collective loss of
immune defences or of the individual loss of
symbolic defences a situation in which
some societies become vulnerable to terror¬
ism, drug addiction and violence (but also
to depression or to fascism). And it is ob¬
vious that the only solution would be to
restore those immunities and those symbo¬
lic defences. But in the West we also know
that we live in a system which is tending, in
the very name of science and progress, to
destroy all natural immunities and to re¬
place them with substitute systems of artifi¬
cial immunity.
Why should we expect such a system to
change direction? And now we see the use
of drugs from another, exactly opposite,
angle: while it is part of the immune de¬
ficiency syndrome, it is itself a defence.
Better defences may exist, but it is possible
8

to speculate (for we must respond to such
an insoluble state of affairs with paradoxical
hypotheses) that the use and abuse of drugs
may be a vital and symbolic reaction,
however despairing and suicidal it may
seem, against something still worse.
Without by any means yielding to the
temptations of the over-optimistic ideology
in the West during the 1960s and 1970s
concerning the "expansion of conscious¬
ness", there are grounds for thinking, much
more prosaically, that this is not only an
impulse to flee from the objective process of
brutalization that life in some societies may
be, but a collective movement of avoid¬
ance, a shared reflex of flight from the
universal standardization, rationalization
and regimentation which undoubtedly con¬
stitute, in the long term, a much more se¬
rious danger to society and to the human
race. We know that individuals use neurosis
as an effective protection against madness;
similarly, it is possible to use, not absolute
good, but relative evil, as a defence against
absolute evil. The Church has coped with its
heresies in the same way, by treating them
as necessary (from its point of view) aberra¬
tions, as harmful offshoots (but offshoots
nevertheless). A Church which no longer
generates heresies or which has stamped
them all out begins to wither, just as a body
which no longer produces any kind of
offshoots, including those which work for
its destruction, is a dead body.
That said, drug-taking in the industrial¬
ized countries is no longer in its intensive
phase, the phase sustained by euphoric or
glorifying rhetoric, whether subversive or
suicidal. It is in its extensive phase: while it
is spreading and gaining ground, it is in the
process becoming less virulent for society.
It is no longer a more or less subversive type
of anomy, but an anomaly which is becom¬
ing institutionalized.
How should we react to this process of
familiarization? Should we fight it even
more strenuously? A hard new anti-drug
philosophy (now that there is no longer any
philosophy of drugs) may seem problema¬
tic. In this state of precarious balance, or
imbalance, of the immune system of society
and of the individual, where drugs play an
ambiguous role, such an approach intro¬
duces a rigid moralizing element, a rigid
dichotomy between law and anomy which is
no longer appropriate for the delicate man¬
agement of anomalies (this rigidity is,
moreover, itself highly ambiguous, since it
is often a disguise for political strategies in
which drug-taking, like any other form of
delinquency, is used as an easy alibi).
It is imperative to realize that the prob¬
lem of drug-taking must be approached
with sensitivity, and (because it is an ambi¬
guous problem) with strategies that are
themselves ambiguous. The best form of
prevention is to introduce a symbolical ele¬
ment into the social strategy, a difficult
undertaking which involves flying in the
face of today's excessive rationalization and
Giving young people help and support is ±
an essential part of a preventive approach %
to the drug problem.
social organization. Lack of a ready-made
solution does not spell failure, and we must
at all costs avoid clear-cut, unilateral
strategies of denunciation, whereby one
kind of society takes complacent refuge in
its own hypocrisy. Drug-use is a question to
which there are no glib answers. Nor should
too hasty a distinction be drawn between
drug use and abuse: no one could trace
clearly the unstable boundaries between
them.
All drugs, hard or soft, including tobac¬
co, alcohol and all modern variants, are a
means of exorcism: they exorcise reality,
the social order and callous indifference.
But it should not be forgotten that, through
drugs, society itself exorcises certain forgot
ten powers, certain drives, certain inner
contradictions. Exorcism is production for
the sake of rejection. Society produces this
effect, and society condemns it. Failing the
ability to stop producing it (which is consi¬
dered desirable), society should at least
cease to condemn it.
JEAN BAUDRILLARD, French sociologist, is
professor of sociology at the University of Paris
X-Nanterre and scientific director of IRIS (Socio¬
economic Research and Information Institute),
Paris IX-Dauphine. His publications in English
are The Mirror of Production (1975) and For a
Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign
(1980).
