The desert as a way of life
by Hamidou A. Sidikou
TO survive in a harsh world man has
no option but to adapt to the
physical and climatic conditions
of his environment. In doing so he must
develop strategies which are often
reflected in salient features of his culture
and society.
The peoples of Niger, and especially
the Tuareg, the Tubu, the Kanuri, the
Guézébida and the Arabs who live in the
difficult conditions that prevail in the arid
and semi-arid regions of the country, are
no exception to this universal rule. Indi¬
vidually and collectively, their way of life
is influenced, if not determined, by the
need to adapt to the rigours of a climate in
which the dominant factors are wide tem¬
perature variations, their duration and
intensity.
Over two-thirds of Niger's total area of
1,267,000 square kilometres consists of
desert and semi-desert zones situated
between latitudes 15° and 23° North. Of
this vast expanse, the Ténéré Desert,
bounded to the west and north-west by
the Air massif and to the north and north¬
east by high plateaux whose southern lim¬
its are marked by impressive cliffs, itself
covers more than 350,000 square kilo¬
metres.
In these climatic zones, a combination
of factors related to rainfall, atmospheric
humidity and seasonal temperature vari¬
ations normally gives rise to four distinct
seasons of varying length.
The rainy season, which lasts from
July-August to September, is short and
irregular. When it does rain, the pre¬
cipitation is often slight, but sudden vio¬
lent storms are a threat to those whose
houses are made of low-quality earth con¬
taining a large proportion of salts which
dissolve rapidly in the wet.
From the end of September to the end
of October there is a short intermediate
season characterized by both a high
atmospheric humidity level and very high
temperatures. This is followed by a dry,
cold season lasting from November to
March when an east wind, the Harmat-
Berber peoples living in Mali, Niger and
other Saharan countries, the Tuareg have
created an original civilization adapted to
the desert and its borderlands. In the
southern parts of the region, nomadic
herding over vast areas is a way of life
conditioned by the arid climate and scar¬
city of water and grassland. Above, a
Tuareg of Niger and his camel.
tan, brings dry mists which are liable to be
transformed into violent sandstorms, and
temperatures fall below zero at night.
Finally, there is a hot dry season which
extends from March to June or July. This
is the season of very great heat, with tem¬
peratures reaching 45CC or more.
The maximum daily temperature
range which is generally experienced at
the beginning and end of the dry season
may be as great as 20°C, while the range
between the absolute minimum and max¬
imum temperatures may even reach
40°C, if not more. An extraordinary
capacity for adaptation is required of
16

peoples subject to such rigorous climatic
conditions. This adaptation is reflected in
every aspect of their lives. The strategies
they adopt are in many cases indissocia¬
ble from the organization of society and
from housing, clothing and diet.
In this setting, human activity is strictly
ruled by the existence of watering places.
Because they are so rare, they have great
economic value and are decisive factors
in the determination of social status.
Three branches of human activity
stock-raising, agriculture and manual
labour appear to be directly deter¬
mined by the harsh climatic conditions.
Stock-raising activities not only fulfil
economic requirements but also meet the
need to adapt to the climate with its great
variations of temperature. Camels and
cattle are the main species raised, pri¬
marily for the production of milk which is
the basic element of the diet. Since cam¬
els are more hardy than cattle, they can
be raised in wide open rangelands and are
able to adapt more easily to variations in
soil composition and grazing vegetation.
The available quantity of milk, which
serves as both food and drink, varies from
season to season, and this is why two com¬
plementary species are chosen for its pro¬
duction. Thus camel's milk, which is
available in adequate quantities during
the hot, dry season, is appreciated both
for its very rich vitamin content and for its
low fat content, characteristics which are
thought to increase endurance and resis¬
tance to hunger. It is also said to have
remarkably beneficial effects on eye¬
sight. The absence or very low proportion
of visually handicapped people among
populations whose diet is based on cam¬
el's milk may be partly due to its high
mineral content.
Camel-herders also engage in trans-
Saharan trading. One reason for this is
the need to reconcile the differing
demands of life in complementary ecolo¬
gical zones. Until it declined following
successive droughts which decimated the
herds and destroyed the vegetation on
which they depended for grazing, the car¬
avan trade, in which tens of thousands of
camels were still involved only a few years
ago, was of more than just economic sig¬
nificance. It was one of many responses
to the particular environmental condi¬
tions and perpetuated a whole way of life
through a wide-ranging network of social
relationships.
Knowledge of the location of watering
places is a key factor in this way of life in
areas where the water supply is a matter
of fundamental and permanent concern.
Agricultural activity is thus limited to the
area around oases where a permanent
supply of water is available. Date-grow¬
ing is the mainstay of this irrigation agri¬
culture adapted to the seasons. Dates,
An Inhabitant of Bilma, a large town in ©
Niger, carries loaves of household salt for s
family consumption. £
17

which are an important item of trade with
the regions to the south, are a source of
food, according to their quality, for both
man and beast.
Manual labour is primarily concerned
with the exploitation of salt and natron.
The latter, a hydrous sodium carbonate,
is an essential element in animal feed
since it meets the animals' salt require¬
ments and also rids them of
intestinal parasites, thus boosting their
milk production.
The concern to adapt diet to environ¬
mental conditions, which always under¬
lies human behaviour, is also apparent in
the unusual, some would say immoder¬
ate, consumption of tea. A beverage that
both quenches thirst and staves off hun¬
ger, tea is served ceremonially. It plays a
part in creating physiological mecha-
Saltpans at Tegguidan-n'Tessoum, Niger.
Salt is produced by solar evaporation of
the brine in each pan. Workers' legs are
covered with ulcers caused by walking
knee deep in the brine.
nisms for adapting to the variations in
temperature.
Dress is another important indication
of adaptation to the environment. The
wearing of the veil and the turban are not
only of social significance (attainment of
adult status, for example), they also serve
to protect the head, and in particular the
eyes, nose and ears against the effects of
low temperatures, the stinging blast of
hot or cold winds and sandstorms. The
wearing of voluminous clothing, usually
made of cotton , is a form of adaptation to
high temperatures.
Finally, housing, its conception, the
materials used in its construction, and the
use made of it in relation to the seasons, is
another important element in adaptation
to climatic conditions. In the Kawar
region of Niger, for example, where, in
past centuries, fortified villages were con¬
structed for security reasons, four main
types of dwellings are found.
Stone houses, the last relics of those
troubled times, are used during the dry,
cold season because they offer better
protection against sharp drops in tem¬
perature.
Finding, transporting and storing water is
a major preoccupation for Saharan
nomads. Right, women of Niger carry
water in gourds, an indication that they
belong to a semi-sedentary village (since
caravaners use water containers made of
goatskin).
During the hot, dry season, houses
constructed of date-palm leaves come
into their own. Cool, airy and well ventil¬
ated, they are divided into rooms desig¬
nated for different functions. A room
reserved for the head of the household
adjoins the entrance; there is a room for
the women and children, a store-room for
food or for animal fodder, a kitchen, and
a living-room in which meals are taken .
Tents, which are made of skins or of
rush matting, vary in size according to the
means of the occupants. They are always
put up on a north-south axis with one or
two openings on the east and west sides to
allow air to circulate and the rays of the
sun to enter. Tents are all-the-year-round
dwellings which can easily be dismantled.
©

L ÜL 4 ri^f
-*-
They are set up on top of dunes during the
hot season and in spots protected by
vegetation among the dunes in the cold
season. The tent is the perfect example
of a dwelling fully adapted to the climate.
Straw huts, whose dimensions vary
according to economic considerations
and to the availability of straw, itself
dependent upon rainfall, are used both as
temporary shelters and permanent dwell¬
ings. In the latter case they are used
mainly during the rainy season and in the
hot season since they offer the best pro¬
tection against rain and great heat.
These are some of the strategies
developed by the peoples of Niger who
live in very hot desert areas. Their pur¬
pose is to provide a minimum of comfort
by adaptation to temperature conditions
which remain, throughout the year, a
matter of primordial concern.
HAMIDOUAROUNASIDIKOU.oM/ger./scon-
sultant to several international organizations,
including Unesco, and permanent secretary of
the Committee responsible for developing a
Rural Code for Niger. A geographer, he taught at
the Faculty of Letters, Human Sciences and
Pedagogy of the University of Niamey (1974-
1981), before directing (1981-1985) the Univer¬
sity's Institute of Research in the Human Sci¬
ences.
Loading a camel with its cargo ofsalt in the
sandy plain of Ténéré. Salt is a vital com¬
modity for man and animal in the desert,
where it is still transported by camel car¬
avans and serves as a form of currency.
19
