Universal child immunization by 1990
I Seap!
ioSh, w
"Vaccinate children under five years
of age", reads the poster carried by a
schoolboy taking part in a recent
"National Vaccination Day" demon¬
stration in Mexico.



A chance
for every
child
by Michel Rey
THE goal of the Expanded
Programme on Immunization
(EPI), launched by the World
Health Organization in 1974, is to ensure
that by 1990 all the world's children are
protected against six killer diseases: mea¬
sles, poliomyelitis, diphtheria, pertussis
(whooping cough), tetanus and tuber¬
culosis.
These six target diseases have been given
priority because each year they cause hun¬
dreds of thousands of deaths and tens of
thousands of disabilities. Now they can be
prevented by immunization. In theory mea¬
sles and polio are eradicable, and diph¬
theria and whooping cough can be prac¬
tically eliminated. For the other two
diseases, the aims of EPI are rather dif¬
ferent. The Programme gives priority to the
prevention of neonatal tetanus; and con¬
fines itself to tuberculosis in children, of
which the most serious manifestation is
tuberculous meningitis. The BCG anti¬
tuberculosis vaccine1 only protects children
1. BCG (bacillus Calmette-Guérin): named after the
French scientists who produced the first attenuated
tuberculosis vaccine in 1906.
13

3M INDEXJtNDtCEUli
c 1 tÛDOr
1 Monitor
|Mark A \ l
i
i
; it Ad
Mm
HI«« j
MM
'¿f ' "*'"c
A key factor in the implementation of WHO'S
Expanded Programme on Immunization, which
aims at protecting all children against measles,
polio, diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus and
tuberculosis by 1990, is called the "cold chain"
system. The cold chain ensures that vaccines
retain their potency from the time of manufac¬
ture to their use. Although there may be no
visible signs of deterioration, vaccines lose
potency when exposed to heat. To show whether
or not the cold chain has been broken, a special
temperature sensitive chemical monitor has
been designed (above), to be attached to record
cards in the national language of the destination
country. The monitor has four windows, A to D,
and when placed in cold boxes or refrigerators
with the vaccines, it turns blue window by win¬
dow as the temperature rises.
The slogan chosen for World Health Day (7 April)
1987 was "Immunization: a chance for every
child". Below, stamps issued by the United
Nations Postal Administration to highlight
efforts by WHO and UNICEF to save children from
preventable diseases.
a* m &L
«Aft
against contamination and cannot change
the epidemiology of the disease, which is
carried and transmitted mainly through
adults.
EPI is implemented in two ways. The
main thrust is the immunization of children
under a year old, who are given the six
vaccines over at least three sessions. The
second line of attack, against neonatal tet¬
anus, is aimed at pregnant women and other
women of childbearing age. Here, immu¬
nization before birth protects the child.
The aims of the Programme are
ambitious. For the moment the chief objec¬
tive is to give all the world's children access
to immunization services. It is accepted that
between now and 1990 it will be difficult to
achieve the 90 per cent level of immuniza¬
tion coverage initially projected for the
group of six vaccines. A 70 to 80 per cent
coverage rate would be satisfactory. For
neonatal tetanus, a more precise objective
has been defined for 1990: reduction of its
incidence to less than one case per thousand
live births in countries which are still
relatively widely affected and to eradicate
the disease entirely in those countries where
it has become a rarity.
EPI can be distinguished from other pre¬
ventive medicine campaigns by the signifi¬
cant technological and operational con¬
straints it faces, and by the fact that this
form of prevention is basically managed by
health services, the resources of which are
mobilized at all levels.
The first constraint concerns the supply
of vaccine. Vaccines are increasingly com¬
plex biological products, manufactured
using advanced technology, and they are
still largely made by industrialized coun¬
tries. There are many obstacles to local pro¬
duction. Even India, a relatively well equip¬
ped country with a vast internal market, has
not yet succeeding in producing all the vac¬
cines it needs for domestic consumption.
The use of low-quality, cheaply produced
vaccines is unacceptable. Such vaccines are
often less efficient, and are also less well
tolerated. They will jeopardize the success
of the Programme by discouraging people
from taking part in it. Much of the vaccine
used by EPI is supplied by interna¬
tional organizations or aid agencies and
must conform with WHO standards.
The preservation of vaccines necessitates
the maintenance of an uninterrupted "cold
chain". In many cases, the absence or
breakdown of this chain has meant the
failure of immunization, especially using
heat-sensitive live vaccine such as
the measles or the oral polio vaccines. A
less temperature-sensitive measles vaccine
has recently been developed, but the cold
chain is still necessary.
Finally, most vaccines are administered
by injection and syringes and needles have
to be very carefully sterilized. It is possible
for tetanus to be transmitted by the injec¬
tion, and today the risks of transmitting
hepatitis B and AIDS by syringes must be
stressed.
How can maximum numbers of the target
populations be reached? Priority has been
given to the integration of immunization
into primary health care. Even if village
health workers cannot give injections or
keep records, they can play a significant
role in informing and mobilizing the popu¬
lation. Obviously this grass-roots participa¬
tion does not exclude action by other
branches of the health services.
If health centres generally bear the main
responsibility for routine immunization, the
lack of such centres in many rural areas
creates the need for small mobile teams to
immunize the people in or near their
homes. Mothers cannot be expected to walk
more than three kilometres from their
homes in order to have their children immu¬
nized. It is admirable enough that they are
willing to make even this effort towards pre¬
ventive care. One major problem of immu¬
nization campaigns is opening individual
files on all children from birth onwards, so
as to record the injections they are given,
maintain personal contact with their fam¬
ilies and keep track of the negligent.
When immunization by health centres is
not feasible, or when the results are
unsatisfactory, mass campaigns can be
launched, on a local or national scale. This
has been done in Brazil, with the oral polio
vaccine, and in Colombia with the six EPI
vaccines. The advantage of such campaigns,
which can assume the guise of a national
festival, is that they mobilize more of the
population and enable large numbers of
people to be immunized, at least at first.
Their epidemiological effect is more spec¬
tacular and for a time they can interrupt the
transmission of certain diseases. But they
are only a means of getting the Programme
under way.
What are the achievements of EPI to
date? The evaluation of immunization
coverage, often effected by poll, shows
great differences between countries (from
less than 10 per cent to over 80 per cent).
This wide range reflects different levels of
social and economic development and
clearly shows that it is easier to achieve a
rapid increase in immunization coverage
where there are well-developed health
infrastructures.
One of the biggest problems is the fall in
family participation between the first and
last immunization session, a rate which can
be as high as 50 per cent. The older the
child, the lower the rate of participation.
The BCG vaccine, which is given earliest,
has been the most successful from this point
of view. It should not be forgotten that in
the United States it took twenty years to
achieve a 95 per cent coverage of measles
immunization, the level at which eradica¬
tion of the disease can be envisaged.
Efforts are thus being made, in the case of
measles, for example, to immunize nearer
birth. This shortening of the immunization
timetable is also a response to the need to
immunize children as soon as possible' after
birth, before they are exposed to natural
infection.
Another vital factor in the success of the
Programme is continuous health education,
which, if it is to be effective, must take into
account the way in which disease is per¬
ceived in different cultures (see article
page 4). Moreover, as the Programme con¬
tinues and the incidence of the target dis¬
eases falls, the people start to be less afraid
of them and lose interest. This is where
14

In the rural areas of many developing countries,
mobile teams of health workers are needed to
immunize villagers in or near their homes.
Above, nurses in the Philippines set off on their
rounds.
Logo of WHO's Expanded Programme on
Immunization.
education can be effective. Finally, the
major role played by women in the success
of the Programme cannot be over-empha¬
sized. It is they who have their children
immunized, it is they who must be informed
and won over.
The true effectiveness of EPI is measured
in terms of morbidity2 and mortality.3 These
factors are the most difficult to evaluate at
present due to the lack of reliable epi¬
demiological monitoring. Three indices are
studied: the incidence of paralytic pol¬
iomyelitis, death from measles and death
from neonatal tetanus. The regression of
these diseases is notable in most Latin
American countries, and the incidence of
neonatal tetanus has fallen dramatically in
Bangladesh. The results for measles have
on the whole been rather disappointing,
and can be explained by inadequate immu¬
nization coverage, by the impossibility of
administering the measles vaccine to chil¬
dren under six months, and by the difficulty
of preserving the vaccine, which until
recently was very susceptible to heat.
As a result of all the technological and
operational constraints it faces, EPI is
relatively expensive. A full course of immu¬
nization for a child costs from $3 to $50 (the
present average being $10). The cost of the
vaccine itself hardly represents 10 per cent
of this sum, most of the remainder being
2. Morbidity: the relative incidence of a particular dis¬
ease in a specific locality.
3. Mortality (death rate): the ratio of deaths in a spec¬
ified area or group to the population of that area or
group. Editor.
used to cover staff or operational costs.
Many poor countries cannot afford such
expenditure and receive outside aid. The
disadvantage of this is that a situation of
dependence is created.
EPI is nevertheless considered to be one
of the most profitable operations in preven¬
tive medicine. Its "profitability" is mea¬
sured in human terms (in the sparing of
lives, and in the reduction of suffering and
of disabling after-effects), rather than in
strictly economic terms.
Finally, in addition to the direct advan¬
tages of immunization (reduction of mor¬
bidity and mortality from the six target dis¬
eases) a number of perhaps even more
important indirect advantages can probably
be added, such as improving the child's
nutritional state, which is greatly affected
by whooping cough and measles. Another
expected advantage is the strengthening of
health services at all levels. EPI is thus
acting as a pacemaker in health care
development.
MICHEL REY, of France, is director of the Epi¬
demiology and Management section of WHO'S
Division of Communicable Diseases and
professor of infectious and tropical pathology at
the Faculty of Medicine, Clermont-Ferrand,
France. He is the author of Vaccinations (1980).
The above article is an edited version of his
contribution to a collection of essays on health,
medicine and development published in 1987 by
the Fondation Liberté Sans Frontières, France.
15
