The Angel with the Arquebus BY MIGUEL ROJAS MIX
ONE of the most typical figures of
Latin American baroque art is that
of a dandified angel with swan's
wings and a broad-brimmed hat with a
feather in it. He is richly clad in a garment
with lace ruffles and a greatcoat with a gold
and silver lining, and he holds a heavy
arquebus.
Although found only in Andean painting,
the "Angel with the Arquebus" is a
supremely representative feature of the
baroque art of Latin America, which is at
once a magnificent and theatrical form of art,
and also a style whose purpose was to induce
the Indian to accept the power of God and
the king and, through religion and force of
arms, to make him part of colonial society.
One of its most common themes was the
system of mestizaje, or ethnic intermixture,
in which people were placed in castes
according to their origin and the colour of
their skin.
Baroque art in Latin America has left an
indelible mark on the individual and on the
course of history. Even today, many writers
consider themselves to be baroque writers.
In fact, baroque art is the art of the New
World. The mixture of Iberian (in which
there was already an Arab element) with
Indian and Black elements produced a dis-
*Wr
36

E
<
©
Left, portal of the church of San Francisco, La
Paz, Bolivia, an outstanding example ofAndean
Baroque. Construction began in 1743. The de¬
coration with anthropomorphic and animal
motifs is typical of Latin American "churri-
gueresque" architecture. Above, façade of the
Jesuit church, known as La Compañía, in
Quito, Ecuador. Completed in 1765, the church
incorporates twisted columns and other Spanish
and Italian features. The interior is decorated
with magnificent gilded wood carvings in local
style.
tinctive style which some have called Indo-
Hispanic, some creóle (criollo), or mestizo.
In accordance with its regional characteris¬
tics, it has also been called "Andean
Baroque" and "Poblano Baroque" (after the
Mexican town of Puebla).
A proselytizing art, Baroque was the
"Bible of the poor", the gospel conveyed to
the Indian's mind by images. While the Prot¬
estants preached simplicity and modesty,
used no images and made no attempt at evan¬
gelization, the Council of Trent (1545-1563)
took a stand against pagan images, extolled
the Eucharist, the Virgin and the Pope,
advocated evangelization and the cult of the
saints, and laid down rules to the effect that
the saints should be portrayed in a setting
suggestive of martyrdom and ecstasy. As late
as 1782, instructions were still being issued
for artists which repeated the Council's
resolutions concerning iconography and set
forth detailed rules on the degree of nudity
that was permissible for each saint, the age at
which he should be depicted and the attitude
in which he should be shown.
The baroque style was a perfect way of
conveying to the Indians the idea that they
should accept their new destiny. Classical art
is an art of moderation and balance, an art
that is concerned with general principles,
and seeks what is universal. Its characters are
rhetorical figures. Baroque art is the
opposite; it expresses what order and mod¬
eration cannot express emotion, grief,
ecstasy and faith. Its representation of
mystical feelings is close to everyday life,
and its examples are taken from actuality. Its
Christs are sacred actors in a human tragedy.
Carved in wood painted the colour of flesh,
with real hair, eyelashes and eyelids, with
glass eyes and real clothing, they are more
like characters in a waxworks exhibition
than sacred images. In the "Christ of Sor¬
rows", the subject most frequently treated in
Latin America, sorrow is dramatized in a
paroxysm of grief. The figure is covered with
blood (made of scarlet cochineal and pitch)
so that the viewer almost feels the pain of the
wounds, and the face and body are distorted
by deep suffering. The convincing realism of
this pain, which is in no sense symbolic, was
intended to show the Indians that their trials
were as nothing compared to the suffer¬
ings of Christ.
In its early period, Latin American
baroque art was thoroughly European in
character. Most of the sixteenth- and seven¬
teenth-century paintings are by European
artists who worked for the New World, or
copies of engravings brought from Europe.
Yet even then there was a certain intermix¬
ture of styles. The plans of the cathedrals
were of Roman or Spanish origin, but they
were considerably modified in the course of
execution. And of course the "plateresque"
or Spanish Renaissance style was a product
of the intermixture of the mudejar style and
late Gothic.
The second period of Latin American
Baroque began when local artists emerged.
Although ideas and works of art continued
to be imported, certain changes and the
emphasis placed on certain themes reveal a
growing independence. Because of the pre¬
vailing taste for pictures that told a story, a
touching story, with an element of fantasy,
art of this period is often called "primitive"
art. The wood carvings known in the
Náhuatl language as tequitqui reveal the sen¬
sibility of the Indian. The combination of
realism and abstraction in these carvings
shows the persistence of pre-Columbian
ideas.
Iconography was also modified by the
Black sensibility. Baroque art (and especially
rococo art) used the Black as a decorative
feature. In Europe he was a figure holding a
lamp, or, in tapestries, a counterpoint to the
white horse whose reins he held. In Latin
America Blacks were at first depicted as
sumptuously liveried servants or as figures
wearing motley. In both cases they added a
picturesque note. As sensibility is a form of
narcissism, an African element was bound to
appear in Latin America to lend dignity to
the popular image. Its failure to do so would
have been an act of self-abnegation by the
artists themselves, who were mestizos,
mulattoes or Blacks. Thus African gods slip¬
ped surreptitiously into the cult of the saints,
and in many cases a darker complexion, ren¬
dered by the mixture of wax and paint used
to depict the flesh of the Virgin or the angels,
was enough to make them recognizable as
Blacks from Brazil, Colombia or other
regions with a large African population.
The Latin American element in baroque
art did not, however, simply consist of mod¬
ification or stylistic exaggeration. The ultra-
baroque or churrigueresque style nowhere
reached such a pitch of ostentation as it did in
Latin America, especially Mexico, but many
of the motifs that artists in the New World
began to use were quite different in spirit:
decorative forms such as masks with Aymara
or Quechua faces, known as indátides, or the
delicately gilded frames with carvings of
macaws, capybaras, monkeys and other
creatures, in settings of papayas, pineapples
and banana trees. Such motifs were depicted
with a "flat" technique, as if the artists
refused to accept the illusion of volume and
space known to Western art.
Other highlights of Latin American
Baroque are the screens that are distinctive
features of churches in the New World, but
37

The work ofAndean sculptors in Peru, Ecuador
and Bolivia ranges from imitations of Spanish
religious sculpture to depictions of local themes.
Above, detail ofa crucifix by Gaspar de Sangur-
ima in the monastery of the Immaculate Con¬
ception, Cuenca, Ecuador. Christ is portrayed
in the realistic style typical ofSpanish sculptors,
with a stream of blood flowing from His side.
Right, Peruvian statue of the baby Jesus dressed
as an Indian, viith cap and poncho.
whose filigreed carving recalls mudejar taste;
other creóle saints as well as the Angel with
the Arquebus; Matamoros images, in which
Indians are portrayed instead of Moors, and
which should really be called Mataindios in
Latin America; depictions of the Magi in
which colonial artists include not only a
Black king, but sometimes a mestizo and an
Indian, so that the subject becomes a meta¬
phor of race; the guitar-playing sirens beside
the doors of San Lorenzo de Potosí, in
Bolivia, and in the choir of San Miguel de
Pomata, in Peru; the creóle Virgins the
morenas (Black women) or mamacitas (little
mothers) as the Indians call them. In the
church of San Juan on the shores of Lake
Titicaca, the child Jesus is shown wearing a
poncho and a cap like those the Aymara
children in the district wear, and to avoid
any possible confusion is labelled with the
inscription "I am Jesus". Innumerable
painted panels show Incas in gala dress,
while others show impoverished Indians.
And of course there are many specifically
colonial characters and themes, such as Santa
Rosa de Lima (1 586-161 7), a saint much por¬
trayed by eighteenth-century painters, and
the "Christ of the Earthquakes", who is ven¬
erated in the cathedral of Cuzco and in many
other Andean churches, a Christian way of
exorcizing the fears of a people that has
always felt threatened by the gods of
Nature.
Baroque art in Latin America is not a mere
transposition of Spanish or Portuguese art.
It is a hybrid art. And it embraces more than
two cultures, for along with the Spanish tra¬
dition it received the Arab heritage in the
form of the mudejar style. It is said that the
Indian contribution is shown in a preference
for a range of pure colours and in the use of
abstraction in the portrayal of figures. But
the Black influence can also be seen, both in
the dark complexion of angels and Virgins
and in the syncretism of African gods with
the traditional Christian saints. A mar¬
vellously enriched style emerged from all
these influences, the style of an art that was
fundamental to a new world. Such is the art
we know as "Latin American Baroque".
MIGUEL ROJAS MIX, of Chile, is the founder
and former director of the Chilean Institute of
Latin American Art. A former professor at the
Sorbonne, he is currently teaching at the Universi¬
ty of Vincennes, Paris. He is the author ofseveral
published works, including Vera historia natural
de Indias ("The True Natural History of the In¬
dies") and a short history of Latin America for
children.
38
