Hunter-gatherers
of the tropical forest
by Laurentiu Palade
Between 100,000 and200,000 Pygmies live
in equatorial Africa, scattered through the
forest which extends from the Atlantic
Ocean to the great lakes of the east.
Remarkably well adapted to conditions in
the tropical forest, they live byhunting and
gathering. Below, a Uganda Pygmy hunter
with animal hides for use as drumskins.
Beating drums is a form ofcommunication
between isolated groups in the forest.
TROPICAL forests form a green
band around the Equator,
extending roughly 10° North and
South. This means that they account for
only a small proportion, about 8 per cent,
of the Earth's land surface. Yet they com¬
prise almost half of all growing wood on
the face of the planet, and harbour at
least two-fifths of Earth's plant and ani¬
mal species, a genetic resource of increas¬
ing importance to humanity through agri¬
culture, medicine and industry. They also
comprise the most complex and diverse
ecosystems on Earth, which fulfil regula
tory and productive functions that are
essential to man and to his natural
environment.
The question of human adaptation to
conditions in tropical rain forests has
been examined in a number of scientific
studies on groups of hunter-gatherers
such as the Pygmies. The existence of
such peoples is recorded in ancient times.
Representations of them dating back
over 4,000 years are found on ancient
Egyptian bas-reliefs from the tombs of
pharaohs of the Vth Dynasty. They are
mentioned by Homer in the Iliad as well
m
w*£

Source: Nature and Resources, Unesco, 1 983
Moist, dense, broad-leaf evergreen forests with many epiphytes ("air
plants" growing non-parasitically on trees and other plants and deriving
their nutrients from the air)
i/y- ~: Drier, more open, partially deciduous forests with relatively few
«¿xiia epiphytes
World distribution of tropical forests
as by Herodotus and Aristotle. Yet while
other civilizations have completely disap¬
peared, the Pygmies, living in perfect har¬
mony with their environment, have sur¬
vived the ages.
Pygmies are to be found in most of the
world's tropical forests. They are fairly
numerous; the Ituri Pygmies of Africa,
for example, number some tens of thou¬
sands. Operating in small groups of from
five to thirty-four individuals, they live a
semi-nomadic life adapted to conditions
in the rain forest which are as extreme
and pitiless as those of the cold and inhos¬
pitable Polar regions.
Light penetration of the forest canopy
is minimal. Virtually all ultraviolet rays
are screened out. The accumulated heat
and humidity is so intense that the
atmosphere is like that of a greenhouse.
The average temperature is 28°C, with
variations no greater than from 3°C to
9°C. Average relative humidity is 95 per
cent at night and 60 to 70 per cent during
the day, with only slight seasonal varia¬
tions. Winds are also very light, except
when there is a tornado, and the air is
extremely rich in carbon dioxide and is
laden with scent elements, formic vapour
amd microscopic particles of hair, scales
and fibres. Rapid breakdown and trans¬
formation of organic matter is ensured by
micro-organisms, which teem in the heat
and humidity.
The level of évapotranspiration is very
high three times the average for the
planet as a whole. The forest floor is per¬
manently moist and a protective layer of
branches and leaves is essential should
you wish to lie on it. Ants and termites
abound. Like the flora, the fauna of the
forest is rich and varied. Animal life is
"stratified", with different species living
at different levels. Monkeys and birds live
in the higher levels of the canopy where
conditions are easier and food is more
abundant.
The tropical forest is not very generous
to the people and the larger animals who
live at ground level. Food is difficult to
find and they sometimes have to be con¬
tent with fruit that has been dropped by
monkeys. At night, the large predators
venture out to the open savannah at the
edge of the forest and to river banks and
abandoned cultivated plots. Game con¬
sists mainly of small antelope. At the
same time, the inhabitants of the forest
are under constant threat from insects,
parasites and arboviruses, a group of
viruses that develop in anthropods such
as mosquitoes and are then transmitted
by bites to vertebrate hosts.
One indication of adaptation to forest
life is to be seen in the fact that forest-
dwelling elephant and buffalo are, in gen¬
eral, half the size of their counterparts
living in the savannah. The forest people,
too, weigh less and are shorter than those
who live in open country. A comparative
study undertaken in Africa has shown
that forest-dwellers weigh, on average,
39.8 kilograms and are 1.44 metres tall, as
compared with 62.5 kilograms and 1.69
metres for inhabitants of the savannah. In
comparison with other population
groups, their oxygen consumption during
effort, their pulmonary capacity and their
cardiac rhythm are above average. They
show no signs of protein deficiency or
malnutrition.
Their small stature gives the hunter-
gatherers of the tropical forest a definite
advantage in the form of a relatively high
work capacity under difficult climatic
conditions. A well organized routine,
with major activities carried out early in
the morning or late in the evening, helps
them to avoid excessive perspiration. In
fact, despite the dampness of the
atmosphere, they sweat very little. In
general, they maintain a satisfactory state
of health and, among those who live in a
Pygmies in concert: this man from the
Central African Republic is playing a whis¬
tle cut from a branch of the papaya tree.
21

Below, a Yanomamo Indian. The
Yanomamo, with a population of over
15,000, live in the luxuriant tropical forests
of Venezuela and Brazil.
forest ecosystem which is still intact,
there is a very low incidence of malaria.
In order to adapt to the constraints of a
life of hunting and gathering in the forest,
the Pygmies, like nomads, have had to
reduce their material possessions to a
minimum. Those they do have are easily
replaced. All they need is a stick to dig
with and a leaf to drink from; a hollow
stem provi Jes a pipe for them to smoke.
As a general rule they manage without
anything that is too heavy to carry, such
as pots and pans and looms. The forest
provides them with liana, bark and
branches with which to built their huts,
make their beds and clothe themselves.
They make strings for their bows and
padding for their shields from raffia fibre.
From the hide of the game they kill they
make belts. They carve traps from roots
and make wicker griddles which, placed
over a fire, enable them to smoke the
flesh of big game. Food is cooked in large
leaves.
Hunting, upon which the survival of
the group depends, is traditionally a male
preserve. It has had a profound effect on
both the individual and the collective
mentality and has forged family and
social structures. The forest is a foster-
mother who must be respected. It is tac¬
itly accepted that no animal should be
killed or tree felled unnecessarily. Game
is usually caught with a net made of inter¬
woven liana and its meat is shared out in
accordance with a strict ritual. Gather¬
ing, which is left to the women, is a com¬
plementary source of food. The produce
of the forest fruit, roots, leaves, mush¬
rooms is abundant. Certain insects,
such as caterpillars and termites, are
gathered, as is honey. The forest also
provides products for bodily care and the
treatment of wounds, sickness and infir¬
mities.
These forest people know their
environment to perfection. Far from
being overwhelmed by their natural sur¬
roundings, they are well organized and
lead an active social life festivities, pal¬
avers, dancing and have a culture rich
in tradition, myth and legend.
The uncontrolled clearing of tropical
forests for agriculture presents the forest-
dwellers with problems of adaptation to
their changing environment and may
expose them to health and other risks.
The pathogenic agents found in a forest
environment attack man more readily in
a cleared area than in an intact forest,
where they concentrate on the primate
and rodent population. An increase in
the incidence of malaria, cardio-vascular
troubles, physiological ailments and
nutritional imbalances has in fact been
noted.
The exploitation of forest regions con¬
stitutes an indispensable economic
development resource in many tropical
countries. In order to achieve a judicious
strategy which respects the natural bal¬
ance, Unesco's Man and the Biosphere
Programme (MAB) is currently engaged
on a project to study the ecological effects
of increasing human activity on tropical
and subtropical forest ecosystems. It is
hoped that this project will help to answer
the many scientific questions raised by
land use planning in the tropics.
LAURENTIU PALADE is a staff member of
Unesco's Division of Ecological Sciences. After
following an academic and scientific career in
Romania, he spent several years in the humid
tropics engaged on a Unesco/World Bank pro¬
ject. The author ofover a hundred scientific stud¬
ies, in 1983 he was awarded the European
Environment Prize by the Goethe Foundation,
Basel, Switzerland.
22
