Food for all -
The 'Paris Appeal'
by Yannis Coutsocheras
'- ar¿~
TODAY'S so-called age of affluence is
also an age of paradox. The mounting
wave of individuals and peoples driven
to despair by famine is reaching alarming pro¬
portions.
The brunt of this unacceptable state of
affairs is borne primarily by the children of
developing countries, where 1 5 million people
starve to death every year and 50 million more
are undernourished and suffer from the
serious physical and psychological con¬
sequences of malnutrition, such as inability to
attend school or to work.
Dire poverty is the rule in the population
groups and peoples devastated by famine.
Meanwhile quantities of foodstuffs that the.
market cannot absorb are being destroyed.
The scientific advances that would make it
possible to produce enough food to feed a
population much larger than that of the world
today are not being applied for fear of a drop in
prices. Moreover, astronomical sums are
being wasted on the arms race in order to
prepare for a war which will never take place,
since It is acknowledged that total war would
mean universal suicide. Such poverty is
a source of ever-growing despair, where
bitterness breeds hatred, revolt, violence
and war.
Free access to staple foods in order to guar¬
antee the right to life is a fundamental require¬
ment. The conception of human rights which
has evolved over the years to include the right
to health, the right to education and the right to
work, seems to be lagging behind with respect
to the basic right to life.
In 1975, as a member of the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe, I pre¬
sented a proposal calling for universal free
access to basic foodstuffs; subsequently, so
that this ideal might be achieved by degrees, I
restricted my proposal to children, wording it
as follows: "In order to safeguard the lives of
all children, certain basic food products
should not be subject to market forces, and
each child should be entitled to a free
ration."
This proposal has been adopted by various
organizationsthe Council of Europe (1 980),
the Greek Parliament (1 984), Unesco (1 985),
the International Association of Democratic
Lawyers (1986) and by many distinguished
figures. It meets with approval and support
wherever it is put forward, since it is consid¬
ered to be effective and capable of implemen¬
tation without delay.
The onus is on intellectuals to take the first
step and, unswayed by religion, culture,
Threshing grain in Lebanon
nationality, political convictions, race or
colour, to rise up against injustice and make a
joint effort to bring this shameful situation to an
end; so that we may never again read such
headlines as "Rampant famine" or "Rising
world toll of famine and malnutrition", and
never again be told that hunger now afflicts
730 million people.
With this end in view, a group of dis¬
tinguished persons from various countries
has recently set up a Provisional Committee in
Paris to make preparations for 16 October
1 987, World Food Day, when a meeting will be
held at Unesco Headquarters to launch the
"Paris Appeal" for the early withdrawal of sta¬
ple foods, in particular children's foods, from
the arena of market forces. The appeal will go
out to all governments and will be taken up by
news agencies and the media to bring the
campaign to the attention of the world. Subse¬
quently, political will must come to the fore,
since without it nothing can be done.
