Suspension bridge over the river
Apurimac in the eastern cordillera (Peru)
was made of plaited grass using tech¬
niques known to the Incas. It is rebuilt
every year.
IT'S
by Gerardo Antesena,
Mario Paz-Zamora
and Enrique Vargas
T
|HE overwhelming majority of the
world's population live between
sea level and an altitude of 3,000
metres. Only some 15 million persons live
in permanent settlements between that
level and 4,800 metres, mainly on the
high plateaux of the Andes in South
America, and of Tibet in Central Asia.
Altitude inevitably imposes constraints
on people who live in these regions. In the
first century AD, Pan Kou, a Chinese
historian, described in these terms the
Karakoram mountain range in Central
Asia: "It is necessary to cross two moun¬
tains, one large and one small, which
make the head ache. The earth lies naked
there, on the scorching slopes, and the
human body loses its colour because of
the heat; the torrid sun causes headaches
and nausea, and it has the same effect on
animals ..."
Father José de Acosta, a Jesuit mis¬
sionary to the New World, describes
acute mountain sickness in his treatise
Historia natural y moral de las Indias
(1590; Natural and Moral History of the
Indies, 1604), and relates it to the fact that
at such altitudes "the air is so subtle and
so refined that it is unsuited to human
respiration, which needs air that is
thicker and more temperate ..."
What exactly is meant by the term alti¬
tude? Altitude in the sense of environ¬
ment consists of a number of physical fac¬
tors, principally the lowering of
barometric pressure1 and therefore of the
partial pressures2 of respiratory gases , the
wide range of variation in day and night
temperatures, increased solar radiation
and a greater incidence of high-energy
heavy particles in the atmosphere.
The lowering of barometric pressure is
by far the most important factor as far as
man is concerned, arid it is an unavoida¬
ble constraint to which technology has
found no practical long-term solution.
Consequently, the values of the partial
1. Atmospheric pressure as indicated by a barometer,
usually of mercury, and expressed in several different
systems of units, such as pounds per square inch, or
millimetres of mercury.
2. The pressure that a gas, in a mixture of gases, would
exert if it alone occupied the whole volume occupied by
the mixture.
8

TOUGH AT THE TOP
Life at high altitude
pressure of respiratory gases, especially
that of oxygen in the arterial blood, are
usually taken as the basis for determining
the physiological limits of altitude.
"Physiological" altitude therefore does
not correspond to physical altitude. On
the one hand, the fall in atmospheric
pressure is not directly proportional to
height above sea level; on the other, the
oxygen content of the blood is not a sim¬
ple function of the partial pressure of oxy¬
gen in the air. Three levels can be dis¬
tinguished, according to the value of the
partial pressure of oxygen in arterial
blood:
- above 70 millimetres of mercury,
changes in the partial pressure of oxygen
(i.e. in altitude) have little effect on the
amount of oxygen contained in the blood .
(The normal arterial blood pressure at
sea level is 90 millimetres of mercury.);
- between 70 and 40 millimetres of merc¬
ury, the effect of the fall in the partial
pressure of oxygen becomes more
noticeable;
- below 40 millimetres of mercury, the
oxygen content of the blood falls consid¬
erably and more or less constantly with
small changes in the partial pressure of
oxygen.
Altitudes of less than 3,300 metres cor¬
respond to the first level; there are no
significant effects on the oxygen trans¬
porting function of the blood.
The Ourou Indians live in floating settle¬
ments on Lake Titicaca, one of the world's
biggest mountain lakes (8,340 km', alti¬
tude 3,812 m), on the border of Peru and
Bolivia. Above, a group ofOurou Indians in
their boats made of bundled reeds.

«UI
S**- ft **
' ".WfV-
»Mi
Harvest scene In the Dolpo Valley (Nepal),
4,000 m up in the Himalayas. Barley is the
only cereal grown in the valley.
It is impossible for man to live perma¬
nently at the third level above 5,500
metres.
Altitude, in the physiological sense of
the term, thus corresponds to a level of
between 3,300 and 5,500 metres (a baro¬
metric pressure of between 500 and 370
millimetres of mercury).
The main problem for the human
organism in such an environment con¬
sequently lies in transferring oxygen from
the atmosphere to the cells.
Like the higher animals, man has two
active transfer mechanisms: the respira¬
tory system, and the circulatory system
which distributes to the various tissues
the oxygen bonded to the haemoglobin in
the blood. At an altitude of over 3,500
metres the partial pressure of oxygen in
the air is insufficient to saturate the
haemoglobin. Respiration and circula¬
tion rates are therefore the most
affected.
People living at high altitudes have
more red corpuscles and more
haemoglobin circulating in their blood,
and this makes up for the fall in the partial
pressure of oxygen. This increase in red
corpuscles at high altitudes allows the
cardiac output to return to, or sustain, its
sea level value. These two responses,
greater cardiac output and an increase- in
the number of red corpuscles, have the
same purpose: to convey to the tissues the
oxygen they need, despite its rarefaction
in the atmosphere. The first is an immedi¬
ate functional response; the second is
more adaptive and takes over from the
first.
Reduced barometric pressure is not the
only constraint due to altitude; cold is
usually an associated factor. Some phys¬
iological responses to cold, such as
decreased circulation to the skin, are
also among the responses to altitude
hypoxia.3
Man is thus not naturally suited to life
at high altitudes; all the regulatory and
control mechanisms of the human organ¬
ism work in accordance with sea level
conditions. However, in temperate and
tropical regions people live at heights
where the barometric pressure is close to
half that of sea level, and most of the
body's functions have adjusted accord¬
ingly.
People have travelled through and
lived in high altitude regions since ancient
times. They have served as places of
refuge or as extensions of land used for
stock-rearing, for example. The inhabi¬
tants have adapted physiologically to
these exceptional living conditions, but
they depend for subsistence on the poor
pasture land which feeds the animals they
3. Deficiency in the amount of oxygen delivered to the
body tissues.
raise, and they are always at the mercy of
a severe winter which could decimate
their beasts. They also rely on the water
supply from glaciers to irrigate their
fields.
The people who live in the high
plateaux of South America or Central
Asia lead an active life as farmers and
herdsmen. Their extensive empirical
knowledge of the soil and climatic condi¬
tions has enabled them to create a highly
efficient system of terraced irrigation and
cultivation. They follow a sowing time¬
table which ensures that crops can be har¬
vested in the minimum of time, and they
know how to cross-breed animals to
increase their resistance and how to store
food as a precaution against irregular har¬
vests. The growing of cereals and the rais¬
ing of animals are closely interdepen¬
dent, for intensive agriculture is only
possible if manure is available.
The Andean peoples grow potatoes,
maize (corn), fava beans and quinoa (a
plant of the Chenopodium family) and
raise llamas and vicunas. They use the
wool and meat of another camelid, the
alpaca, as well as its skin and its fat, which
is thought to have therapeutic powers.
The breeding of these animals and of
oxen and sheep, which were introduced
in the sixteenth century, is their main live¬
lihood: a herd of 200 animals is needed to
maintain a family of six.
10

Several centuries of exploitation of
mineral resources have led some peoples
to settle at altitudes of around 4,800
metres at the Chorolque mine in
Bolivia, for example. In Central Asia,
the farmers who live in the southernmost
and easternmost valleys of Tibet grow
barley, peas and, more recently, potatoes
on irrigated land. They also raise oxen
and sheep.
Nomadic tent-dwelling herdsmen in
these regions live entirely by stock-rear¬
ing. In the main they breed animals such
as yaks, sheep, goats and horses, which
are well suited to the conditions. The yak
provides them with milk, from which they
make butter and cheese, as well as meat,
skins and hair; it is also used as a beast of
burden. These nomads control the
greater part of the transport and trade in
salt, bartered for grain from the lower-
lying valleys.
In order to obtain food and survive at
high altitudes, the inhabitants of the
Andean and the Central Asian mountain
ranges have developed production sys
tems designed to subjugate nature,
reduce risk, and make the most of avail¬
able resources (in the case of the Andes,
by making the maximum use of the ecolo¬
gical zones at different altitudes). Their
aim is to take from the environment all
that is necessary to meet their needs, at
the same time eliminating or reducing cli¬
matic risks. This is a basic feature of the
relationship between high mountain
societies and their environment, and it is
to be seen not only in agriculture and
stock-rearing, but in all the other
activities of their life the procurement
of food, shelter and a dwelling-place.
The very wide range of individual reac¬
tions suggests that altitude may have had
a selection pressure on peoples living per¬
manently in high-altitude regions, and
that throughout the generations such
selection may have favoured people who
were better suited to develop favourable
responses and, even more, to reduce
those responses likely to prove
unfavourable.
GERARDO ANTESENA, MARIO PAZ-
ZAMORA and ENRIQUE VARGAS, of Bolivia,
are directors of research on the high-altitude
physiologyandpathology ofman in the Andes, at
the Bolivian Institute of High-Altitude Biology
(IBBA) of the Major San Andres University, La
Paz. These studies are also carried out at the
high-altitude stations of Potosí (4,200 m),
Chorolque (4,800 m) and in the lowlands at
Santa Cruz (400 m).
Entrance shaft of the "Siglo XX" tin mine,
part of Bolivia's most important mining
complex. The Bolivian writer Sergio
Almaraz Paz has written of this mining
region, over 4,000 m up In the Bolivian
Highlands or Altiplano, "There is no
colour; nature is clad in grey. Contaminat¬
ing the belly of the earth, the ore has trans¬
formed it into a desert. "
11
