In harmony with nature
The making of the Alpine landscape
by Leo Lienert
WHEN we talk of the Alps, we
usually think of the mighty arc
of mountains extending
across much of Europe from Marseille on
the Mediterranean to Vienna in the east.
But the word alp (or alpage) also means
"high mountain pasture". How did this
double meaning come about? Probably
because in former times people were only
interested in the useful parts of moun¬
tains passes and the pastureland on
their flanks.
It was only much later that the terrible
beauty of the Alpine peaks came to be
appreciated. Gradually the town and city
people began to wish to climb the Alps
instead of simply crossing them. To reach
the summits they had first to cross the
high pastures, and the "back to nature"
fashion found an embodiment in the life
of the Alpine herdsman. Life in the Alps
became a symbol of nature, of man's true
vocation.
The well-tended, varied landscape,
restful to eye and mind alike, that can be
admired in the Alps is not the creation of
nature alone. It is the result of stubborn
and patient work by mountain farmers
and foresters who slowly and
painstakingly created the cultivated
environment to which we are
accustomed. Today, it is our respon¬
sibility to preserve this environment, and
hand it down intact to future generations.
This can be achieved only by a com¬
prehensive environmental protection
policy.
Most of today's meadows, heathlands
and fields were wrested from the pri¬
meval forest by human effort. Except
The perseverance of many generations of
mountain farmers has shaped an Alpine
landscape whose harmony is the result of
a fragile balance between the action of
nature and the hand of man. This balance,
on which the Alpine economyandenviron¬
ment depend, must be protected against
excessive pressures from the consumer
society. Right, a village in the Dolomite
Alps in northeastern Italy. The Dolomites
are Italy's leading Alpine tourist centre,
with such well-known summer and winter
sports resorts as Cortina d'Ampezzo.
24 SO 7S km
FRANCE
A
OV0*
BAVARIA
/
ZECHOSLOVAKI A
Der***
®
.
7 N
T-7COI »un LIECHTENSTEIN. ,_- _____ v
TZERLAND vj*«/» -nw ALP5 **#«»< .tí** _ Z
*í imm» ,iT*"' CENTRAL ALPS O^
^T; °"A *&* a " .s"""~< «««i. -^
S KM««, '"*A TT;
r. .. .. _T? A»* .n .... J
iMi
. PK"
Maççor* £o",°
Bulto ArtiiK)
L|ubi|*n*
YUGOSLAVIA
^
Zw<>

where there are lakes, peatbogs, steep
rocky slopes, scree and eternal snows,
forest is everywhere the natural vegeta¬
tion. All grassland situated beyond the
limits of the forest must therefore be
tended if it is to be preserved. It is a
transitory formation which, without con¬
stant human toil, would soon become
overgrown and would subsequently
revert to native forest. Secondary forest
has grown in areas which have been
farmed and later abandoned.
As soon as human settlement in the
Alps began, the forests began to be
cleared and burned. They receded before
the grassland established near the earliest
villages. A number of sources show that
Alpine agriculture developed rapidly in
the late Middle Ages. Encouraged by
population growth and a period of mild
climate, the mountain pastures were
intensively exploited. Villages were grad¬
ually established up to an altitude of 2,000
metres . Large tracts of forest were felled ,
and unfortunately felling also took place
in areas where trees were indispensable in
order to retain the topsoil. As a result,
many disasters avalanches, uncon¬
trolled torrents, rockfalls, landslides
occurred on the edge of forests and on
steep slopes. During this period the first
mountain roads were made and the first
defences against erosion were con¬
structed.
The farmer's task is not only to provide
food for the population but to tend and
safeguard the agricultural landscape,
which is a reflection of human activity
and hence of culture. One of the main
characteristics of natural areas such as the
Alps is their wealth of plant and animal
life. The advent of modern farming meth¬
ods geared to maximum profit (especially
single-crop farming) has seriously
impoverished the environment as compe¬
tition with industrial output has forced
farmers to increase production and use
more fertilizers and chemicals. This is a
dangerous situation. Exploitation of the
natural heritage of soil, water and air for
exclusively economic ends must stop.
Instead, these resources should be hus¬
banded as well as possible, taking
account of the requirements of plants and
animals, as well as human needs.
The dwindling of botanical and animal
species is due to the shrinking of their
habitat and to changes in farming meth¬
ods. In all biotopes regions uniform in
environmental conditions and in their
populations of animals and plants there
is a strong interdependence between
flora and fauna, and any reduction or
change in type of grassland has drastic
consequences for the animal life associ¬
ated with it. For example, if areas of dry,
sparse, hot grassland are more intensively
cultivated, grasshoppers disappear. Sim¬
ilarly, dragonflies, frogs, and certain

In recent years the rich variety of flowers
and animal life in the Alps has been dwin¬
dling because their habitat is shrinking
and because of the increasing use of ferti¬
lizers and pesticides in agriculture. The
ecological balance is thus being distur¬
bed. Above, from left to right, three exam¬
ples of Alpine animal life: two specimens
of the rock ptarmigan (Lagopus mutus),
camouflaged against the snow by their
whiteplumage; two male Alpine wildgoats
(Capra ibex) in combat; an Apollo butterfly
(Parnassius apollo).
One way of coping with the problem of
avalanche risk is to use artificial means to
trigger off avalanches when there is no
one around. Below, a young French¬
woman from the resort of Alpe-d'Huez,
Haute-Savoie,one of few women to do this
dangerous job, is about to hurl a stick of
dynamite. When it explodes on the slope it
will start the avalanche.
birds which are extremely useful for
maintaining the equilibrium of natural
living communities, can no longer find
food or reproduce when pools, ponds or
marshland disappear. Biologists realized
some time ago that destruction of the
ecological balance is far more of a threat
to living species than hunting or gather¬
ing. In the Alps, therefore, emphasis
must be placed on overall protection of
the environment, on the care and mainte¬
nance of the biotope in a state which, if
not entirely natural, is at least close to the
true Alpine nature.
The key to the efficient maintenance of
an agricultural landscape close to nature
is use of the land according to methods
that are geared to the natural conditions
in the area in question, and preservation
of the necessary habitat of indigenous
plants and animals. A thorough knowl¬
edge of local conditions is indispensable.
Study and mapping of the local geology,
soil patterns and plant resources will lead
to an understanding of the ecological and
biological environment: planning of the
Alpine economy must be based on the
findings of such research. Land use
geared to local conditions will involve
separating forest from pasture, and tend¬
ing wooded areas as carefully as grass¬
land. The forest is protected if livestock
are kept out of it, and new stands of
young trees can grow in safety.
It has long been known that only
healthy and regularly renewed forests
afford protection against avalanches.
Less well known is the fact that the main¬
tenance or neglect of mountain slopes
also does much to determine avalanche
risk. Short grass, for instance, offers
snow a good hold. Long, withered grass
lying flattened in a downhill direction
forms a surface that favours sliding and
thereby increases the risk of avalanches.
In other words, every ungrazed slope and
every unmown strip of grass is a potential
danger.
The factors determining avalanche risk
therefore change radically when styles of
mountain farming change or disappear.
Remote slopes, where in the past skiers
could venture without danger, suddenly
become death traps. New avalanche cor¬
ridors soon threaten roads, railways and
villages. In such areas, protection must
be provided by avalanche barriers, dikes
to contain torrents, and by costly
reafforestation. But avalanches hurtling
down unwooded slopes have undesirable
long-term consequences as well as being a
source of immediate danger. When snow
freezes, clinging to stalks of dry grass
which have been left unmown in the
autumn, an avalanche will carry down all
the grass with it and, even more impor¬
tant, all the topsoil in which it is growing.
After such a disaster, only bare rock or
loose stones remain. The descending ava¬
lanche becomes a rushing mass of earth
and mud. In its wake, nothing will grow,
and the gaping wound will not heal; the
CONTINUED PAGE 8

Thepeople of the Alps have always been aware of the need to
protect their environment and with it their way of life both
against natural hazards andsometimes a more difficult
taskagainst the consequences ofhuman activity. (1) A floo¬
ded meadow at Feldmoos Glswil In the Swiss canton of
Obwalden. (2) Anti-avalanche barriers. (3) Ski-slopes In the
Swiss canton of Graubünden (Grisons), during the summer.
The grass has totally disappeared as a result of erosion
caused by skiing. (4) Barriers channel an Alpine torrent at
Rotmoosgraben in the Obwalden. (5) Two kinds of Alpine
meadow separated by a fence: at left, grass cropped by
livestock; at right, grass mown for hay.

scar merely spreads as the years go by.
Gradually the whole region becomes
defenceless against ever greater torrents
of snow, mud and stones and all
because the grass on the slopes was no
longer used!
Making and maintaining paths and
flights of steps is the responsibility of the
local communes and the owners of moun¬
tain pastures. When the latter are no
longer used, it is difficult to find road-
menders, especially if the forestry
authorities cannot take over the task of
their upkeep. All hikers should remem¬
ber that, stone by stone and step by step,
the paths leading them through the
mountain scenery that they so much
admire were made by skilful and hard¬
working men who knew how to turn the
land to the best advantage, digging
ditches and building retaining walls
where necessary. At any moment, snow,
snowmelt and landslides can destroy the
results of this painstaking work, unless
they are constantly maintained and
repaired.
In the mountains, maintenance of a
forest that is healthy and close to the nat¬
ural state is the central task of landscape
protection. All forests even those
grown for timber must be properly
cared for and managed. The quality of
the forest soil can be maintained only
when the trees are regularly replaced: the
forest's health depends on this. For
example, in recent decades, there has not
been enough grazing for cloven-hoofed
game animals, with the result that these
animals were often forced to feed on
shoots and saplings. This jeopardized
efforts to renew the forest, and it became
necessary to reintroduce predators which
had died out, such as the lynx, in order to
restore the balance between the forest
and its natural inhabitants. If forests were
left alone, the new growth of young trees
would be inadequate, and there would
not be enough protection against ava¬
lanches, flash floods and rockfalls.
It is the mountain farmer who, from
generation to generation, has created
today's Alpine agricultural landscape,
and he alone can maintain and safeguard
it effectively. At the same time, many
mountain farms depend on tourism for
their survival. This clearly demonstrates
the interdependence of the different eco¬
nomic sectors and the absolute necessity
of joint planning. In the context of such
planning and its implementation pri¬
ority should be given to safeguarding the
landscape by providing economic
security for mountain farmers.
Every living mountain landscape has a
character of its own, expressed in its lan¬
guage, customs, architecture and crafts.
This variety makes a particular region a
home for its people. Every valley that
loses its inhabitants and every village that
dies is an irreplaceable loss. We can no
longer afford such losses and such
damage.
LEO LIENERT is a former forestry engineer at
the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology,
Zürich. After working in the Royal Forestry Admi¬
nistration in Sweden and the Forestry Depart¬
ment of the Principality of Liechtenstein,'he was
appointed director of the Cantonal Department
of Land Improvement and Forests, Obwalden,
Switzerland. Among his published works are
Naturschutz in Obwalden (1970, "Nature
Conservation in Obwalden") and (as co-author)
of Alpwirtschaft und Landschaftspflege im
Gebiet Glaubenbüelen, Obwalden (1972, "The
Alpine Economy and Landscape Protection in
the Glaubenbüelen District of Obwalden").
An engineer performs an acrobatic feat to
repair the wheel of a ski-lift at Flaine, a
French winter sports resort in Haute-
Savoie. Tourism is essential to the Alpine
economy today and enables many Alpine
farms to survive. At the same time, only the
mountain farmer who has created the
Alpine landscape can effectively maintain
andpreserve it. The differentsectors of the
Alpine economy are today interdependent
and planning must take into account and
reconcile the interests of all concerned.
8
