ITwas now seven o'clock by his watch: he had just time enough to dine before
catching his train, which was due to leave at eight-fifty. He worked out how
long the crossing from Dieppe to Newhaven would take, added up the hours
on his fingers, and finally told himself: "If the times given in the guide are correct,
I shall arrive in London dead on twelve-thirty tomorrow afternoon." ...
While the table was being laid, Des Esseintes inspected his neighbours. ... he
saw a crowd of islanders with china-blue eyes, crimson complexions, and earnest
or arrogant expressions, skimming through foreign newspapers; but here there
were a few women dining in pairs without male escorts, robust Englishwomen
with boyish faces, teeth as big as palette-knives, cheeks as red as apples, long
hands and long feet. They were enthusiastically attacking helpings of rump-steak
pie meat served hot in mushroom sauce and covered with a crust like a fruit tart.
The voracity of these hearty trencherwomen brought back with a rush the
appetite he had lost so long ago. First, he ordered and enjoyed some thick, greasy
oxtail soup; next, he examined the list offish and asked for a smoked haddock,
which also came up to his expectations; and then, goaded on by the sight of other
people guzzling, he ate a huge helping of roast beef and potatoes and downed a
couple of pints of ale, savouring the musty cowshed flavour of this fine pale beer.
In the course of his sedentary life, only two countries had exerted any attraction
upon him Holland and England. He had surrendered to the first of these two
temptations; unable to resist any longer, he had left Paris one fine day and visited
the cities of the Low Countries, one by one. On the whole, this tour had proved a
bitter disappointment to him. He had pictured to himself a Holland such as
Teniers and Jan Steen, Rembrandt and Ostade had painted. ...
Still thinking of this past disappointment, he once more consulted his watch:
there were only ten minutes now before his train left.
"It's high time to ask for my bill and go," he told himself. ...
"Get up, man, and go," he kept telling himself, but these orders were no sooner
given than countermanded. After all, what was the good of moving, when a fellow
could travel so magnificently sitting in a chair? Wasn't he already in London,
whose smells, weather, citizens, food, and even cutlery, were all about him? What
could he expect to find over there, save fresh disappointments such as he had
suffered in Holland?
Now he had only just time enough to run across to the station, but an immense
aversion for the journey, an urgent longing to remain where he was, came over
him with growing force and intensity. Lost in thought, he sat there letting the
minutes slip by, thus cutting off his retreat.
"If I went now," he said to himself, "I should have to dash up to the barriers and
hustle the porters along with my luggage. How tiresome it would be!"
And once again he told himself:
"When you come to think of it, I've seen and felt all that I wanted to see and
feel. I've been steeped in English life ever since I left home, and it would be
madness to risk spoiling such unforgettable experiences by a clumsy change of
locality. As it is, I must have been suffering from some mental aberration to have
thought of repudiating my old convictions, to have rejected the visions of my
obedient imagination, and to have believed like any ninny that it was necessary,
interesting, and useful to travel abroad."
He looked at his watch. ,
"Time to go home," he said. And this time he managed to get to his feet, left the
tavern, and told the cabby to drive him back to the Gare de Sceaux. Thence he
returned to Fontenay with his trunks, his packages, his portmanteaux, his rugs,
his umbrellas, and his sticks, feeling all the physical weariness and moral fatigue of
a man who has come home after a long and perilous journey.



Paris- on-Thames
by Joris-Karl Huysmans
Duke Jean Floressas des Esseintes, the
hero of A rebours (1884) by the French
novelist Joris-Karl Huysmans (1848-
1907), is a prey to boredom, despite his
nobility and wealth. As a form of
escapism, he immerses himself in "the
tumultuous spaces of nightmares and
dreams". In des Esseintes, the
personification of refined decadence,
Huysmans created a character who
epitomized the. spirit o/fin de siècle
European art and literature. At once
grotesque and pathetic, a figure in some
ways reminiscent ofDon Quixote, this
armchair traveller who imagines himself
in Dickensian England while dining at an
English tavern in Paris is one of
literature's most memorable portraits ofa
mind in torment.
Le train engourdi, a collage by Max Ernst
(1891 -1976). The work belongs to a series
entitled La Femme 1 00 têtes (1929) which is
one of the masterpieces ofSurrealist art.
A Rebours, English translation© Robert Baldick, 1959,
under the title Against Nature.
33
