The great illusionists BY ARNAULD BREJON DE LAVERGNEE
*G
, OUNTER-REFORMATION
art", "the Jesuit style" ... these
' are but two of the countless des¬
ignations that have been applied to baroque
art. After a period of austerity which coin¬
cided with the end of the Mannerist school,
ideas changed, the Church became less rigid
in its attitude towards artists and there was a
general resurgence in all the arts. Painting,
sculpture and architecture combined to give
birth to a new conception of the handling of
space. Rome witnessed the genesis of a spec¬
tacular style, spread by the Jesuits and
The Crucifixion of St. Peter (1600-1610), oil on
canvas by Caravaggio, below, is today pre¬
served in the church ofSanta Maria del Popólo,
Rome. In his short life (1573-1610) Caravaggio
paved the wayfor baroquepainting through his
emphasis on heightened emotional tension, his
dramatic use oflight and shade, and his realistic
depictions of religious themes.
backed by the Church, which encouraged a
visual approach to the teaching of dogma.
The painted ceilings of Roman churches are
the masterpieces of this illusionist art, a tri¬
umph of the wondrous and of decorative
effervescence.
The seventeenth century ushered in a new
kind of painting. The Italian critic Luigi Sal¬
erno expressed its guiding principle in these
words: "The image is no longer just a matter
of line or colour; the artist wants to convey
something which goes beyond lines, colours
and perspective and which strikes the view¬
er's feelings and imagination." To stimulate
the imagination, the artist attempted to
break down the barrier between the viewer
and the work of art and to give his painting a
"non-finite" aspect.
The Bolognese painter Annibale Carrac-
ci's purpose seems to have been to bring the
figures in his paintings closer to the space
occupied by the viewer by creating the illu¬
sion that his paintings were a continuation of
real space. The revolution introduced by
Caravaggio, it would appear, was the sancti¬
fication of everyday life. A few years later it
was Bernini's turn to complete the process
and with him the frontiers between art and
life were finally eliminated. What, then,
were the stages in this artistic revolution
which accompanied the development of the
baroque style? Everything happened in
Rome, in the space of three generations.
Annibale Carracci and the new style. In
1595, Annibale Carracci (1560-1609) arrived
in Rome at the invitation of Cardinal
Odoardo Farnese. In addition to many easel
paintings, he created one of the great master¬
pieces of seventeenth-century Italian art
when he painted the ceiling vault of the gall¬
ery of the Palazzo Farnese (1597-1609) for
which he took as his theme the Triumph of
Love (Amor omnia vincit). Against a back¬
ground of highly complex trompe l'sil arch¬
itecture (imitation vaulting, imitation of the
wooden frames that usually surround paint¬
ings, imitation bronze and marble statues on
which a golden light plays), Carracci
unfolded mythological scenes that are inven¬
tive, joyful and dynamic, in accordance with
the criteria of "ideal beauty". The decorative
scheme of the ceiling of the Farnese gallery
was so richly inventive that it influenced ceil¬
ing decoration for generations and left its
mark on both classical and baroque artists.
We must turn to the Swiss art historian
Heinrich Wölfflin (1864-1945) for an expla¬
nation of the baroque style, which he dis¬
tinguishes from the classical style on the fol¬
lowing five counts:
the classical style is linear, stressing the
limits of the subject which it defines and
isolates. Baroque style is pictorial and its
subjects have a natural relationship with
their surroundings;
the classical style is a construction of
planes, whereas baroque art is built in depth;
Classicism is a closed system, the Baroque
is open;
the unity of the classical style is a com¬
position of clearly distinct elements, the
unity of the baroque style is an indivisible
unity;
Classicism aims above all for clarity
whereas the Baroque is less concerned with
its personages as individuals than with their
inter-relationships.
In its strict sense, the word Baroque (from
the Portuguese word barroco, used to
describe a pearl that is crudely or irregularly
shaped) applies to an architectural style cre¬
ated in Rome at the beginning of the seven¬
teenth century arid which spread later to
other countries. Gradually the word came to
be applied to other arts (such as sculpture,
painting, music and poetry). Although its
dates vary from country to country, there is
general agreement in situating the baroque
period as a whole between the beginning of
30

f*Vj
"\
\
M y-
F
.1 j
r *
I9H
the seventeenth century and the first half of
the eighteenth century.
Giovanni Lanfranco (1582-1647) was one
of the first adepts of the new style. Fasci¬
nated by the diffused luminosity and the
daring handling of space in the frescoes of
Correggio (1494-1534), Lanfranco devel¬
oped some new experiments in his own
frescoes use of contrasting light and shade
to obtain greater expression, a taste for bold,
dynamic compositions, and spectacular
effects and illusions.
One of the first major commissions he
received from the Roman clergy was for a
fresco of imposing dimensions on the theme
of the Assumption ofthe Virgin, for the dome
of the church of S. Andrea della Valle (1 625).
Splendour and unreality; the Baroque
comes of age. Pietro da Cortona (1596-1669)
was the first truly baroque Italian artist. The
Bernini of painting, Pietro da Cortona was
the artist of the Church triumphant (his
career spanned six pontificates) and of abso
lutism. He was the originator of a style of
painting that was to be followed by Le Brun
but whose aesthetic would be more fully
understood by Luca Giordano and Tiepolo.
The grandiose plans of Pope Urban VIII
(Maffeo Barberini), to make of Rome a
worthy capital, were carried through by sev¬
eral leading artists including Bernini and
Pietro da Cortona. In one of Pietro's major
works, the frescoed ceiling of the Palazzo
Barberini (1633-1639), the trompe l'iil
architectural features and sculptures merge
into the main body of the work to give a
"total painting" effect and this gives a unity
to the complex allegories depicted. In the
central section, Divine Providence,
enthroned on clouds above Chronos and tbe
three Fates, receives a crown of stars from
the hand of Immortality and displays the
Barberini coat of arms.
Following on from the professions of faith
of Carracci and Caravaggio, we see the last
of the three fundamental currents of seven¬
teenth-century Roman painting taking
The great age ofItalian baroque painting came
to an end with the Venetian artist Giovanni
Battista Tiepolo (1696-1770). The elegance,
spirit and lightness of touch of Tiepolo's work
influenced much 18th-century painting, espe¬
cially in Spain where Tiepolo spent much ofhis
life. Above, The Meeting of Antony and
Cleopatra, a fresco from the Palazzo Labia in
Venice.
shape. With its splendours and unreality, its
riot of colours and forms set free in space,
this is a style which speaks to us in a language
close to that of Bernini. Within a setting of
trompe l'eil architecture, a host of symbolic
figures spill out against wide open blue skies
in a ceaseless undulation of flowing drapery
and golden ringlets. Heraldic arms, garlands
of flowers and dancing cherubs enliven the
representation of an ideal world in which
earthly glories receive their highest accolade
in a free and happy rapprochement with the
symbols of Catholicism triumphant and of
classical mythology.
31


Spectacular painted ceilings in 17th-century
Roman churches andpalaces reveal the fondness
8 ofbaroque artistsforfantastic, illusionist effects.
| Left, The Triumph of the Name ofJesus (1662-
\ 1683), a ceiling fresco painted by Giovanni
5 Battista Gaulli, known as Baciccia, in the
íá church ofII Gesù in Rome. Carved andpainted
© figures blend with imitation and real
S architectural structures to create an extraordin-
f ary trompe-l'oeil effect.
Remarkably, the shapes and forms are not
confined within the frame which appears
behind imitation stucco atlantes over which
the figures enthroned on the clouds freely
spread. The frame is an integral part of the
painting, giving a profound sense of spatial
unity which is underlined by the warmth of
the Venetian palette. The renewal is total and
complete, with forms that seem to engender
each other spontaneously.
Some thirty years later, in his last great
decorative work, the fresco (Vision of St.
Philip Neri during the Building of the
Church, 1664-1665) for the vault of the nave
of the Chiesa Nuova, Pietro da Cortona cre¬
ated a new form of illusionism. The impor¬
tance of this work needs to be underlined
since it influenced most of the decorative
work for church naves in Rome and its sur¬
roundings throughout the eighteenth cen¬
tury. With its daring foreshortening, its
original di sotto in su (upward movement)
and, above all, the way in which the mar¬
vellous and the divine are presented as if they
are part of everyday life, this fresco remains
unmatched. The new ambition of the artists
of the middle years of the century was to
make the fantastic seem credible.
Naples was, perhaps, the second great
artistic centre of the seventeenth century in
Italy. From Caravaggio to Luca Giordano, a
whole range of experiences clashed only to
combine, often with very original results. At
the heart of baroque creativity, Luca Gior¬
dano's prolific, impetuous inventiveness laid
the foundations of eighteenth-century Euro¬
pean painting. A felicitous poetic streak and
tender humanity free of all bombast, set him
apart from the other great Italian decorative
artists. His fresco in the gallery of the library
of the Medici-Riccardi palace, in Florence
(1682-1683), that great, luminous fable, was
born of a fusion of many influences and
experiments (Venetian art, the message of
Pietro da Cortona...). On the themes of the
Apotheosis ofHuman Life and of the Life of
Thought, Luca Giordano carried through a
rigidly established, allegorical, symbolic and
mythological programme with a supreme
liberty of invention to produce a unified
composition that was both balanced and
daring.
Gaulli and Andrea Pozzo: illusion carried
to perfection. In Rome, some extremely
important decorative works were created at
the end of the century. From 1680 to 1685
the Genoese artist Giovanni Battista Gaulli
(1639-1709, also known as Baciccia) trans¬
formed Il Gesù, the Counter-Reformation-
style mother church of the Jesuit order,
built during the previous century by
Giacomo da Vignola, into a baroque church
with a nave fresco on the theme of the Tri¬
umph of the Name ofJesus.
Stimulated by Bernini, Gaulli at II Gesù
propagated Bernini's ideas, amply illustrat¬
ing his revolutionary pictorial concepts.
Baroque artists were always seeking to intro¬
duce an element of illusion and at II Gesù it is
to be found in the plasticity of the painted
figures, mingled with the stucco figures, and
in their movement beyond the architectural
framework on to the coffering of the vault¬
ing and into the real space of the church.
Here for the first time can be seen the com¬
position characteristic of late baroque
frescoes, in which the juxtaposing of the
darker areas is of greater importance than the
distribution of the figures. Since some of the
stucco figures are painted and some painted
figures have been placed where stucco fig¬
ures would have been expected, it is no
longer possible to distinguish painting from
sculpture. Gaulli gave his paintings a strong
relief effect, influenced by Bernini's sculp¬
tures, and this, coupled with his vigorous
distribution of light and shade, makes even
compositions as vast and as well-peopled as
the Gesù frescoes clear and legible. As well
as imparting a certain mystic quality, the
divine light builds and organizes the entire
composition.
It has often been remarked that the great
artisans of baroque art active in Rome came
from northern Italy. Andrea Pozzo (1642-
1709), a native of Trento, confirms the rule.
The vault fresco of the church of St. Ignatius,
begun in 1668 by Pozzo, himself a Jesuit
priest, extols the glory of the founder of the
Jesuit order. Above the real architectural
structures of the church, he painted, with
brilliant trompe l' effect, the walls and
arcades of another great temple which opens
out on to infinite heavens peopled with
groups of angels, of the blessed and of alle¬
gorical figures. With the vault of the church
of II Gesù, painted by Gaulli, this is, per¬
haps, the most solemn and the most forth¬
right celebration of the splendours of the
Church in the entire decorative output of
seventeenth-century baroque art.
Illusionism, the trompe l' effect sought
by Gaulli and Pozzo, gives rise to a merging
of pictorial space and real space. With Gaulli
some of the painted figures are projected into
the real space of the church occupied by the
viewer. Pozzo, on the other hand, doubles
the real space of the church by the creation of
a painted space. At the centre of his fresco
Pozzo added a vanishing point around
which his ceiling was organized. Thanks to
this innovation, the effects of painting
mingle with those of architecture. As for
Gaulli, he had recourse to sculpture. This
development was to triumph during the
eighteenth century. The power of the colour
arid the studied virtuosity beguile the view¬
er's eye with their prestige, but stir no emo¬
tion in the soul. They are beautiful paintings
and their technical prowess is seductive, but
they do not lead the mind on to meditation.
Painting has become a feast for the eyes. The
beauty of reality is revealed, but not the
secret inner anguish of the soul.
ARNAULD BREJON DE LAVERGNEE,
French art critic and historian, is a curator at the
Louvre Museum, Paris. He has organized exhibi¬
tions on baroque artists and has written several
catalogues for the Louvre and other French
museums. He is the author ofhi peinture italienne
du 17e siècle (1979; "Italian Painting of the 17th
Century ") and of many articles on classical and
modern artists.
33
