A Roman



freighter
yields its secrets
The Madrague
de Giens
wreck
by André Tchernia
FOR eleven years, from 1972 to 1982,
diver-archaeologists of the
Archaeological Institute run jointly
in Aix-en-Provence (France) by the Uni¬
versity of Provence and the National Centre
for Scientific Research (CNRS), pitched
camp each summer in a pine wood over¬
looking the sea on the southern shore of the
Giens peninsula, some thirty kilometres
east of Toulon.
A Roman wreck had been discovered
near the little fishing port of La Madrague
de Giens in 1967, and since it was lying at a
reasonable depth 18 to 20 metres and
had not, like so many others, been pillaged
by looters, it was chosen as the site of the
first truly scientific underwater excavation
carried out in France on a considerable
scale. Three years of work were planned:
little did we know, at the time, that the
wreck would prove to be one of the two or
three largest ancient ships whose remains
have ever been found under the sea.
The method adopted is easier to describe
than it was to implement, given the nature
of our equipment and changing conditions
at sea. It meant extricating the objects care¬
fully and completely using an air pump,
without moving any one of them before its
position had been recorded; attaching
clearly visible numbers to all the amphoras
and other important objects; carrying out a
stereoscopic photographic coverage of the
area explored; raising to the surface the
objects thus identified, and continuing to
probe, level by level, as far as the hull.
Lastly, we carefully examined the hull itself
and dismantled parts of it in order to deter¬
mine how it had been constructed.
The ship was wrecked some time around
70-60 BC. It was carrying a cargo of wine
from Italyto be precise, from the region
of Terracina: we know the location of the
workshop where most of the amphoras in
the cargo were manufactured. It measured
nearly 40 metres in length, and could carry
7,000 or 8,000 amphoras, which gave it a
tonnage of 350 to 400 tons: a respectable
capacity for any traditional sea-going vessel
as late as the nineteenth century.
Part of the cargo of amphoras carried by
the Roman merchantman wrecked off the
south coast of France near La Madrague
de Giens.
But we did not find so many thousands of
amphoras on the sea-bed. Firstly because,
on its last voyage, the ship was not fully
loaded with wine. An extra cargo, consist¬
ing of crates of black glazed pottery, had
been packed on top. Secondly, and above
all, because we were able to establish that
divers probably professionals had come
to salvage the sunken cargo shortly after the
wreck, and had raised to the surface at least
half of the amphoras. There were two con¬
sistent pointers to this. The wreck is strewn
with large stones; a geological study has
shown that they very probably came from
the peninsula itself, or from the opposite
coast adjoining the town of Hyères. These
are the stones used by skin divers in order to
plummet more quickly to the sea-bed, as
sponge divers have done for centuries
throughout the Mediterranean.
Furthermore, scrutiny of photographs
and plans produced during the excavation
reveals beyond a shadow of doubt that,
despite the displacement of the cargo dur¬
ing and after the wreck, while three layers
of amphoras are still in place on the port
side, there is only one layer to starboard. In
some places there are even holes in the
cargo, and one or two isolated amphoras
have remained embedded in the volcanic
sand which, to aft, was used both as ballast
and to hold the amphoras in place, whereas
those next to them were hoisted on board
the boat used as a base by our predecessors
in Roman times.
Studying the hull called for the most spec¬
tacular measures. In order to examine the
keel and take samples from it, it was neces¬
sary to dig a tunnel under the hull and to use
underwater chain-saws. The fragments re¬
moved were taken apart and studied trenail
by trenail on land, then reassembled exactly
as before and returned to their place in the
wreck.
The most important finding was the con¬
firmation that the strongly curved hull pro¬
file and the depth of the keel would certain¬
ly have prevented the ship from drifting
very much and would have enabled it to sail
to windward. The elaborate form of the hull
would have compensated for the large, non-
specialized sails of ancient ships and given it
speed. Forward, an inverted stem and a
bobstay piece added the finishing touches to
the ship's nautical qualities.
Patrice Pomey drew up a detailed plan of
the hull and superimposed it on a much
later picture of a ship represented on a
Tunisian mosaic. The proportions are ex¬
actly the same: the upward sweep fore and
aft begins at exactly the same point, and the
bilge pump and the masts are in the same
positions. From this we must draw three
important conclusions: that this mosaic,
and probably many others, represent
ancient ships with much more realism and
accuracy than might be supposed; that the
missing parts and the sails of the Giens
wreck must have been similar to those on
the mosaic; and that this type of ship was
built to a virtually identical pattern for more
than three centuries.
Five years after the end of the excavation ,
an exhaustive study of the results is still far
from complete. Further observations will
be made. It is a pity that no other way of
preserving this great sailing ship of Antiqui¬
ty could be found than covering it with sand
again and leaving it buried where we had
found it.
ANDRE TCHERNIA, of France, is assistant
director of the sciences of man and society at the
National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS).
In 1967 and 1968 he served as France's first
director of research in underwater archaeology.
With Patrice Pomey he directed, under the au¬
spices of the CNRS, the excavations of the Mad¬
rague de Giens shipwreck from 1972 to 1982. 11
