Society and the disabled
IN the last twenty years and especially
since 1 981 , the International Year of Dis¬
abled Persons, the integration of dis¬
abled young people into the ordinary educa¬
tion system has become widely accepted and
is now a prominent goal of educational plan¬
ning in many countries.
This undeniable change in attitudes and
behaviour towards disabled people is playing
an essential role in their integration into work¬
ing life and into the societies to which they
belong. This integration is based on the fun¬
damental principles of equality of access to
education and the full participation of all per¬
sons, including the disabled, in social life and
in national development. It is one of the objec¬
tives of the World Programme of Action con¬
cerning Disabled Persons which was adopted
by the General Assembly of the United Na¬
tions in 1982. Unesco is co-operating with
other specialized agencies of the United Na¬
tions system in implementing the Programme,
which was included in Unesco's Second
Medium-Term Plan (1 984-1 989). The integra¬
tion of disabled young people into ordinary
schooling is already being carried out in many
Unesco Member States on a long-term basis,
to the benefit of both the disabled themselves
and of the education systems in these coun¬
tries, which thereby become more flexible.
Integration contributes to the acceptance of
"differences", promotes mutual tolerance and
respect and encourages the democratization
of education.
The concept of "handicap" has been great¬
ly modified in the last two decades. It is now
distinguished from that of "impairment" or
"disability" and is defined as a disadvantage
for a given individual, resulting from an impair¬
ment or a disability, that limits or prevents the
fulfilment of a role that Is normal, depending
on age, sex, social and cultural factors, for
that individual. Handicap is therefore a func¬
tion of the relationship between disabled per¬
sons and their environment. It occurs when
they encountercultural, physical or social bar¬
riers which prevent their access to the various
systems of society that are available to others.
Thus, handicap is the loss or limitation of
opportunities to take part in the life of the
community on an equal level with others.
This new concept of what it means to be
handicapped highlights the relative nature of
differences between the performances or sta¬
tus of disabled people and those of others,
and draws attention to the fact that these gaps
may be reduced, if not removed, by appropri¬
ate action on the disabled person's physical,
psychological, educational and social en¬
vironment, and by measures to make him or
her as self-reliant as possible.
From an educational point of view, the in¬
tegration of disabled people requires specific
measures, and above all that account should
be taken of the special situation of each hand¬
icapped child or adolescent. The nature and
importance of the disability should be eva¬
luated, along with the possibilities of educa¬
tion and of developing" individual aptitudes,
following the strategy best adapted to each
case. The breaking down of barriers within
institutions, the setting up of multi-disciplinary
educational teams and the use of varied
teaching methods are required.
Integration into ordinary education takes
different forms in different countries, some¬
times even within the same country, depend¬
ing on requirements and on the facilities
available. Nevertheless all these forms are a
response to the same overriding concern: to
encourage the development of each child's
personality and to ensure his or her eventual
integration into adult society. In the article
overleaf, a specialist describes the integration
process in Portuguese schools today and pre¬
sents in their own words the testimony of two
visually handicapped children.
The integration of disabled children into the ordinary education system is a goal being
pursued in many countries. Alia Zureikat, a young Jordanian girl afflicted with cerebral
palsy, attends an ordinary school in Amman. According to her teachers, Alia, here seen
holding her younger brother in her arms, is a highly motivated and enthusiastic pupil
whose level in some subjects is higher than the class average.
29
