The high tech explosion
Technological ingenuity,
Japan's home-grown raw material
Three examples of Japanese mastery of minia¬
turization technology. Left to right: an electric
razor, a transistor radio and a camera which
also serves as a key-ring. by Shigeru Kimura

IT was not until the 1980s that the high
level of Japanese science and tech¬
nology began to attract worldwide at¬
tention. Up till then, the United States could
boast of its supremacy in these fields; but
at the beginning of the present decade
Japan overtook the USA in several fields:
steel-making, cars, numerically controlled
machine tools, industrial robots and in¬
tegrated circuits.
Imitation and creativity
How is it that Japan has made such
rapid technological advances? Various
reasons can be adduced, the first of which
is the determined adoption by Japanese
engineers of the latest technology avail¬
able in other countries.
Dr. Masaru Ibuka, founder of the Sony
Corporation, is a case in point. When he
was In the United States in 1952, looking
for ideas that might lead to new devel¬
opments in technology, he heard that
Western Electric, Inc. had decided to allow
other companies to make use of its transis¬
tor patent. Dr. Ibuka at once began nego¬
tiating with Western Electric with a view to
obtaining the right to use the information
disclosed in this patent. At that time his
company was very small and little known.
Its achievements in developing tape re¬
corder technology were highly thought of,
however, and no obstacle was raised to his
acquiring the right to use the patent in
question.
During the negotiations, the Western
Electric executives asked him what he pro¬
posed to use transistors for. When he re¬
plied that he wanted to see if he could use
them to make a miniature radio, the Amer¬
icans advised him to give up the idea: the
transistors would be expensive to produce,
and even if he were to succeed in making a
radio with them, they assured him, it would
be no match for the ordinary valve radio,
either technically or cost-wise, so he would
be wasting his time.
Undeterred, Dr. Ibuka returned to Tokyo
and set to work with a small team of re¬
searchers to develop his idea in a lab¬
oratory that was little more than a shack.
Two years later, in the winter of 1954, the
sound of the first transistor radio was
heard. It was badly affected by static, but at
least it was a radio. This transistor radio
was subsequently exported all over the
world, and became very popular.
Until 1949, the metal teeth of the zip
fasteners made by Yoshida Kögyö Ltd.
(YKK), today the world's biggest zip manu¬
facturer, were implanted in their cloth edg¬
ing by hand. In 1950, however, the com¬
pany imported an automatic implanting
machine from the United States. The ma¬
chine was secondhand, but Company 31

Japan, which today produces over half the world's output of computer
microchips, has an outstandingly successful electronics industry.
Above, computer components in an "electronic bazaar" in Tokyo's
Akihabara district, which specializes in the sale of electrical and
electronic equipment through outlets ranging from market stalls to
chain-stores employing over 1,000 people.
32
President Tadao Yoshida took it apart,
studied it in detail, and added a series of
improvements, till finally he succeeded in
producing a version which was far superior
to the original. The company reached 'its
present position as the world's number one
producer of zip fasteners in 1960.
It is often said that the Japanese are
very good at imitating other people's ideas,
but short on originality or creativity. But
there is no doubt that without originality
without creative thinking neither that first
transistor radio nor the improved zip fas¬
tener machine would have been possible.
After the Second World War, Japan found
itself lagging behind in science and tech¬
nology. By first assimilating scientific and
technological advances that had been
made overseas, and then adding its own
unique ideas to the expertise thus ac¬
quired, Japan was able to produce finished
products of outstanding quality, and
thereby to win a high reputation in world
markets.
Japanese originality can also be seen in
the small home video recorders, now found
throughout the world, that were developed
by two Japanese companies, and in the
fact that 98 per cent of the facsimile ma¬
chines in use worldwide were made in
Japan.
Catching up the first priority
Until about a century ago, Japan was no
more than an underdeveloped country in
the remote Far East. In science and tech¬
nology, it lagged far behind Europe and the
United States.
The Japanese government of that time
sent many students to study in Europe and
in the United States. Between 1868 and
1874, some 550 of these students went
overseas; a considerable number, in an
age in which Atlantic and Pacific crossings
were made in small ships.
The government also invited many sci¬
entists and technical experts from other
countries to teach in Japan. Some of these
teachers, who came from the United King¬
dom, France, the United States, Germany,
The Netherlands, Switzerland and Italy,
were more highly paid than Japanese Cab¬
inet Ministers. Between 1868 and 1889
2,299 foreigners were thus employed.
In addition, the government very quickly
recognized the importance of education,
and began to introduce a system of uni¬
versal education as early as 1871. While
only 35 per cent of children of eligible age
were attending school in 1875, by 1905 the
rate had risen to 96 per cent.
Thanks to a combination of traditional
values, talent and government policies, by
the 1920s Japanese science and tech¬
nology had already caught up with Europe
and the United States in several fields. The
Japanese had, for example, discovered
new pathogens and established the theory
of mesons.1
In the Second World War, however, the
fruits of this scientific and technological
research were lost. Once again Japan had
no alternative but to start from scratch and
learn from other countries. Thirty-five
years after the War, the Japanese led the
world in a number of areas.

Japans MU radar systems are among the
world's most advanced technological equip¬
ment for studying the Earth's upper atmos¬
phere. A very large MU installation has been
developed at Shigaraki (province of Gifu, on
Honshu island) by Kyoto University's Centre
for Studies of Super High Atmospheric Elec¬
tric Waves, in order to carry out meteorologi¬
cal studies and other scientific research. The
facility has 475 3. 5 -metre-high antennae stand¬
ing 4.5 metres apart in hexagonal groups
(above).
The problems ahead
But as the 1980s draw to a close, the
skies are not cloudless for Japanese sci¬
ence and technology.
In 1957 Japan became the world's lead¬
ing shipbuilding nation, and maintained
this lead for many years. But recently the
Republic of Korea has mastered the most
advanced technology in this field, and can
now build excellent ships more cheaply
than Japan, with the result that Japanese
shipbuilding companies are facing hard
times.
In steel manufacturing technology too,
the Republic of Korea has caught up with
Japan. Lower Korean wages mean that
Japan cannot compete with Korean manu¬
facturing costs, and Japanese steelmakers
are being forced to curtail their oper¬
ations.
The Republic of Korea has also Intro¬
duced car production technology from Ja¬
pan, and is now manufacturing cars which
are as good as, but cheaper than, the
Japanese product.
If this trend continues, it may well be that
countries such as the Republic of Korea,
Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore will
overtake Japan in the 1 990s, just as Japan
has been overtaking the United States in
the 1980s.
The people of a country such as the
United States, rich in natural resources,
are not likely to be pushed into extremes of
poverty by technological decline. But Ja¬
pan has virtually no oil, coal, or any other
raw materials of its own. Until now the
Japanese have imported raw materials
from overseas, and used their technologi¬
cal capacity to transform them into manu¬
factured goods for export. With their export
revenues they purchase essential com¬
modities such as oil, food and animal
fodder.
Japan cannot abandon this trade in
manufactured goods all at once. No effort
must be spared in formulating research
and development programmes relating to
the manufacture of high tech products that
cannot be easily imitated by competitor
countries.
The Japanese government is encourag¬
ing original inventions and discoveries
through such initiatives as its Project lor
the Promotion of Creative Science and
Technology, and it is fortunate that Japa¬
nese parents are so closely concerned
with their children's education. The
average level of education certainly
compares favourably with that of other
countries.
There is no doubt that Japan will contin¬
ue to produce top level scientists and tech¬
nologists whose work will help to improve
the lives of many people throughout the
world.
1. Elementary particles. Editor
SHIGERU KIMURA is assistant administrator of
a satellite broadcasting company, Eisei Chan-
neru. A specialist in the history of science, he
was formerly a journalist with the Tokyo daily
Asahi Shimbun, where he was head of the
scientific department and director of research.
He is the author of several published works,
including Japan's Science Edge: How the Cult of
Anti-Science Thought in America Limits U.S.
Scientific and Technological Progress, Universi¬
ty Press of America. USA, 1985. 33
