The canopy raft
SATELLITES, aircraft, ultra-light air¬
craft and tethered balloons all
enable photographs and measure¬
ments to be taken from above the forest
canopy. Something else is needed,
however, for taking measurements and
samples from within the canopy, hence the
use of walkways and vertical towers at MAB
research stations such as Sakaerat (Thai¬
land), Tai (Ivory Coast), and Dimonlka-
Mayombe (Congo).
Another approach is to climb up into the
canopy, either using the trunk as a means
of support or directly into the branches from
the ground or from a neighbouring tree.
Abseiling is among the devices borrowed
from rock-climbing that have been used in
scaling up and down the forest profile, but
this is definitely not a technique to be
recommended to the uninitiated or the faint¬
hearted.
Recognition of the shortcomings of these
methods led to the idea of using a hot air
balloon as a method for studying the forest
canopy. The idea was the brain-child of
Francis Hallé, a botanist who has long been
interested in the architecture of tropical for¬
est ecosystems, Dany Cleyet-Marrel, an
aeronautic designer and owner of the bal¬
loon, and Gilles Ebersolt, a young balloon
enthusiast and constructor.
The Radeau des Cimes (canopy raft), as
it was baptized by its French inventors, is
31 metres long by 22 metres wide and con¬
sists of inflatable rubber cylinders con¬
nected by a sort of net trampoline made of
PVC-covered Kevlar. Weighing 750 kilo¬
grams, the raft serves as the nacelle for the
hot air balloon of 3,000 cubic metres to
which it is attached by twelve cables.
Once airborne, the raft skims downwind,
just a few metres above the forest canopy.
The two-man crew of pilot and scientist use
a guide-rope to orient the raft and to land it
on top of the canopy. Once the raft is landed
and secured, the balloon is deflated and
folded away and the scientific work can
begin. Liaison with a ground team ¡s estab¬
lished by means of a caving cable, which
enables other scientists to have access to
the canopy.
Initial results have been promising. After
trials with a helicopter-landed, 12 by 12
metre prototype raft ¡n the Forest of Pllat, in
France, in October 1 985, the first field trials
in the tropics took place in October 1986 in
25

French Guyana, in the region of Montsin-
ery. Samples were taken of trees, lianas
and parasitic plants, which were then con¬
served using a method perfected by the
British Museum of Natural History in
London. Ultra-violet lamps and interception
nets were among the methods used for col¬
lecting insects, particular emphasis being
given to two groups of beetles. Other obser¬
vations and sampling concerned epiphytic
plants, ant gardens and atmospheric
pollen.
If all goes well, a second set of trials, to be
held in late 1 987 at the MAB project site of
Makokou, in Gabon, will seek to associate
other scientific disciplines in addition to
those that took part in the first series med¬
ical entomology and parasitology, bio-
climatology and mammalogy, ornithology
and floral biology.
First, however, a number of improve¬
ments need to be made in the basic opera
tion of the canopy raft. These include an
increase in upward force, improvement of
visibility through the nets, Improvement of
access from the soil, improvement of night
use and the addition of a directional move¬
ment capability. At a post-trial meeting held
in Paris in December 1 986, the feeling was
that these various improvements should all
be technically feasible, although a fair
amount of financial sponsorship would be
required.
It might well be asked what was the role
of Unesco/MAB in all this. In truth, it was
very modest moral support plus a few
thousand dollars. But, as in other similar
instances, the small amount of financial
support from Unesco (¡n this case a joint
effort with UNEP, the United Nations
Environment Programme) was "put up
front". It was made available at the very
early risk-taking stage of the project. This
"pump-priming" support was useful to the
leader of the project, Francis Hallé, in
attracting more substantive funding from
public and private sources such as the
French Ministry of the Environment and
National Research Council, the Office for
Scientific Co-operation Overseas
(ORSTOM), the national petroleum com¬
pany (Elf/Antargaz), and a national televi¬
sion channel, Antenne 2.
Already the initial success of the canopy
raft has had considerable coverage in
newspapers and magazines, both ¡n
France and abroad. In addition, one film, for
the scientific audience, has just been com¬
pleted and another, for a more general
public, is in the making. Francis Hallé and
his team hope that this publicity will help to
attract further support for this novel way of
entering the enchanted, unknown world of
the forest canopy.
