From moonbeams to lasers
The art of making light work
Above and right, traditional lamp of the Edo
period (17th-19th centuries) known as an
ariake lamp or night-light. The word ariake
designates the pale moon which can be seen at
dawn and, by extension, dawn itself.
by Motoko Ishii
LIGHTING devices of great beauty,
using handmade paper, were de¬
vised at an early date in Japan. A
flame produced by burning a candle or
lamp oil was screened by a paper shade so
as to diffuse a soft light equally In every
direction. Chöchin, collapsible lanterns
with a paper shade stuck over a bamboo
frame, and andon, standing lanterns with a
similar paper-covered frame, in this case
Japan has many Shinto and Buddhist sects,
and it is possible to practise several forms of
beliefsimultaneously. Below, the Sanctuary of
the Shinji Shùmei-kai Shinto sect at Shiga.
Lighting heightens the majesty of the site, add¬
ing to the atmosphere.
made of thin strips of wood, were devel¬
oped and widely used in the Edo period
(1603-1867).
Many of these traditional means of light¬
ing were highly ingenious and well-
designed. Examples are the Odawara chö¬
chin,'1 a portable lamp tha» could be folded
so as not to take up sps^e on a journey, the
ariake andon (night-light), the light of which
could be reduced by covering it with a
wooden cube with apertures in its panels
shaped like the crescent moon, or the
tsuji-zndon (crossroad lanterns), covered
with a tiny roof, that were placed at cross¬
roads and street corners to help people
find their way.
Not only Japan but other Far Eastern
countries such as China and Korea have
from ancient times shown a special appre¬
ciation of moonlight. On the nights when
the moon was full people came together to
drink saké and celebrate the beauty of the
moon, and many fine poems describing
such scenes have survived in both Japan
and China. I believe that this traditional
love of moonlight underlay the develop¬
ment of the beautiful lighting devices that
were produced in Japan during the Edo
period.
With the arrival of Western civilization in
the Meiji period (1868-1912), gas and elec¬
tric lamps made a dramatic impact. Many
people were astounded by the brilliant light
of the arc lamps that were installed in
Tokyo's famous Ginza district in early Mei¬
ji, an event commemorated in ukiyo-e
prints of the time. Electric lighting spread
rapidly from the late 1880s onwards, but
for cost reasons most houses had only one
lamp in each room, suspended from the
centre of the ceiling. The oil lamps of the
Edo period, which stood on the floor and
could be moved to wherever was conve¬
nient, disappeared altogether, and for a
long period "one room, one light" was the
standard practice.
Innovations were introduced into Japa¬
nese lighting after the Second World War.
In the black-out during the war years, with
their constant air raids and drastic short-

ages of food and other supplies, the Japa¬
nese experienced both physical and spiri¬
tual darkness. They saw a symbol of peace
in the bright white light of the fluorescent
lamps that began to be manufactured soon
after the war.
First used in industry, which was then
struggling to get back on its feet, these
lamps came into domestic use in the
1950s. The number of households choos¬
ing this form of lighting for the family room
known as the chanoma (dining/living area)
grew steadily, and one product of this peri¬
od was the circular fluorescent lamp
(called the "Circline"2 in Japan), an al¬
ternative to the conventional straight
fluorescent tube which is unique to Japan
and is still in widespread use.
The spread of fluorescent lighting raised
the illumination levels of offices, factories,
stations, banks and all kinds of public
buildings until they were high even by inter¬
national standards. Lighting techni¬
cians aimed at a shadow-free illuminated
space in which the light was bright and
evenly balanced. In this they had support
from industry, whose first priority was
to increase production, and also from
architects.
The 1970s saw a second wave of in¬
novation, initiated by Expo 70, the In¬
ternational Exposition held at Osaka In
1970. Eighty-five pavilions were erected
on a 351 -hectare site at Senri, a suburb of
Osaka. Seventy-seven nations took part in
Expo 70, which attracted an astonishing
number of visitors some 64 million. One
of the Expo's most popular attractions was
the beauty of its illuminations at night.
I was commissioned to design the light¬
ing for five sites at Expo 70 the Electric
Power Pavilion, the Art Gallery, the Takara
Beautilion, the roof of the Housing Capsule
in the "Symbol Zone", and the Japanese
Garden. My proposals involved rejecting
the concept of uniformly and brightly lit
space which had until then been the guid¬
ing principle of lighting in Japanese archi¬
tecture, in favour of the idea of a more
"animated" space using both light and
shade with a moderate level of brightness;
a form of lighting that would form a link
between people and architecture.
In the Electric Power Pavilion, a variety
of different light sources were used
throughout the building, and a programme
was devised for continuous blinking on and
off and for modulating each source. In the
Art Gallery a wave-like effect was attempt¬
ed, by setting clear bulbs into the glazed
framework of the large foyer and alternat¬
ing different circuits in the vertical direction,
the variations in light intensity making it
appear as if the space were "breathing". In
the Japanese Garden, on the other hand,
the effect we aimed at was that of a tran¬
quil, gentle light. In all these sites no effort
was spared to create new, experimental
forms of architectural lighting. Expo 70
was the scene of many other such experi¬
ments, which found wide acceptance.
Interest in lighting as a source of enjoy¬
ment and of beauty, as distinct from its
merely functional role, has grown in Japan
ever since. I have been involved, with lead¬
ing architects such as Kenzö Tange, Yosh-
inobu Ashiwara and Kiyonori Kikutake, in
numerous design projects including hotels,
Created in 1976 for an insurance company,
this chandelier (diameter 6 metres) is made of
specially processed aluminium panels with in¬
candescent mini-bulbs, mercury-vapour lamps
und fluorescent tubes. It was designed so that
the light level can be varied at will, not only for
aesthetic reasons but to save energy.
1 . Odawara: a city in the Kanagawa department, some
80 km from Tokyo. The lamp described here was
invented in the 16th century by Jinzaemon. a native of
Odawara.
2. Like many other terms in modern Japanese, this
word (originally a trade name) is based on a very free
adaptation of English words, in this case "circular line".
Editor. 17

theatres, embassies and commercial
buildings.
In the mid-1970s the Japanese econo¬
my, which for some time after Expo 70 had
appeared to be in good shape, was hit by
the dramatic rise in oil prices. The profes¬
sion of lighting design was directly affected
by the oil crisis. Chandeliers were switched
off, as were all the light bulbs in ornamental
lighting brackets beyond the number need¬
ed to provide a bare minimum of light.
Even the spectacular neon illuminations in
the Ginza district went dark. For those
involved with lighting, like myself, it was a
heartbreaking time.
By the end of the 1 970s, however, Japan
had recovered from the oil shock. While
due regard was still paid to the need to
save energy, bright lights reappeared in
shops and offices. Incandescent lamps
with a high power consumption were re¬
placed in many cases by HID (high in¬
tensity discharge) lamps, and cold cathode
tubes and neon lighting became increas¬
ingly popular.
With the 1980s came a general prefer¬
ence for greater balance in lighting design.
Another trend can be seen in the growing
number of buildings requiring special
forms of lighting, particularly religious
buildings.
The Shiga Sacred Garden of the Shinji
Shümei-kai, a Shinto religious body, was
completed in 1983. At the centre is a sanc¬
tuary to the movement's founder.
Within the vast internal space, which is
40 metres high, a diffused light, mostly
from concealed sources, creates a sense
of solemnity and awe. The lighting here
plays a similar role to that of an atmo¬
sphere of appropriate temperature and hu¬
midity.
On the night of the ceremony marking
the completion of the sanctuary, I put on a
laser beam show in the plaza in front of the
building. One of the greatest discoveries of
the present century, the laser beam is a
powerful, artificially "bunched" or nar¬
rowed ray of light beamed in a single direc¬
tion. Using laser beams as a medium for
"free composition", we succeeded that
night in giving light a new form of expres¬
sion in endowing light with an existence
of its own, independent of architectural
space.
My current task is to create hew forms of
light in all kinds of architectural space,
using different light sources and a variety
of control techniques. At the same time, I
hope to revive the traditional Japanese
sensibility to lighting, with its special feeling
for the beauty of moonlight.

