I
r
B <%&
In nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) scanning,
one of the most refined techniques of medical
investigation, the patient is placed in a powerful
magnetic field that has a profound effect on the
protons (nuclei of hydrogen atoms) in the body.
These protons normally point in random direc¬
tions, but inside the scanner's magnetic field
they align themselves in the direction of the
field's poles. When the scanner excites them
with a radio pulse, it knocks them out of align¬
ment. Within milliseconds they spiral back into
place, emitting a "signal" which varies accord¬
ing to the composition ol the tissues under
observation. A computer translates the signal
into an image on a video screen. NMR gives an
extremely precise anatomical picture, as in the
high definition image of the brain, above.
IN his laboratory at the Hôtel Dieu, a
leading Montreal hospital, a young
Canadian cancer specialist is experi¬
menting with a technique which may be in
everyday use before the year 2000: the loca¬
tion, on a video screen, of the metastases
(secondary or mini-tumours) of a patient
suffering from breast cancer.
The technique owes as much to biology as
it does to video equipment and informatics,
since it uses antibodies specially designed to
identify cancerous cells in a very specific
manner. These "monoclonal" antibodies,
as they are called, are "tagged" with a
radioactive substance. Injected into the
patient, they home in and lock on to the
metastases, however small they may be,
which can then be pin-pointed with the aid
of a special, radioactivity-sensitive camera.
"It is our hope," the Canadian doctor
explains, "that with the help of this tech¬
nique we will one day be able to detect
metastases wherever they may be within the
body. Our dream is that we will then be able
to attach a few molecules of an appropriate
medicament to these monoclonal anti¬
bodies which will deposit them directly at
the site of the tumour ..."
In a laboratory at Mama Yémo Hospital,
8,000 kilometres away in Kinshasa, a team
of doctors and researchers working on the
Zaire AIDS Research Project (Projet
SIDA) have taken up another challenge:
they are attempting to perfect a cheap but
reliable test to detect the presence of AIDS
virus antibodies.
The test currently in use costs a minimum
of $3 a time, a "luxury" which no poor
country can afford for a comprehensive
screening programme. The researchers in
Zaire are seeking to develop a test which
would be one hundred times cheaper. This
would make it possible to test all blood
received from blood-donors and thus
ensure the safety of the blood transfusion
service, an essential weapon in the medical
28

Tomorrow's medicine by Yanick Villedieu
armoury, but which, today, is still impli¬
cated in the spread of the AIDS virus in
Africa.
Montreal and Kinshasa. Two snapshots
of the medicine of today and two facets of
the medicine of tomorrow one sophisti¬
cated, at the leading edge of progress; the
other, equally fascinating, the medicine of
daily life. Two worlds with but a single pur¬
pose to help the sick to the best of the
capabilities of science and technology ...
subject to the constraints of time and place.
Molecular medicine
The monoclonal antibodies of Montreal
and the AIDS virus test of Kinshasa are but
two of the amazing possibilities within the
range of modern medicine. From the 1950s
on, following breakthroughs in biology and
molecular genetics, researchers have con¬
centrated on unravelling the mysteries of
the functioning of the human organism in
ever more minute detail.
From observation of a particular organ
and its function, they have gone on to seek
to understand its internal mechanisms.
They have penetrated deep into the heart of
the cell, analysing the subtle chemistry of
life and decoding the score that governs the
fabulous orchestration of the genes. In so
doing they have discovered dozens of genes
that control the manufacture of the hor¬
mones, peptides and proteins that are
essential to the proper functioning of the
human organism . . . and at times are respon¬
sible for its malfunctioning. They have
found out how a molecule enters a cell to
feed it , to deliver a message , or to destroy it .
And since the genetic code is universal, as
applicable to a bacterium as to an elephant,
they have also uncovered the secrets of
multitudes of microbes, viruses and other
parasites.
The biology of today will be an important
constituent of the medical science of tomor¬
row. Progress in one leads to advances in
the other. A few years ago, for example,
Canadian researchers discovered a hor¬
mone secreted by the heart which plays an
important role in the control of blood pres¬
sure. Since then, teams of Japanese, Amer¬
ican, Canadian and European researchers
have been battling fiercely to find applica¬
tions for this discovery, since the heart hor¬
mone, it would seem, may well turn out to
be the model on which all future treatment
of hypertension will be based.
Progress in molecular medicine, as scien¬
tists like to call it, is beginning to make its
influence felt in the field of hereditary
health problems. In some cases, pre-natal
diagnosis can detect an anomaly in the
foetus which would indicate the advisability
of therapeutic abortion. In other cases,
early diagnosis of a problem makes it possi¬
ble, a few days after a birth, to start treat
ment which would be too late if it were left
until symptoms appeared. Finally, a great
leap forward has been achieved with the
arrival of "molecular probes", which will
become widely available during the coming
decade. Using these probes it is now possi¬
ble to detect the presence of defective genes
in parents who, unknown to themselves, are
carriers of the defect. Applied where there
is an exceptionally high risk of hereditary
problems, such probe tests will enable
improved genetic counselling to be given.
This is not all. Genetic medicine has
applications beyond the field of hereditary
illness in the conventional meaning of the
term. The gene involved in cancer of the
retina has recently been identified and
genes thought to be implicated in
Alzheimer's disease and depression have
also been discovered. Many research work¬
ers believe that, in the not too distant
future, the genes involved in such common
illnesses as atherosclerosis, diabetes, some
cancers and certain neurological problems
may also be found.
One day, perhaps, we shall learn how to
heal or replace defective genes. What is
envisaged in the more immediate future is
the emergence of a form of predictive, indi¬
vidualized medicine which will make it pos¬
sible to adapt general health advice to meet
the specific needs of each individual , having
regard to his or her susceptibility to, for
example, lung cancer, heart attack, obesity
or depression a kind of preventive medi¬
cine à la carte.
Mapping the human brain
The next decade will witness a surge of
research interest in the brain, which has
already displaced the gene as the new fron¬
tier of medical science. The stock of scien¬
tists with specialist knowledge of the noble
organ is rising on the world "grey matter"
market. Founded in 1971 by 500 North
American researchers, the Society for Neu¬
rosciences now has 10,000 members.
Another sign of the times is that the greatest
research institutions in the United States,
from New York to San Diego, have recently
established centres specializing in brain
research, endowed, moreover, with consid¬
erable resources.
The boom in neuroscience is neither for¬
tuitous nor the expression of a sudden fad.
For several years now researchers in this
field have achieved prodigies of pioneering
work. They have discovered the functions
of the different regions of the brain,
described the complex tangle of the neurons
and observed anomalous conditions so as to
learn more about the normal functioning of
the most inaccessible of human organs.
They have discovered substances that regul¬
ate the waking and the sleeping states, man¬
age the emotions, control pain, govern sex
ual desire or the will to power, and cause
anomalies of behaviour, temperament and
memory.
Acquiring mastery of the amazing chem¬
istry of the brain has been, and will continue
even more intensely to be, the priority
objective of the neurosciences. One exam¬
ple, by no means the most recent, was the
discovery that Parkinson's disease was due
to a lack of one of these chemical sub¬
stances, dopamine. Later it was found that
the condition of sufferers could be allevi¬
ated by the administration of L-dopa (a sub¬
stitute for dopamine which has the capacity
to penetrate the barrier which envelops and
carefully guards the brain).
The brain is an electronic as well as a
chemical machine, a super-computer whose
circuitry we are now able to study. A
researcher in Denmark is studying the cere¬
bral activity of individuals undertaking
mental operations. Using apparatus that
can detect the consumption of oxygen
within his subject's brain, he can have the
curious experience of "seeing a brain think"
on a video screen (see back cover).
We are still very far from having pene¬
trated all the secrets of the brain. But things
are already happening. In Sweden, a few
years ago, and more recently in Mexico,
surgeons attempted to restore full function
to the brains of sufferers from Parkinson's
disease. They took cells that produce
dopamine from glands situated in the kid¬
neys of their patients and transplanted them
into their brains. While the results achieved
in Sweden were disappointing, those
obtained in Mexico were very positive. It is
said that the brain, with all its dizzying com¬
plexity, will never be able fully to compre¬
hend itself. It will soon, however, be able to
"repair" itself.
"Pseudo-hormones" and high-tech vaccines
Two other branches of biology, endocrinol¬
ogy (the science of hormones) and immu¬
nology (the science of the immune system),
are experiencing an unprecedented boom.
Stimulated by genetic techniques, aided by
new instruments for the exploration of the
infinitely small, and with the backing of the
pharmaceutical industry which has recog¬
nized their enormous potential, they are
beginning to "deliver the goods".
In universities and private laboratories,
thousands of men and women in white coats
are concocting a profusion of products with
exotic names prostaglandins, neuropep¬
tides, immuno-regulators, anti-car¬
cinogens, monoclonal antibodies. ... Some
of the products, such as interleucines
(regulators of the immune system) and,
above all, interferon, have achieved star
status before even having become medi¬
cines in the strict sense of the word. Sooner
or later, several of these products will be |>
29

? reinforcing the armoury of hospital medi¬
cines and may even be available at the local
pharmacy.
Prostaglandins, for example, are
"pseudo-hormones" derived from fatty
acids. They are to be found almost every¬
where in the body. They constitute an
already large family including, for exam¬
ple, leucotrienes, thromboxane and pros-
tacycline some members of which may
soon become as well known as aspirin.
Their role as medicines is seen as being in
the prevention of heart attacks and the for¬
mation of ulcers, and in the treatment of
inflammation and of asthma.
Interferon, interleucines, prostaglan¬
dins, hormones of the brain and of the heart
are all natural substances that can now be
synthesized in large quantities after gene
cloning. They can even be produced by bac¬
teria that have been genetically re-pro¬
grammed. Insulin, interferon and the
growth hormone are already produced
commercially in this way.
The good old vaccines of long standing
will also benefit from the latest genetic tech¬
niques. Once its structure is known, an anti¬
gen (the part of a microbe that stimulates
the formation of antibodies) can be pro¬
duced artificially by chemical synthesis or
by re-programmed bacteria. Some vac¬
cines, which are manufactured in a rather
crude, empirical fashion, will soon be pro
duced using the most modern techniques,
just as will new vaccines. American
researchers are relying on genetic engineer¬
ing to provide a vaccine against malaria
which they see as the next important break¬
through in preventive medicine the next,
that is, unless the eagerly awaited vaccine
against AIDS overtakes it to become the
very first great high-technology vaccine in
medical history.
A revolution in medical imaging
The medical science of tomorrow will not,
however, stem solely from biology. Elec¬
tronics, informatics, the science of mate¬
rials and nuclear physics will also have a
large part to play.
Lasers are already making their contribu¬
tion to delicate surgical procedures such as
eye operations, and tomorrow a laser
attached to the end of a flexible wire will be
used to unblock clogged arteries.
Computers, with their artificial intel¬
ligence, are helping doctors to make their
diagnoses and chemists to design molecules
to achieve specific pharmacological effects.
Used in conjunction with video cameras,
axial tomography, magnetic nuclear reso¬
nance and echography, they are making
their contribution to the revolution in medi¬
cal imaging which is making it feasible for
30

Understanding of immunological mechanisms
and a breakthrough in the development of
immunosuppressive drugs have given a signifi¬
cant boost to organ transplantation and opened
up new horizons in treating many formerly
incurable autoimmune diseases. (1) spores of
the fungus Tolypocladium inflatum, from which
the powerful immunosuppressive agent
cyclosporine is produced. (2) crystal of synthetic
cyclosporine. (3) computer-generated view of
natural cyclosporine and a synthetic derivative
(below).
doctors to explore the brain of a schizo¬
phrenic, the heart of a cardiac sufferer or
the belly of a pregnant woman in a way
never possible before. These "non-invas¬
ive" techniques are destined to have
a major effect on medical practice in coming
years, particularly in the field of
diagnosis.
When it is too late to prevent or to heal,
then it is a matter of replacing the affected
part. Already artificial hearts are plugged
in, admittedly without great success. Tiny
miracles of electronic wizardry are
implanted in the inner ear to make the deaf
hear. Knees, ankles, fingers and skull-cases
are rebuilt. Artificial skin and blood,
hydraulically operated walking machines,
motorized arms which respond to the
wearer's nerve impulses, electronic hands
covered with sensitive artificial skin, all
these are already on the test-bench. Tomor¬
row, this "spare-part surgery" will be able
to offer artificial replacement muscles,
larynxes, sphincters, nerves, pancreas and
intestines at least to those who can afford
them.
- &
mot a
Social and preventive medicine
New medicines and vaccines, decisive pro¬
gress on cancer and cardio-vascular dis¬
eases, access to genes and to the brain,
31

i
*?
.i&à
0
v-
grafting made commonplace, more effec¬
tive artificial organs, all these will be the
stuff of the medical science of tomorrow.
We must not, however, aliow ourselves
to be dazzled by the promise of advanced
technology. Even more than today, medi¬
cal science will have to come to terms with
a new phenomenon the intervention of
ethical considerations. New techniques to
assist human reproduction have already
aroused passionate debate and will confront
society with difficult choices. Science alone
cannot answer the questions raised about
the new techniques for prolonging life and
the counter problem of the right to a digni¬
fied death. The field of action of genetic
engineering will have to be clearly marked
out if we are to avoid , for example , the false
trails of eugenics. The immense cost of such
innovations as the artificial heart will also
pose delicate problems of social justice and
the allocation of medical resources, not
only in those countries where experiments
in this field are being carried out, but
throughout the world.
It is not enough for the medical science of
the future to be merely futurist. It must also
always be concerned with education, pre¬
vention, hygiene, the cleansing of the
environment, proper supply of drinking
water and food, adequate housing, the
immunization and schooling of children.
On both sides of the North/South divide,
the primary concern of medical science will
always remain those tasks which, because
they are not spectacular, we tend to think
of as simple or humdrum and yet which
are more difficult by far to carry out than
the cloning of a gene or transplanting of a
heart.
YAN1CK VILLEDIEU, Canadian scientific jour¬
nalist and broadcaster, has written many articles
and reports on different subjects, notably medi¬
cine and health. He has also been involved in
professional and academic meetings and semi¬
nars in the field of public health and medicine.
Among his published works are Demain la santé
(1976; "Health Tomorrow").
It has recently been discovered that the heart is
more than a pump: it is also an endocrine gland
that secretes a hormone which regulates blood
pressure and blood volume. Synthesis of this
hormone, which in the body is stored in granules
around the nuclei of cardiocytes (heart-muscle
cells), could lead to new treatments for hyper¬
tension and other blood-pressure diseases.
Above, an electron micrograph showing the hor¬
mone-storage granules (enlarged 12,000 times)
in a cardiocyte of a rat.
There is continual feedback between the cells of
the nervous system (above right, neurons) and
those of the immunological system (below
right, lymphocytes) in which neuropeptides,
endorphins, hormones, lymphocines and inter-
leucines act as chemical messengers. These
interactions have been extensively studied by
molecular biology, a field in which Unesco has
for many years encouraged international
co-operation. The International Brain Research
Organization (IBRO), which promotes neuro-
scientific research, was founded under Unesco
auspices in 1960, and in 1962 Unesco was
instrumental in founding the International Cell
Research Organization (ICRO), which helps to
train young scientists worldwide.
©
32
