by Jacques C. Senez
The new
biotechnologies
Promise and performance
SINCE the beginnings of civilization,
man has been a biotechnologist, tak¬
ing advantage of the activities of
micro-organisms of whose very existence he
was unaware, to produce foodstuffs and fer¬
mented drinks. Over the centuries, the
practices by which he did this gradually
developed, in a makeshift, empirical fash¬
ion, to attain a high degree of perfection.
Yet biotechnology proper, in the sense of
the scientific use of biological principles for
practical purposes, only emerged at the end
of the last century with the birth of micro¬
biology and its early application to indus¬
trial fermentation processes.
Since the Second World War, biology has
made prodigious progress. In just a few
years the basic mechanisms of life and
heredity at the molecular level have been
unveiled, thus opening up limitless hori¬
zons. Some of these prospects, in particular
that of the development of genetic engi¬
neering (see article page 13) with its con¬
notations of man the creator, captured the
imagination and fired the enthusiasm of the
general public.
The transfer of genetic material between
organisms as widely different as bacteria,
plants, animals and man gave rise to great
hopes, some of which, such as the produc¬
tion of human insulin by bacteria recom-
bined in vitro, have already become reality.
Today, these methods are on the verge of
finding new applications of considerable
economic and social importance in the field
of agriculture. It would be wrong, however,
to think that the prospects for biotechnol¬
ogy are limited to the field of genetic engi¬
neering. Recent advances in fundamental
knowledge and techniques in the physiol¬
ogy of cells, biochemistry, enzyme catalysis
and bioengineering are just as promising.
It is generally thought that there is a great
future for biotechnology in the developing
countries, particularly in its applications to
agriculture. These hopes are well founded,
but it should not be forgotten that progress
involves potential dangers against which all
possible preventive measures should be
taken.
The first major achievement of agri¬
cultural biotechnology was the "Green
Revolution", whose ambitious objectives
have been largely achieved (see box page
7). Thanks to the Green Revolution India,
Bangladesh and several other Third World
countries have achieved self-sufficiency in
food. This was a true success, but it brought
in its train a number of unforeseen social
consequences. The farming of high-yield
cereals requires considerable investment in
fertilizers, pesticides and irrigation which
many small farmers were unable to make.
As a result many of them had their fields
taken over by the large landowners and
were forced to move to the cities and swell
the ranks of the sub-proletariat.
The recent collapse in the world price of
Egyptian bakers and brewers of 3,500
years ago are shown at work in this scene
from a Theban tomb. "Biotechnological"
processes such as microbial fermenta¬
tions have been used for thousands of
years to produce beverages and foods
such as beer and cheese.
Drawing taken from A History of Technology
© Oxford University Press
sugar is another example of a social and
economic backlash due to biotechnology.
Due largely to the production of iso-glucose
in the United States, this sugar price col¬
lapse has spelled ruin to a number of tropi¬
cal countries whose economies are based on
sugar-cane.
Fortunately, not all biotechnology
applications entail problems such as these.
However, there is a danger that some of
them will further increase rather than
diminish Third World dependence on the
richest and most scientifically advanced
countries (see article page 29).
Bearing this in mind, the developing
countries must concentrate their efforts on
programmes which are both of direct inter¬
est to them and which can be implemented
immediately within the limitations of their
financial and economic resources. Many
such opportunities are open to them in agri¬
culture in which two avenues in particular
beckon: that of primary production, where
there are possibilities in the field of plant
improvement and nitrogen fixation, and
that of bioconversion of agricultural prod¬
ucts and wastes into energy and food
resources.
New techniques
for better plants
Plant improvement by the traditional
methods of selection and cross-breeding is
as old as agriculture itself. Thanks to recent
advances in knowledge of the genetics and
physiology of plants these methods have
been refined and will long continue to pro¬
duce very important results. During the
past thirty years, for example, the yield of
maize has increased from 12 to 62 quintals
per hectare, while that of wheat has grown
on average by one quintal per hectare per
year. Similar progress has been made with
rice, the second most important of the great
cereals in worldwide use. Today, the Inter¬
national Rice Research Institute (IRRI),
set up in the Philippines in 1962, has a col¬
lection of 60,000 varieties of rice (see the
Unesco Courier, December 1984).
<
©


plant culture of colony of
meristem or cells
cells multiplication
in sterile
conditions
regeneration
of plantlets
mini- greenhouse
In addition to improving yield, the main
purpose of selection is to obtain new vari¬
eties which are resistant to parasites and to
bacterial and viral diseases. In recent years
a number of new techniques have made
their appearance, some of which are
already in use while others are still at the
laboratory stage. One of their main aims is
to reduce considerably the time needed for
a new variety to be put on the market and
brought into large-scale cultivation. Using
classic methods the lead time required to
achieve this is of the order of ten years,
whereas, given the capacity for adaptation
of the phytopathogenic agents (the bacte¬
ria, viruses, etc., that cause plant disease),
the useful life of a new variety is estimated
to be a mere five years.
Another advantage of certain recently
evolved techniques is that they make it pos¬
sible to cross-breed species that are too far
apart for normal sexual reproduction, thus
opening the way for the creation of entirely
new plant varieties.
The first major successes were achieved
by means of vegetative hybridization of
cereal seedlings. This method, which con¬
sists of cross-breeding between plants by
the elimination of self-fertilization, is com¬
paratively easy in the case of allogamous
cereals, such as maize, in which the male
organs are separated from the female
organs and can thus be manually eliminated
before fertilization has taken place. It is
more difficult with autogamous plants, such
as wheat, tomatoes, soya and lupin, in
which the male and the female organs are
contained in close proximity within the
flower. Today, this difficulty has been over¬
come by the discovery of chemical com¬
pounds which render the pollen sterile.
Many varieties of hybrid cereals and
other plants are now on the market. Gener¬
ally speaking, fields should be sown with
first generation hybrid seed. Hybrid seed
usually tends to degenerate and must be
renewed annually. At all events, the world
market for hybrid seed is growing rapidly
and, according to a recent estimate, will
attain a value of $20,000 million by the year
2000.
Other techniques now being developed
are more distant in prospect yet just as
promising. One of these is in vitro vegetative
propagation, or micro-propagation, by the
culture of the meristem or other plant
tissues. Meristem is the name given to a
grouping of embryonic cells situated at the
tip of the plant stem (see drawing below).
Cultivated in aseptic conditions on a solid,
nutritive culture medium, these cells
proliferate producing a callus which can be
divided and reproduced many times.
Treated with plant hormones (auxins,
cytokins and gibberelins), the calluses diffe¬
rentiate into plantlets having all the prop¬
erties of the original plant.
By this means, in a period of eight
The apical meristem is a tiny mass of cells
where growth takes place at the tip of a
plant stem. It plays a particularly important
role in plant propagation because it re¬
mains healthy even when the rest of the
plant is infected with a virus. In vitro cul¬
ture of the meristem of a diseased speci¬
men makes it possible to generate a new,
healthy plant, and allows the rapid produc¬
tion of virus-free planting materials. Be¬
low, sectional drawing of a plant bud
shows the apical meristem at centre, pro¬
tected by enfolding leaf shoots. Meristem
culture calls for particular care in the
choice of culture conditions and nutritive
media.
leaf shoots
Drawing shows in highly simplified form
one of the techniques used in modem
biotechnology for experimentation under
controlled conditions with plant cells, tis¬
sues and organs and for vegetative (i.e.
non-sexual) propagation of plants in ster¬
ile laboratory conditions. The sterilized
plant material which is cultured in the nut¬
rient medium may be a meristem (see
drawing at bottom of page), or some other
piece of plant tissue (see photo story
pages 8-9), or a protoplast, a plant cell
whose outer walls have been removed
(see page 10). From this organ, tissue, or
protoplast, a proliferating clump of dis¬
organized tissue called a callus can be
obtained. From this it is possible to re¬
generate whole intact plants, and to pro¬
duce many genetically identical copies,
known as clones, in a relatively short time.
A one-cubic-centimetre culture may con¬
tain one million cells each carrying the
potential of becoming an entire new plant.
By selecting cells with certain properties,
the process of breeding new varieties of
disease-resistant, stress-tolerant crops,
trees or flowers can be greatly
accelerated.
months, 2,000 million identical tubers,
spread over an area of 40 hectares, were
obtained from a single potato tuber derived
from a meristem, that is a rate of propaga¬
tion 100,000 times greater than that of sex¬
ual reproduction. A further advantage is
that plants obtained from meristems are
free of pathogenic contaminants, in particu¬
lar of viruses, which means that it is possible
to regenerate stock threatened with extinc¬
tion due to diseases that cannot be treated
in any other way.
Tropical agriculture has much to gain
from micro-propagation. For example, a
single oil palm regenerated from a fragment
of leaf tissue could, within a year, supply
500,000 identical, filariosis-resistant plants
producing up to 6 tonnes of oil per hectare
per year, that is six to thirty times more than
the principal oil-producing plants (sun¬
flower, soya, peanut). This same technique
is now being applied to the propagation of
new varieties of coconut palms.
Another technique which holds great
promise for the future is the in vitro produc¬
tion of haploid plants (plants whose cells
contain a single set of chromosomes). Tra¬
ditional methods of selection are made
more time-consuming and complicated
because of the diploid nature of vegetative
plants, that is to say, because the cells of
which they consist contain a double set of
chromosomes, one coming from each pa¬
rent. As a result, some so-called "recessive"
characteristics carried by a chromosome
may be masked by a dominant homologous
chromosome and its presence may only
be revealed, through the operation of
Mendelian segregation, after several
generations.
This, of course, slows down the work of
the person undertaking the selection. The
recent emergence of a technique somewhat
similar to micro-propagation has made it
possible to overcome this difficulty. This
technique enables a complete plant to be

obtained either from the male gametes, or
reproductive cells (androgenesis), or from
the female gametes (gynogenesis). Like the
gametes from which they are derived, these
plants are haploid. Since they have only one
set of chromosomes, their genetic charac¬
teristics, whether recessive or dominant,
are immediately evident to the person mak¬
ing the selection. Haploid plants are usually
infertile, but by treating them with col¬
chicine, which induces a doubling of the
chromosomes, a fertile plant is obtained
with two sets of identical chromosomes and
with phenotypically stable characteristics.
Another technique used in gynogenesis is to
fertilize the ovule with irradiated pollen.
In China, new varieties of rice obtained
by androgenesis are being cultivated on sev¬
eral millions of hectares of land. Laboratory
experiments in gynogenesis are also now
being undertaken on barley, rice, wheat,
maize, sugar-beet and other species.
High hopes are also being placed in soma¬
tic hybridization, a technique which consists
of fusing two cells whose cell walls have
previously been removed by enzymatic
treatment. Using this technique scientists
have succeeded in fusing plant cells not only
with other plant cells but also with animal
and even human cells. In most cases,
however, the chromosomes of one of the
fused cells are quickly eliminated and it has
only been possible to obtain complete,
stable hybrid cells from the fusion of cells
from very closely related species. Further¬
more, even when stable stock has been
obtained, it has proved difficult to regener¬
ate a complete plant from such fused cells.
The first success achieved was the regenera¬
tion of the pomato, a cross between a potato
and a tomato. However, the plant is sterile
and remains no more than a laboratory
curiosity.
More recently scientists have succeeded
in regenerating somatic hybrid cells of sev¬
eral plants of agricultural interest such as
rapeseed, chicory and potato. On the other
hand, attempts to do the same with sun¬
flower, cereals and legumes have so far
failed. Nevertheless, there is hope that
present difficulties will soon be overcome,
at least in obtaining hybrids of varieties of
the same species.
The great advantage of somatic hybrid¬
ization is that it makes it possible to transfer
not only the genetic characteristics borne by
the chromosomes of the nucleus, but also
those of the specialized parts of the cell
contained in the cytoplasm (the "liquid"
portion of a cell surrounding the nucleus)
such as mitochondria and chloroplasts.
These latter are the key to processes and
properties of great importance such as
photosynthesis, the assimilation of carbon
dioxide, male sterility and resistance to
herbicides, diseases and drought.
Somatic hybridization has paved the way
for the newly emerging discipline of plant
genetic engineering which is concerned with
the implantation of specific genes", whether
of vegetal or other origin, into the genetic
make-up of a plant (see article page 13).
Using these new techniques the nutritional
value of the haricot bean, for example, has
been improved by the transfer of a gene
from the Brazil nut.
In Europe, Japan and the United States
of America, a number of large multina¬
tional companies are showing keen interest
in these new techniques of plant improve¬
ment with a view to competing for the world
market. Nevertheless, this branch of bio¬
technology also offers great opportunities
for the developing countries. These new
techniques, which they have already
acquired or can rapidly master, will enable
them to adapt their agricultural production
to meet local conditions and requirements.
Nitrogen fixation
Through its World Network of Micro¬
biological Resources Centres (MIRCENs),
one of whose priority programmes is
devoted to the question of nitrogen fixa¬
tion, Unesco is contributing actively to
another field of biotechnology that is rich in
promise (see article page 27).
The nif genes, which are coded for the
fixation of nitrogen, have now been identi¬
fied and their structure is on the point of
being fully mapped out. Furthermore, these
genes have been transmitted to non-
nitrogen-fixing organisms such as Proteus
vulgaris, Agrobacterium tumefaciens and
Escherichia coli. In principle there is no
reason why they should not also be trans¬
ferred to higher plants and important
results in this direction can be expected
soon. However, the creation of nitrogen-
fixing cereals is a distant prospect still in the
realm of science fiction.
With regard to plants other than the
legumes, attention is now concentrated on
nitrogen fixation by bacteria and fungi
which invade their roots either on the root
surface or by entering their tissue where
they form nitrogen-fixing nodules. These
studies have not yet reached the molecular
biology or the genetic engineering stage,
but they hold out much promise for tropical
forestry, sand dune stabilization and the
fight against desertification.
Finally, mention should be made of stud¬
ies being made in the Philippines and Sene¬
gal on the use of the water fern Azolla pin-
nata as a biological fertilizer in rice fields
(seethe Unesco Courier, December 1984).
In symbiotic association with the blue-green
algaAnabaena this water fern has the ability
to fix atmospheric nitrogen. Ploughed into
the soil between harvests, this "green fertil¬
izer" can increase the crop by over 50 per
r
The Green Revolution
RESEARCH into the selection of new
high-yield cereal varieties began after
the Second World War. Wheat and
rice varieties were selected In Mexico and the
Philippines respectively, then during the
1960s the new strains were used in other
parts of the world, and it was later established
that they had contributed to a significant
increase in agricultural yields.
In the mid-1960s, following the introduction
of these high-yield varieties Into several coun¬
tries of Asia and Latin America, the expres¬
sion "Green Revolution" was coined to
describe the various efforts made to increase
agricultural production in the developing
countries by means of these new varieties,
especially wheat and rice. The cultivation of
these crops required the use of pesticides and
Irrigation in addition to fertilization and sound
agricultural practices. Cross-breeding be¬
tween these varieties and hardy local breeds
made it possible to obtain cultivars that were
even better adapted and which gave a better
yield. In addition to wheat and rice, this
research also concerned millet and sorghum,
triticale, maize and several leguminous plant
species.
In just over a decade, more than half the
surface of corn-growing land and one-third of
that of rlceland in developing countries had
been sown with high-yield cereal varieties.
When the latter are irrigated, and receive ade¬
quate supplies of fertilizer and weed-killer, the
yield is two or three times higher than that of
traditional varieties.
The new varieties of wheat were introduced
to India in 1966 and Indian wheat production
had doubled by 1970-1971, when it reached
23.4 million tonnes. As a result of local efforts
to improve varieties and a more widespread
use of selected seeds, output reached 33 mil¬
lion tonnes in 1978-1980. From being the
world's second largest cereal importer in
1966, India had become self-sufficient by the
end of the 1970s. In the Punjab, farm re¬
venues doubled in 1972, six years after the
introduction of new cereal varieties.
In some regions of Asia where water
resources permitted, the shortening of the
growing period of new rice varieties allowed
two or three crops to be harvested per year.
The prime beneficiaries of the "Green
Revolution" were the wealthier farmers of
some developing countries. The countries of
Africa south of the Sahara were scarcely
affected; only Kenya and Zimbabwe in¬
creased the area of land on which new vari¬
eties of maize were grown. The wheat and rice
varieties were not introduced at the same
pace as in Asia where the development of
irrigation, adequate fertilizer supplies, and the
marketing system of farm produce played an
important role in the success of the "Green
Revolution."
Source: Oue//es biotechnologies pour les pays en développe¬
ment? by A. Sasson, Biofutur/Unesco, Paris. 1986

cent and its effect, which lasts for two years,
is equivalent to the use of 60 kilograms of
nitrogen fertilizer per hectare.
Energy from waste
Biotechnology's contribution in the field of
new energy sources is today arousing great
interest for two reasons: the foreseeable
exhaustion of our supplies of fossil energy
(oil and coal), and the world energy crisis
which, since 1973, has weighed heavily on
the economies of all countries, but par¬
ticularly on those of the countries of the
Third World.
One achievement, which has already
been developed on a large scale in a number
of countries, is the production of biogas
from cellulose and animal and human
wastes. This is based on the anaerobic
digestion of cellulose and nitrogenous
organic matter by mixed populations of
microbes consisting of bacteria that break
down cellulose into organic acids and other
bacteria that convert these organic acids
into methane.
Experience acquired in India indicates
that the manure from ten cows would
provide a daily yield of 1.8 cubic metres of
biogas, which is the equivalent of 1.3 litres
of petrol, enough to cook the food for four
people or operate a hundred candlepower
lamp for fourteen hours. What is more, the
residue constitutes an excellent fertilizer of
a quality far superior to the original
manure.
A million of these cheap and simple bio-
gas digesters are in service in India and
more than seven million are in use in China.
Production of biogas on farms can be
expected to spread soon to other agri¬
cultural areas in which other forms of
energy are not available. From the ecologi¬
cal viewpoint, biogas has the great advan¬
tage that it can replace firewood, thus
contributing to the struggle against
deforestation and desertification.
Biogas production is also increasing in
the industrialized countries as well as in
large towns and heavily populated rural
areas in general. The main economic gain
here is that the treatment of waste water
and the handling of agro-industrial wastes
and the animal waste from intensive stock-
rearing can be turned to advantage by the
production of methane. Already several
urban water treatment plants in Europe
meet all their energy requirements by the
production of biogas.
Green gasoline
The production of liquid fuels, in particular
ethanol, is another major contribution of
biotechnology in the field of new energy
sources. A large number of agricultural raw
materials can be used for the production of
ethanol by fermentation, including the
sucrose in sugar-cane, sugar-beet and
molasses, the starch from cereals, manioc
and potatoes, and the inulin from Jerusalem
artichokes.
Brewer's yeast (Saccharomyces cere-
visiae) and certain anaerobic bacteria, such
as Zymomonas mobilis, convert the sugars
into ethanol with an average yield of 47 per
cent, by weight. Several suitable raw mat¬
erials are available in considerable quan¬
tities at a low price. However, from the
economic point of view there is one impor¬
tant drawback: the ethanol has an inhibiting
effect on the micro-organisms that produce
it and the maximum concentration in the
reactors cannot exceed 8 to 10 per cent. As a
result, the distillation of bio-ethanol and its
complete dehydration, which is essential to
its use as a fuel, are costly operations con¬
stituting about 60 per cent of the cost
price.
In Brazil, ethanol fuel is produced from
sugar-cane on a large scale. At present pro¬
duction is running at 8.4 million tonnes
which in energy terms is equivalent to 5.6
million tonnes of super-grade petrol. In
agricultural terms the yield is 4.7 tonnes per
hectare of sugar-cane per year.
At present, the cost price of bio-ethanol
exceeds that of petrol by $380 per tonne. In
Brazil, however, the economic motivation
for producing bio-ethanol is to improve the
balance of payments by reducing imports of
petrol and to provide an outlet for the sugar
industry which has been badly hit by the fall
in the price of sugar on the world market.
Bio-ethanol is arousing great interest
elsewhere for similar reasons. In the United
States, "Biohol", an automobile fuel con¬
taining 10 per cent ethanol produced from
maize, has been on the market for several
years. In Western Europe it is planned to
produce 3.4 million tonnes of bio-ethanol
annually. The aim of this project is to make
use of European surpluses of wheat and
sugar-beet. There is also an ecological
motivation. Added to automobile petrol in
a proportion of 5 per cent, ethanol can
replace the tetraethyl lead anti-knock addi¬
tive now used in petrol, but shortly to be
banned because of its toxic effects.
Bridging the protein gap
Generally speaking, proteins, or the lack of
them , constitute the major nutritional prob¬
lem facing the developing countries. Statis¬
tics published by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations
(FAO), show that average total protein
consumption per head of population in the
developing countries is only half that of the
rich countries. The difference is even more
marked with regard to protein of animal
origin, average consumption of which in the
developing countries is 13 grams per
day a mere 22 per cent of that in rich coun¬
tries and this falls to 4 grams per day in
the poorest regions of Africa and Asia.
In the developing countries a great vari¬
ety of agricultural products and wastes lend
themselves to the production of single-cell
edible protein. These include, in particular,
ligno-cellulosic matter which is available in
large quantities at a low price. According
to the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), the world crop of
cereals produces annually 1,700 million
The cloning
of the oil palm
The oil palm (Elaeis guineensisj is culti¬
vated as a source ofoil in the humid tropic¬
al zones of Africa, the Americas and
South-east Asia, where oil palm planta¬
tions cover several million hectares.
Selection cycles to produce higher-yield¬
ing varieties through sexual reproduction
were very long, and their results were only
perceptible after 15 or 20 years. In the
1970s, attempts were thus made to perfect
in vitro propagation of the oil palm using
Photo © IRHO-CIRAD/ORSTOM, Paris
tissue culture, and since 1981 oil palm
plantlets have been produced on a semi-
industrial scale at the La Mé research sta¬
tion in the Ivory Coast (1) using a cloning
technique developed by British and
French researchers in the 1970s. Photos
show some of the stages in the cloning
process. Fragments of very young leaves
are carefully removed from the tip of a tree
(2) and placed in a nutrient medium where
calluses develop (3). After going through a
second and then a third culture medium
the calluses evolve into "embryoids" (4)
comparable to the embryos obtained by
sexual reproduction. They multiply spon¬
taneously, and this multiplication is fos¬
tered in a fourth culture medium. A fifth
culture makes it possible for the embryos
to develop into young leaved plantlets (5).
The shoots are transferred to a sixth
medium in which roots are induced (6),
while in a seventh medium entire young
plants are obtained for planting in soil (7).
It takes about 3 months to obtain a 12 cm
shoot from an embryoid.
L
8


Powerful protoplasts
Techniques for the cloning of plants are
now so refined that a single cell removed
from the body of a plant can be cultured in
the laboratory and then induced to re¬
generate a complete individual plant.
Drawings at left and below are a schematic
representation of the cloning process
used by Prof. James F. Shepard and his
colleagues at Kansas State University to
regenerate a complete potato plant from
protoplasts (living cells stripped of their
outer wall) prepared from leaf cells. Small
terminal leaves are first removed from a
young potato plant (1). The leaves are
placed in a solution containing a combina¬
tion of enzymes capable of dissolving the
cell wall to produce protoplasts (2). The
solution also causes the protoplasts to
withdraw from the cell wall and to become
spherical, thereby protecting the proto¬
plasm during the disintegration of the
walls (3). The protoplasts are next grown
in a culture medium (4) where they divide
and begin to synthesize new cell walls (5).
After 2 weeks of culture in these con¬
ditions, each protoplast gives rise to a
clump of undifferentiated cells or micro-
calluses (6). These microcalluses develop
into full-size calluses in another culture
medium (7) and their cells begin to dif¬
ferentiate, forming a primordial shoot (8).
The shoot develops into a small plant with
roots in a third culture medium and is then
planted in soil (9). Under appropriate con¬
ditions protoplasts from 2 different plants
can be fused to form a cell possessing
genes of plants which cannot be crossed
using classic methods. The fused proto¬
plasts of some species can be grown into
plants in a process known as somatic
hybridization.
tonnes of straw, to which can be added
some 127 million tonnes of bagasse from
sugar-cane and pulp from sugar-beet. At
present, the main obstacle to their use for
the production of proteins is the lack of
sufficiently active microbial strains for this
specific purpose. Recently achieved labora¬
tory results suggest that this problem will
soon be overcome.
Cuba is, at present, the only developing
country producing single-cell edible protein
from agricultural raw material. Eighty
thousand tonnes of forage yeasts for use as
animal feed are produced annually from
sugar-cane molasses. The Cuban example
will probably soon be followed in other
countries, such as India, where molasses is
also available at a low price.
10

33^
yj.
For a long time now Western Europe has
been producing single-cell edible protein
from various agro-industrial wastes such as
lacto-serum (80,000 tonnes per year) and
the sulphite liquors used in paper-making
(25,000 tonnes per year). As with biogas,
the main economic incentive for this pro¬
duction is the elimination of the cost of
handling potentially polluting wastes. It is
to be expected that the same will happen
soon in the developing countries where
increasing industrialization is making pro¬
tection of the environment an ever more
urgent necessity.
One of microbiology's most promising
contributions to the problem of edible pro¬
teins is their production on an industrial
scale from oil, methanol and natural gas.
Born in Europe some thirty years ago, this
branch of biotechnology has developed to
the point where there are factories with a
production capacity of 100,000 tonnes per
year.
The oil treatment processes make use of
yeast micro-organisms (Candida lipolytica
and Candida tropicalis) which are derived
from diesel oil or from paraffin, previously
extracted from crude oil, and having a yield
of 100 per cent by weight. In the case of
methanol, chemically derived from natural
gas, the biomass produced is that of bacteria
such as Methylophilus methylotropha whose
yield on this substrate is of the order of 50
per cent, by weight. The methanol treat¬
ment processes make use of specific meth¬
ane-eating bacteria (Pseudomonas meth-
8
©
Protein enrichment by fermentation is a
branch of biotechnology that could help
some developing countries increase their
protein resources. Microbial fermentation
of such crops as manioc, which contain
much starch and relatively little protein,
yields a product with a substantially high¬
er protein content. The banana is a fruit to
which this process could be applied, and
several banana-producing countries are
investigating the possibility of using in
this way the high proportion of fruit re¬
jected for export and usually wasted.
Above, harvesting bananas in Martinique.
After J.F. Shepard in Scientific American, New York, 1982
11

ylotropha or Methyiococcus capsulatus) in
conjunction with other species whose task is
to prevent the inhibition of the bacteria by
intermediate accumulation of methanol.
Very large-scale experiments with the
products thus obtained from oil and meth¬
anol have demonstrated conclusively their
high nutritional value and complete
innocuousness. Up till now, these edible
proteins have been marketed exclusively as
animal feed, but preliminary studies have
shown that there is nothing to prevent their
being used directly as food for humans.
Following the first oil crisis of 1973, pro¬
duction of single-cell edible protein from oil
and from methanol slowed down in West¬
ern Europe due to the increased cost of the
raw material. In Eastern Europe and in the
USSR, however, it has developed consider¬
ably and now amounts to some 3 million
tonnes per year.
This branch of biotechnology is of
obvious interest to those developing coun¬
tries that are producers of oil and natural
gas, since these raw materials are available
to them in large quantities at prices well
below the world market price. The Organi¬
zation of Arab Petroleum Exporting Coun¬
tries, for example, proposes as a first step to
produce 100,000 tonnes of single-cell edible
protein a year, either from oil or from meth¬
anol, and it estimates the potential market
in the Middle East and in the Maghreb at
more than a million tonnes. It should be
pointed out that this amount of protein
could be obtained from 0.1 per cent of their
total oil production.
Protein enrichment of foodstuffs by fer¬
mentation is another promising prospect.
Application of modern biotechnological
methods to this practice, which is tradi¬
tional in Africa and the Far East, seems set
fair to provide the developing countries
with a substantial increase in their protein
resources for human and animal consump¬
tion.
The end product of this fermentation pro¬
cess is a directly consumable mixture of pro
tein-rich microbial biomass and residual
agricultural raw material whose nutritional
value is thus enriched. This relatively sim¬
ple technology has the advantage that it can
be used both on a large industrial scale and
in small, inexpensive production units
located in rural communities. This means
that high-quality edible protein can be pro¬
duced from a wide range of agricultural raw
materials that are too costly or available
locally only in quantities too small for use
with standard single-cell edible protein pro¬
duction methods.
In all the tropical regions, manioc (also
known as cassava) is the chief agricultural
raw material potentially available for pro¬
tein enrichment. Cultivated throughout
Africa, in Asia and Latin America, the
world production of manioc is of the order
of 100 million tonnes. Very rich in starch,
but containing practically no protein, man¬
ioc is used above all as a supplementary
energy food. Furthermore, although under
good conditions it can yield 50 tonnes per
hectare and over, it is normally only culti¬
vated on small patches of land using rudi¬
mentary methods with low productivity.
At present, the only country in which
manioc cultivation has been developed
rationally is Thailand, which exports 7.5
million tonnes of manioc root to the Euro¬
pean Community each year.
Starting with dried manioc with an initial
content of 90 per cent starch and less than 1
per cent protein, fermentation with an
amylolytic mould (Aspergillus hennebergii)
yields a product containing 20 per cent well-
balanced proteins and 20 to 25 per cent
residual sugars. In this way manioc can
provide nearly 2 tonnes of protein per hec¬
tare, that is, three times more than can be
obtained from the cultivation of soya or
other leguminous plants.
The banana too is a raw material with a
bright future. In the collection centres of
exporting countries, 20 to 30 per cent of the
fruit gathered is rejected. This rejected
fruit, whose protein content at 1.1 per cent
is too low for it to be used as animal feed, is
a complete write-off. For a number of Cen¬
tral American countries which export sev¬
eral million tonnes of bananas annually, the
prospect of recuperating wastage on this
scale by use of the fermentation process is
clearly of the greatest interest and this
possibility is being actively investigated in
Mexico, Guatemala and the West Indies.
Finally, the third major contribution that
biotechnology has to offer to the solution of
the world problem of edible protein is the
industrial production of amino acids as a
complement to plant proteins. Many such
proteins, in fact, are only of limited nutri¬
tional value because of their lack of certain
essential amino acids which man and other
mono-gastric animals (including pigs,
young ruminants and poultry) are unable to
synthesize and therefore must find in their
food. This is the case in particular of lysine,
which is the amino acid in which cereals are
most notably deficient and lack of which is
the main cause of malnutrition in the Third
World. Almost all the amino acids used as a
complement to plant proteins are obtained
by fermentation using hyper-productive
bacterial strains selected genetically.
Apart from methionine, which is
basically intended for use in animal feed,
lysine is the only amino acid produced in
large quantities (40,000 tonnes per year). It
has been estimated that the world deficit in
lysine, most marked in Africa and the Far
East, is 136,000 tonnes for human food and
three times that figure for animal
foodstuffs. As things stand at present, the
cost price of lysine is still too high to ensure
satisfaction of Third World needs and to
compete with soya in animal feed. The sit¬
uation is the same for other amino acids, in
particular threonine and tryptophan,
which, after lysine, are the chief elements
lacking in plant proteins. However, it is
reasonable to assume that, thanks to
genetic engineering, substantial progress
will soon be made.
JACQUES C. SENEZ, French biologist and uni¬
versity teacher, is a former Secretary-General of
the Unesco-sponsored International 'Cell Re¬
search Organization (ICRO) and a consultant
member of the Protein Advisory Group of the
United Nations. A past Secretary-General of the
International Union of Microbiological Societies
(IUMS), he is the author of a number of studies
on microbiology and bacterial biochemistry. In
the late 1960s he initiated the production of
Single Cell Protein (SCP) from petroleum.
2 Many developing countries are engaged in
I programmes to harness the techniques of
e biotechnology for national development.
§ Left, fermenters of a Cuban factory pro-
$ ducing single-cell edible protein from
© molasses. The installation produces some
% 40 tonnes of protein a day for use as anim-
£ a/ feed.
12
