overty and progress
Class, caste andpower
by Ambalal Somabhai Patel THE basic cause of poverty in de¬
veloping countries is usually con¬
sidered to be the economic back¬
wardness or stagnation of the rural areas
where the vast majority of the population
live. In India the main occupation of
these rural people is agriculture, which
contributes almost 40 per cent to the net
domestic product. Yet the income of agri¬
cultural workers is substantially below
the national average, and is often almost
at subsistence level.
There are a number of reasons for this,
notably:
the unviable size of land holdings
(still decreasing as a result of the system
of dividing property among many);
lack of irrigation facilities, so that
farmers are dependent on rainfall and the
vagaries of nature;
lack of sufficient financial resources
to invest in seeds, manure or equipment,
or to pay seasonal labour costs;
lack of satisfactory administrative
machinery, such as co-operatives, to
organize the purchase and resale of agri¬
cultural produce;
lack of transport facilities and a
good road network to ensure rapid dis¬
tribution of fresh vegetables and fruit;
inadequate knowledge of farming,
farm products and seasonal crops,
through non-utilization of available faci¬
lities such as further education pro¬
grammes.
The productivity of small farms is
generally low, resulting in very poor re¬
turns on labour input and capital invest¬
ment. The plight of small farmers and
unskilled agricultural labourers is made
worse by the fact that they are ill-
equipped for alternative employment in
related sectors which could provide a
source of income during the slack season.
While economic stagnation results
from external factors that can be altered
by determined implementation of
appropriate development policies and
"Another social mechanism, exploitation,
is a natural consequence of the class,
caste and power systems, and plays an
important role In perpetuating economic,
social and political inequalities." Right, a
scene from Sadgati (1981), a film by the
Indian director Satyajit Ray.
26

programmes, there are other social or
sociological factors, which are deeply
rooted in tradition and are woven into the
fabric of Indian society. Big efforts by the
education system and the media are
needed to overcome these obstacles,
which arise from caste distinctions and
religious beliefs. The rigid hierarchy of
the caste system and the specific func¬
tions assigned to each caste since ancient
times, underpinned by religious injunc¬
tions, provide little scope for upward
mobility. Rural people are also more con¬
servative and traditional in their outlook
and believe so strongly in religious practi¬
ces, social customs and superstitions that
they resist attempts to change social be¬
haviour and attitudes. The weight of past
traditions, customs and values acts as a
brake on economic development and the
rapid elimination of poverty.
Another social mechanism, exploita¬
tion , is a natural consequence of the class ,
caste and power systems, and plays an
important role in perpetuating economic,
social and political inequalities. The rich
exploit the poor in subtle ways of which
the latter may be unaware; employers
exploit employees; engineers exploit con¬
tractors or builders; the upper classes or
castes exploit the lower; school adminis
trators exploit teachers; teachers exploit
students (although sometimes the reverse
is the case); doctors and lawyers exploit
patients and clients; intellectuals exploit
non-intellectuals and create problems of
student unrest.
Among other factors which affect the
economic well-being of a society are
family composition and size, which influ¬
ence not only the intellectual and person¬
al characteristics of family members, but
also affect the family's financial status
and the benefits derived from it. Two
families differing in size and age structure
may derive very different benefits from
an equal total income. On the other
hand, two families of equal size may have
unequal earning capacities because of dif¬
ferences in age, sex, intellectual and per¬
sonality traits, social or job status, or the
number of aged, infirm or young family
members.
Since the poor are usually unem¬
ployed, unemployment is often regarded
as a cause of poverty. It should rather be
seen as a contributing factor, or as a
consequence of other variables which
may co-exist with poverty.
Demographic factors have been raised
in discussions of poverty because the
population parameter appears in the
measurement of wealth in terms of per
capita national income. One conclusion
drawn from this is that in order to reduce
poverty, the numerator (national in¬
come) should increase, while the denomi¬
nator (population size) should be re¬
duced. At one time the population factor
was relegated to the background Karl
Marx, for example, saw no link between
demographic growth and poverty and
held the capitalist system entirely
responsible for the latter. In the 1950s
and 1960s many developing countries ex¬
perienced a population explosion as the
result of a rapid decline in mortality rates
unaccompanied by a corresponding fall in
the birthrate. This again brought the
population factor to the forefront.
However, to imply that rapid population
growth is the cause or even one of the
main causes of the problem of poverty is
clearly an oversimplification of the
problem.
AMBALAL SOMABHAI PATEL, Indian special¬
ist in experimental and social psychology, is
director of the Psycho-Clinic and Psycho-
Assessment Services, Baroda, Gujarat, India,
and editor of the Indian Journal of Psychology,
the official organ of the Indian Psychological
Association, of which he is a former president.
-
<
©
27
