The mystic
way
by Farïd oddïn 'Attär
Farid oddïn 'Attär (d. c. 1220) is one of
the most celebrated Persian Sufi poets and
mystics. In the West his best-known work
is the Manteq ot-teyr (The Conference of
the Birds), an allegorical poem describing
the quest of30 birds (sï morgh) for the
Simorgh, or Divine Bird. This poem has
been a constant source of inspiration for
mystic poets. But 'Attar's masterpiece is
doubtless the Mosibat-nämeh ("Book of
Affliction"), which describes the quest of
the soul, embodied by the Pilgrim, for
unity. The passage published here is
taken from the beginning of the poem, at
the moment when the path to God is
revealed to the Pilgrim. Each stage of the
innerjourney on which he embarks is
punctuated with anecdotes rich in
spiritual meaning.
DISTRAUGHT and dumbfounded, the pilgrim saw a hundred universes,
oceans upon oceans of seething waters, each in search of God, all of them
engulfed in the vortex of God. A hundred thousand times he sifted all the
earth, and cast aside intelligence, doubt and aporia. A hundred thousand times he
sifted the earth of the world and as many times he laid upon the bench the pearl he
had won. At last, success came to him from God. As he was sifting, a wise man
came to him, a sun illuminating both worlds, gathering in myriads of stars on the
Way, in the world and out of it, in the centre and out of it; settled, and forever
travelling; invisible, and forever present; sun flooding the two worlds with light,
and frightened by his own brilliance; red flame on the Way, vast heart like the
green ocean. Let him perish who makes no khôl with the dust of his steps, be he
pure or impure! Ah, son, the road is long and full of pitfalls, the traveller must
have a guide. How can the blind man find his way without a stick? There is no
Wise One, thou sayest? Ask, seek desperately! If there was not in the world a
single Wise One, the earth would rise up and time would stop.
In short, when the Pilgrim met the Wise One, the guide on the Way, he bowed
low before him. His heart overflowed with joy. With all his heart, he fixed the ring
of servitude to his ear. A hundred thousand rosebuds blossomed in the garden of
his heart. Grace brought him ecstasy, impiety fled, the way opened.
The Wise One said to him:
"Brigands lurk on the Way. Sleep not, do what you have been told. The road is
long. Son, watch out! Let sleep await the tomb, keep watch! To each a task has
been assigned. Many have suffered such distress. On this long road beware of
being hindered by trifles. Wherever you halt you will remain prostrate for ever.
May heartbreaks and burnings in your'breast be calls. May this echo of the Qur'an
sing in your soul like the nightingale's song! Walk upright, do your best, be
vigilant. Carry the burden, eat the thorn, keep your ears wide open!"
The Pilgrim became inflamed like a lover seized with passion. He threw off
melancholy and rapture and plunged naked into the ocean. He laid complaint and
gratitude aside, and set out along the endless Way.
26
"-
A meditating Sufi
portrayed in a 15th-
century Persian miniature
(Shiraz school). Sùfism
consists ofa variety of
ascetic rules and mystical
paths followed by Muslim
orders and brotherhoods.
One of the saints of
Sùfism is ¿alai ad-Din ar-
Rùmi (1207-1274),
founderof the
Mawlawlyah orderof
Sufis better known in the
West as the "whirling
dervishes" because of the
dance their founder
prescribed for them.
