The obedience
due to
princesses
by Ibn Batutah
"No intelligent man," wrote Ibn Djuzayy,
the scribe to whom Ibn Batutah dictated
his memoirs, "can fail to see that this
sheikh is the traveller of the age." But
Ibn Batutah (1304-1368 or 1377) was not
only the greatest Arab traveller of the
Middle Ages, he was one of the greatest
travellers ofall time. When he set out
from his birthplace, Tangiers (Morocco),
for Mecca in 1325, he was embarking on
an adventurousjourney that would take
him halfway round the world as far as
China and would last almost 30 years.
The first stage of his travels took him to
the Middle East. During a second, longer
stage he visited central and eastern Asia.
Finally, after returning to Tangiers, he
set off again, this time for the Sahara and
the Sudan: his is the only description of
these regions to have survivedfrom the
Middle Ages. Ibn Batutah was not a
geographer like the great al-Idrisi (1100-
c.1165), author of the famous Kitâb
Rudjâr ("The Book ofRoger"). His
observations are those of a curious,
intelligent and cultivated Muslim tourist.
His account of his travels (the Rihla ), in
addition to its literary value, gives a
panoramic picture of the 14th-century
world. The extract published here is
thought to show Ibn Batutah in the
Philippines, before his visit to China.
ON the second day after our arrival at the port of Cailoûcary, the princess
invited the nâkhodhah, or skipper of the ship, the carâny^ or secretary,
the merchants, the chiefs, the tendu, or general of the infantry, and the
sipâhsâlâr, or general of the bowmen, to partake of the meal that Ordoudjâ was
accustomed to provide as a hospitable gesture. The skipper asked me to'go with
them; but I refused, for these people are- infidels, and it is not lawful to eat their
food. When the guests came to the princess's abode, she said, "Has any of your
number not come?"
The skipper replied, "Only one man is not here the bakchy, or judge, who
does not eat your food."
Ordoudjâ answered, "Send for him."
Her guards sought me out; with them were the companions of the nâkhodhah,
who said to me, "Obey the princess."
I went and found her seated on her great chair, or ceremonial throne; before
her stood women, holding in their hand's registers which they presented to her.
Around her were old women, or duennas, her counsellors; they were seated
below the throne, in sandalwood armchairs. The men, too, were in front of the
princess. The throne was covered with silk, and had silk curtains above it, and it
was made of sandalwood encrusted with gold leaf. ...
When I had greeted the princess, she said to me in Turkish, Khochmicen
iakhchîmîcen, which means "Are you well? How are you?" She made me sit
down near her. The princess could write Arabic correctly, and she said to one of
her servants, Daouâh oué betecguétoûr that is, "Bring the inkwell and paper."
He did so, and the princess wrote, "In the name of God, the merciful and
compassionate"; then she said to me, "What is that?"
I answered, Tangry nam that is, "It is the name of God."
She replied, Khoch, which means, "That is right." Then she asked me what
country I came from, and I told her that I came from India. "The land that pepper
comes from?" (Malabar), she said, and I replied that that was so. She asked me a
lot of questions about the country and its history, and I answered them all. The
This masterpiece of 1 6th century Arab
cartography is from the Portulan of the
Mediterranean Sea, a bookofsailing charts
by Ali Ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad a/ Sharqiof
Sfax (Tunisia). Following the usual practice of
medieval Arab cartographers, the south is at
top ofmap. The Mediterranean is at centre.
34

Footloose and
princess then said, "I really must make war on this country and take it for myself;
for I am attracted by its abundance of riches and of troops."
"Do so," I said. The princess caused me to be given: (1) clothing; (2) as much
rice as two elephants could carry; (3) two female buffaloes; (4) ten ewes; (5) four
pounds of julep or syrup; (6) four marthabân, or large porcelain jars, full of
ginger, pepper, lemons and mangoes; all was salted, as food is when it is to be
eaten at sea. .
The skipper told me that in Ordoudjâ's army there were free women, slave girls
and female captives, who fought like men; that she went to war along with the
troops, both male and female, invaded her enemies' lands, was present at the
battles, and fought the most valiant of her foes. He also told me about a desperate
battle that once took place between the princess and one of her foes; many of
Ordoudjâ's soldiers were killed, and her whole army was about to flee; then the
princess rushed forward, and made her way through the ranks until she reached
the king whom she was fighting; she stabbed him to death, and his troops fled;
Ordoudjâ returned, bearing her enemy's head on a spear; her enemy's kin
redeemed the head by handing over great sums of money to Ordoudjâ; and when
the princess returned to her father he gave her this town Cailoûcary which had
been governed by her brother before her. The skipper also told me that the sons of
kings ask Ordoudjâ's hand in marriage, and that she answers, "I shall marry none
but a man that fights me and defeats me;" but they will not fight her, for they fear
that their reputation would suffer if she were victorious.
