Colours to whet the pal
JAPANESE cuisine, it has been
claimed, is a feast not only for the
taste-buds, but also for the eyes; in
a case like this, I would even be tempted
to say: not just a feast for the eyes but,
better still, for the spirit! A contemplative
state of mind is induced by the quiet har¬
mony between the glow of candles flicker¬
ing in the gloom and the reflections in the
lacquerware. Some years ago, the great
writer Söseki1 celebrated in his Kusa-mak-
ura2 the colours of the yökan? and in a
sense these colours are also, surely, aids
to meditation. Consider their cloudy sur¬
face, semi-translucent like jade, the im¬
pression that they convey of drawing sun¬
light into their very substance and holding
in their depths a tremulous glimmer like a
dream; consider the deep harmony of col¬
our tones, and their complexity; you will
not find these in any piece of Western
confectionery. To compare them to some
cream or custard would be superficial and
naive.
Now take a lacquer cake dish and set
upon it the subtly-tinted harmony of a
yökan, place it in the shadows so that its
colour is scarcely discernible and you will
find that its power of focusing contempla¬
tion is even stronger. And when at last you
carry to your lips this cool, smooth sub¬
stance, you will feel as if part of the dark¬
ness of the room, solidified into a morsel
of sweetness, were melting on the tip of
your tongue, and in this yökan which is,
after all, rather insipid you will discover
an unusual depth that enhances its
taste.
In all the countries of the world, efforts
have doubtless been made to create
pleasing colour combinations with food,
tableware and even the walls in the back¬
ground; at any rate, if Japanese dishes
are served in surroundings that are too
well-lit, or in crockery that is predomin¬
antly white, they lose half their attraction.
Take the red misoA soup, for example, that
we eat every morning; look at the colour of
it, and you will have no difficulty in under¬
standing that it was invented in the dark
houses of a bygone age. One day, when I
had been invited to a tea party, I was given
a serving of miso, and when I saw that
murky, clay-coloured soup that I had al¬
ways eaten without paying it much atten¬
tion when I saw it by the soft glow of
candlelight, lying like a calm pool in the
curve of the black lacquer bowl, I discov¬
ered that it had real depth and the most
appetizing of hues.
Shôyu,5 a sticky, glistening sauce, also
gains much from being seen in the shad¬
ows, and is perfectly at home in darkness,
especially if one follows the custom of the
Kyoto region for seasoning raw fish, or
pickled or boiled vegetables, and uses the
thick variety called tamari. Similarly, white
miso, töfu,6 kamaboko,7 steamed sweet
potato cakes, white fish all white foods,
in short, are not shown off to advantage if
their surroundings are brightly lit. Rice,
above all: the very sight of it, served in a
shiny black lacquer box placed in a dark
corner, is aesthetically pleasing and at the
same time it whets the appetite. Flawless
rice, cooked to perfection, heaped in a
black box and giving off hot steam as soon
as one lifts the lid, every grain gleaming
like a pearl: there is not a Japanese alive
who can remain indifferent to this offering
of sheer goodness. All this goes to show
that our cuisine is meant for a shadowy
setting and has an enduring bond with
darkness.
Jun'lchiro Tanizaki
Extract from In'ei raisan (1933; "In Praise of
Shadows") by Jun'ichirö Tanizaki (1886-
1965).
1 . Söseki. Natsume Söseki (1867-1916), one of the
greatest Japanese novelists of the early 20th cen¬
tury.
2. Kusa-makura, "The Three-Cornered World" (a
poetic expression meaning literally "the grass
headrest", associated In classical literature with the
notion of a journey), a novel by Natsume Söseki,
published in 1906.
3. Yökan. jelly-like confectionery similar to crystal¬
lized fruit. The basic ingredients are bean paste
with added sugar and agar-agar seaweed, fla¬
voured with fruit: chestnut, persimmon, plum,
etc.
4. Miso, a purée of fermented soya beans, boiled
and mashed, with added salt and yeast. It is a basic
ingredient for a soup that is always served for
breakfast.
5. Shôyu, a brown sauce with a fermented soya
base, the essential condiment used in Japanese
cooking.
6. Tôfu. a whitish curd obtained from soya beans
that have been crushed and boiled, then strained
and thickened with a coagulent. Töfu is used in
many dishes, but it can be eaten alone, with various
condiments.
7. Kamaboko, a firm pâté made from the flesh of
certain white fish, steamed and then dried. Slices of
kamaboko are found in a variety of dishes. Editor.
18
MOTOKO ISHII studied industrial design at To¬
kyo University of Fine Arts before specializing in
the new field of lighting designand installation,
in which her work at the 1970 Osaka Exposition
attracted widespread attention. She has won an
international reputation for such projects as the
lighting of the Okinawa Ocean Expo '75 and of
several pavilions at the Tsukuba International
Exhibition in 1985, and has been invited to work
in many countries.
