Ten great discoveries
One of the Riace statues shortly after being
recovered from the sea
Photo Giansanti © Sygma, Paris
ITALY
The Riace warriors
In August 1972, a Roman skin-diver disco¬
vered two large bronze statues representing
human figures near Riace on the Calabrian
coast of southern Italy. He immediately
informed the archaeological authority for
the area, and the statues, about 2 metres
high and weighing over 150 kilos, were reco¬
vered from the sea-bed and brought back to
land. Authentic examples of classical Athe¬
nian art, it is thought that they may have
belonged to a group of 11 statues intended
to decorate the temple at Delphi. Some
specialists believe that they are the work of
the great Greek sculptor Phidias who, with
his pupils, carved the frontispiece and
friezes of the Parthenon in Athens. After
some 2,000 years of immersion, the restora¬
tion of these masterpieces of 5th-century-
BC Greek art proved a long and painstaking
job. The statues were X-rayed to provide a
picture of their internal structure and the
thickness of their different parts in order to
choose appropriate restoration materials.
Research revealed that metals other than
bronze were used for certain parts of the
statues. The teeth and eyelashes of one of
the figures are in silver, lips are of copper,
ivory was used for whites of the eyes and
vitreous paste and amber for the iris. The
statues are now preserved at the Magna
Graecia Museum in Reggio di Calabria,
where they were shown to the public for the
first time 7 years after being discovered.
(See Unesco Courier, November 1981)
On this double page and overleafwe present a selection of discoveries and achievements of
underwater archaeology in the last two decades which have attracted widespreadpublicity and have
contributed to the growingpopular interest in the underwater heritage.
P
Map Jack Kelly, courtesy Archaeology Vol 38, 4 I
Archaeological Institute of America 1 985
TURKEY
'Metal biscuits with ears'
This was how a young sponge diver des¬
cribed the objects he had spotted lying on
the sea-bed, in the autumn of 1982, less than
100 m from his home village of Kas. For the
experts from the Bodrum Museum of
Underwater Archaeology, this image re¬
called the copper ingots recovered in 1960
from a shipwreck at nearby Cape Gelidony-
a. The US archaeologist George Bass and
his team from the Institute of Nautical
Archaeology of Texas A & M University,
who had studied the Gelidonya wreck, im¬
mediately launched plans to excavate the
site, which has pushed back knowledge of
the shipbuilding techniques of Antiquity as
far as the Bronze Age. The copper ingots
found in the Kas wreck resemble an ingot
depicted in an Egyptian tomb at Thebes
dating from 1350 BC (copper was combined
with tin to make the bronze from which the
era takes its name). The discovery of a
miniature seal, no larger than a button, with
markings similar to those used by ancient
Greek merchants, suggested the origin of
the vessel. Among the finds in the wreck are
many precious objects in gold, pottery,
amphoras from Canaan, Mycenae and Cyp¬
rus, as well as cobalt-blue glass ingots, the
earliest glass ever found, probably intended
for making jewellery or goblets. The wreck
is still giving up its rich cargo, and the
remains of the hull will perhaps supply vital
information on the type of ships in use at the
time of the Trojan Wars.
Photos © Deutsches Schiffahrtsmuseum, Bremerhaven,
Fed. Rep. of Germany
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF
GERMANY
Conserving the Bremen Cog
When the harbour at Bremen on the Weser
estuary in the Fed. Rep. of Germany was
dredged in 1962, engineers uncovered a
14th-century merchant vessel or "Cog" pre¬
served in the mud (top). The wreck was
rescued with a view to research and conser¬
vation. The raising of the Cog, the Wasa and
the 5 Viking ships from Roskilde Fjord
confronted museum conservators for the
first time with the problem of preserving
huge objects made of waterlogged, soft, old
wood. Scientists discovered that such tim¬
bers could be protected against the distor¬
tions caused by shrinkage which would in¬
evitably occur as they dried by impregna¬
tion with a water-soluble wax, polyethylene
glycol (abbreviated PEG). After the Cog
had been reconstructed from some 2,000
pieces of timber (a task which took 7 years) ,
a conservation tank was built around it so
that it could be immersed in a PEG solution
(above). Today visitors to the German
Maritime Museum at Bremerhaven can see
the resubmerged vessel through windows in
the tank, where it will be immersed for
many years. Controlled drying will then
take place and the tank will function as a
huge controlled climate chamber.

Map Reinhardt and Cavanagh, courtesy Archaeology
Vol. 37, 1 © Archaeological Institute of America 1984
JAMAICA
Port Royal a submarine
Pompeii
Shortly before noon on 7 June 1692, the
bustling life of Port Royal (Jamaica) ended
in a violent earthquake and tidal wave.
Within minutes, nine-tenths of the great
Caribbean trading centre lay beneath the
waters of what is now Kingston Harbour.
Since then many divers have explored its
ruins, but not always with the controls and
documentation demanded by modern
archaeology. In 1978 a plan of collaboration
between the Government of Jamaica and
the Institute of Nautical Archaeology of
Texas A & M University was established,
and a thorough research programme was
initiated. There are hundreds of submerged
buildings to be excavated, offering a wealth
of architectural data and artefacts, and
work will continue for years to come. A vast
quantity of brass, pewter, silver, iron, glass,
pottery and wood objects have already been
brought to the surface to be restored and
studied . The X-ray of one find , an encrusted
watch, has revealed the time at which the
earthquake struck.
UNITED KINGDOM
Tudor life at sea
On a calm summer day in 1545, as a French
invasion fleet lay at anchor off Portsmouth,
King Henry VIII's flagship, Mary Rose,
sailed into her final battle. Probably as a
result of poor handling and overloading, she
heeled over and sank, so close to the shore
that the king, watching her go down, is said
to have heard the cries of the drowning,
sailors. On 1 1 October 1982, 437 years later,
the surviving starboard hull structure of the
700-ton vessel was raised to the surface (see
drawings) and towed into Portsmouth har¬
bour as the climax of a great rescue opera¬
tion which had begun in the late 1960s when
maritime archaeologists located the wreck.
A survey and exploration programme was
carried out by volunteer divers, scientists
and archaeologists until 1979, and then the
contents of the ship were removed and its
structure fully recorded. Divers brought up
17,000 artefacts representing almost every
aspect of Tudor life at sea. The internal
structural timbers of the hull were disman¬
tled and taken ashore. After being raised in
a protective steel cradle, the Mary Rose was
taken to a special dry dock in Portsmouth
dockyard. Today visitors can view the hull,
like a giant cutaway model towering to the
height of a 4-storey building, and watch the
work underway to replace many of the tim¬
bers removed during the years of underwa¬
ter excavation (top right). When this work is
complete long-term conservation can begin.
The hall in which the ship is preserved is
kept at 95 % humidity. The hull is sprayed
with chilled water to prevent degradation
and uncontrolled drying.
Photo © Mary Rose Trust, Portsmouth, UK
The hull ready for lifting with wires attached
to tubular steel lifting frame
The hull in suspension from the lifting frame
being transferred underwater to a support
cradle
The cradle with the hull ready to be lifted into
the air and placed on a barge to be towed
ashore
uw^Ti
MEXICO
The sacred well of Chichén-Itzá
Underwater archaeology began in Mexico
with the exploration of the cenote (sacred
well) of Chichén-Itzá (left), a freshwater
well with a diameter of 68 m and a depth of
22 m to the surface of the water, itself 14 m
deep. The Mayan civilization, a highly de¬
veloped pre-Hispanic culture of Meso-
America, worshipped water deities, and vo¬
tive offerings were thrown into the well in
their honour. The first, unsuccessful,
attempt to explore it was made in 1881 to
1882 by the French antiquarian Désiré
Charnay. In 1904, Edward H. Thompson,
the first United States consul to Yucatán,
organized two seasons of diving work to
dredge the well, recovering archaeological
treasures (jade figures, stone sculptures,
gold and copper discs, remains of human
skeletons), which went to the Peabody
Museum in Harvard University, USA.
Other salvage attempts were carried out at
later dates. The most recent explorations
took place in 1967 to 1968, under the direc¬
tion of Dr. Pina Chan, of the National Insti¬
tute of Anthropology and History, Mexico.
The team employed various methods, such
as lowering the water level almost 4 m and
chemically clarifying the water. The divers
used the most advanced techniques, and all
the artefacts recovered, which will be pre¬
served in museums in various parts of the
country, will be studied and classified by
specialists from the Institute.

Full-scale replica of a Viking ship from
Roskilde Fjord
Photo © Viking Ships Museum, Roskilde
DENMARK
Viking dragon ships
Five Viking sailing ships scuttled over 900
years ago at the entrance to Roskilde Fjord,
near the village of Skuldelev in Denmark,
were discovered in the late 1950s during
underwater excavations organized by the
Danish National Museum. In 1962, a coffer¬
dam was built round the site which was
pumped free of water so that the wrecks
could be excavated as if on land. After
lengthy conservation treatment the ships
were painstakingly reconstructed. The re¬
mains were those of 2 warships of different
size, 2 merchant ships, and a smaller vessel,
perhaps a ferry or a fishing boat. The larger
warship seems to have been at least 30 m
long with provision for 26 pairs of oars. Such
a longship, designed for speed and man¬
oeuvrability, could have carried up to 60
warriors as well as its crew, and would have
been a pillar of Danish maritime power a
thousand years ago. One of the merchant¬
men is almost certainly a knarr, a type of
broad-beamed ocean-going craft which was
described in the Icelandic Sagas and formed
the backbone of Viking trade. The Roskilde
find provided archaeologists with a unique
opportunity in northern waters to study
ships built at the same time but for different
purposes.
A diver examines a Neolithic site (4000 BC)
in Lake Zürich.
Photo © Dr. Ulrich Ruoff, Zürich
SWITZERLAND
Lake-floor archaeology
The archaeological wealth of lakes and
other inland underwater sites is much less
well known than that of sites located in or
near the sea. In Switzerland and its neigh¬
bouring countries important discoveries
have been made from lake settlements built
on piles and dating mainly from the
Neolithic period and the Bronze Age (from
the end of the 5th century to the beginning
of the 1st century BC). In the last 20 years
excavations in Lake Zürich, one of the most
important centres of these lacustrine set¬
tlements, have brought to light Stone Age
and Bronze Age axe helves, ladles, flint
knives, looms, archery bows, wooden
boxes, scraps of netting and textiles, balls of
yarn and other finds providing valuable in¬
formation about prehistoric technology.
Four years ago the ground plan of a late
Bronze Age house was discovered at a spot
where volunteer divers had previously
found a collection of small Bronze Age
vessels. Today this cultural heritage is in
great danger due to construction work on
the shoreline, dredging to accommodate
shipping, and increased wave erosion in the
shore area as protective reeds are removed.
The preserved and reassembled hull of the
2,300-year-old Kyrenia Ship
Photo © M.L. Katzev, Arlington, Vt., USA.
Kyrenia Ship Project
CYPRUS
The Kyrenia wreck
Discovered by a sponge-diver, a 4th-cen-
tury-BC amphora carrier lying in about 30
m of water near the harbour town of Kyre¬
nia, Cyprus, began to be surveyed and exca¬
vated in 1968 by a team led by Michael L.
Katzev of the University of Pennsylvania.
Thus began a programme of conservation
and research which has continued for
almost two decades and culminated in the
building of Kyrenia II, a full-scale, sailable
replica of the ancient Greek merchantman
(see page 23). The Kyrenia Ship, writes
Katzev, "represents the best preserved hull
of the Classical Greek period ever found.
About 60 per cent of her total area and more
than 75 per cent of her representative tim¬
bers survived to be recorded in meticulous
detail. Five years went into raising the hull
piece by piece, preserving it in polyethylene
glycol, then mounting it for exhibition in a
handsome sandstone gallery of the Crusad¬
er Castle at Kyrenia". Its cargo included
some 400 amphoras, as well as crockery,
millstones, iron ingots, and the remains of
nearly 10,000 almonds.
SWEDEN
Raising the Wasa
In 1961, the Swedish warship Wasa was
raised from the bottom of Stockholm har¬
bour, where she had sunk at the start of her
maiden voyage in 1628. This huge vessel,
displacing about 1,300 tons and measuring
70 m from stem to stern, was apparently
unstable and capsized in 35 m of water. She
was remarkably well-preserved: she had not
suffered damage from long service at sea,
she had not run aground, and, lying at the
bottom for three centuries, she had not
been damaged by ice or currents nor attack-
Richly decorated stern of the Wasa. In the
middle, the Swedish national coat-of-arms.
ed by wood-destroying marine organisms.
The wreck, rediscovered in 1956 by an
amateur marine archaeologist and histor¬
ian, Anders Franzen, is an outstanding
testimony to 17th-century naval
architecture and life in Sweden. An unpre¬
cedented rescue operation was mounted
which lasted from 1957 to 1961. The sal¬
vaged ship was housed in a special hall
where the correct temperature and humid¬
ity could be maintained, and sprinklers
were installed to prevent premature drying
out of the wood. Treatment of the water¬
logged timbers was carried out by a system
of pipes and nozzles by which every part of
the ship was sprayed for more than 10 years
with a solution of polyethylene glycol
(PEG). By the late 1970s, more than 6
million people had already visited the
museum to see this major addition to
Sweden's cultural heritage.
