Stress in the modern world
by Lennart Levi
ACCORDING to United Nations
statistics, the world's urban pop¬
ulation has doubled since 1950
and may double again by the end of this
century, by which time three-quarters of
the population of developed countries
and one-third to one half of the popula¬
tion in developing countries will be living
in cities. Current estimates suggest that as
a result of both population growth and
migration, the number of poor people
clustered in slums and shanty-towns is
increasing annually by 10 to 15 per cent.
Conditions in these places are appalling.
The result is tension, depression and vio¬
lence superimposed on physical hardship
and a constant threat of disease.
According to the Athenian statesman
Pericles (495-429 BC), "health is that
state of moral, mental and physical well-
being which enables man to face any crisis
in life with the utmost facility and grace".
This ancient, definition, highlights two
critically important points: firstly that
health concerns man's interaction with
his living conditions, and secondly that he
may lose his capacity to adapt if the life
crisis is severe enough.
Much more recently, this insight has
been echoed in the terms of a Swedish
measure, the Public Health Service Bill
(1984-1985), which declares that "Our
health is determined in large measure by
our living conditions and lifestyle. ..."
The Bill goes on to state that "The health
risks in contemporary society take the
form of, for instance, work, traffic and
living environments that are physically
and socially deficient, unemployment
and the threat of unemployment, abuse
of alcbhol and narcotics, consumption of
tobacco and unsuitable dietary habits, as
well as psychological and social strains
associated with our relationships and
lack of relationships with our fellow
beings."
The Bill strongly advocates what is
called a "holistic approach" to such prob¬
lems and attempts to solve them, mean¬
ing that "people's symptoms and ill¬
nesses, their causes and consequences,
are appraised in both a medical and a
psychological and social perspective".
Bearing this in mind, let us look at some
of these possible "causes" in the human
environment, including some of those in
the world's major cities in developing and
developed countries.
According to recent United Nations
and World Bank statistics, half of the
countries of Africa and southeast Asia,
including four of the five largest, with a
combined population of almost 2,000 mil¬
lion, have an annual median per capita
income of less than $300. This mass pov¬
erty leads to hunger, undernourishment
and malnutrition for vast legions of chil¬
dren in the developing world.
In the worst of cases, children die. In
the "best" of cases, they grow up with
physical and mental disabilities. When
they reach sexual maturity, therefore , it is
even more difficult for them to plan their
families and care for their children, who
then become even more malnourished,
even more disabled, and even less com¬
petent to care for the following genera¬
tion of children. Thus a descending spiral
is created causing morbidity, death and
suffering for hundreds of millions more in
the poor countries of the world.
According to recent UNICEF reports,
in the developing countries 15 million
children die annually before the age of
Poster, right, gives a telephone number of
Switzerland's "Helping Hand" service,
which offers those in despair the solace of
"someone to talk to". The Swiss post
office co-operates by providing the tele¬
phone call free.
Participation in group activities within the
community, above, can be a way of over¬
coming the social isolation which causes
widespread distress in modern cities.
five, most of them because of lack of
potable water, adequate nutrition and
basic hygiene. In many African and some
Latin American countries, plagued by
hunger and shortage of water, this means
almost every other child.
The Food and Agriculture Organiza¬
tion of the United Nations (FAO) and the
World Bank report that at least 430 mil¬
lion human beings are malnourished or
undernourished. In the developing coun¬
tries about 60 per cent of the population
has no access to safe potable water; 75 per
27

cent has no access to basic hygiene
simple latrines, ways to dispose of house¬
hold rubbish, and personal and food
hygiene.
Only 19 per cent of the population of
these countries has access to housing of
acceptable quality. Four out of every five
households live in miserable huts in the
countryside or in shacks made of burlap,
cardboard and sheet metal in the slums of
the large cities. Public health services are
available to less than 15 per cent of the
rural and urban poor.
Such conditions cause acute physical
and psychological and social stress by
creating threats to survival, health and
well-being, to self-esteem, to close
attachment to others, to the sense of
belonging to a valued group. These
threats can in turn provoke potentially
pathogenic reactions leading to further
increases in sickness and mortality
rates.
But causes of psychological and social
stress are also extremely common in
developed countries, in all types of social
and economic systems. In the United
States, for example, 13.7 million children
have unemployed or absent fathers. One
out of three white and three out of five
black children will experience marital dis¬
ruption before reaching the age of six¬
teen. Most of them will grow up in
women-headed families, which are six
times as likely to be below the poverty
level. In 1978, 17 per cent of all children
in the United States under eighteen (11
per cent white, 27 per cent Hispanic, 41
per cent black) lived in poverty, i.e. in
conditions of run-down housing, heavy
traffic, overcrowding, risk of contagion,
accidents, injuries, pollution, violence,
abuse and neglect.
When people are exposed to stress-
inducing conditions of this kind
whether it is a question of lack of control
over their lives, combined with excessive
demands, unsatisfied needs, expectations
that cannot be fulfilled, overstimulation,
or role conflicts most of them experi¬
ence "dysphoric" reactions such as feel-
Above left, an oral health clinic in Thailand. In the developing countries the provision ot
medical treatment, vaccination and safe drinking water is an essential part of a global
approach to environmental health risks which also takes into account other aspects of
the "human ecosystem "such as malnutrition resulting from masspoverty. The Rheuma¬
tic Heart Centre, established at the foot of the Great Pyramids at Giza, above right, came
into being thanks to the initiative of a Cairo voluntary association.
In the developing worldsome 15 mil¬
lion children die annually before the
age of 5, mostly because of lack of
safe drinking water, adequate nutri¬
tion and basic hygiene. Left, Niger
has launcheda community-oriented
nursing programme to improve
child health care. Below, monitoring
the growth ofa toddleratan open-air
clinic in Nicaragua.
28

©
£
*
ings of anxiety, depression, uneasiness,
apathy, alienation and hypochondria.
In Sweden, statistics produced by the
National Board of Health and Welfare
(1978) show that every third four-year-
old has mental problems (with symptoms
such as bed-wetting, aggressivity, noctur¬
nal fears). Every third adult suffers from
malaise, sleep disorders, fatigue, dejec¬
tion or anxiety. Every seventh working
person is mentally exhausted at the end of
the working day. Every other man and
three women out of four will suffer from
pronounced mental decompensation
some time in his or her life up to the age of
sixty. Every tenth man has an alcohol
problem. Two thousand people commit
suicide every year, and 20,000 attempt to
do so (in a population of 8.3 million).
Taken together, these figures mean
that approximately every third or fourth
Swede lives a life in which malaise, anx¬
iety, fatigue or dejection is a common
component. Moreover, the situation did
not improve from 1968 to 1974, in spite of
a considerable increase over this period in
material wealth and social security. This
rather alarming picture assumes a further
dimension when related to the ambitious
goals and very considerable material
means of the Swedish welfare state.
According to studies recently sum¬
marized by the World Health Organiza¬
tion (WHO), there are at least 48 million
drug abusers in the world. But this is only
one example of stress-related pathogenic
behaviour. Others include tobacco
dependence, quoted as the primary cause
of one-third of all cases of cancer, 75 per
cent of chronic bronchitis and 25 per cent
of myocardial infarction in the United
States.
As well as reacting emotionally to the
stresses and strains of modern life and
behaving in potentially disease-provok¬
ing ways, we also react physiologically
with our internal organs. Coping with
stress influences basic physiological reac¬
tions in our central nervous system as well
as our ductless (endocrine) glands. The
biologically active agents of the glands,
Air pollution (above) Is only one of many
pressures in modern industrial society
that impose strain on the organism,
adding to the tensions that have always
been part of human life.
Below, for millions of people living in the
slums and squatter settlements of the
great cities of the developing world, life is
primarily a struggle for survival as they
seek to protect themselves from cold,
heat, hunger, disease and dirt. What they
want is decent housing in an environment
which will harm neither their lives nor their
dignity.
29

the hormones, together with nervous
impulses, influence virtually every cell in
the organism. If prolonged, pronounced,
or recurrent, such reactions can eventu¬
ally lead to physical ill health.
A WHO report (1986) also mentions
the high prevalence of somatic symptoms
resulting from psychological and social
distress, i.e. in cases with no ascertaina¬
ble organ pathology, or with complaints
of discomfort disproportionate to the
physical problem. This accounts for from
30 to 50 per cent of all consultations in
developed countries and for from 15 to 25
per cent of those coming to the attention
of health care personnel in developing
countries the largest single complaint
category in primary care.
Altogether, the resulting conditions
make for extreme and ever greater suffer¬
ing for over one-quarter of mankind. It is
true that people can adapt even to
extreme environmental influences. Yet,
as indicated above, this adaptation takes
its toll in terms of emotional, behavioural
and/or physiological deformation.
Although a cause-effect relationship is
difficult to prove in specific cases, circum¬
stantial evidence supports the existence
of such a relationship.
In developed and developing countries
alike, governmental action against such
problems is often of a troubleshooting
nature; it addresses only one or a few
specific problems. It may include the
provision of medical treatment, vaccina¬
tion, food shipments, or wells of potable
water. Not infrequently, it takes the form
of acute disaster aid in situations where
disasters are usually chronic. In such
cases, intervention is usually admin¬
istered by one of many specialized agen¬
cies, with no or insufficient co-operation
with other specialized agencies. One
health problem say, ill-health caused by
pollution may therefore be attacked,
while another, such as poverty-induced
undernourishment, is neglected, or vice
versa.
This brief, oversimplified account illus¬
trates the existence of many interacting
and pathogenic factors in the human eco¬
system. If one of its components is influ¬
enced, effects will occur in many of the
others. Consequently, it will probably be
impossible to cope successfully with cur¬
rent and future urban and health prob¬
lems by considering in research,
therapy and/or prevention just one or
two of the components of the total eco¬
system. Success will be more likely if as
many as possible of the critical ones can
be taken into account.
LENNART LEVI, of Sweden, is professor of
psychosocial medicine at the Karolinska
Institutet in Stockholm, where he is chairman of
the Department of Stress Research at the World
Health Organization's Psychosocial Centre. He
is also director of the National Swedish Institute
for Psychosocial Factors and Health (IPM) in
Stockholm. His many publications on stress, .
health andpreventive medicine have been trans¬
lated into several languages.'

