Of maize and meat
by Perla Petrich
O
Culinary traditions and cultural identity
in Mexico and Argentina
MlJIMIIilHI.'Nf" \'
©
ALTHOUGH the food that groups
of people choose to eat is un¬
doubtedly dictated by their phy¬
siological needs, their environment and
the technical and economic facilities
available to them, these factors form part
of a wider context the social and histor¬
ical background and the outlook on the
world which are specific to each society.
In other words, exclusively ideological
motives play an important role in the
choice of the staple foodstuffs and food
processing techniques that make it possi¬
ble to create a culinary tradition that is
primarily recognized as a sign of cultural .
identification.
The ideology that each society creates
in relation to food and eating is reflected
in the choice of foodstuffs, the techniques
employed in preparing them, and the
rules laid down for their consumption.
What is the relationship between the
physical need to eat and the ideology
which justifies or determines what is
eaten? In an attempt to answer that ques¬
tion, we shall take two examples from
Latin America: maize (Indian corn) in
Mexico and meat in Argentina.
Even if soybeans or rice were cheaper
to grow or produced higher yields, Mex¬
ican farmers would never dream of grow¬
ing these crops instead of maize, which
accounts for 80 per cent of their diet. For
them maize is a cultural landmark of
fundamental importance as well as a
source of nutrition. According to Maya
mythology, man was created by the gods
from maize dough. Other materials such
as clay and wood had proved useless.
Only people made from maize survived
to venerate the plant from which they had
originated and which provided them with
their daily sustenance.
Every ear of maize, every morsel of
tortilla (maize cake), every sip of atole
the traditional beverage made from
maize flour provide incontrovertible
proof that feeding is not merely a chemi-
.cal and biological process but a form of
direct communication with the deities.
Through that communion, which is re¬
newed every day, people bear witness to
their faith in the gods, whose presence
guarantees that life will go on.
Since the gods chose maize to create
and feed mankind, how could man ever
doubt its perfection, cease to revere it, or
fail to believe in its origins and its divine
reproductive powers? Maize has had di¬
vine status for centuries. Even today,
Mexican Indians are reluctant to sell their
maize because that would be tantamount
to trading in their own flesh. Maize is
grown exclusively for personal con¬
sumption.
Maize is the Mexican farmer's only
criterion of taste, to the exclusion of all
others. No other foodstuff can replace
the tortilla which the women prepare with
maize dough and then brown on the com¬
al, a baked earthenware hotplate. In this
context, quantity is not important; even if
people gorge themselves on meat or fish
they will still feel unsatisfied if they do not
eat tortillas. On the other hand, a few
tortillas accompanied by a pinch of salt or
chili pepper will be sufficient to stave off
hunger.
The tortilla has formed the Mexicans'
taste for food. It is made from maize
which is boiled and then kneaded into a
soft, smooth dough. Compared with such
a food, which calls for little chewing,
meat is unpleasant, regardless of its qual¬
ity. Roast meat is regarded as hard and
dry, and it often happens that when hun¬
ters roast the animals they kill, the
women later boil the roast meat in the
kitchen.
In this indigenous culture there is a
general feeling that maize is the only
nourishing food. All other foods may be
eaten for pleasure but they are not consi¬
dered to have any nutritional value, be¬
cause, it is assumed, they will be quickly
expelled as waste. A man achieves social
recognition when he begins to farm the
land, and a woman when she begins to
cook. Only when they have shown that
they can grow and cook maize can they
start a family. Only then do men become
eligible for positions of responsibility
10

within the community. The influence of
maize thus permeates every aspect of hu¬
man life, since it provides physical suste¬
nance, integrates men and women into
the system of agricultural production,
justifies their existence and reaffirms
their beliefs.
Paradoxically and tragically, this con¬
ception of maize is not confirmed by the
biological facts. Maize cannot cater for
the individual's energy requirements un¬
less it is supplemented by a substantial
protein and calorie intake. With few ex¬
ceptions, the Indian's diet is limited to a
maximum of 45 grams of protein a day
compared with the 70 grams that are con¬
sidered essential, and to 1,300 calories
instead of the 2,600 calories needed by
people engaged in regular physical
labour.
The Pampa, the vast humid plain in
central Argentina, has always provided
the country with its food. It was there that
the Indians hunted game and that Span¬
ish and Creole settlers grew wheat and
then began to rear cattle on a large scale.
From the seventeenth century
onwards, beef formed the staple diet and
roasting was the most common culinary
technique. To the Argentines, roasting
evokes lavishness and plenty, in contrast
to boiling, which is symptomatic of scarci¬
ty and frugality. Boiled meat not only
preserves its juices but increases in
volume. Roast meat, on the other hand,
shrinks as it dries out.
Opposite page, detail from the "Codex Fe-
jervary-Mayer" a 14th-century Meso-
American pictographic manuscript. The
water-goddess can be seen pouring water
on maize with a hand that emerges from
her head. Maize is depicted as a sturdy
young man firmly rooted in the soil.
Lassoing (1820), a watercolour by the
English artist Emeric Essex Vidal (1791-
1861).
The maize harvest as depicted in the
"Codex Florentino", a manuscript contain¬
ing information from indigenous sources
which was used by the Spanish monk and
ethnologist Bernardino de Sahagún (1500-
1590) in his study of Aztec civilization,
Historia general de las cosas de Nueva
España (Genera/ History of the Things of
New Spain).
A comparison of roasting in Argentine
cookery with boiling as practised in Mex¬
ico shows how food preparation patterns
reflect not only different ecosystems but
contrasting forms ofxsocial and cultural
organization. In Mexico, from the six¬
teenth century onwards, the areas on
which farmers were able to grow food
were reduced as a result of colonial set¬
tlement. This land shortage was" com¬
pounded by low crop yields caused by
constant soil erosion. In Argentina, on
the other hand, food production called
for little effort until the mid-nineteenth
century. The gauchos who lived on the
plains considered themselves the
monarchs of all they surveyed. If they felt
hungry, they killed an animal, cut off a
piece of flesh sometimes only the
tongue and left the rest for the dogs or
birds of prey. Today things have
changed; unless they own livestock, peo¬
ple have to buy their meat. Even so, meat
is still reasonably priced and continues to
be the staple of everyday diet.
The hospitable ethos of the Pampa and
its seemingly boundless vistas influenced
ways of cooking. Food was prepared in
the open air meat was spit-roasted in
the courtyard of the home or in the
fields for the entire extended family
and friends who would turn up to eat
without a formal invitation. Another sig¬
nificant feature of this type of cooking is
11

its masculine character. As hunters and
livestock raisers, men not only procured
the food and did the slaughtering and
skinning; they also did the cooking. The
meat was either impaled on a spit, one
end of which was driven into the ground
so as to maintain it at an angle over the
flames, or else placed, with the entrails,
on a grill, to avoid direct contact with the
hot cinders.
It was the usual practice and still is in
rural areas for everybody to take his
knife and cut off the slice he fancied, and
then eat it without any seasoning. The
only drink that went with the roast
meat the asado was mate, an infusion
prepared in a small gourd and drunk
through a metal tube, or bombilla.
Women took no part in the preparation
of the asado and only emerged when the
meat was cooked. Their culinary duties
lay elsewhere in boiling, frying or bak¬
ing the food for the daily meal when the
family circle was confined to the intimacy
of parents and children, and when the
food was both prepared and consumed
inside the home. Women prepared the
puchero, a stew consisting of beef, Span¬
ish-type chorizo sausage, black pudding,
bone marrow, bacon, pumpkin, yams
and potatoes, and the carbonada, a dish
made with charqui, salt meat dried in the
sun.
The Argentine culinary horizon
broadened with the arrival of Italian,
Spanish, Syrian, Lebanese and Jewish
immigrants at the end of the nineteenth
century and the beginning of the twen¬
tieth. However, the choice of food was
not greatly modified ; roast beef remained
the staple diet and all other types of meat
or cereal were secondary. Roasting con¬
tinued to be the favourite cooking
method.
For the Argentines, roast meat sym¬
bolizes the direct assimilation of the ani¬
mals vitality and of nature. People must
eat plenty of meat to conserve their
strength. All other foods are regarded as
secondary, inessential. This approach to
food has led to excessive meat consump¬
tion, to the detriment of dairy products
and other foodstuffs. Argentina's vast
herds of cattle have been used almost
entirely for meat production. Even
today, the consumption of milk and dairy
products is negligible.
Both in Mexico and in Argentina, the
appetite can only be satisfied by the sta¬
ple food, the tortilla in one case, roast
meat in the other. This does not exclude
the consumption of other foodstuffs or
the use of other cooking techniques,
especially in the urban areas where they
were introduced by immigrants in the
early years of the century. Pizza and pas¬
ta, for example, have become part of the
everyday diet, and although roast meat is
still the most highly prized dish, it is no
longer a regular feature. In urban areas,
it has been replaced by steak, which ful¬
fils for those who eat it the conditions
A herd of young cattle on an Argentine ranch
12

described by the French critic and I
essayist Roland Barthes: succulence and
simplicity.
The long-standing preference for beef I
is reflected not only in the high rate of I
beef consumption but also in the rejec¬
tion of other types of meat. The offshore
shelf of Argentina abounds in an extraor¬
dinary variety of fish, but the lean, white
flesh of fish is no substitute for beef, let
alone a complement to it. Fish is only
eaten occasionally and has an exclusively I
symbolic significance ; as a result of Span- I
ish influence, salt cod is eaten on Fridays I
in Lent and during Holy Week.
These occasions apart, fish almost nev- I
er appears on the family table. The I
reasons are clearly neither biological nor I
economic (domestically caught fish is no I
more expensive than beef), nor are they I
imposed by the natural environment.
The same symbolic significance can be I
seen in the "imported" Christmas menu,



which is a carbon copy of that prepared I
by the family forebears in the Iberian I
Peninsula and includes the pinenut cakes , I
almonds and nougat which were designed I
to make good the calorie deficit caused by I
the European winter but are quite unsuit- I
able as well as being indigestible in a I
sultry South American summer, even I
though the family continues to decorate I
its Christmas tree with cotton-wool snow.
In short, roast beef has undoubtedly I
come to be a practical sign of "Argentine- I
ness" and boiled maize of "Mexican- I
ness", in that they are both nourishing I
foodstuffs, the natural environment lends
itself to their production, and the tech- I
niques are readily available for turning
them into food. Fundamentally, I
however, these dishes embody the sym¬
bolic values which the two peoples have
vested in them and which add to the
pleasure of eating them. Referring to I
these intellectual models for interpreting
and giving meaning to reality, the people I
of one region of Latin America look upon |
themselves as "maize people" who have
been created and nourished by the tender
grain which they venerate, while the peo¬
ple of another region see themselves as
consumers of meat whose consistency
evokes the boundless, rich and untamed
land which, like the meat itself, can only
be conquered by biting at it vigorously.
PERLA PETRICH, of Argentina, Is professor-of
Latin American literature at the University of
Paris VIII and a member of the French National
Centre for Scientific Research's Laboratory of
Languages and Civilizations with an Oral Tradi¬
tion (LACITO). She is the author ofseveral works
on food and nutrition, including La semántica del
maíz entre los mochó ("The Semantics of Maize
among the Mochos").

