adventurers
The Burial of the Sardine, painted around
1810 by the Spanish artist Francisco Goya
(1746-1 828). This carnival scene is one of
Goya 's most powerful depictions of Spanish
life.



Scholar
Gypsy
by George Borrow
A tall, strapping Englishman "standing
sixfoot two in his stockings", George
Borrow (1803-1881) was, with his shock
of white hair, a man of distinctive
appearance. An accomplished horseman,
knife-thrower andfriend of the Gypsies
whose language he spoke fluently, he
bore more resemblance to a character in a
novel than to the travelling salesman he
became when the British and Foreign
Bible Society, after sending him on a
mission to Russia, commissioned him to
distribute the Bible in the Iberian
Peninsula. The Bible in Spain (1842), his
account of this evangelical mission, is
sub-titled "The Journeys, Adventures,
and Imprisonments of an Englishman in
an Attempt to Circulate the Scriptures in
the Peninsula". This story ofBorrow's
adventures, by turns amusing, dramatic
and tragic, was an overwhelming success
when it was published and is still as
popular as ever. The incident he describes
here takes place in Madrid.
* Twelve ounces of bread, small pound, as given in the
prison. (Borrow's note.)
The Bible in Spain, Everyman's Library, J.M. Dent &
Sons Ltd., London, 1969.
APROPOS of bull-fighters: Shortly after my arrival, I one day entered a low
tavern in a neighbourhood notorious for robbery and murder, and in
which for the last two hours I had been wandering on a voyage of discov¬
ery. I was fatigued, and required refreshment. I found the place thronged with
people, who had all the appearance of ruffians. I saluted them, upon which they
made way for me to the bar, taking off their sombreros with great ceremony. I
emptied a glass of val de peñas, and was about to pay for it and depart, when a
horrible-looking fellow, dressed in a buff jerkin, leather breeches, and jackboots,
which came halfway up his thighs, and having on his head a white hat, the rims of
which were at least a yard and a half in circumference, pushed through the crowd,
and confronting me, roared
"Otra copita! vamos Inglesito: Otra copita!" ["Another glass! Come on, little
Englishman, another glass!"]
"Thank you, my good sir, you are very kind, you appear to know me, but I have
not the honour of knowing you."
"Not know me!" replied the being. "I am Sevilla, the torero. I know you well;
you are the friend of Baltasarito, the national, who is a friend of mine, and a very
good subject."
Then turning to the company, he said in a sonorous tone, laying a strong
emphasis on the last syllable of every word, according to the custom of the gente
rufianesca [brigands] throughout Spain
"Cavaliers, and strong men, this cavalier is the friend of a friend of mine. Es
mucho hombre. [He's quite a man.] There is none like him in Spain. He speaks the
crabbed Gitano though he is an Inglesito. "
"We do not believe it," replied several grave voices. "It is not possible."
"It is not possible, say you? I tell you it is. Come forward, Balseiro, you who
have been in prison all your life, and are always boasting that you can speak the
crabbed Gitano, though I say you know nothing of itcome forward and speak to
his worship in the crabbed Gitano."
A low, slight, but active figure stepped forward. He was in his shirt sleeves, and
wore a montero cap; his features were handsome, but they were those of a
demon.
He spoke a few words in the broken gipsy slang of the prison, inquiring of me
whether I had ever been in the condemned cell, and whether I knew what a
Gitana* was?
"Vamos Inglesito, " shouted Sevilla, in a voice of thunder; "answer the monro
[fellow] in the crabbed Gitano."
I answered the robber, for such he was, and one, too, whose name will live for
many a year in the ruffian histories of Madrid ; I answered him in a speech of some
length, in the dialect of the Estremenian gipsies.
"I believe it is the crabbed Gitano," muttered Balseiro. "It is either that or
English, for I understand not a word of it."
"Did I not say to you," cried the bull-fighter, "that you knew nothing of the
crabbed Gitano? But this Inglesito does. I understood all he said. Vaya, there is
none like him for the crabbed Gitano. He is a good ginete, [horseman] too; next to
myself, there is none like him, only he rides with stirrup leathers too short.
Inglesito, if you have need of money, I will lend you my purse. All I have is at your
service, and that is not a little; I have just gained four thousand chulés by the
lottery. Courage, Englishman! Another cup. I will pay all. I, Sevilla!"
And he clapped his hand repeatedly on his breast, reiterating, "I, Sevilla! I "
16
