Three great domes BY GIULIO CARLO ARGAN
St. Peter's basilica, Rome, with the colonnade
designed by Bernini flanking the square
St. Paul's cathedral, London The church of St. Louis des Invalides, Paris
IF Roman Baroque is the representation
of a religious and political ideal, French
Baroque is the representation of an
exclusively political ideal, and English
Baroque that of a civic and social ideal. The
diversity of the ideological content of
French, English and Italian Baroque is strik¬
ingly illustrated by a comparison between
the three famous domes of St. Peter's in
Rome, the church of St. Louis des Invalides
in Paris, and St. Paul's cathedral in London.
The first is clearly the archetype. In the
thinking of its architect, Michelangelo, later
followed and given a wide allegorical sweep
by Bernini in his conception of the colon¬
nade flanking St. Peter's Square, the dome
was ta be identified with the body of the
church, to be the image of the head of Chris¬
tianity and of the celestial vault which ideally
covers the whole ecumene (the world). In
Bernini's design, the wings of the colonnade
are like the arms of a figure whose head is the
dome.
Resting on a double drum, Jules Hard-
ouin Mansart's dome in Paris rises in sov¬
ereign isolation above a flat façade divided
by columns into geometrical panels: its mass
and its ornate decoration dominate the
whole building, supported on a perfect
architectural arrangement just as the sov¬
ereign power was supported by the hier¬
archical order of the State of which it was the
summit.
Christopher Wren's dome in London is
related, through the Italian architect Sebas¬
tiano Serlio, to Donato Bramante's original
plan for St. Peter's. It rests on a vast edifice
with which it is so little articulated that it
requires a cylindrical base. It is like a build¬
ing incorporated into another building and
only distinguished from it by the stylized
elegance of the drum and the curvature of the
dome. This dome is more of a symbol than
an image of power; and its function is purely
formal, like that of the sovereign in the
English political structure of the late seven¬
teenth century. Without going so far as to
see a deliberate political allegory, it must be
remembered that the form of a dome tradi¬
tionally symbolizes authority or power and
that such a political intention is surely at the
origin of Michelangelo's dome and inspired
the domes of Mansart and Wren.
GIULIO CARLO ARGAN, Italian art histor¬
ian, is a professor at the University of Rome and
was mayor ofthe aty from 1976 to 1979. He is the
author of many works on art history, urban plan¬
ning and methods of criticism, including the book
from which this article is taken, Immagine e per-
suasione. Saggi sul barocco (1987) and, published
in English, The Renaissance City (Braziller, New
York, 1969).
