study programme
on Alpine meteorology
by Roger Newson
>vj;w.j^r-.»ULH»ii.i'.i.'i.B'M.iJi"'»iw^-.j».i .u.i.i.u« rwumujati.; wm- %
THE unique character of the
weather over and near the
world's mountainous areas is
well known, and the great diversity of
weather events that may occur in this sit¬
uation is nowhere better illustrated than
by the meteorology of the Alpine region.
There is an enormous variety of weather
types in this region, and the rapidity of
change from one type to another can be
breathtaking.
In countries near the Alps some of the
most significant meteorological effects
are associated with the generation of
deep depressions in the Gulf of Genoa
which are known as "Genoa cyclones".
These depressions develop very rapidly
and are often associated with strong
winds, heavy rain, flooding and storm
surges in the Mediterranean basin. The
catastrophic floods in Florence in 1966
were linked with the development of one
of these "Genoa cyclones", as are the
periodic tidal surges which from time to
time affect Venice. The characteristic
local winds in the Alpine region, such as
the Foehn and the Mistral, which occa
sionally blow with destructive force, are
also well known phenomena.
In principle, the fact that extensive
mountain ranges have major effects on
the weather should cause no real sur¬
prise, since a mountain barrier will
obviously deflect the atmospheric cir¬
culation both vertically and horizontally.
The Alps straddle the path of the prevail¬
ing westerly winds and weather systems
coming from the Atlantic, thus causing
significant interruption to the natural air
flow and leading to a variety of sometimes
dramatic local effects. The sudden
development of a Gulf of Genoa cyclone
as an Atlantic weather system comes up
against the Alps is vividly illustrated in
the sequence of satellite pictures above.
The important role that mountains
play in determining weather and climate
over considerable areas of the globe was
recognized from the outset of a major
international meteorological research
investigation, the Global Atmospheric
Research Programme (GARP), whose
overall objective was to study the dynam¬
ics of atmospheric phenomena in order to
extend the range of useful weather fore¬
casts.
The success of this fifteen-year
programme, jointly organized by the
World Meteorological Organization
(WMO) and the International Council of
Scientific Unions (ICSU) in response to
resolutions adopted at the 16th and 17th
sessions of the General Assembly of the
United Nations, has led to dramatic pro¬
gress in meteorology as a whole. In par¬
ticular, GARP included a major field
investigation, the 1982 Alpine Experi¬
ment (ALPEX), the aim of which was
specifically to understand the way in
which air flows over or around moun¬
tains, the development of cyclones such
as those in the Gulf of Genoa, and local
mountain winds.
One of the main characteristics of
mountain weather is the small scale,
meteorologically speaking, of the fea¬
tures involved and their sudden genera¬
tion and disappearance. Accordingly,
ALPEX was designed to gather suffi¬
ciently detailed information in space and
time over the Alpine region. The mete-
34

A sequence ofsatellitepictures taken on 4,
5 and 6 March 1982 shows the develop¬
ment of a cyclone over the Gulf of Genoa.
Left, the clouds ofan Atlantic weather sys¬
tem approach the Alps; centre, a cyclone
develops between Genoa and Corsica;
right, the mature depression covers much
of the Mediterranean.
orological services and scientific commu¬
nities of twenty nations took part in the
Programme, and several years of inten¬
sive efforts and detailed planning culmi¬
nated in the implementation of a Special
ALPEX Observing Period from 1 March
to 30 April 1982.
For this, the existing network of
observing stations was supplemented by
thirty-four additional stations which
provided many extra measurements of
pressure and wind at all levels of the
atmosphere. An array of sixty microbaro-
graphs, capable of tracing with great pre¬
cision the slightest fluctuations in pres¬
sure, was set up along the St. Gotthard
and Brenner sections of the Alps. Seven¬
teen aircraft operating from Geneva
undertook numerous sorties on pre
defined tracks, collecting many observa¬
tions on wind speed and direction. In the
Mediterranean itself, information was
gathered from eleven research vessels
and many buoys, field platforms and tide-
gauges. All this was supplemented by
images and atmospheric sounding data
from meteorological satellites. This
extensive range of observations has been
assembled to form a unique quality-con¬
trolled internationally available data set.
Never before have observations of com¬
parable quality and density been pro¬
duced over a mountain region.
Since 1982, the ALPEX data set has
been fully exploited as both a foundation
and an inspiration for research and, as a
result, considerable advances have been
made in knowledge of the effect of moun
tains on the atmospheric circulation. One
of the main achievements has been a
greatly increased understanding of how
mountains should be treated in the
numerical models of the atmosphere now
used routinely for forecasting the move¬
ment of weather systems and the genera¬
tion of new features such as depressions
and anticyclones. It was found that at
least a fraction of the error in forecasts
could be attributed to an insufficient
representation of the blocking effect of
mountains on the air flow. Improvements
have now been introduced into numerical
models in this regard with consequent sig¬
nificant benefits for operational weather
forecasting.
ALPEX data have also permitted a
detailed analysis in three dimensions of
the structure of lee cyclones such as the
Genoa cyclones and identification of
mechanisms contributing to their inten¬
sification. It has also proved possible,
using particularly refined versions of
numerical models, to reproduce the
behaviour of these features more^
faithfully. Again, an improvement in the
35

The weather station at Gornergrat, near
Zermatt in the Swiss Alps. Mountains play
an important role in determining weather
and climate over large areas of the earth.
skill of predicting the occurrence and
intensity of lee cyclones, which can have
such severe effects, has important
implications for operational weather
forecasting.
Using the ALPEX data set, it has also
been possible to examine in detail the
behaviour of the atmosphere flow as it
approaches a mountain range, revealing
a sharp division between the low level
flow going predominantly around and the
upper level flow moving over the moun¬
tain. The reproduction of this splitting
pattern in weather prediction models is a
key test of their performance in capturing
the perturbing effect of mountains. The
phenomenon of flow splitting is also a
factor in the deformation of weather sys¬
tems as they cross the Alps and much has
also been learned on this subject as a
result of ALPEX.
Finally, using particularly the data
gathered in the aircraft missions, it has
been possible to carry out studies of the
structure of the strong local wind systems
which occur near mountains, and views
on the nature of the driving mechanisms
for these winds are now converging.
In the light of the results obtained, it
can already be said that ALPEX was a
highly successful project. The co-opera¬
tion of the participating countries and the
authorities involved was outstanding,
especially that of the many aviation
bodies. Indeed, there is considerable fol¬
low-up action in some of the Alpine coun¬
tries Switzerland, Austria, the Federal
Republic of Germany and Italy have
formed an organization called "ALPEX
Regional" which is continuing the
co-operation established in ALPEX and
undertaking further examination of par¬
ticular mountain weather manifestations.
The impact of the scientific results on
atmospheric physics has already been sig¬
nificant and will grow in the next few
years. An important side effect has been
the stimulation of research and the gener¬
ation of many new ideas.
ROGER NEWSON, of the United Kingdom, is
senior scientific officer of the World Climate
Research Programme, which is a joint pro¬
gramme of the World Meteorological Organiza¬
tion and the International Council of Scientific
Unions, based in Geneva, Switzerland.
