I was born at Mauzé in the département of Les Deux Sèvres. My parents were
poor and I had the misfortune to lose them when I was still a child. The only
education I received was that given in the free village school. As soon as I
could read and write I was put to learn a trade, but I soon got tired of this because
of the travellers' tales which I devoured during all my spare moments. My young
brain was especially excited by reading the story of Robinson Crusoe. I longed to
have adventures like his and I already felt an ambition growing within me to
achieve fame by making some important discovery.
I was lent geography books and maps. My interest was excited above all by the
map of Africa where I saw only desert countries or those marked unknown.
Finally this taste became a passion to which I sacrificed everything else. I ceased to
take part in the games and amusements of my comrades and locked myself up on
Sundays to read travellers' tales and all the travel books I could procure. I told my
uncle, who was my guardian, of my wish to travel. He disapproved, painting a
vivid picture of the dangers I would encounter at sea and the homesickness I
would feel far away from my country and family. In short, he made every effort to
dissuade me from my project. But I was not to be put off. I continued to insist on
going and he abandoned his opposition.
I had only sixty francs and with this small sum I proceeded to Rochefort in 1816.
I embarked on the Loire, a store-ship that was about to sail for Senegal. ...
The town of Timbuktu is inhabited by blacks of the Kissur nation who form its
main population. There are also many Moors, who engage in trade. They remind
me of those Europeans who go to the colonies in the hope of making a fortune.
These Moors later return to their own country to live in peace. They have much
influence over the natives. Nevertheless the king or governor is a black man. His
name is Osman. He is greatly respected by his subjects and is very simple in his
habits. Nothing distinguishes him from the others. ...
This prince received us in the middle of his courtyard. He was seated on a
beautiful mat with a rich cushion. We remained seated for a moment at a short
distance from his person. My host told him that I had come to pay my respects. He
told him of my adventures. I could not follow their conversation for they spoke in
the Kissur language. Then the king addressed me in Arabic and asked me some
questions about the Christians and how they had treated me. We withdrew after a
brief visit. I should like to have seen the interior of the house, but was not to have
this satisfaction. This prince seemed to be an affable person. He might have been
fifty-five years old. His hair was white and curly, he was of average height with a
handsome face, very black-skinned, with an aquiline nose, thin lips, a grey beard
and large eyes. His clothes, like those of the Moors, were made of European
material. He wore a red bonnet with a large piece of muslin around it in the form
of a turban, and shoes of morocco leather which resembled our bedroom slippers
and were made locally. He made frequent visits to the mosque.
As I have said, there are many Moors established in Timbuktu. Theirs are the
finest houses in the town. They grow rich very quickly from trading. They are sent
consignments of goods from Adrar and Tafilet, and also from Taouat, Ardamas,


Into the heart
of Africa
by René Caillié
I
Although the French writer René Caillié
(1799-1838) was long viewed as a kind of
colonialist before his time, a very different
figure emerges from the journal, rich in
all kinds of observation, of his journey
(1824-1828) to the renowned Malian city
of Timbuktu. Humble and determined,
Caillié died as a result of the sickness and
privations he endured on his journey,
sacrificing himself to his dream of
reaching the mysterious city on the banks
of the Niger. A remarkable human
document, Caillié's journal is also a
unique portrait of still-sovereign Arab and
African societies and of cross-cultural
exchanges across the Sahara from the
Maghreb to Black Africa before the
arrival of European colonialism.
35

fancy free
£ I
CO
O
o
I
Plate from the first edition of René Caillié 's
boo/cVoyage àTemboctou et à Jenné (1830).
The caption reads, "Mr. Caillié meditating on
the Qur'an and taking notes".
Journal d'un voyage à Temboctou et à Jenné, dans l'Afri¬
que Centrale ... pendant les années 1824, 1825, 1826,
1827, 1828. Editions La Découverte, Paris, 1979.
Tripoli, Tunis and Algiers. They receive large quantities of tobacco and mis¬
cellaneous products from Europe, which they forward in boats to the town of
Jenné and elsewhere. Timbuktu can be regarded as the principal entrepot in this
part of Africa. All the salt from the Tudeyni mines is stored there. This salt is
transported by camel caravans. The Moors of Morocco and other countries who
travel to the Sudan stop in Timbuktu for six to eight months to engage in trade and
await a new load for their camels.
The slabs of salt are tied together with rope of inferior quality made from a kind
of grass which grows in the neighbourhood of Tandaye. This grass is already dry
when it is gathered. Before it is used it is soaked, then buried to protect it from the
sun and the east wind which would dry it too quickly. As soon as it is well
impregnated with moisture it is disinterred and twisted into rope by hand. The
Moors use it for various purposes. Sometimes the camels throw off their loads and
when the slabs of salt arrive in the town they are partly broken. This would make
them less saleworthy if the merchants did not take the precaution of having them
repaired by their slaves, who restore the broken pieces and pack them again with
stronger rope made from oxhide. The slaves draw patterns in black on the slabs in
the form of grooves, lozenges, etc. They like this work because it enables them to
collect a small supply of salt for their own use. As a rule men of this class are less
unhappy in Timbuktu than elsewhere. They are well clad, well fed and rarely
beaten. They are obliged to attend religious services, and this they do very
scrupulously. But they are nonetheless regarded as merchandise and are exported
to Tripoli, Morocco and other places on the coast where they are less happy than
in Timbuktu. They are always sorry to leave this town although they have no idea
of the fate in store for them.
When I was leaving, I saw several slaves take leave of each other in a most
touching manner, although they were not acquainted. The similarity of their
unhappy situations leads to feelings of sympathy and mutual interest amongst
them and they exchange recommendations of good conduct. But the Moors
responsible for taking them away often speed up the departure and tear them
away from these gentle effusions which might lead to pity for their fate.

