
The challenge
of AIDS
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
(AIDS) and all the diseases associated with
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infec¬
tion have in the space of a few years become a
matter of great concern to the international
community. The disease has taken on pan¬
demic proportions, creating a worldwide
emergency of which public health officials,
doctors, politicians and the public at large
must be made aware.
AIDS was recognized for the first time in
1981. Since then the number of cases has
increased considerably. By the end of June
1987 over 52,600 AIDS cases had been
reported to the World Health Organization
(WHO) by 1 1 8 countries. However, according
to WHO estimates, the number of cases is
higher than 100,000, and worldwide between
5 and 1 0 million persons may now be carriers
of the HIV virus.
"AIDS robs societies mainly of 20 to 49
year-olds, men and women in their most pro¬
ductive years. This has potential for economic
and political destabilization in the severely
affected parts of the developing world,"
according to Dr. Jonathan Mann, Director of
the WHO Special Programme on AIDS. "To
the loss of human potential must be added the
extraordinary financial burden of an incurable
disease. A problem of this magnitude
demands a global response, in which WHO
has a constitutional responsibility to direct and
co-ordinate the struggle against AIDS."
National AIDS Committees have already
been established in more than 100 countries.
Between January and May 1987, WHO sup¬
ported 40 countries, including 25 African
countries, in the development of prevention
and control programmes. By the end of the
year, the WHO Special Programme on AIDS
will be supporting 40 sub-Saharan and a fur¬
ther 30 countries in Asia and the Americas.
International collaboration organized by
WHO includes the establishment of banks for
viruses and sera, studies of the epidemiology
of the disease and the different criteria logis¬
tic, technical, economic, social and ethical
which screening programmes must satisfy. A
world summit of health ministers will be held
under WHO auspices in London in January
1 988, as a follow-up to two regional ministerial
meetings in Australia (July) and in the Amer¬
icas (September). Finally, given that
"AIDS thrives not only in the body, but on
human ignorance, fear and resistance to
change", WHO launched a global public infor
mation campaign on 27 May 1 987, with the
message: "AIDS. A worldwide effort will stop
it." This theme and the symbol that illustrates
it (two red hearts that converge in a blue fright
mask) were chosen, said Dr. Mann, to "simul¬
taneously communicate the severity of the
AIDS threat and that a global strategy can
control it". This strategy "is to stop the spread
of AIDS worldwide by striking every way the
virus spreads, in every country, using every
scientific and educational tool available".
Unesco has always actively encouraged
"preventive education" and in this field has
developed programmes designed to elimi¬
nate prejudice and intolerance, to prevent or
contain environmental deterioration, to pre¬
vent unplanned fertility, and to combat drug
abuse. A number of these activities have been
carried out in close co-operation with other
United Nations agencies. Unesco is thus well
placed to support WHO'S strategy for AIDS
prevention and control and to mobilize educa¬
tional authorities and teaching personnel.
In December 1986, Unesco was invited by
the International Conference on Education to
prepare "as a matter of urgency and in
co-ordination with other competent bodies in
the United Nations system, a draft emergency
programme of education and information in
schools for AIDS prevention". Accordingly, a
meeting of experts was held at Unesco Head¬
quarters in Paris from 29 June to 1 July 1 987,
in order to work out the details of a joint
Unesco/WHO plan of action, which will be
submitted to Unesco's General Conference in
October 1987.
