The great transalpine routes
by Bruno Parisi
THE Alps carry more traffic than
any other mountain system in the
world. The total length of roads
and railways is 405,000 kilometres. Over
this network between 1978 and 1982
passed an annual average of 87 million
tonnes of goods, 78 million passengers,
and 6.8 million light and heavy motor
vehicles. Most of the main routes are the
same as those which have been used for
the last 3,000 years, since the time when
the technological revolutions in the use of
bronze and iron took place in the Alpine
region.
Archaeological findings show that
about four centuries after the foundation
of Rome in 752 B.C., there were at least
forty settlements in the Alps, each of
which had a relatively large, stable popu¬
lation predominantly engaged in extrac¬
ting and working copper and iron. Judg¬
ing from investigation of their ancient
burial grounds, there were such settle¬
ments at Hallstatt (near to what is now
Salzburg, in Austria) and La Tène (Lake
Neuchâtel, in Switzerland), two major
sites which have given their names to Iron
Age cultures.
As early as the second century B.C.,
the Roman historian Polybius knew that
there were four passes over the Alps
one through Liguria, two through the
The "Julian columns", top, stand at the
highestpoint of the Julier Pass (2,284 m) in
the Swiss Alps. Of Celtic or Roman origin,
they are shown here in an engraving from
a guide to routes across the Alps written
by the Swiss naturalist Johann Jakob
Scheuchzer (1672-1733). Above, the
modern road across the St. Gotthard Pass
in Switzerland (2, 1 12 m).
kingdom of the Taurini and the Salassi,
and another through Resia. The route
that Augustus made into a highway
doubtless led to the first of these. Near to
this highway, in A.D. 13, he erected a
monument in Turbia, near Nicala (now
Nice) to mark the subjection of forty-five
Alpine tribes. This road continued west¬
ward to the port of Massilia (Marseille),
which the Phoenicians had made a centre
of the tin trade. The second pass was
probably the Col de Montgenèvre; the
third may have been either the Little
Saint Bernard or the Great Saint Ber¬
nard, and the fourth was probably the
Brenner Pass.
The Mont Cenis Pass, by which Hann¬
ibal crossed the Alps in 218 B.C. with
20,000 infantry, 6,000 cavalry and 27 ele¬
phants and, after him, his brother
Hadsrubal was used by the Romans in
their wars against the Gauls and to pro
tect Marseille. It is the only pass of which
we have a detailed description by later
classical writers such as Strabo (first cen¬
tury A.D.) and Ammianus Marcellinus
(fourth century).
There were no surfaced roads over the
Alps before Roman times, only paths by
which the mountains could be crossed on
foot, by donkey or on horseback.
Nothing was done to make these old
tracks into roads for wheeled traffic until
12 B.C., when the emperor Augustus
built the Via Julia Augusta, a coast road
with extensions into several transalpine
countries. A few years later the great
highway from Verona to Pons Drusi
(Bolzano) was begun; it went as far as the
Resia and Brenner Passes, and it was
known as the Via Claudia Augusta
because it was completed by the emperor
Claudius.
The Roman legions and settlers were
thus able to make their way across all the
main Alpine passes by excellent roads,
along which large, stable settlements
appeared.
In the early Middle Ages, after the fall
of the Roman Empire and the collapse of
the old pagan civilization, the ethnic sub¬
divisions that we know today were com¬
ing into being in the enclosed feudal
world of the Alpine region. But along the
11

old Roman roads, which made contacts
between people easier, Christianity was
gaining ground as a result of the work of
evangelists. Evidence of the spread of
Christianity can be seen in the chain of
monasteries in the Alps, from the early
eighth-century abbey of Disentís (in what
is now the Swiss canton of Graubünden),
to the monasteries of Pfäfer, San Can-
dido, Scharnitz (near Partenkirchen),
and Kremsmünster (founded as the base
point for the conversion of the Slavs), and
the monasteries on the Great Saint Ber¬
nard, the Simplón and Mont Cenis.
In the Middle Ages the Via Claudia
Augusta of Antiquity was still the main
route across the central Alps. There was
Early 18th century engraving of the Devil's
Bridge across the Schöllenen gorges in
the upper valley of the Reuss river, which
rises in the Aare-Gotthardmassif (Switzer¬
land). The gorges were impassable until
the Devil's Bridge was constructed in the
13th century, giving access to the St. Got¬
thard Pass and opening up one of the great
transalpine routes.
no real improvement until the demo¬
graphic and socio-economic revival early
in the second millennium A.D.: in 1237,
the Schöllenen Pass from the Devil's
Bridge to the Saint Gotthard the
so-called "people's road" was opened.
The opening at that time of good roads
capable of carrying wheeled traffic was
due mainly to the efforts of the great mer¬
chants who wished to trade in the urban
fairs. Thus the road over the Simplón,
which was not used for a century after
1450, was reopened through the efforts of
Kaspar von Stockalper (1609-1691), a
typical figure of the pre-capitalist mer¬
chant era, who became known as the
"king of the Simplón". Then the Fischer
family of Berne set up a regular postal
service over the Simplón; similar services
were set up along other roads the
Splügen, the Saint Bernard and the Saint
Gotthard. Goods were still conveyed by
long trains of pack animals.
The modern network of roads across
the Alps only began to take shape in the
first half of the nineteenth century, when
many carriage roads were built. As early
as 1801-1805, Napoleon gave orders for
the construction of a new highway across
the Great Saint Bernard; as much as 8.4
metres wide in places, and 63 kilometres
long, it had 611 bridges and seven tun¬
nels. The modern highway over the Mal-
oggia Pass dates from 1839.
The situation began to change more
rapidly with the coming of steam, which
in turn was stimulated by strategic consid¬
erations that led to the construction of the
first railway line in the Alps, the Semmer-
ing line (Austria) in 1854. A few years
later the Brenner line (1867) and the Fré-
jus line between Piedmont and France
(1871) were built. After the invention of
nitroglycerine and of the pneumatic drill
a number of railway tunnels were built (a
total of 250 kilometres): the Saint Got¬
thard (1882), the Arlberg (1884), the
Simplón (1906) and the Caravanche and
Wocheim tunnels on the Salzburg-Trieste
line. Besides these great international
tunnels, national railway lines were built,
mainly to attract tourists. Notable among
them was a line opened in 1898, which ran
through a tunnel under the Kleine
Scheidegg and rose to a height of 3,457
metres above Interlaken in the Jungfrau
massif.
Since then the importance of roads has
grown steadily, with the development of
motor traffic, the introduction of asphalt¬
ing, protection against avalanches and
the ventilation of tunnels. In this decade,
the volume of traffic across the Alps
amounts to 20 per cent of the number of
passengers and 15 per cent of the goods
transported in the EEC countries.
In recent years the Mont Blanc (1965)
and Saint Gotthard tunnels, together
with the Great Saint Bernard, San Ber¬
nardino and Fréjus (1985) tunnels and
the Tarvisio motorway (1966) have been
the principal factors in the extension of
the road network in the Alps.
Modern transport technology has also
played an important role in the installa¬
tion of pipelines, which in 1979 conveyed
43 million tonnes of hydrocarbons from
Liguria, the Padua region, Trieste and
the Swiss canton of Valais, to Ingolstadt
(Bavaria) and Vienna (via Linz), and in
the development of high-tension electri¬
cal lines.
BRUNO PARISI, of Italy, is associate professor
at the Facoltà di Magisterio (teacher training
faculty) ofMilan and Brescia, director of the Insti¬
tute of Geography at the Catholic University of
the Sacred Heart, Milan, and president of the
Central Scientific Committee of the Italian Alpine
Club. Among his published works are "Funicular
Railway Transport in the Service ol Tourism in
the Alps" and "Geographical Bibliography of the
Alps".

The Pass of St. Gotthard (c. 1803-4), oil on canvas by the English painter
Joseph Mallord William Turner (1775-1851). The work reveals the
artist's amazing skill at painting mountain peaks glimpsed through
swirling mist and anticipates the atmospheric effects that he was to
obtain in later paintings.
13
