of myth
The first men
on the Moon
&
a
o
Cl
[C by Neil A. Armstrong and
Edwin E. Aldrin
An old dream came true on 21 July 1969,
when the two American astronauts, Neil
A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin,
became the first men to set foot on the
Moon. At right, some of their remarks on
that historic occasion. A cosmic symbol
from time immemorial and the source of
countless myths, legends and cults, the
Earth's nearest neighbour in space at last
, showed its true face. From Antiquity to
modern times, the Moon has inspired
many feats of imaginative writing. In the
17th century, the French author Cyrano
de Bergerac wrote a novel of imaginary
travel in which a small sailing boatflew to
the Moon powered by evaporating dew,
and in the 19th century, the heroes of
Jules Verne's From the Earth to the
Moon orbited the Moon in a comfortably
furnished ballistic shell. In the 1950s, the
characters drawn by the Belgian
cartoonist Hergé (Georges Rémi, 1907-
1983) made an eventful trip to the Moon
which has already fascinated two
generations of readers, many of whom
find it hard not to think ofHergé's
fictional hero Tintín as the first human
being to walk on the Moon ...
Armstrong: Okay, Houston,* I'm on the porch.
Houston: Roger, Neil.
Aldrin: Halt where you are a minute, Neil.
Armstrong: Okay.
Aldrin: Everything's nice and straight in here.
Armstrong: Okay, can you pull the door open a little more?
Aldrin: Right.
Houston: We're getting a picture on the TV.
Aldrin: You've got a good picture, huh?
Houston: There's a great deal of contrast in it and currently it's upside down on
monitor. But we can make out a fair amount of detail.
Armstrong: Okay, will you verify the position, the opening I ought to have on the
camera.
Houston: The what? We can see you coming down the ladder now.
Armstrong: I'm at the foot of the ladder. The LM* * footpads are only depressed in
the surface about one or two inches, although the surface appears to be very, very
fine-grained as you get close to it. It's almost like a powder. It's very fine. I'm
going to step off the LM now.
That's one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind.
The surface is fine and powdery. I can pick it up loosely with my toe. It does
adhere in fine layers like powdered charcoal to the sole and the sides of my boots.
I only go in a small fraction of an inch , maybe an eighth of an inch , but I can see the
footprints of my boots and the treads in the fine sandy particles. ...
Actually no trouble to walk around.
It's quite dark here in the shadow and a little hard for me to see if I have good
footing. I'll work my way over into the sunlight here without looking directly into
the sun. Looking up at the LM, I'm standing directly in the shadow now looking
up at ... in the windows and I can see everything quite clearly. The light is
sufficiently brightly backlighted into the front of the LM that everything is clearly
visible.
I'll step out and take some of my first pictures here.
Aldrin: Are you going to get the contingency sample? Okay. That's good.
Armstrong: The contingency sample is down and it's up. Like it's a little difficult to
dig through the crust. It's very interesting. It's a very soft surface but here and
there where I plug with the contingency sample collector I run into very hard
surface but it appears to be very cohesive material of the same sort. I'll try to get a
rock in here.
Houston: Oh, that looks beautiful from here, Neil.
Armstrong: It has a stark beauty all its own . It's like much of the high desert of the
United States. It's different but it's very pretty out here. Be advised that a lot of
the rock samples out here, the hard rock samples have what appears to be vesicles
in the surface.
Aldrin: Ready for me to come out?
Armstrong: Yeah. Just stand by a second, I'll move this over the handrail.
Aldrin: Okay?
Armstrong: All right, that's got it. Are you ready?
Aldrin: All set. ...
How far are my feet from the ...
Armstrong: You're right at the edge of the porch.
Aldrin: Small little foot movement. Porch. Arching of the back ... without any
trouble at all. Now I want to back up and partially close the hatch making sure
not to lock it on my way out.
Armstrong: Good thought ...
Aldrin: That's our home for the next couple of hours; we want to take care of it.
I'm on the top step. It's a very simple matter to hop down from one step to the
next.
Armstrong: Yes, I found that to be very comfortable, and walking is also very
comfortable, Houston. You've got three more steps and then a long one.
Aldrin: I'm going to leave that one foot up there and both hands down to about the
fourth rung up.
Armstrong: A little more. About another inch. There you got it. That's a good
step.
Aldrin: About a three footer. Beautiful view.
Armstrong: Ain't that somethin'?
Edwin E. Aldrin, the second manto
walk on the Moon, descends from
Apollo 1 1 's lunar module, which rests
on the dusty surface of the Sea of
Tranquillity.
* City in Texas, USA, and location of the Lyndon B.
Johnson Space Center, from which NASA (the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration) manages the
manned flights of the United States astronaut
programme.
* * LM = Lunar Module, the vehicle used to carry two
of the three astronauts from the Apollo 1 1 spacecraft to
the surface of the Moon and then back to the space¬
craft.
10
