by Brigitte Bachmann-Geiser
Horn of plenty
A Swiss legend describes how the
alphorn was invented when a
young dairy farmer was invited to
choose a gift from among those offered by
three weird strangers. A red ogre offered
him strength and prosperity for his cattle; a
green huntsman tempted him with guile,
gold and the loveliest of maidens; but the
youth chose to accept a gift from the third
stranger, a pallid individual who offered the
ability to yodel and play the alphorn.
Although the wooden trumpet has
undoubtedly long been used by Alpine
herdsmen, it is not recorded historically
until the sixteenth century. The Zürich nat¬
uralist Conrad Gessner, seeing an alphorn
for the first time in 1555 on Mount Pilatus
near Lucerne, described it as being "made
Barely 2 metres long, the alphorn of the
early 19th century was held in an almost
horizontal position by the instrumentalist,
unlike its much longer modern counter¬
part which is played with its bell resting on
the ground. Engraving (above) by the
Swiss artist Franz Hegi (1 774- 1850), aftera
painting by Gabriel Lory, adorned the
cover of a book entitled Sammlung von
Schweizer-Kühreihen und alten Volkslie¬
dern ("Collection of ranz des vaches and
old Swiss folksongs"), Berne, 1818.
of two slightly curved, hollowed-out pieces
of wood thickly covered with willow."
This simple design has changed little.
Until about twenty years ago, however, the
practice was to choose a fir tree growing.on
a slope and therefore curving up from the
roots, strip off the bark, split the tree in two
lengthwise and hollow it out with chisel and
gouge. Alphorn makers now prefer to stick
together pieces of high-quality wood and
then carve them into the outer shape of the
instrument, but the work of hollowing out
the two halves has scarcely changed it still
takes more than seventy hours. The two
halves are finally stuck together and cov¬
ered with split cane. Formerly, protection
from the weather was provided by whatever
material lay to hand cord, wire, birch or
cherrywood bark, strips of nutwood or
pieces of linen soaked in pitch.
Alphorns made in the nineteenth century
have a recessed blow-hole, but today a
mouthpiece specially cut out of boxwood
enables players to transmit their lip vibra¬
tions to the air captured in the conical tube.
With no finger holes, flaps or valves, this
instrument cannot produce all the notes of
the tone-scale. Consequently, the only
notes that can be produced on the alphorn
are natural sounds, including the well-
29

©
known "alphorn F" (see page 32), a note
that sounds rather false. This limited range
of notes over long intervals explains why all
Swiss alphorn tunes have a family
resemblance, whether they are traditional
or recently composed.
Since the key of an alphorn is no longer
determined by the length and thickness of a
fir tree, and standardized instruments are
Below, a postcard sent by Johannes
Brahms to Clara Schumann on 12 Septem¬
ber 1868. On it the German composer
noted a Swiss alphorn melody with the
message: "From the mountain heights,
from the valley depths, I send you a thou¬
sand friendly thoughts." Brahms later
incorporated this melody into the fourth
movement of his Symphony No. 1 in C
Minor.
now manufactured in a variety of pitches,
the one-time calling and signalling instru¬
ment of the mountain herdsman can now be
played by amateur musicians in duets, trios,
quartets and, of late, in alphorn choirs. This
instrument, formerly used only in folk
music, was introduced into "serious" music
in 1971 with Jean Daetwyler's Concerto for
Alpine Horn and Orchestra. Thanks to a
number of professional hornplayers and to
compositions by Etienne Isoz, André
Besançon and Jost Meier, the alphorn is no
longer a rarity in concert halls, or even in
churches as an accompaniment to the
organ.
The extension in the use of this herds¬
man's instrument to contemporary and
"serious" music has brought the alphorn
Herdsmen in central Switzerland today
often take a smaller version of the alphorn
called a Biichel with them to the summer
pastures. They use this trumpet-like in¬
strument, above, to play their traditional
calls.
Since 1971, when the Swiss composer
Jean Daetwyler wrote a Concerto for
Alpine Horn and Orchestra, the alphorn
has made frequent appearances in the
concert hall. Below, Joseph Molna is the
alphorn soloist in a performance of Daet¬
wyler's work given at Nymphenburg Cas¬
tle, Munich (Fed. Rep. of Germany) by the
East Switzerland Chamber Orchestra,
conducted by U.P. Schneider.
©
O
Él
( .'
t
30

back into fashion in Switzerland, and the
thirty or so craftsmen who still make the
instrument set lengthy delivery dates!
This was not always the case. The
organizers of the first Alpine festival, held
near Interlaken in 1805, expected a big
turnout for their horn players' competition,
but their hopes were in vain. Only two can¬
didates appeared, and they shared the prize
of two black sheep. Travellers' accounts
from the early nineteenth century reported
that the Swiss national instrument was
dying out. Thus the Berne painter Franz
Nikiaus König wrote in 1814 that "the
alphorn is scarcely heard or seen anymore"
and suggested to the authorities of his can¬
ton that they organize the manufacture of
the instrument and instruction in its play¬
ing. The Sankt Gallen composer Ferdinand
Fürchtegott Huber (1791-1863), who was
interested in the music of the mountain peo¬
ple and had recorded the songs and yodels
of the herdsmen in the Bernese Oberland,
was sent to Grindelwald in the summer of
1826. He gathered young singers from the
region into an inn and had them each sing in
turn. The six most promising were enrolled
in a two-month course, which was repeated
the following summer.
The well-known form of alphorn with an
upcurved bell, the trumpet-like, serpentine
Biichel of central Switzerland and the
straight metal tuba of the Graubünden
highlands were still being played by herds¬
men in the 1940s as traditional working
instruments. As recently as 1972, an aged
Valaisan from La Sage (Val d'Hérens)
recounted how people waited every sum¬
mer evening for the sound of the alphorn. A
melodic air meant that up in the Alps all was
well, while single, repeated notes were a
signal for the men in the valley to go to the
aid of the herdsman on the mountain.
On 12 September 1868, Johannes
Brahms noted a horn melody on a postcard
he sent to Clara Schumann. Was it a tune
from the Rigi or the Stockhorn? We do not
know. We do know, however, that the great
composer immortalized this melody from
Swiss folk music in the fourth movement of
his first symphony, which he completed in
1876.
BRIGITTE BACHMANN-GEISER is a specialist
in Swiss folk music instruments, about which she
has written a number of works including Die
Volksmusik-instrumente der Schweiz (1981).
With the suppod of the Swiss Federal authori¬
ties, the canton of Berne and the municipality of
Burgdorf, she is currently setting up a museum
and institute of folk music and instruments at
Burgdorf.

