'Let the days come in'
Magic and medicine
of the Maya
by Jesús F. García Ruiz
THE Maya languages of Mexico and
Guatemala have no specific term to
designate the state of illness. A person
may be in one of two states: s-kaw-al-i:l (kaw
meaning sturdy, strong, whole) or kam-i (kam
meaning inert, dead, not firm). This contrast
between living and dead is the basis of
another series of connotations: a living person
is "someone who has days within him", that is,
there is time ahead to live. A sick person is
"someone who has no days", that is, his or her
days are numbered. The same image
appears in the word for "cure" the Mocho
Indians of Mexico use the expression oksa
c'a'ik, literally "to cause the days to come in".
Moreover, the term used for the concept of
being ill is kamela:! (\.o die): sickness is likened
to death. The same term is used both for the
"disease that is present in the world" the
harm that can produce disease and for the
sick person.
Diseases are divided into two broad cate¬
gories, corresponding to the two natural
components of the Mocho conception of
personality:
1 . Kamela:! smani:l (disease of the body)
This is the kind of disease that affects only
externals, which "lightly touches" the person
but does not "take hold" or "get in". The
Mocho believe that such illnesses as head
colds, muscular pains, cuts and minor skin
eruptions are caused by the fact of "not taking
care of yourself". They are usually local ail¬
ments that clear up quickly. This last point is
important, for a disease of the "body"which
is not serious may become a disease of the
cahci:lwhich is serious if it persists or
becomes chronic.
2. Kamela:! cahciil (disease of the vital
force)
In the Mocho language, cahci.i means the
dim, uncertain light common in foggy weather,
at dusk or at dawn. In reference to a human
being, it describes the vital force that is con¬
tained in the blood and which, during the night,
leaves the body of a sleeping person to
wander in the world of the dead with the other
cahci.i who are still alive.
Diseases affecting the cahc'r.1 are always
regarded as serious; they destroy a person's
physical, psychic and social wholeness.
These are pathological states in which the
disease "gets in" and 'lakes hold", man
ifested in two kinds of symptoms: physical
(tachycardia, diarrhoea, pallor, anorexia) and
psychosomatic (inability to speak, depres¬
sion, nervous troubles, amnesia).
This second category includes diseases
with strong cultural connotations with their
own special pathology, for example:
Siwel (fright), is the syndrome following a
sudden encounter which makes a person
"jump" and produces a state of fear and agita¬
tion. Such a state may be caused by an animal
(a dog or a snake), a natural phenomenon
(lightning, thunder) or an accident (falling into
a river). The person falls ill because fright
allows part of the cahci.i to escape and "lose
itself", and so he or she gets weaker every
day. Recourse must then be had to the
qamam ("defender"), in order that he may
"put out an appeal" for the cahcr.Ho return and
make the sick person whole again.
Ka:h'i'q (air), which to the Maya is an
separate element charged with positive and
negative forces. The air contains sorcerers'
spells and words which express people's bad
feelings and jealousies. If air that is charged
with negative forces enters the body, it may
cause illness.
Illnesses due to "fright" or the "air" may be
the fault of the gods or of man. Specialist
healers have to decide on the aetiology of the
disease and establish a diagnosis. Diseases
which affect the body alone do not require the
attention of a healer; they can be treated by an
old woman or a poso.m (someone who has a
knowledge of herbs). Diseases of the cahci.i,
on the other hand, are entrusted to a healer,
who acts in various ways:
Among the Mocho divination plays a part in
medical diagnosis. Above, a healer examines
the disposition of seeds to help him diagnose an
illness.
First, as an ico:m (diviner), to determine
the causes of a disease and make a diag¬
nosis, by divination, or by studying the miches
(seeds). He also analyses patients' dreams
and their relationships with other people.
Second, asapo:mo:m (someone able to
offer prayers and incense), he makes offer¬
ings to the gods and helps patients to get rid of
guilt feelings and to regain confidence in
themselves. He understands the use of tradi¬
tional herbal remedies, and if necessary uses
some modern medicines.
Finally, as a qamam (defender), he looks
after his patients and, with a combination of
ritual and traditional phytotherapy, gives them
constant support. In this way he is responsible
for patients' health and for defending them
from a sorcerer's spells or from the "jealousy"
of an "enemy".
JESUS F. GARCIA RUIZ, of Guatemala, is a
doctor of ethnology who is currently a research
officer with the French National Centre of Scien¬
tific Research (CNRS). He is the author of many
books and articles published in international
reviews.
