Unesco ecology projects in the Alps
by Jörg Schaller
When men
and mountains meet
THE aim of Unesco's Man and the
Biosphere (MAB) Project 6 in
the Alpine region is to reveal the
impact of interrelationships between eco¬
nomic activities, land use and ecology
and to identify and describe those pro¬
cesses which jeopardize the long-term,
sustained protection of the mountain
region as a living space, an area of econo¬
mic activity and a recreation zone.
The research fields and major problem
areas were defined by MAB experts in
1973 as human settlements at high alti¬
tudes, land use in the mountains, the
impact of large-scale technical installa¬
tions in mountain areas, and the effect of
tourism and recreational activities on
mountain ecosystems.
Out of a total of 160 MAB 6 projects
throughout the world, 85 concern
research into the ecosystems of high
mountain areas and 10 of these apply to
the European Alps (see map). These
investigations result from the successful
integration of scientific disciplines into
regionally co-ordinated research projects
largely designed to meet practical re¬
quirements.
Thanks to close geographical proxi¬
mity, many publications on the subject
and personal contacts between MAB
researchers in the Alpine region, an
^t^pKP^y^rv
A*M*
exchange of experiences has been possi¬
ble which has led to a substantial im¬
provement in research methodology and
the transferability of methods.
Case studies on the impact of different
activities on natural resources have been
carried out in all MAB projects in the
Alpine area. They relate essentially to the
land-use impacts of agriculture, forestry,
tourism and housing development, which
are often in conflict with efforts to protect
natural resources. Typical problem areas
studied are mountain pastures, the effect
of erosion on fertilization and cultivation
at high altitudes, the protection and res¬
toration of mountain forests, the disap¬
pearance of wild game populations, dying
forests and the resultant problems such as
landslides, reafforestation, the negative
effect of traffic, damage to vegetation,
the massive impact of summer and winter
tourism (walking and skiing), as well as
the aesthetic impact of changes in
methods of cultivation or the intro¬
duction of infrastructural equipment for
tourism.
In many conservation areas there is the
additional question of protecting endan¬
gered plant and animal species or symbio¬
ses, as well as of monitoring ecosystems in
Alpine regions that have hitherto been
largely undisturbed. For example,
through research at the MAB test sites of
Grindelwald (Switzerland), Berchtesga¬
den (Fed. Rep. of Germany) and Haute
Tarentaise (France), the possible impact
on the ecosystem and regional economy
of holding the Winter Olympics was
examined.
The results of MAB research in the
European Alps point to three fields of
practical application which are exceptio¬
nally important for the future develop¬
ment of the sustained management of the
natural system on which human life in the
Alps is based.
Practical tools for dealing with com¬
plex ecological problems have been deve¬
loped and can be applied to other moun¬
tain regions.
Thanks to the case studies, bases for
decision-making have been created
which will enable politicians to introduce
the long-term demands of the sustained
management of resources into everyday
policy.
Valuable stimuli and ideas for long-
term research into ecosystems and the
permanent observation of Alpine ecosys¬
tems can be drawn from the results of the
MAB Research Project because, thanks
to its integrated approach, limited
research resources can be concentrated
on priority areas and on acute problems.
Grindelwald in the Bernese Oberland, near
Interlaken, is a leading Swiss mountain¬
eering, summer and winter sports resort.
The impact of tourism and recreational
activities on natural resources is one of
the major questions being studiedby MAB
research projects In the Alps.
JÖRG SCHALLER, of the Federal Republic of
Germany, is an agricultural engineer speciali¬
zing in landscape ecology and landscape plan¬
ning. Since 1984 he has been director ofa lands¬
cape planning bureau and manager of the
Environmental Systems Research Institute
(ESRI) in Kranzberg, near Munich. He is director
of research into the ecosystem of the Ber¬
chtesgaden Alpine and National Park, Bavar¬
ia, one of the test sites in Unesco's Man and
the Biosphere (MAB) Project 6: Impact of
Human Activities on Mountain Ecosystems.
10
