The ones
that get
away
FOR many years, the protein intake
of some Papua-New Guiñean
villagers was thought to be so low
as to be incompatible with adequate pro¬
tein equilibrium. Moreover, as an appa¬
rent paradox, these people were usually
well-built and muscular. The amount of
physical work they performed and their
levels of fitness were also high: indeed
their results in fitness tests put them well
above well-fed European populations.
A satisfactory explanation was difficult
to formulate until relatively recently,
when it became clear that protein de¬
ficiency was much less common through¬
out the world than had been supposed
and that the requirement of the human
body for protein is relatively modest. The
low protein intake of these New Gui-
neans was therefore unusual but not phy¬
siologically harmful.
However, if people are allowed access
to even a relatively restricted choice of
foodstuffs, they almost invariably seem
to make a choice which provides an in¬
take of protein which is equivalent to
between 10 to 14 per cent of the total
energy content of their diet, whatever the
particular foods that comprise that diet.
The New Guiñean population whom
we studied was therefore a very unusual
group since, although its members lived
on the coast and had easy access to the sea
and to fishing, they had an extraordi-
Two Melanesian cooking utensils from the
Sepik River valley In north-east New
Guinea: below, anthropomorphic earthen¬
ware bowl; below right, ladle made from a
coconut shell.
by John Durnin
The eating habits of these Papua-New
Guiñean villagers are a biological puzzle.
Although they have plenty of opportuni¬
ties to fish and hunt, they persist in follow¬
ing a very low-protein diet. Their physical
condition is superior to that of some "well-
fed" peoples.
narily low protein intake. They lived in a
large village of about 1 ,200 people, on the
edge of moderately open jungle. The
mainstay of their diet, grown in gardens
cleared from the secondary forest, was
taro (a root vegetable) and bananas, both
of which were grown in several varieties.
They also ate some nuts and fruit, and
consumed occasional small amounts of
animal protein from flying foxes (which
they shot with bows and arrows) and
opossum. Taro, bananas and nuts contri¬
buted about 75 per cent of the total ener¬
gy intake, and animal protein accounted
for less than 20 per cent of the total
protein in the diet.
The extraordinary feature of the vil¬
lagers' diet was that although they lived
near the coast, possessed canoes which
they used frequently for leisure activities
when they went to the beach, and had no
apparent taboos against eating fish, they
caught and ate an astonishingly small
quantity of fish. The amount of sea-food
in their diet was negligible although fish
was relatively plentiful in the sea, was the
object of leisure-time hunting, and in¬
deed was eaten when it was caught.
A coastal community
that turns its back on fish
5 The behaviour pattern of these New
»j Guiñean coastal people is at variance
© with the accepted norm. It would appear
that although their protein intake was
low, it was adequate in biological terms
and they had no "intrinsic", fun¬
damental, biological urge to supplement
it by increasing their protein intake from
animal sources.
This particular study, on a group of
people living in very simple circumstan¬
ces, seems to have revealed a biological
conundrum, in that the presence of
reasonably plentiful animal protein in a
situation where other sources of protein
were of inferior type and limited quan¬
tity, did not seem to have provided any
stimulus to increase the total intake of
protein to a "usual" level.
An adequate amount of protein in the
diet is regarded as important for renew¬
ing body tissues, for the constant manu¬
facture of enzymes and hormones, and
for replacing body losses in general.
From a psycho-social point of view it is
widely assumed that people prefer to eat
a diet containing around 10 to 14 per cent
of total energy in the form of protein. The
basis of many theories of what constitutes
a desirable diet depends upon this idea. If
it is not universally valid as would seem
to be the case from our studies in New
Guinea the implications are quite wide-
ranging.
JOHN DURNIN, British nutritionist, is professor
of physiology at the University of Glasgow. He
has carried out research on energy requirements
in a number of countries and has published over
a hundred scientific articles and texts on topics
such as energy metabolism.
17
