The changing home
Tradition and modernism in domestic architecture
FOR decades the traditional Japanese
house has exercised a fascination on
many architects, and today it gets
plentiful coverage in interior decoration mag¬
azines and art publications.
By Western standards it is not a comfort¬
able place to live in. It is cold in winter and the
people who live in it sit on the bare floor on
mats (tßtami). For the investor it lacks the
reassuring durability of stone. Nevertheless,
because of its design, method of construction
and aesthetic philosophy, it is a rare example
of a complete, complex system.
Because of the wood of which it is built and
the subtle series of transitions between it and
the outer worldthe gardenit stands in
close relation to nature. Because of its
thatched roof, cob walls, and the fact that it is
built on piles, it can stand temperatures of
about 40° accompanied by over 80 per cent
humidity in summer, and its flexible construc¬
tion enables it to absorb earthquake tremors.
With its sliding partitions it can be adapted to
any occasiontwo rooms can be converted
into one by drawing back four paper doors or
fusuma. It is the spatial expression of a form
of social and family organization in which
hierarchical relations between individuals are
strictly governed.
But all this is becoming a thing of the past.
After evolving gradually over many centuries,
the traditional Japanese house is now
scarcely more than a memory in the big cities
like Tokyo and their dormitory suburbs. Pro¬
found and rapid changes in construction
methods and the consequent appearance of
new types of individual and collective dwell¬
ing have revolutionized traditional living hab¬
its since the Second World War.
There are many reasons for this change. It
by Marc Bourdier
Heavy modern furnishings and fittings seem
an encumbrance in the traditional Japanese
house with its characteristic simplicity and
flexible use ofspace. The practice ofallotting a
specific function to each room and separating
rooms with concrete walls instead of mobile
screens makes the amount of living space seem
smaller.
24

is not due only to Western influence, although
the latter is responsible for the appearance of
the bed in 42 per cent of Japanese homes,
where it coexists with the traditional bedding
(futon) which is put away in a cupboard (oshi-
ire) every morning after exposure to the sun.
A bed takes up. a lot of space in a small
apartment (the average area of a Tokyo flat is
58 m2).
Chairs, which were not found in Japanese
homes before the war, have also come from
the West. Nowadays table and chairs of
Western type can often be seen in one room
and the traditional low table and cushions in
another. This duality can be explained by the
relatively low ceilings of mass-produced
dwellings as well as by force of habit. The
volume of a room is perceived differently
depending on whether one is seated on the
floor or on a chair. Likewise, more people can
be accommodated on cushions around a low
table than on chairs around a Western-style
table.
Nevertheless, most of the changes in Ja¬
panese living habits are of local origin.
Whereas in the past people would sleep, eat
or study in the same room, in modern dwell¬
ings each room is assigned a single purpose.
This is due to the concern for better hygiene
which grew up in pre-war Japan and led to
the idea that people should sleep and eat in
different rooms.
The inventors of this idea expected that
there would be a big increase in the surface
area of mass-produced dwellings after the
war. But they were wrong. Partly because of
the concentration of the population in big
cities, the average surface area of rented
apartments is now 43 m2. All the rooms are
small and each has only one function. If they
communicated with each other as in the past,
their smallness would be tolerable. But the
use of reinforced concrete in the construction
of apartment blocks has brought an increase
in the number of walls in the living area,
instead of the mobile partitions found in the
traditional wooden type of dwelling. More¬
over, the new building code which came into
force in the 1 950s requires that small wooden
houses be capable of resisting earthquake
tremors and not merely absorbing them as
before. Here again one of the technical solu¬
tions has been to increase the number of
solid walls.
Nowadays Western visitors to a Japanese
home will probably find their eyes drawn to
certain typical features and habits which
seem to have survived, such as taking off
one's shoes in the hall and walking on tatami
mats in certain rooms, or the traditional cor¬
ner alcove (tokonoma). which now accommo¬
dates the television set instead of the floral
arrangement (ikebana) as in the past. Such
"exotic" features hide the fact that these
concrete dwellings, which are heated in win¬
ter and air-conditioned in summer, are a
source of previously unknown inconve¬
niences and. as recent surveys have shown,
are a source of stress to people of rural
origin who have been accustomed to a diffe¬
rent way of life.
Japanese housing and life style may not
have become completely Westernized, but
they have undergone a considerable trans¬
formation.
The traditional Japanese house (above) is a
fragile dwelling which blends into its natural
surroundings. Its occupants can experience the
rhythm of the changing seasons and feel the
sense of "impermanence" which is fundamen¬
tal to Buddhism. Translucent sliding outer
panels diffuse light and open directly on to a
garden which is a composition designed to he
seen, like a picture, front inside the house.
MARC BOURDIER, French architect, is a mem¬
ber of a team ol specialists engaged on a Fran¬
co-Japanese co-operative research programme
on the quality of the urban environment in To¬
kyo. He is the author of several published works,
including "Housing Production and Living Con¬
ditions, the First Subsidized Housing in Japan.
1924- 1942 "and "The Problem of Urban Housing
in Japan ". 25
