Breaking down the barriers
for visually handicapped children
by Maria Adelaide Moreira de
Moráis Alves
Catia Susana when aged 8
THE social and educational integration of
visually handicapped children and young
people in schools forming part of the ordi¬
nary education system is today the policy of the
Special Teaching Division of the Portuguese
Ministry of Education and Culture, which is
responsible for the education of the disabled.
Since the beginning of the 1970s, the Division
has followed the lead taken by other countries,
notably the United States.
As a result, blind and amblyopic1 children who
were formerly educated in private institutions or
boarding schools (where State intervention was
minimal), cut off from society and separated from
their families, now have an opportunity to attend
ordinary schools.
The first step in this direction was the creation
of salas de apoio, or support classes, in primary
and secondary schools in the main cities of Por¬
tugal. In these cities were the boarding establish¬
ments where the blind and amblyopic pupils
completed four years' primary education before
entering the secondary schools where support
classes had been created. They continued to live
either in the boarding schools or at home. The
support classes were staffed by specialized
teachers who provided pupils and subject teach¬
ers with teaching materials and advice on
changes in the curricula necessary to cater for
the type and degree of disability suffered by each
pupil.
1. Amblyopia: dimness of vision without apparent
change in the eye structures. Editor.
However, this system soon proved to be inad¬
equate. The support classes were few, and the
numbers of visually handicapped pupils in them
constantly increased until they came to form
"colonies" within the schools. The visually hand¬
icapped young people stuck together and sel¬
dom mixed with the other pupils during recrea¬
tion periods or in their free time. There was no
real social integration.
Moreover, in order to attend these secondary
schools, pupils from other cities and from rural
areas had to be separated from their families and
friends. When these pupils returned home after
completing their studies, they were treated as
outsiders. They felt uprooted; they had no
friends; they had lost touch with their community
and had great difficulty in fitting back into it. Many
of them, especially those from rural areas,
refused to return. They could not face the pros¬
pect of going back to the humble homes where
they had been born and living among those
whose culture and habits were now quite dif¬
ferent from their own.
One pupil from a village once said something
which shocked me and impelled me to do all I
could to change the system. "You bring us here,"
he said, "to turn us into birds with clipped
wings."
It was urgent to solve the problems stemming
from the young peoples' isolation from their fam¬
ilies and from society. This could only be done by
creating the conditions for "full-scale integra¬
tion", so that visually handicapped pupils could
go on living with their families in their home
environment and attend local schools like other
children and teenagers, use the same public
transport facilities, play the same games, and
experience the same pleasures and the same
problemsin short, be a part of the community.
After the necessary legislation had been pre¬
pared, it soon became clear that legislation in
itself was not enough. A much more difficult
problem had arisen. It would be necessary to
change the attitudes of teachers who, through
feelings of uncertainty or mistrust, through preju¬
dice or because they were unwilling to put them¬
selves out, refused to accept visually handicap¬
ped pupils or, when they did, left them on the
sidelines.
This was the mid-1 970s, and the struggle was
a hard one. Today, with few exceptions to the
general rule, the integration of the visually hand¬
icapped in Portugal can be said to have become
a reality.
Today pupils are integrated into ordinary
schools as early as possible, and are provided
with support from specialized teachers. Each
pupil can be given back-up teaching two or three
times a week, depending on the gravity of the
handicap and the level of instruction. The teach¬
ers periodically advise the parents about their,
children's education and other activities that may
contribute to their balanced development. They
also alert parents about the need for regular
medical attention.
We cannot claim that everything is perfect:
indeed, we are only too aware of our limitations,
including a shortage of specialized teachers, the
30

lack of facilities to produce teaching materials,
and lack of funds to purchase better equipment.
However, we believe that it was necessary to
choose the lesser evil, and the sheer pleasure of
seeing our children and young people grow up
within their families, be accepted by their fellow
pupils, display the same abilities and the same
limitations, and become fully-fledged members
of the community, strengthens our conviction
that we are on the right track.
Boarding schools and special schools have
not disappeared. They will continue to exist,
especially for the more severe cases of multiple
disablement calling for more constant attention
and the use of a wider range of techniques.
These establishments are working with the sup¬
port teachers in the integrated education system
on developing training methods and organizing
vacation courses.
The following remarks illustrate how the
approaches described above have affected the
lives of two visually handicapped Portuguese
children who are integrated into schools in the
ordinary education system.
Catia Susana was born with severe malforma¬
tions in both eyes involving the degeneration of
the iris and the cornea. At the present time, she
can just about perceive the light. She lives with
her parents and elder brother in Santarem, a
town some 90 kilometres from Lisbon. At three
years of age, she attended nursery school just
like any other child and at six went on to the
primary school in the area where she lives. She
is now in her third year and was nine years old in
June. It is clear that she is fully integrated into the
school from the way she talks about it and her
friends:
"The teacher is good and amusing and
teaches well. She is kind, but since I'm a chatter¬
box she is always telling me to be quiet. She has
separated me from the others, but she has put
me next to a boy called Rodrigo, and we are
always talking to each other. I read to him what I
have written and we talk about all sorts of things.
"I learned typing in my second year, so as to
be able to write without seeing. I already know
how to type, but I can also write in Braille.
"I go to school with my mother, but I some¬
times go on my own, with my stick. I know the
area well and when I go down the street, I guide
myself by the curve of the houses. In the after¬
noon, when I come out of school, I go home with
my girlfriends and we play with dolls, or else I
read my stories to them until my mother comes.
At other times, I go to a local shop where there Is
a little dog I like very much, and I also go to visit
my old nurse. I don't go out at rush-hours, but If I
am a bit late, I ask somebody to help me cross
the street."
Catla's parents have learnt to accept her dis¬
ability and lavish affection on her, without show¬
ing either overprotectiveness or rejection.
Catia's intellectual development is superior to
the norm for her age, perhaps because she has
always received encouragement. Her mother
says, "When she was very young, I tried to teach
her by reading her all the stories I could lay my
hands on and by giving her detailed descriptions
of illustrations in the books." This may explain
Catia's enthusiasm for reading and writing.
She says: "My favourite subject is Portuguese
language and then grammar. ... I write whenever
I can, both at school and at home, in prose or in
verse, depending on my mood." Her mother
says: "Reading is her world," to which Catia
adds: "Books make my mouth water because
there are so many marvellous stories to read."
Catia spends her free time with her parents
and with other friends of her age, goes to the
beach or on walks, or stays at home reading,
writing or playing with her dolls. She also goes
swimming and has already had music lessons.
She began by being very enthusiastic because
she was very fond of music, but she ended up by
losing interest in the lessons because "the
teacher was too demanding". Catia is a very
determined child: she is a perfectionist and
hence she loses interest in anything that she
cannot succeed at right from the start. What
more could be expected of a nine-year-old
child?
I asked her to think of a message for children
all over the world. She pondered for a moment
and then wrote the following words: "THE SUN.
When the sun shines brightly, it makes the blond
hair of some children shine too, like the coins
they need to live. The sun is a playful figure who
gives life to all children and all hearts and brings
them together, whether they are red, white, black
or yellow. In every country, if the sun shines, then
hearts, hands and arms join together to turn the
world's children Into flowers that will form great
clusters of love and friendship."
Renato Jorge is totally blind. His premature
birth and very low birth weight account for the
many health problems he had in his early years.
He lives near Lisbon with his parents and grand¬
parents. He is now twelve years old and is in his
sixth year at the Vasco da Gama de Melecas
college. He is a happy, high-spirited child who
expresses himself easily and precisely.
"Before I came to the college, I was at three
other schools. The first of these was rightly called
the 'Inicio' (the 'Beginning'). I only stayed there a
month because I still felt very ill and it was hard
for me to be away from my parents. I had prob¬
lems fitting in. Then I spent a year with my grand¬
mother, but my parents dropped in to see me
whenever they could. When I was four, I went to
the A-da-Beja school for two years. From then
onwards I remember things better.
"When I was six, I went to the Antonio Feli¬
ciano de Castilho Institute in Lisbon, which was a
school for children and young people with eye¬
sight problems. The teachers and my school-
friends were very good to me and really helped
Renato Jorge, aged 12
31

me to 'grow' because I was very frail and back¬
ward. At the Institute, I had two women teachers
who were not only kind to me but were very good
at teaching, and aroused my interest in lessons. I
spent a lot of time playing with my friends and
those who could still see and those who were
blind used to play tricks on one another.
"My mother took me to school every morning
and collected me every afternoon. There were
fewer people at the Institute than at the college
where I am now. It was a family affair, whereas
my present school is very large. That is the only
difference between them, since both of them are
equally good. I feel happy in the college where I
am now. I like everything about it. The curriculum
is well organized and I like the way the teachers
treat me.
"I responded at once to the very first lessons
because the teachers, who had never had a blind
person in their classes before, taught me just like
the pupils who had their sight. I have never felt
that they make the slightest distinction between
me and the others. When they write^n the black¬
board, they dictate out loud what they are writing
and sol have no problem in taking notes. I enjoy
all subjects, although I have more difficulties with
visual education. However, the teacher makes
adjustments when there are things in the curricu¬
lum that I cannot cope with. My favourite subjects
are history and natural science. I have always
been fond of history because I like to understand
why we have reached our present situation,
good or bad.
"My schoolfriends are very nice. Whenever
somebody has a birthday, he invites the others.
A great idea! In my free time, I do judo, take
music lessons and go on bicycle rides. I have
also done some horse-riding. I had to drop It
because I did not have enough time, but plan to
take it up again. At weekends or during the long
vacation, I go out with my parents and friends. I
have many friends- of my own age with whom I
can play, but I also very much like talking to older
people because I am always trying to improve
my Portuguese and acquire more knowledge.
They can teach me the things they have learnt
from their own experience.
"At home, I help my mother to dust the house
and my father to mend the fence or the cart if
necessary."
Renato made this long statement almost with¬
out a break, displaying admirable self-assurance
and equanimity. Whenever he referred to his
parents or to other members of his family, he did
so with great affection and with a smile on his
lips. My final question was whether he too would
like to send a message to other young people.
He replied without hesitation as follows:
"I should like to say to the readers of this article
that if they are disabled, or if they have children
who are disabled, they should take life as it
comes, as I do. If they do that, they may succeed
in overcoming their problems more easily. That
is my family's motto and we have had plenty of
problems to contend with."
That is the message of courage and hope
which visually handicapped Portuguese young
people wish to address to the world. By their
example, these young people teach us to face
life with optimism and to fight for our ideals.
MARIA ADELAIDE MOREIRA DE MORÁIS
ALVES is a Portuguese educator who is re¬
sponsible within her country's Ministry of Educa¬
tion for the basic education of visually handicap¬
ped young people. She has organized many
seminars and training courses to help teachers
overcome the problems of integrating disabled
children into the ordinary education system and
regularly takes part in national and International
meetings and workshops devoted to the educa¬
tion of handicapped children.
irait oí snov

