Festivities in the
Friendly Islands
by James Cook
The great English navigator and explorer,
Captain James Cook (1728-1779), wrote a
classic account of his voyages in the
Pacific. Cook made a great contribution
to geography by dispelling the myth that
an Antarctic continent reachedfrom the
South Pole as far as temperate latitudes,
and by bequeathing to posterity a
remarkable collection of extremely
accurate maps. To his investigations of
the lives and customs of the peoples he
encountered he brought such a high
degree of rigour and objectivity that he is
regarded as one of the first
ethnographers. During his third voyage,
in 1777, he visited the Friendly Islands
(Tonga.) where he hadfirst landed three
years before.
FEENOU* had expressed a desire to see the marines go through the military
exercise. As I was desirous to gratify his curiosity, I ordered them all
ashore, from both ships, in the morning. After they had performed various
evolutions, and fired several volleys, with which the numerous body of spectators
seemed well pleased, the chief entertained us, in his turn, with an exhibition,
which, as was acknowledged by us all, was performed with a dexterity and
exactness far surpassing the specimen we had given of our military manoeuvres. It
was a kind of a dance, so entirely different from anything I had ever seen, that I
fear I can give no description that will convey any tolerable idea of it to my
readers. It was performed by men; and one hundred and five persons bore their
parts in it. Each of them had in his hand an instrument neatly made, shaped
somewhat like a paddle, of two feet and a half in length, with a small handle and a
thin blade, so that they were very light. With these instruments they made many
and various flourishes, each of which was accompanied with a different move¬
ment. At first the performers ranged themselves in three lines, and, by various
evolutions, each man changed his station in such a manner that those who had
been in the rear came into the front. Nor did they remain long in the same
position. At one time they extended themselves into one line, they then formed
into a semicircle, and lastly into two square columns. While this last movement
was executing, one of them advanced and performed an antic dance before me,
with which the whole ended.
The musical instruments consisted of two drums, or rather two hollow logs of
wood, from which some varied notes were produced by beating on them with two
sticks. It did not, however, appear to me that the dancers were much assisted by
these sounds, but by a chorus of vocal music, in which all the performers joined at
12

the same time. Their song was not destitute of pleasing melody, and all their
corresponding motions were executed with so much skill, that the numerous body
of dancers seemed to act as if they were one great machine. It was the opinion of
every one of us that such a performance would have met with universal applause
on an European theatre; and it so far exceeded any attempt we had made to
entertain them, that they seemed to picque themselves upon the superiority they
had over us. As to our musical instruments, they held none of them in the least
esteem, except the drum, and even that they did not think equal to their own.
In order to give them a more favourable opinion of English amusements, and to
leave their minds fully impressed with the deepest sense of our superior attain¬
ments, I directed some fireworks to be got ready; and, after it was dark, played
them off in the presence of Feenou, the other chiefs, and a vast concourse of their
people. Our water and sky-rockets, in particular, pleased and astonished them
beyond all conception; and the scale was now turned in our favour.
Feenou, the chief, was considered to be ruler of the
entire archipelago.
Captain Cook's Voyages of Discovery, Everyman's
Library, J.M. Dent & Sons Ltd., London, 1948.
Captain Cook watches men of the
Friendly Islands (today Tonga) perform
a nocturnal dance, during his third
voyage (1776-1780).
The discoverers
