Beneficial beans?
THE bean, certain kinds of which are
among the most nourishing vegetables
eaten by man, has also since very
ancient times produced a luxuriant crop of
beliefs, cultural practices, rituals and taboos.
A bean taboo imposed on those rendering
sacrifice is mentioned in the oldest Indian
ritualistic text, the Yajurveda. In ancient
Greece, the use of beans is mentioned at
banquets and festivals, and a bean-god,
Cyamites, was worshipped. In the Roman
world beans played a role in magic rites, and
the priest of Jupiter was forbidden to touch a
bean or mention its name.
These and many other examples of the
cultural and religious importance of beans
have been recorded by the American anthro¬
pologist A.C. Andrews, who has written that
"the ancients felt towards beans a mingled
respect and dread, a complex of emotions
generally applied to an object believed to be
charged with some supernatural force, con¬
tact with which might be either beneficial or
harmful".
The Greek philosopher Pythagoras (c.580-
500 BC) forbade his followers to eat beans
"on the ground that beans were occupied by
the souls of the dead and thereby took on the
qualities of human flesh". Through this pre¬
sence, according to the Pythagorean theory,
beans became dynamic receptacles of gen¬
erative power.
Two American specialists, Solomon H. Katz
and Joan Schall of the University of Pennsyl¬
vania, have made a study of the consumption
patterns of fava beans in the Mediterranean
region and have suggested that the "rich
growth of cultural beliefs and taboos sur¬
rounding the fava bean may be a product, in
part, of the fact that many individuals who
consume the beans become very sick". This
sickness, known as favism, is "an acute
haemolytic anaemia resulting in fever, jaun¬
dice and possibly death". Those who are sus
ceptible to favism are those who suffer from a
hereditary metabolic defect in a red blood cell
enzyme, known as glucose-6-phosphate de¬
hydrogenase deficiency (G6PD-). A particu¬
larly severe variant of this condition (GdB-)
has been found to occur at frequencies of 10
to 30 per cent in certain populations in the
Mediterranean region.
"Why", ask Katz and Schall, "are fava
beans consumed in areas with high G6PD-
frequencies since so many people would face
a serious health risk? If the consumption of
fava beans is so disadvantageous, they
should be used less and/or be replaced by
other nutritionally equivalent legumes ... In¬
stead, fava cultivation and consumption have
been widespread in the Mediterranean region
since Neolithic times, suggesting that fava
consumption confers some adaptive advan¬
tage through its nutritional qualities, [and/or]
possible psycho-pharmacological effects ..."
In fact, it seems that the distribution of fava
bean cultivation and consumption corres¬
ponds closely with that of the enzyme de¬
ficiency described above and with the inci¬
dence of malaria in the Mediterranean region.
Since fava beans contain a number of sub¬
stances which are similar to those used in
antimalarial drugs, could it not be possible that
their consumption may confer some protec¬
tion against malaria?
For Katz and Schall, "The consumption of
fava beans may indeed confer an antimalarial
effect on G6PD normal individuals, similar to
antimalarial drugs. In some individuals ...,
fava consumption could prevent malaria,
while in others ... it could precipitate serious
disease and death. The continued use of fava
beans as an important staple crop in these
populations with high GdB- frequencies is
more understandable if positive health effects
are enjoyed by many, even though there are
clearly deleterious consequences for some
GdB- individuals."
ùi&ïtpm t j?
"Pythagoras and Music". Woodcut from a
late 1 5th-century illustrated book by a Ger¬
man musicologist, Michael Keinspeck.
13
