Aiming high
Japan's demanding education system
by Kazuo Kurimoto
Below, students at a graduation ceremony at
one of Tokyo's technological universities.
Japan has a large, highly developed system of
higher education which each year produces a
massive output of well-trained graduates.
THE Japanese economy grew through¬
out the 1970s until it eventually
came to account for 10 per cent of
world economic activity. It is often said that
education played a major role in this eco¬
nomic expansion. What is the nature of this
contribution? What is the current state of
Japanese education, and what problems
does it face?
In Japan, primary education, which lasts
six years, and the first three-year stage of
secondary education in middle school, are
compulsory and free, and enrolment is
close on 100 per cent. As all the members
of every class move up into the next grade
together, there is no such thing as bright
children skipping a year, nor do slower
pupils "fail" or have to repeat a year.
The second stage of secondary educa¬
tion (three years of high school) is not
compulsory, but enrolment is about 97 per
cent of the eligible age group.
Thirty-six per cent of the young people
who complete the twelve years of primary
and secondary education go on to study at
universities or junior colleges. A further 1 2
per cent proceed to higher education in
specialist schools or colleges. Thus half of
the relevant age group go on to institutions
of higher education; and practically all of
these students complete their education at
these institutions.
About half of Japanese young people
enter working life after finishing twelve
years of education; the other half do so
after undergoing some form of higher edu-
10

Juku, private tutoring establishments where
children are helped to improve their school
results and older pupils are coached for uni¬
versity entrance examinations, are widely pa¬
tronized as a complement to the "official"
education system. Right, a juku teacher
reprimands a pupil who does not know his
arithmetic.
cation. Virtually all of both groups acquire
specialist or professional skills from in-
service training, under something like an
apprenticeship system, in the organization
which they have chosen to enter on com¬
pletion of their school and/or college
education.
Broadly speaking, then, only half of the
education which Japanese children re¬
ceive as they progress to adulthood is at
school, college or university. The other half
consists of studies they pursue on their
own when they have become fully-fledged
members of society, or as part of their
training within the enterprise or organiza¬
tion to which they belong.
In-house training
In Japan a person is not assigned once
and for all to carry out a specific function at
the workplace. After acquiring a variety of
skills and experience within an organiza¬
tion, employees move on to more special¬
ized or managerial types of work. In Japa¬
nese companies, work is not organized so
that people are hired from outside and
dismissed when they are no longer re¬
quired. The general rule is that a fixed
number of new employees, who will consti¬
tute the bottom layer of the personnel
structure of the organization, are taken on
every year and trained in the necessary
skills, or switched to different work, as
occasion may require, within that person
nel structure. In addition to the major role
of the organization in providing education
and training, employees are highly motiva¬
ted to study on their own account.
Society expects the school system to
produce individuals with the basic skills
they will need as members of the orga¬
nizations they will eventually join, together
with the ability and aptitude that will enable
them to benefit by future training at work.
People do not believe that the function of
schools is to turn out ready-made special¬
ists who can be useful at work without any
further training after they have been
hired.
The key to social status
At the beginning of 1987, a report was
published on the results of joint research
carried out by Japanese and US special¬
ists on education in Japan and the United
States. The Japanese team focused on
education in the USA, and the American
team concentrated on Japanese educa¬
tion, and their conclusions were published
simultaneously. In their analysis of Japa¬
nese education, the US educationists
made the following points:
Japanese society is highly education-
oriented. Success at school is synony¬
mous with success in life, the only route to
social and economic status.
Japanese education produces striking
results, which are the product of co-oper
ative effort by parents, children and teach¬
ers. The education system is reinforced by
historical and cultural tradition, by a close
relationship between employers and edu¬
cation, by the availability of preschool edu¬
cation and, at the primary and middle
school levels, by supplementary out-of-
school education.
The nine-year period of compulsory ba¬
sic education is well balanced and of high
quality. Both the average levels of aca¬
demic achievement and the rates of at¬
tendance throughout primary and second¬
ary education are very high.
Japanese education also motivates pu¬
pils to succeed at school; it teaches them
how to study efficiently, maintains an effec¬
tive learning environment, promotes edu¬
cation of the whole person, and provides
effective careers assistance to high school
graduates.
But, according to the US report, Japa¬
nese education is not perfect. It is too rigid,
too uniform. There is too little opportunity
for choice; hardly any attention is paid in
schools to the needs of, and differences
between, individual pupils. An associated
problem is that when it comes to employ¬
ment an individual's academic record is
given too much weight.
Why is it that Japanese society is so
education-oriented, and parents are so in¬
tent on the education of their children that
they send them to juku, private coaching
establishments, for extra lessons after

school hours? The reason seems to lie in
the structure of Japanese society.
A 'selection machine'
It is generally accepted that there are no
ethnic divisions within Japanese society,
and regional divisions have diminished as
a result of rapid urbanization and the pow¬
erful impact of the mass media. Also, the
widespread destruction of homes and the
means of production in the Second World
War, together with the subsequent land
reform, meant that the nation was forced to
make a new start at a time when rich and
poor alike were all in equal straits, with
disparities in wealth reduced to a lower
level than almost anywhere in the world.
People were no longer so clearly con¬
scious of a division between "upper" and
"lower" classes; and a kind of classless
society emerged, in which everyone thinks
of himself or herself as middle-class.
With 120,000,000 people forming a sin¬
gle vast group without linguistic or ethnic
differences, with few variations in regional
culture or vertical class divisions, social
mobility is extremely easy for the able
individual. On the other hand, people fear
that if they do not succeed against the
competition, the fall will be limitless.
In this homogeneous society, virtually
the only social identity the individual can
acquire is that derived from education, and
the academic record, including the names
of the schools children have attended, is
an important factor in determining their
career and lifestyle when they reach
adulthood.
As pointed out above, 97 per cent of
young people attend high school, and 48
per cent go on to higher education. Japan
has 5,000 high schools with 4,600,000
students, 500 junior colleges with 400,000
students, and 460 universities with
1 ,800,000 students. With a school, college
and university system on this scale, the
future employers of graduates from these
institutions have to adopt a method of se¬
lection. Some decide to limit their intake to
graduates of specific institutions, which
means that graduates of other universities
are automatically excluded from joining
leading companies and other organiza¬
tions that may otherwise have been their
first choice. In effect, the university en¬
trance examination serves as a first stage
of the examination by which employers
select their new recruits. The entire school
system thus acts as a kind of "selection
machine" for sorting out children's future
potential.
Private lessons
and study groups
The ability to get into a university or
some other institution of higher education
is of crucial importance for a child's social
and economic future. Consequently young
people push themselves to the limits to
pass the entrance examination of the uni¬
versity which offers the best conditions. In
order to prepare their children for university
entrance examinations, parents must first
get them into a high school with a partic¬
ularly good reputation. This means going
to a good middle school first and so the
competition escalates. Many parents send
their children to juku to help them obtain
good marks in the fiercely competitive en¬
trance examinations that exist at every
stage of Japanese education. The chil¬
dren, afraid of being overtaken by their
classmates, are eager to attend these ex¬
tra classes.
The State school system does not sanc¬
tion either the skipping of grades by gifted
children or "failure" on the part of slower
children. Classes are not streamed so as
to separate the able from the less able
pupils. There is thus a wide variety of
attainment within a class; the bright chil¬
dren are not fully stretched, while the
weaker pupils cannot keep up. The bright
children find satisfaction in the lessons
offered by juku which specialize in prepar¬
ing high-fliers for entrance into "elite" uni¬
versities, while other juku cater for those
who find it difficult to keep up with the
ordinary school curriculum, which they
supplement by revising basic subjects in a
way that these children can understand.
As well as the "academic" juku catering
for different levels of attainment, there'are
juku which provide training in the use of the
abacus, or teach brush calligraphy, not to
mention the opportunities for learning af¬
forded by private "studios" offering instruc¬
tion in a variety of skills such as painting,
piano-playing or swimming. Nor is it only
primary and middle school children who
make use of these opportunities. Japan
now has an enormous variety o\juku, "stu¬
dios" and "study circles", which are used
by people in every walk of life. Working
adults and students attend driving schools,
computer programming schools and ac¬
countancy schools, in addition to working
or pursuing their academic studies. Young
men and women belong to a wide range of
"study groups", not only for such activities
as cooking, swimming and tennis, but also
for traditional subjects which predate the
introduction of the modern school system,
such as the tea ceremony, flower arrange¬
ment and handicrafts.
Together with the wide variety of "stu¬
dios" and "study circles", the purely aca¬
demic juku form part of a traditional "pri¬
vate", or unofficial, educational system.
This unofficial system seems to have
evolved spontaneously behind the
scenes, as it were, of the public and official
system, with its uniformity, excessive sup¬
pression of individuality, and lack of
freedom of choice as a means of contrib¬
uting to the development of the
individual.
Japanese education today compels chil¬
dren to devote long hours to study. The
result is that they are deprived of opportu¬
nities to play freely, and to think or test
things out for themselves as individuals,
away from the group. In the competition for
marks In the tests which are an integral
part of school life, the original aims of
education become distorted. It is hardly
surprising that some cannot stand this
fierce competition, and find an outlet for
© Japanese companies provide a wide range of
| in-house training schemes which give their
employees the opportunity to learn new skills
and acquire a high degree ofprofessional mo¬
bility. Left, a workman whose post has been
abolished because of automation is retrained
as an engineer.

Photo Richard Kalvar © Magnum. Paris
their inability to adapt to test-dominated
education in violence on school premises
or in absenteeism. Both teachers and par¬
ents are fully aware that this kind of educa¬
tion is injurious to children's intellectual,
social, emotional and physical develop¬
ment. However, the system is so en¬
trenched that the minority of educationists,
teachers and parents who would like to
reform it have little chance of success.
Education has now become a major so¬
cial and political issue. A third reform is
being planned, on a scale comparable with
the introduction of a modern school system
in 1872 and the reforms of 1946, the aims
of which were equality and expansion of
educational opportunity. This is in line with
the needs of Japanese society as it rapidly
becomes more "internationalized" and in¬
formation-oriented, and of an economy
and society which is currently in the
process of breaking out of a system of
standardized mass production.
Winning admission to a good university is a
major hurdle for Japanese young people
hoping to achieve social status and material
rewards. Above, prayers inscribed on
wooden tablets have been placed in a Tokyo
shrine by students anxious to succeed in their
examinations.
KAZUO KURIMOTO is a Unesco staff member
specializing in educational administration and
management.
13
