SOME of the people of the ship used to tell me they were going to carry me
back to my own country and this made me very happy. I was quite rejoiced
at the sound of going back, and thought if I should get home what wonders I
should have to tell. But I was reserved for another fate and was soon undeceived
when we came within sight of the English coast. While I was on board this ship, my
captain and master named me Gustavus Vasa. I at that time began to understand
him a little, and refused to be called so, and told him as well as I could that I would
be called Jacob; but he said I should not, and still called me Gustavus; and when I
refused to answer to my new name , which at first I did , it gained me many a cuff ; so
at length I submitted and was obliged to bear the present name, by which I have
been known ever since.
The ship had a very long passage, and on that account we had very short
allowance of provisions. Towards the last we had only one pound and a half of
bread per week, and about the same quantity of meat, and one quart of water a
day. We spoke with only one vessel the whole time we were at sea, and but once
we caught a few fishes. In our extremities the captain and people told me in jest
they would kill and eat me, but I thought them in earnest and was depressed
beyond measure, expecting every moment to be my last. While I was in this
situation, one evening they caught, with a good deal of trouble, a large shark, and
got it on board. This gladdened my poor heart exceedingly, as I thought it would
serve the people to eat instead of their eating me; but very soon, to my astonish¬
ment, they cut off a small part of the tail and tossed the rest over the side. This
renewed my consternation, and I did not know what to think of these white
people, though I very much feared they would kill and eat me.
There was on board the ship a young lad who had never been at sea before,
about four or five years older than myself: his name was Richard Baker. He was a
native of America, had. received an excellent education, and was of a most
amiable temper. Soon after I went on board he showed me a great deal of
partiality and attention and in return I grew extremely fond of him. We at length
became inseparable , and for the space of two years he was of very great use to me
and was my constant companion and instructor. Although this dear youth had
many slaves of his own, yet he and I have gone through many sufferings together
on shipboard, and we have many nights lain in each other's bosoms when we were
in great distress. Thus such a friendship was cemented between us as we cherished
till his death, which to my very great sorrow happened in the year 1759, when he
was up the Archipelago on board his Majesty's ship the Preston, an event which I
have never ceased to regret as I lost at once a kind interpreter, an agreeable
companion, and a faithful friend; who, at the age of fifteen, discovered a mind
superior to prejudice, and who was not ashamed to notice, to associate with, and
to be the friend and instructor of one who was ignorant, a stranger, of a different
complexion, and a slave!
Olaudah Equiano as portrayed on the
frontispiece of the first edition of his
autobiography, The Interesting
Narrative of the Life of Olaudah .
Equiano, or Gustavus Vasa, the
African. Written by Himself (1 789).



How I became
Gustavus Vasa
by Olaudah Equiano
At the age often, Olaudah Equiano, born
in 1745 in a village in what is now
Nigeria, was captured and sold as a slave
to a planter in the West Indies and worked
there and aboard slave ships that plied the
Atlantic. By the age of nineteen, he had
saved enough money to buy his freedom.
As a free man, he served as a merchant
seaman and quartermaster and did a
variety of otherjobs. He visited the
Mediterranean and took part in Phipps'
expedition to the Arctic in 1773. Equiano
was an ardent and active member of the
Anti-Slavery movement and towards the
end of his life was appointed Commissary
ofStores on a ship carryingfreed slaves
to Sierra Leone. His autobiography,
published in 1789, was famous in his
time, and ran into some 12 editions in the
United Kingdom and the United States
between 1789 and 1827.
Equiano's Travels, edited by Paul Edwards. Heincmann
Educational Books, London and Ibadan, 1967. Photo © Heinemann Educational books Ltd., London and Ibadan
17
