A new form ofself-expression' BY LEOPOLDO ZEA
THE term baroque refers to forms of
cultural expression orginating in a
distinctive conception of life and
humanity. The Renaissance, basing itself on
a distant Greek past and turning away from
the Christian view of man, had evolved a
new ideal and a new idea of mankind.
Renaissance man rejected the heritage of
medieval man, the creature and servant of
God, and wished to sever all connections
with the immediate past. A new start was to
be made. Man should be the architect of his
own destiny, as the French philosopher
René Descartes would later insist.
The Baroque in Europe was therefore
associated with a certain rationalism. It was
more than simply an aesthetic phenomenon.
Its striking diversity, variety of ideas and
involution of forms reflect an attitude to life
that was consonant with Jesuit rationalism
and the dialectic of Spinozism. As an artistic
phenomenon, it gave rise to a number of
different forms of expression, among which
Spanish Baroque appears to have been the
origin of baroque art in general.
Across the sea lay America, the object and
the instrument of the dreams of imperial
Spain. In the sixteenth-century controversy
about whether or not Indians should be con¬
sidered as human beings, the ideas of the
Spanish historian and theologian Juan Ginés
de Sepúlveda prevailed over those of the
Dominican missionary to the Americas,
Bartolomé de Las Casas. The result was that
the indigenous people of Latin America were
regarded as homunculi something less than
human beings and as such only fit to be the
servants and slaves of those who were con¬
sidered supreme examples of the human
race.
With their status as human beings called
into question, forced to reproduce exactly
the models imposed on them by the domi¬
nant culture, the people of the Ibcro-Amer-
ican colonies gradually became aware of
their identity. "What am I," they asked, "a
man, or a homunculus?"
In the sixteenth century, the creóle culture
of Latin America was a mere copy, and
sometimes a poor one, of metropolitan mod¬
els. Of course, in the following century the
models came from an Iberian peninsula that
was aware of its decline. The Baroque was an
expression of that awareness, and the spirit
of Spain was manifested in it. And this kind
of artistic expression, with its characteristic
diversity, was to enable Latin American peo¬
ple to manifest their disputed identity, albeit
unconsciously. Thus appeared the mar¬
vellous products of Latin American baroque
art, with its proliferation of contorted lines
which expressed the originality of those who
had fashioned them. Outstanding examples
of this art include the little church of
Tonantzintla, in Puebla (Mexico), in which
cherubs and saints are shown with Indian
faces; and the flowers and offerings which
appear in other baroque works of art
throughout Latin America.
But what is the true status of these works?
Since they are not faithful reproductions of
baroque models, should they not be consid¬
ered simply as mediocre copies?
If they are considered to be poor copies, it
is because they do not closely resemble the
original; they differ from the model. Despite
the painstaking efforts of the copyists, the
copy was a distortion of the model. In time,
their failure to execute faithful copies was to
be the undoing of these artists; they were
Left', 17th-century portrait of the Mexican
poetess Juana Inés de la Cruz (1648 or 1651-
1695), one of the great figures of baroque litera¬
ture in the Spanish language. Her works include
religious and secular plays and poetry, notably
an outstanding series of love sonnets.
34

A remarkable example of Mexican colonial
baroque architecture, the church of the Jesuit
college ofTepotzotlán, above, was built between
1760 and 1762, at a time when decoration was
beginning to proliferate but was still executed
with the lyrical freshness characteristic of local
artists. (See also back coverfor the decoration of
the church ofSanta Maria Tonantzintla.) Statue
of the Virgin, above right, in the Museo del
Virreinato, Tepotzotlán, exemplifies the
gracefulness of Hispano-American sculpture.
The devil's horns beneath the Virgin's feet, a
typically Spanish feature, symbolize victory
over Evil.
excluded from the colonial system, and even
became subversive of it.
In Latin America, the Church was the
only channel through which culture could
reach the people, and, repressive though it
was, it set out to investigate the nature and
true situation of the people in that part of the
world. Like the sixteenth-century Fran¬
ciscans, the Jesuits, from the seventeenth
century onwards, aimed to find out more
about the art forms that were characteristic
of Latin American people and their environ¬
ment.
In the eighteenth century, conscious or
unconscious attempts at reconciliation
begun in the baroque period took the form
of a new, rationalist approach, which tried to
bring together the imported and the indi¬
genous, the internal and the external. An
effort was made to reconcile the dominant
culture with the specific nature of the people
who were subjected to it, and to make the
anachronistic nature of that culture compati¬
ble with the new forms of cultural expression
that had replaced it in Europe.
Such conciliatory and casuistical attitudes
placed the old colonial order in a difficult
situation. Eighteenth century colonialism
claimed to be enlightened. It tried, albeit
despotically, to lead its Latin American sub¬
jects along the path that the new nations
were treading the path of progress for all
peoples and it came up against the Society
of Jesus. Enlightened despotism proved to
be at variance with the Jesuits' eclectic, con¬
ciliatory attitude, which had already made it
possible for the theocratic system to be
accepted in countries such as Paraguay. In
the end, the attempt made in the baroque
period to reconcile the irreconcilable jeopar¬
dized the system which it was supposed. to
reinforce.
After their exile in Italy, a group of Mex¬
ican Jesuits made it their business to study
the situation of Mexico and of Latin America
in general. As a result of their investigations,
the characteristics of the region, instead of
being seen as worthless, came to be regarded
as the basis for a new form of self-expres
sion. They also drew attention to the rights
of certain peoples to be themselves, not
merely skilful copyists of alien cultural
ideas. From such a view to subversion was
but a step. The outcast became a rebel.
The "mediocre copy" was actually a
means of self-expression. When the people
of Latin America realized this, they began to
forge their own identity. It was then that
they had to try to reconcile the seemingly
irreconcilable. To the question, "Who are
we? Spaniards or Indians?", they answered,
with Simón Bolívar, "We are Americans!"
LEOPOLDO ZEA, Mexican philosopher and
essayist, is professor ofthephilosophy ofhistory and
the history of ideas in America at the Autonomous
National University, Mexico City. Much of his
writing is devoted to the analysis and the history of
Latin American culture. Among his works pub¬
lished in English are The Latin American Mind
(1963) and Latin America and the World (1969),
both published by the University of Oklahoma
Press.
35
