580 million over 60s by the year 2000
A grand old age by Edit Beregi
THE proportion of elderly people in
the population as a whole is signifi¬
cantly growing. Between 1970 and
the year 2000 the number of over-sixties is
expected to rise worldwide from 307 million
to 580 million. This increase presents physi¬
cians, biologists, psychologists, sociologists
and social workers with new problems.
The prime objective of all gerontological
research is to prolong the individual's active
and productive life. During the last decade
our knowledge of the changes wrought by
the ageing process, as well as of the health
problems, social needs, and medical
requirements of the aged has substantially
increased.
Ageing is a slow physiological process.
Studies have shown that most organs of the
body reach their functional peak between
the ages of twenty and twenty-five years,
thereafter remaining on this plateau for a
considerable time. As the years go by, these
functions decline in varying degrees. It has
also been established that up to the age of
seventy the incidence of these changes var¬
ies widely. Many people will retain their full
capacities even to the age of seventy, theii
organs functioning as soundly as those of
people half their age. In other cases, the
decline in the functional efficiency of an
individual's systems may have become so
marked by the age of seventy as to require
him or her to be taken into care.
Reduced functioning of organs lies at the
root of many of the illnesses of the aged. At
the same time, in assessing the different
functions, it must be remembered that a
person's lifestyle can profoundly affect the
performance of his or her organs. Several
studies have shown that an unsuitable diet,
lack of physical exercise, tobacco smoking
and the consumption of alcohol have an
adverse effect on the functioning of some
organs and contribute to the appearance of
diseases associated with old age.
Industrial and technological progress has
brought many benefits but also harmful
effects such as an increase in diseases such
as hypertension and arteriosclerosis, higher
levels of physical and psychological stress
and a greater incidence of disorders of the
25

nervous system. Rapid urbanization has led
to environmental pollution, which in its
turn has brought about an increase in the
number of pulmonary complaints. Thus,
over the last few decades, the type of dis¬
eases prevalent among the old has changed.
Whereas at the turn of the century infec¬
tious diseases headed the list, nowadays
chronic conditions have become the chief
problem.
We still do not know how the state of
health and lifestyle of the elderly will
develop in the course of an extended life¬
span. Different authors have different
views on the subject. According to some,
people will enjoy good health to the age of
eighty-five, after which the organism is
likely to deteriorate rapidly. In this view,
death will occur from biological ageing
rather than from chronic disease. By con
trast, others foresee a protracted loss of
functions and increasing incapacity, leading
to a marked rise in the number of the chron¬
ically sick. They deem it essential therefore
for medical science to address the problem
of how to improve the last period of life. Yet
others hold that a longer healthy lifespan
can be expected with an extension of the
middle "second age". Studies also find that
seventy-five-year-olds today are healthier
than were their counterparts ten years ago.
This change is the result of preventive mea¬
sures against the usual ailments of the
elderly.
Recent results of research and tech¬
nological progress have drawn attention to
many opportunities and tasks involved in
efforts to improve the quality of life of the
elderly.
Pride of place must go to the need for a
change in lifestyle. Adoption of a correct
lifestyle must come, however, at an early
age, for, apart from hereditary factors, the
health of the elderly is largely determined
by their mode of life in younger years. An
incorrect lifestyle can give rise to illness
even in a person's youth, which will then be
carried over into old age.
Modern technology can assist in the early
diagnosis of some diseases and help to
ensure that treatment of a chronic condition
begins in good time. Many diseases can now
be successfully treated in their initial stages,
thereby avoiding subsequent complica¬
tions. The success of early treatment is
proven by the fact that where screening for
and early treatment of hypertension has
been introduced, the incidence of stroke
and myocardial infarction has significantly
decreased.
26

An 80-year-old Hungarian athlete gives an
impressive demonstration of gymnastics to a
youthful audience.
New ways must be sought of promoting
mental health, and new aids must be
developed to improve mobility and the
functioning of the sense organs in the
elderly. Active life is often impeded in old
age by diseases of the joints, by impaired
hearing and poor eyesight. Provision must
also be made for organ transplantation in
the elderly.
Another crucial task is to find ways of
influencing the changes which accompany
the biological ageing process and of coun¬
teracting its effects. Attempts have already
been made to inhibit these changes or to
retard their appearance, but as yet, no defi¬
nite conclusions applicable to human beings
can be made. It remains for future studies to
determine how the results of basic research
might be applied in practice.
In the light of our present knowledge,
preventive care is the only way in which we
can retard biological ageing and the inci¬
dence of the ailments associated with
advanced age, while at the same time ensur¬
ing active and productive old age. The fol¬
lowing preventive steps are feasible:
* Early diagnosis of the diseases likely to
occur in the elderly and their timely treat¬
ment. This will ensure that those approach¬
ing old age will do so in good physical and
mental health. Early diagnosis is facilitated
by a number of screening techniques, which
makes them valuable aids in geriatric
medicine.
* Another useful aid in preventive care is
preparation for retirement with a view to
safeguarding the individual's physical and
mental well-being and minimizing the
psychological stress of retirement. Such
preparation should begin around the age of
50 since at that age the personality has not
yet become too rigid.
* The third preventive step is based on
awareness of the importance of a healthy
lifestyle, of a correct diet, of the need for
physical exercise , and the adoption of a sen¬
sible life routine in keeping with the state of
retirement. Attention must be paid to the
right amount and right kind of rest to be
incorporated in the day's activities. At the
same time, the importance of the preserva¬
tion of an active mental life through stimu¬
lating pastimes must be kept in mind. Guid¬
ance should be given about relieving elderly
people of physical burdens, while fully pre¬
serving those activities which do not impose
a strain on them.
* A novel idea in preventive geriatric medi¬
cine is that of the University of the Third
Age which can make a valuable contribu¬
tion to the promotion of an active life, the
maintenance of alertness and the provision
of useful leisure activities among the
elderly.
Further advances in science and technol¬
ogy, as well as conscious preparation for old
age, give grounds for hope that by the turn
of the millennium the large percentage of
old people in the population will be able to
lead a healthy and active life, their main
concern being how to make the best use of
their new-found years of freedom.
EDIT BEREGI, of Hungary, is director of the
Gerontology Centre at the Semmelweis Medical
School, Budapest, where she also teaches. She
is a member ofmany international medical asso¬
ciations, including the WHO Expert Advisory
Panel on the Health of Elderly Persons, and the
Board of Directors of the International Centre for
Social Gerontology (CIGS), based in Paris. She
is the author ofmanyscientific articles and of four
books on gerontology.
Education and later life is one of the themes of a
major Unesco programme, Education lor All.
Activities in this field focus on preparation for
retirement, the development of educational
activities for the elderly, and using the potential
which elderly people possess to help meet edu¬
cational, social and cultural needs.
27
