The meal is the message
The language of Brazilian cuisine
by Roberto DaMatta
EVERYONE has to eat to live, but
each society defines in its own way
the significance of the act of
eating, and stipulates what should be con¬
sumed regularly and what must never be
eaten for fear of turning into an animal or
a monster.
Strict rules define the relationship be¬
tween the food consumed and the condi¬
tion of the person who consumes it. All
Brazilians know that they should fast be¬
fore taking communion, in order to main¬
tain the assumed state of purity compati¬
ble with the host which they receive into
their bodies. They behave very dif¬
ferently, however, when they entertain
their relations or friends at home for Sun¬
day lunch. On these occasions they care¬
fully choose the food that will help them
to define the social situation they wish to
create.
If I am invited to eat a feijoada, a
cozido, or apeixada, I expect to take part
in an informal ritual of meal-sharing in
which there will be a connection between
what is eaten, the way in which it is eaten,
and the people with whom it is eaten.
These dishes consist of a variety of ingre¬
dients (either meat or fish combined with
vegetables and flour) from which the
guests help themselves and make their
own mixture of the various items offered
on the table, Brazilian-style, establishing
a parallel between the act of eating and
the ideal of "mixing" socially those who
eat together.
Brazilians have strict rules for match-
Above, a food-vendor in a street of Salva¬
dor, capital of Bahia State (Brazil). Among
her wares are crab, pé de moleque (a kind
of nougat made from brown sugar, far
right) and fried bananas coated with flour.
ing a meal to those who eat it. I should
never think of inviting home the Gov¬
ernor of my State for a feijoada. A more
classic menu would be appropriate on
such an occasion and might include such
dishes as roast chicken with salad, or
meat cooked in a more cosmopolitan
style. However, there is nothing wrong in
having a cup of coffee or a snack with
strangers, but in this case you eat stand¬
ing up in a downtown snack-bar or bal-
cäo. This is a mode of eating in which the
utilitarian concept of "eating to live"
takes precedence over the moral or sym¬
bolic aspects of a meal. During a slap-up
meal with your friends, on the other
hand, Socrates' adage is forgotten and
instead of eating to live you live to eat.
In Brazilian cooking and hospitality a
great effort is made to combine the
"universal" aspects of food (such as its
nutritive and energy value, its capacity to
sustain the organism and its protein con¬
tent) with its symbolic characteristics,
since "man does not live by bread alone"
and the act of eating has great social
significance. All this is connected with
"totem commensality", as the French
anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss de¬
scribed a system in which people and
their mood, the surroundings, the food
and even the way of preparing the meal,
must all be in harmony.
This no doubt explains why in Brazil a
sharp distinction is made between the
concept of "food" and the concept of a
"meal". In the language of Brazilian
cuisine, these terms express a fun¬
damental semantic opposition between
the universal and the particular. Brazi¬
lians know that all edible substances are
"foods" but that not every food is neces¬
sarily a "meal". In transforming food into
a meal the preparation is of critical im¬
portance, but a degree of ceremony is
also required. When preparing a careful¬
ly organized and well-thought-out meal,
no Brazilian will be satisfied with simply
buying top-quality produce and then obe¬
diently following a cook-book recipe. He
will take great pains to prepare the ingre¬
dients and season them properly. Since
the quality of the meal, served copiously
and with care, expresses consideration
for the guests, it would be inconceivable
for a Brazilian to serve pre-cooked con¬
venience foods, as is now the practice in
Anglo-Saxon countries.
The meal is also a means of expressing
and asserting a national, regional or local
identity, or even the identity of a family
or an individual, depending on the con¬
text. Essentially, the act of eating crystal¬
lizes emotional states and social identi¬
ties. Outside my country I can use a re¬
gional dish to express my national iden¬
tity, but within Brazil I identify many
regions and even families through the
99

way in which they prepare and serve cer¬
tain foods. In a genuine system of "totem
meals" social identities can be expressed.
Every Brazilian knows that the people of
the Northeast are as fond of flour as mice
are of cheese; that tutu con linguiça (a
dish based on sausage and beans) is typic¬
al of Minas Gerais State; and that chur¬
rasco is the favourite dish of the gauchos
of the South.
And so, when speaking of Brazilian
cooking both the modes of eating and the
groups of people who are invited to share
certain kinds of food must be taken into
account. There is no doubt that in some
contexts meals acquire a personality of
their own, which explains the enormous
importance of meals as offerings in Brazi¬
lian traditional cults. Thus there are
foods associated with the sacred (or the
profane), with sickness (or health), with
virility or femininity, with childhood or
with maturity.
Sitting down at table is supposed to put
an end to disputes. Brazilians believe that
some dishes and some situations (the
Carnival, for instance) are, like some
women, irresistible, so that the very pre¬
sence of certain dishes should be enough
to create a degree of conviviality and
bring harmony to those who are assem¬
bled around the table.
But the symbolism of meals also pro¬
vides an opportunity to examine a highly
complex question which is usually over¬
looked in "anthropologies of eating"
the search for a rational explanation for
the culinary peculiarities that are found in
every society. Every society has dishes it
would almost be ready to die for. It is not
fortuitous that North American society
has an individualistic culinary model
according to which everyone tucks into a
Ritual offerings for a macumba ceremony
in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil).
solitary meal from a tray in front of a
newspaper or television set. There must
be some connection between the fast
food and junk food industries, self-ser¬
vice restaurants, and the values of self-
reliance and independence which under¬
pin society in countries such as the United
States.
But what is happening in countries like
Brazil where traditional cuisine exists
alongside modern, more individualized
patterns of food consumption? There is
no doubt that in these countries, the mod¬
ern practice of eating an individual food
product such as a hamburger, either
alone or with strangers, coexists with tra¬
ditional eating habits which reassert
themselves at banquets held in that
atmosphere of friendliness and convivial¬
ity to which people are still strongly
attached.
The Brazilian example reveals that
these two practices are not mutually
exclusive. On the contrary they can re¬
inforce each other; dual eating habits
seem to exist in societies of this kind. One
practice is an expression of "modernity",
while the other can provide a focus for
personal relationships. In Brazil there is,
indeed, an impersonal, individualized,
public cuisine, in contrast to traditional
home cooking which keeps people in
touch with the basic social relationships
that give form and meaning to life.
On the whole, however, the concept of
the meal as an act of sociability is insepa- .
rabie from family, friends and colleagues,
in other words from all close relation¬
ships. In this connection it is worth men¬
tioning that all Brazilian national dishes
such as feijoada, peixada, cozido, vatapá
(a dish based on manioc flour or rice with
fish or meat) and cararú (typical of Bahia
State), specifically combine solids with
liquids, meat with fish, and dried veg¬
etables with green vegetables.
In Brazilian cooking the utmost im¬
portance is attached to combining ingre¬
dients which in other countries are served
separately. Brazilians pay close attention
to the arrangement of the table and care¬
fully blend black beans with assorted
meats, cabbage, oranges, torrezno
(pieces of bacon) and white manioc flour,
all of which are eaten in a rather curious
manner, taking a little here and a little
there and mixing everything up in the
centre of one's plate.
Echoing the layout of the table, where
the main dish is surrounded by accom¬
panying dishes in a perfectly-defined
hierarchy, the centre of each plate is re¬
served for the principal item of food, as
though gradations were emphasized at all
levels. The ideal of Brazilian cooking is to
assemble appropriate dishes and guests
on an important occasion in a harmo¬
nious ceremony which is the main symbol
of sociability in Brazil.
Does this arrangement of the table
(where there is always a leading figure
and supporting actors), table manners
(the main dish is served first, then the
others) and even the method of eating,
have a direct correlation with what I
would call "intermediate meals", an
embodiment of the ties which for centur¬
ies have enabled so hierarchical a society
to absorb and harmonize values from
other cultures? It is similar to the effect
achieved by humbly and subtly blending
in the same dish black beans and white
manioc flour to form an intermediate
mass that is as delightful as a mulatto
skin.
ROBERTO DAMATTA, of Brazil, is professor of
social anthropology at Brazil's National Museum,
Rio de Janeiro. He has also taught and studied at
universities in the United States, the United King¬
dom and France. Among his published works are
A Divided World and Carnavais, Malandros e
Herois ("Carnivals, Bandits and Heroes").
23
