ON Easter Sunday, the last day of March, the Captain sent the chaplain
ashore early in the morning to celebrate Mass. And the interpreter went
with him to tell the king that we were not landing in order to dine with
him, but simply to hear Mass.
When he heard this, the king sent two dead pigs. And when the time came to say
the Mass, the Captain went ashore with fifty men, unarmed except for their
swords and each one dressed as decently as it was possible to be. Before the
barques reached shore, our ships fired six rounds of artillery as a sign of peace.
The two kings were there as we disembarked and graciously received our
Captain and placed him between them, then we went to the place prepared for the
celebration of Mass, which was not far from the shore. Before the Mass began, the
Captain threw a quantity of musk-rose water over the two kings. And when the
Mass was offered, these two kings went to kiss the cross like us, but they made no
offering. At the moment of the Elevation of the body of Our Lord, they were
kneeling as we were and worshipped our Lord with their hands joined in prayer.
And the ships fired all their guns at the Elevation of the body of Our Lord.
When Mass had been said, each one did his Christian duty, receiving Our Lord.
Then the Captain got his men to demonstrate swordsmanship, which greatly
pleased these kings. Next he had a cross brought, with the nails and the crown, to
which these kings bowed down. And the Captain had it explained to them that
these things which he was showing them were the sign of the Emperor his master
and lord, who had charged and commanded him to place it everywhere he should
go or pass by. And he told them that he wished to erect it in their country for their
benefit, because if some Spanish ships later came to these islands, when they saw
this cross they would know that we had stayed there. And thus they would do
nothing to harm them, neither their people nor their belongings. If they took any
of their people prisoner, they would let them go at once on being shown this
sign.
Furthermore, the Captain told them that it was necessary that this cross should
be erected on the summit of the highest mountain in their land, so that on seeing
the said cross each day they should worship it and that, if they did so, neither
thunder, lightning nor tempest could harm them.
These kings thanked the Captain and said that they would gladly do so. Then he
had them questioned as to whether they were Moors or Gentiles, and what they
believed in. They replied that their only form of worship was to join their hands
while looking at the sky, and that they called their god Aba. On hearing these
words the Captain was filled with joy. ... So the Captain had him [the first king]
asked if he had any enemies who made war against him , and that if there were any
he would go and defeat them with his men and his ships in order to bring them to
obedience. The king, thanking him, replied that there were two islands on which
the people were his enemies. However, this was not a good time to go and attack
them. The Captain therefore said to him that if by God's grace he should return to
this country, he would bring so many men that he would force them into obeying
the king. Then he had the interpreter tell them that he was going to dine and that
he would come back afterwards to have the cross erected on the summit of the
mountain; the two kings said that they were well pleased and, on this, they
embraced the Captain, and parted. ,
Painting on the ceiling of a church at
Cebu (Philippines), where Magellan
Magellan's Voyage Around the World, by Antonio landed ¡n 1521, shows the navigator
Pigafetta. having a cross erected.



Mass to the
sound of gunfire
by Ferdinand Magellan/
Antonio Pigafetta
A Portuguese navigator in the service of
the Spanish crown, Fernäo de
Magalhäes, (Ferdinand Magellan,
c. 1480-1521), sought the western route to
the "Spice Islands", in particular the
Moluccas, for trading purposes. But his
voyage, which supplied practical proof
that the Earth was round, had many
repercussions as a result of the account of
it brought back by Antonio Pigafetta,
chronicler of the expedition. Pigafetta was
one of the few survivors of this first
voyage around the world, which lasted
almost three years and cost Magellan his
life. In March 1521, the navigator
reached the Philippines.
11
