TODAY glaciers cover 3,200 km2 of
the Alps roughly the same area
as those of Scandinavia and some
twenty times more than those of the Pyre¬
nees, but barely one-tenth of the maxi¬
mum glacier area during the Pleistocene
Epoch. The erosive action of this enor¬
mous mass of ice as it advanced and
retreated gradually shaped most of the
lake basins in the Alps, although tectonic
occurrences also contributed to the for¬
mation of many such basins including
those of the Bodensee and the Traun-
see.
But one thing is certain. The basins of
some Alpine lakes were formed very long
ago, possibly even in the Tertiary Period
(more than 1.5 million years ago), where¬
as the present lake stage may be scarcely
older than 18,000 years.
So one of the most interesting ques¬
tions facing limnology, the scientific
study of lakes, is how our modern lakes
developed. So far our knowledge of their
history is fragmentary. One piece of
information was gleaned when construc¬
tion work on the highway near the Mond-
see in Upper Austria brought to light lake
sediment from the last interglacial period
(between the Riss Glacial Stage and the
Wurm Glacial Stage). This revealed not
only that the water level of the Mondsee
was then 60 metres higher than it is today
but also that it formed part of a much
bigger lake embracing both the Irrsee and
the Attersee. It has also been established
that the water level of Lake Waginger in
Bavaria has fallen 15 to 20 metres since
the Wurm Glacial Stage.
On the other hand, archaeologists are
convinced that the construction methods
used in Alpine lakeside dwellings be¬
tween 4,200 and 5,900 years ago were
possible only if the water level was several
metres lower. But this assertion, which
would imply the absence of outflows and
therefore a higher salt content in the lakes
in question, has not been confirmed by
limnology.
There were also and no doubt still
are a number of lakes with a lifespan of
no more than a few thousand years. They
largely originated during the retreat of
the great glaciers, as in the Salzach and
Enns valleys, which were filled with boul¬
ders and debris within this short period.
Masses of water could also be dammed up
behind terminal moraines and lead to the
flooding of valleys. This phenomenon,
which is found more rarely in the Alps
36

Lakes and glaciers of the Alps
by Heinz Loffler
than in some other mountain regions, led
to catastrophe in the Andes not long
ago.
Some small lakes connected with the
advance and retreat of glaciers have an
even shorter lifespan. Since the last maxi¬
mum glacier level around the middle of
the nineteenth century, many lakes have
emerged in this way and in some cases
disappeared, including the small Eisrand-
see near Hochkönig (Salzburg), which
completely emptied through a newly for¬
med ice tunnel in September 1934.
The Alpine lakes have been subject to
human influences since ancient times.
Control and drainage operations and
wetland reclamation led to the drying out
of some basins. Water pollution as a
result of the discharge of chemical waste,
stocking with fish and lakeside housing
Pasterze, Austria, the largest (8 km long
and around 5 km wide) glacier of the
Eastern Alps and one of the most beautiful
ofallAlpine glaciers, is fedby the snows of
the Grossglockner. It has been for many
years in a state of recession.
4*
s3^ v.
'
TO». \
37

The Mondsee and the Attersee lakes in
Upper Austria, both of which formed part
of a bigger lake during an interglacial
period in prehistoric times when relatively
moderate climatic conditions melted
Alpine snow and ice to create a water level
60 metres higher than it is today.
development were and are human activi¬
ties whose effects have been known for
years and are, albeit sporadically,
controlled. In the meantime, however,
transregional phenomena such as acid
rain and water pollution by effluents (see
the Unesco Courier, January 1985) are
affecting extensive areas in the Alps, and
causing new problems in lake protec¬
tion.
However, while the disappearance or
pollution of lakes in the distant and more
recent past is to be deplored, it must be
admitted that new stretches of water have
been created in recent decades. Dammed
lakes (Alpine reservoirs), artificial lakes
and controlled natural lakes containing
considerable quantities of water (over 1.5^
thousand million m3 in Austria alone)
contribute primarily to energy produc¬
tion.
These developments create problems
for landscape and nature protection.
Lakeside areas, devoid of scenic attrac¬
tion and mostly arid, at low water levels
unfortunately resemble the astatic waters
of arid zones. In many cases the damming
of lakes has destroyed valuable wetlands
or even led to thé disappearance of ende¬
mic species two Coleóptera belonging
to the Staphylinide group in the case of
the upper Stubach valley in Austria.
Today the threats once posed by gla¬
ciers, snow and Alpine waters are well
understood and generally controlled as
part of water supply management pro¬
grammes. If catastrophes still occur in
our time, they are chiefly connected with
human intervention such as deforesta¬
tion, acid rain, tourism, housing develop¬
ment in unsuitable areas, and, last but not
least, the drainage of wetlands and the
diversion of watercourses in such a way as
to destroy the beauty of the landscape.
HEINZ LOFFLER, of Austria, is director of the
Institute ofLimnology at the Austrian Academy of
Sciences and teaches at the University of
Vienna. He has worked with Unesco's Man and
the Biosphere (MAB) Programme and with the
Scientific Committee on Problems of the Envi¬
ronment (SCOPE) of the International Council of
Scientific Unions (ICSU). He is the author of
Neusiedlersee Limnology of a Shallow Lake in
Central Europe.
