Home thoughts from abroad
A Japanese writer in Paris reflects
on his country's postwar literature
THERE is a subtle and unexpected
pleasure to be derived from reading
the literature of one's homeland
while in Paris, a cosmopolitan city thou¬
sands of kilometres from Japan, surround¬
ed by people of another culture, hearing
only a foreign language and reading only
newspapers written in that language. From
this perspective, Japanese writing seems
mildly exotic, remote in time as well as in
space, and for that very reason has a
striking if paradoxical freshness. Distance
brings a certain detachment. Yet it is after
all the literature of one's own country, and
a feeling of frustration is unavoidable, com¬
bined with relief at not being involved a
combination of responses not easy to
explain.
Reading the same books in Tokyo, one
immediately pictures each writer's face,
hears his tone of voice, conjures up his
distinctive gait, the idiosyncrasies of his
speech or his drinking habits, not to men¬
tion the gossip that surrounds him. and the
part that his work has played in one's life.
His writing comes across as the voice of a
fellow-inhabitant of a familiar world. Here in
Paris, however, this "aura" is swept away,
or filtered out, and only the voice of. the
by Tokuyoshi Hiraoka
writing is heard, like a call from another
world.
Take the following extract from a piece
by Yutaka Haniya in an issue of the journal
Bungakukai ("Literary World"), which has
just reached me.
"If we really penetrate into and concen¬
trate on those of his masterpieces now
available to us, they will not yield up their
astonishing series of intellectual revela¬
tions, which are linked together like the
model built by Watson and Crick to repre¬
sent the "double helix" structure of DNA
and we will never get out of the maze of his
books until we lift our mental awareness to
the point where we unconsciously find our¬
selves climbing step by step to heights
within ourselves whose existence we had
never suspected."
These lines are from an essay in mem¬
ory of that unorthodox genius. Tatsuhiko
Shibusawa, who died not long ago. How
strikingly applicable they are to Haniya
himself, who began his Shiret ("The Spirits
of the Dead"), a monument to waking delu¬
sions, just after the Second World War.
and forty years later is still painstakingly at
work on this same novel. But that is not all.
What is important is the unique "voice".

42
that characterizes not merely Haniya's
novels, which are few, but his many critical
articles, collected essays, travel sketches,
and even his countless koshimaki' recom¬
mending other writers' work. A shiver of
excitement runs through us as we catch
the characteristic note of this voice, one
not easy to reproduce in translation, as of
an electrical pulse from some remote cor¬
ner of the universe.
From Haniya and his immediate contem¬
poraries in the "first postwar school" of
writers right up to Masahiko Shimada, who
is still in his twenties, the evolution ol
modern Japanese literature has been
closely connected with the revolutionary
movement, aiming at the transformation of
Japanese society. In Yasahii Sayoku no
tame no Kiyükyoku ("Divertimento for a
Tender Left"), the novel which first brought
him to prominence, Shimada caricatures
the naivety of the peace movement, which
he sees as a childish game. He employs,
for example, the device of writing sayoku
(left-wing), that sacred catchphrase of the
postwar years, not with ideographs but
with the simple phonetic letters that chil¬
dren use before they have mastered the
"adult" system of writing. But behind this
portrayal, nevertheless, there is clearly an
awareness of the passionate sincerity of
the young men and women who were in¬
volved in violent clashes with the police in
the struggle against the Japan-US Security
Treaty in 1960 and the unrest on university
campuses in 1970. When Yutaka Haniya,
Ken Hirano and other writers who had
survived the war and its aftermath,
launched Kindai Bungaku forty years ago,
they drew a clear line between art as a
servant of revolution and the Communist
Party as such. But they still believed in the
political effectiveness of literature, and in
the end failed to differentiate between "ar¬
tistic revolution" and "revolutionary art".
This left them open to attack by the "na¬
tionalist" school, and their influence de¬
clined. Haniya's Shirei. with its insistence
on "permanent revolution", despite this
background he has lived through, towers
W J
i
WT>'2r ¿à
JlrÉlEBr / -^
^BBPRJSfcSBfiHr- ^^"3

Left, a still from the film Ekimae ryokan (1958), directed by Shirö
Toyoda and based on a novel by Masuji Ibuse (born 1898). Ibuse's
prolific fictional output consists almost entirely of stories, such as
Tajinko mura, (1939; Tajinko Village, 1971) and Yöhai taichö (1950;
Lieutenant Lookeast, 797/), which are highly popular in Japan and
describe with dry humour Japanese urban and rural life. Ibuse was
awarded the Noma Prize, one of Japan's highest literary distinctions,
for his longest novel, Kuroi ame (1966; Black Rain, 1969) in which he
drew on eyewitness accounts of the Hiroshima catastrophe. In 1982, he
published his autobiography, Ogikubo füdoki ("Topography of Ogi-
kubo").
Below left, a scene from Kon ¡chikawa's film
Enjö (Conflagration. 1958) based on the novel
Kinkakuji (1956; The Temple of the Golden
Pavilion, 1958) by Yukio Mishima
(1925-1970). The novel tells the story of a
young Buddhist monk who burns down his
house of prayer because he -is obsessed by its
beauty. A prolific writer whose works ranged
from an autobiographical novel. Kamen no
kokuhaku (1949; Confessions of a Mask.
1958) and other fiction such as Shiosai (1954;
The Sound of Waves, 1956) to plays including
Kindai nögaku shü (1956; Five Modern No
Plays. 1957), Mishima committed public ritual
suicide a few days after completing a vast
4-volume epic, Höjö no umi (1965-70; The
Sea of Fertility. 1971-74). Brilliant, full of
contradictions, his work reflects the conflict
between Western influence and traditional Ja¬
panese values.
amid the darkness, his "voice" continuing
to haunt his readers' inner world.
Among the noted writers who did not
belong to the Left, Shöhei Ooka, a disciple
of Stendhal, himself experienced life in a
prisoner of war camp. His massive Reite
senki ("Record of the Battle of Leytel"),
written as a tribute to his comrades who
died during their pitiable flight from a victo¬
rious enemy, contains an outstanding
analysis of modern war. Another major
figure was Yukio Mishima. Mishima never
abandoned his right-wing, ultra-national¬
istic ideology; he lived the life of a star,
fascinating and baffling the mass media,
until, like a coiled spring snapping back to
its original position, he committed seppuku
(ritual suicide) out of grief over the state of
his country.
More noteworthy is the major talent of
Masuji Ibuse, whose position is some¬
where between the so-called "I novel" writ¬
ers (who find their reality in the faithful
depiction of the details of their everyday
lives) and the "pure literature" school, typ¬
ified in his younger days by Hideo Ko-
bayashi. Among Ibuse's many works, all
distinguished by their stylistic elegance
and a highly individual sense of humour, is
his long novel Kuroi ame (1966; Black
Rain. 1969), in which he deals directly with
the Hiroshima atomic bomb. What led him
to write it, he has said, was a sense of
unbearable frustration during the Vietnam
War at the newspaper reports of the
seemingly unending stream of American
reinforcements.
Whatever their stylistic differences, Ja¬
panese writers are extremely serious-
minded. One manifestation of this serious¬
ness is a sense of justice and fairness.
Today Kenzaburö Oe seems to be the sole
spokesman of this trend, which may, how¬
ever, also take the form of a devotion to
"pure literature". This approach can be
traced back to the "ethics" which all Japa¬
nese children were taught in elementary
schools before the war, and, to go back
further, to the Confucian code of morality
which has been deeply rooted in the minds
and hearts of Japanese intellectuals ever
since the days of the Tokugawa Shogun-
ate. which turned the teachings of Confuci¬
us and Mencius into what was virtually a
State religion. But the primary question
with which this Confucian ethic, unlike
Christianity, is concerned is "how best to
get through life?", not "what is life for?".
Junnosuke Yoshiyuki, Shdsaku Endo.
Shötarö Yasuoka and others of the so-
called "third wave"? of postwar writers,
rejected what they saw as over-intellec-
tualism. denied that literature could have
any effect on politics, and were fond of
characterizing themselves as "poor stu¬
dents", "dropouts" or "bad boys". Yet now
CONTINUED PAGE 45
A master of narrative, Yasushi lnoue (born
1907) is the author of many novels whose
screen versions have added to his popularity as
a writer. The film made in 1963 by Shirö
Toyoda from lnoue's novel Yüshü Heiya tells
the story of a beautiful middle-class woman
who suffers in her search for true love (above),
lnoue is also noted as the author of brilliantly
imaginative historical novels such as Aoki
Ökami (7960; "The Blue Wolf) and Fütö
(1963; "The Storm") set in ancient or medieval
times in China, Mongolia and other countries
on the Silk Road. He has won many literary
prizes and plays a leading role in Japanese
cultural life.
1 . A koshimaki (literally "loincloth") is a small strip of
paper wrapped round the dust cover of a new book,
with a short recommendation by a well-known writer or
specialist.
2. A term used to designate chronologically the third
group of Japanese writers to emerge after the Second
World War. The first group began to make their name in
1945-1946; the second appeared around 1950. The
"third wave" authors appeared on the literary scene
around 1952-1953. 43

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 43
they find themselves members of the pres¬
tigious Selection Committee for the Ak¬
utagawa Literary Prize, and even of the
Japan Arts Academy, which makes it look
as if they have now become the guardians
of "pure literature". In terms of what they
really stand for, probably even Yasushi
lnoue, who is widely spoken of (especially
in the West) as a candidate for the Nobel
Prize for Literature, is not a "pure litera¬
ture" writer.
Not only this group, but also the "I novel"
writers, have a latent propensity to classify
work into what is and what is not "pure
literature", much as at one time it was
usual to distinguish between what was and
what was not "progressive". The Kyöfüki
("Tale of a Mad Wind") of Jun Ishikawa, a
writer of astonishing imaginative range and
force; the Hako otoko (1 973; The Box Man,
1980) of Köbö Abe, who has an interna¬
tional reputation as an avant-garde novel¬
ist; the Shiki ("Four Seasons") of Shin-
ichirô Nakamura a dazzling picture-scroll
of love and lust: none of these comes
within this category of "pure literature",
because in none of them is the question
"how to live?" asked.
This is the kind of literary landscape that
I see as I look back at Japanese literature
from abroad a landscape that appears to
me in this way because I too am concerned
about my country, take an interest in poli¬
tics, and am a believer in "pure literature".
From behind this literary perspective,
though or superimposed upon it come
the "voices" of such writers as Haniya and
the much younger Kenji Nakagawa. Other
voices, those of Atsushi Mori, Nobuo Koji-
ma, Meisei Götö and Minako Oba, are less
easy to "place" within this broad perspec¬
tive; which paradoxically adds to their
appeal.
In Japan it is well understood that there
is a clear division of territory between the
two most prestigious literary awards, the
Akutagawa Prize and the Naoki Prize, the
former being concerned with "pure", and
the latter with "popular", literature. The
members of the Akutagawa Prize Selec¬
tion Committee sometimes award the
Prize to really original work such as Yosh-
ikichi Furui's Yöko, Ryü Murakami's Kagiri-
naku tömei ni chikai buru ("Almost Trans¬
parent Blue"), or the woodblock print artist
Masuo Ikeda's Egekai ni sasagu ("Offering
to the Aegean Sea"). But whenever this
happens, some members of the Commit¬
tee object even to the point of resigning, on
the ground that the style is too unorthodox
or the ideas are too bold. This is always
followed by a sharp reaction, and before
long the stress is once more on the impor¬
tance of completeness or "roundedness"
in candidate works, rather than on their
originality. Future potential is no longer
taken into account; and the Prize then
tends to go to collections of short stories,
unpretentious and small in scale, but with a
due measure of sabi3 and a pleasantly
readable style not unlike that of the Com
mittee members themselves. This is how
devotion to "pure literature" manifests
itself.
Throughout the 1960s, when this sit¬
uation was a dominant factor in the literary
world, the new "prize-winners" who ap¬
peared on the scene year by year were all
in their forties or fifties, and voices were
raised to deplore this "ageing" of Japa¬
nese literature. Then Ryü Murakami's sud¬
den emergence ended this apparent state
of saturation. A group of talented young
writers, all in their early thirties Kenji Na¬
kagami, Michitsuna Takahashl, Masahiro
Mita, So Aono, Haruki Murakami, and
Wahei Tatematsu came on stage close
behind him.
Of all the work published by this group,
Kenji Nakagami's fine novel Karekinada
("The Sea of Dead Trees"), depicting the
day-to-day existence of a tough youth
struggling to make something of his life
within the context of a complex family
structure in the remote district of Kumano,
sandwiched between the mountains and
the sea, is probably the only one to have
acnieved full acceptance by the literary
establishment. There is a "Roots" ele¬
ment the tracing of one's origins in this
story, though it is not so prominent as in
Yasuoka's Ryuritan ("A Tale of Wander¬
ings in a Strange Country"). Like Yoshiyu-
ki's Suna no ue no shokubutsugun ("A
Cluster of Plants on the Sand"), it is haunt¬
ed by the horror of incest; and it has many
of the specific qualities beloved of the
"pure literature" school especially the
lovingly detailed descriptions of the daily
life of ordinary country people with neither
education nor property. It is filled with sun¬
light and the sound of wind, the love of
flowers, and the smell of sweat; with a
sense of oneness with nature.
"When he started work, Akiyuki at last
felt the sun soaking into his body. A film of
sweat made a second skin, sensitive to the
light breeze. His shadow stretched out
over the soil as he dug into it with his pick.
He scooped the soil up with a spade. He
felt the sound of his breathing, as it rose
from within his hollow body that was made
only of arms, stomach and muscle, res¬
onate with the soil as the air rose from it,
smelling of the sun-roasted earth. The air
was breathing. The mountains were
breathing."
But when one reads from the vantage
point of "abroad" the successive variations
on his theme that Nakagami builds up
"Now he would work. He dug with his pick,
lifted the soil with his spade. The pick was
Akiyuki. The spade was Akiyuki." "He ac¬
cepted the sun. He was steeped in its light.
Akiyuki melted into the sunlight. He be¬
came the trees, the stones, the air. Stand¬
ing, Akiyuki trembled, like a blade of
grass" what comes across primarily is
not the feeling of a lyrical scene depicting a
young labourer in love with his work, but a
particular music, of the kind which I sus-
77¡t' novels of Köbö Abe (born 1924) are fantastic parables of social life. One of
Abe's main themes is the alienation of modern man in an anonymous and stifling
world. In Tanin no kao (¡964; The Face of Another. 1966). adaptedfor the cinema
bv Hiroslti Teshihagara in 1966 (below), the hero is an industrialist who is rejected
bv his wife after being accidentally disfigured, and secretly undergoes plastic surgery
in an attempt to fashion a new identity and win her back. Abe established his
reputation in Japan in 1951 when his collection ofstories Kabe won the Akutagawa
Prize. The publication «/'Suna no onna (1962; The Woman in the Dunes. 1964)
brought him international recognition. His latest novel, Hakobune Sakuramaru
("The Ark of Sakura") is mainly set in a nuclear shelter.
3. Quiet, elegant simplicitya quality traditionally much
esteemed in Japanese literature. Editor.

pect writers of "pure literature" most de¬
test: Rock 'n' Roll, with its powerful, relent¬
less beat ... Not only passages like these,
but also the intentional build-up of scenes
which are of basic importance for the hero,
make it quite clear that this novel was
"composed" (using the word in its musical
connotation) in a highly intellectual man¬
ner. And reading the sequel, Hösenka
("Balsamine"), which depicts the troubled
life of the young man's mother, seen from
her point of view, I was suddenly reminded
of William Faulkner. In his sun-baked Ku-
mano, with its abundance of legends and
of tales of blood, Nakagami has created a
world as vivid as Faulkner's Yoknapataw-
pha County. No other critic seems to have
made this particular point. Who knows
perhaps this too is a spin-off from reading
one's own literature abroad.
TOKUYOSHI HIRAOKA, who has taught since
1370 at the Waseda University, Tokyo, has
published two collections of short stories, "The
Vanished Chimney" and "Eating the Rose", as
well as many articles of literary criticism and
translations of French authors into Japanese.
This article was written during a sabbatical year
which the author spent in Paris.
