The urban maze
No single thread has yet been found that
can guide us through the tortuous labyrinth of the city
IN a famous phrase recorded by his biog¬
rapher James Boswell, that peerless
eighteenth-century man of letters Sam¬
uel Johnson once declared that "when a
man is tired of London, he is tired of life, for
there is in London all that life can afford".
This was less a panegyric of London per
se than an affirmation of the fact that cities
are the melting-pot ot ideas and invention,
market-places for the exchange of informa¬
tion and centres of learning, the fount of
human culture and creativity in short, that
cities are the sine qua non of civilization.
For the medieval peasant, city life held an
additional attraction residence in a city for
a year and a day brought emancipation
from serfdom. "Stadtluft macht frei" (City
air brings freedom), declared Emperor
Henry the Fifth in drawing up the charters of
the cities of Speyer and Worms. And even
today, this same desire to escape the pov¬
erty and servitudes of rural life remains the
major driving force behind the explosive
expansion of many cities in the developing
world.
Dome of polluted
air (photochemical
smog, heat inversion
and changes in
the microclimate)
Deterioration of the
landscape (changes
in vegetation, erosion
construction)
8
Importation
of energy
Exportation
of materials
Groundwater
Sewage Polluted coastal water

Concentrated
in birüsof prey
<4 Touba, Senegal
Accumulation
in polar ice caps
Right, a descriptive risk assessment model
illustrating what occurs when DDT is used in
a developing country and is recycled through
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems.
^Tlunningof cgpshells-
/ reproductive lailurc in birds
-¿L~
Persists in soil half life or 10 years
Long tenu storage in sediment
Affects learning
processes. Alters
natural behaviour.
Abnormal growth
After Whyte and Burton, Environmental Risk Assessment, 1 980
©
©
Chang an jie Avenue, Beijing, China
Left, a qualitative input-output model show¬
ing the energy and materialsflows involved in
the metabolism of the city ofBarcelona.
To the ecologist, however, a city may
appear to be a very artificial system. It is
true that the sites of man's earliest fixed
settlements, such as the rich valleys of the
Fertile Crescent, were chosen for their
favourable environmental conditions, but
with each new technological advance the
city-dweller became increasingly divorced
from his "natural" environment until, today,
man is able to use almost any environment
for town living. Indeed, as Soviet space
experiments have shown, man can now live
for months on end in a totally artificial,
wholly man-made environment.
What is a city?
In these circumstances, the question arises
as to whether the ecological approach is
applicable to urban systems. What, indeed,
is a city? Is it an organism, and, if so, is it a
"parasite" with the natural environment as
its host? Is a city an organism within an
environment, or itself an entire ecosystem?
Urban ecologists are thus still seeking to
establish their discipline on a firm theoreti¬
cal basis, while at the same time being
swamped with demands for advice from
politicians and city bosses on how to handle
the horrific problems resulting from the
urban explosion.
The threat of massive failure of cities,
through resource depletion, disease and
famine, which has always existed, seems
more menacing than ever. In the general
confusion about the nature of the urban
phenomenon, ecologists have perforce
adopted an ad hoc approach.
As a result, urban ecology has come to
include a heterogeneous ragbag of study
topics. These range from studies of energy
and materials flows and the use of ecologi¬
cal indicators to measure urban environ¬
mental quality, to traditional and experi¬
mental building forms and the carrying
capacity of urban systems and ecological
support systems.
In practice, most urban studies under¬
taken within the MAB framework have
focused on one aspect only, such as the

ill lu III in IH »¡Tin^iesa, 1 "^tfYrÄR1 T^MVl
» - V
» * -1 ! j
Mv "" li f
m. i& ' X-
" M| I
distribution of flora and fauna within urban
areas, or the human ecology of children in
the city.
One study, which explicitly aimed to inte¬
grate city-wide studies of energy, food and
water flows with a bio-social survey of indi¬
vidual quality of life and human adaptation
(Hong Kong), was unable to demonstrate
how a change in one level affected the
other, even though it seemed reasonable to
suppose they must be interlinked.
Although many of these case studies
have succeeded in providing a valuable
scientific basis for handling urban planning
problems specific to particular cities, the
original objective, of setting up an interna¬
tionally agreed comparative data set for
urban systems so that case studies could
be contrasted and compared so as to
provide answers to common, process-
oriented questions, has been virtually
abandoned.
This is because, owing to the sheer
speed and magnitude of the urban explo¬
sion, the problems themselves are chang¬
ing, both in scale and in nature, almost as
fast as the necessary data can be collected
and collated.
Under these circumstances it has been
well-nigh Impossible to establish agreed
data collection standards, and without stan¬
dardized units of measure and similar
descriptive parameters the individual stud¬
ies are doomed to remain no more than
Isolated case studies.
The way ahead
Today, a critical point has been reached in
the development of ecological approaches
to urban systems. No single thread has yet
been found that can guide us through the
tortuous labyrinth of the city.
The auguries, however, are good. In the
fifteen or so years since MAB was launched
a wealth of experience has been gained
and an impressive store of research data
acquired. The advent of the new generation
of micro-computers means that it is now
possible to make speedy and effective use
of these data to make comparative analysis
a reality and to realize the full potential of
systems analysis. Furthermore, introduc¬
tion of the technique of risk assessment
offers new horizons for urban ecology.
Comparative analysis
The option here is, in part, to go back to
basics and take up the work begun a
decade ago in setting up a comparative
data set for urban systems. The time is now
ripe to develop and agree a detailed, inter¬
national framework for data collection
which will include: (a) common parameters
for describing urban systems, and (b) the
variables required for specifying key sys¬
tem relationships. This is a prerequisite for
development of valid comparative analysis
of urban systems.
There remain considerable difficulties. It
may not be easy to formulate common
parameters that will encompass the older
cities with their history of slow, organic
growth and many modern cities which are
rapid, ad hoc, one might almost be tempted
to say "artificial" creations.
10

Systems analysis
With the arrival of the latest generation of
micro-computers, the full potential of sys¬
tems analysis as applied to urban systems
can now be realized. The work done ¡n con¬
structing input-output matrices and plotting
metabolic city flows can now be incorpo¬
rated into policy-oriented decision models.
These models will allow policy-makers to
assess the consequences for an eco¬
system of proposed actions, whether the
specific proposals be about green spaces, -
housing or transport.
In this connection, a state-of-knowledge
report is at present being prepared by a
joint working group* to assess the status
and potential of integrated economic ecolo¬
gical models for understanding urban sys¬
tems. These models provide rapid, graphic
feedback and are one important way of put¬
ting existing results into the policy arena.
Risk assessment
Although risk assessment methods were
originally developed for technological and
Left, city centre of Frankfurt, Federal
Republic of Germany
"New Construction", one of the entries in an
international photo competition organized in
connection with the United Nations Con¬
ference on Human Settlements (HABITAT),
1976, in Vancouver, Canada.
chemical risks, such as nuclear power and
heavy metals, risk assessment ¡s essen¬
tially an application of the ecosystem
approach. It translates Information about
ecosystem relationships into probability
statements about likely harm and inte¬
grates these with social value judgments
about the acceptability of risk to provide a
basis for policy-making.
Risk assessment, then, whilst not a pan¬
acea, provides a general paradigm for look¬
ing at urban vulnerability and resilience
from the perspective of decision-making
under conditions of uncertainty. It is eco¬
system thinking within a management
framework.
The balance sheet
The biennium 1985-1986 saw a re-exam¬
ination of basic principles and a subtle
re-shaping of the practical approach to
problems of urban ecology along the lines
suggested above. These trends are
reflected ¡n the practical achievements of
the period.
The next milestone in the evolution of an
integrated ecological approach to cities
may well be the development and use of
"expert systems" and inclusion of the
decision-making process as part of the
ecological system to be studied.
of MAB, the International
Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), the Scien¬
tific Committee on Problems of the Environment
(SCOPE), and the International Federation of
Institutes for Advanced Study (IFIAS)
11
