Looting of ancient shipwrecks is widespread.
How can it be stopped?
IE
The amphora war
MORE than 2,000 years ago, Greek
and Roman galleys sailed the
Mediterranean Sea loaded with
goods for trade or soldiers for conquest.
Today, off the coasts of Italy, Spain, and
France, hundreds of these ancient ship¬
wrecks, sunk for centuries, are being pi¬
rated by clandestine salvagers and deep-sea
divers. In the past twenty years in France
alone almost 400 shipwrecks from the
Greek and Roman eras have been found.
All but three had been pillaged before being
discovered by the authorities.
The statues, art works, precious metals
and amphoras found on these ships supply
an international market of private buyers.
The publicity surrounding the volume of
this trade, soaring prices, the aggressive
promotion by auction houses, and con-
- tinued record-breaking sums have done
much to promote this illegal traffic. And it
has led to violence. Rival gangs are known
to have burned each other's boats, and over
twenty divers, some very experienced, have
been found dead due to dangerous clandes¬
tine working conditions in deep water or
outright murder. In the South of France
they call it the Amphora War.
For hundreds of years, men tried to in¬
vent ways of getting to sunken ships with
little or no success. With the invention of
the scuba tank, a practical solution was
found.
It was one of the inventors of the scuba
tank, Jacques Cousteau, who excavated the
first ancient ship from the sea floor. In 1954,
diving down 60 metres off the Grand Con-
gloué island in the Mediterranean near the
city of Marseilles he found an ancient Ro¬
man shipwreck sunk in the second century
BC. Two thousand amphoras were disco¬
vered on the ship. Cousteau's divers simply
raised them to the surface and drew no
plans of the site, but this first expedition led
to the birth of underwater archaeology.
On land, wholesale plundering of ancient
artefacts had been going on since the eight¬
eenth century. Today, treasure hunters
spend more time searching under the sea
than on land.
In France, the police responsible for en¬
forcement of the laws protecting under¬
water archaeological sites are under the
authority of the Customs Service. With a
fleet of 20 boats, 12 helicopters and 3 aero¬
planes, the Customs agents regularly patrol
the areas of known underwater archaeolo¬
gical sites. Aircraft Spottings are reported
to patrol boats that are equipped with radar
and armed with sub-machine guns. But. as
Commandant Rivière, head of Customs
from the Mediterranean coastline from Ita¬
ly to the Spanish border and the island of
Corsica, has pointed out, "... The fight to
prevent the pirating of underwater wrecks
is only a small part of our activity because
our main job is aimed against drugs and
terrorists. T|
"Guarding underwater archaeological
wrecks is very difficult because there are a
lot of wreck sites and it is impossible to put a
Customs officer on every site, and if you are
not there to catch someone red handed
bringing up an artefact, then most probably
the pirate cannot be prosecuted."
The major problems facing the preserva¬
tion of ancient shipwreck sites are the ex¬
pense of an excavation, the tedious weeks at
sea, around-the-clock security to protect
the site from pirates, and the health dangers
of decompression from repeated deep-wa¬
ter diving. Since diving can be done only
seven months a year off the coast of France ,
unfinished excavations must be buried in
hundreds of tons of sand to protect them
from pirates during the winter months, and
then painstakingly uncovered the following
year before new work can begin.
m
This text has been extracted from the script of a
new video programme entitled Amphora War. A
Unesco-Cross Communications Europe co-pro¬
duction, the 26-minute video reviews the ques¬
tion of piracy of amphoras and other artefacts off
the coast of southern France and the measures
being taken by Unesco for the protection of the
underwater heritage. For further information
about the video, which exists in English and
French versions, please apply to: Division of
Audiovisual Productions, Unesco, 7 Place de
Fontenoy, 75700 Paris.
