The most accurate, up-to-date
research data will be worthless
unless they are presented with
the end user's objectives in
mind



Information please
IN a tribute to the greatest scientist of the
seventeenth century, Alexander Pope
wrote:
Nature and Nature's laws lay hid in night;
God said, "Let Newton be!" and all
was light.
Somewhat more than two centuries later,
in a light-hearted pastiche of Pope, Sir John
Collings Squire paid his own wry tribute to
the greatest scientist of the twentieth
century:
It did not last: the Devil howling "Ho!
Let Einstein be!" restored the status quo.
The two couplets are of more than merely
anecdotal interest. They highlight the tre¬
mendous volume and complexity of scien¬
tific advance in the 229 years between the
publication of Newton's Principia Mathe-
matica (1687) and of Einstein's The Foun¬
dation of the General Theory of Relativity
(1916).
Publication of scientific information
increased ¡n parallel with scientific
advance. Beginning with two journals that
started publication in 1665 (the Journal des
Scavans and the Philosophical Transac¬
tions of the Royal Society of London), the
number of scientific periodicals has grown
enormously. Estimates of the present num¬
ber of such journals vary from 25,000 to
100,000 (the wide variation being due to
differing opinions as to which publications
qualify as scientific journals).
To publications such as these must now
be added an overwhelming mass of report
literature (the periodic reports often
required by organizations sponsoring
research), papers published by informa¬
tion-exchange groups, newsletters,
reviews and abstracting services,
reference books, handbooks and manuals.
For the scientist struggling to cope with
this rising flood of information, with which
he must contend if he is to keep abreast of
his subject, the immediate solution has
been to narrow his field of interest by
increasing his degree of specialization.
This in turn has contributed to the fragmen¬
tation of the major disciplines Into ever
smaller subject areas, each with its own
specialized data bases, newsletters,
periodicals, and so on. The net result has
been a greater and greater amount of in¬
formation accessible to fewer and fewer
specialists.
This is not to suggest that there is, or ever
will be, too much scientific information
available. There is a striking parallel to be
made between an apparent information
glut and the "food mountains" that have
grown in the West at a time when two-thirds
of the world population is either mal¬
nourished or under-nourished.
Part of the food problem is that in many
cases the surpluses produced in the West
are unsuitable, ¡f not indigestible, to those in
need of food elsewhere.
The problem is somewhat similar with
scientific research data. Decisions are
made every day throughout the world which
will affect the lives of millions of people, in
complete disregard of scientific facts, sim¬
ply because those facts are not available to
decision-makers in a form which they can
apply, or to the people who will be affected
in a form they can understand.
To go back for a moment to Newton; the
apocryphal story that his theory of gravity
came to him when he was hit on the head by
a falling apple while resting under ah apple
tree was related to the everyday experi¬
ence of ordinary people. Because of this
they gave credence to his assertion that the
Universe was regulated by simple mathe¬
matical laws.
Einstein, whose theory of relativity rel¬
ated to events outside the direct experience
of almost the entire population of the globe,
was less well served by a limerick
published ¡n the magazine Punch in
December 1923:
There was a young lady named Bright,
Whose speed was far faster than light;
She set out one day
In a relative way,
And got home the previous night.
Fortunately, two events have occurred
which have gone a long way towards
resolving the information dilemma.
The first, paradoxically, was the emer¬
gence of yet another scientific specializa¬
tion ecology, which originated as an off¬
shoot of biology. By definition ecology ¡s
basically the study of relationships, of eco-
systems, and, although it took some time to
break their ingrained habits, ecologists
found themselves working in teams made
up of scientists from different specialities
and therefore obliged to communicate
between each other, to think in terms of
other disciplines, other time scales, other
objectives than their own. Horror of hor¬
rors they even had to work with special¬
ists from the social sciences, which many of
them did not consider to be "real" sciences
at all.
The second event was the arrival en
masse of cheap, readily available compu¬
ters capable of handling huge quantities of
data flexibly and at great speed.
Suddenly the sum of human knowledge
as related to a particular problem has
become available at the price of a few
strokes of the keyboard instead of hours,
months or years of painstaking sifting
through reams of paper.
Suddenly the prospect is in sight of being
able to ask such questions as: "What would
happen ¡f we were to cut down 1 00 hectares
of forest in West Africa?" and to get a reply
which covers not only the forestry aspects
of such an action but the economic, social,
human, wildlife and public health effects
as well.
As one of the world's major International
ecology programmes, Unesco's Man and
the Biosphere (MAB) Programme has
played its part ¡n this evolution. A com¬
puterized documentation system for MAB
has been set up through an agreement with
the Centre International de Documentation
Agronomique pour les Régions Chaudes
(CIDARC), at Montpellier, France.
Research data on all of the 250 or so bio¬
sphere reserves are available on computer
at the Conservation Monitoring Centre, in
Cambridge, England, and a Biological
Diversity Program to develop detailed com¬
puterized inventories of the biological
resources of biosphere reserves following
a standard protocol is being developed in
co-operation with the Smithsonian Institu¬
tion, in Washington, D.C.
More importantly, perhaps, MAB has
tried to convince scientists that, to be effec¬
tive, information must be presented in a
usable form that takes into account the tra¬
ditional knowledge, skills, and cultural,
social and economic imperatives of those
to whom it is being imparted.
24
