Apollonia,
a modelport ofAntiquity
RECENT discoveries made in the
submerged ancient harbour of
Apollonia (see colour page 22) by
the French Archaeological Mission to the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya were featured in
an exhibition held at Unesco's Paris head¬
quarters from 3 to 15 June 1987. The exhibi¬
tion, produced by Unesco's Division of
Cultural Heritage, also highlighted the re¬
sults of major projects for the study, safe¬
guard and presentation of the Libyan Cultu¬
ral Heritage carried out as a result of co¬
operation between Unesco, the Depart¬
ment of Antiquities of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, and the Archaeology Depart¬
ment of the University of Manchester
(UK).
Located on the northeast Libyan coast,
Apollonia has been described as "a text¬
book example of an ancient harbour." It
was the port, and originally a dependency,
of the great inland city of Cyrene, which was
founded around 631 BC. In the first century
BC, it became a city in its own right. Today
the ancient harbour installations are sub¬
merged because of subsidence that has
occurred all along this part of the Libyan
coastline.
The harbour was formed of two linked
sandstone islets joined to the shore by natu¬
ral breakwaters. Today these islets are 300
metres offshore. An extraordinary range of
buildings and other structures has been dis¬
covered, including the best preserved set of
slipways in the Mediterranean, a well-pre
served piscina or fish tank, and the remains
of warehouses including grain-storage silos
cut into the rock.
The French Mission, directed by Profes¬
sor André Laronde and working in co-op¬
eration with the Archaeological Service of
the city of Aries, has carried out a systema¬
tic survey of submerged structures and
wrecks and other material recently located
in the eastern dock. The wreck of a mer¬
chant ship, originally about 25 metres long,
has been discovered. Apart from its
wooden structure, the wreck has also
yielded ship's tackle and the remains of a
cargo have been found nearby.
Another wreck contained terra-cotta
bowls with ornamentation in relief, known
as "Megarian" ware, which come from the
coast of Asia Minor, together with Rhodian
amphoras for transporting wine. The
stamps on the handles make it possible to
date this material and consequently the
whole cargo to about 180 BC. Underwater
exploration has also produced an abund¬
ance of undecorated ceramic ware, most of
it locally made, which gives an idea of the
accessories of everyday living. A bronze
candelabrum head from the beginning of
the Roman period bears witness to trade
with southern Italy in the first century BC,
while a gold coin (solidus) from Constanti¬
nople shows that trading relations were still
being maintained at the time the Arabs
arrived in Libya.
