Cities
by Rafael M. Salas
THE world has embarked on a
course which will transform it into
a predominantly urban planet. By
the time population stabilizes at the end
of the next century, truly rural popula¬
tions will have become a very small
minority.
More than 40 per cent of the world
population currently live in urban areas.
This figure will increase to more than 50
per cent shortly after the turn of the
century. Developed regions have been
more than 50 per cent urban since the
mid-20th century. Developing countries
are expected to pass the 50 per cent mark
in the first quarter of the next century.
Within the less developed regions
there are important differences. The de¬
veloping countries of Africa and Asia are
less than 30 per cent urban. Latin Amer-
10

without limits
V
M
«
Î
r
o
ica, on the other hand, is nearly 70 per
cent urban, reflecting the region's stage
of development and the special features
of its urban structure and history.
By the year 2000:
5 'super-cities' of 15 million
Most of the world's urban population
today lives in developing countries. In
1970 the total urban population of the
more developed regions was almost 30
million more than in the less developed.
Five years later the position was reversed
and by 1985 the difference had widened
to more than 300 million. By the year
2000 the urban population of developing
countries will be almost double that of the
developed countries. By the year 2025 it
will be almost four times as large.
The city offers a visionperhaps a mir¬
ageof wealth for the rural poor, who
might otherwise face a bleak future.
11

The rise of the cities
By the year 2000 half of the world popula¬
tion will live in cities, according to the 1986
State of World Population report from the
United Nations Fund for Population Activi¬
ties (UNFPA). The map above indicates the
projected populations (in millions) for the
year 2000, in the twelve largest metropoli¬
tan regions of the world.
At present the urban population of
Africa is smaller than that of North
America, but by the beginning of the next
century it is expected to be substantially
greater, and three times greater by the
year 2025.
The proportion of the world popula¬
tion living-in the largest cities will almost
double between 1970 and 2025, because
of the growth of such cities in developing
countries. By the year 2025 almost 30 per
cent of the urban population in the de¬
veloping regions will be living in cities of
over 4 million, more than double the
figure for the more developed regions.
Although only a small proportion of the
African population today lives in very
large cities, by the end of the first quarter
of the next century this proportion could
be higher than that of any other con¬
tinent. In developed countries,
moreover, there is a trend towards de-
concentration.
By the year 2000 there will be five
"super-cities" of 15 million or more in¬
habitants, three of them in the develop¬
ing regions. Two of them, in Latin Amer¬
ica, will have populations of around 25
million. In 1970, nine of the twenty
largest cities in the world were in the less
developed regions; in 1985 there were ten
and by the year 2000 there will be sixteen.
This change signals the end of the close
relationship between large cities and eco¬
nomic development. Until recently such
cities were because of their size centres of
international political and economic net
works, a situation which may now begin
to change.
The urban population in developing
countries is currently increasing three
times more quickly than that of de¬
veloped countries, at a rate of about 3.5
per cent a year, a doubling time of only
twenty years.
There are important differences be¬
tween the developing regions. Latin
America has the lowest rates of popula¬
tion growth, followed by Asia. Africa,
especially East Africa, has the highest.
The current growth rate for Africa is 5 per
cent a year, implying a doubling of the
urban population every 14 years. The
current figure for East Africa is above 6.5
per cent, a doubling time of little more
than ten years.
Migrants to the cities
Such extremely rapid urban growth is
without precedent. It confronts the cities,
especially in the developing countries,
with problems new to human experience,
and presents the old problems urban
infrastructure, food, housing, em¬
ployment, health, education in new and
accentuated forms.
Furthermore, despite migration to the
cities, rural population in developing
countries will continue to increase, at a
rate of around one per cent annually.
Five important points emerge from an
analysis of United Nations population
figures:
12

The world's rural population is now
more than 2.5 thousand million;
Rural population density is already
very high in many parts of the less de¬
veloped regions. Standards of living,
while improving, remain low. It is doubt¬
ful whether added demographic pressure
will benefit agricultural development
on the contrary it may jeopardize the
development of many rural areas;
Increasing rural population in de¬
veloping countries will make it difficult to
reduce the flow of migrants to the cities;
The natural growth rate (the differ¬
ence between the number of births and
the number of deaths) of the rural
population is higher than the one per cent
rate often more than double. The dif¬
ference is due to the number of migrants
to the cities;
For most of Africa, unlike the rest of
the developing world, rural populations
will continue to increase until well into
the next century.
Although urban fertility in developing
countries tends to be lower than rural
fertility, it is still at least twice as high as
that in developed countries.
When natural increase in urban areas is
high and migrants contribute substan¬
tially to it, the migrants'. future fertility
becomes an important factor. The high
fertility typical of rural areas may be car¬
ried over into the urban environment;
more optimistically, migrants plunging
into new endeavours in a different con¬
text may adapt rather quickly to urban
values, including lower fertility.
Those who consider urbanization to be
a blessing hold that migration to the cities
is part of a dynamic development pro¬
cess. Those who think that it is a burden
believe that rural surplus population be¬
comes an urban surplus, producing
"over-urbanization", in which an ineffi¬
cient and unproductive "informal sector"
consisting of street vendors, shoeshine
boys, sidewalk repair shops and other
so-called marginal occupations becomes
more and more important.
Urban life has its positive aspects, but
they emphasize employment rather than
what workers get for their labour. A city
worker may earn more than a rural coun¬
terpart, but is it enough to cover the basic
needs of food, health, housing and
education?
Two important aspects of urban life are
income distribution and the number of
city-dwellers living below an acceptable
and culturally adjusted "poverty line".
Reliable data are lacking, but it is prob¬
ably true that the distribution of incomes
is more inequitable in urban than in rural
areas, in that there are proportionally
more very rich and very poor people in
the cities.
This may be as much an indication of
economic development in the urban
areas as of the privileges enjoyed by
urban élites. Rapid demographic growth
among the urban masses also contributes
to the inequality of income distribution
and swells the numbers of the poor.
A massive housing deficit
The most visible manifestations of the
problems of rapid urban population
growth are the makeshift settlements on
the outskirts of every city in the develop¬
ing world. They are usually in the worst
parts of town as regards health and acces¬
sibility, lacking basic services and secur
ity of tenure. They are by their nature
overcrowded average occupancy rates
of four to five persons per room are
common.
The names given to these settlements
graphically express their characteristics.
In Latin America the word callampas
(mushrooms) refers to their almost
magical overnight growth. The term
bidonvilles (tin can cities) , is often used in
Francophone Africa to describe their
makeshift nature. There are many other
labels, usually given by outsiders: those
who live in these settlements might de¬
scribe them differently, perhaps even
CONTINUED PAGE 16
The child in the city
For Third World parents the city may seem the best place to bring up a child - education
and health services are usually better than in the countryside. But there are
disadvantages too: the city child will spend much more of the day away from the family
and at greater risk of exploitation.
URBAN ADVANTAGES
Health and education services are easier to provide in
cities. And mortality and literacy statistics do show the
urban areas in a favourable light
URBAN«
RURAL LU
Colombia
Peru
Kenya
Senegal
Bangladesh
Indonesia
Health
Infant deaths per thousand
live births
84
84
¡12
110
71
	J
196
I But there will be great differences between the poorer
I and richer parts of each city. In Lima, Peru, for
S example, 1 9% of the children overall are malnourished
« but this figure rises to 36% in the poorest districts.
STREET CHILDREN
Some 40 million children around the world spend their
days on city streets- often working. The majority maintain
contact with their families, but millions of children also
live on the street.
Why they are there
A survey in Maputo, Mozambique, asked children why
there were on the street. These are the reasons they gave.
Hunger and poverty in the home 27% /
Treated badly at home 27% hyjJjQjNothing else to do 27% l
Sent by the family 9%
Abandoned by the family 9%
Just following other children 1%
What they do
Many city children work (as well as going to school for
part of the day). Research in Asuncion, Paraguay, asked
children what their major jobs were:
Selling newspapers 27%
Shining shoes 24%
Selling food etc. 33%
Cleaning windscreens 6%
Cleaning and looking after cars 9%
Others 1%
City children also have factory jobs - often in harsh
conditions. And in rich and poor countries alike street
children risk falling into prostitution.
137
137
Document UNFPA
13

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 13 considering them as starting points on the
path to a higher standard of living.
There is a massive housing deficit in
many large cities. The World Bank esti¬
mated in 1975 that the poorest quarter of
the population in most African and Asian
cities cannot afford even minimal
housing. Wood and cardboard packing
crates, sheets of plastic or corrugated
iron, flattened tin cans, leaves, bamboo
and beaten earth are the main sources of
materials.
Space is also a problem. Landlords
may add illegal floors to existing build-
How cities grow
The urban population of developing countries will be almost
double that of developed countries by the year 2000 - according
to the 1986 'State of World Population' report from the UN Fund
for Population Activities.
CONTINENTAL CONURBATIONS
Latin America has some of the largest cities of the developing world but
Africa is now urbanizing at a rapid rate. The chart shows the percentage of
the population living in urban areas.
poooog
SB»*"»Ï»»'
SJÏÏ
$ß>
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
BUILDING FROM BELOW
The major architects of today's Third World cities are poor families
building their own homes. The diagram below shows the percentage of
squatters and slum dwellers in four major cities.
Document UNFPA
ings, only to watch their dreams of wealth
collapse along with the buildings and the
lives of the unfortunate inhabitants. In
some cities several workers will use the
same "hot bed" in shifts over the twenty-
four hours. In Cairo squatters have occu¬
pied a large cemetery: the tombs of the
wealthy have become homes for the
poor.
Colonies of squatters occupy the last
areas to be settled, and may be perched
on steep hillsides subject to frequent
landslides, or installed by rivers or on
swampy ground which is flooded regu¬
larly. In Mexico City about 1.5 million
people live on the arained bed of a salt
lake, bedevilled by dust storms in the dry
season and floods in rainy months. In
Lagos, Nigeria, the proportion of wet
land to dry land settled has worsened,
while the absolute area of dry land occu¬
pied has doubled.
Where squatter settlements have been
established near workplaces, the inhabi¬
tants may run the risk of pollution and are
exposed to dangers such as the leak of
poisonous gas in Bhopal, India, or the
explosions at oil refineries in Mexico
City.
Squatter settlements typically lack
water, sewage and waste disposal facil¬
ities, electricity and paved streets. In
Mexico City, 80 per cent of the popula¬
tion have access to tapwater, but in some
squatter settlements the figure is less than
50 per cent. Water consumption in the
wealthy quarters of Mexico City is at least
five times as high as in the poorer areas.
In Lagos, water is strictly rationed and in
some parts of the city residents must walk
long distances to obtain water from a few
pumps which are turned on only in the
early morning.
According to a study carried out in
Lima, Peru, lower income groups spent
three times more per month on water
from vendors but consumed less than a
sixth as much as those with running water
at home.
It is estimated that three million in¬
habitants of Mexico City do not have
access to the sewage system. In Säo
Paulo, Brazil, the absence of sewage sys¬
tems have turned the two main rivers into
moving cesspools.
Because they occupy land owned by
the government, private individuals or
communal organizations, squatters are
frequently subject to harassment, which
increases their feeling of insecurity and
the precariousness of their existence.
Illegal or barely legal occupation does
nothing to encourage squatters to im¬
prove or even maintain the shaky struc¬
tures in which they live.
A number of schemes have been de¬
vised to give more security to squatters,
but there are risks. One is that improving
living conditions in the city will encour-
16

age people to move there. Another is that
improvements to property will increase
its value and encourage squatters to sell,
while moving it out of the reach of other
low-income families.
Two urgent problems:
child health and education
The health of the poor may be worse in
urban than in rural areas. Infant mortal¬
ity in the Port-au-Prince slums is three
times higher than it is in the rural areas of
Haiti . In some of thefavelas of Säo Paulo ,
infant mortality is over 100 per thousand
live births! The overall infant mortality
rate for the slums of Delhi is 221 per
thousand, twice that for some castes. In
Manila infant mortality is three times
higher in the slums than it is in the rest of
the city. (Tuberculosis rates are nine
times higher; the incidence of diarrhoea
is twice as common ; twice as many people
are anaemic and three times as many are
undernourished.) In Panama City, of
1,819 infants with diarrhoeal diseases,
45.5 per cent came from the slums and
22.5 per cent from squatter settlements.
Children living in the best housing were
not affected.
In most cities in developed countries,
young people under 19 constitute less
than 30 per cent of the population. In
developing countries, the proportion is
typically over 40 per cent and may reach
50 per cent in cities such as Manila, Jakar¬
ta and Bogotá. If the education system
breaks down under this sort of pressure,
it will add immeasurably to problems of
employment, delinquency and allied
problems caused by the existence of
"street children".
Education is probably the most press¬
ing of urban problems. A lower rate of
population growth would immeasurably
help the situation, but such a decrease
partly depends on the spread of educa¬
tion. Family planning programmes will
certainly be useful, but they must be
accompanied by renewed efforts to bring
education to the urban masses.
How will the cities be fed?
How will agriculture respond to the
tremendous pressure of urbanization and
the growth of urban population? A recent
study by the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the
. United Nations Fund for Population
Activities (UNFPA) draws attention to
some of the likely effects.
First, urban populations demand
cheap food. By weight of numbers they
force governments to keep retail prices
down. Governments may make up the
difference by subsidizing farmers but ex
perience has shown that, once estab¬
lished, such subsidies are difficult to with¬
draw.
Second, as urban populations grow and
indigenous agriculture fails to keep up
with demand (for lack of incentive to
increase supply), more food is imported.
This drains off hard currency intended for
capital imports with a view to long-term
development.
Third, urban population increase
means that rural populations and the
agricultural labour force will grow more
slowly. But to meet urban needs agri¬
cultural productivity should be increasing
by 17 per cent for each agricultural
worker in developing countries between
1980 and the year 2000. This figure seems
high, but recent experience in Asia and
Latin America shows that it is possible.
For Africa, however, the increase per
worker will have to be almost 25 per cent,
an eventuality that seems very doubtful in
view of recent events. Research in Africa
has shown that lower production gains
were made in countries with high rural-
urban migration. This contrasts with ex¬
perience in other regions, where rural-
urban migration has been at least partly
the consequence of higher agricultural
labour productivity.
Fourth, tastes in food change under the
influence of urban life-styles, as tradi¬
tional staples are partly replaced by foods
such as bread, meat and vegetables.
Fifth, the growth of urban population
intensifies competition for land, water
and energy. Cities gobble up agricultural
land, often the best land because its fertil¬
ity Was the original attraction which
stimulated urban growth. Between 1980
and the year 2000, according to one
study, cities will devour four million hec¬
tares of land with the potential to feed 84
million people.
Sixth, while malnutrition may be more
widespread among rural populations, the
urban poor suffer more acutely. People in
the lowest income groups normally have
to spend more than half of their incomes
on food.
Balanced approaches
to an urban planet
The transformation from a rural to an
urban planet offers both great blessings
and heavy burdens. The transition from
agrarian to urban has always been consi¬
dered a positive step, part of the process
of modernization. However, the rapid
growth of urban populations in societies
rapidly changing in other ways is fraught
with enormous tension and tremendously
complex problems.
In its search for solutions to problems
of urban population dynamics, UNFPA
puts continuous emphasis on three fun
damental objectives: economic efficien¬
cy, social equity and population balance.
It recognizes that the solution for many
urban problems will only come through
economic efficiency and vast growth of
the productive forces. Economic growth
is essential to any solution of urban prob¬
lems. At the same time social equity
should be pursued, with emphasis on
equal opportunity for all.
Neither economic efficiency nor social
equity can be attained without demo¬
graphic balance balance within and be¬
tween urban and rural areas, balanced
population distribution and balanced
population growth.
RAFAEL M. SALAS, of the Philippines, is an
Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations
and executive director of the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities, which he has
headed since it became operational in 1969. A
graduate of the universities of the Philippines
and of Harvard (USA), he has sen/ed asa Minis¬
ter and occupied other high-level posts in the
Philippine Government.
17
