Eating together
The emergence
of homo sapiens
as a convivial animal
- by Naomichi Ishige
EVEN the most delicious food lacks
savour if it is eaten in solitude. To
enjoy our meals we need a com¬
panion to sit at our table and share our
food with us. Of course, this does not
mean that the pleasures of the table
should be shared with just anyone. It is
better to eat alone than with a stranger.
But we all know people with whom we
are on close terms members of our
family, friends or colleagues, a group
which varies from country to country and
from person to person the people we
feel at ease with when we are at table. We
all belong to a social group through which
we relate to other people. One such
group consists of those who eat together,
and might be called the kyöshoku shüdan
or "conviviality group".
Eating together strengthens the group
and gives it a certain cohesion. A meal is
also a means of communication whereby
people assert their identity within the
group.
Those who share a meal also share
sensations. That is why, in many
societies, ritual celebrations are often
accompanied by feasting, which provides
an opportunity to create new bonds be¬
tween people and to strengthen those
bonds that already exist.
In the animal world, eating is a solitary
activity. A meal is neither a means of
communication nor an occasion to get
together. Mammals give milk to their
young, and birds bring their chicks food
as long as they stay in the nest. But that
can hardly be called conviviality. It is a
temporary relationship, for when the
young have reached maturity they will
feed alone. Carnivores which hunt in
packs sometimes gather around a good
catch and eat it together. But here too
there is no conviviality, despite
appearances.
On the other hand, studies have shown
that chimpanzees may beg their food
from other members of the troop, who
sometimes let them have part of a meal
composed mainly of plants but some
times of prey. If a chimpanzee catches a
large animal or gets hold of some fine
fruit, he is quite prepared to share his
precious trophy with any member of the
troop who pesters him for it. It is often
the female who presses the male to feed
her on his return from the hunt. The
behaviour of chimpanzees is in some
ways reminiscent of the division of labour
between man and woman in the early
18

(Table) manners makyth man
days of mankind, when the man went
hunting and the woman gathered the
fruits of the earth.
There is no reason, however, to think
that the sharing of food among chimpan¬
zees means that they have a preference
for certain members of their troop, espe¬
cially since they behave as individuals
when actually eating.
We can therefore conclude that con
viviality is an attribute peculiar to man,
and has been so since the emergence of
the human race.
Man has been defined as an animal
with the power of speech and the ability
to use tools, but it could also be said that
man is a convivial animal in the sense that
he likes to eat in company. And the basic
unit in which every human being likes to
share his rneal is the family.
"The basic unit in which every human
being likes to share his meal is the family."
19

"In many societies, ritual celebrations are
often accompanied by feasting, which pro¬
vides an opportunity to create new bonds
between people and to strengthen those
bonds that already exist." Left, a wedding
ceremony In the Japanese Shinto tradi¬
tion. The couple make their marriage vows
by exchanging a bowl of saki three times.
"The usefulness of home cooking is chal¬
lenged by ready-to-eat orpre-cooked food
products, or the increasingly popular
practice of eating out In fast food or self-
service restaurants." Below, automatic
vending machines dispense an instant
family snack.
According to the French anthropolog¬
ist Claude Lévi-Strauss, marriage is the
exchange of women between groups, and
women were the first currency in the
history of mankind. Food, however, was
another form of currency. We do not
know whether the family started with the
formation of a couple or whether the
sharing of food between man and woman
came before the couple this is the old
problem of which came first, the chicken
or the egg.
As soon as man stood upright he began
to hunt and learned to handle tools. Meat
began to assume an important place in
people's diet. In all hunting communities
today, the males do the hunting. Since
the dawn of mankind this activity must
have been left to the men because of their
greater physical strength.
The basic unit of society, the family,
was probably established when a man
began to share an animal he had caught
with one particular woman and her chil¬
dren. The family came into being when a
stable sexual relationship was begun be¬
tween the man and the woman, who were
linked by the sharing of food, and when
someone had to be chosen to bring up the
children born of their union.
The man left the dwelling-place to go
hunting and led his life in a wider orbit,
where he had what might be described as
a social life. The woman stayed in or near
the home. Her life was directed more
towards the family gathering fruit and
nuts, looking after the children and the
household. So their ways of life became
differentiated, and the work was divided
into male and female tasks. In almost all
societies the woman is expected to pre¬
pare the family's meals. But a man a
professional chef is often entrusted
with the preparation of meals eaten on
social occasions.
It is clear that man does not regard
eating as a solitary but as a profoundly
social activity. A meal is something to be
shared, not to be consumed in solitude.
This means that rules of conduct must be
established. Table manners are the codi¬
fication of these rules.
All societies have their own rules of
behaviour while eating, even those
societies which do not use tables or any
kind of cutlery whether chopsticks,
knives, forks or spoons where, for ex¬
ample, people eat with their fingers. Such
rules reflect the complex nature of each
culture; they are the outward sign of the
power either of the head of the family or
of religion. When a number of people eat
together, the main cause of disagreement
is the question of how the food is to be
shared. Obviously, if there are no rules
the strongest will prevail. This may be the
origin of table manners, the observance
of which had to be enforced by a familial
or religious authority as a means of keep¬
ing order. In any society, the appropria¬
tion of food which has been offered to
someone else, especially if that person is
about to eat it, is considered to be ex¬
tremely impolite. However, these rules
may be set aside when close relatives or
friends (parents and their children, or
couples) exchange food that has been
partly eaten.
Sex and food are the two principal
bonds that hold the family together. Sex¬
ual relations are reserved for husband
and wife, and are regarded as incestuous
if they occur outside the couple. But all
the members of a family are entitled to
20

share the food on the table, and sharing it
is designed to bring them closer together.
That is why in many cultures the family is
symbolized by the hearth and the oven
which are used in the preparation of food .
This symbol, however, is tending to
lose its meaning in highly industrialized
societies. The usefulness of home cook¬
ing is challenged by ready-to-eat or pre¬
cooked food products, or the increasingly
popular practice of eating out in fast food
or self-service restaurants.
Thus, in technologically advanced
societies, giant food and catering indus¬
tries constitute a challenge to the family
home. Meals have become more indi¬
vidualized. In days gone by, when the
home was both the unit of production and
of consumption in a self-sufficient eco¬
nomy, the individual could not decide
unilaterally when and what to eat. Now,
it matters less if some members of the
family are not present at meal-times.
They eat whenever and whatever they
wish. Does this mean that the very mean¬
ing of the family, based as it is upon the
sharing of food, is disappearing, and that
the human race will soon be eating as
individuals again, much as animals do?
The family has made a material and
economic contribution to the success of
industrialized societies, but it is doubtful
whether society can take its place in pro¬
viding the emotional relationships which
family members husband and wife, pa¬
rents and children establish between
themselves.
The members of a modern family
spend over half their time outside the
home, at work or at school, and for them
the family table is the main meeting
place, the opportunity to confirm mem
bership of the group. If people were to
stop eating together the family would
cease to exist.
The origins of the family can thus be
traced back to the sharing of meals. Mod¬
ern civilization has not yet found another
basic living unit, compatible with human
psychology, to take its place. The present
family system should thus be preserved,
even if it appears outdated, through the
institution of the common meal. For
although eating has become more of an
individual activity than it was in the past,
it seems unlikely that the kitchen or the
family table will cease to be part of our
homes in the near future .
NAOMICH1 ISHIGE, Japanese cultural anthro¬
pologist, teaches at Japan's National Museum of
Ethnology. He is the author of many published
works Including "An Investigation into Food and
Life" and "The Ethnology of Gluttony".
21
