The 'newpoof
by Giovanni Sarpellon
IN the past decade, three phenomena
have been observed in the West
which are gradually bringing major
changes to the structures of production,
society and even culture. These are the
cessation of big-city expansion, the
mushrooming of small and medium-sized
firms, and the return to a personalization
of labour. The combined effects of these
three phenomena undoubtedly mark the
end of the industrial era which, as it gra¬
dually unfolded, saw the birth of the in¬
dustrial giants and, around them, of the
huge conurbations in which the "working
class" acquired its present form.
This transformation has been greatly
facilitated by the establishment, im¬
mediately after the Second World War,
of large industrial firms which sought to
extract maximum benefit from econo¬
mies of scale in the technical and produc¬
tion spheres. However, all the disadvan¬
tages of these vast enterprises became
painfully apparent in the late 1960s and
thereafter: the technical advantages
proved markedly inferior to the dis¬
advantages where labour organization
and management were concerned.
Independently of any value judgement
on the trade union struggles in these
years results have been encouraging in
many respects but discouraging in
others such struggles inevitably
brought big firms into situations of con¬
flict which have had very harmful reper¬
cussions on their management systems.
The swift but silent response has been to
embark on the "deverticalization" of
large firms, which has been matched by
the parallel development of smaller com¬
panies. I am thinking here of small and
medium-sized firms outside urban areas,
whose expansion is facilitated by tech¬
nological innovations.
The present crisis is above all a crisis of
the city, of urban economics and urban
society.
The numbers of workers with which
large-scale urban industry is flooding the
labour market fail to find, on the spot, the
jobs that nevertheless exist in the "out¬
lying" regions where the new production
process is under way. There is thus from
the outset a "territorial" imbalance be¬
tween supply and demand where jobs are
concerned. Consequently there is grow¬
ing unemployment in the big cities. The
great European cities are facing problems
that were formerly inconceivable: fami¬
lies with no means of support claim full
relief, and attempts are made to satisfy
their needs by wholly outdated means
such as soup kitchens and State hostels.
The territorial imbalance between
supply and demand on the labour market
is aggravated by an equally wide gap be¬
tween the occupational skills available
and the skills in demand. Unemployed
workers are primarily to be found in the
heavy industry sector, i.e. they are skilled
in a trade which emerged, more or less
directly, from the industrial revolution of
the nineteenth century. But the jobs cur¬
rently available are increasingly to be
found in the sector of micro-electronics,
indisputably the mainspring of another
"revolution" which is bringing profound
changes to production systems and work¬
ing methods.
The technological revolution poses a
threat to the productive class as a whole,
numerically, economically and political¬
ly. The traditional industrial sectors are
continually losing jobs and are involving
other, related activities in their decline;
new wealth and new social prestige are
developing out of the new occupations,
and, if present trends continue, the num¬
ber of individuals making a living from
their labour is bound to decline.
At the same time, attitudes towards
inequalities are also noticeably shifting.
Many things have changed since the in¬
dustrial revolution, in the ideological as
22

"The numbers of workers with which
large-scale urban Industry Is flooding the
labour market fail to find, on the spot, the
jobs that nevertheless exist in the 'out¬
lying' regions. ... Consequently there is
growing unemployment in the big cities."
well as the material spheres. In the days
of large firms, it was easy to regard pro¬
duction as the fruit of a joint effort in
which it was difficult to single out the
contribution of each individual. Collec¬
tive bargaining determined workers' pay
as the outcome of a conflictual rela¬
tionship with the employer, who con¬
verted part of the workers' labour into
profit. Workers were thus impelled to
join forces in order to defend themselves
against employers, whom they regarded
as growing steadily richer at their
expense.
The situation has since changed, and
by the same token, so have attitudes to
social inequalities. The recent emergence
of the small production unit has set a new
value on the roles of both company direc¬
tor and worker. The specific contribution
of each individual has become more vis¬
ible: that of the employer, who takes the
risks, and that of the worker, who has his
or her personal stake in the success of the
firm. Profit and "personalized" wages
thus become the "fair" remuneration for
the various contributions made to the
running of the firm. Any differences aris¬
ing are thereby justified; and so are the
resulting inequalities.
This new tolerance of positive discri¬
mination (he who makes the greatest con¬
tribution deserves the greatest reward)
nevertheless has its negative side: he who
does not contribute to the joint effort is
entitled to nothing.
The affirmation of this new attitude has
had major repercussions throughout the
Western world, and much criticism has
been levelled at the systems of redistribu¬
tion of resources especially at the aid
granted to population groups outside the
labour market. This process of frag¬
mentation and individualization weakens
the feeling of belonging to a community
and gradually erodes those areas where
social solidarity with the least privileged
categories of the population can flour¬
ish with people who are excluded from
the realm of production and who are thus
in danger of being deprived of the basic
necessities of life.
This is the context in which the prob¬
lem of the new poverty arises. The ex¬
pression is ambiguous, being open to
different interpretations.
The first interpretation assigned to the
new poverty is inappropriate and should
be dropped. It has to do with the emerg¬
ence of "post-materialist" needs (new
needs) peculiar to societies which have
solved their material problems and which
are now increasingly aware of relational,
cultural or even psychological pressures.
Failure to achieve personal fulfilment,
loneliness, frustration, the inability to
make the most of leisure time, and cultu¬
ral dependence, are some of the prob¬
lems which the affluent society not only
fails to solve but which it causes and
positively exacerbates. These are, of
course, extremely important problems to
which we should not remain indifferent.
But it is equally obvious that they have
nothing to do with poverty, even if we
label it "new" poverty. In the context of
the crisis affecting the welfare state and
industrial society, the emphasis placed on
this type of "new poverty" may be seen as
an attempt to reassert the central position
of the traditional productive class and its
right to expect the State to supply it with
the means of satisfying its new needs. It is
no coincidence that this type of demand is
voiced in the same breath as harsh criti¬
cism of systems of aid (to the destitute).
There is another meaning of "new
poverty". A decade of economic difficul¬
ties has necessarily left deep scars on the
world of work. For a start, the steady
improvement in standards of living has
come to a halt, and the middle class has
been abruptly disappointed in its expec¬
tations. Just when the historical pro¬
tagonists of the industrial revolution were
reaping the fruits of their success, a long-
lasting economic crisis has occurred
which now seems to be taking a new turn.
Those who see themselves as the "new
poor" are the passive victims of this
change of direction. These new poor are
people who are excluded from the pro¬
duction process, but, still more, they tend
to be those individuals who stand to lose
their central position in society. The crisis
looming on the horizon is now taking the
form of a crisis in the unions (undermined
by corporatist attitudes), a crisis in the
political parties (weakened by their
dwindling numbers), and a crisis in cul¬
ture (moving towards new themes and
values). The technological revolution has
also thrown up a new race of "tycoons",
whose fingers are on th ; buttons of sci¬
ence, technology and power: they use
computer language and computer print¬
outs, which have reduced the people at
23

Poverty and progress
large to a sort of new illiteracy, not to say
a state of utter dependence.
A new process that creates inequalities
is under way, and no effective measures
have been taken to counter it; it does
seem, however, that there has been a
general growth of awareness. The new
poverty stands revealed as the price that
society must pay if, after a period of
transition of uncertain duration, it is once
again to be able to enjoy a definite im¬
provement in its overall well-being. In
the meantime, both forms of poverty,
new and old, will continue to develop.
The new poor are, and will be, victims
of the crisis and victims of the impact of
the technological revolution. Loss of em¬
ployment is much more serious in a
period burgeoning with innovations in
the production sphere than in a period of
flagging technological progress.
The new poverty has thus evolved from
the world of work: the category most at
risk is that of unemployed adults who lack
the occupational skills made necessary by
the new technologies. There are two cate¬
gories of poor people who are still, for the
time being, in a twilight area, but who
cannot be ignored much longer. These
are the temporarily out-of-work, who are
highly unlikely to find another job in
production, and young people looking
for their first job. The former are not
poor, because they receive unemploy¬
ment benefits, whereas the latter do not
appear in the statistics of poverty because
they are still living at home in families
which are not themselves poor. And yet
both categories are in a situation which is
maintained artificially and which, sooner
or later, will turn into real poverty.
Finally, the fact cannot be glossed over
that, while it is undoubtedly necessary to
pay attention to the new categories of the
poor, whose numbers are steadily in¬
creasing, we must nevertheless not forget
those who have never ceased to live in
conditions which are even worse. This
reminder must be all the more emphatic
in view of the fact that "traditional"
poverty seems to be gaining ground as
growing numbers of individuals find
themselves in precarious and marginal
situations, while, at the same time, sys¬
tems of national assistance seem to be
tending towards steady cutbacks in
benefits, owing to the difficulties with
which national insurance schemes have
increasingly to contend.
GIOVANNI SARPELLON, Italian specialist in
problems ofdevelopment andpoverty, is profes¬
sor of sociology at the University of Venice.

The poorest of the poor
The International Movement ATD Fourth World1 was among the
participants at the international meeting on "Poverty and Prog¬
ress", held at Unesco HQ from 17 to 21 November 1986.
In a working document prepared for the meeting, Huguette
Redegeld and Eugen Brand quote a saying from Africa south of the
Sahara to the effect that "The medicine for Man is Man", and point
out that this "medicine", "for populations weakened by persistent,
acute poverty, is not simply a matter of professional expertise. It
lies in the willingness of men and women to offer an important part
of their lives, to risk their careers in order to work for progress for
others ...
"We note that progress is always slow to reach the poorest of the
poor. When the rest of the population is already beginning to taste
the fruits of forms of progress such as new communications
technologies, the poorest of the poor are still fighting illiteracy and
struggling to learn how to read and write ...
"The very poor should be involved in charting the future. History
shows that if they are not involved at the planning stage of new
projects, then they will not be the beneficiaries of change. Progress
which is meant to benefit everyone has not resulted in the elimina¬
tion of extreme poverty ...
"ATD Fourth World, founded on a refusal to let the weakest be
pushed aside, is pledged to serve those to whom it has made
commitments and with whom it works each day ... The search for
solidarity in face of the plight of the most deprived is a task of such
overriding importance that everything possible should be done to
ensure that it is fruitful. To see man as the centre of progress and to
put the weakest at the heart of our concerns is to take one step
towards mobilizing all mankind for justice and for peace."
