The riddle of the Rosetta
BY JEAN VERCOUTTER
Scholars and adventurers who
rediscovered a forgotten civilization
N 27 September 1822, the French
scholar J e an - F r a n ço i s
Champollion read out to the
members of his country's Académie des In¬
scriptions et Belles-Lettres his celebrated Let¬
tre à M. Dacier, relative à l'alphabet des
hiéroglyphes phonétiques employés par les
Egyptiens, a text which marked a turning-
point in the rediscovery of ancient Egypt.
The civilization of the Pharaohs, with its
grandiose monuments and the exotic facets
of its religion, has always inspired curiosity
and wonder. The writings of Herodotus, of
Diodorus of Sicily, of Strabo and of Petrarch
were rich in detail of the way of life and the
religious practices of the ancient Egyptians.
However, in the fourth century AD,
Christianity became the religion of the
Roman Empire and, in 391, Theodosius I
closed all pagan temples. The Egyptian
priests, who were the only teachers of
hieroglyphic writing, gradually died out,
and with them died all knowledge of the art.
By the sixth century, no one could read the
texts inscribed on monuments or written on
papyrus.
It was not until the seventeenth, and more
particularly, the eighteenth century that in¬
quisitive travellers reawakened interest in
^Discovered near the mouth of the
Nile by an officer of Napoleon's
army in 1799, the Rosetta Stone,
left, was the key to understanding
the long-forgotten language of
ancient Egypt. It bears the text of
a decree by Egyptian priests to
commemorate the crowning of
Ptolemy VEpiphanes, King of
Egypt from 205 to 180 BC,
written in three different scripts:
hieroglyphic at the top, demotic
(the popular language of Egypt at
that time) in the middle, Greek at
the bottom. One of the pioneers of
the decipherment of the
hieroglyphic script was the
French scholarJean-François
Champollion (1790-1832), shown
above in an anonymous 19th-
century portrait. He was the first to
establish an entire list of
hieroglyphs and their Greek
equivalents, providing a basis for
the translation of all Egyptian
hieroglyphic texts.

Stone Napoleon's Egyptian expedition of 1798-1799 was
accompanied by a team of scholars whose mission was to
study and record all aspects of Egypt, ancient and modern.
The team produced a multi-volume work, the Description
de l'Egypte (1809-1830), which contributed to Europe's
growing interest in Egypt. Illustrations from the
Description, below, are views of the temple complex at
Dendara in Upper Egypt drawn by the French engraver
Vivant Denon (1 747-1 825), who accompanied the
Egyptian expedition.
.
Egypt, its monuments and its mysterious
writing. The works of Benoit de Maillet and
Claude Sicard, and Constantin François de
Volney's Voyage en Syrie et Egypte (1787;
"Travels Through Syria and Egypt"), fur¬
nished details of the geography of the coun¬
try and of its great temples, while Vivant
Denon's sketches made the face of Egypt
known to Europeans.
Denon was an attractive personality who
lived a very full life. After serving as a gentle¬
man-in-waiting to Louis XV and then as
embassy secretary at St. Petersburg and
Naples under Louis XVI, he persuaded
Napoleon to allow him to join his expedition
to Egypt in 1798, "despite his age" (he was
then fifty!). Appointed Director of
Museums by Napoleon on his return from
Egypt, he created the Musée Napoléon, now
the Louvre Museum.
Vivant Denon's Voyage dans la Basse et la
Haute Egypte ("Travels Through Upper and
Lower Egypt") marked the beginning of a
rebirth of interest in ancient Egypt. Pub¬
lished in Paris in 1802, it was a runaway
success throughout Europe. It ran to forty
successive editions and was translated into
English and German.
Denon had accompanied General Desaix's
detachment to Upper Egypt where, often at
risk of his life and sometimes bearing arms
himself, he sketched all the Pharaonic monu¬
ments he came across. The charm of his
evocative drawings fuelled the "Egyptoma-
nia" that was rife both among the educated
élite and the general public. Egyptian-style
furniture and knick-knacks proliferated
and an unexpected consequence this the
theft of antiquities soared.
Vivant Denon's book was followed short¬
ly afterwards by Description de l'Egypte, a
massive work consisting of nine volumes of
text and eleven large tomes of maps and
illustrations. This was the work of the
150 scholars who accompanied Napoleon to
Egypt; it was published between 1809
and 1830. In 1822, however, the riddle of the
hieroglyphs with which the walls of many
Egyptian monuments were covered re¬
mained unsolved and the real story of Egypt
of the Pharaohs remained shrouded in
mystery.
In August 1799, during the preparation of
earthworks near Rosetta (Rashid), to the east
of Alexandria, an officer of Napoleon's
army noticed a stone of black basalt covered
with inscriptions. His superior, General
Menou, had the stone taken to Alexandria
and showed it to the scholars accompanying
the expedition. The stone was inscribed with
three texts. The one at the top was in hiero¬
glyphic characters, the middle one in charac¬
ters that looked somewhat like Arabic wri¬
ting, and the one at the bottom in Greek
characters. Since several of the scholars knew
Greek, they were immediately able to read
the bottom text, a decree dating
from 196 BC, during the reign of
Ptolemy V. Deducing, correctly, that these
were three versions of the same text, they
realized that they had in their hands a poten¬
tial key to hieroglyphic writing.
The scholars took rubbings and made
several copies of the inscriptions. This was
fortunate, since, on the surrender of the
French forces, the British seized the
"Rosetta Stone" as war booty. It is today in
the British Museum, London.
News of the discovery of the Rosetta
Stone spread quickly throughout Europe,
and there began a fiercely competitive race to
be the first to decipher the mysterious
writing.
Jean-François Champollion was the most
fervent, and also the youngest, of these com¬
petitors. Born at Figeac in southwest France
in 1790, he grew up in a milieu in which
Egypt was a consuming passion. His
brother, Jacques-Joseph Champollion, who
had been unable to take part in the expedi¬
tion to Egypt, was secretary to the mathema¬
tician, Egyptologist and Prefect of the Isère
département, Joseph Fourier. Fourier had
been among the scholars who had accompa¬
nied the Egyptian expedition and on his
return to France he wrote the lengthy histor¬
ical preface to the Description de l'Egypte.
Brought up in contact with two such men,
Jean-François himself became passionately
interested in Egypt. On seeing a copy of the
Rosetta Stone inscriptions he vowed that he
would be the first to decipher the hiero¬
glyphs. At the age of thirteen, with this
objective in mind, he not only learned Latin
and Greek but also Hebrew, Arabic, Syriac
and Aramaic. In addition, at the age of seven¬
teen, he also acquired Persian and Coptic,
for he had become convinced that Coptic
was, in fact, ancient Egyptian transcribed in
Greek characters.
In 1821, after some misadventures result-

ing from dabbling in politics, Champollion
settled in Paris near nis brother who was
now secretary to Bon Joseph Dacier, a Hel¬
lenist, and Perpetual Secretary of the
Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres.
He devoted himself wholly to his research
whilst keeping an anxious eye on the pro¬
gress of his rivals, the English physicist
Thomas Young, his compatriot Sylvestre de
Sacy and the Swede Johan David Akerblad,
all of whom were attempting to unravel the
secret of Egyptian writing.
Like Champollion himself, they were all
faced with the same conundrum. Was
Egyptian writing ideographic or phonetic?
In other words, did each character represent
an idea or a sound? On 14 September 1832,
Champollion had the sudden intuition that
Egyptian was both ideographic and
phonetic. With the help of the Rosetta Stone
and copies of inscriptions from other monu¬
ments sent to him from Egypt by friends, he
succeeded in deciphering the names of
Greek and Roman rulers: Alexander,
Cleopatra, Arsinoe, Augustus, Nero, and so
on. With these names as a starting point he
succeeded in deciphering the basic
alphabetical characters; and from the names
of the Caesars and the Ptolemies he went on
to unravel those of the Egyptian
Pharaohs the Ramesses and the Tuthmosis
Dynasties. Gradually increasing the number
of hieroglyphic characters he could recog¬
nize at eacn stage of his research, he ended up
by being able to read them all. By working at
ever longer texts he finally mastered the
Egyptian language.
Despite the jealousy that his discoveries
aroused, his achievement gradually gained
recognition. With the backing of some high-
ranking members of the court, he was
This granite bust of Ramesses II (c. 1290-1224
BC) is the sole remaining part of a great colossus
of the king from his vast mortuary temple, the
Ramesseum, on the west bank of the Nile at
Thebes. Drawing of the sculpture being dragged
to the river was made in 1816 by the Italian
gatherer of antiquities Giambattista Belzoni,
who had been commissioned to organize its
removal to the British Museum.
nominated Curator of the Egyptian collec¬
tions at the Louvre Museum. In 1827 he
achieved the ambition of his life when he was
entrusted with a mission of exploration in
Egypt. Setting out in 1828, accompanied by
a number of excellent artists, such as Nestor
LlHôte, and a team of Italians led by his
pupil and friend Rossellini, he spent fifteen
months scouring the valley of the Nile from
Alexandria to Aswan, stopping for a time at
Abu Simbel and going as far as the Second
Cataract. He was able to write with pride to
his patron Dacier: "I can now inform you
that no changes will be necessary in our
Lettre sur l'Alphabet des Hiéroglyphes
("Paper on the Hieroglyphic Alphabet");
our alphabet is correct and holds equally
good (...) for the inscriptions on all the tem¬
ples, palaces and tombs of the Pharaonic
epochs."
Whilst Champollion and his rivals were
hard at work deciphering the hieroglyphics,
the first effect of the "Egyptomania" which
had become the rage with the publication of
Vivant Denon's book and the Description de
l'Egypte was to arouse the covetousness of
collectors, and in particular of the great
European museums, all of which wanted
their own collection of Egyptian antiquities.
Furthermore, scores of adventurers were
attracted to Egypt in the hope of making a
quick fortune.
Egypt was, in theory, under the
sovereignty of the Sultan of Constantinople,
but, in fact, the Viceroy, Mehemet Ali, ruled
the country as an absolute monarch.
Mehemet Ali wanted to modernize the
country and had little interest in antiquities.
As a result, taking advantage of their pri¬
vileged diplomatic status, the foreign consuls
obtained from him the necessary permits to
carry out archaeological excavations and
take away ancient monuments. They re¬
cruited agents amongst adventurers, whom
they engaged to carry out excavations in
their name and to bring back the antiquities
discovered or bought. It was in this manner
that a number of important collections were
constituted.
The Italian diplomat and collector
Bernardino Drovetti, who was French Con¬
sul General in Egypt between 1810
and 1829, took advantage of his long tenure
to indulge in some profitable trafficking in
The French Egyptologist Auguste Mariette
(1821-1881) made his name with the excavation
of the Serapeum, a temple at Saqqara (Memphis)
which was originally the necropolis of the Apis
bulls, sacred animals of the god Ptah. The
subterranean chambers of the temple, which
Mariette entered in 185 1 , yielded the mummies
of 64 Apis bulls. This engraving made in 1858
shows a newly excavated gate of the Serapeum.
antiquities, at times directing the search for
them himself. His agents pillaged sites un¬
scrupulously, especially in the area of
Thebes. He offered a first collection to
Louis XVIII, but the French monarch found
the price too high. It was acquired by the
king of Piedmont and the Museum of Turin
thus became the owner of the first Egyptian
collection of high quality.
Encouraged by this, Drovetti put to¬
gether a second collection which, on
Champollion's advice, Louis XVIII's suc¬
cessor Charles X bought for the Louvre
Museum. He then built up a third collection
which was bought by the king of Prussia
in 1 836. Not so large as the other two, it was
nevertheless very fine.
Appointed British consul in 1816, the
artist Henry Salt followed Drovetti's exam¬
ple. He too assembled three successive col¬
lections. The first was bought by the British
Museum, except for its finest piece the ala¬
baster sarcophagus of Sethos I which was
sold to a private collector for the same price
as all the rest of the collection. The second
and much more important collection was
acquired by Charles X in 1824. Thanks to
the combined collections of Salt and
Drovetti, the Egyptian department of the
Louvre became the equal of that of the
Museum of Turin. Salt's third collection was
sold after his death, the major part of it going
to the British Museum.
These outstanding collections could never
have been put together without the untiring
efforts of the consuls' agents, notably the
Frenchman Jean-Jacques Rifaud, who
worked for Drovetti, a Greek named
Giovanni d'Athanasi, and above all the ex¬
traordinary Italian Giambattista Belzoni,
who acted for Salt. Born in Padua, Belzoni
had considered becoming a monk when he
was twenty, but instead he went to England
where, as a circus entertainer, he astonished
the public with his incredible feats of
strength. Later he turned up in Portugal, in
Spain, in Malta and finally in Egypt. There
he perfected a hydraulic pump of his own
invention for use in irrigation, but the ven¬
ture was not a success as Mehemet Ali re¬
fused to buy it. Penniless, he was recom¬
mended to Salt who took him into his ser¬
vice. Evidence of his astuteness and prodi- .
gious strength abounds in the narrative he
left of his Travels in Egypt and Nubia, dur¬
ing which he gathered antiquities for Salt.
Champollion's discoveries, and the pub¬
lications to which they gave rise, were to
form the basis of the training of the first
Egyptologists, among whom were some
outstanding figures.
Karl Lepsius, who studied at the College
de France, learned to read hieroglyphs from
posthumously published works by
Champollion. From 1842 to 1845 he headed
a great expedition to Egypt organized by the
king of Prussia. Appointed to a profes-

sorship at the University of Berlin, he was
the father of German Egyptology. His major
work, Denkmaeler aus Aegypten und
Aethiopien ("Monuments of Egypt and
Ethiopia") describes all the monuments of
the Nile Valley from the Fourth Cataract to
the Mediterranean.
John Wilkinson can, perhaps, be consi¬
dered the father of British Egyptology.
Abandoning a military career, he settled in
Egypt where he undertook archaeological
digs for more than ten years. In his Manners
and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, he
was the first to describe the daily life of the
craftsmen and peasants of Pharaonic times as
depicted in tomb paintings.
After studying engineering and archi¬
tecture, the Frenchman Prisse d'Avennes had
an adventurous life as a young man. He
fought against the Turks in the Péloponnèse
and then became secretary to the Governor
General of India before settling in Egypt
where he devoted himself to archaeology.
He gave the Louvre the "Royal Chamber",
or "Hall of the Ancestors", removed from
the temple of Karnak just before Lepsius
arrived to take possession of it. He donated
to France the "Prisse Papyrus", a long and
precious document which dates from
2000 BC and has been described as the oldest
book in the world.
Finally, Auguste Mariette ensured the
future of the burgeoning discipline of
Egyptian archaeology by putting a stop to
the traffic in antiquities which had involved
quantities of objects, monuments and papyri
taken from Egypt either under cover of offi
cial permits or as booty from clandestine
excavations.
A secondary school teacher at Boulogne-
sur-Mer, Mariette was irresistibly drawn to
Egypt after seeing the drawings of Nestor
L'Hôte. Using Champollion's Grammaire
he taught himself to read hieroglyphs. Then,
after obtaining a modest post at tne Louvre
Museum, he was sent in 1850 on a mission to
Egypt to buy Coptic manuscripts. While
waiting for the permits necessary to make
these purchases he made a visit to Saqqara.
The sight of a few sphinxes, half buried in the
sand, reminded him of a text of Strabo which
mentioned an avenue lined with sphinxes
which led up to the Serapeum, the tombs of
the Apis bulls. Abandoning the Coptic
manuscripts, he decided to excavate. Un¬
covering sphinx after sphinx, he traced out
the avenue he had discovered and found that
it did indeed lead to the Serapeum, where he
dug out the enormous sarcophagi of the
sacred bulls and everything around them.
This discovery caused a great sensation
and earned Mariette an international repu¬
tation. But above all, having tasted the joys
of working in the field and experiencing the
heady intoxication of discovery during the
months of feverish exploration, he could no
longer do without them. Through the good
offices of Ferdinand de Lesseps, the viceroy
of Egypt, Said Pasha, entrusted Mariette
with the task of protecting the antiquities of
Egypt. In 1858 he appointed Mariette to the
post of Director of Works for the
Antiquities of Egypt and gave him all the
resources needed for action. Mariette then
began archaeological excavations at Giza,
Saqqara, Abydos, Thebes and Elephantine
and assembled all his finds in Cairo.
Anxious to protect all the objects and
monuments of ancient Egypt, Mariette had
the very greatest difficulty in ensuring the
application of the necessary measures.
Nevertheless, from that time, thanks to his
efforts, the foundations of the Egyptian



Antiquities Service and of the Cairo
Museum were laid. After his death, in 1881,
his work was continued by his successor,
Gaston Maspero. The way ahead was traced
out and was to lead to the great discoveries
which would lead to a deeper understanding
of Pharaonic Egypt the secret hiding-place
of the royal mummies at Deir el-Bahri, the
tomb of Tutankhamun and the royal tombs
ofTanis.
JEAN VERCOUTTER is a French Egyptologist
who was formerly director of the French Institute
of Oriental Archaeology in Cairo and of the Sudan
Antiquities Service, and professor of Egyptology at
the University of Lille, France. He is the author of
numerous works on ancient Egypt, including
Textes biographiques du Sérapeum de Memphis
(1962; "Biographical Texts from the Serapeum of
Memphis") and A la recherche de l'Egypte oubliée
(1986; "In Search of Forgotten Egypt").
