Archives ofthe Planet
WITNESS TO THE WORLD
Auguste Léon: Children in Aswan, Egypt, 1914
THE ALBERT KAHN
COLLECTIONS
Autochromes from the Albert Kahn Collections
have been reproduced in colour in several books,
including Les Archives de la Planète, in two
volumes ("France", and "The World"), with an
introductory text by Jeanne Beausoleil, curator of
the Albert Kahn Collections, and Mariel J.
Brunhes Delamarre (Hachette Réalités, Paris,
1979), and Villages et villageois au Tonkin 191 i et
1920 (Albert Kahn Collections, 1987). A collec¬
tion of autochromes taken in Ireland in 1913 will
be published shortly. A comprehensive catalogue
was compiled for the exhibition "Au-delà d'un
jardin ... Albert Kahn", which was held at the
Cultural Centre, Boulogne-Billancourt, in 1986.
"Life. We must seize it wherever it is,
abroad, in the street, everywhere." These
words of Albert Kahn (1860-1940) could
have served as his motto. This French finan¬
cier invested his immense wealth in an ambi¬
tious humanitarian project which became his
life's work: to reconcile the peoples of the
world through furthering communication,
by all possible means, between those "who
hold in their hands the destiny of nations".
He was one of the first men whose actions
kindled the idea of internationalism.
In 1910, grasping the importance of
photography and cinema as major mediums
for documenting the human heritage, he
decided to draw up, under the title of
"Archives of the Planet", a "kind of photo¬
graphic inventory of the surface of the globe,
as inhabited and worked by man, as it was at
the beginning of the century", in order to
"fix in the memory once and for all the
different aspects of human activity, the cus¬
toms and practices, the inevitable disappear¬
ance of which is only a question of time".
A breakthrough in photographic tech¬
niques had just occurred the autochrome
process, developed by the Lumière
brothers which meant that colours could
be directly reproduced for the first time.
Kahn entrusted Jean Brunhes, pioneer of
human geography in France, with the re¬
sponsibility of directing the missions of
photographers and film-makers who, from
1910 to 1931 (the date of Kahn's financial
ruin), travelled the world and brought back
around 72,000 autochrome plates and some
140,000 metres of film. Far from being taken
at random, these images were intended to be
of great significance, not only in themselves
but also as regards the accompanying
documentary records, which have not yet all
been brought together. The pictures were
later shown to the personalities from all over
the world whom Kahn invited to his home.
Of this inspired innovator, who in the
service of the "planetary" philanthropic mis¬
sion which he felt was invested in him, set up
a number of foundations, bursaries and a
club, Autour du Monde, whose members
widened their horizons by travel, two
memorials remain. The gardens, revealing
inspiration from many lands, which Kahn
laid out at his home in Boulogne-sur-Seine,
France, and the "Archives of the Planet",
now reorganized into a photo-library and a
film-library. The gardens and the libraries
are open to the public.
Three autochromes from this unique col¬
lection are reproduced here in black and
white, and another in colour on page 2. D
16

WITNESS TO THE WORLD
	 **»>> rt»'P'i«>* ' m^ i.*^****
Auguste Léon: Place de la Nation, Paris, 14 May 1918, during the First World War.
Sandbags protect the "Triumph of the Republic" monument from bombardments.
Léon Busy: Hands of a writer, Tonkin
(northern Viet Nam during the French colonial period), 1915
17
