Long-range learning
Australian education responds to the challenge of distance
BY MALCOLM SKILBECK
Australians have always had to
contend with the factor of dis¬
tance. Early forms of adapta¬
tion to remoteness and low population
density included the one-teacher school
and the itinerant teacher. Residential
facilities for students were also provided
at an early stage at State high schools in
provincial centres and at universities in
the capital cities of the States.
Early this century the primary and
secondary sectors of the State Education
Departments (together with the tertiary
sector, led by the Brisbane-based Uni¬
versity of Queensland) established cor¬
respondence programmes which have
since matured into a wide array of orga¬
nizations providing education at a dis¬
tance, such as the School of the Air, the
Correspondence School, and various
distance education networks and de¬
partments of external studies.
Despite differences of level, approach
and organization, these programmes all
subscribe to the principle that struc¬
tured, formal education in a very wide
range of subjects can and should be
made available to people regardless of
their physical location, their direct ac¬
cess to teachers, libraries and laborator¬
ies, their age or stage of educational
development.
	 32 	
The conventional view that formal
education is contingent on attendance at
schools, colleges or universities and pre¬
sence in classrooms, laboratories and
workshops, in face-to-face contact with
teachers, is not so much displaced as
expanded by the advocates of distance
education. All the elements of the con¬
ventional approach to teaching and
learning are translated into comparable
programmes of education at a distance
using all the available means of
communication.
While distance educators are in
theory ready to use whatever means and
media seem appropriate, in practice
selection is necessary, and it inevitably
takes into account practical considera¬
tions among which cost and utility rank
high. The written word is still the single
most important vehicle of distance
education at all levels.
The early emergence and success of
correspondence education at school and
university level depended, of course,
upon a comprehensive, reliable postal
service. Such a service, now taken for
granted, is relatively recent. In a country
the size of Australia, the establishment
of the postal service was a major public
sector achievement of the nineteenth
century.
"

Teachers check a video tape
for use with the Kalgoorlie
School of the Air, Western
Australia.
I
Left, Black Mountain
telecommunications tower
on the shores of Lake
Burley Griffin, Canberra.
::l
Effective and varied means of com¬
munication are of vital importance to
the distance education college or univer¬
sity. Although the written word is fun¬
damental, texts can now be produced
and transmitted by modern technolo¬
gies such as word processing, electronic
mail and a range of reprographic techni¬
ques. Graphics also play an important
role in the design and presentation of
text, and the use of audio and video
tapes, telephone and video tutorials, and
satellite broadcasts, is increasing. Tuto¬
rial advice and guidance are available to
students night and day by telephone,
and library delivery services are able to
despatch books at twenty-four hours'
notice to any point in the country.
	 33 	

The challenge is to integrate all of
these elements into a comprehensive
teaching-learning system, using low
unit-cost technologies, and to make
education accessible to any student,
anywhere in the country, who can
benefit from the opportunities it pro¬
vides. Recognizing this formidable chal¬
lenge, the Federal Government, which
funds higher education, is now propos¬
ing significant changes, including a re¬
duction in the overall number of provid¬
ers of distance higher education from
over forty universities and colleges to
six national Distance Education
Centres.
While open access is the goal," the
number of students participating in dis¬
tance education programmes is still re¬
latively small. Of a total Australian uni¬
versity and college population of
420,000 in 1988, approximately 48,000
are enrolled in external, distance or off-
campus programmes. The trend of enrol¬
ments is, however, definitely upward.
The choice of subjects offered by dis¬
tance education in Australia is already
considerable, yet there is need for even
greater variety. Growth during the past
decade has resulted in a disproportion¬
ate provision of programmes and
courses in the arts, humanities and social
sciences. This is not surprising, nor is it
cause for regret. Institutions have re¬
sponded to student demand and have
satisfied many interests in so doing.
Furthermore, courses in these disci
plines have been easier to develop than
in those requiring more laboratory,
workshop or fieldwork provision.
The British Open University
pioneered the philosophy of the second
chance in higher education. Australian
institutions have followed suit and will
continue to explore this theme, for ex¬
ample in relation to groups that have
been under-represented in higher edu¬
cation: lower socio-economic groups,
Aborginals, and women (now,
however, in some subjects more strong¬
ly represented than men). But access to
distance education is increasingly
associated with trained professionals,
who need to upgrade or change their
skills.
Important as is the emphasis on the



needs of the professions and the con¬
tinuing commitment to the principle of
the "second chance", perhaps the
greatest challenge to higher distance
education lies in the continuing de¬
velopment, appraisal and renewal of
basic educational philosophies and
strategies. As the target groups change
to embrace an ageing, more highly edu¬
cated, professionally sophisticated and
consumption-conscious population,
education policies and approaches must
be adapted accordingly.
MALCOLM SKILBECK is Vice-Chancellor of
Deakin University, one of Australia's main pro¬
viders of distance tertiary education. He was
director of the Australian Curriculum Develop¬
ment Centre from 1975 to 1981.
Using the 2-way radio, these youngsters receive
daily lessons and assignments, ask and answer
questions, and listen to other pupils.
34
