Mount Taishan (People's
Republic of China)
Inscribed on the World He-
5¡"Q ritage List in 1987 for its ex-
Ilffpy ceptional association of
cultural and natural ele
ments, Mt. Taishan is the
oldest and the most impor¬
tant example of an ancient
geological transformation
system in eastern China, rich in fossils da¬
ting back to Cambrian times. Up to 462
species of medicinal plants are known to
come from the area, and some of the trees
are hundreds of years old. Twenty-two
temples, 97 sites of ancient ruins, 819 stone
tablets and 1,018 cliffside and stone inscrip¬
tions are among the many traces of China's
rich cultural heritage which have been
found in the area. Here, in one of the birth¬
places of Chinese civilization, evidence of
human activity dates back 400,000 years.
During Neolithic times (5,000-6,000 years
ago), the Dawenkou and Longshan cultures
flourished, on the north and south sides of
the mountain respectively. These moun¬
tainsides were also the sites of 2 rival States,
Qi and Lu, and their cultural artefacts cre¬
ated between 770 and 476 BC. Ruins of a
500-km wall built by the State of Qi can still
be seen in the area. Some of the temples on
Mt. Taishan, such as the Temple of the
Heavenly Rock, the Temple of the Queen
Mother of the West, and the Temple of the
Azure Clouds, are important Buddhist and
Taoist centres.



The world's wild places
AN old man climbed the steep
mountain. Oak forests spread their
canopy below him; pines and Cy¬
prus clung with gnarled roots to the fissures
of stone beside his path. His disciples fol¬
lowed, their thigh muscles quivering with
strain. They reached the painted temple at
the summit and slept, huddled in their
robes. The old man rose again before dawn.
He stood on a rock overhanging the abyss.
Far beneath, the plain stretched unbroken
for 200 kilometres towards the eastern sea.
The sun rose and suddenly flared, refracted
by layers of still air into a two-part goblet of
red jade. "The world is small!" exclaimed
the old man, and his disciples wrote it
down.
It was two and a half thousand years ago
that Confucius watched the sunrise from
Taishan Mountain. Last year, in December
1987, at the proposal of the Chinese Gov¬
ernment, Mount Taishan was declared a
World Heritage site. In addition to its sig¬
nificance for the hundreds of thousands of
Chinese who climb to its summit each year,
it is also a global treasure.
Approximately one-third of the sites in¬
cluded on the World Heritage List are there
because of their natural beauty and scientific
importance. They include mountains such
as Sagarmatha, Mother of the Universe,
which Westerners call Mount Everest,
gorges such as the Grand Canyon, and sea-
coasts such as Australia's Great Barrier
Reef. Some are remote and difficult of ac¬
cess, such as Tassili n'Ajjer in the Algerian
Sahara. The significance of some sites is not
widely appreciated. A knowledge of evolu
tionary theory is needed, for example, to
understand the importance of the rainbow
array of fish flapping in a fisherman's net on
the shores of Lake Malawi.
Many World Heritage sites possess a nat¬
ural grandeur that has drawn people to them
for worship through the ages. Ayers Rock
in Australia is sacred to the Aborigines, as
Machu Picchu in Peru was to the Incas. Not
only Confucius but most of China's em¬
perors and even the modern leaders of Chi¬
na have climbed Mount Taishan. Temples,
bridges and a 6,660-step staircase have been
built there, and inscribed stone stelae
erected.
The World Heritage natural sites de¬
scribed below fall into three groups. The
first group comprises habitats of the great
herds of large mammals which are among

«.
aBÈËf***
£;^^
1
rt
-a
c
U
¿c *pS?Mr
© ^
'.flWr' -
3
-Û
O
U
"o
_c
s
0
S
-C HH 1 1 V"~v
^Wood Buffalo National Park
(Canada)
Straddling the border between
Alberta and Northwest Territo¬
ries in northern Canada, Wood
Buffalo (44,800 km2) is one of
the world's biggest national parks. On its
vast northern plains are found such typical
animals of the region as wolf, lynx, Amer¬
ican hare, black bear, muskrat, beaver and
marten. But it is renowned above all for its
free-ranging herd of some 6,000 bison. The
Park was created in 1922 to protect the last
survivors of the North American bison
population and repopulated with bison in
the following years. Inscribed on the World
Heritage List in 1983, it contains one of the
world's biggest inland deltas where the
great Athabasca and Peace rivers flow into
Lake Athabasca, attracting hundreds of
thousands of migrating birds. The winters
are long and hard; the summers short and
hot. The dry climate is a cause of the forest
fires which have helped to create the present
mosaic of plant life. The Park management
plan is designed to cope with the fire prob¬
lem and to regulate access, facilities for vis¬
itors, the protection of the bison and the
exploitation of resources by local people.
Nature's most spectacular phenomena. The
second group features wetlands, and the
third Biosphere Reserves, areas where a
whole new concept of management is being
practised with the aim of harmonizing the
needs of people and nature.
Homes of the large mammals
Serengeti National Park is in the United
Republic of Tanzania, which has set aside a
larger proportion of its land for various
forms of conservation than any other coun¬
try. The Park was declared a World Heri¬
tage site in 1981. Not far away, in the strata
of the Olduvai Gorge, lie the skulls and
handbones of our earliest ancestors, Homo
habilis and Homo erectus. Not all the mam¬
mals they knew have survived, but if we
ever hope to imagine what it was like to be
only one fragile mammal among many, it
must be on the African plains.
The Serengeti National Park covers
14,763 km2, an area with the greatest con¬
centration of plains animals left anywhere in
the world. During the rainy season wilde-
beeste and zebra feed on the short-grass
plains of the southern Serengeti. They
browse among purple and yellow wild
flowers in November, then, as the grass
dries, male wildebeeste begin to circle their
females, gathering harems together. At the
height of the rut in May the plains shimmer
with heat and yellow dust, as the bulls
frantically charge round and round their
collection of jostling, bleating mates.
Then, on some signal still unknown to us,
the whole mass of animals turns northward.
They gallop for days towards the better
watered bush country in the north. The grey
torrent of wildebeeste pours over the banks
of streams and swims across rivers. The
six-month-old calves run to keep up with
the other animals; many die on the way.
Whatever the strange urgency that drives
them, only death can keep them from their
goal.
Today discoveries are still being made
about the behaviour of the great mammals
that roam the world's wild places such as the
Serengeti. Perhaps the most startling is that
of elephant infrasound. Elephants, like
other mammals, have a complex social
structure. Matriarchal groups of females
roam apart from the bachelor bulls, al¬
though the two sexes sometimes join each
other as if by telepathy. Dr. Katherine
Payne of Cornell University (USA) has
found that elephants bellow to each other at
frequencies far below the range of human
hearing, with a volume that carries over
several kilometres.
Africa is not the only continent of vast
herds. When the first Europeans reached
North America, perhaps 50 to 60 million
bison roamed the plains. A portion of that
heritage is preserved in another World Heri¬
tage site, Wood Buffalo National Park, in
Canada, which at 44,800 km2 is one of the
world's largest national parks. Its 5,000 to
6,000 bison are the last remnant of North
America's great wild herds. They graze on
the salt-adapted grasses and wild flowers of
saline meadows, where the puddles are ring¬
ed with white rime, and wallow among the
grass and sedge of the huge inland delta of
the Peace and Athabasca Rivers. They roam
through woods of spruce and jackpine, as¬
pen, poplar, tamarack and birch. The bison
share the land with hundreds of thousands
Lake Malawi National Park
(Malawi)
Of all the African lakes which
are known for their great depth
and volume of water, Lake Ma¬
lawi is perhaps the most impor¬
tant biologically. It has more than 500 spe¬
cies of fish, of which 90 per cent are
endemic. One well-known group, the col¬
ourful Mbuna, consists of rock-dwelling
fish with highly localized home-ranges.
This and several other species occur in small
populations of a few hundred individuals.
The sedentary nature of most of the lake's
fish species, including the Mbuna, restricts
them to shoreline locations along specific
islands. The Lake Malawi National Park,
which covers about 94 km2, includes the
relatively large Cape Maclear Peninsula, 3
other smaller mainland areas and 12 islands
of varying size. The protection given to lake
waters within 100 m of all terrestrial parts
of the Park, though it protects only 7 km2 of
water area, preserves the habitat of the
endemic species of fish. Several Iron Age
sites are located in the Park, which was
established in 1980 and inscribed on the
World Heritage List in 1984, primarily in
recognition of its natural value. Although
the Park represents only 0.04 per cent of
Lake Malawi, it has contributed greatly to
the recognition of the lake as part of Mala¬
wi's natural heritage and to the improved
management of the resources of the lake as
a whole. Lake Malawi National Park was
inscribed on the World Heritage List in
1984.

of migrating waterfowl, with nesting
whooping cranes, with bear, beavers, musk-
rat, and wolves. Especially wolves. The bi¬
son are regulated by their own natural pred¬
ators, not by the reluctant calculations of
game managers.
The original inhabitants of the Park are
the rare, shaggy, forest-adapted wood bi¬
son. Many of the herd, however, are plains
bison descended from a small group saved
from extinction in the last century by the
New York Zoological Society. Nowadays it
is true for Wood Buffalo Park, as for the
Serengeti, that "no significant component is
missing; no natural influence is excluded".
More and more of the great parks and
large mammals need the active care of hu¬
man beings. One such case is that of the
white rhinoceros of the Garamba National
Park, in northern Zaire, on the Sudanese
border. With a total area of some 4,480 km2,
the Park ranges from fairly dense woods in
the south to tree savannah in the north. It
has a unique population of the heavy,
square-lipped white rhino, whose territory
is cut off to the south by Zaire's great rain
forest. The Park was founded in 1938 specif¬
ically to help save the white rhino, of which
there were an estimated 1,000 in 1960. By
1980, when Garamba became a World Heri
tage site, after two decades of war and
poaching there were just twelve white rhi¬
nos left.
Rhino horn sells at a high price and at¬
tracts mounted bands 'of poachers armed
with high-powered rifles and automatic
weapons. The Park staff burn the grass as a
preventive measure early in the season, so
that the animals take cover in dense riverside
woodlands. Otherwise the poachers would
set fire to the high late-season grass, and kill
their prey as it flees before a wall of flame.
Now, with international support, the
staff of Garamba can begin to count their
successes. Every rhino wears a radio that
transmits its ranging patterns, and the Park
monitors the animals by plane. This year's
cohort of calves has raised the total pop¬
ulation to twenty-three.
It is not only in Africa that war destroys
animals as well as people. The last wild
European bison was killed in 1919. It lived
in Bialowieza forest, which straddles the
Soviet and Polish borders. Ironically, the
forest itself exists in part because during the
Middle Ages there were bloody disputes
between neighbouring princes, and the re¬
gion was almost entirely depopulated. In the
fifteenth century it became a royal hunting
preserve. Today, the central core of 47 km2
is almost the only true virgin forest in cen¬
tral Europe.
Once the forest sheltered auroch, the now
extinct ancestor of modern cattle, and tar-
pan, which survived there until the eight¬
eenth century. The bison herd numbered a
few hundred animals at the start of the First
World War. Soldiers and poachers wiped
them out. Then, in 1923, Professor Jan Szto-
loman of Poland proposed that efforts
should be made to reconstitute the herd.
British, German, Polish and Swedish scien¬
tists discovered fifty-four bison in the zoos
of Europe, though many were hybrids with
domestic stock. Careful back-crossing, a
pedigree book in which every bison calf is
named, and management through winter
feeding and summer surveillance have mul¬
tiplied the herd. Today, some 500 bison
wander the cathedral-columned glades of
Bialowieza National Park, which is now on
the World Heritage List. A further twenty
live in stalls, in strict isolation as a reserve
stock, in case of epidemic. And elsewhere in
Europe there are about 200 other breeding
centres for bison.
Wetland sites
If land is often a scarce resource, so is
water, and the world's wetlands are often
subjected to a tug-of-war between different
uses. This is illustrated by the five World
Heritage sites described in this section: two
lakes, one wild river, and two low-lying
swamps.
Lake Malawi, which is over 760 metres
deep, was created only some 5,000 years ago
in a fissure of the Great Rift Valley. Below
the plunging mountainside the valley is rich
and fertile. Around the edge of the lake are
small farms and villages. Fishermen paddle
their boats, ply the lake in craft powered
with new outboard motors, or haul ashore
U-shaped nets containing rainbow-hued
fish belonging to species that exist nowhere
else on Earth.
Perhaps two dozen species of African fish
entered Lake Malawi after the cataclysm of
its birth. Now, in an evolutionary instant,
their numbers have risen to between 500 and
1,000 species, virtually all of them endemic.
The explanation for this multitude of spe¬
cies seems to be that most fish have a great
love of home. The shore of Lake Malawi is
divided into rocky points and sandy bays.
Fish which live among the rocks rarely cross
the sand to the next set of rocks, and sand-
loving fish, though more mobile, still do not
travel far. The lake is thus divided into a set
of discrete habitats, each with its own, limit¬
ed gene pool. The fish of each point or bay
are different.
If Lake Malawi demonstrates what isola¬
tion can do to produce species, Lake Ich-
keul in Tunisia shows how one site can be a
crucial link in an international chain of hab¬
itats. It is a winter refuge for vast numbers
of migrating waterfowl. Almost the entire
population of Europe's greylag geese winter
there, as well as large fractions of the pop¬
ulations of pochard, widgeon and shoveler

ducks. One census reported as many as
188,000 coots. In summer, when the mi¬
grants leave, some 600 of the rare and shy
white-headed duck remain to breed and
dabble among the reeds with their sky-blue
bills. Almost any European or North Afri¬
can bird can be seen here at some season.
Even Lake Ichkeul's water is not isolated.
It lies near to the Mediterranean, and while
runoff from rivers normally replenishes the
fresh water, in seasons and years when the
flow slackens off, saline water seeps in from
the sea. The reeds and aquatic life are adapt¬
ed to the changes, but now there is in¬
creasing human pressure to dam the rivers
and divert their water for irrigation. Studies
suggest how sluices might help to control
the freshwater flow and allow the coexis¬
tence of both lake and irrigation, and there
is hope that agreement will be reached.
Sometimes, however, wetland sites are
the focus of a direct confrontation. One
notable case, a proposal to dam the lower
Gordon River in Tasmania, Australia, and
its tributary, the Franklin, to produce elec¬
tric power for bauxite refining, ended with a
search for another site for that purpose.
Tasmania is rich in National Parks. The
7,693-km2 group of Western Tasmania
Wilderness National Parks contains one of
the world's last great temperate rain forests.
This is an area of quartzite peaks, limestone
caverns, and rivers whose rapids foam
through deep gorges. Loggers sought out
the region's Huon pines, some of which are
2,000 years old. Botanists, on the other
hand, treasure the forests of Nothofagus, the
southern deciduous beech, which is a relict
of the era when Tasmania, Australia and
Antarctica were all joined to South America
and Africa. This huge southern continent of
Gondwanaland was the home of the south¬
ern beech, which survives only in a few high
rainfall zones like the lower reaches of the
Gordon and Franklin rivers.
Djoudj National Bird Sanctuary, in the
delta of the Senegal River, illustrates how
tough decisions about the use of natural
wonders may be. A Sahelian country, beset
by drought in the interior, Senegal faces the
problem of apportioning land between no¬
mads and settled farmers, as well as meeting
its needs for irrigation and power. Large-
scale dams are being built on the Senegal
River, thus threatening the ecological bal¬
ance in the delta park of Djoudj, which has
three million visitors a year the palaearctic
birds which land after a gruelling 2,000-km
flight across the Sahara. Pelicans, herons and
ducks paddle beside typical desert mam¬
mals. The endangered Dorcas gazelle has
even been reintroduced here, since this is
one of the few Sahelian habitats where wild
grazers can hope to survive.
The Djoudj delta is subject to a desert
people's needs for water. The Sundarbans,
the wilderness of mangrove trees at the
mouth of the Ganges in India, is subject to
mountain peoples' needs for fuelwood, and
the needs of millions of plains peoples for
timber. Building wood is so expensive now
in India that it is sometimes cheaper to use
steel. In the Himalayas, the trade-offs be¬
tween natural forest for villagers' use, and
commercial pine for cash-cropping, have
provoked legal battles, riots, and social
movements like the Chipko, the women
who hug trees to stop them being felled.
The deltaic mangrove system of the Sun¬
darbans covers some 10,000 km2 of India
Sian Ka'an (Mexico)
The Sian Ka'an Biosphere Re¬
serve is located some 150 km
south of the tourist centre of
Cancun, on the ancient lime¬
stone plain of the Yucatán Peninsula. The
Reserve's 528,000 hectares include tropical
evergreen and semi-deciduous moist for¬
ests, marshes and mangroves, as well as a
large marine section with the second long¬
est barrier reef in the world. There is an
abundance of wildlife, including 1,200 plant
species, 5 species of cat (jaguar, puma, oce¬
lot, margay and jaguarundi), the Caribbean
manatee and Geoffroy 's spider monkey.
Sian Ka'an means "origin of the sky", the
name given to the region by the Maya
peoples who lived there in the 5th century
AD. Over 20 Maya archaeological sites have
been registered in the Reserve. Today some
800 people live there, some of them descend¬
ants of the Maya. Most live from lobster
fishing and have organized themselves into
co-operatives, which regulate the number
of fishermen and the size of the catch in
order to maintain this resource. Local peo¬
ple are also working with scientists on a
major ecological research programme. A
model farm has been established to develop
intensive cropping techniques, with the aim
of reducing the land area to be cleared for
agriculture. The site, which was inscribed
on the World Heritage List in 1987, is a
good example of the combined conserva¬
tion, research and development functions of
a Biosphere Reserve. Right, gathering of
pelicans and terns.
Sundarbans National Park
(India)
The Sundarbans, extending
over 10,000 km2 of land and wa¬
ter across India and Bangladesh,
is part of the world's largest del¬
ta, formed from sediments deposited by
three large rivers, the Ganges, the Brah¬
maputra and the Meghna. The core area in
west Bengal, India, was established in 1984
as the Sundarbans National Park, and in¬
scribed on the World Heritage List in 1987.
Situated in an area where cyclones and tidal
waves are relatively frequent and intensive,
the Sundarbans forms a barrier which pro¬
tects the interior regions from these natural
hazards. Some of the tidal waves whose
force is dispersed within the plains of the
delta can reach a height of 75 m. The low
mangroves, salt water forests, beach forests
and sand dune vegetation are the habitat of
a variety of fauna. Most importantly, they
are the home of the largest population of
the Bengal tiger (left), estimated at 264 in
1963, in India. Aquatic mammals such as
the Ganges dolphin, the Indo-Pacific
hump-backed dolphin, and the finless por¬
poise, also frequent the area. The setting for
the most intense human-wildlife conflicts in
India, the Sundarbans is a site that symbol¬
izes mankind's commitment to protect the
Bengal tiger.

and Bangladesh. The Indian part is a World
Heritage site covering 2,600 km2 in a strictly
controlled nature reserve, the Sundarbans
National Park, which contains India's sin¬
gle largest population of tigers. When the
reserve was founded in 1973, there were 153
tigers; by 1980 there were 264, and the
numbers continue to grow.
The mangrove habitat is both sea and
land. Five species of dolphins and porpoise
and the rare saltwater crocodile live in the
Sundarbans. Tigers, which elsewhere hunt
wild antelope and the wild cattle called gaur,
are here known to catch fish, monitor liz¬
ards, and sea turtle. As India's Project Tiger
emphasizes, tigers are the index of the health
of their habitat. If people cut the mangroves
for wood, or drain islands for agriculture, or
even lose all control of the rivers' flood
regime, the tiger will be the first to go.
The world's wetlands face many threats,
from drainage to floods. Their resources
may be diverted to agriculture and power
generation. They may be polluted by runoff
of chemical toxins and fertilizers. No nat¬
ural site is now isolated from human influ¬
ence, so we must pioneer forms of manage-
. ment which try to reconcile diverse needs,
without waiting for confrontations to
develop.
Biosphere Reserves: living in
harmony with nature
The purpose of a Biosphere Reserve, as
envisaged in Unesco's Man and the Bio¬
sphere (MAB) Programme, is to reconcile
the needs of people and natural habitats.
This concept is today being used to conserve
World Heritage natural sites. Ideally, a Bio¬
sphere Reserve includes a core of minimally
modified natural habitat, outside which lie
one or several buffer zones, which people
use in such a way that the core continues to
exist. Biosphere Reserves form a worldwide
network which aims to conserve biological
diversity and to provide information which
will help people to live in harmony with
nature. The key to success is sustainable
buffer zone use, which provides both eco¬
nomic benefit and an environmental ethic
for local people.
Such use may, in fact, stem from local
traditions. The Sian Ka'an Biosphere Re¬
serve is located in Mexico's Yucatán Penin¬
sula. It protects more than 5,000 km2 of
tropical moist forests, marshes, mangroves,
and coral reef. Within the Reserve live about
800 people, descendants of the Maya Indi¬
ans who called the region Quintana Roo,
and left temple sites which date from the 5th
century BC. The modern Maya are mainly
lobster fishermen, but they practise age-old
farming methods, and gather traditional
plants for medicine, food and housing.
There is an entire research station dedicated
to understanding and improving the Re¬
serve, which also means learning from its
people.
Biosphere Reserves are intended to pre¬
serve typical samples of each of the planet's
ecosystems. Some are locally important, but
not spectacular enough to be included on
the World Heritage List. There are forty-
three Biosphere Reserves in the United
States alone, but only five of them are on the

World Heritage List: Yellowstone, and Ev¬
erglades, Redwood, Olympic and Great
Smoky Mountains National Parks. The
Great Smokies of North Carolina are tiers
of wooded Appalachian hills, which, seen
from a distance, are covered with a blue
haze which gives them their name. They
stood south of the great glaciers of the Ice
Age, and a number of plants which survive
there, such as ginseng, are closely related to
plants found in central China. Amphibians
also proliferate in the Great Smokies, in¬
cluding twenty-two kinds of salamander,
the largest of which is the hellbender, which
can be 75 centimetres long.
This wilderness of oak and mountain lau¬
rel, whitetailed deer and black bear, is far
from free of people. There is no question of
driving out the residents or of limiting tour¬
ist access, but building and clearing must be
carefully controlled in order to maintain the
tourist revenue that supports the region.
Above all, pollution from both automobiles
and distant industries can change the very
nature of the soil. It will be a sad com¬
mentary on our sense of values if we let acid
rain wipe out the forests which even the Ice
Age spared.
A variety of strategies are needed for the
development of conservation and manage¬
ment systems. Sometimes this means mas¬
sive investment projects in the nearby re¬
gion to offer the people an alternative way
of life. Sometimes, on the other hand, it
means reinforcing the support base of tradi¬
tional life.
Soon, it seems, we may need a much more
complicated system, the cluster Biosphere
Reserve. According to the cluster concept,
the management of a number of separate
areas is co-ordinated to perform the func¬
tions of a Biosphere Reserve, so that a
number of different ecological and socio¬
economic situations are englobed within
one biogeographical province. Such innova¬
tive macro-conservation offers some of the
flexibility needed in a rapidly changing
world.
Three more World Heritage sites St.
Kilda, Tassili n'Ajjer, and the La Amistad
park serve to illustrate the dangers and the
opportunities facing Biosphere Reserves.
St. Kilda is a place where the local culture
did not survive. It is a group of small islands
some 160 km west of Scotland. Its sea-cliffs,
which rise up to 430 metres above the
pounding Atlantic waves, are the highest in
Europe. St. Kilda is also a largely man-made
landscape. It was settled at least 2,000 years
ago, and Viking sagas record a voyage there
in AD 1202. The people led a hard life. They
ate fulmar and other seabirds, and dressed in
wool from their flocks of sheep. Until the
eighteenth century, traditional dwellings
were stone "black houses", where livestock
and manure were kept in an outer room.
Tourists, merchants and naturalists began
to visit the islands, and a school and medical
posts were built. Knowledge of how to
survive on fulmar and barley as well as any
desire to do so was forgotten. On 29 Au-,
gust 1930, the last remaining islanders left
for the Scottish mainland. Today there are
only a military base and a weather station,
vast colonies of seabirds, and the Soay sheep
which have reverted to the ranging patterns
of their wild ancestors.
The St. Kilda islanders adapted to chang¬
ing social conditions; the Tassili plateau of
Algeria bears witness to changes in climate
St. Kilda (United Kingdom)
This tiny archipelago lies in
splendid isolation in the Atlan¬
tic Ocean, some 160 km off the
west coast of Scotland. It orig¬
inates from an ancient volcano which has
been weathered and glaciated to produce a
bare, rocky group of islands with dramatic
cliffs which rise vertically to 430 m above
the waves and are the highest and most
spectacular in Europe. St. Kilda demon¬
strates how the ecological isolation of small
populations of animals can result in genetic
divergence: the tiny St. Kilda wood mouse
and the St. Kilda wren are different from
their mainland cousins and found nowhere
else. The seabird populations form one of
the largest concentrations in the North At¬
lantic, and include gannets (52,000 pairs),
fulmars (30,000 pairs) and puffins (300,000
pairs). Over 1 million seabirds may live on
St. Kilda at any one time. In spite of the
isolation and inclement living conditions,
St. Kilda was inhabited more or less contin¬
uously for 2,000 years: local people harvest¬
ed seabirds for their eggs and meat, and
spun the wool of the Soay sheep, an ancient
rustic breed which now lives in the wild. In
1930 the islanders finally left their home for
the mainland. Today St. Kilda, which was
inscribed on the World Heritage List in
1986, is protected as a National Nature
Reserve. The old village has also been re¬
stored for the few tourists who manage to
land in the summer months to admire the
stark landscape and wildlife of this remote
archipelago.
View of Great Smoky Moun¬
tains National Park, United
States
10

itself. Isolated in the sands of the Sahara,
Tassili n 'Ajjer is a rocky region some 100
km wide by 700 km long. Pinnacles of
banded rock sprout from the massif, a few
pools of "fossil water" offer relief, and,
strangely, a few springs of volcanically heat¬
ed water bubble out. Several hundred Tua¬
reg nomads, dubbed the "Blue Men" of the
Sahara because of their indigo dyed clothes,
drive their herds between the oases.
In this desert museum, rock paintings
dating from 8,000 years ago, when the cli¬
mate was far moister, show giraffe, buffalo,
elephant, hippopotamus, rhinoceros.
Around 6,000 years ago, these depictions of
savannah wildlife give way to representa¬
tions of piebald white and red-ochre cattle,
which must have been domestic herds. Por¬
trayals of horses on the rock walls date from
about 3,000 years ago, and depictions of the
first camel caravans were made around AD
200. Today, the only survivors of this
kinder age are a few Cyprus trees in the
canyons, their trunks 5 metres in diameter,
and strange relict fish. There were croco¬
diles, too, but the last was killed in the
1940s.
As both our societies and our climate
seem bound to change increasingly rapidly
in the coming decades, we can look back for
instruction to St. Kilda and Tassili n'Ajjer.
We can also look ahead, at one of the
world's great bridges from North to South.
Talamanca Range-La Amistad Bio¬
sphere Reserve (Costa Rica) connects two
countries, two oceans and two continents.
Its name comes from a friendship ("Amis-
tad") zone declared between Costa Rica and
Panama, and it includes some 8,000 km2 of
land set aside for conservation. The Bio
sphere Reserve stretches from the Atlantic
to the Pacific, here little more than 150 km
apart. It includes one of the most diverse
biotas on Earth, because it was here that the
plants and animals of North America came
into contact with those from the south,
when upthrusting volcanoes connected the
two great continents. The area is still thrust¬
ing upward: earthquakes and vulcanism
have lifted the highest peaks above 3,500
metres. There is dry woodland on the Pacif¬
ic coast and true jungle on the Atlantic side,
a haunt of jaguar which can only be pene¬
trated machete in hand. On the heights there
is magnificent pine cloud forest where the
quetzal flies, and, ultimately, alpine rock
gardens where furry lycopodium club-
mosses huddle against the cold. La Amis-
tad's inner valleys are almost untrodden by
man: besides the rich variety of known
species, there are certainly many more crea¬
tures to be discovered.
La Amistad covers 10 per cent of Costa
Rica, and is home to more than 40 per cent
of Costa Rica's Indians. People of the Bri-
bri, Cabecar, Brunca and Guaymi tribes live
within the Reserve. The Indians are well
aware of Western lifestyles, wear Western
clothes, and would like their school build¬
ings to be made of brick, even if the bricks
have to be flown in by helicopter.
The World Heritage Convention is one
way of linking the interests of people within
each region to the interests of the world
community. No one ever said it would be
easy. But it is clearly essential, if we wish to
preserve the world's wild places, not just as
relicts of the past, but as bridges to the
future.
ALISON JOLLY, of the United States, is a
zoologist who has been Visiting Lecturer at Prin¬
ceton University since 1987. She is the author of
several books including Lemur Behaviour. A Ma¬
dagascar Field Study, Chicago University Press,
1966; A World Like Our Own: Man and Nature
in Madagascar, Yale University Press, 1980; and
The Evolution of Primate Behaviour, Macmillan,
New York, 2nd ed. 1985. 11
