«L'ENCYCLOPEDIE »
An eighteenth-century best-seller
AS soon as the first volume of the first edition of the
supreme work of the Enlightenment, Diderot's En¬
cyclopédie, reached the subscribers, in 1751, it be¬
came apparent to the authorities in France that the book was
dangerous.
It did not merely provide information about everything
from A to Z; it recorded knowledge according to philoso¬
phic principles expounded by d'Alembert, the co-editor, in
his "Preliminary Discourse". Although he formally ac¬
knowledged the authority of the Church, d'Alembert made
it clear that knowledge came from the senses and not from
Rome or Revelation. The great ordering agent was reason,
which combined sense data, working with the sister faculties
of memory and imagination. Thus everything man knew
derived from the world around him and the operations of his
own mind.
The Encyclopédie made the point graphically, with an
engraving of a tree of knowledge showing how all the arts
and sciences grew out of the three mental faculties. Philoso¬
phy formed the trunk of the tree, while theology occupied a
remote branch, next to black magic. Thus Diderot and
d'Alembert presented their work as both a compilation of
information and a manifestation of philosophie. They meant
to merge those two aspects of the book, to make them seem
like two sides of the same coin: Encyclopedism; and the men
behind it became known not merely as collaborators but as
Encyclopedists. Traditional learning, they implied, amount¬
ed to nothing but prejudice and superstition.
So beneath the bulk of the Encyclopédie's twenty-eight
folio volumes and the enormous variety of its 71,818 articles
and 2,885 plates lay an epistemológica! shift that transformed
the topography of everything known to man.
The Encyclopédie was a product of its time, of mid-
eighteenth-century France, when writers could not discuss
social and political questions openly, in contrast to the
prerevolutionary era, when a tottering government permit¬
ted a good deal of frank discussion. The book's radical
element did not come from any prophetic vision of the
far-off French and industrial revolutions but from its at¬
tempt to map the world of knowledge according to new
boundaries, determined by reason and reason alone. As its
title page proclaimed, it claimed to be a "dictionnaire raison¬
né des sciences, des arts et des métiers" that is, to measure
all human activity by rational standards and so to provide a
basis for rethinking the world.
Contemporaries had no difficulty in detecting the purpose
of the book, which its authors acknowledged openly in key
articles. Diderot and d'Alembert had laid out such pleasant
paths through the arid expanses of knowledge that one could
merely follow their lead, stopping now and then to enjoy the
flowers along the way, and still have the satisfaction of
belonging to the intellectual vanguard. One did not even
have to read many other books, for the Encyclopédie was a
library unto itself. The editors did not list the works that it
rendered obsolete, but anyone who consulted its Discours
préliminaire would have no difficulty in distinguishing be¬
tween the heavy tomes of traditional learning and the stream¬
lined, modern model. From the appearance of the first
volume in 1751 until the great crisis of 1759,1 the Encyclopé¬
die was denounced by defenders of the old orthodoxies and
the Old Régime, by Jesuits, Jansenists, the General Assemb¬
ly of the Clergy, the Parlement of Paris, the king's council,
and the pope. The denunciations flew so thick and fast, in
articles, pamphlets, and books as well as official edicts, that
the Encyclopédie seemed doomed. But the publishers had
invested a fortune in it, and they had powerful protectors,
notably Chrétien-Guillaume de Lamoignon de Malesherbes,
the liberal Directeur de la librairie, who superintended the
book trade during the crucial years between 1750 and 1763.
The scandal continued to sizzle and spread as volumes 3 to
7 appeared and as skilful polemicists like Charles Palissot and
Jacob-Nicolas Moreau fanned the flames on the side of the
priests. On the other side, Voltaire loaned his pen and his
prestige to the cause; and Diderot and d'Alembert found the
ranks of their collaborators swelling with other illustrious
writers, including most of the men who were beginning to be
28

BY ROBERT DARNTON
Copyright © 1979 by the President and
Fellows of Harvard College
ROBERT DARNTON, ofthe USA, is Davis Professor ofEuropean History
at Princeton University, New Jersey. He is the author of several books on
French cultural history, including The Literary Underground of the Old
Regime (1982), The Great Cat Massacre: And other Episodes in French
Cultural History (1986) and The Business of Enlightenment a Publishing
History of the Encyclopédie, 1775-1800 (Harvard University Press, 1979),
from which this article has been extracted.
Volumes from the 18th-century French Encyc¬
lopédie, ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des
arts et des métiers ("Encyclopedia, or Classified
Dictionary of Sciences, Arts and Trades"),
edited and published by Denis Diderot and Jean
d'Alembert. The original large-format folio edi¬
tion (1751-1772) consisted of 17 volumes of text
and 11 volumes of plates.
identified as philosophes: Duelos, Toussaint, Rousseau, Tur-
got, Saint-Lambert, d'Holbach, Daubenton, Marmontel,
Boulanger, Morellet, Quesnay, Damilaville, Naigeon, Jau-
court, and Grimm. They also claimed Montesquieu and
Buffon, whose works they cited constantly, though it seems
that neither wrote anything expressly for the Encyclopédie.
Nothing could have been better for business than the
continued controversy and the volunteer corps of authors.
The publishers had envisaged a first edition of 1,625 copies,
but the subscriptions poured in so fast that they increased it
three times, until it reached 4,255 copies in 1754.
The Encyclopédie became smaller in size and cheaper in
price as it progressed from edition to edition.2 While the
format shrank from folio to quartp and octavo, the sub¬
scription price fell and the size of the print-runs increased.
Having satisfied the "quality market", the publishers tried to
reach a broader public by producing in quantity.
The "democratization" of the Encyclopédie had limits,
First page of the alphabetical entries in the first
edition of the Encyclopédie.
ENCYCLOPEDIE,
O U
DICTIONNAIRE RAISONNÉ
DES SCIENCES,
DES ARTS ET DES MÉTIERS-
A A
K \K
t& e.f.m. {trdft EmtyioftJ.
IwW. Stitact di f komme ,
Itftmwt , A't 4* (MiMwf«r,
Ci*mm. j cM*A*ft ou km
d* I» pteminc letite de l'Al¬
phabet , tu lâiin. en fiant,'1" .
ht tu prefqut to«« 1« Lan-
(¡«et i.- 1 \ ; -'.
Onptut c jrsfidetft ee »IK-
. eu tant que lent« , «A le ligne A* (on a ,
qui de tout Im Cm« de k **« cfl W pta fxile à
witaiir U M Um qu'ouvm I» bouche de pojíti
[ut -Li poumont.
On ¿* q»; '* ***** Tj't/4 .!« llcbreui: «wit
r j en not qne fou ne vient que de U ton lotir» tt^n
«kl otganctdc U parole i ic le tuiûcte on f*pnta
¿mm noue nout ferrant p«« itpreTenitt c« ion «
noutvitnt de IWaAa dti OtHB. 1 rt Luiat Ac let
MM pauptei de iTurnpc. ou imité le» Gre« dan«
I ; rotenc H'i'iU o« douait i celte lettic. Selon let
OntHBJÉni rlcraiiquet, te liC.iunnwic grnetitt
de P- R. p. 11. fuJr/u ne/fi ( lojOMttfnui ) ta'ffwr
t~t('n*'t f âr H4*n*ifem **/ feJaw aV U+tytllt mi M
tftf0t*ti\ i>li fail »oil «fie U rvcuemeii'ion dci let*
Irrt eft £u|«fí à vuiitk* dint d« Lenguct mrtitt ,
tontuaa elk fe* dam leí (.»çuet »"«« Cm il r*
eouftant , felón M UfAwf« 1< H. ILwcrgaftt ,qut
l'a/i/t fe piononçok tuitrf»* tMM mi*tr a , fe
OU"lL| TT im ene ftttIOtlT p» It [> »ll .'.,'( .1'F.rl ffh* , /*/.,-.
¿V. lív X. t. *j. ow ce l\ foultet, t ft« I« » Guía «m
ti Iciiret del HrKr-i; /,' cv tiu<¿ f*g*-
'rfptltM.-ent entfi imttíigii, (/»V
j'aun waananenr i'fvtF Qtud *mitm\t¡
' mmn (ÇmmmtUm} ew»,eiil>t
let mile» fp.it
!.
iuiciJirk f.fl J; ïj.qnitûûpii , ,ci ; Je
mi , & leí fillet le fon de \'t , premíete votelk de
ftm'i** : nuil t'tft une imagnWtflon fin* fontfeinent.
Quand let enf»m litMcnt tu monde ( ti que putW
It [ttniíit fait ill p <«iUn' Tait del ponmonij on
enten«! le fon de datfrrutret vorfiel , Mon qnMi
onvtcnt fUf on omÎm U bouvkt.
On du en f«wd À , ne ^ffrt e : mA * eft du ^( rt«
ip*&.i!ia , eunme Ut «wie« mjelU» de ckhic *l-
Le fo« defrf, «ttflî Wn^tte xiloide f«, et long
enectuim mwtl , eV bt.f en J'»u-rci; 4e(ltoof¿d«M
grJee , At bit fcUtn n|nM. Il U>. ij dit» idiAe qjunnd
ce mot fi^mne nn onv>*fje eju'on donne i like; Ai
il cil ber* dam Uth/ , mainU , foitillme. Il vA long
(Uni ».xi*, £iot chien; A: hrvfdtnt «Mflnt nremiti«
pHtic du r»u - ffw/narAM ImHI dtidPfjftJté
é»M.CAmU4*Ql
Ici Ronuiai, notu muquee Te lont* , Veíiinhent
JJi t.l dtxil>e , A.-U paw í/.'¿ ; i'iA nidi qu'on
tioa*e de«* nnt mcWm Antroii F.h.cuh **gi , fit-
Enfuit» lit iniéiettiM t» e emit kt dent n , .***/**
Enfin ili mtituum qtKlqncfou U figne ut U ftlitb«
lowrM, îj'j.
On met MJinufJlini un litem ùttoiulrft fur J"*
long , *a lien dc 1/qn'on èenroet »rrafott iruci ttt
« : m .it ta Htu iTécine mdßix , M*fmt , «/m » «V***
on i < r » mJifa , J/daw, due. Mut il ne faut pel croen
tree U plupart del Giunnument , OU« not ptitt
nVciivoM-iH (rtte /tpièt l'a , ou unce toute aulla
voyelle , qu*¿ pom mieqocí out rette voyant eeoie
longac: Ib ¿etiToMnt («le /. t*** q^'iU It pío-
nunfoiftv, et rent pranonciaiioM e* encoin an «¡Tift
dam not P.-ovintci ntcndkuvilcl, ou fön ptononet
tKif'n. tljlly í(/íti..
mtt point d'aoccnt fur la biff OU e nmmon
La fK,i tr* R w-iint rw« app- lU Umt f*Lunt ;
Jjutrj/. . |l t- fit; t chh Uilhpi'il
l igiáUt et'jlu jusIic «a dc cvfM*ow«t on »tfuie , let
©
29

Sm
A/ '
od
©
Imprimerie ai Letíraí , t.;>,*
Plate from the Encyclopédie showing operations
in the composing room of a printing shop. Top
left, a compositor transfers metal type (such as
the letter "S" and the different-sized blank
spaces for separating words shown in 1) from
typecase to composing stick (2) to make a line.
Top centre, another compositor moves a line to
a tray or "galley" of type where, with other lines
(3) it forms part of a page. Top right, a third
compositor has locked two pages of type inside a
metal frame and is levelling the printing surface
ready for the press.
however, because even the cheapest edition would have
seemed expensive to the common people. The book re¬
mained beyond the purchasing power of peasants and arti¬
sans, even though some of them may have consulted it in
cabinets littéraires (reading clubs).
Diderot and his collaborators had done their share of the
work, but that was only the beginning of a long process
which culminated around 1780 with the reproduction and
distribution of their copy on a mass scale throughout Eu¬
rope. The text that reached the general reading public, if not
the masses, differed somewhat from theirs, however, because
it, too, suffered from the strains of the production process.
In his prospectus for the quarto edition (1777-1779),
Joseph Duplain, a Lyonnais bookseller who managed the
enterprise, had promised not only to reprint the original text
in its entirety but also to improve it in three ways: to correct
its numerous typographical and factual errors; to add a great
deal of new material; and to blend the four folio volumes of
the Supplément3 into it. He never intended to produce a
literal copy of the first folio edition but rather to create a
superior version of itor at least to persuade the public that
he had done so. The correcting, augmenting and blending
would require a great deal of editorial work, so the contracts
provided for a rédacteur. Duplain gave this job to the Abbé
Jean-Antoine de Laserre, an Qratorian priest and a minor
literary figure in Lyons-. Laserre therefore became the suc¬
cessor of Diderot and the intermediary through which Dide¬
rot's text reached most of its readers in the eighteenth
century.
For the most part he left the text alone, not because he
respected it but because he did not have time to make
changes. He worked at a furious pace, cutting out references
to the eight volumes of plates that were not to be included in
the quarto, attaching snippets from the Suppléments to the
main body of the book by bits of his own prose, and reading
over the final amalgam of printed and manuscript copy that '
was to be mailed out to the printers. As a half dozen printing
shops were working on different volumes at the same time,
he could hardly keep up with their demand for copy.
Having sent for copy, presses, type, ink, paper, ink-ball
leathers, candles, quills, imposing stones, galleys, chases, and
a hundred other articles, the printing shop needed men to put
Plate from the Encyclopédie showing machinery
used to wash out impurities from iron ore.
30

©
Portraits of some of the "Encyclopedists" sur¬
round this scene in the Procope café in Paris, a
well-known meeting place for literary figures.
Anti-clockwise from top left: Buffon, Gilbert,
Diderot, d'Alembert, Marmontel, Le Kain,
Jean-Baptiste Rousseau, Voltaire, Piron and
d'Holbach.
the matter in motion. It ordered the workers pretty much as
it ordered the equipment and ran into the same problems of
supply and demand. But it also had to cope with the
peculiarities of printers as human beings. They had no notion
of joining a firm. Instead, they worked by the job, coming
and going according to the availability of tasks and their own
inclination. For printing was a tramping trade. Men went
where they could find work, even if they had to hike
hundreds of kilometres. When work abounded, they some¬
times changed jobs in order to collect travel money or simply
by "caprice", as they put it. They came and went at a furious
pace during the Encyclopédie boom, which sent repercus¬
sions throughout the migratory circuits of France, Swit¬
zerland, and parts of Germany, producing as much competi¬
tion for workers as for paper.
Psychologically, nonstandardized work must have differ¬
ed considerably from the kind of work that was then being
imposed on the labouring classes in England. The pace of
work in the factories was set by clocks and bells, by the
opening and closing of gates, by fines and beatings, and
ultimately by the production process itself; for later, in
assembly-line production, the men were reduced to "hands",
and work streamed past them in an endless, undifferentiated
flow. The compositors and pressmen worked at their own
pace. They exerted some control over their production.
Some mastery over the production process did not mean
that the workers developed any special affection for the real
masters of it. The bourgeois retained most of the power and
manipulated it brutally, by hiring and firing, while the
workers responded with the few devices at their disposal.
Although they may have felt some pride in their craft, they
took shortcuts and compromised on quality when it made
labour easier. The results can be seen in any copy of the
Encyclopédie todayclear, crisp typography for the most
part, but margins askew here, pages misnumbered there,
uneven register, unsightly spacing, typographical errors, and
smudges all of them testimony to the activity of anony¬
mous artisans two centuries ago.
In the era of the handmade book there existed a ty
pographical consciousness that disappeared sometime after
the advent of automatic typesetting and printing. Like their
forerunners of the Renaissance, the compositors of the
Encyclopédie made lines by transferring type from cases to
composing sticks; they made pages by moving lines from the
composing sticks to galleys; and they made formes by
imposing the pages in a chase. Gompositorial practices could
go no further in the direction of speed and efficiency until
the introduction of mechanization, in the form of cold-metal
typesetting machines during the 1820s, Linotype in the
1880s, and electronic composition today. Presswork, too,
did not advance by any great leaps forward in technology
before the adoption of the cylinder press from 1814 and
steam power in the 1830s. The Encyclopédie was printed on
the venerable common press, in essentially the same way that
books had been printed for the previous two or three
hundred years.
A whole world had to be set into motion to bring the book
into being. Ragpickers, financiers, and philosophers all
played a part in the making of a work whose corporeal
existence corresponded to its intellectual message. As a
physical object and as a vehicle of ideas, the Encyclopédie
synthesized a thousand arts and sciences; it represented the
Enlightenment, body and soul.
1 . In January 1 759, the procureur general of the Parlement of Paris warned that behind
the Encyclopédie hovered a conspiracy to destroy religion and undermine the State. The
Parlement promptly banned its sale and appointed a commission to investigate it. But
authority over the printed word in France belonged to the king. On 8 March 1759, the
Conseil d'Etat reaffirmed the king's authority by revoking the book's privilege and
forbidding the publishers to continue it. The Encyclopédie went onto the Index
librorum prohibitorum, the list of books banned by the Roman Catholic Church, on 5
March, 1759, and on 3 September Pope Clement XII warned all Catholics who owned
it to have it burned by a priest or to face excommunication.
2. In addition to the six versions of Diderot's basic text (three reprints of the original
folio edition, one quarto and one octavo edition), totalling almost 24,000 copies before
1789, there were two quite different works that used it as a point of departure: Felice.'s
Encyclopédie d'Yverdon, printed between 1770 and 1780 at 1,600 copies, and Panck-
oucke's Encyclopédie méthodique, begun in 1 782 at a print-run of approximately 5,000
copies.
3. The Supplément, in four folio volumes of text and one of plates, was published in
Paris and Amsterdam in 1776 and 1777, in a print-run of 5,250 copies. It had no formal
connection with the original Encyclopédie and involved a new group of contributors
and publishers.
31
