Sinan the Magnificent
by Aptullah Kuran
The work of the great Turkish architect
lives on, four centuries after his death
IN 1988 Turkey is preparing to com¬
memorate the 400th anniversary of the
death of a great architect. For half a
century this architect designed and super¬
vised all major buildings in Istanbul and was
responsible for numerous projects through¬
out the vast Ottoman empire. He is given
credit for over four hundred buildings. But
more significant than the number of works
ascribed to him is the quality of the
architecture he produced and the impact he
has had on those who have followed him. If
he symbolizes the climax of the Ottoman
classical period, it is because he synthesized
the experience of the two preceding centur¬
ies to achieve a universal architecture. This
30

A The Süleymaniye Mosque (1550-1557),
Istanbul, built by Sinan for Siileyman the
Magnificent on the central of the seven hills
of the old walled city, conveys a powerful
impression of spatial unity. The two
minarets at the corners of the main structure
are taller than those flanking the portico
leading into the courtyard, contributing to
the gradual build-up towards the central
dome. The mosque complex is included in
the international campaign launched by
Unesco to safeguard the cultural heritage of
Istanbul and Göreme National Park.
man was Sinan ibn Abdülmennan, Chief
Court Architect under three sultans from
1538 until his death in 1588.
Little is known about Sinan's origins and
childhood. He came from the province of
Kayseri (the ancient Caesarea Cappado-
ciae) and was conscripted, probably in
1512, to serve in the Imperial army. Nine
years later he took his place among the
ranks of the Janissaries. From 1521 to 1538,
he participated in the various military cam¬
paigns of Siileyman the Magnificent. These
campaigns were of utmost importance to
Sinan's development as an architect, for not
only was he commissioned to build or repair
military structures such as bridges, fortifica
tions and warehouses, but he was also given
the opportunity to visit many cities of his¬
torical importance. It would not be un¬
reasonable to contend that an architect of
Sinan's calibre would have examined and
evaluated any architectural monument he
came across on the campaign routes, and
stored the information away in his mind for
future reference.
Sinan's Janissary education included the
learning of a craft: he became a master
carpenter. The experience gained from
building with wood stayed with him
throughout his career. During his active
military service he restored old mosques
and shrines when the army wintered in a
major city. Through the 1530s, while he was
stationed in Istanbul between campaigns,
he designed small buildings in and around
the capital. His earliest works consisted of
three tiny mosques, which have not sur¬
vived in their original condition. They must
have attracted the attention of influential
figures at Court, however, as upon the
death of the Chief Court Architect in 1538,
Sinan was appointed in his place. With the
construction of the Haseki Mosque, Istan¬
bul, which he built for Siileyman the Magni¬
ficent 's wife Hiirrem Sultan (Roxelana),
there began one of the most remarkable
careers in the history of architecture.
Although a great many detailed accounts
exist relating to the construction methods of
Ottoman architecture, no theoretical trea¬
tise dating from the sixteenth century or
earlier has come to light. Architecture was
considered to be a craft and the secrets of
the trade, passed on from master to appren¬
tice, were apparently well guarded. For this
reason, Sinan's professional mind is inac¬
cessible to us. However, it is clear from his
buildings that he was familiar with Eucli¬
dean geometry, that he understood the
principles of space organization, and that
he had a feeling for the subtle manifesta¬
tions of centrality and axiality in
architecture.
Sinan's early building complexes, such as
the Haseki Mosque and the Mihrimah Sul¬
tan Mosque, Usküdar, are not noted for
their site planning: the arrangement of the
buildings lacks geometry and order. But
two other great building projects deserve
special comment. These are the mosques of
Shehzade (Prince) Mehmed (1543-1548)
and Süleymaniye (1550-1557), both in
Istanbul and both commissioned by Siiley¬
man the Magnificent. He had the first built
in memory of his favourite son who died of

smallpox at the age of twenty-two, and
ordered the second to provide his capital
city with a splendid higher education
centre.
With its quadriform superstructure, sym¬
metrical plan, and vast prayer hall of an
austere simplicity in contrast to the wealth
of external decoration, the Shehzade
Mehmed Mosque marks a turning point in
classical Ottoman architecture. For it is in
this mosque that Sinan reverses the princi¬
ple of interiority, fundamental to Islamic
building, by emphasizing the outer skin of
the structure.
The mausoleum of the prince, which
stands among other tombs in the traditional
cemetery garden behind the mosque, . is
similarly enriched by an ornamental veneer
on the outside as well as being colourfully
decorated inside. Its interior walls are tiled
from the floor to the base of the dome in
blue, turquoise, lilac, green and yellow. On
the outside, the faces of the octagonal struc¬
ture are constructed of polychrome
stonework surmounted by a ribbed dome
on a fluted circular drum.
Sinan considered the Shehzade a work of
his "apprenticeship". But his patron Siiley¬
man the Magnificent must have judged it a
masterpiece, since barely two years after its
completion ground was broken for the
finest of the Sultan's mosques in Istanbul.
The Süleymaniye Mosque and its numerous
attendant buildings were built on and
around a vast rectangular plaza, created by
means of an elaborate system of founda¬
tions and retaining walls on a hillside over¬
looking the Golden Horn, on the Bosporus.
On the west of the mosque compound are
madrasahs (theological schools) and the
medical madrasah all built on a terrace
32
with a row of thirty-five shops tucked under
it. To the north are the hospital and the
kitchens, with guest rooms for the caravan¬
serai in the basement, facing the street at
the back. Overlooking the Golden Horn on
the east side of the plaza, behind the shop¬
ping street at a lower level, are the second
pair of madrasahs the Third and Fourth
unique formations with stepped arcades
and rooms on either side of sloping inner
courts. Placed under the twin madrasahs is a
string of eighteen more rooms for graduate
students. On the south side of the mosque,
in the traditional cemetery garden, stand
the octagonal tombs of Süleyman the Mag¬
nificent and his wife Hürrem Sultan.
Unlike the Süleymaniye, Sinan's third
and last monumental building complex, the
Selimiye Mosque in Edirne (1569-1575),
does not have a large number of buildings.
Only a covered shopping street and two
small madrasahs accompany the monu¬
mental mosque that rises in the middle of a
great rectangular plaza.
The Selimiye is Sinan's masterpiece. The
interior architecture is completely reflected
in its external form which embodies striking
A The Shehzade Mehmed Mosque (1543-
1548), Istanbul, was built in memory of
Prince (Shehzade) Mehmed, one of the sons
of Sultan Süleyman the Magnificent. This
mosque, the First of Sinan's masterpieces,
marks a turning point in classical Ottoman
architecture. The slender, two-balconied
minarets between the courtyard and the
prayer chamber are ornamented with low-
relief carvings, and Sinan's use of a succes¬
sion of different-sized domes gives the com¬
plex a pyramidal aspect.
The Moglova aqueduct (1553), a construc¬
tional masterpiece on the outskirts of Istan¬
bul, forms part of the system devised by
Sinan to supply the capital with water.
The Selimiye Mosque (1569-1575), built at
Edirne in the reign of Selim II, son of Süley¬
man the Magnificent, is considered to be
Sinan's master«ork. The immense dome is
surrounded by four incredibly slender
minarets (90 metres high including the con¬
ical spires), which reinforce the upward
movement of the composition.
contrasts of horizontals and verticals,
curved and straight lines, solids and voids,
and also a marked distinction between the
load-bearing structure and the lace-like
screen walls. Buttressed by four minarets,
over 70 metres in height, at the corners of
the prayer hall, and surmounted by a huge
31.5-metre dome on eight elephantine pil¬
lars, the Selimiye Mosque achieves an ex¬
pression of centralized geometrical order.
Centrality in Ottoman classical
architecture was a philosophical statement
of the unity of space under a vast dome,
symbolizing the totality of the universe and
the Oneness of Allah. The integration of
architectural space brought with it the need
for height; stressing the vertical dimension
fostered exteriority by increasing the
amount of exposed wall surfaces requiring
articulation. This requirement was success¬
fully met by Sinan in the sixteenth century
when he brought the rationale of the cen¬
tralized building to its logical conclusion in
his superb imperial mosques. Where Asia
embraced Europe and Islam and Christian¬
ity overlapped, he integrated the precepts
of Islamic interiority with Graeco-Roman
exteriority to produce a universal
architecture.
APTULLAH KURAN, of Turkey, is professor of
architecture and head of the faculty ofscience and
arts at Bogazici University, Istanbul. A specialist
in the history of architecture, he is the author ofa
number ofarticles and books in this field, includ¬
ing The Mosque in Early Ottoman Architecture
(1968) and Anatolian Madrasas (1969).
