Lao musicians playing
traditional instruments
it the bad welcome ceremony



WAT PHOU
$£* *
20

Saving a treasure
of Khmer civilization
BY RUTH MASSEY
The northern temple,
built in the 11th century.
of the Sanctuary
of Vat Phou
	3Lt
CHAMPASSAK was animated de¬
spite the sweltering heat of
mid-morning. Women dres¬
sed in sarong-like skirts and white
blouses converged on the community
hall that overlooks the palm-shaded
river meandering through the village.
The women of Champassak had been
cooking for several days. Enough rice,
fish, pork and poultry had been pre¬
pared to feed the whole village and its
guests. Many of the men were inside the
community hall awaiting the arrival of a
group of visitors from Vientiane, the
capital of their country, the Lao Peo¬
ple's Democratic Republic. They had
seen the orange dust cloud in the wake
of the vehicle bearing the visitors long
before it came to a halt in front of the
hall. The group of men and women who
emerged Lao, American, Indian,
Bulgarian and British-had all been
waiting for this moment: their first
glimpse of Wat Phou, the legendary
temple that had been built in this
remote corner of Laos in the days of the
Khmer empire.
While the elders led the visitors into
the community hall, the village orches¬
tra struck up an undulating rhythmic
song played on traditional instruments:
flutes, clarinets, xylophones with bam¬
boo crosspieces, drums, cymbals, and
the khen, a hand-held pipe organ that is
the national instrument. In a large room,
about seventy men sat around a centre¬
piece in the form of a tree made from
banana leaves and flowers and sur¬
rounded by symbolic foods. The had
ceremony, marking the importance of
the occasion, was about to start. While a
lay priest intoned benedictions and
prayers, the villagers tied cotton strips
around the wrists of their guests, sym¬
bolizing good health, prosperity and
happiness.
At the banquet that followed the had,
women served steaming dishes of fish,
pork and chicken and the staple of all
Lao mealssticky rice. There were
toasts in lau lao, the potent locally-
brewed rice liquor, followed by
speeches dedicated to the purpose of the
gathering: the restoration of Wat Phou.
Built by the Khmer kings on the
slopes of the mountain that emerges
from the forest surrounding the village,
Wat Phou is in ruins. Champassak was
21

celebrating the fact that the temple was
about to be saved from the tidal wave of
vegetation in which the heavenly dan¬
cers of its bas-reliefs were drowning.
The visitors represented years of effort
by the Government of Laos and the
international community to save this
national treasure, efforts that had cul¬
minated in the United Nations De¬
velopment Programme (UNDP) and
Unesco agreeing to finance and assist in
the renovation work, and in the estab¬
lishment of a museum in Champassak to
house some of Wat Phou's more vulner¬
able artefacts.
Two hundred years older than
Angkor Wat in Democratic Kam¬
puchea, Wat Phou was built in the
second half of the fifth century. At that
time it was a centre of kingly power on
the lower Mekong River, one of a col¬
lection of principalities stretching along
the coast but extending inland to en¬
compass what is now southern Laos.
The temple was the site of a cult closely
associated with the Indianized monar¬
chies of ancient Indochina, part of the
vast Khmer empire that, some 200 years
later, made Angkor its capital.
The speeches over, the group from
Vientiane, accompanied by village
elders, drove the short distance through
the forest to the temple. A long cause¬
way led them into the centre of an
architectural composition whose
ancient stones were bathed in the golden
light of the late afternoon.
Rising above the Mekong River, Wat
Phou is a majestic ruin covered with a
mantle of vegetation, a symbol of what
the Lao themselves had suffered and
withstood invasions, colonialism and
wars. Nowadays, Wat Phou's battle is
against the vegetation that relentlessly
attacks its ancient stones. The conflict is
between the ruins and the jungle which
has overrun them.
At the end of the causeway, two ex¬
quisite rectangular pavilions made of
sandstone stand near a large artificial
lake, believed by the Khmers to have


possessed extraordinary purificatory
powers. For the god-kings of the Khmer
empire Wat Phou was a favourite royal
bathing place, with its grand approach,
its majestic flight of steps flanked by
statues of lions and mythical animals.
Today the lions are faceless and the
statues have lost their heads. Buffaloes
stand motionless in the once virtuous
waters of the lake, only their heads
showing.
The rectangular pavilions used to be
temples for segregated worshipone
for women and the other for men. Roots
follow the outlines of the masonry along
the temple walls, mimicking the
architectural motifs which they cover. A
whole section of wall is cracked and
prevented from disintegration by the
roots' embrace. Ferns and underbrush
have attached themselves to walls,
screening the idealized representations
of the Khmer aristocracy, while beneath
the onslaught of vegetation, the power¬
ful Brahman gods of the Khmer
empire Krishna, Vishnu and Indra
riding the elephant Airavata are
slowly suffocating.
A wide avenue leads from the temples
to a majestic stairway carved into the
side of the mountain. At the top is the
sanctuary which had once housed the
idol of the cult. Here time has wrought
wonders with the sandstone, and the
sun and rain have softened the decora¬
tive instincts of the Khmers. Local
legend has it that the Emerald Buddha,
which now sits in Bangkok, is a fake and
that the authentic one is hidden here.
Behind the sanctuary the side of the
mountain rises perpendicularly to the
skies. From here it is easy to imagine the
beauty of this site in its prime. The view
spreads out harmoniously from moun¬
tain to plain. First the sanctuary, then
the immense staircase interspersed by
large terraces, the esplanade with the
two rectangular temples, the artificial
lake, the park, the forest and, beyond it,
the course of the majestic Mekong flow¬
ing towards the horizon.
By the time the visitors had climbed
down the stairway and reached the fore¬
court, the day was waning. A group of
boys strolled through the ruins. They
had come to this once exclusive place to
burn incense-sticks at a small Buddhist
Detail of a carved portal from Wat Phou
("mountain temple"), before restoration. This
immense temple complex, the oldest part of
which dates from the 5th century AD, is located
in the south of the Lao People's Democratic
Republic.
shrine made of sticks and paper. It was
all that was left from a festival that had
been held in the previous month. For
four days Wat Phou had basked in some
of its ancient splendour, with proces¬
sions and fireworks and hundreds of
people from the surrounding regions
chanting and praying to the rhythm of
the khen and the deep sounds of gongs.
In just over an hour night would de¬
scend over the mountain sanctuary. The
last rays of the sun lit up the growth of
tropical vegetation, highlighting the de¬
terioration of the buildings. The task of
restoration is immense and greatly ex¬
ceeds the resources of the Government
of Laos. In associating itself with the
efforts of the Lao people, the world
community will help to conserve a
monumental site which is not only the
work of a particular people, but also
belongs to the common heritage of
mankind.
RUTH MASSEY is an Information Officer with
the United Nations Development Programme in
New York.
22

These and other ancient statues from Wat Phou
are now conserved in the site museum, in the
neighbouring village of Champassak.
¿r*.
-.vs ^Z^P^?S - ^Z%j^.yCZ^.
	< -_c stairway and terraces ¿(fil " V* ^.	. B-_\
.'3¿N»^>^»r main sanctuary >-""'-
- '^" "
northern temple
as ;
23
