An idea in action
The World Heritage Convention
and how it works
34
Who participates in the World Heritage
mechanism?
Depending on their national procedures,
States may ratify, accept or accede to the
"Convention Concerning the Protection of
the World Cultural and Natural Heritage".1
These countries (called "States Parties")
thus become full participants in the Con¬
vention's mechanisms. Adopted by Unes¬
co's General Conference in November
1972, the Convention entered into force in
1975, once a "critical mass" of States Parties,
set at twenty, had joined. The United States
of America was the first to do so, on 7
December 1973. It was followed in rapid
succession by nineteen others from all lat¬
itudes (Egypt, Iraq, Bulgaria, Sudan, Alge¬
ria, Australia, Zaire, Nigeria, Niger, Islamic
Republic of Iran, Tunisia, Jordan, Yugosla¬
via, Ecuador, France, Ghana, Syrian Arab
Republic, Cyprus, and Switzerland).
As of 1 June 1988 there were 102 States
Parties from all the world's regions. Of
Unesco's total membership, only fifty-six
States are yet to become Parties to the Con¬
vention, making it not only Unesco's most
broadly accepted international instrument
but also the world's most ratified agreement
on conservation. So, just as its framers in¬
tended, the day is not far off when the
Convention will extend its protection to
"the world heritage of mankind as a
whole".
The States Parties meet in General As¬
sembly once every two years to elect
twenty-one of their number to the World
Heritage Committee. Each State's term of
office is six years, but one-third of the
membership changes every two years. The
first Committee was elected in November
1976. It held its first session in June 1977, at
which principles and methods of work were
agreed. By the following year, with the
1. The Convention applies to immovable property. Thus
it defines cultural heritage as "monuments, groups of
buildings and sites" natural heritage as "natural features
(e.g. physical and biological formations), geological and
physiographical formations and natural sites".
inscription of the first twelve sites, the Con¬
vention became operational.
The Committee's current members are
Algeria, Australia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Cuba, France, Greece, India, Italy, Leba¬
non, Malawi, Mexico, Norway, Pakistan,
Sri Lanka, Tunisia, Turkey, United Repub¬
lic of Tanzania, United States of America
and Yemen Arab Republic.
Unesco officers responsible for the heri¬
tage preservation programmes provide the
secretariat of the Committee and implement
its decisions. The Committee is advised,
particularly in the selection of properties for
the World Heritage List, by specialists in
the non-governmental organizations active
internationally in safeguarding the cultural
and natural heritage the International
Council on Monuments and Sites (ICO-
MOS) and the International Union for Con¬
servation of Nature and Natural Resources
(IUCN). The two organizations also con¬
tribute technically to the safeguard of World
Heritage sites, together with the Interna¬
tional Centre for the Study of the Preserva¬
tion and the Restoration of Cultural Proper¬
ty in Rome (ICCROM), founded under the
aegis of Unesco.
How are World Heritage properties
chosen?
States Parties begin the process by nomi¬
nating properties in their territory that the
Committee may consider to be of "out¬
standing universal value", hence deserving
inscription on the World Heritage List. The
Committee then inscribes on the List those
properties that meet criteria which focus the
easily understandable but broad, and neces¬
sarily subjective, concept of "outstanding
universal value". These criteria have been
carefully worked out over the years. The
process has involved long hours of study,
comparison and discussion among natural
scientists and historians of art and architec¬
ture as well as within the Committee itself.
But even today uncertainties remain and
certain inscriptions can be agreed upon by
all only after animated discussion.
Bfaj
St. Mary's Cathedral and St.
Michael's Church, Hildesheim
(Fed. Rep. of Germany) ^
The layout and interior deco¬
ration of these 2 monuments
throw light on an important pe¬
riod in the history of religious
art of the Holy Roman Empire during the
Romanesque era. Founded in the 9th centu¬
ry and rebuilt in the 1 1th, St. Mary's Cathe¬
dral (right) is embellished with major works
of art, notably its bronze doors depicting
scenes from the book of Genesis and the life
of Christ, and a bronze column, inspired by
Trajan's Column in Rome, whose spiral
decoration depicts scenes from the New
Testament. Both works were commissioned
by bishop Bernward (933-1022), who was
the leading counsellor of emperor Otto III
and a passionate art lover. St. Bernward
was also the founder of the ancient Bene¬
dictine abbey church of St. Michael (mainly
llth-12th centuries). St. Michael's is the
masterpiece of Ottonian Germanic archi¬
tecture, with its symmetrical layout, its
treatment of volumes, and its original sil¬
houette in which 4 elegant circular turrets
contrast with the 2 massive lantern towers.
In the crypt is St. Bernward's tomb. The
painted wood ceiling of the nave depicts a
gigantic Tree of Jesse and Christological
scenes. These 2 buildings were inscribed on
the World Heritage List in 1985.
Garamba National Park
(Zaire) |
Among the great mammals
which roam the vast expanse of
the Garamba savannah in
north-eastern Zaire is one of
Africa's rarest and most threatened species,
the northern white rhinoceros (Ceratothe-
rium simum cottoni). Larger than the black
rhino, it owes its name to its rectangular
jaw, the word "white" being a corruption of
the Afrikaans word wyd (wide, or large).
The white rhino is actually dark grey, when
it is not covered in the red lateritic mud in
which it wallows. Garamba National Park,
founded in 1938 to save the white rhino,
was inscribed on the World Heritage List in
1980. Thanks to a project organized within
the framework of the World Heritage Con¬
vention and jointly funded by the World
Wildlife Fund (WWF), Frankfurt Zoo (Fed.
Rep. of Germany), Zaire Institute for the
Conservation of Nature and Unesco, the
white rhino population, which in 1985 had
fallen to a critical threshold of a dozen, is
now around twenty. The main purpose of
the project, which will continue for several
years until the rhino's numbers have in¬
creased sufficiently to ensure its survival, is
to combat poaching. Hippopotamus, ele¬
phant, buffalo, giraffe and leopard also live
in the 4,480 km2 Park. A balance between
woodland and grassland is maintained by a
policy of preventive burning which lets the
new grass grow for pasture.

The Committee meets every autumn to
inscribe properties nominated and is aided
in its evaluation by ICOMOS and IUCN,
who use their international networks of
specialists to assess each site against the
criteria. Since 1978 therefore there has been
an annual cycle of nomination, evaluation
and inscription. The List's rate of growth
has been striking, with an average of thirty
new properties added each year since 1978.
The List has grown much more rapidly in
cultural properties: out of 288 so far in¬
scribed 211 are cultural, 68 natural and nine
so-called "mixed" properties such as Tikal
National Park in Guatemala and Mount
Taishan in China, sites that combine great
natural and cultural significance. One
hundred and thirty-three of these properties
are found in Europe and North America, 36
in Latin America and the Caribbean, 48 in
Asia and the Pacific, 32 in Africa and 39 in
the Arab States.
Today's List is clearly not yet universally
representative.- Nor does it include certain
properties whose worldwide importance
would be recognized immediately by the
man in the street, not to speak of the art
historian or natural scientist. This is simply
because a third of the world community has
not yet joined the Convention. And the
order in which the List has been established
reflects the priorities of States Parties them¬
selves.
What is the practical benefit of
inscription on the List?
Since better protection of World Heritage
properties is the Convention's essential pur¬
pose, the immediate and obvious benefit of
international listing is to strengthen the 35

Mogao Caves (China)
This ensemble of Buddhist cave-
3_£J^ temples is located on the edge of
iJtt TI the Taklamakan desert, Gansu
^^^^* Province, in north-west China.
Monks first began work on the caves in the
4th century AD at a place where, according
to legend, a monk had a vision of a thou¬
sand Buddhas. The site, which was on the
Silk Road, saw intensive activity until the
14th century, by which time hundreds of
caves had been hewn out of the rock and
decorated with frescoes (detail, right) and
sculptures by artists from diverse tradi¬
tions. Today 496 caves still exist. After a
period (4th to 6th centuries) marked by the
influence of Graeco-Buddhist art and the
predominance of illustrations of jätakas,
stories relating former lives of the Buddha,
Mogao art reached its zenith between the
6th and the 9th centuries with the evoca¬
tion of Buddhist scriptures or sütras, scenes
from daily life and historical subjects. From
the 10th to the 14th centuries, with the
decline of the Silk Road and the recruitment
of artist-functionaries to decorate the caves,
a more academic style evolved. Mogao was
inscribed on the World Heritage List in
1987. In 1988, Unesco sent a team of experts
to help the Chinese authorities set up a
conservation plan for the site, which is in an
earthquake zone prone to sandstorms. De¬
spite the arid desert climate, the morning
mist in spring and summer can trigger a
chemical reaction which alters the colours
of the frescoes. Training courses in the con¬
servation of wall paintings are planned for
staff working at Mogao.
36
hand of those who are committed to their
protection and enjoyment. These may be
the conservation personnel of national an¬
tiquities or parks services, who must com¬
pete with other government departments
for limited funds. They may be local author¬
ities or even private associations of con¬
cerned citizens.
But international notoriety and moral
support are not enough. Thus the World
Heritage Fund created by the Convention
makes it possible to provide concrete fi¬
nancial and technical support to countries
with limited resources. All States Parties
have to contribute to this Fund: either 1 per
cent of their share of Unesco's Regular
Budget as a compulsory contribution, or a
voluntary contribution that should at least
equal that 1 per cent. The Convention also
provides for contributions from non-gov¬
ernmental bodies and private individuals.
The World Heritage Committee allocates
the annual budget of the Fund2.7 million
U.S. dollars in 1988 to a wide range of
activities. These include the identification of
potential World Heritage properties, the
study of their state of conservation and of
the conservation measures they require
($100,000 allocated in 1988); the provision
of expert advice, technical support and
equipment for conservation (some $700,000
allocated); the strengthening of training in
conservation ($500,000) and finally, emer¬
gency assistance when properties have been
suddenly damaged by a disaster or threat¬
ened by one ($200,000).
Furthermore, the Committee may also
choose to place a severely threatened site on
the "List of World Heritage in Danger".
Such listing provides the opportunity to
take urgent steps and raise funds for the
large-scale operations needed to avert the
danger. To date seven natural and cultural
sites have been so listed.
In all cases, the framers of the Convention
clearly stipulated that the national author¬
ities, who are the direct depositary of the
heritage in question, should match the com¬
mitment of the international community.
With honour comes responsibility and, in
the ultimate analysis, accountability. By the
same token, the Committee has not rested
content with simply inscribing more and
more properties year after year. It has set up
a system of monitoring the state of conser¬
vation of listed sites and of intervening ap¬
propriately when local resources prove to be
insufficient.
Since 1978, a total of some 5 million
dollars has been disbursed by the Fund, a
paltry sum in relation to enormous needs
the world over and a pittance when com¬
pared to the vast amounts nations spend on
weapons of destruction. Yet the money has
gone a long way, for it has been used to
supplement national investments, to cata¬
lyze local resources and, perhaps most
important of all, to stimulate support at
various levels, both national and inter¬
national, for the conservation of a common
heritage.
In Haiti, for example, a comprehensive
4-million-dollar conservation and training
programme has been developed for the his¬
toric Citadel, Sans Souci Palace and Ramiers
site. The Fund has contributed $ 100,000,
Unesco's Regular Budget the same amount,
and the United Nations Development Pro¬
gramme (UNDP) some $ 1.2 million. Bilat¬
eral reinforcement of the government's in¬
vestment comes from Austria, Canada,
Chile, France, the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many and the Netherlands. The World
Monuments Fund has also raised almost
$ 200,000 from American philanthropic
sources. Similarly, support from the World
Heritage Fund has led to a vast movement
of solidarity in favour of Zaire's splendid
Garamba National Park, the last refuge of
the northern white rhino.
