A global report onpeople at work
BY SEBASTIÄO SALGADO
Sebastiäo Salgado: The opencast gold mine
of Serra Pelada, around 400 km south of
Belém (Para State), Brazil
SEBASTIÄO
SALGADO
is a Brazilian photojournalist. Since 1973 he
has carried out a number of photo reports in
different countries of Africa, Latin America
and Europe. In 1982 he was awarded the W.
Eugene Smith Memorial Fund Grant in
Humanistic Photography (United States)
for his Latin American report, and in 1985 he
received the World Press Photo Prize from
the Holland Foundation (Netherlands) for
pictures taken in Ethiopia. Apart from his
contributions to group exhibitions, he has
had many one-man shows in European capi¬
tals, and is the author of two books, Sahel,
l'homme en détresse (1986) and OtherAmer¬
icas (1986). In 1987 he embarked on a
worldwide photographic survey, which has
already taken him to many countries, on the
theme ofpeople at work. A selection of these
photos is reproduced on the following
pages, together with an explanatory text by
the photographer.
My goal is to portray people at work and to
draw up a world picture of traditional indus¬
tries at the end of the 20th century, as new
technologies supplant the old ways, taking
the word "industry" in its widest sense, that
is to say, mechanical and manual "produc¬
tive activity". I would like to put together a
visual document illustrating the different
manufacturing processes still in use today.
This will include examples of craftsmanship
as well as those techniques used by heavy
industry and the primary sector (large scale
18

WITNESS TO THE WORLD
agricultural production and the mining in¬
dustry).
The underlying idea is that we are today
witnessing the transition from the industrial
age to what could be called the "techno-
atomic" era. During this transition period,
the overall methods of production are com¬
pletely changing. This transformation is it¬
self the historical product of the accumula¬
tion of intellectual, technical and scientific
achievements. It is by continually reflecting
on the nature of work that we make changes
in it. In recent years, we have attached im¬
portance to natural resources and to their
preservation. The decrease in available natu¬
ral resources (raw materials as well as
sources of energy) has obliged us to look
again at notions of productivity and output
and to redefine our needs.
The growing degree of specialization
brought about by high technology means
that man must eventually abandon the tradi¬
tional role of worker-producer, of his own
free will, and replace it with that of observer-
manager. In years to come, these changes in
the role of the worker will even take place in
developing countries.
This photographic survey thus sets out to
be a kind of archive, a visual record of work¬
ing people and their heritage as the 21st
century approaches. In photographing
scenes from an age of production before it
disappears, seeing it as a whole, I hope to
make a small contribution to the age to
come, a testimony for tomorrow's workers,
showing what work was like in our day. D
19

WITNESS TO THE WORLD
Sebastiäo Salgado: Sugar cane plantation at Jaboticabal (Säo Paulo State), Brazil
Sebastiäo Salgado: Automobile factory at Zaporozhye, the Ukrainian SSR
20

WITNESS TO THE WORLD
Sebastiäo Salgado: Steelworks at Zaporozhye, the Ukrainian SSR
WILLIAM EUGENE
SMITH
(1918-1978)
Pittsburgh, 1955. The picture stories of this great
American photographer, an inspiration to Sebas¬
tiäo Salgado, are the work of an accomplished
artist and humanist with a rigorous and honest
approach. They include "Pittsburgh, the story of
an American city", on one of the major centres of
the iron and steel industry in the United States;
and a series of combat photographs of the war in
the Pacific, where Smith was seriously wounded.
Many of his photo sequences were taken for Life
magazine, including "The Country Doctor"
(1948), "Spanish Village" (1951), "Nurse Mid¬
wife" (1951) and "Minamata" (1973), a report he
made with his wife Aileen on the victims of mer¬
cury pollution in a Japanese fishing community.
21
