A thousand-year
heritage
BY METROPOLITAN JUVENALY
THE conversion of Russia to Christianity, the
thousandth anniversary of which is being solemnly
celebrated in 1988 by the Russian Orthodox Church,
was an event of great historical significance, bringing as it did a
major part of the population of eastern Europe into the family
of Christian nations.
The first seeds of the faith had, however, begun to sprout
from the soil of what was to become the State of Rus' as early
as the first century AD, the Age of the Apostles. According to
one thesis, St. Andrew, the "first-called", carried out mission¬
ary activities in the region. This thesis is confirmed by a
tradition related to this saint in the first- to third-century
Christian communities of the northern Black Sea coast. Ex¬
cavations of churches of this period at Chersonesus, Tanais
and the ancient city of Aksaiskoe (or Kobyakovoe) have
yielded moulds which were used for making communion
wafers and which are patterned with the distinctive X-shaped
cross of St. Andrew rather than the more familiar upright
cross.
During the third and fourth centuries, there were Greek
dioceses in a region stretching from the north shore of the
Black Sea to the limits of the Slav-dominated regions; the
evangelizing influence of the more sophisticated culture and
religion that they represented cannot have been lost on the
members of the Slav communities. And when, in the sixth
century, successive waves of invaders Huns, Magyars, Bul-
gars and Avars displaced the Slav tribes until they occupied
virtually the whole of the Balkan peninsula as far as ancient
Sparta, the resulting close cohabitation with Christian Greeks
must have had a further impact. From this period date the
earliest established settlements of Christianized Slavs.
According to the Lives of St. George of Amastris and St.
Stephen of Surozh, bands of Russian warriors (druzhinniki)
attacked these two cities in Asia Minor at the end of the'eighth
century, and were later baptized there. In 864 an entire Slav
State, Bulgaria, was converted to Christianity. By the tenth
century, it was already possible to speak of the eastern Slavs as
comprising both Christians and pagans a mixture noted by
the contemporary Arab writer and traveller, Masudi (c.900-
c.956), in his compilation "The Fields of Gold". It seems that
at that time Christianity had made greater progress among the
southern Slavs, who were closer to the Bulgarians and the
Greeks, than among those living further north.
In 957, Princess Olga of Kiev was baptized in Constantino¬
ple. She remained a Christian until the end of her life, and
strove unremittingly to extend the faith among her compat¬
riots. "May God's will be done," she implored; "may He
pardon my people and the land of Russia; and may it be
granted to them as it was granted to me to turn to Him." It
was Olga's grandson, Prince Vladimir, who in 988 accepted
Christianity on behalf of the Kievan State.
An age of mass evangelization had arrived. Whole countries
abandoned paganism and became part of European Christen-
CONTINUED PAGE 18
16

1
The Pecherskaya lavra (Monastery of the
Caves) in Kiev was founded in the 11th cen¬
tury. Its first monks were hermits living in
caves dug out of the clay banks along the
Dnieper. The Lavra (ör important monastic
foundation), which soon became the centre of
Kievan intellectual life, is an extraordinary
architectural ensemble which was built over 9
centuries. One of the monks was the late 11th
century chronicler Nestor, the main compiler
of The Russian Primary Chronicle which re¬
lates the earliest history of Kievan Russia.
Above, manuscript ofthe Chronicle, preserved
in the Lavra's museum ofancient books. Photo
left shows (at left) the church of the Trinity
(1106-1108), which is built above the main
gateway of the Lavra; centre, the ruins of the
first, brick-built abbatial church (1077), des¬
troyed in 1941; at right, the great bell tower
(1731-1745).
17

The soaring lines of the church of the Ascension
(1532) at Kolomenskoie, southeast ofMoscow,
call to mind a famous passage in The Russian
Primary Chronicle describing the awe felt by
the emissaries ofPrince Vladimir ofKiev when
they saw the majesty ofworship at Constanti¬
nople: "For surely there is no such splendour or
beauty anywhere upon Earth, and we are at a
loss how to describe it. We only know that God
dwells there among men.... "
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 16
dorn: Denmark in the tenth century; Iceland and Norway
around the year 1000; Sweden during the following century.
The Christianization of Russia is important because the
new religion brought a fundamentally new manner of perceiv¬
ing the world, the organization of society, the power of the
State, relations between peoples and their interpretation of
morality. There is, after all, total antinomy between Christian
and pagan principles of self-awareness. Moreover, a Christia¬
nized world is no longer the domain of deities bent on
delivering chastisement, to be appeased with sacrifices, but
the creation of an infinitely benevolent and all-merciful God.
And all people are equal in dignity for in Christianity, as the
Apostle Paul wrote (Epistle to the Galatians, 3,28): "There is
neither Jew nor Greek ... you are all one in Jesus Christ."
"Cherish not only your own faith but also that of others", the
Russian Church enjoined its followers. Finally, Christian
baptism brought with it a number of commandments such as
"thou shalt not kill ... thou shalt not steal ... thou shalt.not bear
false witness ...", which transcended national frontiers and
were to be observed by all who shared the same faith.
With the coming of Christianity, the writings of the
Church Fathers made their way into western, northern and
eastern Europe, together with the literature of Antiquity.
Monasteries, churches and schools were founded. Annalists
like the Venerable Bede in England, Adam of Bremen in
Germany, and Nestor the Chronicler in Russia (considered to
be the compiler of the Povest vremennykh let, or "Tale of
Bygone Years", also known as The Russian Primary Chronic¬
le) committed their countries' legends to massive tomes.
There began an age of journeys, peregrinations and cultural
contacts, later to be described in autobiographical accounts,
of which the twelfth-century "Pilgrimage of the Abbot Daniel
to the Holy Land" is one outstanding example from early
Russian literature.
Christianization brought with it a passion to build. Follow¬
ing his conversion, Prince Vladimir gave orders for the con¬
struction of religious edifices in Kiev and elsewhere,
launching a large-scale programme which literally laid the
foundations of Russian architecture with such world-famous
masterpieces as the cathedrals of St. Sophia in Kiev and
Novgorod, the cathedral of the Assumption in Vladimir and
the Pecherskaya lavra (Monastery of the Caves), also in Kiev.

The birth of Slav literature, for its part, was a direct product
of the evangelistic activities of the missionaries, Saints Cyril
and Methodius, who in the ninth century created a new
alphabet for the translation of the Gospels and various litur¬
gical works into the language known as Old Slavonic. In the
Russian Orthodox Church, the national language now began
to be used for religious services and sermons.
The eleventh and twelfth centuries also saw the emergence
of a distinguished school of Russian writers, including Hilar-
ion, metropolitan of Kiev; Cyril, bishop of Turov ; Daniel the
Exile; and Simon, bishop of Vladimir, and the monk Poly-
carp. At the same time, missionary activity and the creation of
new monasteries in outlying regions facilitated further settle¬
ment and the extension of Russian territory.
With the thirteenth century, the sky darkened. Storming
out of the east, the Mongols hurled themselves against the
State of Kiev in 1237. Three years later, the city fell and the
Horde of Khan Batu pressed further westwards, laying waste
to everything in its path. They were halted essentially because
the fierce resistance of the Russian State wore down the
Mongol forces.
Below: 15th-century icon painted on both
sides. Right, The Trinity and left, a Virgin
Hodigitria (see also top photo page 19), in
which the Virgin holds the Christ-child on her
left arm while she gestures towards Him with
her right hand. Jesus holds a scroll of the Scrip¬
tures in His left hand and makes a benediction
with His right. The Greek monogram ofChrist
(ICXC) is inscribed above His head. This icon
belonged to the cathedral of St. Sophia in
Novgorod.
Photo A. Riazantsev © Soviet Culture Fund, Moscow
For 200 years, occupied Russia was under the Mongol
yoke. While the countries of western Europe applied their
genius to the construction of cathedrals, cities and castles, the '
creation of magnificent libraries and the foundation of schools
and universities, Kievan Rus', its energies sapped by servi¬
tude, paid annual tribute to its nomad overlords.
Little by little, however, and thanks notably to the efforts
of the Church, a patriotic resistance movement took shape in
and around the hitherto obscure city of Moscow. The guiding
spirit of the struggle for freedom was the founder (in 1337)
and Father Superior of the monastery of the Trinity, St.
Sergius of Radonezh, who predicted the hard-won victory
over the Mongols on the Plain of Kulikovo in 1380, which
marked a turning-point in Russian history and a milestone on
the road to liberation. The disciples of St. Sergius travelled to
the farthest corners of the land of Russia where, in the most
remote and untamed wildernesses, they founded monasteries
and hermitages.
Despite the sufferings imposed by the Mongol yoke, the
Russian Orthodox Church continued, through the efforts of
its most faithful servants, to produce crop after crop of
Influence ofreligious icons can be seen in works on secular themes by some modern Russian painters.
Below, The Year 1918 at Petrograd, painted by Kuzma Petrov-Vodkin (1875-1939) in the
dramatic atmosphere of the early days of the Revolution, is a modern treatment of a favourite
subject of the old icon painters, the Virgin and Child. Affinities with ancient icons can also be seen
in the stylization of the figures and the purity of the colours.
23

spiritual fruits. This period saw the foundation of religious
institutions including the Trinity and St. Sergius monastery
(1337), the monasteries of Spass-Andronikov (1360), Simo-
nov (1370), Kirillovo-Belozersky (1397), Solovetsky (1429),
and many others. Some monasteries became centres of annal-
writing; others incorporated schools and libraries; still others
provided workshops where such masterpieces of Orthodox
icon painting as the works of Theophanes the Greek and,
most notably, the Old Testament Trinity of Andrei Rublev
were created (see front cover and page 3).
The significance of Russian religious culture during the past
thousand years may be measured by its influence on
European, Asian and American cultures. At one point or
other in its history, this influence has reached out to Finland,
Poland, the Volga region, the' Caucasus and Transcaucasia,
Western Siberia, Yakutia, Kamchatka, the Amur river region,
Alaska, the Aleutian islands, North America, Japan, Central
Asia, Korea and parts of China. The evangelistic work of the
Church over these immense territories brought more than
forty different ethnic groups totally or partially into the
Christian fold; thanks to the missionaries, many of them
acquired their own written language and gained access to
translations of the Gospels. Thanks, too, to missionaries of
the Russian Orthodox Church, the original religious culture
and traditions are alive today in the art, music, architecture
and plainsong of Orthodox dioceses in such countries as the
United States, Japan and Finland.
The consolidation of Russia as a unified State centred on
Moscow may be said to have begun under the influence of
Metropolitans Peter (d. 1326) and Aleksei (d. 1378). Russian
culture of the Muscovite period may be defined as essentially
religious. At the time when western Europe was caught up in
the crisis of the Reformation, daily life in Russia was perme-
A number ofmonasteries classifiedas historical
monuments have recently been returned by the
Soviet State to the Russian Orthodox Church.
One of them is the 13th-century Danilov
monastery in Moscow, which is the seat of the
Moscow Patriarchate and the Holy Synod of
the Russian Orthodox Church. The main cere¬
monies marking the millennium have taken
place in the monastery, Moscow's oldest, which
has been meticulously restored. Left, view of
the monastery from a bell tower. Right, an old
photo of the 16th-century Vvedenski monas¬
tery, which was returned to the Church in
1987. The Russian writer Fyodor Dostoyevsky
paid two visits to the monastery while working
on his novel The Brothers Karamazov.
H
©
ated with, and to a great extent determined by, the influence of
the Church, which inspired the creation of whole cities that
may today be considered as monuments to Russian Ortho¬
doxy: Suzdal, Rostov-Veliky, Pereslavl-Zalessky, Kirillov
(see photos pages 14 and 15).
The construction of new monasteries carried Russian
architecture to even greater heights; the result may be seen in
such splendid edifices as the churches of the Ascension at
Kolomenskoe; of St. John the Precursor in the village of
Dyakovo; of the Intercession on Red Square in Moscow (the
cathedral of St. Basil the Beatified); of Elijah the Prophet at
Yaroslavl; of the Resurrection on the Debr at Kostroma; and
very many others.
The art of icon painting has given us the names of Diony-
sius, Prokhor of Gorodets, Daniel Cheorny, Prokop Chirina,
Istom Savina, and Simon Ushakov. A Greek deacon, Paul of
Aleppo, wrote after a visit to Russia in 1666 that "the icon
painters here have their equals nowhere on Earth, such are
their artistic skills, the delicacy of their touch and their ease of
craftsmanship. ... Sad it is, indeed, that such hands are
mortal."
The heritage of Muscovite Russia developed still further
during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Familiariza¬
tion with ancient traditions generated fresh literary and artis¬
tic creativity. Nikolai Gogol, Nikolai Leskov, Pavel Melni-
kov-Pechersky and many others, including Fyodor Dos¬
toyevsky, wrote against the background of Orthodox spir¬
ituality. Even the works of those Russian writers of genius,
from Pushkin and Tolstoy to Blok, whose attitude to Ortho¬
doxy was more contradictory, are indelibly marked with signs
of their Orthodox roots; while the sceptic Ivan Turgenev
depicted the piety of the Russian people in his story "Living
Relics".
The paintings of Mikhail Nesterov (1862-1942), Mikhail
Vrubel (1856-1910) and K.S. Petrov-Vodkin (1875-1939), the
sources of whose art lay in Orthodox icon painting, are of
very great interest; while the history of music has been
immensely enriched by the Russian Orthodox choral tradi¬
tion and, later, by the work of Bortnyansky, Tchaikovsky and
Rachmaninov.
Russian religious thought has left more than a few traces in
European history. During the first half of the present century,
"Russian philosophy and theology influenced western Euro¬
pean culture through the works of such eminent figures as
Vladimir Solovev (1853-1900), the priests Sergei Bulgakov
(1871-1944), Pavel Florensky (1882-1943), Georgy Florovsky
(1893-1979) and many others.
Today, the members of the Russian Orthodox Church
24

«98
¿«uMitb v jyti
11* »ai m ¿M" Hfcriwirt II»»« ,|wrp<Mwr4
lw«nv« * mu foui» <rVx«-ri*fM
h« ri* uasiup HT«ï»r«i * A
K! MfWUMUUi *4m|"
rt-57#Ä^- ***"** ***** *?**
; ,- »- tri Sr- ti'*"
.i«-Tfír»f *fi*i 'K
s ¿SÄ Ëj3j&£A&o
0
s
X
-Û
'J
C
'c
_l
©
o
o
Inherited from the Byzantine musical tradition, the liturgical chant of
the Russian Orthodox Church was originally monophonie (sung by a
single voice or by several voices in unison) and executed without
instrumentalaccompaniment. Above, verses ofhymns composed by Ivan
the Terrible.
number tens of millions. With ten centuries' experience in
building a Christian ethic, our Church in the modern world is
engaged both in the pursuit of its traditional mission and in
the identification of new approaches to its task. Since strongly
endorsing and adhering to the international peace movement
when it emerged in the late 1940s, it has become a member of
many international organizations working for peace, cultural
creation and the safeguard of cultural values.
In 1977, for the first time in the history of our country, an
international conference was organized on the initiative of the
Russian Orthodox Church on the theme of "Clergy for a
lasting peace, disarmament and equitable relations between
peoples". The conference established guidelines for co-opera¬
tion between the Russian Orthodox Church and the members
of other religions in the struggle for peace. A similar confer¬
ence was held in 1982.
In 1987, our experience of co-operation in the struggle for
peace was widened to include not only the members of other
religions but also international public opinion, when our
Church took part in an international forum, "For a denucle¬
arized world, for the survival of humanity", which launched
an appeal for joint action.
The thousandth anniversary of the Christianization of
Russia has shown the great interest in our Church taken by
international opinion, and at international meetings held to
celebrate this event in Kiev (1986), and Moscow (1987),
scholars of worldwide reputation have traced the links be¬
tween Russian culture and the Orthodox heritage.
Monsignor JUVENALY, Metropolitan of Krutits and Kolomna, is a leading
figure in the Russian Orthodox Church and a member of its Holy Synod. He
is a member of the USSR National Commission for Unesco and an active
participant in the work of many Soviet organizations and institutions con¬
cerned with cultural affairs, international co-operation and peace.
25
