-Time and the river-^
BY JOHN BAINES Life in ancient Egypt
was geared
^annual ÑUe-floQd
WITHOUT the Nile, which flows
north from the Ethiopian high¬
lands and Central Africa to the
Mediterranean, Egypt with its negligible
rainfall would have been almost completely
inhospitable. Because of the river, it was the
largest and most prosperous East Mediterra¬
nean State from 3000 BC until the Roman
conquest in 30 BC. It regained this pre-emi¬
nence in the Middle Ages, and remains the
most important and populous country in the
Near East. There is true continuity over this
enormous period, because Egypt's boundaries
have changed little.
Throughout Antiquity, the country's
standing relied on its agricultural wealth and
hence on the Nile; yet agriculture was not
the original basis of subsistence, but evolved
with the land in prehistory. As well as gov
erning material potential, the Nile and other
geographical features affected political de¬
velopments and played a part in Egyptian
ideas.
In the Pleistocene era, which ended
around 10,000 BC, Egypt was part of the
eastern Sahara, which was inhabited by
nomadic hunter-gatherers. The region was
rather less arid than at present and supported
people in areas now without resources or
population. The Nile, whose Valley and
Delta were largely swamp, was privileged as
a reliable water source, attracting game and
people, and being exploited for its plants and
fish. By 12,000 BC people also gathered wild
grasses, presumably for their cereal grains,
which needed more processing than other
foods they consumed. This suggests that
pressure on food resources was increasing.
In succeeding millennia the Sahara slowly
dried, becoming by 200Ó BC almost as arid
as it is now. From 10,000 to 5000 BC, late
Stone-Age people gathered where there was
water, exploiting resources ever more inten¬
sively, both in the desert and near the Nile.
The culture of the region was uniform, un¬
like that of later small-scale peasant societies.
The transition to crop-growing occurred
either near water in the desert or in the Nile
Valley and Delta. Dates of 7000-5000 BC
have been suggested for both, much later
than in Western Asia. Because the Nile
Valley preserves little evidence for farming,
it may have been present earlier than can be
documented.
The Nile Valley and Delta were opened up
gradually for agriculture and population in¬
creased. By 4000 BC there were only two

^The Nile in flood. The annual inundation
transformed the Nile Valley into a green ribbon
of cultivation bordered by deserts.
Pink-veined breccia statuette of a bearded man,
50 cm high, was fashioned in the Nile Valley by a
craftsman of the Naqada I culture which
developed in Predynastic Egypt in the
4th millennium of the pre-Christian era.
Photo © Almasy, Paris
principal cultures in Egypt, the older
Merimda culture in the Delta and the
Badarian, centred on Asyut in Upper Egypt.
Before 3100 BC the single Egyptian State
had formed the first large nation State.
Egypt continued to develop and popula¬
tion increased until Roman times. Important
factors in this process were unity and politic¬
al stability, and the possibility of cultivating
ever more fertile land. In this internal expan¬
sion the harnessing of the Nile was crucial.
Crops could be planted after the annual in¬
undation, which covered the Valley and
Delta from late July to September; they
needed minimal watering and ripened
from March to May. Some management of
the inundation to improve its coverage of the
land and to regulate the period of flooding
increased yields, while drainage and the
river's slow deposition of silt extended the
fields. Vegetables grown in small plots
needed irrigating all year from water carried
by hand in pots; not until 1500 BC was any
artificial water-lifting device introduced.
Some plants, such as date palms, whose
crops ripened in the late summer, drew their
water from the subsoil and needed no other
watering.
It is uncertain how early and how far this
regulation of the inundation and small-scale
watering shifted toward full-scale irrigation.
By the Middle Kingdom (c. 2040-1640 BC)
basin irrigation, in which large sections of
the floodplain were treated as single units,
was well established, but it may not have
been present in the Old Kingdom (third
millennium BC), when the great pyramids
were built.
Egyptian texts say little about irrigation
and provision of water, making it difficult to
establish when techniques were introduced.
Exceptions are autobiographies of local lead¬
ers of the troubled First Intermediate Period
(c. 2134-2040 BC), who claimed that they
built canals and supplied water to their peo¬
ple when others had none. In more prosper¬
ous times such matters may have been taken
for granted or not thought prestigious
enough to be described in public texts. The
only area where there was major irrigation
work before Graeco-Roman times was the
Faiyum, a lakeside oasis to the west of the
Nile south of the Delta apex. Here Middle
Kingdom kings reclaimed land by controll¬
ing the water flow down a side river channel
and directing it away from the lake to low-
lying land. Their constructions did not last.
The Nile's annual inundation was quite
reliable, and the floodplain and Delta were
uniquely fertile, making Egyptian1 agricul¬
ture the most secure and productive in the
region, while stability allowed storage
against scarcity. This situation was,
however, only relatively favourable. Crop
failure due to poor floods, population loss
through disease, and other hazards, res¬
tricted the pace of growth and unlike mod¬
ern Egypt only one main crop was grown
per year. High floods could be very
destructive.
The principal crops were cereals, emmer
wheat for bread, and barley for beer. These
made up the staple diet and were easily
stored. Other vital plants were flax, which
was used for products from rope to the finest
cloth and was also exported, and papyrus, a
swamp plant which may have been culti¬
vated or gathered wild. Papyrus roots could
be eaten, and the stems were used for making
anything from boats and mats to the charac¬
teristic Egyptian writing material with the
same name as the plant; this too was ex¬
ported. In addition, a wide range of fruit and
vegetables was cultivated. Meat from live¬
stock was relatively unimportant in the diet,

but birds were hunted in the marshes and the
Nile produced much fish, which was the
main animal protein for most people.
Apart from making agriculture possible,
the Nile was the chief means of communica¬
tion. In the Egyptian script words for
travelling are written with signs of ships.
Heavy loads were taken by river and the ease
of water transport helped the country's in¬
tegration, while the complex geography of
against failures, so that they took upon
themselves much that is achieved through
co-operation in small societies. The central
organization that grew in the third millen¬
nium BC created a disciplined labour force
which was used to build vast royal monu¬
ments and élite tombs, for the fortifications
and pyramids of the Middle Kingdom, for
the imperial expansion, temples and private
tombs of the New Kingdom
M
A
ifraAg
r-rrr^rrr		¡	 ~-f\r\r ' . \f ') rr=
Wh
¿*L±r"
the Delta and its mouths were obstacles to
invasion. Travel into the desert or to Asia
was incomparably more difficult than move¬
ment within Egypt. The river could also
separate people. The image of a poor man
was someone who had no boat, whom the
more fortunate should ferry across. Dying
was "coming in to land" on the "other side",
and the passage into the next world was a
"crossing".
The compactness of Egypt, centred on the
Nile, favoured political unity, which
brought both potential for exploiting the
land's fertility and obligations on rulers.
Rulers controlled agricultural resources
through ownership of land, taxation of its
produce, administrative measures to ensure
that it was cultivated, and compulsory
labour. In return for control, they were re¬
sponsible for storage and for provision
(c. 1550-1070 BC), and for building and
other activities of the Graeco-Roman
period.
Organization and the productivity of in¬
undation agriculture made all this possible,
temporarily releasing many from the land
during the slack summer months in the
fields, or permanently freeing people to fol¬
low specialized and élite occupations. When
central control collapsed, chiefly in the three
Intermediate Periods, few monuments were
constructed and there was little political ex¬
pansion, but the agricultural basis of power
and prosperity was not destroyed; after
reunification monumental projects and
general culture revived. One should not,
however, forget that for most people this use
of labour made available by productivity
was not a personal benefit, but served the
rulers and the élite. Were it not for political
Detail from scene in relief on the limestone
ceremonial mace head of King "Scorpion" (so
called from the sign of a scorpion near his face).
The king is shown digging the first trench ata
temple-founding ceremony. Late Predynastic
Period (c. 3000 BC).
god Osiris, ruler of the netherworld, is
depicted in this painting from the tomb of
Sennedjem at Thebes. The crook and flail he is
holding allude to the god's ancient links with
the kingship and with pastoralism. The tomb
dates from the reign of Sethos I (c. 1306-1290
BC). (See also photo page 24.)
Carving of the ram-headed god Khnum, from
the Small Temple of Abu Simbcl. Patron of the
First Cataract with its mythical caverns which
were considered to be the sources oftheNile
inundation, Khnum was worshipped chiefly in
the area around Elephantine in Upper Egypt.

$¡l
.I****
À
..J.L.
%, ».
*¿ 'A
*x
ovv''
M£it
instability, the lot of many could have been
as good or better in the Intermediate Periods
(c. 2134-2040 BC, 1640-1532 BC, 1070-712
BC), but here beliefs about king and country
may have affected their outlook.
The Nile, which was so fundamental to
the country's life, was surprisingly unimpor¬
tant in religion. The Egyptians took their
environment for granted as the centre of the
world. There was no special name for the
Nile, which was simply the "river"; the
word "Nile" may not be Egyptian in origin.
The bringer of water and fertility was not the
static river but its inundation, called Hapy,
who became a god. Hapy was an essential
image of abundance, but he was not a major
god. Both kings and local potentates likened
themselves to Hapy in their prosperity and
provision for their subjects. A hymn to
Hapy dwells on the inundation's bountiful
wf?
nature but does not relate him to the rest of
the gods, as was done in the praise of other
deities. He was not depicted as a god but as a
fat figure bringing the produce of abundance
to the gods. He had no temple, but was
worshipped annually at the start of the inun¬
dation with sacrifices and hymns at Gebel
el-Silsila, which was probably a prehistoric
frontier, where the hills come close to the
river north of Aswan.
In some other respects the Nile and the
inundation were central to the Egyptian
world view. Unlike most peoples, the
Egyptians oriented themselves to the south,
from which the river came, so that the west
was on their right with the result that it was
the "good" side for passage into the next
world. The year and calendar were deter¬
mined by the Nile and by the stars. New
Year was in mid July, when the river began
to rise for the inundation; this coincided
with the reappearance of the star Sirius,
Egyptian Sothis, in the sky after seventy
days' invisibility. The river defined three
seasons of four months, "Inundation",
"Emergence" (November-March) when the
land reappeared and could be cultivated, and
"Heat" or "Harvest", when crops were
gathered and the water was lowest.
The major god most closely connected
with the Nile was Osiris. In myth Osiris was
a king of Egypt who was killed by his
brother Seth on the banks of the river and
cast into it in a coffin. His corpse was cut
into many pieces. Later, his sister and widow
Isis succeeded in reassembling his body and
reviving it to conceive a posthumous son,
Horus. Osiris, however, did not return to
this world but became king of the under¬
world. His death and revival were linked to
the land's fertility. In a festival celebrated
during the inundation, damp clay models of
Osiris were planted with barley, whose ger¬
mination stood for the revival of the land
brought by the flood, so that Osiris, the river
and the land were drawn into a complex of
ideas about fertility and rebirth.
Another important god linked to the river
was Khnum the "Lord of the Cataract", the
ram god of Elephantine at the southern fron¬
tier. Khnum was a creator god and the pat¬
ron of the point where the inundation en¬
tered Egypt. This connection was, however,
secondary, supplementing an ancient local
cult of the goddess Satis, whose temple cele¬
brated the conjunction between Sothis and
the inundation; despite the later arrival of the
inundation in more populous areas further
north, the conjunction was observed and
recorded at Elephantine.
The Nile's fundamental importance may
be more evident to us than to the ancient
Egyptians, who were so accustomed to it
that they termed rain in other countries an
"inundation in the sky". In order to appreci¬
ate its position in Antiquity, one must see it
through ancient eyes with ancient distinc¬
tions between sacred and secular, divine and
human. The Egyptians had a matter-of-fact
attitude to the river, whose inundation could
be destructive but was a beneficent moral
force in their lives; most gods were more
complex beings whose abode was outside the
normal world. It was left to the Greeks and
Romans to make the Nile a god like the other
rivers of their world. I
JOHN BAINES, of the United Kingdom, has
been Professor of Egyptology at the University of
Oxford since 1976. He is the author with Jaromir
Málek of the Atlas of Ancient Egypt (1980), which
has been translated into many languages, of
Fecundity Figures (1985), which includes a study
ofthe personification ofthe inundation ofthe Nile,
Hapy, and of articles on Egyptian religion, king¬
ship and other subjects. He has lectured on ancient
Egypt in Africa, Europe, and the United States.
