Self-portrait of a clown by Leonid G. Engibarov
I trained at the Moscow Circus School,
where my teacher was Yuri Petrovich
Belov, a young director passionately
interested in the art of the clown. We cre¬
ated my character together. Inventing a
character is the trickiest of all the problems
facing a clown. An actor on the screen, on
the stage or even in music hall is in a very
much easier position, because his character
is described in writing by an author, where¬
as the clown creates his own character.
All sorts ofquestions had to be answered.
For example, should my character wear a
clown's make-up? We considered in turn
the make-up and masks worn by the
greatest comic artistes that we knew. What
ideas could they give us for the figure that
we were creating? We were particularly
drawn to the white face of Grock, the great
Swiss clown. I found this make-up, similar
to the classical mask of Pierrot, very
attractive.
On mature reflection, we nevertheless
decided against a variant of this type of
mask, which strongly emphasizes the sad
eyes of the person acting the clown. But
before deciding on the make-up, it was
necessary to work out the personality of my
character. Who was he?
At Belov's suggestion, we gave free rein
to our imagination and carefully noted
everything that occurred to us in connection
with our character, whom we called
Lionia Engibarov, since I had decided that,
initially, he would be loosely based on
myself.
Our Lionia was a youth of eighteen or
nineteen, whose life had followed a similar
pattern to my own. Like me, he had been
born in Moscow. He did not have very
pronounced national characteristics, but
was clearly of Eastern origin. We strove to
understand his personality, his likes and
dislikes, his view of the world, his tastes, his
inclinations and everything that made him
an individual in his own right. We gave him
a child's curiosity and thirst for knowledge,
both of which would very often lead him
into scrapes.
Here we already had material for comic
misunderstandings. But we had to give
much more emphasis to the character's
comic side. I was determined that Lionia
should be a very modest person. He per¬
forms the most complicated circus feats
without turning a hair. We thought and
events proved us right that there was
strong comic potential in this.
Lionia's personality gradually took
shape. Here was a comic hero who made
people laugh without malice. We agreed
that he should be a sort of gallant knight,
@ -4 Left, the great Swiss clown Grock (Adrien
s Wettach, 1880-1959) waits to go into the ring
I at Toulon, France, 1954
always ready to fly to the rescue of ladies or
underdogs. Even if Lionia did not look like
a tough guy, he had a certain strength of
character.
Finally we had to fit him out with clothes.
It was essential that his costume should not
be a hindrance to juggling or acrobatics,
and so it had to be functional. But it also had
to express the character's personality.
Lionia wears his father's outsize shoes, a
feature that we borrowed from our beloved
Chaplin. His trousers and the braces that
hold them up were an idea of my mother's.
"Dressed like that, he'll look a real scally¬
wag," she said.
Then we spent a long time looking for a
shirt, and finally opted for a striped singlet
that makes him look even thinner than he
is. We tried out several dozen types of
headgear, from caps to berets, before de¬
ciding that what suited Lionia best was the
most ordinary type of hat, bought across the
counter. We tied a silk scarf around his neck
and put a slapstick in his hands to show
clearly that he was a clown, and we decided
that he would enter the ring walking per¬
fectly normally.
The image continued to develop as we
worked. The young fellow still had to
mature, not physically, but psychologically.
However, if my invented character was to
mature, I had to develop spiritually as an
artiste. To be a brilliant juggler and capable
Leonid Engibarov (below) believed that "the
clown always does everything seriously. Of
course, that's not to say that he doesn't want
to be funny. On the contrary, his aim is to
make people laugh. But the true comic does
this without trying to raise a laugh at any
price."
of doing handstands is not enough, nowa¬
days, to make a clown worthy of the name.
The artiste must, as the Czechs say, be
"drawn out of himself. In the way that he
handles a character, the artiste gives im¬
mediate, perceptible expression to the way
he relates to it. And this is precisely what I
want: the audience must always be aware,
underneath Lionia's comic guilelessness, of
my own personal reactions to what happens
to him.
I have often been asked why I never
speak in the ring. It is not because I can't but
because the circus is primarily a visual spec¬
tacle. It seems to me that people go to the
circus to "watch" a performance and not to
"hear" one. I am silent also because I am
very fond of mime. I love its language,
wordless yet so remarkably expressive.
The subject of a circus mime must be
simple, like a children's fable, without
being unduly "primitive". A true fable is a
fount of wisdom; its meaning can always be
clearly grasped. A person performing a cir¬
cus mime must aim at the same kind of
clarity. As a rule, I create my own inter¬
ludes and scenes. How do I get the ideas for
my comic turns? There is no hard-and-fast
rule. It varies according to the circumstan¬
ces. However, I always start by writing a
little story for my character. I imagine all
sorts of adventures that he might have, and
I place him in a wide variety of situations.
I sometimes feel that I have "said it all"
and used up all my ideas. Only fresh emo¬
tions can help at such a time, whether ex¬
perienced directly in life or through the
mirror of art. When such moods descend on
me, I spend a lot of time strolling around, I
travel and I voraciously watch films and
shows. Not necessarily comedies. Grieg and
Beethoven are as indispensable to a co'mic
artiste as Charlie Chaplin, Buster Keaton or
Fernandel. I let myself be guided by my
curiosity. I listen to music whenever I can. I
go to exhibitions and art galleries, and visit
painters in their studios. I have a craving for
poetry. I leaf through my collection of char¬
acter sketches and caricatures.
One day I happened to hear a blues sung
by that incomparable Black American
singer Louis Armstrong. I was moved by
the poignant sadness of the melody. Almost
against my will, a subject for a little story
crept into my mind: the story of a sad
acrobat. He has known so many failures
that even when he has become an artiste of
great prowess, dexterity and talent, he can¬
not believe in his own success. And this lack
of confidence makes him very touching. I
fleshed out this theme with the help of a few
tricks and stunts.
. Lionia walks towards the audience with
his head bent, his hands in his pockets. He
gives the traditional salutation and then, to
the slow tempo of this sad blues, he starts to
go through a complicated routine. At the
end, he walks towards the ring doors, as
17

"Having chosen to make mime my life's
work, I assembled a collection of themes for
pantomimes and sketches." Above, En¬
gibarov strikes a pose in a mime sequence
entitled The Crocodile.
dejected as ever. The ringmaster urges him
to come back and take a bow. But the young
man still cannot believe that his art can give
pleasure to anyone, and he shakes his head.
Then the audience warmly applauds Lionia,
to encourage him. And when he appears for
the next turn, happy and beaming, the audi¬
ence bursts into even louder applause.
It always gives me great satisfaction as an
artiste when I succeed in mastering a new
genre or in performing an original trick. But
I never, never do a number in the ring just
for its own sake. I always make sure that
each trick is woven into a story that matches
my character.
One day, somebody told me about skip¬
ping with a rope, not in the usual upright
manner, but lying down. I decided to prac¬
tise this trick, which greatly appealed to me.
But for a long time I was unable to work it
into an act, since I could not think of a
suitable pretext. Skipping ropes and urchins
go very well together, I reasoned. But how
could I bring in skipping lying down?
And then I had an idea. The ringmaster is
annoyed when he sees that rascal Lionia
skipping during the performance, and takes
away his rope. But Lionia has another in
reserve. The ringmaster confiscates that
one, too, and then a third. This walking
embodiment of discipline finally gets really
angry and forces the kid to turn out his
pockets. But Lionia acts stupid and pre¬
tends not to understand what he is supposed
to do. I get as much as I can out of the
business of emptying my pockets, first the
right, then the left, according to Chaplin's
principle of milking a gag for the last drop of
laughter. The audience watches the scene
closely, and it does not occur to anyone that
I may have another rope ... in my hat. This
is a wonderful surprise for everyone.
But what a pity the rope is too short.
What is to be done? I heave a disappointed
sigh, and then I hit on the solution: I stretch
out on the floor and start to skip lying down.
When the ringmaster rushes towards me yet
again, I quickly knot the rope around my
heck like a tie. My whole attitude seems to
be proclaiming: you can't touch me, it's
only my tie. Then I march out with my nose
in the air.
Improvisation is another way of creating
an act. I have a very soft spot for our
wonderful clown Karandash, who is famous
for his improvisations. And although I con¬
sider the best "improvisation" to be the one
that can be rehearsed beforehand, I am
willing to improvise if the opportunity
arises.
One day, when I was working one of the
many interludes in the programme, the
ringmaster whispered in my ear: "Spin it
out." This meant that there was a problem
behind the scenes and that the audience had
to be kept amused. I had neither my slap¬
stick nor my hat, both useful props in such
cases. But I noticed that the props manager
had placed a microphone on the ring fence,
ready for the next number.
As I walked towards the microphone, I
had no idea what I was going to do. But as
soon as I had it in my hands, an idea came to
me and I burst into an impassioned speech
... which did not have a single word in it. I
suddenly realized that the microphone was
not working. I tapped it and blew into it.
Meanwhile I was desperately thinking:
"What next? What next?". "Step on the
wire", the voice of inspiration suddenly sug¬
gested. Remembering the illusionist's trick
of distracting the audience's attention by a
false movement, I raised the microphone as
if to hold it closer to the light, and thus
made the audience look up, while in the
meantime I surreptitiously trod on the wire.
From then on it was all plain sailing. To my
great surprise, I had discovered what was
wrong.
I shifted my foot and tapped again on the
microphone: everything was working! I
took up the stance of an orator. And sud¬
denly I was overcome by stage-fright. I
opened my mouth, but no words came. In a
panic, I shot a glance at the ringmaster. He
gave an encouraging sign. I signalled to him
that I was afraid, and on a sudden impulse I
held the microphone to my heart like a
stethoscope. The rest followed naturally: I
started to tap gently on the microphone
with one finger, and the whole circus heard
the rapid "toc-toc" of my racing heart. Then
I had the idea of testing the ringmaster's
heart. It was beating to quite a different
rhythm, at long intervals: "boom ... boom

. . . boom". The audience burst out laughing.
And at that moment we received the signal
that behind the scenes everything was now
in order.
Later, I developed and improved on what
had come to me by chance. I concentrated
on showing my anxiety about the irregular
rhythm of the ringmaster's heartbeat. I am
dismayed as it begins to beat more and more
slowly and finally stops. In desperation, I
look everywhere for his heart, placing the
microphone over various parts of his body.
But in vain. I shake his head to and fro, peer
into his eyes and burst into despairing sobs.
Then, with a smile, the ringmaster suggests
that I should look for his heart on the left,
and when the microphone finds it and I hear
it beating perfectly normally, I am filled
with childlike joy.
LEONID GEORGIEVITCH ENGIBAROV
(1935-1972), of the Soviet Union, was one of the
first modern clown-mimes. A skilled juggler,
tightrope walker and acrobat, he also performed
in films, pantomime and music hall, in sketches
that he had written himself. This article is an
edited version of a contribution to "The Art of
the Clown", published in 1969 in the USSR.
