The Chinese
scientific genius
BY ROBERT K. G. TEMPLE
POSSIBLY more than half of the basic
inventions and discoveries upon
which the "modern world" rests
come from China.
Without the importation from China of
nautical and navigational improvements
such' as ships' rudders, the compass and
multiple masts, the great European
Voyages of Discovery could never have
been undertaken. Columbus would not
have sailed to America, and Europeans
would never have established colonial
empires.
Without the importation from China of
the stirrup, to enable them to stay on
horseback, knights of old would never
have ridden in their shining armour to aid
damsels in distress; there would have been
no Age of Chivalry. And without the
importation from China of guns and gun¬
powder, the knights would not have been
knocked from their horses by bullets
which pierced the armour, bringing the
Age of Chivalry to an end.
Without the importation from China of
paper and printing, Europe would have
continued for much longer to copy books
by hand. Literacy would not have become
so widespread.
Johann Gutenberg did not invent mov¬
able type. It was invented in China. Wil¬
liam Harvey did not discover the circula¬
tion of the blood in the body. It was
discovered or rather, always assumed
in China. Isaac Newton was not the first to
discover his First Law of Motion. It was
discovered in China.
These myths and many others are shat¬
tered by our discovery of the true Chinese
origins of many of the things, all around
us, which we take for granted. It is exciting
to realize that the East and the West are
not as far apart in spirit or in fact as most of
us have been led, by appearances, to be¬
lieve, and that the East and the West are
already combined in a synthesis so power¬
ful and so profound that it is all-perva¬
ding. Within this synthesis we live our
daily lives, and from it there is no escape.
The modern world is a combination of
Eastern and Western ingredients which
are inextricably fused.
Right, detail from a Chinese star map
dating from c. 940 AD. Some 1,350 stars
are shown on the map. They are drawn in
3 colours, white, black and yellow, to
correspond to 3 ancient schools of
astronomy.
Left, hoeing crops during
the Han Dynasty (207 BC-
220 AD). Intensive hoeing
and cultivation of crops in
rows originated in China
around the 6th century BC.
4 _

*t 1
¥
IL
it
9
S
Va
tit
1
Astronomical instruments silhouetted
against the sky at the Beijing
Observatory, built in the 15th century.
Beijing hayhad an astronomical
observatory since the Qin Dynasty
(3rd century BC).
The discovery of this truth is a result of
incidents in the life of the distinguished
British scholar Dr Joseph Needham, au¬
thor of the great work Science and Civi¬
lisation in China. In 1937, aged thirty-
seven, Needham was one of the youngest
Fellows of the Royal Society and a
biochemist of considerable distinction at
Cambridge. He had already published
many books, including the definitive his¬
tory of embryology. One day he met and
befriended some Chinese students, in par¬
ticular a young woman from Nanjing
named Lu Gwei-djen, whose father had
passed on to her his unusually profound
knowledge of the history of Chinese sci¬
ence. Needham began to hear tales of how
the Chinese had been the true discoverers
of this and that important thing, and at
first he could not believe it. But as he
looked further into it, evidence began to
come to light from Chinese texts, hastily
translated by his new friends for his
benefit.
Needham became obsessed with this
subject, as he freely admits. Not knowing
a word of Chinese, he set about learning
the language. In 1942 he was sent to China
for several years as Scientific Counsellor
to the British Embassy in Chongqing. He
was able to travel all over China, learn the
language thoroughly, meet men of science
everywhere he went, and accumulate vast
quantities of priceless ancient Chinese
books on science. After the War,
Needham became Unesco's first Assistant
Director General for the natural sciences.
In July 1946 Needham stated in a lec¬
ture to the China Society in London that:
"What is really very badly needed is a
proper book on the history of science and
technology in China, especially with re¬
ference to the social and economic back¬
ground of Chinese life. Such a book would
be by no means academic, but would have
a wide bearing on the general history of
thought and ideas."
Needham, now back in Cambridge,
went ahead and wrote and is still writ¬
ing the very work which he envisaged,
except for the fact that it is, indeed, very
academic. It is in fact much easier to read
than it looks, but of course is very expen-

sive, and even many libraries cannot
afford it. Needham, however, has never
lost his early vision of a work which was
"by no means academic"; he has always
wanted to make his work more accessible
in every possible way. Therefore, when I
approached him in 1984 with the sugges¬
tion that I write a popular book for the
general reader based upon his half cen¬
tury's labours, he agreed more readily
than at the time I could understand. It is
now clear that this was a project which he
had long envisaged, and which he felt he
could no longer hope to accomplish
himself.
In the 1946 lecture which was so
prophetic of his future activities, Dr.
Needham went on to say: "I personally
believe that all Westerners, all people be¬
longing to the Euro-American civiliza¬
tion, are subconsciously inclined to con¬
gratulate themselves, feeling with some
self-satisfaction that, after all, it was
Europe and its extension into the
Americas which developed modern
science and technology. In the same way I
think that all my Asian friends are subcon¬
sciously inclined to a certain anxiety about
this matter, because their civilization did
not, in fact, develop modern science and
technology."
We need to set this matter right, from
both ends. And I can think of no better
single case than the lesson to be drawn
from the history of agriculture. We should
take to heart the astonishing and disturb¬
ing fact that the European agricultural
revolution, which laid the basis for the
Industrial Revolution, came about only
because of the importation of Chinese
ideas and inventions. The growing of
crops in rows, intensive hoeing of weeds,
the "modern" seed drill, the iron plough,
the moldboard to turn the ploughed soil,
The earliest surviving Chinese notations
are records ofdivination incised over
3,000 years ago on "oracle bones"
(tortoise shells or the shoulder blades of
animals). Some oracle bones unearthed
near Anyang are inscribed with
astronomical and calendrical
information such as the names of stars
and data about solar and lunar eclipses.
Left, two Anyang oracle bones bearing
astronomical inscriptions.
and efficient harnesses were all imported
from China. Before the arrival from China
of the trace harness and the collar harness,
Westerners choked their horses with
straps round their throats.
Although ancient Italy could produce
plenty of grain, it could not be transported
overland to Rome for lack of satisfactory
harnesses. Rome depended on shipments
of grain by sea from places like Egypt. As
for sowing methods probably over half
of Europe's seed was wasted every year
before the Chinese idea of the seed drill
came to the attention of Europeans.
Countless millions of farmers broke their
backs and their spirits by ploughing with
ridiculously poor ploughs, while for two
thousand years the Chinese were enjoying
their relatively effortless method.
It would be better if the nations and the
peoples of the world had a clearer under¬
standing of each other, allowing the men¬
tal chasm between East and West to be
bridged. After all they are, and have been
for several centuries, intimate partners in
the business of building a world civiliza¬
tion. The technological world of today is a
product of both East and West to an extent
which until recently no one had ever im¬
agined. It is now time for the Chinese
contribution to be recognized and ack¬
nowledged, by East and West alike.
ROBERT K.G. TEMPLE is an American writer
who specializes in the popularization of science.
His published works, which have been widely
translated, include The Sirius Mystery, and
Conversations with Eternity, a history of divina¬
tion in the Ancient World. He is currently enga¬
ged in the co-production of a television, series
based on his book China, Land of Discovery and
Invention.
Precursors
6 _
