The last refuge of the giant panda
by Pan Wenshi
GIANT pandas, with their unique
black and white fur and adorably
clumsy behaviour, are today an en¬
dangered species whose fate is worthy of
general concern, for they are a treasure not
just of China but of the whole world.
Though the origins and taxonomical de¬
tails of the giant panda are still being de¬
bated, its evolution has been clearly defined
after scientific study of fossils unearthed at
hundreds of spots in China, eastern Burma
and northern Viet Nam.
The giant panda already existed three
million years before the anthropoid apes
evolved into humans. At that time there
was only a small number of them living in
what is now South China's tropical and
sub-tropical jungle where the giant apes
ruled. Judging from the fossilized teeth of
the giant pandas in those times, their diet
was almost the same as it is today, but their
average size was only half that of a grown
panda today.
Some 750,000 years ago, giant pandas
began to spread northward, over the Qin-
ling Mountains which extend across the
western half of China, all the way from the
Pearl River and the Yangtze River basins in
the south to Zhoukoudian in the mountains
southwest of Beijing in the north. It was at
this time that the giant panda population
reached its peak. The pandas also grew in
size, averaging about one-eighth bigger
than those of today.
In this early period of their evolution,
they not only flourished in the tropical and
sub-tropical jungles of the south, but also
adapted to the mild-to-cool climate of the
northern forests.
The giant pandas suffered their first set¬
back some 18,000 years ago when the last
Ice Age began. Their kingdom north of the
Qinling Mountains was swept out of exist¬
ence while their numbers in the south
dwindled. The real knock-out blow,
however, did not come from nature, but
from the most intelligent of all living crea¬
tures human beings.
The fast-growing human race in the last
few millennia has slowly but irresistibly
forced the giant pandas to retreat from the
fertile land in the lower mountains of south¬
ern China into the deep valleys on the east¬
ern skirt of the Qinghai-Tibet plateau.
Today, giant pandas are found only in six
separate locations in the mountainous west
of China. In one of these locations, an area
of some 1,650 square kilometres on the
southern slopes of the Qinling Mountains,
are no more than 240 giant pandas. The
largest of the six locations, in which some
350 pandas live, spreads out over 13,300
square kilometres of slopes on the Minshan
Mountain on the border of Gansu and
Only about one thousand giant pandas today
survive in nature, all in 6 small blocks of
high bamboo forest in western China. The
panda exists almost entirely on a diet of
bamboo.
Sichuan provinces. The now-famous
Wolong Nature Reserve, surrounded by the
Qionglai Mountains in Sichuan Province,
accommodates about 250 giant pandas over
an area of 10,425 square kilometres. The
southern limit of the giant pandas' living
space is along the three mountain chains of
Daxiangling, Xiaoxiangling and Daliang-
shan, where some 100 of the rare animals
hide in bamboo thickets scattered over an
area of 3,300 square kilometres. All told,
there are now less than 1,000 giant pandas
in a combined area of 28,725 square
kilometres.
How have the giant pandas managed
to survive so far? Scientists from Beijing
University have reached the following con¬
clusions after studying the natural history
of the giant pandas living in the Qinling
Mountains.
In their hard-earned coexistence with the
human world over thousands of years, the
giant pandas have improved their capacity
24

Zhen-Zhen ("precious" or "rare treasure"),
an elderly female panda, shows no fear as
she visits the panda studies centre estab¬
lished in the Wolong Nature Reserve
(Sichuan Province) by the Chinese Ministry
of Forestry and the World Wildlife Fund.
to endure the environmental changes
brought about by human civilization. But as
the changes became quicker and more radi¬
cal, the giant pandas could no longer keep
up the pace and were eliminated in large
numbers. However, there were times when
civilization affected the natural environ¬
ment less dramatically, and the giant pan¬
das were thus able to survive. An example
of this can be found on the southern slopes
of the Qinling Mountains.
Over 2,000 years of attempts to cultivate
the mountain slopes have yielded practical¬
ly nothing because of the harsh climate at
such a high altitude. This natural barrier
protected the giant pandas from human in¬
terference, because people stayed in the
warm temperate and sub-tropical areas be¬
low 1,400 metres. The temperate and cold
temperate forest climate above that height
has therefore become the last shelter for the
Qinling giant pandas.
Unfortunately, however, the giant pan¬
das are being deprived of their last natural
habitat as a result of irrational deforestation
prompted by the pressing needs of 1,000
million people. Today the giant pandas of
China are threatened with extinction. The
shrinking forests, the increasing failure of
the animals to multiply because of close-kin
mating within separate small groups and the
widespread starvation caused by the
periodic flowering of the bamboo which
forms their diet and which dies after blos¬
soming all these factors have worsened
the giant pandas' already serious plight.
Nature can no longer keep the giant pan¬
das alive. It is up to us to help them to
survive. Since China is the only country in
the world where giant pandas live in the
wild, the Chinese Government has taken
strict measures to protect them and is doing
all it can through legal protection and edu¬
cational programmes to help people to
realize the importance of helping these
endangered animals.
Nature reserves have been declared in 20
per cent of the areas where giant pandas
live. A panda studies centre was jointly
established by the Chinese Ministry of
Forestry and the World Wildlife Fund in
1980. Located in the Wolong Nature Re¬
serve, the centre has carried out compre¬
hensive studies into the life of the giant
pandas and worked out measures to protect
them in their natural habitats.
In 1984, scientists from Beijing Universi¬
ty made detailed observations in the Qin¬
ling Nature Reserve, hoping to find a way of
creating an ideal forest community that
would not only provide the giant pandas
with a comfortable living environment but
also yield more timber. They hope that their
work will help to ease the discord between
the giant panda and man and point the way
to harmonious coexistence in the future.B
PAN WENSHI, of the People's Republic of Chi¬
na, teaches biology at Beijing University. He is the
author ofmany studies on the giant panda, includ¬
ing a forthcoming book about the natural habitats
of the giant pandas of the Qinling Mountains.
25
