THE LONG STRUGGLE
FOR LIBERATION
Reflections on the abolition of slavery in Brazil
THE abolition of slavery in Brazil,
which was enshrined in the Lei Áu¬
rea ("Golden Law") of 13 May 1 888,
was the outcome of a long struggle punctu¬
ated by defeats as well as victories. The
decree that became law on that Sunday in
May was couched in simple, unembroidered
language:
"Article 1 : With effect from the date of the
present law, slavery is declared to be abo¬
lished in Brazil.
Article 2: All provisions to the contrary are
hereby repealed.
(Signed) Isabel, Imperial Princess Regent."
In spite of the brevity and terseness of its
language, this document, which had actually
been drafted six days before, on 7 May 1888,
revealed the extent to which the struggle
against slavery in Brazil had intensified.
It was the culmination of a long story in
which African slaves black Brazilians
were treated as chattels. Their fate was de¬
cided as if they were pawns in a game of
chance.
The black slaves who, according to "offi¬
cial" records, were present in Brazil from as
early as 1550, became a key element in the
country's development. "Without the
Blacks, Brazil would not exist," claimed the
Portuguese historian Oliveira Martins.
There would have been no sugar or coffee or
tobacco, and stock-raising and mining
would not have been developed. None of the
wealth that fuelled Brazilian prosperity in
the late nineteenth century would have been
generated. It is easy to grasp the importance
of the interests that opposed the emancipa¬
tion of the slaves.
It can be argued that the Brazilian eco¬
nomy would have collapsed without the
black slaves. Hence, before the long process
of liberation could begin, the circumstances
that had prompted the European countries
to impose slavery in the Americas had to
change.
After abolishing the slave trade, Britain
began to exert pressure on other nations to
follow suit so that the products of her col¬
onies would continue to be competitive.
Brazil came under this pressure after achiev¬
ing independence in 1822, and probably as a
result of it Emperor Pedro I signed a conven¬
tion in November 1826 (ratified the follow¬
ing year) whereby "any trade in slaves con¬
ducted in the three years subsequent to this
date shall be deemed to constitute piracy".
BY OSWALDO DE CAMARGO
The Emperor had spoken, but how much
weight did his wishes have compared with
those of the powerful interests involved in
the Brazilian slave trade? This was only the
beginning of a long and gradual process dur¬
ing which many decrees were promulgated,
some of them tinged with bitter irony, such
as the law in respect of "sixty-year-olds",
which freed Blacks who had reached sixty
years of age.
After the slave trade had been officially
abolished in 1850 under the law sponsored
by Euzébio de Queirós and as a result of the
vigorous steps taken by the authorities, no
more "ships laden with ebony" would ever
again set sail from Africa for Brazil. And,
some thirty-eight years later, Princess Isabel
would sign the celebrated Aurea law.
What is a slave but an empty shell, utterly
devoid of speech? "Servus non habet perso¬
nam" slaves have no personality ; they have
no bodies, no past, no names, no property.
For white people, slaves, as bodies without
the attributes of personality, were by defini¬
tion the incarnation of a social void.
Indeed, the most harrowing and dramatic
consequence of slavery in Brazil was the
slaves' loss of their identity. And it is that
identity which black Brazilians have been
10013»00
de
seeking since the beginning of the century
through paths that have been fraught with
difficulty.
White Brazilians were among the first to
praise the abolition of slavery. One of them
was Luis Murat, whose "Redemption
Hymn" was set to music by Abdom
Milanez:
How fortunate you are, my native land.
Your explorers see you emerge as beautiful as
the dawn.
Tell the slaves that masters no longer exist
and that now they arefree the world over.
These 4 photos ofblack slaves in Rio deJaneiro
were taken before 1870 by a Rio photographer,
José Christiano de Freitas Henriques Junior.
They belong to a series ofportraits originally
usedaspostcards showing "a substantialpart of
the population of Rio de Janeiro, over half of
whom are Blacks or mulattos, slaves or free".
Top of page: proclamation issued in 1862,
offering a reward for the capture of a fugitive
black slave.
Photos taken from Escravos brasilieros do sécula XIX nafotografía
de Christiano Jr., Ex Librís publishers, Sâo Paulo
36

;Cätiftca
oáo
However, this is not the tone adopted by
most black Brazilians when they think about
13 May. The literature produced by Afro-
Brazilians to advance the arguments pro¬
pounded in the nineteenth century by the
mulatto Luiz Gama and by the Black Joäo da
Cruz e Sousa is a magnificent demonstration
of their desire to achieve self-awareness and,
above all, to act as black people.
While white people such as Luis Murat
could sing the praises of 13 May in a spirit of
tranquillity and satisfaction, the black poet
Carlos Assumpçâo (born in Teite, Säo Paulo
State, in 1927) gives vent to feelings of anger
in his poem Protesto:
Although my words offire are not heeded,
I shall not cease from crying out
No. I shall not cease from crying out,
Masters.
I was sent into this world
To protest
Neither lies nor empty show, nor anything
else
Can make me silent.
And he goes on to say:
. One day, in the midst of applause and
bouquets of roses,
They suddenly cast me out from the prison
where I lay
Into a more spacious prison.
The freedom they granted me
Proved to be a Trojan horse.
There were snakes lying in wait
Under the cloak of enthusiasm.
Earlier, the poet Solano Trindade (1908-
1974), from Pernambuco, in his Cantares äo
meu povo (1961; "Songs for My People")
had written:
/ sing the praises of Palmares,
Without envying Virgil or Homer
Or Camoens,
Because my song
Is the cry of a race
In the thick of its struggle
For freedom.
The Brazilian slaves always fought for
their freedom, there should be no mistake
about that. The black people in Brazil were
never submissive and never yielded to their
lords and masters. Right from the outset,
whether in the countryside or in the city,
revolt and flight were commonplace. In
1719, the slaves of the State of Minas Gerais
planned an uprising against their white mas¬
ters. The date was set for 30 March. In his
book Aboliçâo em Minas ("Abolition in
Minas Gerais State"), Oliam José states that
"the rebels had reached the point where they
had appointed a king and ministers to help
them govern the black country, so that there
would no longer be slaves in Minas Gerais".
However, the movement was betrayed and
the uprising did not take place.
Quilombos, settlements of fugitive slaves,
came into being. In the largest of them, there
were a code of legal and moral rules and a
tribunal to judge the most serious misde¬
meanours. The most famous of the many
quilombos was Palmares, a veritable republic
founded in the seventeenth century. The
significance of Palmares, which soon came to
be known as the black Troy, is increasingly
recognized, especially by the present-day
black movements in Brazil. Earlier in the
century Palmares also had great symbolic
values for the Imprensa negra ("Black
Press") which was published from 1916 on¬
wards by a group of Afro-Brazilians, and for
such movements as Frente negra ("Black
Front") which was launched in Säo Paulo in
the 1930s.
A genuine black hero emerged from Pal¬
mares. This was Zumbi, a black warrior who
fought against the slave-owners. A "Short
History of Brazilian Blacks" published in
Brazil in 1976 describes how "After two
years' resistance, the troops led by the mer¬
cenaries Domingos Jorge Velho and Bernar¬
do Vieira de Meló succeeded in destroying
Macaco, the capital of the Palmares quilom¬
bo, in 1694. In the course of the battle, many
Blacks perished or else flung themselves over
the precipice surrounding the citadel. On
that occasion, Zumbi managed to escape and
lived to return and mount further attacks
but, on 20 November 1695, he was cornered
in his hideout after being betrayed by a
former companion-in-arms. Outnumbered,
he died fighting heroically against an enemy
force." The date of 20 November has come
to be the Day of Black Consciousness in
Brazil.
For Brazilian Blacks 13 May is a day of
reflection, on which they give thought to the
consequences of the Aurea law promulgated
by Princess Isabel. By way of conclusion, it
should be noted that 13 May is severely
condemned in the works of most black Bra¬
zilian authors.
One of them, the poet Oliveira Silveira,
(born in Rio Grande do Sul in 1941) pro¬
claims in his poem "Treze de Maio":
The thirteenth of May spells betrayal:
Freedom without wings
Freedom with clipped wings
Like
This poem.
And so disenchantment with the historical
date on which slavery was abolished in Bra¬
zil continues to be a distinct and consistent
theme in poetry and prose, indicating the
way in which black people nowadays think
about their condition. In his book A noite
nao pede licença (1987; "Night Seeks No
Permission") Paulo Colina writes:
May
Thirteenth
One thousand eight hundred and eighty-
eight
Sounds to my ear like a whisper
From the cosmos.
37

Watercolour depicting black slaves in Brazil is
by the French painter Jean-Baptiste Debret
(1768-1848), who went to Brazil in 1816 as
official court artist to the Emperor Pedro I.
Debret recorded his experiences in Brazil in
many paintings and drawings and in 3 illus¬
trated volumes entitledVoyage pittoresque et
historique au Brésil (1834-1837).
Startled by sirens,
The night
Rouses me out of my sleep.
I turn out my pockets,
Looking for the pass
That will allow me
To cross the streets
Of Säo Paulo
In uneasy peace.
The Princess forgot to sign
Our labour permit.
I'm afraid that a living Palmares
Is still necessary.
The same sentiment is reflected in prose.
In some instances, this sense of frustration is
expressed with deep irony and bitterness.
The following passage is taken from A
alvura das pálpebras (1987; "Under the
Whiteness of the Eyelids"), a story from a
collection entitled Quizila by Cuti (Luís
Silva):
"My grandfather told me to kill the Prin¬
cess. I took from his hands the guts of my
great-grandfather and used them to strangle
the 'Mistress of Freedom '."
It is clear that this centenary year of the
abolition of slavery in Brazil represents, for
the black Brazilian, something that is still
unfinished and unfulfilled, which has to be
re-examined and re-evaluated. The black
people of Brazil and especially black intel¬
lectuals and black students are today re¬
vealing the hidden underside of that historic¬
al event. Brazil has changed and, with it, its
former slave population which, for a century
now, has been gradually asserting itself by
the force of its gestures, its actions and its
words. Little by little, it is taking control of
its destiny and its soul.
They are merely human beings, black hu¬
man beings. What could be more important
than that?
OSWALDO DE CAMARGO, Brazilian jour¬
nalist and poet, is an active participant in the work
of Black movements, especially in the field of
literature. He is the author of six books, including
"Black Writing Notes on the Black Presence in
Brazilian Literature" (1987).

