The International Fund
for the Promotion
of Culture
The International Fund for the Promotion of
Culture is unique in the sense that it is
Unesco's only organ created by inter¬
governmental decision that operates on the
basis of direct contact with private and public
institutions, groups and individuals active in a
myriad of. cultural fields. This makes the Fund a
flexible and fast-moving mechanism.
While it is staffed by members of Unesco's
Secretariat, the Fund's policy- and decision¬
making are entrusted to an autonomous fifteen-
member Administrative Council. Men and
women of distinguished achievement in the arts,
cultural administration and finance, the mem¬
bers of the Council are chosen in their personal
capacities by the Director-General. Thus they
speak not on behalf of governments but for
themselves, and in the name of innovation,
creativity and cultural values.
Giving a concrete boost to the notion of the
cultural dimension of development was a basic
motivating factor in the Fund's creation. The
original idea of an international "cultural bank"
was launched in 1970 by Mr. Edward Seaga,
now Prime Minister of Jamaica and then Minister
of Finance and Planning, who crystallized the
thinking of a small band of pioneers struggling to
release culture from the vicious circles of in¬
adequate funding. Their efforts to nurture an
international financial institution to provide and
promote direct support for cultural activities gra¬
dually gained momentum. By the end of the
1970s, generous donations from governments
(principally Venezuela, Saudi Arabia and the
Islamic Republic of Iran), supplemented by con¬
tributions from bodies such as the Gulbenkian
Foundation, the Agnelli Foundation, the Lee
Foundation (Singapore), the Association of
Hellenic Banks, the Tata Trust (India), the A.G.
Leventis Foundation, the Hamdard Foundation
(Pakistan), the Kuwait Foundation for the
Advancement of Science and Technology, and
the International Cultural Society of the Republic
of Korea, made for a handsome endowment.
The total of Fund contributions and earnings
now approaches the $9 million mark. Since it
began its operations the Fund has lent its sup
port to some 273 projects in 85 different coun- '
tries. While funding has been generally limited to
"seed money", the Fund's support has taken a
multitude of other practical forms, calling upon
the human and institutional resources and net¬
works at Unesco's command. The Fund's invest¬
ments in cultural creativity and infrastructure
development have covered fields too numerous
to be listed here, but the examples cited in these
pages should reflect some of that polyvalence.
The Fund is clearly an ¡deal instrument to help
achieve tangible and exemplary results during
the World Decade for Cultural Development, for
the goals It has pursued since 1977 anticipate
the ambitious worldwide purposes now defined.
The challenge of the Decade in turn highlights
the challenges now facing the Fund.
First and foremost is the challenge of fund-
raising, so as to make the Fund itself a more
powerful and influential instrument. A linked
challenge is that of focusing the Fund's activi¬
ties, after over ten years of very broad-based
operations. Concentration on the areas of emph¬
asis identified for the World Decade is bound to
yield effective synergisms resulting in more sig¬
nificant projects. This in turn implies a more
"pro-active" role for the Fund as a broker of
innovative ideas, in identifying means of im¬
plementing them, in using its own resources to
build partnerships and networks and in securing
complementary financing for them. In so doing
the Fund will also fulfil one of its statutory pur¬
poses, that of serving as a clearing-house
for information on the financing of cultural
development.
While the Decade seeks above all to achieve a
new state of mind, this truer awareness of the
cultural dimension of development must lead to
tangible results: increased investment in cultural
activities the world over. Meeting that goal will
not be easy, as the Fund's own experience has
shown. But even small sums can go a long way,
provided they initiate really well-designed pro¬
jects that are able to catalyze resources and
mobilize support at all levels, achieving in cul-
xiral terms that elusive "multiplier effect".
In 1981 the Government ofJamaica, with
assistance from the Fund, set up a "memory
bank" to record theJamaican people's heritage
enshrined in oral traditions, music, poetry,
customs and beliefs. Right, a farmer explains to
a memory bank interviewer how cassava is
grown, while three other farmers listen
intently. The use of cassava has been inherited
from the Arawak Indians who inhabited
Jamaica when Christopher Columbus arrived
therein 1494.
16

In 1987 the first part of a new five-volume
history of Korean music was published by the
National Commission for Unesco of the
Republic of Korea, with the assistance of
Unesco's International Fund for the Promotion
of Culture. The fully illustrated books will cover
ritual Buddhist chants, courtly music, musical
notations and musical instruments. With their
accompanying cassettes they will constitute an
anthology of the different currents forming the
Korean musical tradition. Left, cover
illustration of the first volume.
The National Museum of Mali, established
in 1982, has become a focal point in Mali's
cultural life through its spread of activities
(below) ranging from the preservation of the
cultural heritage and the training of specialists
to art and environmental education. With the
Fund's financial assistance, the Museum has
purchased audio-visual equipment enabling it
to extend its activities to the country as a whole.
17
