Unesco
and the printed word
Over 8,000 titles have been published by
Unesco or under its auspices in over 70 lan¬
guages, since the founding of the Organiza¬
tion in 1946. Right, the latest edition oilndex
translationum, Unesco's annual guide to
world translations.
*""
'¿«mu
I The rural press in Africa
In Africa today only 15 out of\every 1,000
people are reached by daily newspapers, and
the use of the press as a medium of mass
communication presents many problems,
especially in the rural areas where 80 per cent
of the population lives and where over 800
languages are spoken. And yet the printed
media can play an important role by bridging
the communications gap which prevents iso¬
lated farming communities from taking full
part in national development programmes
and by providing excellent follow-up mate¬
rials in literacy teaching. For many years
Unesco has co-operated with Member States
in this field by helping to create rural news¬
papers, by training journalists and by provid¬
ing other forms of technical support. One
current undertaking, the West and Central
Africa News Agencies Development Project
(WANAD) based in Cotonou, Benin, is serv¬
ing 13 national news agencies. As part of its
activities WANAD, which was launched in
1984 by Unesco with finance from the Feder¬
al Republic of Germany, provides training
for journalists in the fields of international
relations, health, rural development and the
environment. A sister project, SEANAD,
was set up in 1986 in Southern and Eastern
Africa. Above right, front pages of rural
newspapers from 2 WANAD Member States:
issue of Kpodoga, published in the Ewe lan¬
guage by the Institute of Adult Education of
the University of Ghana; special Interna¬
tional Literacy Day (8 September 1987) issue
of Tew Fema, published in the Kabyie lan¬
guage of Togo.
I Children's books in Asia and the Pacific
Launched in 1970 by the Tokyo-based Asian
Cultural Centre for Unesco, the Asian/
Pacific Copublication Programme (ACP) is a
venture designed to provide children in
countries of Asia and the Pacific with reason¬
ably priced illustrated books. Good stories
and illustrations by authors and artists from
different countries are selected and published
in an English version. Participating coun¬
tries use this master edition (as well as films of
the colour illustrations, which are also pro¬
vided free) to produce editions in their own
languages. ACP books have so far been
translated into some 27 Asian languages and
more than 2.5 million copies have been
printed. Right, illustration from Folk Tales
from Asia for Children Everywhere (Book 6).
lynamiini
n« Cui »kI ihc Watt
"neico
I Practical training for publishers
As part of its efforts to stimulate book pub¬
lishing in the developing world, Unesco has
organized a number of regional training
courses for publishing personnel in Asia and
the Pacific, Latin America, Africa and the
Caribbean. Over 200 people attended these
courses in 1986 and 1987. During a 6-week
course jointly undertaken by Unesco and the
University of the Philippines Institute of
Mass Communication in December 1987,
participants were divided into 3 teams, each
of which was given a manuscript about rice
and asked to prepare it for publication as an
illustrated booklet. Each team had to edit the
manuscript, prepare it for typesetting, cor¬
rect proofs, lay out the text, design the cover,
and write publicity material. Left, the book¬
lets produced by the 3 teams.
IBook development in Latin America
The Regional Centre for Book Development
in Latin America and the Caribbean (CER-
LALC) was founded in Bogotá in 1971 by an
agreement between Unesco and the Govern¬
ment of Colombia. Participating countries
today are Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Re¬
public, Ecuador, El Salvador, Nicaragua,
Panama, Paraguay, Spain and Venezuela.
The Centre aims to promote the production
and distribution of books and to encourage
the reading habit, taking account of develop¬
ment programmes as well as the public and
school library systems in each country. In
addition to the professional training courses
which CERLALC organizes for publishing
personnel, it has launched a copublication
programme of children's books for Latin
America. The aim is to publish good-quality
children's literature at low prices by sharing
the production costs between all the partici¬
pating countries. The first title to be pub¬
lished was "Tales, Myths and Legends for
Latin-American Children", in an edition of
20,000 copies (above left, cover of the Portu¬
guese version). Today publishers from 15
countries are taking part in the programme,
and 6 titles have been published, totalling
(with reprints) 332,000 copies.
19
