'Magic mirrors5
Those who like to think of China as a land of mystery are well served by the
Chinese "magic mirrors", which are some of the strangest objects in the
world, They are known to go back to at least the fifth century AD, though
their exact origins are unknown. About 1,200 years ago, there still existed a
book entitled Record ofAncient Mirrors, which apparently contained the
secrets of these magic mirrors and their construction, but sadly it seems to
have been lost for over a thousand years.
When magic mirrors came to the attention of the West in 1832, dozens of
prominent scientists attempted to discover their secret. It was a hundred
years before a satisfactory theory of magic mirrors was formulated by the
British crystallographer Sir William Bragg.
What exactly, then, is a magic mirror? On its back it has cast bronze
designs pictures, or written characters, or both. The reflecting side is
convex and is of bright, shiny polished bronze which serves as a mirror. In
many conditions of lighting, when held in the hand, it appears to be a
perfectly normal mirror;
However, when the mirror is held in bright sunshine, its reflecting
surface can be "seen through", making it possible to inspect from a
reflection cast on to a dark wall the written characters or patterns on the
back. Somehow, mysteriously, the solid bronze becomes transparent,
leading to the Chinese name for the objects, "light-penetration mirrors".
But surely, the reader will protest, solid bronze cannot be transparent.
This is true, and there was certainly a trick to it. But it was a sufficiently
good trick to baffle Western scientists for a century, and even the earliest
surviving Chinese discussion of magic mirrors consists of speculation on
how they might work. This occurs in a fascinating work, Dream Pool
Essays, by Shen Gua, published in 1086. Even at this date, Shen Gua
thought of the mirrors as coming from some vague archaic period:
"There exist certain 'light-penetration mirrors' which have about twenty
characters inscribed on them in an ancient style which cannot be inter¬
preted. If such a mirror is exposed to the sunshine, although the characters
are all on the back, they 'pass through' and are reflected on the wall of a
house, where they can be read most distinctly.... I have three of these
inscribed 'light-penetration mirrors' in my own family, and I have seen
others treasured in other families, which are closely similar and very
ancient; all of them 'let the light through'. But I do not understand why
other mirrors, though extremely thin, do not 'let light through'. The
ancients must indeed have had some special art .... Those who discuss the
reason say that at the time the mirror was cast, the thinner part became cold
first, while the raised part of the design on the back, being thicker, became
cold later, so that the bronze formed minute wrinkles. Thus although the
characters are on the back, the face has faint lines too faint to be seen with
the naked eye."
Although differences of cooling rate are not the explanation, Shen Gua
was correct in suggesting that the shiny, polished mirror surfaces concealed
Above, the polished reflecting surface
and (top) the ornamented back of a
bronze "magic mirror". When bright
light is projected at the reflecting surface
and the mirror is held sothatitcastsa
reflection on a dark wall, the ornamental
design on the back becomes visible in the
reflection on the wall. The mirror shown
here is Japanese. The characters Takasago
which form part of the ornamental
design refer to the title of a No play.
16 _

minute variations which the eye alone could not detect. Needham says of
the experiments carried out by European scientists: "Careful and extended
optical experimentation demonstrated that the surfaces of 'magic' mirrors
reproduced the designs on the backs because of very slight inequalities of
curvature, the thicker portions being very slightly flatter than the thinner
ones, and even sometimes actually concave."
The basic mirror shape, with the design on the back, was cast flat, and the
convexity of the surface produced afterwards by elaborate scraping and
scratching. The surface was then polished to become shiny. The stresses set
up by these processes caused the thinner parts of the surface to bulge
outwards and become more convex than the thicker portions. Finally, a
mercury amalgam was laid over the surface; this created further stresses
and preferential buckling. The result was that imperfections of the mirror
surface matched the patterns on the back, although they were too minute to
be seen by the eye. But when the mirror reflected bright sunlight against a
wall, with the resultant magnification of the whole image, the effect was to
reproduce the patterns as i/they were passing through the solid bronze by
way of light beams. As Sir William Bragg said when he finally discovered
this in 1932: "Only the magnifying effect of reflection makes them plain."
Needham rightly calls this "the first step on the road to knowledge about
the minute structure of metal surfaces. "

