Lacquer
Carved lacquer box in the shape of a
plum blossom decorated with clouds and
dragons. It was produced during the
reign of the Ming Dynasty Emperor
Longqing (1567-1572).
Lacquer was in use by at least the thirteenth century BC in China. Queen
Fu Hao of that date was buried in a lacquered coffin, discovered when her
intact tomb was excavated in 1976 at Anyang. Needham has written that:
"Lacquer may be said to have been the most ancient industrial plastic
known to man."
Lacquer is obtained rather like rubber, by tapping the sap of tree trunks.
The lacquer tree (Rhus vernicifera, recently named verniciflua by bota¬
nists) is indigenous to China but not to Europe. It is particularly common
in central China, growing at altitudes between 900 metres and
2,000 metres. The trees are tapped in summer and left to recover after a
period of five to seven years, though in some cases they are cut down after
tapping, and an inferior lacquer is obtained from their branches. The
largest amount of lacquer a tree can produce is about 50 grams.
Lacquer is a plastic varnish which has remarkable powers of preserva¬
tion, strength and durability. Strong acids and alkalis cannot damage it; it
cannot be affected by heat less than 200°-250°C; it cannot be damaged by
water or other liquids; it is insoluble to most solvents; and it is resistant to
bacterial attack.
Lacquer was used for kitchen utensils thousands of years ago in China.
Wood, bamboo or cloth utensils coated with many layers of thin lacquer
formed the standard dinner service for rich Chinese in place of bronze
vessels. They were able to withstand the heat of cooking and serving of
food as well as metal. Chinese emperors gave lacquered articles to their
officials as recognition for their services, and the monetary value of
lacquerware actually exceeded that of bronzes.
Lacquer was used in China for furniture, screens, pillows and boxes of
all sorts. It was worn as bonnets and shoes. Weapon accessories, such as
sword scabbards, bows and shields were made of it. Lacquers were often
inlaid with gold and silver or tortoiseshell. The fluidity of the lacquered
surface when applied made possible a form of Chinese decoration which
was as free and spontaneous as could be imagined, and this had a major
impact on ancient Chinese art.
The lacquer industry in ancient China was highly organized, in the
traditional Chinese bureaucratic way. There were both private and state
lacquer manufacturing centres. There is a lacquered wood wine cup which
can be dated precisely to the year 4 AD by an extraordinary inscription
which, besides giving the date of manufacture, lists seven artisans involved
in making the cup and five other officials of the company. Twelve people to
produce a single cup, nearly half of them functionaries who perhaps never
A craftsman cuts decorative
incisions in a lacquer bowl
(late-18th-century painting).
30 _

even saw it! But on the other hand, it indicates also the use of something



very like the modern industrial production-line.
As early as the second century BC, the Chinese had made important
chemical discoveries about lacquer. They found a way to keep it from
going hard by evaporation they threw crabs into lacquer to keep it liquid!
Crustacean tissue does in fact contain powerful chemicals which inhibit
certain enzymes, including the one which makes lacquer solidify!
Needham comments on this bizarre affair as follows:
"There can be no doubt that the ancient Chinese, before the second
century BC, had accidentally discovered a powerful lacease inhibitor. ... So
great an interference with the course of nature, analagous to the arrest of a
spontaneously occurring rigidification and ageing process, must have
seemed highly significant to the alchemists, preoccupied as they were by
the preservation of supple youth and the postponement or elimination of
ankylosis and death."
Not only did the perpetual liquefaction of lacquer pose a model for
immortality, in this proto-industrial biochemistry, but lacquer accompa¬
nied a Chinese from cradle to grave he would be fed as a baby from
lacquer vessels with lacquer ladles, and in death he would be buried in a
beautifully ornamented lacquer coffin.
Red lacquer throne of the Qing Dynasty,
dating from the period 1736-1796.
