The unknown art ofAustralia
BY BERNARD SMITH
NearHeidelberg (1890), oil
on canvas by Sir Arthur
Streeton (1867-1943). A
leading member
of the "Heidelberg School"
of artists, named after
the Melbourne suburb
where they often worked,
he is best known
for his luminous,
panoramic landscapes
of Victoria and New
South Wales.
LIKEthe first Australian art created
by the Aboriginal people, the
highly distinctive art that has
developed in Australia since European
settlement in 1 788 is rarely mentioned in
general histories of art. Why is this so?
There are two important reasons.
First, most general histories of art are
written by European or North
American historians. Most of them are
convinced that art produced outside of
Europe and North America is either
folk art or a second-rate imitation of
European art. In either case it can safely
be ignored.
The second reason why Australian art
is not known abroad is related to the
first. The art establishment in Australia
is well aware of the Eurocentric values
that dominate the world oí high art, and
when preparing collections of
Australian art for exhibition abroad it
always sets out to show that Australian
art is just as up-to-date as that from
anywhere else in its knowledge of the
latest European fashion. Australians call
this approach "the cultural cringe".
Of course good art possesses both a
regional and a universal quality: region¬
al in that it evokes the spirit of a place, a
time and a people; universal in its appeal
to all humankind, and in its links and
associations with other cultures and
other times. To recognize this basic but
paradoxical fact was the greatest
achievement of modernism.
Australian art has become, during the
past century, a highly important theatre
of activity in which this central paradox
of modernism, the connection between
the regional and the universal, has been
continuously enacted and contested.
Again, there are two main reasons for
this. The first is environmental.
Australia, with its great deserts, rain
forests and wide stretches of open
savannah, its curious plants and animals,
presented a major challenge to
European taste and perception just as
modernism did. Though determined to
go on behaving like Europeans in a
strange environment, the first settlers
were continually challenged by the en¬
during power of the so-called "primi-
23

$S£z.
i¿¿¿¿ Ufase
tive" character of the land and the "pri¬
mitive" character of the people. Though
they tried to forget or ignore both, they
had to learn to alter their ways. Those
who did not accept the challenge created
mere imitations, second-order
European art.
The second reason is cultural. The
early European settlers found them¬
selves clinging to the shores of a great
continent the size of the United States,
situated between the Indian and Pacific
Oceans, with south-east Asia to their
north. They found' themselves sur¬
rounded by non-European cultures of
great antiquity. This fact has been even
more difficult to come to terms with
than the natural environment. Never¬
theless, under the long-term effects of a
radically different environment and sur¬
rounding, alien cultures, European con¬
ventions in art have been seriously chal¬
lenged and an excitingly new kind of art
is evolving.
Consider architecture. The Aboriginal
Australians had no need of permanent
buildings. European settlers began
building the kinds of houses they had
known in their former homelands', but
these were found to be unsuitable. The
first public building in Australia, Gov¬
ernment House in Sydney (1788) was
given the form of a Georgian box-like
structure derived ultimately from the
fortress-like town house of the Italian
Renaissance. But under pressure from
the great heat and flooding rains of
Australia, the Georgian box trans¬
formed itself into a spreading umbrella.
The verandah, pioneered by the
Portuguese when creating the first
European empire in the tropics, became
the active principle in the transforma¬
tion of Australian colonial architecture.
It evolved diverse shapes and structures
and was found in all types of building,
from rural homesteads to city terraces.
By the end of the nineteenth century it
had given rise to a style of architecture in
Australia as distinctive as the rococo.
This style, known as the Federation
style because it came to maturity around
the time of the federation of the
Australian States into the Common¬
wealth of Australia in 1 901 , soon spread
all over the continent.
The inner dynamic of the Federation
style, under the long-term pressure of
the environment, was to break up wall
spaces, roofs and verandahs into distinc¬
tive units. It was an open, relaxed style.
This long-term trend persisted, despite
the "European" components of mod¬
ernism, and the most characteristically
Australian modernist architecture re¬
mained open, light, and free-ranging,
Saddling up at Coen Races (1953), by Russell Drysdale, one of a brilliant
galaxy of Australian artists who emerged during the Second World War.
,*"%
24

The Mining Town, oil and tempera on chipboard panel, by Arthur Boyd (b. 1920)
spreading over the ground and resisting
hierarchical disposition of the compo¬
nent parts of the building, or severely
ordered groupings. It was an
architecture suited to a modern demo¬
cracy. When that young architect of
genius, the Dane Jörn Utzon, made his
preliminary designs for the Sydney
Opera House, he seems to have in¬
tuitively grasped the inner dynamic at
work in the evolution of Australian
architecture. His great work became a
modern masterpiece, a threefold unity
of place, form and the transcendent hu¬
man spirit.
\ Long-term environmental factors
also affected Australian painting, direct¬
ing it towards an extended, open-form
and non-hierarchical style.
European-born colonial artists at first
tried to apply the styles and aesthetic
theories of the picturesque and the sub
lime that had emerged in response to
European landscape over several cen¬
turies. But their works looked like false
European landscapes. If an artist paint¬
ing Australian scenery closed off the
foreground with side-screens of trees or
used belts of vegetation to separate fore¬
ground from middle distance and back¬
ground, a sense of falsity emerged. The
picturesque did not work well in
Australia.
The first to realize this was the
English architect, John Glover. "There
is a remarkable peculiarity in the trees of
this country," he wrote. "However
numerous, they rarely prevent you trac¬
ing through them the whole distant
country." He had discovered that the
Australian landscape possesses a trans-
lucency in depth not found in European
landscape.
Australian landscape also subverted
European notions about the sublime.
For Edmund Burke, the essence of the
sublime lay in great height and depth*.
He did not believe that an extensive
plain could be sublime. But when
Australian colonial landscape painters
such as Conrad Martens exaggerated the
heights and depths of the Blue Moun¬
tains, near Sydney, they tended to
"Europeanize" their depictions. Eugene
von Guerard, a fine painter who worked
in Australia in the late nineteenth cen¬
tury, became aware of this problem. In
his works, sublimity is not achieved by
emphasizing and exaggerating height
and depth but by endowing the land¬
scape with a feeling of infinite depth and
extension in lateral space. A new kind of
landscape painting was evolving that
subverted conventional notions of the
picturesque and the sublime.
As a result Australian landscape
painting, like the best Australian
architecture, developed as a distinctive¬
ly open-form structure. It reached its
first maturity in the 1 890s in the work of
the artists of the Heidelberg School,
named after the Melbourne suburb
where they often gathered to paint.
Their work was addressed to the highly
distinctive character of Australian light,
colour and atmosphere. They produced
a brilliantly novel kind of landscape
painting which built upon the open-
form, "lateral sublime" principles of
their colonial predecessors and con¬
tained hints of European plein-air and
Impressionist painting before the latter
became preoccupied with broken col¬
our and the spectrum palette.
The open-form landscape became a
powerful tradition in Australia. It sur¬
vived the reductivist and universalizing
* Burke's contribution to aesthetic theory, A Philosophic¬
al Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime
and Beautiful, was published in 1757. Editor
25

rJrZcÇ - v'X
4fc.v- .
Lady and Unicorn, charcoal and pastel by Charles Blackman
of the "Antipodeans", a group of artists which formed in Melbourne
in 1959
trends of late modernism to be reas¬
serted triumphantly in the landscapes of
Fred Williams. He has given contem¬
porary Australians a new vision of their
natural environment.
Until the 1960s, the predominantly
Anglo-Celtic society of Australia large¬
ly ignored the surviving Aboriginal cul¬
ture it had dispossessed and the cultures
which surrounded it in south-east Asia
and the Pacific. An important exception
to this trend was Margaret Preston who,
influenced by the "primitivism" of
modernism, turned to Aboriginal art for
inspiration and championed it as a
source for the establishment of a truly
Australian art. She admired and used the
dull earth colours of Aboriginal art and
its geometric shapes.
Ian Fairweather, an English artist
who had lived in China and south-east
Asia prior to arriving in Australia in
1934, successfully related his own work
to that of both Asian and Aboriginal art.
An eccentric genius in the mould of
Gauguin one of the few artists of the
twentieth century to produce a creative
synthesis of eastern and western art
Fairweather's work deserves to be much
better known internationally than it is.
Until the early 1940s, most of the
white settlers of the continent had been
content to depend upon Britain for pro¬
tection and to offer nostalgic homage to
their European homelands. But when
Hitler over-ran western Europe in 1940
and the Japanese bombed Pearl Har¬
bour in 1941, the Australian nation ex¬
perienced a traumatic shock. For the
first time in their history, Australians
were forced to consider seriously who
they were and where they stood in the
world.
That shock gave Australian art re¬
newed vitality. A generation of artists
caught up in the tensions of a nation at
war began to construct a new kind of
Australian art from the humanist com¬
ponents of early modernism. Inspired
by surrealism, expressionism and
realism, some delved into their personal
anxieties and emerged with a new sense
of what it was to be Australian. Others
began to examine repressed aspects of
the Australian psyche, such as its treat¬
ment of Aboriginal people. Wartime
Australia produced a brilliant galaxy of
artists comparable to any grouping then
at work anywhere in the world. In
mood and presentation their work
ranges from the spritely early modern¬
ism of Sidney Nolan's paintings in the
Wimmera district of Victoria to the
brooding compassion of Noel
Counihan's paintings of Aboriginal
women.
Many of these artists continue to cre¬
ate important work and several possess
international reputations, but it was
during the 1940s and 1950s that their
work made its greatest impact upon
Australian culture.
In 1959 a group of seven painters, the
Antipodeans Charles Blackman,
Arthur and David Boyd, John Brack,
Bob Dickerson, John Perceval and
Clifton Pugh held an exhibition in
Melbourne in defiance of the powerful
waves of total abstraction then being
propagated in Australia, mainly from
New York. The event created an uproar
that has not yet subsided. What is still
not appreciated is that the position the
Antipodeans took constituted perhaps
the first effective criticism anywhere in
the world of the censorious aesthetic
limitations of late modernism.
During the 1960s Australian art was
colonized by successive waves of
American-type abstraction. Art fed
upon art almost exclusively. During the
past twenty years, a more pluralistic
position has been reasserted, the finest
achievements of which cannot yet be
assessed with any certainty. One hope¬
ful sign is the increased interaction be¬
tween the European and Aboriginal
sources of Australian art and the in¬
creasing cultural contacts with Asian
and Pacific art.
BERNARD SMITH was the Foundation Profes¬
sor of Contemporary Art and Director of the
Power Institute of Fine Arts at the University of
Sydney from 1967 to 1977, and was President of
the Australian Academy of the Humanities from
1977 to 1980. He is the author of European Vision
and the South Pacific, Australian Painting, and
many other books on Australian art, history and
culture.
26
