A major international study project on the
\'Z<.
ÍT
m
Two cities on the Silk Roads, thousands
of kilometres apart: Venice, Italy (above)
and Xian, China (below).
r VZT,i ' ^THBT'**.''7»^-.-.'.. .1
FOR many centuries caravans of
merchants passed beneath the
western gate of the city of Xian,
capital of China during the Tang
Dynasty, their camels laden with luxury
goods that would find ready buyers in
the markets of Europe over 6,000 kilo¬
metres away. Most famous of the com¬
modities they bore on their hazardous
journey through the deserts, steppeland
AK^
~.*T
fuESP m i '
«f - VI
*»«£jjgp
.
J" - * -
- ^

ancient commercial and cultural routes between the Orient and the Occident
Rediscovering the Silk Roads
and mountain passes of Central Asia
was silk, the precious fabric whose
manufacturing secrets China guarded
for thousands of years. It was this that
caused the nineteenth-century German
geographer and geologist Ferdinand
von Richthofen to coin a new term to
describe the caravan routes that thus
linked East and West the Seiden¬
strassen, the Silk Roads.

Silk was not the only cargo carried by
the caravans, nor was the traffic only
one-way. A host of natural and man-
made products ranging from bronze and
porcelain to wool and cobalt were trans¬
ported over the centuries from East to
West and West to East. Above all the
Silk Roads, with their overland and
maritime extensions westwards as far as
Rome, Venice and Cadiz, and eastwards
as far as Nara, were a channel for the
spread of ideas, technologies, religious
concepts and the arts, and contributed
to the cross-fertilization between
civilizations.



Many studies have been made of these
great arteries of cultural and commercial
exchange by scholars acting individually
or with academic institutions. So far,
however, no complete study of an inter¬
disciplinary nature has been carried out
by a truly international team. Now, as
part of an important new Unesco pro¬
ject within the framework of the World
Decade for Cultural Development,
scholars and scientists from many
different fields of study and many
14

Three poster designs created by the Japanese artist Ikuo Hirayama
for Unesco's major project entitled
"Integral Study of the Silk Roads: Roads of Dialogue"



countries are preparing to follow in the
footsteps of the merchants of old.
The project, entitled "Integral Study
of the Silk Roads: Roads of Dialogue",
was approved by Unesco's General
Conference in 1987. It is still in its early
stages but has already been warmly wel¬
comed by scientific circles, non-gov¬
ernmental organizations and the media.
Over the next five years it will involve
over a thousand specialists working in
close co-operation with the more than
thirty countries situated along the old
Silk Roads.
It will provide an opportunity to redis¬
cover the three major routes, which will
be followed by a caravan consisting of an
international team of scholars. Some fif¬
teen international seminars will be held at
the key sites and meetings will be orga¬
nized at each place with scholars from the
locality or country concerned.
Interdisciplinary co-operation on the
widest possible scale is hoped for, with
specialists in such fields as paleogeogra-
phy and paleoethnography clarifying
such questions as the ecology of the
Silk Roads.
Some thirty associated projects are
planned. For one of them the Sultanate
of Oman has agreed to put an Omani
ship, the Fulk Al-Salamah ("Ship of
Peace") at the disposal of Unesco for a
maritime expedition to be known as the
"Voyage of Dialogue". With some
thirty scholars and scientists on board,
the ship will set sail from Venice (Italy)
late in 1 990 and arrive in Osaka (Japan) a
hundred days later after calling at over
thirty ports in some twenty countries.
The itinerary of the "Ship of Peace" will
also include places in which Unesco is
engaged in the field such as Alexandria
(see page 8), and also the city of Sana'a in
the Yemen Arab Republic and the his¬
toric site of Shibam in Democratic
Yemen, both of which will be restored
with the help of Unesco.
Other associated projects include a
sea voyage on board the Cocachin, an
ancient Chinese junk, which will set sail
next November to retrace Marco Polo's
homeward trip from Cathay, also mak¬
ing a technical and scientific reconnaiss¬
ance for the 1990 expedition.
Two other expeditions planned for
next year include one from the Chinese
capital Beijing across the Gobi desert to
Ulan Bator in Mongolia, possibly
continuing as far as Minussinsk in
Siberia. Another, in autumn 1989, will
travel from Odessa to Baku on the
Caspian Sea.
An Historical Atlas of the Silk Roads
is also planned. The latest technology
such as remote sensing techniques and
computer animation will be used in its
preparation, and, in the spirit of the
project ¿s a whole, the Atlas is intended
to be of value to the general public as
well as the scholarly community.
The Silk Roads project will culminate
in two events of international import¬
ance which will take place in Paris in
1992: a conference to review the studies
which have been carried out and a major
exhibition bringing together important
collections for the first time.
15
