The monkey and the leopard
An African folk tale
Africa is a mine of proverbs and folk
tales which were transmitted from gen¬
eration to generation by word of mouth
at village gatherings. Many of these
stories feature animals and communi¬
cate a message which is expressed with
humour and eloquence. "The repertoire
of folk tales seems to be ... a kind of
'unwritten Bible' bequeathed to poster¬
ity by the ancestors," notes the Camer-
oonian writer Gabriel Evouna Mfomo,
a specialist in his country's oral tradi¬
tion. The following story has been taken
from Soirées au village ("Village Eve¬
nings"), an anthology of Cameroonian
tales collected and translated into
French by Gabriel Evouna Mfomo
(Karthala publishers, Paris, 1980).
Photo A.B.Y. © Jacana, Paris
ONE day the leopard set out on a
hunting expedition. He was very
hungry, because for many nights he
had not tasted so much as a mouthful of
game. He padded softly through the forest,
his eyes glaring, his tail between his legs and
his tongue hanging out. Suddenly he fell
into a pit carefully covered with dead
leaves, which was used as a trap. He was
dumbfounded, and did not know what to
do. Should he cry out? But if he did, he
would hasten the arrival of the hunter, who
would bear him afar off and come to dis¬
patch him. He thrashed around in the bot¬
tom of the pit, springing from one side to
the other. But there was no way out!
Breathless with trying, he began to howl.
For, as he said: "Can I die in silence when I
have a voice to shout for help? Who knows?
Perhaps a brother from the tribe of quad¬
rupeds will hear me and come to rescue
me."
On the contrary! As soon as an animal
saw the leopard at the bottom of the pit, it
ran away as fast as it could, saying "What!
The leopard? Who can come anywhere
near him without risking his life? Let him
find his own solution: we all have our own
problems!"
The quadrupeds passed by in single file,
avoiding the trap: the leopard was left to his
fate in the hole.
Meanwhile, Ahem-koé, the white-nosed
monkey, was sitting on a branch of an
umbrella tree, partaking of a golden fruit
and pulling faces as he did so. He heard the
leopard's lamentations. He leaned forward
and peered into the undergrowth, but could
not descry the owner of the voice that
seemed to be issuing from the bowels of the
Earth. The monkey straightened up, lost his
balance and let himself fall to a lower level,
where he landed in a bush. He listened
carefully: real groans were emanating from
the pit. He was worried.
"What's the matter now? Who can be
groaning like that?"
He alighted on the ground, and what did
he see? A leopard, covered in mud from
head to tail, groaning at the bottom of the
pit.
"O leopard, son of my father, what are
you doing there?" asked the monkey.
The leopard spoke.
"O monkey, O son of my father, I entreat
you in kinship's name: save me! I am at
death's door! Above all, I am afraid of the
owner of the trap. If he were to find me
here, it would certainly be all up with me. O
monkey, my brother, have pity and pull me
out of the pit!"
Ahem-koé paused for a moment to think.
He was familiar with the leopard's charac¬
ter. He wanted to clear up a suspicion:
"If I pulled you out, wouldn't you be
likely to catch me?"
The leopard swore an oath:
"Never! What? Who ever dreamed of
doing such a thing?"
The monkey replied:
"Let us be clear about this. If we come to
an agreement, you give me your word of
honour."
The leopard confirmed:
"I swear it by the ancestors: Have no fear,
son of my father. Rescue me."
Still doubtful, the white-nosed monkey
wanted to be quite sure:
"Ah, but, leopard! Are you not saying
this simply because your life is in danger?
Can it really be you who is saying these
things? All the animals know how you tend
to behave. Have you ever spared an ani¬
mal's life?"
The leopard swore repeatedly that he
would mend his ways. Ahem-koé invoked
the wisdom of tradition:
"Our ancestors said: 'Death is easily
given.' They added: 'It is easy to treat an
illness, but not someone's character, be¬
cause the character sticks to its owner!'"
The leopard burst into tears. He begged:
"White-nosed monkey, son of my father,
try to pull me out of this hole and I swear to
you that the clan of the monkeys and the
clan of the leopards will form a lifelong
alliance!"
The monkey gave in.
"O leopard, you have pledged your word.
We shall see!"
Thereupon, he cut a long stick which he
laid across the pit. He sat on it and let his tail
dangle within the leopard's reach. The
leopard grabbed it and, in the twinkling of
an eye, he was out of the pit. The monkey
was still recovering his breath and was
about to ask the leopard how long he had
been in the hole when he noticed a sudden
change in the attitude of the leopard, who
was, indeed, devouring him with his eyes.
The monkey trembled inwardly; he began
26

Photo Verzier © Jacana, Paris
to shake all over. Timidly, he stammered:
"But why, O leopard, are you looking at
me like that? Can you never restrain your
fury?"
The freed leopard then spoke as follows:
"White-nosed monkey, have you never
learned that one person's happiness is
another's misery? Have you not learned
that the willing horse got the worst of the
bargain and has to carry human beings on
his back and be beaten by them? As for you,
true enough, you pulled me out of the pit.
But do you now expect me to starve to death
when you are right there in front of me?
You have decided to help me: let me eat
you, then!"
Ahem-koé found himself face to face
with a ferocious carnivore, with glaring
eyes, protruding tongue, tail held low,
threatening teeth and steely claws. The ter¬
ror of the forest! "So it is true," thought the
little acrobat. "The leopard has decided to
gobble me up!" He was still trying desper¬
ately to think of some means of escape when
the leopard abruptly interrupted his
thoughts:
"White-nosed monkey, have you never
heard that the lenient never prosper?"
As best he could, the monkey strove to
keep the discussion going in the hope of
postponing the evil moment. He thought
that he was saved when, walking around the
trap, a long procession of quadrupeds filed
past on their way home. As each one passed
by, he explained his dispute with the
leopard, hoping for an impartial judge¬
ment. But they were afraid of the leopard.
After all, was it not preferable that one
should die for the sake of them all? The
verdict against the monkey was unanimous:
they urged him to let himself be eaten by the
leopard. The great cat became dangerously
impatient and was no longer willing to con¬
tinue the discussion. He quoted at his victim
one last proverb from the wisdom of the
ancestors: "Prolixity is a sign of poverty!".
And he was about to spring at the primate
when all of a sudden along came the
.tortoise, laden, as always, with his heavy
shell. The antagonists called upon him to be
their final judge.
"O tortoise, son of my father," began the
monkey. "Something unbelievable has hap¬
pened to me today! I rescued the leopard
from the pit, son of my father, this pit that
you see here. And he swore not to harm me.
But as soon as I had rescued him, he saw me
as nothing but a defenceless prey. Please:
you at least can give a clear verdict. If I am
in the wrong, I will allow myself to be
eaten."
The tortoise clapped his hands in asto¬
nishment.
"Do you mean to say," he asked the
monkey, "that you managed to pull the
leopard out of the hole? Impossible! Where
did you get the strength?"
"I am not lying," answered the monkey.
"Here is the leopard himself. Ask him."
"O leopard," inquired the tortoise. "Is
the monkey telling the truth?"
"Of course what he says is true," growled
the leopard. "But that is not the point. I am
telling the monkey this: I am hungry and Í
have nothing else to eat!"
The tortoise reassured him:
"You are quite right, son of my father.
However, when I investigate a case, I do
not like to rely on hearsay; I always prefer
to have direct evidence. So this is my point
of view. We are all here, the monkey, the
leopard and myself. Here, too, are the pit
and the stick. Can you show me how you
proceeded? On your side, O leopard, you
have nothing to fear. The monkey cannot
run away. I am here to guard him."
With a bound, the leopard vanished into
the pit.
The tortoise called the monkey:
"White-nosed monkey!" he said. "Have
you never heard that a carrier of frogs will
one day carry a toad? Have you never heard
that if you kiss every tree, then one day you
will kiss a thorn tree? That if you keep
catching flies, then eventually you will catch
a bee?"
Safe and sound once more, the monkey
made the following pronouncement:
"The leopard is what he is. And Ahem-
koé is still Ahem-koé! I shall never regret
having helped someone!"
The tortoise turned to the leopard, half-
stunned at the bottom of the pit:
"Stay there in peace, son of my father.
And never forget this: our character is our
salvation; our character is also our down¬
fall!"
Naa, na hm!
Copyright © Editions Karthala, Paris
