THE CULTURAL HERITAGE
Reflectedglory ofthe TajMahal
Raghu Rai: Täj Mahal on a winter's morning
RAGHU
RAI
of India, began taking photographs in 1965
and worked for ten years with a leading
Indian daily newspaper, The Statesman, be¬
fore becoming a freelance photographer. In
1982, he was appointed picture editor of the
magazine India Today, and he has been the
Magnum photographic correspondent in
Delhi since 1 977. His work, for which he has
obtained many Indian and international
awards, has been widely published and he
has held one-man shows in Paris, New
York, Prague, Hamburg and Tokyo. His
publications include Indira Gandhi (1974),
Delhi: A Portrait ofa City (1983), The Sikhs
(1984) and Taj Mahal (Singapore, 1986; Par¬
is, 1987), a selection of colour photographs
of the famous monument with a text by the
Indian journalist Usha Rai.
In the 17th century, the Mughal emperor
Shah Jahän created an architectural marvel,
the Täj Mahal, in memory of his much-loved
wife, Mumtäz Mahal ("Chosen One of the
Palace"), who died in childbirth in 1631 after
having been the emperor's inseparable com¬
panion since their marriage in 1612.
Credit for the original conception of the
mausoleum should no doubt go to Shah
Jahän himself, but Mughal tradition has it
that several architects collaborated in draw¬
ing up the final plans. The chief architect was
most probably Ustad Ahmad Lahori, a
mathematician and astrologer renowned for
his skill in designing buildings of vast dimen¬
sions and perfect symmetry.
The construction of the monument was
begun in 1 632 and took over twenty years. A
team of several thousands of master-builders
and craftsmen, masons, marble-workers, in-
layers, goldsmiths, calligraphers and other
decorators, came from all over India and
Central Asia to work on this large-scale
building project. The chosen site was outside
Agra, on the southern bank of the Yamuna
River, whose course was diverted in order
that the water would reflect and enhance the
beauty of the monument.
This extraordinary mausoleum of lumi¬
nous white marble, with its geometrically-
arranged gardens covering almost 17 hec¬
tares, has inspired poets and writers for over
300 years and still draws countless pilgrims
today. Rabindranath Tagore, the Indian
Nobel Prize-winning poet, described the Täj
as "the guardian of death tenderly covered
with the shroud of memory".
Agra has now become an industrial town
and steelworks have been constructed near¬
by. The ensuing atmospheric pollution is
endangering the Täj Mahal, now included on
Unesco's World Heritage List as a property
of outstanding universal value. The Indian
photographer Raghu Rai has recently taken
a series of colour views of the Täj, adding up
to an exceptional profile that embodies both
the dream and the reality of this masterpiece.
Even when these photographs are trans¬
posed into black and white, as here, the
power of his work remains intact. D
30

THE CULTURAL HERITAGE
Raghu Rai: Reflection of the Täj Mahal, Ägra, India
Raghu Rai: Visitors to the Täj Mahal during the rainy season
31
