Man and animals
n
*<
EACH culture thinks about animals
differently and classifies them in
ways which define the possible rela¬
tionships between man and those other spe¬
cies which share his physical and symbolic
environment. The modes of classification
vary from period to period and place to
place, but they usually lead to the dif¬
ferentiation (or to the association within
general groups) of human beings, gods,
plants, animals, stones, and spirits.
Generally speaking, the natural sciences
are not fundamentally distinct from indige¬
nous and popular forms of knowledge; they
develop as a result of a continual process of
"conceptual tinkering". Thus, in order to
distinguish plants from animals and to
accommodate organisms which were diffi¬
cult to classify, in the nineteenth century it
was found necessary to create a kind of
halfway house or intermediate category,
that of the "protists", from which the bac¬
teria were later extracted and assigned to a
separate kingdom, that of the procaryotes.
It is almost as difficult to establish a tax-
onomical difference between man and ani¬
mals. One specialist, Jacques Goimard, has
summed up the problem in these terms:
"even the latest scientific thinking, in spite
of appearances, has not completely aban¬
doned the attempt to define a specific quali¬
ty which differentiates animals from plants
and, above all, from human beings. The
animal might be defined as a non-human.
But all attempts to solve this problem are
unsatisfactory: none of the proposed
criteria is acceptable, except possibly that of
upright posture, which is the least meta¬
physical ... of all." The difference is not
biological but essentially cultural and
perhaps metaphysical.
The French anthropologist Claude Lévi-
Strauss has pointed out that "the Navajo
Indians, who proclaim themselves to be
'great classifiers', divide living creatures
into two categories, depending on whether
or not they have the gift of speech. Beings
without speech include animals and plants".
Once the frontiers have been defined,
relations can be established and com¬
munication can begin.
4 A woman gathering honey is depicted in this
reproduction of a painting (c.10,000/8000-
c.3000 BC) in the Araña cave, near Bicorp,
Valencia (Spain). Prehistoric rock art pro¬
vides the earliest record of man's reactions
to the animal world.

by Marc-Olivier Gonseth wmmu
Many of the deities of ancient Egypt had
animal forms. One of the oldest was the
sky-god, Horus the falcon, who is depicted
with a human body in this low-relief carving
on the walls of the Nubian temple of Kalab-
sha. Other sacred animals in ancient Egypt
included the ram, the bull, the ape and
the cat.
Shamanism and the supernatural
The shamanic experience, in which anim¬
als sometimes appear as messengers or in¬
termediaries, may constitute the most pro¬
found relationship that a human mind can
have with the animal world. The ethnolog¬
ist Emmanuel Désveaux has described
how, among the Indians of Big Trout Lake
in Canada, at puberty a child is taken to a
remote spot where he settles down alone at
the top of a tall tree, on a platform that the
Indians liken to an eagle's nest , and fasts for
several days. He experiences hallucinations
that enable him to make contact with super¬
natural entities (opawakanuk) , which be¬
long to the animate world as it is perceived
by the Indian mind, and which to us corres¬
pond to real animals, to mythical animals,
and to supernatural creatures that haunt the
forest. After this initiation, the child adopts
towards the different animal species an indi¬
vidual system of rituals which include food
taboos, verbal taboos and rituals governing
the treatment of meat or bones after con¬
sumption.
On these occasions the Indians form rela¬
tionships which they keep up throughout
their lives. They also seek to create others,
so that the power they receive from super¬
natural agencies increases as they grow
older. When the men are too old to hunt,
they can exercise their specific powers in the
community through another ritual known
as kosapashikan (long-distance sight), in
which the Indian summons his opawakanuk
Scene from a fresco in the cultural centre of
the Hopi Indians at Albuquerque, New Mex¬
ico (USA). It was executed in 1978 by the
Indian artist J.D. Medina.

^ Richly adorned with animal motifs, this
wooden prow of a boat was carved by an
artist of the Douala people of Cameroon.
This tiny bronze figure of a pelican feeding
its young is an ornamental weight produced
by a metalworker of the Baoulé people of the
Ivory Coast. It was once used for weighing
gold dust and nuggets. West African crafts¬
men fashioned a variety of such weights
depicting animal figures and scenes. Each
one corresponded to an ancient unit of
weight based on the seeds of certain plants
and was designed to illustrate a proverb or
transmit a message.
into a hemispherical shelter and entrusts
them with certain missions. This is a
"psychic process common to all indi¬
viduals", and lasts from the earliest initia¬
tion to the onset of old age. "In this sense, it
can be said that shamanism ... permeates all
activities, every moment of the Indians'
lives. The opawakanuk, essentially animal
spirits, are the vectors through which the
shaman accomplishes his extraordinary
tasks beyond place and time".
Clean and unclean
Pork, which is the object of absolute
prohibitions in Jewish and Muslim
societies, is a case which illustrates the
importance of the classifications which
underlie the culture and identity of human
groups.
Whether or not a group consumes certain
animal species is of fundamental importan¬
ce. Someone who eats or does not eat a
specific kind of meat, in a specific way, in
specific circumstances, is often considered
an outsider.
In her famous book Purity and Danger
the British anthropologist Mary Douglas
analyses the food prescriptions given in
Deuteronomy and Leviticus and notes that
"in general the underlying principle of
cleanness in animals is that they shall con¬
form fully to their class. Those species are
unclean which are imperfect members of
their class, or whose class itself confounds
the general scheme of the world". Thus the
pig is excluded by Hebrew tradition be¬
cause, not being a ruminant, it conflicts
with the following rule: "Whatsoever parts
the hoof and is cloven-footed and chews the
cud, among the animals you may eat" (Levi¬
ticus 11, quoted by Douglas). This prescrip¬
tion also excludes the camel, the rock bad¬
ger and the hare (which are not cloven-
footed). It would be hard to find a clearer
instance of the importance of categories of
thought in social practices.
Restrictions are also imposed on the eat
ing of pork in societies where it is widely
consumed. The reasons given for this are
essentially "dietary" and relate to the often
deplorable production conditions as well as
to latent anxieties about the status of the pig
as an omnivorous, scatophagous and sup¬
posedly dirty animal.
Animal eaters and animal lovers
The pork processing industry is unfortu¬
nately not the only one which sometimes
causes concern. The conditions in which
other animals than pigs are mass produced
for consumption are often scandalous and
contrast strongly with the sometimes exces¬
sive care lavished on domestic animals.
Another problem is related to the con¬
sumption of animal protein, the production
of which is extremely costly in terms of
energy (it takes between 5 and 20 kg of
plant protein to produce 1 kg of animal
protein). Levels of consumption vary wide¬
ly in different parts of the world. Whereas
the majority of people do not eat meat or
only eat meat on high days and holidays, for
a small proportion of the world's population
every day is a feast. The adoption of "carni¬
vores" as companion animals is an addition¬
al boost to the excessive consumption of
meat.
Hunting and rearing animals for their fur,
fishing of the great sea mammals, and other
examples of the massive exploitation ofwild
animals by "civilized" man have had spec¬
tacular consequences such as the trans¬
formation of lakes and forests into
aquariums and vivariums, and the increas¬
ing rarity of certain species.
The contemporary French artist François-
Xavier Laianne with his "Flock of Sheep".
The work, 6 examples of which were pro¬
duced, consists of 24 lifesize "sheep" (16
headless). Materials used include copper
plating, cast aluminium, wood, steel and
sheepskin.
»SaJ,
mM

One writer, Philippe Roger, has related
the disappearance of animal species to a
question of classification which led to the
"elimination of animality in the decades
between Darwin and Freud". Roger points
to the sacred character of all animals as the
dominant characteristic of very ancient
times, and suggests that it may have been
reinforced by Christianity. He notes that
medieval bestiaries still emphasize the
strangeness of animals and sees the "ra¬
diant" animality expressed in the bestiaries
as lasting until the time of the eighteenth-
century French naturalist Buffon, who him¬
self stressed "the radical difference between
the two worlds" by asserting "that man is of
a different nature, that he alone is in a class
apart".
Unfair game?
Any discussion of the extermination of
animals leads inevitably to the question of
hunting and its significance. Animals which
are highly valued for their fur, skins or ivory
are pitilessly and systematically hunted in
some parts of the world. The pretexts for
expeditions in which risk and the exercise of
virility are the backdrop for all kinds of
excesses, or decimated in quasi-industrial
fashion by groups organized along com¬
mando lines, these species are today so
seriously threatened that a strict and
perhaps partially inoperative regulation has
been drawn up to protect them.
The relationship between hunter-gather¬
er peoples and animals is (or was) generally
of another kind. Emmanuel Désveaux tells
how, before the arrival of the missionaries,
the Indians of Big Trout Lake were each
given the name of a different animal spe¬
cies. As a result of this process, a profound
relationship could be established between
the future hunter and the future quarry. A
specific ritual also marked the first capture
of a given quarry.
The practices described above are far
from being universally accepted, and va¬
rious organizations and individuals have

The anthropomorphic rodent Mickey
Mouse is one of the most famous animated
cartoon characters created by the American
film-maker Walt Disney (1901-1966). He
made his film debut in Steamboat Willie
(1928), the first animated cartoon with
sound, and later starred in over a hundred
short productions. Left, a Mickey Mouse
figure takes part in a Washington, D.C.,
parade.
contributed to the debate on the protection
of animals, again raising the question of
where the frontiers of humanity should be
drawn. Jurists are also being asked to give
their opinion on animal rights and to formu¬
late legal provisions for the protection of
animals. Which animals should be protec¬
ted and to what extent? How can human
beings be persuaded or forced to respect
measures for animal protection?
Man-animal projections
Projections of human characteristics onto
animals and vice versa have given rise to
two apparently contradictory ways of think¬
ing. The first is that adopted by Walt Disney
and other creators of cartoon animals
whose attitudes, reasoning powers, attri¬
butes, anxieties and preoccupations are un¬
equivocally human. Perhaps this massive
output of anthropomorphic perceptions
and projections has further confused our
thinking about the relationship between
man and animals. Urbanization and the
industrialization of agriculture have dis¬
rupted the relationship between man and
animals and led to totally different por¬
trayals of the latter.
The reverse form of projection, from
animal to man, is often misused by scientific
and popular ethology (life is a jungle, man
is wolf to man, the strongest devour the
weakest, the female is subjected to the
male ...)
Here again we encounter demarcation
problems. Colette Guillaumin notes that "if
a common animal nature makes it possible
to make man, whenever the need arises, by
turns a chimpanzee, a wolf or a Scotch
grouse, no attempt is made to explain the
wolf in terms of the grouse or the chimpan¬
zee in terms of the wolf. This reveals at least
one thing: ethology describes the animal but
explains man. The reference point is man
and not animal social behaviour as such: the
animal is the mask that conceals, albeit
inadequately, the project of justifying ...
man. ... In spite of appearances, we are not
so far from the universe of La Fontaine or
Aesop, incapable of not projecting our 'pas¬
sions', of not peopling the world with con¬
structions engendered by our relations with
each other".
This remark seems particularly relevant
to species that are close to man (biological
proximity in the case of mammals; analogic¬
al proximity in the case of social insects),
but the further one goes from the human,
the less possible the transfer.
Experimentation with animals rests in
many cases on the same difficulties of trans¬
position, since man is the only guinea pig on
whom medicines destined for his fellows
can be reliably tested.
There is one field in which the animals we
think of as wild and even ferocious still
enjoy a little autonomy: in our individual or
collective fantasies and in the stories in
which they feature, wolves, tigers and hye¬
nas join the hybrids and monsters of our
imagination dragons, centaurs, were¬
wolves, yetis and other "alien" creatures
to define the imaginary limits of our
humanity.
Perhaps we have lost our feeling for the
"right distance" between ourselves and
animal species, a distance that can enable us
to communicate with animals without over-
sensitivity or cruelty and can at the same
time stimulate our symbolic imagination.
By coming too close to certain species, by
scandalously exploiting others, and by re¬
jecting animals which are hard to accept in
the sanitized capsules in which we live,
could we be fomenting dangerous problems
in our own minds and in the world at large?
The above article has been adapted from Des
animaux et des hommes ("Animals and Man"), a
book published by the Museum of Ethnography,
Neuchâtel (Switzerland) as a commentary on an
exhibition with the same title which was held at the
Museum in 1987. In the last thirty years the
Neuchâtel Museum of Ethnography has won a
reputation for its innovative exhibitions. Since
1 981 it has presented a series ofstriking exhibitions
designed to stimulate reflection on cultural relativ¬
ism through the unexpected juxtaposition of arte¬
facts from different cultures.
MARC-OLIVIER GONSETH, Swiss ethnologist,
was a staff member of the Neuchâtel Institute of
Ethnology from 1983 to 1987. He is currently
engaged on research among the Ifugao people of
the Philippines.
8
