People and pets
by Erika Friedmann
Photo © Edouard Boubat, Pans
PET keeping is virtually ubiquitous
among human groups. People have
kept domesticated animals for at
least 10,000 years, and have captured,
tamed and kept wild animals as com¬
panions, without breeding them, for con¬
siderably longer. Although the initial im¬
petus for domestication is unclear, the first
breeding of animals, in the Mesolithic
period, was probably associated with
favourable environmental changes in speci¬
fic areas which dramatically increased the
availability of food. According to the
archaeological records, dogs were the first
and cats the second domesticated pets.
The importance of pet animals in modern
industrial society is repeatedly demons¬
trated in the popular press, movies and
books. Pets, and dogs in particular, are
often characterized as man's "best friend".
From a symbolic perspective, pets may well
represent the lost relationship of the mother
to the infant; that is complete and total
devotion, love, and adoration. They can
help bridge the developmental transitions
from infancy to childhood; from depend¬
ence to independence; from isolation to
social integration at varying times and
stages in our lives. While the relationship
between people and their pets may be a
symbol for the relationship of a mother to
an infant, the species difference constitutes
a fundamental distinction, providing emo¬
tional continuity without negating our indi¬
viduality.
Prior to the last decade there were few
scientific studies of the benefits of interac¬
tions between people and pets. Freud rec¬
ognized the unique and important role of
pets in people's lives: "It really explains,"
he wrote, "why one can love an animal ...
with such an extraordinary intensity; affec¬
tion without ambivalence, the simplicity
free from the almost unbearable conflicts of
civilization, the beauty of an existence com¬
plete in itself ... that feeling of intimate
affinity, of an undisputed solidarity."
However, his warm regard for them was not
expressed in a clinical interest. Most in¬
formation about the value of pets to their
11

people was based upon anecdotal informa¬
tion, compilations of personal stories of the
amazing devotion, intelligence and restora¬
tive powers of individual pets or particular
breeds, without the support of systematic
scientific investigation.
In the last ten years the common belief
that "pets are good for you" has gained
scientific support. Pets decrease owners'
loneliness and depression by providing
companionship, an impetus for nurturance,
and a source of meaningful daily activities.
They also decrease owners' anxiety and
stress levels by providing ccr.tact comfort, a
relaxing focus for attention, and a feeling of
safety. In addition, a pet can help its owner
improve or maintain physical fitness by pro¬
viding an impetus for exercise. While most
researchers into the effects of animals on
health have concentrated on dogs, there is
considerable evidence that other pets are
equally beneficial.
Loneliness may cause or worsen illnesses
and can even lead to death, and the com¬
pany of a pet can promote health by ame¬
liorating the pathological effects of lack of
contact with family members or close
friends. Pets can be particularly beneficial
to elderly people, who are especially
vulnerable to loneliness and isolated from
their families and friends. They act as com¬
panions to their owners, many of whom
consider their pets to be family members,
talk to them frequently as if they were
people, and think their pets are sensitive to
their moods.
In the course of a study of the social,
The tradition of keeping domesticated cats
as pets is thousands of years old. In ancient
Egypt, anyone who harmed a cat was
punished and when a pet cat died its master
shaved off his eyebrows as a sign of mourn¬
ing. Below, a modern cat-lover and his
companion.
psychological and physiological factors
affecting the survival of patients with coron¬
ary heart disease (severe chest pain or heart
attack), pet ownership was related to one
year survival. Only three of fifty-three pet
owners died within one year of admission to
a large urban university hospital while
eleven of thirty-nine non-pet owners co¬
vered by the study died in the same period.
As expected, the best predictor of survival
was the severity of the illness. The combina¬
tion of pet ownership and physiological
severity was better at predicting survival
than was physiological severity alone.
Furthermore, pets benefited everyone, not
just those who were living alone, unmar
ried, or widowed. The researchers con¬
cluded that the effects of pets on health
were distinct from the effects of other
people.
Pets can also lead to increased compan¬
ionship by facilitating interactions with
other people. They provide hospitalized or
institutionalized persons with important
links to friends and relatives in the outside
world. Many pet owners seek daily informa¬
tion about their pets during their own hospi¬
talization.
Frequently people who live alone or lose
reciprocity in their relationships with others
become depressed, feel unneeded, and lose
self esteem. These feelings lead to increases
"In early childhood pets provide a connec¬
tion to the natural world and are in¬
strumental in teaching respect for other liv¬
ing things." Below, a playful dog and its
master dwarfed by a high-rise block in the
Paris region.
12

A
Above, a young Gypsy and his 4-legged
friend. Sometimes thought of as confined to
wealthy Western societies, pet-keeping
appeals to a wide variety of cultures
throughout the world.
in the psychological and physiological re¬
sponses to the challenges of daily life which
in turn lead to diminution of the body's
ability to fight infections and resist disease.
By lessening these feelings, pets can de¬
crease the impact of problems, disappoint¬
ments, deaths of friends, and other stressful
events.
Caring for a pet can also improve self
image and facilitate caring for oneself. In
one survey of senior citizens in the United
States, pet owners felt significantly more
self-sufficient, dependable, helpful, self-
confident and optimistic than non-pet
owners. A social worker in Edinburgh
(UK) even used the incentive of caring for a
pet to induce elderly clients to take better
care of themselves. She gave several of her
clients, who relied on open fires to warm
themselves in winter, pet birds which re¬
quired warm environments. None of those
who were given pet birds and instructed to
maintain higher house temperatures for
their pets experienced hypothermia that
winter. Since hypothermia is a major cause
of death for the elderly in Edinburgh, the
pets undoubtedly contributed to their own¬
er's health.
There is growing recognition of the im¬
portant positive role of the sense of touch
throughout the human life cycle. Pets pro¬
vide a crucial source of touch for individuals
who would otherwise be without this sen¬
sory input. Touching an animal decreases a
person's anxiety and stress levels. Touching
a pet, as well as being a means of expressing
affection, has a beneficial effect on owners'
cardiovascular systems. People rarely pet
an animal without talking to it, so it is not
possible to assess the independent effects of
the two activities. Researchers have re¬
ported that talking to and petting a compan¬
ion animal arouse the owners' cardiovascu¬
lar system less than talking with people.
This lends credence to the non-threatening,
supportive nature of the bond between hu¬
mans and companion animals.
Pet animals provide a sense of calmness
and security. People may be more willing to
go for walks, to leave their homes, or to visit
friends when their pet accompanies them or
guards their homes in their absence. Recog¬
nizing the pleasant aura presented by their
inclusion, advertisers and even politicians
often use pets to help create desired moods.
Both scenes and people in them are per¬
ceived as more friendly and less threatening
when an animal is included than when no
animal is present.
When animals are present, people tend to
focus their attention on them, especially in
stressful situations. This focus of attention
outside the self can cause decreases in stress
levels similar to those experienced during
more conventional forms of stress reduction
such as transcendental meditation or pro¬
gressive relaxation. Watching fish swim in
their tank has been as useful as hypnosis for
reducing anxiety and pain during dental
surgery. This type of observation of the
natural world also can be useful in lowering
blood pressure.
Caring for a pet can promote health by
giving people responsibility, providing time
orientation, and encouraging them to de¬
velop a more varied life-style. Taking re¬
sponsibility for a pet can be especially im¬
portant to patients whose activities are
limited due to chronic diseases, handicaps,
or social isolation.
In early childhood pets provide a connec¬
tion to the natural world and are in¬
strumental in teaching respect for other
living things. For slightly older children, the
responsibility of a pet may be instrumental
in developing self-esteem, self-confidence,
and independence.
Pets serve multiple functions at many
points in the life cycle from early childhood
through mature adulthood. Once contact
with an animal is established, it is easier to
enter into relationships with other people.
ERIKA FRIEDMANN, of the United Stales, is an
associateprofessor ofhealth and nutrition sciences
at Brooklyn College of the City University ofNew
York. She has published over 40 scientific articles,
a number of which examine the physiological
effects of keeping pets.
