The chain pump
One of the inventions of the greatest utility which has spread from China
throughout the world, so that its origins are no longer realized, is the
square-pallet chain pump. It consists of an endless circulating chain bearing
square pallets which hold water, earth, or sand.
This pump can haul enormous quantities of water from lower to higher
levels. The optimum angle of slope at which the chain of pallets can be laid
out is about 24°. So, depending on how well the pallets were fitted to avoid
leakage and on the sturdiness of the machine as a whole, the height that
water can be raised by a single pump is about 5 metres.
By medieval times in China, the pumps had been adapted for use as
conveyors of earth or sand rather than just water. They were thus the first
conveyor belts.
We do not know who invented the chain pump, or exactly when.
Although it may have existed some centuries earlier, we can take as its time
of origin the first century AD. The philosopher Wang Chong refers to its
existence about 80 AD in his book Discourses Weighed in the Balance.
Considerable improvements were made to the design during the next
century. We know this from an account in the imperial history of the time,
which discusses the lack of water in the capital, Luoyang. The history tells
us that the famous eunuch minister Zhang Rang (died 189 AD) ordered
various improvements for Luoyang from the engineer Bi Lan:
"He further asked Bi Lan ... to construct square-pallet chain pumps and
suction pumps, which were set up to the west of the bridge outside the
Peace Gate to spray water along the north-south roads of the city, thus
saving the expense incurred by the common people [in sprinkling water on
these roads and carrying water to the people living along them] ...
Chain pumps had achieved a standard form in China by 828. The
imperial history for that year records:
"In the second year of the Taihe reign-period, in the second month ... a
standard model of the chain-pump was issued from the palace, and the
people of Jingzhao Fu were ordered by the Emperor to make a consider¬
able number of the machines, for distribution along the Zheng Bai Canal,
for irrigation purposes."
The pumps were used for civil engineering works and for draining all
sorts of sites, as well as for irrigation and the supply of drinking water. The
pumps were so spectacular in their results that visiting dignitaries and
ambassadors from neighbouring lands eventually adopted them in their
own countries. H
Raising water for irrigation in
17th-century China, using a two-man
treadle-operated chain pump.
_ 13
