The segmental arch bridge
A conceptual breakthrough occurred when a Chinese engineer realized
that an arch did not have to be a semi-circle. A bridge could be built which
was based not on the traditional semi-circular arch but on what is known as
a segmental arch. The way to envisage this is to imagine a gigantic circle
embedded in the ground, of which only the tip shows above ground level.
This tip is a segment of a circle, and the arch it forms is a segmental arch.
Bridges built in this way take less material and are stronger than ones built
as semi-circular arches.
This advance took place in China in the seventh century AD. It was the
concept of Li Chun, the founder of an entire school of constructional
engineering whose influence lasted for many centuries. We are fortunate
that his first great bridge, built in 610, survives intact and is still very much
in use today. Called the Great Stone Bridge, it spans the Jiao river near
Zhaoxian at the foot of the Shanxi Mountains on the edge of the North
China Plain.
Four small whole arches were incorporated within the structure of the
main bridge. They were an innovation of great consequence in bridge-
building, for they were the world's first arched spandrels. Li Chun found
that by punching these holes in the ends of the bridge he could accomplish
several things at once: flood waters could rush through them, lessening the
19

The Great Stone Bridge spanning the
Jiao river in northern China.
Constructed in 610 AD, it was renovated
in the 20th century and is still in use.



chance that the main bridge would be swept away at its supports in a
sudden flood; the total weight of the bridge could be lessened, thereby
diminishing the tendency to buckle by the ends sinking down into the river
banks; and vast quantities of material could be saved, which would
normally have gone to make solid ends for the bridge.
The Great Stone Bridge has a span of 37.5 metres. The largest surviving
Roman whole arch bridge, the Pont Saint Martin near Aosta, spans 35.5
metres. But the average whole arch Roman bridge spanned between 1 8 and
25 metres, whereas whole arches in Roman aqueducts had an average span
of about 6 metres.
The greatest segmental arch bridge in China is the famous "Marco Polo
Bridge", often so named because Polo described it at length. Just west of
Beijing, it crosses the Yongding river at the small town of Lugougiao, and is
213 metres in length, consisting of a series of eleven segmental arches
extending one after another across the river, each with an average span of 1 9
metres. It was built in 1189 and is still heavily used by modern truck and
bus traffic. Marco Polo thought this bridge "the finest in the world".
20 _
