The Egyptian world-picture
BY JEAN YOYOTTE
THE huge temples and enormous funer¬
ary monuments of ancient Egypt
with their profusion of hieroglyphs
are a source of amazement to the modern
mind, which cannot easily grasp their useful¬
ness or significance. The ancient Greeks, so
much closer in time to them, considered the
Pyramids of Giza to be an absurd and
oppressive show of royal pride. However,
these monuments retain their majesty and
cease to tower quite so disturbingly over us
once we see them as an expression of the
conceptions that the Egyptians had formed
of their universe and of the answers that
those conceptions provided to the problems
of their society, reflecting ways of thinking
and of acting that are at once strange and
familiar.
That which is larger than life cannot be
brought down to human proportions by
means of a linear approach. Several different
images, several different sacred accounts,
taken together may help us to understand the
same processes or phenomena. The im¬
penetrable sky is an ocean, a roof, a cow, a
woman's body. Any image rooted in tradi¬
tion is relevant, despite its apparently con¬
tradictory features, and serves as a means of
apprehending, coming to terms with, the
world of the gods.
These differing approaches are often ex¬
pressed through a dualistic way of thinking
in which the whole may be reduced to the
opposition and association of two qualities,
exemplified by the twofold characteristic of
the monarchy twofold on two accounts
by the black earth and the desert, and by
Upper and Lower Egypt. In addition, lan¬
guage, writing and images are not to be
confused with conventional symbols. Be-
Temple relief depicting, at right, Tuthmosis III
(c. 1479-1425 BC) wearing the red crown of
Lower Egypt, with the god Amun, creator and
sustainer of the world. Amun holds the ankh,
the ancient Egyptian symbol for life, and wears
the two-plumed headdress with which he is
usually represented.
tween that which is named and drawn and
the object, an affinity exists. Words thus
create things hence the importance of
wordplay in creation stpries and speech
commands things. These are the two princi¬
ples of "magical" thinking.
The vehicle of the words of the gods, the
hieroglyphic system explains reality; com¬
posed of images drawn from Nature, it came
into being at the same time as the Egyptian
graphic arts. The representation of a living
being, duly accompanied by the person's
17

18
Detail of a pink granite relief carving of Nut, the
sky-goddess and protector of the deceased. The
carving, inscribed with stars, adorned the inside
face of the sarcophagus lid in the tomb of King
Psusennes I (1040-992 BC) at San el-Hagar
(Greek Tanis) in the Nile Delta. Now preserved
in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo, the hoard of
funeral furniture found in Psusennes' tomb is
comparable in richness with the treasure of
Tutankhamun.
name, is a duplication of that person. An
almost maniacal passion for giving lasting
verbal and graphic expression to reality in
order to shore it up by means of a supreme
form of magic is a hallmark of Pharaonic
culture and accounts for its extraordinary
monuments and inscriptions.
The horizon of the Egyptians stretches
from the narrow strip of black earth (kernet,
from which derives Kemi, the Coptic name
for Egypt) constituted by the flat alluvial
valley of the Nile, to the red earth (desheret)
of the immense Sahara all around, with its
arid hills. "The Black Land" is the home of
human beings, a place for the growing of
crops, familiar and reassuring. "The Red
Land" is terrible and strange. Aggressive
bands of backward people are its denizens
and from that area invaders come, whether
from afar or from nearby. But in addition,
the desert offers no escape, with its horizons
where the sun is born and dies; its unchang¬
ing rocks and pure sands are welcoming to
the dead and are the scene of invisible re¬
births. An infinite liquid mass surrounds the
solid universe, appearing on the face of the
Earth in the form of the seas. This water
constitutes the celestial vault where the stars
follow their courses. It flows into the under¬
ground river, where the sun sails from west
to east during the night, and each year it
produces a new tidal flow in the form of the
flood waters of the Nile.
Peopled with mysterious, somnolent
beings, this ocean and the world of darkness
filled the whole of space until the day when
the sun, Re-Atum, rose up, pushing back the
dense gloom to the periphery. A mound
emerged from which the god gave shape to
the present world, breathing air, light and
life into it, while at the same time having to
combat the forces of the void. He then cre¬
ated gods and men, animals and plants. This
was to be but the "first occasion". Every
evening, the sun god grows old, and every
morning, rejuvenated and purified in the
waters, he recreates the universe and joins
battle; every day the dragon Apopis
threatens the sun in his course. A rebellion
on the part of mankind caused Re to take
flight into the skies, but he continues to see
to the maintenance of order, Maat, which he
established and which is his life. Living
beings are destined to grow old and become
young again here on Earth, in accordance
with a perpetual time cycle (neheh), like the
sun, until the day when, touched by the
finger of death, they enter a static eternity
(djet) like Osiris. When Atum returns to his
original state of passivity, both space and
time will cease to exist.
Several different myths and doctrines, re¬
flecting the diversity of approaches and
claims from one locality to another, recount
in their own ways the work of the one and
only demiurge. According to the predomi¬
nant doctrine, originating in Heliopolis, it
was Re-Atum who set things in their places,
but the priests of Memphis believed that it
was Ptah, the Earth, who was the first to
appear and who then placed the sky on high
and brought forth the sun. The scholars
maintained that God conceived the universe
in his heart (i.e. in his mind) and brought it
into being through his mouth (i.e. his
creative word).
In Pharaonic times sexual duality was con¬
sidered to be an inherent part of the process
of life, long before the hymns of the New
Kingdom praised God as the father and
mother. Two myths, that of Kamutef and
that of the "Eye of Re", reveal the place of
woman. Each major god is flanked by a
female companion who is at once his daught¬
er, his wife and his mother. He is brought
into the world by this goddess and he makes
her pregnant, being his own son and the

"Bull of his Mother" (Kamutef). This female
companion is also his eye, the source of
flames and light, who went away from him in
anger and whom he had to pacify. An image
of the ambivalence of the sacred, she is the
good Hathor, desire and joy, and the danger¬
ous Sakhmet, a leonine agent of calamity and
a cobra who may strike against enemies and
sinners.
Two divine couples born of the demiurge
represent the ordering of the physical uni¬
verse: air and light-fire; and earth and sky.
The following generation, ncaring man's
estate, had to contend with human dramas in
the shape of power struggles and death.
Osiris, slain by Seth, found new life through
Isis and Nephthys, and gained sovereignty
over death and the dead. His posthumous
son Horus assumed rule of the Earth by
defeating his uncle Seth. The latter, a
troublemaker who was not to be seen as a
supreme satanic force until later periods, is
an ambiguous figure. His divine violence is
an inescapable fact, causing life to open onto
eternity and serving to help Re and the
Pharaoh to vanquish foreigners and the dra¬
gon of the void, thus giving rise to conflict¬
ing legends. For instance, power is said to be
shared between Horus, the master of the
black earth, and Seth, the master of the red
earth; or Seth is described as the king of the
South and Horus as the king of the North,
forming together an indissoluble confeder¬
ation; or again, and most frequently, Horus
is depicted as expelling Seth and ruling alone
over the organized world.
This entanglement of ideas and images
underpinned a political theology that

marked Egyptian history and culture so
strongly at that time that they arc legitimate¬
ly designated by historians as Pharaonic, the
word "Pharaoh", transmitted to us by the
Bible, being a specific term for the king of
Egypt. The king was the representative of
the divine order and epitomized in himself
alone the forces of economic, social and
political life. The incarnation of Horus since
the earliest times, the son of Re since the
period of the great pyramids, the "perfect
god" fulfilled the role of gods whose image,
heir and servant he was. In him Horus and
Seth were united. His coming marked the
coming of Horus and at the same time the
reappearance of the sun and the beginning of
a new era. He maintained Maat among man¬
kind and ensured security by driving back
the barbarians and imposing Egyptian rule
beyond the Nile Valley. He was the sole
repository of that supernatural force which
ensured victory and political wisdom. He
alone issued decrees and was responsible for
appointments to every single post. Initiated
into the mysteries and highly cultivated, he
kept the gods alive through the arts and
through ritual.
The doctrinal foundations for the legi¬
timacy of kings lay not in heredity but in
immediate predestination, a choice made by
God, illustrated by the fiction of his procrea¬
tion by the god himself (myth of theogamy).
Once he had taken possession of the crowns
and affixed the cobra on his forehead, the
new Horus took up his place among the
gods. He would pass into eternity as a super¬
natural being. His tomb, along with the cere¬
monies accompanying his burial, reflected
this difference that existed between him and
the rest of humanity, exemplified by the
pyramids of the Old and New Kingdoms
with their vast royal temples, and the rock-
cut tombs of the Valley of the Kings and the
"Million-Year Castles" of the New
Kingdom. One of the few social conquests
achieved by ordinary people throughout the
course of Egyptian history was the democra¬
tization of funerary privileges, which were
extended to common mortals during each of
the Intermediate Periods, when the central
authority weakened. But each Kingdom that
restored the unity of the monarchy invented
further differentiations.
Ancient Egypt had no practical or theore-

Painted limestone stela from el-Amarna, with
King Akhenaten (c. 1353-1335 BC) on the left,
his wife Nefertiti and three of their daughters.
The intimate family scene, typical of royal
iconography during Akhenaten's reign, is
blessed by the life-giving rays of the Aten, the
sun god, represented by a solar disk. For 12 years
or so, el-Amarna was Egypt's capital and centre
of the new State religion introduced by the king,
in which only the sun god was worshipped.
Atenism was as close as the ancient Egyptian
world ever came to monotheism.

Detail of a wooden panel from a niche in the
tomb of Hezyre, Chief Scribe and Chief of
Dentists and Physicians of the 3rd Dynasty (c.
2649-2575 BC), at Saqqara. Hezyre carries the
tools of a scribe over his shoulder reed pen,
water pot or bag, and a palette with cakes of
pigment for making ink, all tied together.
Painting from the tomb of Sennedjem, a
high-ranking official during the reign of Sethos
I, shows Sennedjem and his wife Iyneferti
worshipping a group of deities. (See also photo
page 6, left.)
24
tical understanding of democracy. It ele¬
vated to the highest degree, and integrated
into its cosmology, a system whereby all
human authority was delegated to a chief.
Not very inclined towards abstraction, the
"prephilosophical" Egyptian had no word
for State or for Nation, but invested the
person of the sun king with all the attributes
of the State. The various terms used to desig¬
nate the king did not apply to foreign
sovereigns and, in speaking of Pharaoh, the
early Egyptians internalized their national
feeling, although the storytellers were well
aware that Pharaoh as god shared the physic¬
al and moral weaknesses of our species.
Scribes and priests cultivated a spirit of
loyalty towards the monarchy and finally
attributed an ecumenical dimension to it
which made it easier to accept foreign mas
ters representing a universal empire: the
Persians Cambyses and Darius, Alexander
the Great, and the Roman Augustus.
This unified society whose sacred poems
sang of the unity of creation and the mystery
of the creator was at the same time radically
polytheistic and stubbornly idolatrous. The
Egyptian nation recognized all the gods re¬
vealed by the immemorial traditions of the
different localities. Each had its own names,
legends, major attributes and set images,
making it unique of its kind. Each city god
was revered by the local people whose lord
he was and whose happiness he ensured.
However, all the gods and goddesses were
simultaneously recognized as the father or
mother of the Pharaoh who kept them all
alive and expected to be protected by them.
With time, a form of logic came to be
introduced into this extensive pantheon
through the establishment of a hierarchy and
correspondences. The principal god of any
province was thus seen as a manifestation of
the sun, reflected in such names as
Amon-Re, Montu-Re and Sobek-Re. Ulti¬
mately, all the gods came to represent in
theory the manifestations or offspring of a
single, remote god, while their personalities
served on the occasion of State rituals and
local devotions as a medium for approaching
the divinity in its place of being, through its
manifestations. The enlightened reform of
the renowned Pharaoh Akhenaten, impos¬
ing the exclusive cult of the visible sun (the
Aten) could not have any lasting success,
especially since polytheism had profoundly
modelled not only the tolerant spirituality of
the Egyptians but also the economic and
social structures of the country.
What then was the place of men and
women in this universe where the whole of
collective life seemed to be understood and
managed in terms of communication be¬
tween a single flesh-and-blood being the
king and the multiplicity of gods? In com¬
parison with other Near Eastern peoples in
ancient times, Egypt was singularly modern.
Human beings were equal before the creator
and, as a general rule, owed their advance¬
ment purely to the judicious choice of the
Pharaoh. There existed neither statutory
aristocracy nor intermediate authority be¬
tween the State and the individual. A man
defined himself by the name of his parents
and by his title in the administrative appar¬
atus. The legal status of women was equal to
that of men, although marriage was patriloc-
al and the activity of wives centred on the
proud role that each one played as "Mistress
of the House". The pleasure taken in the joys
of the home are prettily expressed in tomb
drawings and inscriptions and in literature.
Children were desired and cared for, not in
order to perpetuate a line but because of the
happiness they brought and in order to en¬
able their parents to live again through the
funerary rites. In each village there was a
strong sense of community.
The "haves" were required by the precepts
of Maat to assist the "have-nots" and, as
early as the third millennium BC, the "wis¬
dom writings" of officials spoke of charity
and alms-giving in terms that foreshadow
Abrahamic religions. These wisdom writ¬
ings preach good manners, reserve, absence
of gesticulation, an entire discipline which is
typified in Pharaonic drawings and statuary.
The omnipresent mediation of the king by
no means ruled out direct relations between
individuals and the gods. Admittedly, ordin¬
ary people, unless performing the functions
of priests, did not enter the precincts of the
major temples, which were so to speak fac¬
tories for maintaining the energy of the uni¬
verse, but at the door of the sacred precincts,
in village oratories and in their inmost being
they prayed to the gods of their choice and
consulted their oracles in an effort to solve
their health and career problems. Moreover,
theories as to the power of names, writings
and images offered a magical means of

'
...... -
Wall painting in the oval-shaped sarcophagus
chamber of Tuthmosis III. It depicts a scene and
texts from the Book ofAmduat ("that which is
in the netherworld"), a religious composition
which describes the sun god's daily death and
rebirth and is often found in royal tombs of the
early New Kingdom. In this scene the sun god's
' bark has reached the 12th hour of the night,
when the god and his retinue enter into the
body of a giant snake which they will leave
rejuvenated as "young children".
The judgment after death, a detail from one of
the many funerary papyri placed in New
Kingdom tombs, which are today known as the
Book ofthe Dead. In this scene Anubis, the god
responsible for embalming and the lord of the
necropolis, weighs the deceased's heart in a
balance against Maat, correct conduct in life. To
his right, the moon god Thoth, symbol of
wisdom and justice, records the result. If the
heart and Maat are in equilibrium, the test is
successful, and the deceased is presented to
Osiris in triumph.
obtaining the favour of a god in one's life¬
time. A statue or stele set in a holy place
transformed the person who had erected it
into a regular companion of the god con¬
cerned and enabled an indirect benefit to be
gained from the offerings made to that god
by the king, thereby ensuring prosperity,
long life and the promise of a good burial.
For this was the one area in which the
Pharaonic world view gave men and women
the possibility of asserting themselves, avail¬
ing themselves of all the magical powers of
art, writing and ritual to ensure everlasting
life for their mummified remains, their
name, their mobile soul (ba) and their life
force (ka). They were offered eternal life,
and a truly royal life since each person was
transformed into Osiris; also, a truly divine
life since each became a companion of the
sun. From the time of the Middle Kingdom
onwards, this survival depended in each case
on the individual's morality. In the temples
Pharaoh alone may have represented and
spoken for humanity, but all Egyptians
could, according to their resources and
merits, express themselves through their
tombs.
The sons of Re reached their first zenith in
the third millennium BC. The Pharaonic
world view was given tangible expression in
the cities of pyramids, scattered through the
region of Memphis, at the junction of Upper
and Lower Egypt. During each successive
reign, a new crop-growing area was estab¬
lished in the valley, while a royal city was
built at the edge of the desert. This city
served a temple where the ruling king, the
incarnation of Horus, worshipped the gods.
The holy of holies of the temple was the
pyramid, representing the primordial
mound and the course of the sun in which
the new Osiris would be reborn. In the
surrounding area, filled with images of
everyday life, the tombs of the princes and
ministers, followed by those of the priests
and the keepers of the pyramids, formed a
city of the dead, above the city of the living.
A record of the conquest of the land, the
chain of pyramids was a reflection of the
ordering of the Egyptian cosmos before
being the illustrious, disconcerting collec¬
tion of mausoleums that we admire so much
today.
JEAN YOYOTTE, of France, specializes in the
history of Egypt ofthe late Pharaonic period. He is
director ofstudies at the Ecole Pratique des Hautes
Etudes, Paris, and until 1985 led the French team
excavating Tanis. His published works include Les
trésors des pharaons (1968; "Treasures of the
Pharaohs") and, in association with P. Vernus, a
"Dictionary of the Pharaohs" (1988).
25
