Nuclear roulette
'Conventional' thinking on nuclear weapons
is a recipe for mutual suicide
John C. Polanyi
-, m '
THE existence of nuclear weapons
has, so far, resulted in restraint in
the use of force on the part of the
nations that possess them. This may well
have prevented a war at some time during
the past four decades. Notwithstanding this,
recent history cannot be our guide in plan¬
ning for the future.
An international group of military, scien¬
tific and political figures who met in Toron¬
to a few years ago gave the reason: "Our
overall conclusion", they said, is "... that,
while the avoidance of nuclear war up to the
present time was a testimonial to good man¬
agement, it was a still greater testimonial to
good luck".
If it is true that we have been engaged in a
game of nuclear roulette, then we carry a
heavy burden of guilt. If, having come to
this realization, we persist in the same pol¬
icies, we lay ourselves open to the charge of
criminal folly.
All too often we have been closing our
eyes to the fact that we have entered a new
age, as differentprobably more differ¬
ent the preceding one than the Iron
Age was from the Stone Age.
In the 1950s it was acknowledged that the
delivery of a hundred nuclear weapons
against any nation would cause such suf¬
fering and such a rending of the social fabric
as to constitute an intolerable tragedy the
death of a civilization.
There followed from this the truism of
our times, namely that the only sane and
moral purpose for nuclear weapons was to
ensure that they should not be used: that is,
their purpose is for deterrence. The num¬
bers of deliverable weapons should, there¬
fore, be held to a few hundred.
This was the prevailing view at the first of
the Pugwash International Conferences on
Science and World Affairs that I attended,
twenty-seven years ago in Moscow.
The subsequent policies of the nuclear
powers spoke louder than our words at that
time, and differently. The numbers of nucle-
. . y-'?
Zr «
V
..'©
* 2
. o
-c
- - c
Carvedface recently discovered by the French
explorerJean Périé in a prehistoric rock shelter
in Mato Grosso State, Brazil
ar weapons were permitted to escalate into
the tens of thousands. Nations chose, it
would seem, to treat nuclear weapons con¬
ventionally, as instruments of war.
The essence of sanity is to recognize the
world for what it is. Our policies in regard
to nuclear weapons have repeatedly failed to
pass that test.
Let me give what appear to me to be three
clear examples of this failure. Between them
they cover the major areas for military
debate.
The first concerns what is referred to
rather loosely as the defence of Europe. It
should be evident, following military exer¬
cises repeated over decades, that Europe is
defended by what the American futurol-
ogist Herman Kahn once termed (in another
context) a Doomsday Machine.
Even after the extremely welcome mea¬
sures of disarmament now coming to frui¬
tion, the war-time task of a commander in a
European conflict will be to ready thou¬
sands of nuclear weapons for use without
inadvertently using them, and also without
giving the impression that they may be
about to be used, since that would invite
nuclear pre-emption by the opposing side.
This task would have to be carried out in a
conventional war in which beleaguered sub¬
ordinates were crying out for reinforce¬
ments, and in which nuclear weapons sites
were being disabled or overrun.
The task of holding nuclear forces in
check under such conditions gives every
evidence of being impossible. The task of
saving Europe from destruction once nucle¬
ar war has been engaged is almost certainly
impossible. Add these two propositions to¬
gether and it is apparent that we have opted
to defend ourselves and Europe by holding
a gun to our heads.
This is a consequence of treating nuclear
weapons conventionally.
A second, similar folly underlies the com¬
petition in intercontinental ballistic missiles.
These awesome and awful devices are com¬
monly thought of as being the embodiment
of deterrence, since they are so evidently too
terrible to use. Conventional thinking in
regard to these "weapons" is nonetheless
evident in the compulsion to match oppos-
31

\'
r
Anti-aircraft missiles at the ready during a
military exercise
The sinister mushroom cloud caused by a nuc¬
lear explosion, photographed some 80 km from
the site at an altitude of3,600 metres
An intermediate range missile with a nuclear
warhead

ing systems with missiles of comparable
range, yield and numbers.
Such thinking is still more evident in the
competition for accuracy and multiplicity of
warheads seen in current debates over pro¬
curement. These weapons are sought after
for their ability to destroy the missile silos
on the opposing side. The opponent nat¬
urally and correctly supposes that the in¬
tention would be to destroy the silo before
rather than after the missile that it housed
was launched.
Far from deterring the enemy from using
his missiles, this threat provides him with a
strong incentive to use his missiles while he
still can.
The logic that leads to the development
and deployment of such weapons, on both
sides, involves a commitment to the conven¬
tional aim of warfare, namely, to emerge
victorious. The aim is sufficiently at var¬
iance with reality that it has been thought
advisable to recast it into the less readily
identified need to "prevail".
The aspect of deterrence that is most to be
feared is the temptation to extend it beyond
the restricted aim of deterring war, to that of
deterring an opponent from actions one
deplores. This constitutes "compellance",
not deterrence. It is, in the oft-quoted
phrase of the Prussian theorist of warfare
Karl von Clausewitz, "Diplomacy pursued
by other means". Deterrence is something
different. Neither Clausewitz nor anyone
else has suggested that mutual suicide serves
the purposes of diplomacy; it merely obvi¬
ates the need.
Finally, in this gallery of horrors, each a
product of conventional thinking in a trans¬
formed world, I include the recourse to
magic as a means of repealing the nuclear
age. I do not of course really mean magic,
but illusions achieved by the use of mirrors.
The mirrors in the current Strategic De¬
fence Initiative scenario will be lofted into
space within a minute of the warning being
received that the opposing side is launching
a missile attack. The function of the mirrors
will be to direct laser beams at the enemy
weapons as they rise from their silos thou¬
sands of kilometres away.
Why have the majority of the U.S. scien¬
tific community, possessed of relevant ex¬
pertise, expressed scepticism as to the tech¬
nical feasibility of the Strategic Defence
Initiative? The two most prominent reasons
are as follows. First, in order to provide
convincing protection against nuclear weap¬
ons, given their enormous destructive pow¬
ers, one needs a highly effective defence.
This is absurdly difficult to achieve. Second¬
ly, it should be evident that the same tech¬
nologies energy weapons, lasers,
X-rays, particle beams, and so forth that
lure us in the direction of developing so¬
phisticated defences, will be even more ef¬
fective in the simpler task of undermining
those defences.
Experts in the experimental sciences will
confirm that it is easier to mess up a highly
sophisticated experiment than it is to make
it work.
In what sense do antimissile defences rep¬
resent an outgrowth of conventional think¬
ing? By rendering intercontinental missiles
"obsolete", they seek to turn the clock back
to an era now firmly lodged in pre-history;
a time when we could settle our differences
by a vast blood-letting, secure in the knowl¬
edge that as a society or species we would
stop short of bleeding to death.
That can never be true again, since we
know now how to shatter civilizations, and
the knowledge will forever be with us. It is
understandable therefore that, as the French
sociologist Raymond Aron put it, the world
is increasingly one of "virile weapons and
impotent men". To vary the metaphor,
there is no winning move in the internation¬
al chess game as presently constituted. We
must have the courage to change the rules.
There is nothing new in that statement.
World leaders frequently make it. Their
problem is to act upon it. That requires not
only that they believe it, but, no less impor¬
tant, that they believe that others believe it.
That is why actions such as the making of
the 1972 AntiBallistic Missile (ABM) Trea¬
ty, that stand outside the previous pattern of
history, are of such critical importance. In
1972, with the signing of the ABM Treaty,
sworn enemies solemnly renounced their
defences. Not only did they admit that in
the nuclear age the emperor had no clothes,
they legislated for this nakedness and made
it the object of round-the-clock inspection.
The agreement on medium- and short-
range nuclear missiles in Europe is of almost
comparable importance, since it presents the
world with the spectacle of two great pow¬
ers with substantial unresolved differences
destroying a part of their weaponry on the
grounds that they are safer without it.
This is a lesson that will not be lost upon
the world. It is the right lesson, though an
incomplete one. At the outset of these re¬
marks I spoke of the overwhelming danger
that nuclear weapons would be used if a
nuclear power felt that its vital interests or
continued existence were threatened.
Even if one makes the implausible as¬
sumption that disarmament might proceed
to the point at which nuclear weapons cease
to have military significance, that overall
picture does not change. The route to esca¬
lation, in our world of abundant fissile ma¬
terial, will remain wide open. A hint that
one side might "go nuclear" would result in
a race to be the first to do so.
Copernicus waited until he was close to
death before declaring his belief that the
Earth is not, after all, at the centre of the
planetary system. He delayed out of fear.
Not fear of the wrath of the Church, but of
the more terrible prospect of being laughed
at by his colleagues. A similar fear prevents
many from saying what is evident today,
namely that the political constellation no
longer orbits around the hallowed concep¬
tion of nationhood.
Nations came into being when those who
were linked geographically banded together
for protection, spiritual sustenance and.mu¬
tual comfort. Today a nation can only offer
to protect its citizens by means that invite a
barbaric level of violence, likely to destroy
them physically or morally.
We cannot base international order on
such lethal behaviour. Means short of war
must be found to resolve national differ¬
ences. Before too long this must be done
within an organizational framework, one
that makes visible the need, facilitates the
process, and institutionalizes precedents for
compromise.
The attempt to make international beha¬
viour subject to agreed guidelines will de¬
pend ultimately on the demonstrated wil¬
lingness of nations to accept the rule of law
at home. A nation that claims absolute pow¬
er within its borders cannot be trusted to
relinquish it abroad. Similarly a nation that
is careless of the plight of those threatened
by starvation, or unconcerned about the
rape of the environment, is unlikely to carry
conviction in its renunciation of mass de¬
struction as an instrument of policy.
If the agenda before us is so daunting, it is
easy to despair. The risks in attempting to
achieve a new international order are indeed
formidable, being exceeded only by the
risks in not doing so. Rather than lamenting
human folly, we should count ourselves
fortunate that the force of reason is compell¬
ing us along the path towards a more civi¬
lized world.
JOHN CHARLES POLANYI, professor of che¬
mistry and physics at the University of Toronto
(Canada), shared the Nobel Prize for Chemistry
in 1986. He is a member of the scientific advisory
board of the Max Planck Institute for Quantum
Optics, Garching (Fed. Rep. of Germany), of the
United States National Academy of Sciences, and
of the Pontifical Academy of Rome. In addition to
his many scientific papers and anieles on science
policy and on the control of armaments, he has
co-edited a book, The Dangers of Nuclear War
(1979).
33
