Cast iron The Chinese practised the technique of using blast furnaces for making cast
iron from at least the fourth century BC. There were a number of reasons
for this. China had good refractory clays for the construction of the walls
of blast furnaces. The Chinese also knew how to reduce the temperature at
which the iron would melt. They threw in something which they called
"black earth", which contained much iron phosphate. If up to 6 per cent of
phosphorus is added in this way to an iron mixture, it reduces the melting
point from the normal 1130°C to 950°C. This technique was used in the
early centuries, ceasing before the sixth century AD, when proper blast
furnaces came into use which needed no such assistance.
Coal, which gave a high temperature, was used as a fuel from the fourth
century AD, and probably earlier. One method was to put the iron ore in
batteries of elongated, tube-like crucibles, and pack these round with a
mass of coal which was then burnt. This had the extra advantage of
excluding sulphur from the process.
The widespread availability of cast iron in ancient China had many side
effects. It led to the innovation of the cast iron ploughshare in agriculture,
along with iron hoes and other tools. Iron knives, axes, chisels, saws and
awls all became available. Food could be cooked in cast iron pots, and even
toys were made of cast iron. Cast iron statuettes of various animals have
been found in Han Dynasty tombs dating between the second centuries
BC and AD. Cast iron moulds for implements dating from the fourth
century BC have also been discovered. Hoes and axes would have been cast
in these, in either bronze or iron.
The expertise in cast iron enabled pots and pans to be made with very
thin walls, impossible by other iron technology. One extremely important
result was that salt could be mass-produced from evaporated brine, which
can only be done in such thin pans. This in turn led the Chinese to exploit
natural gas by deep drilling. This was in order to tap the energy from the
burning gas to evaporate the vast quantities of brine required for the giant
salt industry (which the Han Dynasty nationalized along with the iron
industry in 119 BC). The salt and gas industries could not have existed
without the cast iron industry.
In the third century BC, the Chinese discovered how to make a
malleable cast iron by annealing (that is, by holding it at a high temperature
for a week or so). It was then not so brittle, and would therefore not shatter
Towering achievement of early Chinese
metallurgy. The 13-m-high Yu Quan
pagoda at Dangyang (Hubei) is entirely
built of cast iron. Erected in 1061, it is the
oldest surviving cast iron pagoda.

could survive striking large stones with considerable force. Cast iron had
something of the elasticity of wrought iron, but with the much greater
strength and solidity that came from being cast. It was almost as good as
steel.
Some of the ancient Chinese feats of casting iron are so impressive as to
be almost unbelievable, even when the results are before our eyes. For
instance, there is the cast iron pagoda shown on opposite page.
Perhaps the grandest cast iron structure of all was not actually a building.
The Empress Wu Zetian had an octagonal cast iron column built, called the
"Celestial Axis Commemorating the Virtue of the Great Zhou Dynasty
with Its Myriad Regions". It was built in 695 AD upon a base of cast iron
51 metres in circumference and 6 metres high. The column itself was
3.6 metres in diameter and rose 32 metres in the air; on top was a "cloud
canopy" 3 metres high and 9 metres in circumference. On top of this in
turn stood four bronze dragons each 3.6 metres high supporting a gilded
pearl. We have a record of the amount of metal used in this construction
about 1 ,325 tons. The largest single cast iron object ever made (the pagodas
were obviously not a single piece) was erected on the orders of the Emperor
Shizong of the Later Zhou Dynasty in commemoration of his campaign
against the Tartars in 954 AD. This extraordinary object, 6 metres tall, still
stands and is known as the Great Lion of Zangzhou (Hebei). It is not solid,



but its walls vary from 4 to 20 centimetres, in thickness.
