THE CULTURAL HERITAGE
Impressions ofVenice
Dominique Roger: The Venetian lagoon
DOMINIQUE
ROGER
of France, has been chief of the Photo Unit
in Unesco's Division for Audio-Visual In¬
formation since 1976. As the Organization's
official reporter-photographer she has
travelled the world, and the results of her
work can be seen in Unesco publications and
international exhibitions. Her personal view
of Venice was the theme of a show entitled
"Venetian Wrinkles" (Paris, 1976; Venice,
1978). Recent exhibitions include "France:
A Loving Look" (Paris, 1985; San Francisco,
1988), and "Colette at the Palais Royal"
(Paris, 1987). She is the author of two books,
published by Unesco, Femmes/Women/Mu¬
jeres (1975, to commemorate International
Women's Year) and Precious Waters (1981).
On 4 November 1966, a tidal storm surge of
exceptional height and duration completely
flooded the city of Venice. The famous St.
Mark's Square was covered by over a metre
of water, a catastrophe that drew world
attention to the growing dangers threatening
the site. The Italian authorities immediately
set up a Committee for the Safeguard of
Venice, and Unesco launched an interna¬
tional campaign to save the city and to study
the choices which have to be made if the
protection of Venice and its lagoon is to be
assured.
The historic city is built for the most part
on piles driven into unstable silt in the centre
of a crescent-shaped lagoon approximately
50 kilometres long by 10 kilometres wide,
separated from the Adriatic Sea by a barrier
of narrow islands and peninsulas. Venice has
always been subject to flooding from the sea
and to the deterioration of its foundations.
However, high tides are increasingly fre¬
quent and the islands are sinking into the
lagoon at a much faster rate than previously.
During the present century, some 2,500
hectares of the lagoon have been reclaimed
for agriculture, a road and an airport have
been built, and new fisheries and industrial
zones have been developed.
This transformation has brought a series
of additional environmental problems, in¬
cluding air pollution, which has already de
faced many monuments and art treasures
from the Venetian past; chemical and biolo¬
gical pollution of the waters, whether from
industrial, agricultural or domestic origin;
and erosion and sedimentation of the lagoon.
The magnificent buildings can be safe¬
guarded only by the overall protection of the
city and the rational management of the
lagoon ecosystem, within a context of con¬
tinuing intellectual, commercial, industrial
and tourist activities. With this in view,
Venice and its lagoon have been included on
Unesco's World Heritage List of cultural
and natural properties of universal value. D
32

THE CULTURAL HERITAGE
Dominique Roger: Basin of St. Mark, Venice
33
