The world heritage
concept
BY MICHEL PARENT
32
THE establishment of the World
Heritage List is not an academic ex¬
ercise. It is an international under¬
taking of a juridical, technical and practical
nature designed to mobilize active solidarity
for the safeguard of the cultural and natural
heritage.
This heritage is under constant threat
from the effects of underdevelopment or
ill-advised development. International co¬
operation is required to ensure the survival
of vestiges of vanished cultures and of the
riches of living cultures, to save living spe¬
cies from extinction, to make possible the
sustained renewal of natural resources and
to maintain the ecological balance. The im¬
plementation of the 1972 Convention is in
the forefront of this effort.
Making an inventory of properties of uni¬
versal value is an exciting intellectual en¬
terprise, but one which calls for a more
restrictive definition of the notion of heri¬
tage, which is tending to . become all-in¬
clusive under the impact of scientific devel¬
opment and the expansion of the concepts
of history and culture. It is true that every¬
thing belongs to history and that the whole
of nature and all human artefacts leave traces
worthy of interpretation. But the world is
changing rapidly and if the truly essential
traces of the heritage are not given special
universal recognition, then even they may
be swept away by the forces of change. If
this happens, the notion of permanent value
and its expression in specific sites and arte¬
facts may be lost.
The properties chosen for inclusion on
the World Heritage List are not the only
ones that deserve to be safeguarded, how¬
ever. On the contrary, properties privileged
by inclusion are intended to serve as exam¬
ples and to encourage the formulation of
national or local policies for safeguarding
the environment as a whole. The objectives
of the Convention are thus both ambitious
and credible. It affords to every State Party
prestige, specific assistance and safeguards
in the event of catastrophes against which
no country can be forewarned, not even the
most developed and the best equipped.
All countries possess an appreciable cul¬
tural and natural heritage. Many of the 102
States Parties to the Convention have sub¬
mitted dossiers to the World Heritage Com¬
mittee and obtained the inscription on the
List of numerous properties. But, it might
be asked, why have they not all done so? It
is not very logical for a State to ratify the
Convention (unless it attaches only a sym¬
bolic value to ratification), and then to take
no further action. And why are there only
102 States Parties to the Convention? Why
has the 1972 Convention not won unani¬
mous, universal support? Joint efforts by
the States Parties, Unesco, and the Interna¬
tional Council on Monuments and Sites
(ICOMOS) to define fields of international
co-operation (by areas of common culture,
beliefs and architectural techniques, or by
major communication and trade routes) are
thwarted by the blank spaces which appear
on the maps, like the gaps which indicated
terra incognita in early atlases.
Admittedly there are also great disparities
between States deriving from their size,
population density, the age of their culture,
the vicissitudes of their history or the care
they have hitherto taken to conserve their
cultural heritage. Likewise, the fact that
cultural properties far outnumber natural
properties on the List is not in itself signif¬
icant. A cultural property may be a small or
isolated building or even an archaeological
vestige in the midst of a wilderness; a nat¬
ural property may be an immense national
park bigger than some States.
Tassili n'Ajjer (Algeria)
This vast plateau (tassili in
the Berber language) covers
72,000 km2 of the central
Sahara in south-eastern Al¬
geria. It is a kind of natural
fortress, penetrated only by
a few deep gorges. In the
West, the plateau (on aver¬
age 1,500 m high) ends in a sheer, 500-m
cliff, almost 700 km long. A network of
canyons cuts through the interior, some of
them with pools, springs or even permanent
streams fringed with vegetation. Sedentary
groups of Tuareg peoples have long been
settled in these oases, and nomadic Tuareg
roam elsewhere on the plateau, although
they too are tending to settle down as a
result of drought and declining plant re¬
sources, thus further threatening the del¬
icate ecological balance. Tassili n'Ajjer is
famous for the thousands of rock paintings
and engravings which make it the world's
biggest open-air prehistoric museum. This
Neolithic (6000-2000 BC) rock art and
many other archaeological remains indicate
that the region was occupied during a less
arid period, when flora and fauna were
much more abundant. The site was in¬
scribed on the World Heritage List in 1982
in recognition of its cultural riches as well as
its natural value. A management plan is
being worked out with Unesco assistance
under the terms of the Convention. Right,
engraving of oxen at Tegarghart, near Dja-
net. Below right, polygonaceous shrub at
Essendilène.
As the field of application of the Conven¬
tion is gradually defined, it is becoming
clear that the means needed to accomplish
its aims are far beyond the resources of the
World Heritage Committee, which can only
finance urgent work, expert studies, under¬
funded projects carried out over a long
period, and the preventive work necessary
to avoid the deterioration of properties and
the costs that ensue, and to guarantee their
authenticity.
The publication of information about the
World Heritage in the media should help to
encourage major safeguarding operations,
but the rigour with which the List is estab¬
lished and the need to make it representative
and fully credible will determine the success
of media coverage. Finally, solidarity in aid
of World Heritage properties calls for per¬
manent monitoring of their condition, in
order to guarantee that the Convention is
respected and that financial aid is put to
good use. There should be no question of

inscribing unworthy properties on the List.
Fortunately this is not the case. But the
extension and success of the World Heritage
concept call for vigilance. The exercise of
supra-national control should not be seen as
an infringement of the sovereignty of States,
since they have made their commitment
freely after weighing up the advantages and
constraints.
Any community can find in the Conven¬
tion support for the safeguard of its cultural
identity which goes beyond material aid and
may help to prevent the clandestine de¬
struction of its heritage or to combat in¬
terests which have scant respect for it.
MICHEL PARENT, ofFrance, was President of
the International Council on Monuments and
Sites from 1981 to 1987. As a member of the
committee which drafted the World Heritage
Convention and as rapporteur and later chairman
of the World Heritage Committee, he made a
leading contribution to the birth and development
of the world heritage concept. 33
