Colossal feats of engineering
BY RAINER STADELMANN
The imposing Hypostyle Hall in the Great
Temple ofAmun, Karnak, begun by Sethos I
and completed by his son Ramesses II
(c. 1290-1224 BC). The monumental columns,
their papyriform capitals supporting colossal
architraves ata height of24 m, show a perfect
mastery of construction techniques.
12
ANYONE who has ever gazed at the
pyramids, if only once in a lifetime,
is bound to have wondered how
these extraordinary and massive structures
were built, how the huge stones were trans¬
ported, what technical and mathematical
knowledge the ancient Egyptians possessed
and what tools or machinery they used.
The same questions spring to mind when
contemplating the obelisks of Luxor, the
Hypostyle Hall at Karnak, and especially the
colossi of Memnon, monoliths hewn out of
the quarries north-east of Cairo and trans¬
ported to the city of Thebes 700 kilometres
away.
For the ancient Egyptians, technical and
scientific knowledge was not a specialized
discipline, but formed part of the training
and the career of a competent scribe, a man
employed in the service of his province or his
King. The scribe's education began when he
learned the difficult arts of reading and
writing, achieved with the help of literary
texts but undoubtedly also by means of
mathematical and technical works written
on papyrus, fewer examples of which have
come down to us than works of literature.
A number of common trades were prob¬
ably organized in family guilds from very
early times. There is evidence of specialized
crafts in Egypt in Predynastic times in the
form of finely crafted pottery and stone
tools, stoneware vessels, and metalwork.
The goldmines of the Eastern Desert and the
copper deposits of Sinai may have been ex¬
ploited in prehistoric times, and precious
stones prospected in the desert valleys of the
south-east. In historical times, deposits of
rare hard stone were quarried, often at a
considerable distance from the Nile Valley.
During the Old Kingdom (third millen¬
nium BC), the technique of stoneworking
was perfected in sculpture, both in low relief
and in the round, and culminated in the
earliest colossal statues such as the Great
Sphinx of Giza or the royal effigies of the
Fifth Dynasty (c. 2465-2323 BC).
The soil of Egypt, deposited along the
banks of the Nile by the annual inundation
so that fields continually had to be marked
out afresh, encouraged the development of
surveying and hence of mathematical calcu¬
lations. The rise of the Nile waters and the
annual height of the flood were calculated
and recorded by means of Nilometers in
the south, on Elephantine island, and in the
north, near Memphis for the height of the

waters determined the levying of taxes on the
income from different categories of cultiv¬
able land, particularly plantations on raised
plots. Observation of the relatively regular
inundation and its connection with astrono¬
mical phenomena led to the invention of an
annual calendar geared to the natural rhythm
of the seasons, which was a great improve¬
ment on the old lunar calendar. Knowledge
obtained from agrarian organization and
observation of the heavens and the stars laid
the theoretical foundations of the future
monumental constructions of the Old
Kingdom.
The river was also the country's main
artery. People travelled up or down the Nile
in boats or barges, and in the Delta the
branches of the river were used as channels
of communication. These waterways were
interconnected by canals, and a canal net¬
work also linked the settlements bordering
the Nile Valley. Even deliveries of goods
from one temple to another were carried out
by water. Lighter loads, such as sacks of
grain, were carried on donkeys over the
fields, and from the fields to canal or river.
Wheels, which came into current use only
under the New Kingdom (c. 1550-1070 BC),
were confined to war or hunting chariots.
Although these vehicles were used for excur¬
sions by the upper classes, they were never
strictly speaking a mode of transport. In the
Old Kingdom, high dignitaries used litters
for short overland journeys, but for longer
journeys boats were always the answer.
A royal boat approximately 44 metres
long has been excavated to the south of the
Great Pyramid of Khufu (Cheops) at Giza.
Equipped with five pairs of oars and another
huge pair of oars in lieu of a rudder, the boat
bore signs of wear and tear indicating that it
had actually sailed. It was probably used
only to link the royal residence with the
neighbouring towns of the Delta, for the
craft which plied along the Nile were usually
equipped with collapsible masts. When they
travelled south, the north wind carried them
along, but on journeys north the mast was
lowered and the oars were used. There is
evidence of navigation on the open sea to the
cities of the Phoenician coast from the First
Dynasty onwards (c. 3000 BC). Representa¬
tions of single-masted vessels bearing mer¬
chandise from Syria are common in the Fifth
Dynasty. Heavy loads were transported on
special barges.
The transport by barge of palmiform col
umns lashed on to sledges is depicted on the
southern wall of the entrance to the funerary
temple of Unas (c. 2356-2323 BC), the last
king of the Fifth Dynasty. The obelisks of
Queen Hatshcpsut (c. 1503-1482 BC) arc
shown being carried by barge in the southern
portico of the lower terrace of her temple at
Deir el-Bahri. The two obelisks lie side by
side, the pointed end of one towards the
prow of the barge and that of the other
towards the stern, held in place by ropes. A
fleet of twenty-seven boats tows the barge,
which is accompanied by a pilot vessel.
For the transport of the northern colossus
of Memnon, weighing some 800 tons, an
architect of genius, Amenhotpc son of
Hapu, overseer of the Temple of Luxor and
of the funerary temple of Amcnophis III
near Thebes, built a special boat in approx¬
imately 1350 BC which he named the "Boat
of Eight", a name which seems to signify that
it was eight times larger than a normal barge.
However, the biggest technical problem
must have arisen when the megalith was
being loaded on to the barge, and later when
it was unloaded at Thebes. We know that
One of the boats which formed part of the
funerary equipment of the Pharaoh Khufu
(Cheops, c. 2551-2528 BC) and may have been
intended to enable him to voyage in the next
world. The cedar craft, over 40 m long, has been
reassembled from dismantled sections
unearthed in 1954 close to the Great Pyramid.
13

ÄCsit*Ä*WOk...
The Step Pyramid at Saqqara, last resting place
of King Djoser (c. 2630-261 1 BC). This six-
stepped white limestone monument, 60 m in
»height, is the earliest stone structure of its size
known to the world.
14
when obelisks were transported they were
hauled down ramps as far as a canal dug
specially to connect the quarry to the Nile. A
similar process was probably used for the
transport of the colossal statue of Memnon.
Laden with ballast of stone or brick, the
barge would wait, low in the water of the
canal. The obelisk or colossus would be
heaved on board and lashed horizontally on
a sledge, then the ballast would be unloaded,
whereupon the barge would rise to the sur¬
face and could be towed along.
Over short distances it was possible to
haul a load of some 60 tons along a smoothed
out track, as is shown by the famous repre¬
sentation of the transport by sledge of a
colossal statue of the nomarch1 Djehuti-
hotpe in his tomb at Deir el-Bersha. The
alabaster colossus, 13 cubits high according
to the inscriptions, must have weighed as
much as this. Wedged in place on an enor¬
mous wooden sledge and held down with
ropes, it is being dragged along by 172 men,
four abreast. Holding a pitcher, a workman
perched on the feet of the colossus is pouring
water in front of the sledge to make it slide
more easily along the clay-coated track.
Obelisks, guided by strong ropes, were
probably slid down a ramp built of unfired
bricks and sand towards a quadrangular
shaft filled with sand. While the obelisk,
leaning at an angle, was still held by the
ropes, workmen emptied the sand out of the
shaft, or the sand was allowed to run out
through slots in the walls of the shaft. When,
with much careful manoeuvring, the obelisk
was set upright on its base, there was a risk of
damaging its edges. Above all, its enormous
mass might wobble on its plinth and settle
off-centre, so that the edges of its base were
not parallel to the edges of the plinth. An
accident of this kind must have happened to
the obelisk of Tuthmosis III at Karnak,
although the error of alignment with the
plinth was minute and is scarcely visible.
However, the most extraordinary feats
were those of monumental construction. As
early as the Second Dynasty (c. 2770-2649
BC), Egyptian architects were familiar with
vaulting, and used it in the superstructure of
tombs and doubtless also in dwellings which
have not survived. During the same dynasty,
facing stone was increasingly used in brick
funerary monuments, and dressed stone
blocks were introduced. The crowning in¬
novation, however, took place under King
Djoser, towards the beginning of the Third
Dynasty (c. 2649 BC) in Saqqara, part of the
necropolis of the ancient city of Memphis,
with the first stone monumental construc¬
tion, the Step Pyramid, which took some
thirty years to build. The various stages in its
construction show how Egyptian architects,
in a single generation, gained mastery over
the new building material.
During the first construction phase of the
original step mastaba2, stone seems to have
been used exactly as if it were brick. Blocks
of stone, designed like large bricks, were
arranged in horizontal layers and cemented
with crude clay mortar. A different tech¬
nique emerged in the second phase, marking
the change from step mastaba to step pyra¬
mid. The mass of the dressed stone blocks
was far greater. Each one weighed half a ton.
They were arranged with the lie of the stone
sloping inwards towards the heart of the
edifice at an angle of 18", so that their outer
surface already had the angle of incline of
72" to be found in its final phase in the
enlarged pyramid.
The use of large blocks and the sloping
arrangement of the rows were brilliant in¬
novations which led to a considerable saving
in time and the labour of stonecutting, since
it was no longer necessary to chamfer the
outer surface of the facing blocks, and the
desired angle of incline was more easily
obtained. This technique would not be aban¬
doned until the final form of the pyramid
was attained during the following dynasty.
A steeper inclination of 45" to 54" lent itself
to the use of horizontal layers and again
made it necessary to chamfer the outer sur¬
face of the facing blocks.
The building of a pyramid confronted the
State with great technical and administrative
problems. The organization of large num-
1. Nomarch: governor of a nome, or province.
2. Mastaba: a rectangular tomb with vertical or sloping
sides and a flat roof. Editor

"The hypothesis that a single ramp,
perpendicular to one of the faces of the pyramid,
could have been used to transport the building
blocks to the top of the pyramid and position
them has now been superseded. ... The use of a
spiralling ramp is difficult to imagine from a
technical point of view. ... It is more likely that a
number of small ramps (Fig. 1) were built
around the pyramid right at the start, so that
blocks could be hauled up them to a height of 25
or 30 m. ... Then a larger lateral ramp (Fig. 2),
resting against one of the faces, could have
been used ..."
The type of level which might have been used to
achieve the horizontal alignment of the Great
Pyramid.
A method of finding the north by bisecting the
angle between the rising and setting positions of
a north star.
m
¿BS
bers of workers, prospection for quarries
and the extraction of stone, the regular trans¬
port of blocks of stone to the stonemasons'
yards and their storage, the training of
stonecutters, building workers, transport
specialists, architects and foremen all these
achievements testify to the impressive ad¬
ministrative system of ancient Egypt.
From the construction of the Step
Pyramid of King Djoser to that of the Great
Pyramid at Giza (c. 2550 BC), which was
numbered among the seven wonders of the
world, considerable advances were made in
technical and geometrical expertise. Ancient
Egyptian funerary monuments are always
oriented with extraordinary precision. The
orientation of the Step Pyramid shows an
average deviation of 3", but the deviation of
the Great Pyramid is no more than 3'6". A
perfect orientation was obtained on pre-
levelled ground by observing the polar stars
from a fixed point at the northern corner of
the future pyramid. The instruments used
were the merkhet, a horizontal bar equipped
with a plumbline, and the bay, a wooden rod
with a sighting notch in its upper end. On the
arc of a circle, the positions of the rising and
setting of a north star were marked. To find
true north the Egyptians halved the angle
formed by the position of a polar star when it
rose, the position of the observer, and the
position of the same star when it set. Once
true north had been found, a string connect¬
ing various fixed points on the north-south
Illustrations © Rainer Stadclmann
Two drawings showing a technique which may
have been used for the erection of obelisks in
ancient Egypt. Supported by strong ropes, the
obelisk was slid down a ramp of unfired bricks
and sand towards a quadrangular shaft filled
with sand. The sand was then gradually emptied
out of the shaft and the obelisk manoeuvred
upright until it stood on its plinth.
Unfinished obelisk in a granite quarry near ^
Aswan. Its estimated length and weight are 42 m
and 1,200 tons respectively.
15

axis made it possible to determine one side of
the pyramid. With the aid of measuring rods,
the desired length was marked out. A right
angle was obtained by means of a set of
protractors. If Pythagoras' theorem on the
relationship between the sides of a triangle
had not yet been formulated, it was certainly
applied in practice.
The precision of the right angles of the
Great Pyramid, with an average deviation of
only 2' 48", is still, today, worthy of admir¬
ation, as is the horizontal alignment of its
four corners, with a fractional divergence
of 2.1 centimetres. The alignment must have
been achieved by means of a level in the form
of a large wooden setsquare equipped with a
plumbline which hung between its two equal
arms joined at a right angle (see drawings
p. 15). Connecting these two arms was a
horizontal crossbar with a median notch
into which the string of the weight fitted
when the level was held perfectly horizontal.
All other theories, such as that of filling an
artificial lake around the pyramid, must be
rejected.
There are no ancient descriptions of build¬
ing methods as such. The reports of
<4 Bronze statuette of Imhotep, chief minister and
architect to King Djoser. Imhotep designed the
king's tomb as a monumental stairway towards
the sky. It was built entirely of stone to last until
eternity (see photo page 14). Sage and thinker as
well as architect, Imhotep is thought to have
written the earliest collections of the maxims or
didactic "wisdom texts" which constitute one of
the richest genres of ancient Egyptian writing.
In the Late Dynastic Period (c. 713-332 BC),
some 2,000 years after his death, he was deified
as the patron of scribes and as a healer. The
Greeks identified him with their god of
medicine, Asclepius.
A scribe and his assistants measure a field of
wheat to determine the taxes to be levied.
Painting from theTheban tomb of Menna, a
surveyor during the New Kingdom
(18th Dynasty).
-..,.,,.
t a »»ra. «MtTïfTïiftttt - .«. .tiní.»....%r,a.r,,'
16
Herodotus on this subject are based on in¬
formation supplied by his contemporaries
who, 2,000 years after the building of the
pyramids, probably knew no more than we
do. Near the pyramids of Maidum and
Dahshur, the remains of the ramps used to
transport the stone building materials can
still be seen today. The hypothesis that a
single ramp, perpendicular to one of the
faces of the pyramid, could have been used to
transport the building blocks to the top of
the pyramid and position them has now been
superseded. For the Great Pyramid, such a
ramp would have been 3.3 kilometres long
and its mass would have been 3.5 times grea¬
ter than that of the pyramid itself. The use of
a spiralling ramp is difficult to imagine from
a technical point of view, since it would have
concealed the four faces of the pyramid and
its four corners, making it impossible to
control the angles and the slope of the faces.
It is more likely that a number of small
ramps were built around the pyramid right at
the start, so that blocks could be hauled up
them to a height of 25 or 30 metres. By this
stage, 50 per cent of the mass was already in
place. Then a larger lateral ramp, resting
against one of the faces, could have been used
to transport stones up to a point near the top
"of the pyramid. Such a ramp could dispense
with half the mass of a free-standing ramp
and would also be more stable. In the case of
the Great Pyramid, for example, which is
146.6 metres high, 96 per cent of the mass
would be in place at a height of 100 metres.
The last 20 or 30 metres probably called for
a stepped construction. The pyramidion, or
capstone, could only have been put in posi¬
tion by means of scaffolding, which indi¬
cates that the Egyptians were familiar with
pulleys, even if no depiction of this system
has survived. The use of simpler leverage
devices and sledges has been recorded. Illus¬
trations of irrigation work depict the shaduf,
a hand-operated weight-arm for raising
water. This system may well have been used
to lift building materials.
It is remarkable that the greatest scientific,
technical and artistic breakthroughs, not
only for the history of Egyptian civilization
but for the history of humanity as a whole,
from the discovery of writing to advances in
medicine, evidently took place in the first
half of the third millennium BC. The follow¬
ing centuries only built on and perfected this
knowledge. No innovations were made to
broaden the scientific and technical horizons
until the advent of the Greek philosophers in
the seventh and sixth centuries BC.
RAINER STADELMANN, of the Federal Re¬
public of Germany, is director of the German
Institute of Archaeology in Cairo and of the ex¬
cavations being carried out by the Institute at the
Temple of Sethos I, Qurna (Thebes), and at the
Pyramid ofSnofru, Dhashur. His published works
include Syrisch-Palästinensische Gottheiten in
Ägypten ("Syrian-Palestinian Divinities in
Egypt") and Die Ägyptischen Pyramiden (1986;
"The Pyramids of Egypt"), as well as a number of
articles in specialized journals.
