Time regained
A historical perspective
on cultural sites and monuments
BY GEORGE MICHELL
16
WHILE the cultural sites of the
World Heritage List may be doc¬
umented, analysed, catalogued
and subjected to the hopefully beneficial
processes of restoration, they must never be
divorced from the destiny of man. These
sites are permanent records of human en¬
deavour, the material artefacts of world his¬
tory. Here are displayed the deeds of man¬
kind, from the noble and the spiritual to the
heroic and the tragic. The cultural sites are
visible demonstrations of the survival of the
past into the present era. The World Heri¬
tage Convention is a valid attempt to recog¬
nize the unique qualities of this heritage and
safeguard its survival into the future.
Many of the great monuments and cities
of the past, whether ruined or still in use
today, are inextricably bound up with the
careers of powerful individuals. Only empe¬
rors and princes, military commanders and
generals, and popes and bishops could com¬
mand the considerable economic and artistic
resources that were essential for the erection
of large-scale monuments, let alone the lay¬
ing out of the public spaces and ensembles
of buildings required for a city centre.
Though many of the cultural sites on the
World Heritage List have obviously been
identified for the aesthetic quality of their
architectural or urban character, their his¬
torical dimensions must never be forgotten.
The royal individuals who built splendid
residences for themselves were sometimes
visionaries. Their architectural legacy is of¬
ten imposing and inspiring; sometimes it is
intended to intimidate. Architecture here is
truly in the service of mundane purposes.
This is true of many of the palaces identified
in the World Heritage List, from those of
the Ming emperors in China, and the
Mughals at Fatehpur Sikri in India, to the
châteaux of the French kings at Chambord,
Fontainebleau and Versailles, or the great
houses of the English lords as at Blenheim.
No less concerned with the expression of
power are the ceremonial centres at Perse-
polis in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Teoti¬
huacán in Mexico and Hampi in India, or
the Great Wall of China and the fortifica¬
tions of King Edward I at Gwynedd in
Wales.
Governing nations in almost all periods of
world history were concerned to develop an
architecture based on power. Their military,
administrative, judicial and ceremonial con¬
structions are reminders of past ambitions,
sometimes in eras of enlightenment, at other
times in eras of oppression, but almost al¬
ways in periods of intended glory. The
ensembles of buildings that form the cores
of such historic cities as Istanbul in Turkey,
Aleppo in the Syrian Arab Republic and Fez
in Morocco, for example, are testaments to
continuous state patronage of urban archi¬
tecture over many centuries. The same is
true for the European cities of Toledo, Flo¬
rence, Budapest or Cracow, in addition to
CONTINUEDON PAGE 24

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1 6
Venice with its splendid lagoons which have
miraculously isolated the city from the
threats of motorized traffic.
Some rulers were of foreign origin and the
architecture that they sponsored made in¬
tentional reference to other places and peri¬
ods. The World Heritage List includes sites
of colonial splendour such as the cities of
Oaxaca in Mexico, Cuzco in Peru, Salvador
de Bahia in Brazil, and even Quebec, all of
which are distinctively European in style.
Other urban examples have until recent
years been overlooked by modern devel¬
opment; their buildings are sometimes de¬
scribed as traditional, meaning that they are
identified with an unchanging social and
cultural environment, even if this is more
imagined than historically true. Thus the old
walled cities of Shibam in Democratic Ye¬
men, Esfahan in the Islamic Republic of
Iran, or Cairo in Egypt are not merely
repositories of domestic and civic monu¬
ments of undeniable qualities, they are also
testaments to a past way of life that is fast
disappearing. Such buildings cannot be di¬
vorced from the lives of their inhabitants,
even if these lives have inevitably become
transformed in the late twentieth century.
Some monuments may be appreciated
from the point of view of their symbolic
historical value. The Statue of Liberty was
an emblem of hope for millions of migrants
to the United States. Other monuments
such as Auschwitz Concentration Camp in
Poland serve as reminders of man's capacity
^mi to destroy himself. Yet, most cultural sites
24 cannot represent the extreme range of hu
man history; they belong to a changing
environment in which a diversity of human
needs and ideologies continue to evolve.
There arc cultural sites which continue to
affirm their relationship with the past; today
they are the abandoned, dilapidated and
perhaps recently restored relics of history or
even prc-history. The traces of the cities of
Memphis in Egypt, Delphi in Greece, Hatra
in Iraq, and Chan Chan in Peru are dramatic
artefacts of vanished civilizations. The time
co-ordinates of these sites, so to speak, have
been extended into the present era only by
the modern activities of archaeological re¬
search and that increasing industry of hu¬
man movement known as tourism. Other
edifices of the past have been subjected to
historical processes which have permitted
them to survive into the present as still
living architectural or urban environments.
Such buildings or cities have been reused
over many centuries; for this reason they
have survived, even if in altered form.
With its superimposition of Roman, Byz¬
antine, Baroque and contemporary struc¬
tures, the centre of Rome provides a graphic
cross-section of the fortunes of an empire
and a capital over more than 2,000 years.
Like other cities such as Anuradhapura in
Sri Lanka, Jerusalem, or Santiago de Com-
postela in Spain, Rome was also a place of
pilgrimage. Its religious monuments housed
the worshippers of different cults which,
like the built environment of the city, con¬
tinued to evolve through time. Other urban
centres which form part of the World Heri¬
tage List will develop their historical per-
C0NTINUED0NPAGE26
The Old Town of Avila
(Spain)
lb
Known to Castilians as "the city
of saints and stone", Avila was
founded by Celtic tribes and
later became a Roman outpost
that was captured by the Visigoths. It was
converted to Christianity in the 1st century
by St. Segundo, who became its first bishop,
and was Muslim from the 8th to the 11th
centuries. In 1090, after the expulsion of the
Muslims from Castile, mighty stone ram¬
parts began to be built around the city. This
2.5-km-long wall, with its over 80 semi¬
circular forts and 9 imposing gates, still
exists (see photo). Avila has many religious
monuments, notably a Gothic cathedral
(late 12th-13th centuries) whose crenella-
tions surmounting the Romanesque choir
are another reminder that the town was a
defensive bastion. Among the other reli¬
gious buildings are the late 12th-century
Romanesque church of St. Vicente, rich in
sculptures, and the convent of St. Tomás
(late 15th century), which contains the
tombs of Tomás de Torquemada, the grand
inquisitor, and of Don Juan, the only son of
the Catholic rulers Ferdinand and Isabella.
The convent of the Incarnation was built on
the site of the house of the Spanish nun and
mystic St. Teresa of Avila (1515-1582). A
native of Avila, St. Teresa reformed the
Carmelite order and wrote some of the
world's greatest spiritual classics. The old
town of Avila, with its extra-muros
churches, was inscribed on the World Heri¬
tage List in 1985.

Angra do Heroísmo
(Portugal)
¡¡b
This port on the island of Ter-
ceira in the Azores was a link
between Europe and the "New
World" for more than 3 centu¬
ries. As early as the 15th century it was a
port-of-call for Portuguese fleets returning
to Europe from the Indies. Its site, admi¬
rably chosen by the early Atlantic naviga¬
tors, is sheltered by hills from the prevailing
winds. The port consisted of 2 natural ba¬
sins, the Beacon and the Anchorage (Angra
in Portuguese), from the latter of which the
settlement took its name. Soon after Angra
was founded, the large fortresses of Sao
Sebastiäo and Sao Filipe (today Sào Joäo
Baptista) were built, providing the port
with an impregnable defensive system. At
the same time a town was planned accord¬
ing to an original urban design in which the
checkerboard plan often followed when new
towns are built was modified to take ac¬
count of the prevailing winds. Angra do
Heroísmo is thus a unique example of the
adaptation of an urban model to climatic
conditions. A number of baroque monu¬
ments were built in Angra after it became
the seat of the Archbishop of the Azores in
1534. They include the cathedral of the San-
tissimo Salvador, the churches of the Miser¬
icordia and of the Santo Espérito, and the
convents of the Franciscans and the Jesuits.
In 1980, the town was shaken by an earth¬
quake which severely damaged many old
buildings. In 1983, its historic centre was
inscribed on the World Heritage List. Since
then, Unesco has sent several expert mis¬
sions to help the authorities draw up a plan
to safeguard the area as part of an overall
urban development programme, the major
concern being to restore earthquake-
damaged monuments and dwellings while
respecting the architectural traditions of
Terceira and preserving the town's
authenticity. Left, façade of a building;
below, general view of the town.
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 24
spective only in the future; one of them is
Brasilia, perhaps the most formally planned
of all twentieth-century capitals.
Ultimately, the cultural sites of the World
Heritage List are material links between the
world of the past and that of the future.
They are of inestimable value for mankind
because they are the physical embodiment
of the passage of time. Historical processes,
even if bound up with the careers of individ¬
ual States, are not limited by them; these
processes should be understood as a human
legacy rather than a national one. The pre¬
sent, though by definition only a fleeting
moment, is the only one over which man
can exercise any control. For this reason, it
is imperative that cultural sites of the World
Heritage List be recognized and valued as a
material record of man's historical identity.
GEORGE MICHELL, ofAustralia, is an archae¬
ologist who has specialized in Hindu temple archi¬
tecture. He has written and edited numerous
publications including (as editor) The Islamic
Heritage of Bengal (Unesco, ¡984), Architecture
of the Islamic World and The Penguin Guide to
the Monuments of India. He is currently co-
director of an extensive documentation project at
Vijayanagar in southern India.
