BY GABALLA ALY GABALLAEgypt 


and
the Mediterranean world
H
30
' ISTORIC Egypt emerged as a unified
country, with its own system of
writing, towards the end of the
fourth millennium BC. It rapidly became
the seat of a brilliant civilization in which
flourished philosophy and literature,
architecture and art, science and medicine,
administration and social organization.
From ancient times, thanks to the country's
situation on the Mediterranean coast, the
Egyptians made increasingly numerous con¬
tacts with Europe. The contribution made
by Egypt to Western culture enriched civi¬
lization as a whole.
Around the same time, the Minoan civi¬
lization (named after Minos, the legendary
king), came into being on the shores of the
Aegean, centred on the island of Crete.
Although the Mediterranean was no
obstacle between Egypt and the Aegean,
contacts between Egyptian and Aegean trad¬
ers and emissaries were made first of all in the
Phoenician coastal ports, Byblos in particu¬
lar. Egyptian trading vessels no doubt set sail
from these ports to Crete, and called at
Cyprus, Rhodes, Karpathos and Kasos be¬
fore returning directly to Egypt (some
270 nautical miles from Crete), carried along
by the north winds that blow in summer.
The voyage then took three days and
two nights.
There is no lack of archaeological evidence
for relations between the two peoples. Many
Egyptian cylindrical stone jars have been
found in Crete and eventually the Cretans
adopted the Egyptian technique of manufac¬
turing these jars. On the island of Kithira, an
alabaster vase has been found bearing the
name of an Egyptian king of the Fifth
Dynasty (c. 2465-2323 BC). From the
twenty-second century BC, Egyptian writ¬
ings began to mention Kaftiou, an Egyptian
adaptation of the Semitic name for Crete,
Caphtor, which also appears in the Bible.
At the beginning of the second millen¬
nium BC, there was a thriving trade between
Middle Kingdom Egyptians and Cretans of
the period known as Middle Minoan. Many
Egyptian objects from that era, including
everyday utensils, scarabs used as seals and a
diorite statuette, have been found in Crete,
while Minoan pottery in the Kamares style,
and silver vases showing an Aegean in¬
fluence, have been discovered in a temple
near Luxor.
Around 1500 BC, Egypt cast off the yoke
t

5^*
Vi t*"^ . XI
< -i jS*P
^ Minoan terracotta figurine with an Egyptian
hairstyle (14th or 13th century BC)
have brought back the 365-day solar calen¬
dar from Egypt at the end of the seventh
century BC. The Athenian statesman Solon
(c. 640-560 BC) visited Egypt at the time
when, according to Herodotus, the Six¬
teenth-Dynasty king Amasis II prom¬
ulgated a law under which each Egyptian
was obliged to make an annual declaration of
income and return it to the governor of the
province. Any person guilty of illicit gains
was condemned to death. Solon had an iden¬
tical law adopted in Athens. Another Greek
historian, Diodorus of Sicily, recounts that
Lycurgus (legendary king of Sparta) drew
inspiration from Egyptian legislation, as did
Plato.
Egypt's influence on early Greek art is
evident, too. The kouros figure of a young
man, characteristic of archaic statuary, has
an Egyptian air about it. The tall, slim youth
stands with his left leg forward, his arms held
straight by his sides and his hands clenched.
This type of statue not only imitates the
attitudes of Egyptian figures, but also abides
by the traditional rules governing Egyptian
art, in particular the "rule of proportion"
that its creators had been applying for over
2,000 years. The human body was originally
divided into 18 equal squares, and into 21
from the Saite3 period (seventh century BC),
when the unit of measurement of length, the
cubit, was modified. Diodorus of Sicily re¬
lates that in the sixth century BC Telekles
and Thcodorus, two famous Greek sculp¬
tors, drew on that tradition for a statue of
Apollo by dividing the body into
21 V4 squares.
Over the centuries, the Greeks became
increasingly involved in the history of
Egypt. In 332 BC, the country was con¬
quered by Alexander the Great, and a
Macedonian Dynasty was founded which
governed the country for some three centur¬
ies. Egypt became part of the Hellenistic
world encompassing the eastern basin of the
Mediterranean. Alexandria, the new
Egyptian capital founded by the Greeks,
brought fresh prestige to Hellenism through
its writers, geographers, historians, archi¬
tects and astronomers.
When the Roman general Marcus
Antonius, ally of Cleopatra VII, lost the
battle of Actium in 31 BC, Egypt became a
Roman province. As the granary of Rome it
helped to supply the Roman army during its
major conquests.
As regards religion, the cult of Isis and
Osiris (Serapis, in its Ptolemaic form), and of
their son Horus-Harpocrates, was widely
adopted in the Graeco-Roman world. The
legend of Osiris, based on belief in the after¬
life of the soul in a better world, has strong
popular appeal, since it promises salvation to
all, a concept lacking in the official worship
of the Greek and Roman divinities. To the
Greeks, Isis was the incarnation of destiny,
since she succeeded in freeing herself from
the control of the gods and thereby acquired
absolute power. The Isis cult in Rome corn-
Black basalt Roman statue of the Egyptian
goddess Isis, whose cult was widespread in the
Graeco-Roman world.
The hand of Seshat, goddess of writing and of
learning, and the protector of royal chronicles.
Together with Thoth, patron of scribes and the
art of writing, she recorded each king's name
andthedatesofhisreignonthe leaves ofthetree
of life, as in this relief on the throne of
Ramesses II (c. 1290-1224 BC)at Luxor.
32 3. Named after the Twenty-Sixth Dynasty (664-525 BC)
^^ capital city, Sais, in the Nile Delta. Editor.
pcted with the Roman religion and emperor-
worship. Moreover, the Osirian triad fore¬
shadowed the Christian trinity. Before the
advent of Christianity, Isis-worship in
Europe became as prevalent as the later cult
of the Virgin Mary.
The world also owes the invention of the
calendar and the alphabet to the ancient
Egyptians.
Like other peoples, the Egyptians first
devised a dating system which divided time
into lunar years of 354 days. But before long
they realized that it was not sufficiently
accurate and was unsuited to the organiza¬
tion of their complex bureaucratic system, so
it fell into disuse except for the celebration of
certain religious events. Around 3000 BC
they invented a solar calendar of 365 days
divided into twelve months of thirty days
each, to which at the end of the year were
added five extra, or "epagomenal", days. The
Egyptians knew that their year was six hours
shorter than tjie solar year (365 '/4 days), but
for a long time they did nothing to remedy
this discrepancy. Only under Greek rule did
they begin to add one day to the official year
every four years, to bring it into alignment
with the solar year. That calendar was
adopted by Julius Caesar and imposed in
Rome from 45 BC. The Julian calendar was
used in Europe and the West until, at the end
of the sixteenth century, it was refined by
Pope Gregory XIII and, as the Gregorian
calendar, became known throughout the
world.
Towards the end of the fourth millennium
BC, the Egyptians invented a system of writ¬
ing which used hieroglyphic signs, i.e. pic¬
tures, rather than letters. These pictures were
chosen, not for their meaning, but for the
sounds that they represented.
It is true that the modern European
alphabet is derived from the Graeco-Roman
alphabet, which is directly based on the
Phoenician alphabet. But what system of
writing influenced the Phoenicians? The
oldest Semitic texts known to us date back to
the fifteenth century BC. They were disco¬
vered in the Sinai desert, and contain Semitic
terms transcribed with signs that resemble
hieroglyphs. It is very likely that this Semitic
writing was based on hieroglyphs, using a
system of pictured sounds, and that it de¬
veloped over several centuries into the
Phoenician alphabet, in which each sound is
represented by a single letter. It seems prob¬
able, therefore, that the alphabet, one of the
greatest achievements of the human mind, is
of Egyptian origin.
GABALLA ALY GABALLA, ofEgypt, is Profes¬
sor of Egyptology at Cairo University. He was
formerly visiting Professor at the Mohamed V
University (Morocco), at the University ofCentral
Florida (USA), and at the University of Kuwait.
He is the author oftwo books published in English,
Narrative in Egyptian Art, (1976) and. The
Memphite Tomb Chapel of Mose (1977), and of
many articles.
