Immunology
The origins of inoculation against smallpox in China are mysterious. We know that
the technique originated in the southern province of Sichuan, where there is a
famous mountain called Emeishan which is known for its connections with both
Buddhism and Taoism. The Taoist alchemists who lived as hermits in the caves of
that mountain possessed the secret of smallpox inoculation in the tenth
century AD.
The technique first came to public attention when the eldest son of the Prime
Minister Wang Dan (957-1017) died of smallpox. Wang desperately wished to
prevent this happening to other members of his family, so he summoned physi¬
cians, wise men and magicians from all over the Empire to find some remedy. One
Taoist hermit came from Emeishan. This monk or nun brought the technique of
inoculation and introduced it to the capital.
Inoculation has certain dangers which set it apart from the later technique of
vaccination. When one is inoculated, one has the live virus inserted into one's body.
When the process is successful, one is immune for life. But the process can simply
be one of direct exposure to the disease, so that one ends up with smallpox. With
vaccination, the immunity conferred is only temporary, so that vaccinations have to
be given every few years as "boosters". This is because vaccination uses dead viruses
or some other kind of denatured virus (perhaps a related one) which cannot actually
give one the disease.
At first sight it looks as if inoculation against smallpox must have been madness.
Were not people just being given smallpox every time? The answer is no. And here
we find the subtlety of the Chinese inoculators to be truly astounding. They
practised a variety of methods for the attenuation of the deadly virus, so that the
chances of getting the disease were minimized. First of all, there was a strong
prohibition against taking the smallpox material from people who actually had the
disease. The Chinese conceived of inoculation as a "transplant" of poxy material
imagined as being like beansprouts which were just germinating. "To inoculate" in
Chinese was called zhong dou or zhong miao, meaning "to implant the germs", or
"implant the sprouts".
The method used was to put the poxy material on a plug of cotton, which was
then inserted into the nose. The pox was thus absorbed through the mucous
membrane of the nose and by breathing. (The technique of scratching the skin and
putting the pox on the scratch seems to have developed long afterwards, possibly in
Central Asia as the technique spread westwards.)
Ideally, inoculators chose poxy material from persons who had been inoculated
themselves and had developed a few scabs. They also knew the difference between
the two types of smallpox, Variola major and Variola minor, and they chose
material from the latter, which was a less virulent form. Indeed, the favourite source
of material was from the scabs of someone who had been inoculated with material
from somebody who had been inoculated with material from somebody who had
been inoculated.... In other words, a several-generations attenuation of the virus
through multiple inoculations.
But there were other artificial methods used to attenuate the virus even further,
so that it would be safer still. Here is one account from a work on Transplanting the
Smallpox by Zhang Yan in the year 1741:
"Method of storing the material. Wrap the scabs carefully in paper and put them
into a small container bottle. Cork it tightly so that the activity is not dissipated.
The container must not be exposed to sunlight or warmed beside a fire. It is best to
carry it for some time on the person so that the scabs dry naturally and slowly. The
container should be marked clearly with the date on which the contents were taken
from the patient.
"In winter the material has yang potency within it, so it remains active even after
being kept from thirty to forty days. But in summer theyang potency will be lost in
approximately twenty days. The best material is that which had not been left too
long, for when the yang potency is abundant it will give a 'take' with nine persons
out of ten; but as it gets older it gradually loses its activity, and finally it will not
work at all. In situations where new scabs are rare and the requirement is great, it is
possible to mix new scabs with the more aged ones, but in this case more of the
powder should be blown into the nostril when the inoculation is done."
Needham comments on this and similar passages:
"Thus the general system was to keep the inoculum sample for a month or more
at body temperature (37°C) or rather less. This would certainly have had the effect
of heat-inactivating some 80 per cent of the living virus particles, but since their
dead protein would have been present, a strong stimulus to interferon production
as well as antibody formation would have been given when inoculation was done."
In other words, 80 per cent of the smallpox viruses with which the Chinese were
inoculated would have been dead ones which could not have given anyone
smallpox. Instead, they would (as with vaccination) have stimulated the body to
produce antibodies against smallpox.
The concept of vaccination appeared in
China in the 10th century, when
inoculation against smallpox was
practised. Engraving of a child suffering
from smallpox, above, is taken from the
Golden MirrorofMedicine (1743).
