The Australian cinema
From The Kelly Gang to Crocodile Dundee
«"MÍ^ BY KIM WILLIAMS
Poster from the Australian National
Film and Sound Archive, which has
a collection of around 29,000 films,
a quarter of a million film stills,
30,000 posters and 3,000 scripts.
The early decades of the twentieth
century saw a flourishing
period of feature film produc¬
tion in Australia. Film-makers had be¬
gun making documentaries of daily life,
combined film and slide shows, and
background films for stage plays as early
as 1 896. The highlight of this period was
The Story of the Kelly Gang (1906),
believed to be the first feature-length
film made in the world.
During the "Silent Era" (c. 1907-
1928) well over 150 Australian feature
films were produced, but by 1929 a
combination of forces the introduc¬
tion of sound films from overseas, an
increasing stranglehold on the local
market by American and British distri¬
butors and the devastation of the
Depression signalled a downturn in
Australian film production from which
it would take decades to recover.
The transition to sound in the early
1930s was costly and difficult, though a
few directors adapted to the new tech¬
nology and made commercially success¬
ful films dealing with Australian sub¬
jects, often located in the bush.
During the Second World War, fea¬
ture film output dropped as film-makers
were involved in newsreels and
documentaries. While production was
down, however, cinema attendances
reached an all-time peak in 1944-1945,
with 151 million admissions per year.
The post-war period brought an in¬
flux of British and American film com¬
panies attracted to Australia by its exo¬
tic locations. Few indigenous films were
produced. (A notable exception was
Charles Chauvel's Jedda of 1953, the
first Australian colour feature film
which dealt with relations between
Aboriginals and whites.)
By the late 1960s and early 1970s, a
period marked by social change, politic¬
al protest and cultural re-examination,
there was a burgeoning underground
film culture, based primarily in
Melbourne and Sydney. This period of
questioning and change created an en¬
vironment conducive to lobbying the
government to stimulate a national film
industry and provide the necessary
financial support. The government
accepted the cultural arguments and,
with its assistance, a "renaissance"
began.
The first films to emerge, such as Tim
Burstall's Stork and Alvin Purple and
Bruce Beresford's The Adventures of
Barry McKenzie, explored a strand of
Australian humour. They were all
financially successful in Australia and
overseas. There was a familiarity about
the uncultivated characters portrayed
which endeared these films to audi¬
ences, but some people found the raw¬
ness embarrassing and sought for a
more refined and sophisticated view of
Australia to be reflected in its cinema.
Films such as Sunday Too Far Away
and Picnic at Hanging Rock satisfied
this need for quality cinema rooted in
the Australian experience and/or the
literary tradition. A combination of
Australian landscape, good production
standards and a certain narrative sim¬
plicity became the symbols of the Au¬
stralian cinema, capturing the imagina¬
tion of international audiences and
generating national pride.
Funding for short drama, docu¬
mentaries and experimental works also
made it possible for new directors to
explore ideas and techniques and to ac¬
quire film-making skills. Many of these
films were adventurous and inventive.
35

1
Still from an Australian
TV series,A//tie Rivers
Run, the story of a girl
riverboat skipper
in the late
19th century.
Some of today's well-known Australian
directors, such as Peter Weir and Gillian
Armstrong, made documentaries and
short dramas during this period.
Documentary film-making attracted
attention in the late 1970s as film¬
makers expanded their subject matter
and dealt with such themes as Asian and
Latin American politics, communism,
the environment and Aboriginal
society.
Partly as a result of escalating costs
and a desire to consolidate the economic
base for film production, in June 1981
the Federal Government introduced a
tax incentive scheme to attract more
private investment to feature films,
documentaries, telemovies and televi¬
sion mini-series.
The films produced in the first few
years of the tax incentive scheme in¬
cluded work by some of Australia's
best-known film-makers such as Bruce
Beresford (Puberty Blues), Gillian
Armstrong (Starstruck), George Miller
(Mad Max) and Peter Weir (The Year of
Living Dangerously). Some of them, in¬
cluding Breaker Morant, Mad Max 2
(also known as The Road Warrior),
Gallipoli, The Man from Snowy River,
Puberty Blues, Careful, He Might Hear
You and Phar Lap, were popular and
commercially successful.
Around this time film-makers were
also becoming interested in television
mini-series. The national and interna¬
tional success of A Town Like Alice in
1980 stimulated demand and, in the next
two years, ten mini-series were pro¬
duced. Historical subjects predomi¬
nated, ranging from the penal colonies
(For the Term ofHis Natural Life, Sara
Dane and Under Capricorn), bush-
ranging (The Last Outlaw), the pioneer
spirit (All the Rivers Run), the rise of
nationalism (Eureka Stockade), Abor¬
iginals (Women ofthe Sun), to industrial
unrest in the 1920s (Waterfront). Three
mini-series were on contemporary
themesReturn to Eden, a dramatic
love story; Silent Reach, about
big business in Queensland; and The
Dismissal, about the demise of the
Whitlam government.
Despite the generous tax incentives,
Pillow-fight scene in My Brilliant Career (1979), by Gillian Armstrong.
The film, set at the turn of the century, tells the story of a farmer's
daughter (played byJudy Davis, below) who spends much of her time
writing and dreaming of the future.
36

£_ m*..-¿y Paul Hogan in the title
role of Crocodile
Dundee (1986)
however, it became evident in 1983 that,
after a boost of activity, the Australian
film industry was facing some serious
problems, and substantial cost increases
were undermining the economics of
film production.
The Australian Government, respon¬
sive to these problems and concerned
with the influx of speculative promoters
and the overall quality of production,
introduced a package which, on the one
hand, reduced the tax concessions and,
on the other, allocated a special fund of
$5 million to encourage the production
of high quality film and television with
commercial potential. The fund was to
be administered by the government's
statutory film authority, the Australian
Film Commission, which had been
established in 1975.
The industry was changing as heavy
reliance on direct government invest¬
ment was being replaced by private in¬
vestment. Producers were obliged to
guarantee investors some revenue and,
in order to do that, they had to sell
distribution rights before the film or
television project was made. To attract
the sort of backing required, they had to
look to distribution in the United States
and Europe. With such a dependence on
the international market, there was an
inherent tension between the objectives
of developing an Australian cinema and
the needs of distributors.
Many producers responded to the
challenge of how to make films which
are Australian in spirit but have an inter¬
national appeal. Audiences have re¬
sponded to such films as Crocodile
Dundee (1986), which is the most suc¬
cessful film ever released in Australia,
the largest grossing foreign film released
in the United States, and which broke
the all-time box office record in the
United Kingdom.
In addition, television mini-series
such as Return to Eden, The Anzacs,
Fields of Fire and The Last Frontier en¬
joyed success in the United States, the
United Kingdom and Europe. The two-
part Fields ofFire came fifth and sixth in
the National Top 10 ratings in the
United Kingdom, The Last Frontier
topped the mini-series ratings in the
United States with an estimated audi¬
ence of 65 million viewers, and All the
Rivers Run was seen by 75 million
viewers in the Soviet Union.
In November 1985 a co-production
programme was introduced to assist
Australian producers in collaborating
with foreign partners on approved co-
ventures and still receive the benefits of
the tax incentive scheme. Arrangements
are now in place with the Centre
National de la Cinematographic
(France), the British Broadcasting Cor¬
poration and Channel Four (United
Kingdom), the New Zealand Film
Commission and the Corporation for
Public Broadcasting (United States),
and are currently being negotiated with
Canada and Italy.
By mid-1985 it had again become
clear that the tax incentive scheme was
pushing producers to obtain extremely
high pre-sales, that the costs of attract¬
ing investment were rising significantly
and that there was uncertainty about the
level of finance available as the marginal
tax rate dropped. The industry's finan¬
cial base was shaky.
The Australian Film Commission



then proposed the creation of an inde¬
pendent Australian Film Finance Cor¬
poration to replace the film tax conces¬
sions. The corporation would operate
like a bank, securing its loans against the
rights in the programme, or against sales
agreements. On 1 July 1988, the Federal
Government established the Film Fi¬
nance Corporation with first-year fund¬
ing of $70 million. There is now a new
financial climate for film production in
Australia, and while there is some un¬
certainty as to how the new system will
operate, there is renewed optimism and
energy in the film and television
industry.
KIM WILLIAMS was until recently Chief Execu¬
tive of the Australian Film Commission. A mem¬
ber of the arts and entertainment committee of the
Australian Bicentennial Authority, he is a former
Director of the Confederation of Australian Pro¬
fessional Performing Arts.
37
