Beautyy sanctity and truth
Thephilosophy ofthe icon
BY SERGEI S. AVERINTSEV
IN the chronicles which relate the events that took place a
thousand years ago in Russia, one episode stands out
that of the so-called "testing of faiths".
Prince Vladimir of Kiev had already talked with Muslims,
Roman Catholics, and Khazars ofJewish persuasion. Then he
heard a homily from a Greek "philosopher" who also gave
. him a lesson in biblical history and a brief catechism. This
presentation, it seems, was the one that made the most
favourable impression. The prince observed that the Greeks
were "artful" and "captivating" speakers and that it was a
pleasure to listen to them.
But homilies alone were not enough; nor did doctrine and
question-and-answer sessions settle the matter entirely.
Things had to be seen, as well as heard, to be believed. And so
in AD 987 Vladimir, following the considered advice of his
boyars1 and elders, selected ten "virtuous and sensible men"
1. His chief vassals. Editor
and instructed them to obtain firsthand evidence of each faith,
observing how God was worshipped, by whom and where.
The envoys carried out their mission. The movements and
postures adopted by the Muslims at prayer in their mosques
seemed strange to them. Nor did they find any aesthetic
satisfaction in the Latin ritual: "We saw no trace of beauty
there," they said. In Constantinople, however, "the beauty of
the liturgy" to which they were introduced by the head of the
Church, the patriarch, came as a revelation. "We knew not
whether we were in Heaven or on Earth," they told the
This late 14th-century Dormition of the Vir¬
gin is thought to be the work of Theophanes the
Greek, (c.l350-c,1410) an outstanding icon
painter of Byzantine origin, or of one of his
pupils. Strong dramatic tension is created by
the vigour ofthe composition and the imposing
dimensions of the figure of Christ.

prince. "For surely there is no such splendour or beauty
anywhere upon Earth, and we are at a loss how to describe it;
we only know that God dwells there among men, and their
ceremonies are fairer than those of other nations. We cannot
forget that beauty." Time and time again the word "beauty"
recurs in their account, and the envoys' experience of that
beauty clinches their theological argument: "There, God
dwells among the people." Now the prince could make his
choice. "Then Vladimir replied, and said 'Where shall our
baptism take place?'"
Thus, the aesthetic argument carried the greatest convic¬
tion. "God dwells among men", where beauty is; beauty is
evidence and indeed proof of His presence.
Whatever the real events that inspired it, this story told in
the "Tale of Bygone Years" (also known as The Russian
Primary Chronicle), the most important historical work of
early medieval Russia, reflects a manner of conceiving, or at
least perceiving, the world that is in itself a historical fact.
Even if the thinking of Prince Vladimir and his entourage was
Known as the Ustyug Annunciation from the
town where it originated, this icon (now in the
Tretyakov Gallery) is a work of the Novgorod
school and dates from the 12th to the 13th
centuries.
In Eastern Christian churches ofByzantine tradition, the iconostasis is a
screen which separates the sanctuary, where the sacrament of the
Eucharist is celebrated, from the nave, where the congregation stands. It
is covered with icons (sacred images), andpierced by 3 doors. Far from
being a barrier, the iconostasis symbolizes the boundary between the
world of the senses and the spiritual world, and invites thefaithful to the
sacraments ofthe Eucharist. Right, the iconostasis andaltar (18th to 19th
century) of the cathedral of the archangel Michael in the Kremlin,
Moscow (16th century).
not exactly that described by the chronicler, and even if the
entire anecdote is a fiction, it has a significance which is
remarkably similar to that of a statement made during the first
half of the present century by the Russian priest, scientist and
philosopher Pavel Aleksandrovich Florensky (1882-1943)
who wrote as follows about the most famous of Russian icons,
Andrei Rublev's Old Testament Trinity: "Of all the philo¬
sophical proofs of the existence of God, that which carries the
most conviction is not mentioned in any textbook; it may be
resumed as follows: 'Rublev's Trinity exists, therefore God
exists'."
Obviously, there is a great difference between the story told
in the Chronicle and the extract from Florensky's philo¬
sophical treatise. The chronicler is artless, whereas Florensky
deploys a paradox of whose subtlety he is fully aware. All that
the texts have in common is the extreme simplicity of the
logical proposition that beauty is not "merely" beauty; it is a
criterion of truth indeed of truth at its most profound, its
most important.
An imaginary line drawn through the millennium that
separates the episode of the "testing of faiths" from
Florensky's postulate would pass through many points. On it
one would find that conjunction of a sense of style with a
sense of the sacred, expressed in icon painting, which the Old



Believers2 of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries inher¬
ited from ancient Russia and which is perceptively described
in "The Sealed Angel", a story by the nineteenth-century
writer Nikolai Leskov. In this story, a simple stone-mason,
self-confessedly "of the most rustic education", evokes his
favourite icon, a product of the seventeenth-century Stroga-
nov school of icon painting: "The wings are outspread and
white as snow; against the clear blue of the sky, feather stands
out against feather, and strand against strand in the tuft of each
feather. You look at these wings, and all the fear in you
disappears; you pray 'Give me light', and suddenly every¬
thing falls still, and peace enters the soul".
Are we here in the presence of prayer or of ecstasy ? It is not
enough to say that the two are related. What counts is that this
form of contemplation is just as exacting as prayer; here,
indulgence in emotion, in sublimated sensibility, in art for
art's sake, are kept at a far greater distance than, for example,
in Gothic, Renaissance or Baroque art. At the same time,
prayer cannot be dissociated from the plastic reality of the
icon: there is a relation between the "peace that enters the
soul" and the contrast of "strand against strand in the tuft of
each feather". Here, as in the report by Prince Vladimir's
emissaries and Florensky's aphorism, beauty confers authen¬
ticity. Beauty can be trusted, "and peace enters the soul". But
it must be beauty of a very special kind.
It is precisely because so much depends on the quality of
this beauty that it is subjected to such rigorous demands. In
the seventeenth century, the turbulent archpriest Avvakum,
2. Followers of the ancient rites of the Russian Orthodox Church. Editor
10


leader of the Old Believers, raged against departures from the
traditional aesthetics of icon painting, seeing in such "un¬
seemly figurations" both a spiritual betrayal and a disintegra¬
tion of the values inherent in the life of the people. What was
painted "with carnal intent" forfeited its claims to reliability,
to authenticity. It is interesting to note that at the height of the
Roman Catholic-Orthodox rivalry during the reign of Ivan
the Terrible (1547-1584), the Jesuit Antonio Possevino, who
had vainly endeavoured to convert the Tsar to Catholicism
and thus conserved a certain rancour towards Russia and
things Russian, nevertheless found words of surprised
admiration for the chasteness and sobriety which characte¬
rized both the icon and the manner of its veneration.
The hero of Dostoyevsky's novel A Raw Youth hears the
pilgrim Makar Ivanovich use the archaic word blagoobrazie,
and is deeply moved. The word conveys the idea of beauty as
sanctity, sanctity as beauty, beauty at its most austere as a spur
to asceticism.
In the psychology of the Russian people, beauty and asce¬
ticism are very closely related. Russian folklore offers an
abundance of spiritual verses about the Tsarevich Ioasaf's
renunciation of a life of luxury and his departure into the
wilderness, where care for his bodily welfare is no longer of
importance:
Here, in my wilderness,
Labouring, I must labour still;
Here, in my wilderness,
Fasting, I must further fast;
Here, in my wilderness,
Enduring, I must yet endure....
But this retreat, the scene of labour and endurance, is, as the
folktales insist time and time again, a "beautiful wilderness";
not only a vale of suffering and grief, but also a plenitude of
simple delights for eye and ear alike:
When spring in all her beauty comes back again,
Meadow and marsh will don their finest apparel,
And, in the leaf-decked wood,
The bird of paradise
Will sing with an archangel's voice.
Nowhere else, it seems, in Russian popular poesy is the
beauty of Nature accorded such generous treatment as in
these plaintive songs about a young prince's rejection of
worldly temptations. Only the austere light in which the
whole is bathed justifies the ecstasy that such beauty pro¬
vokes, by providing the guarantee that beauty itself will not
degenerate into forbidden balovstvo (frivolous indulgence),
and will retain the quality of blagoobrazie.
When Florensky, too, attributed to beauty the force of
argument, he chose Rublev's Trinity as his point of departure.
We too shall refer to ancient Russian icon painting, and to
Rublev its uncontested master, in making the more modest
but still extremely important point that the traditional Rus¬
sian attitude to beauty is not a romantic fabrication and that
the examples cited above are in no sense exaggerated.
It may be argued that the story with which we began is after
all only a legend. It is true that similar stories are told about
the conversion of different peoples to Christianity, but this
one is, we believe, uniquely Russian. It may be argued that
Florensky's statement is excessively coloured by the atmos¬
phere of aestheticism and the general climate of opinion in the
early part of this century. And it may be argued that Leskov's
characters are too stylized to be anything but artificial. Even if
Virgin Orans and St. George slaying the
Dragon (11th to 13th century), a double icon
preserved at the church of the Moscow Theolo¬
gical Academy.
such objections are unfair, the fact that they can be raised
means that none of the examples given so far reach to the heart
of the matter.
Only the ancient Russian icons, rediscovered by a handful
of enthusiasts at the turn of the century and now acknow¬
ledged as an important element of the universal heritage,
illustrate irrefutably the relationship between beauty and
sanctity. The Old Believers described by Leskov were the
guardians of a far older tradition, and the icon of the Stroga-
nov school, described with such loving attention, is the
product of a style that was in the process of disintegration. In
the fifteenth century, on the other hand, this style appears in
all its purity. Similarly, Dostoyevsky overheard in the lan¬
guage of the common people the word blagoobrazie, and it
stands out in the pages of his story as the expression of a
profound nostalgia, whereas in Rublev's work and in that of
his contemporaries, blagoobrazie the sanctity of beauty, the
beauty of sanctity is at home, is simply in its place.
12

Using words alone, it would be very hard to prove that the
ideal of beauty as sanctity really existed in Russian culture in a
clearly delineated, vital and active form. But fortunately the
masterpieces of the classical age of Russian icon painting are
sufficient evidence for the existence of this ideal. With them,
demonstration is no longer required, presentation is suffi¬
cient. They are proof in themselves. To paint in such a
manner, one must believe with the totality of one's being that
beauty is not a matter of aesthetics, but of ontology.
Use of these two philosophical terms is a reminder that
until the seventeenth century scholastic philosophy was un¬
known in Russia. This is why there are no Russian equivalents
of such learned works as St. John Damascene's The Source of
Knowledge in Byzantium, or the Summa theologiae of St.
Thomas Aquinas in the medieval West, which provided a
synthesis of the thinking of an entire age. This does not mean,
however, that Russia totally lacked a philosophical approach
to existence, simply that in Russia philosophizing took
another form, that of icon painting. It is not in treatises, but in
religious images; not in syllogisms and definitions, but in
visible manifestations of beauty sufficiently austere, rigor¬
ous and transparent to permit the passage of the pure light of
spiritual significance that the central ideas of ancient Rus¬
sian culture must be sought. In other words, the creation of
beauty assumed in Russia complementary functions which, in
other cultures, were the province of abstract thought.
It is now possible to understand why the style of the
Russian ¡con demands of beauty such a unique austerity,
surpassing even the asceticism of Byzantine art and radically
different from the poetic atmosphere of Gothic. It is pointless
to attempt to compare the highest manifestations of the
potential of art on the basis of "better" or "worse". Rublev's
Trinity is not "better" than the Statue of the Visitation of
Reims Cathedral, because nothing could be "better" than it.
The opposite is also true. But each of these highly spiritual
creations expresses a different form of spirituality. While one,
the Virgin of Reims, appeals to the emotions and the imagina¬
tion, the other appeals to the intellect.
Feeling is one thing; knowledge is another. This is why the
spirituality of Gothic statuary is charged with warm-blooded,
noble and chivalrous emotion and admiration before the
charms of femininity. The Gothic sculptor can permit himself
expressions of this kind because he has been relieved of
responsibility for demonstrating spiritual verities; there are
syllogisms for this purpose. In its austerity, the Russian icon
goes further, passing beyond the stage at which emotion
reigns into the realm where the spirit alone can be heard. The
aim of the Russian master-painter is not to incite, not to
disturb, not to play on the emotions, but to show truth itself,
absolute and incontestable, and to bear witness to this truth.
His duty calls for the greatest possible constraint instead of
an outburst of Gothic enthusiasm, what is required of him is
bezmolvie (silence, or quietude). In Greek, this quality is
denoted by the word hesychia, from which the Hesychasts,
members of a mystical fourteenth-century Byzantine sect for
whom "all human flesh must fall silent....", took their name.
Beauty which seeks to authenticate truth cannot but address
itself austerely.
Modern Russian culture, anticipated in the critical period of
the seventeenth century, born during the age of Peter the
Great, renewed during all the storms of Russian history,
shares a complex and sometimes dramatic relationship with
the ancient heritage of blagoobrazie. But it cannot deny its
affinity with the millenary tradition. The Russian mind seems
to find it difficult to abandon the notion of beauty as a
signpost in the quest for truth. The past two centuries have
Icon depicting St. Nicholas (mid-12th to early
13th century) belonged to Moscow's Novo-
devichei monastery but may have originated in
Novgorod, the city which gave its name to one
of the great schools of Russian icon painting
(12th to 16th centuries). The main figure and
the small surrounding figures ofsaints seem to
have been painted by two different hands. The
icon is now in the Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow.
produced a number of sometimes outstanding Russian philo¬
sophers, but it is still questionable whether the authentic
Russian philosophy is not to be found elsewhere in the
verses of Pushkin or Tyutchev, for example; in the novels of
Dostoyevsky; perhaps in the music of Scriabin. Classical
Russian literature is deeply afraid of aesthetic balovstvo
frivolous indulgence: Gogol burning manuscripts and Tol¬
stoy endeavouring to repudiate the artist in himself in order to
remain simply a pursuer and pedagogue of truth, have few
parallels in the history of other literatures. What is unique in
Russian life is the attitude to poetry as both a draught of
live-giving air and an opportunity of salvation.
If the ancient faith in beauty evoked in The Russian Primary
Chronicle were to disappear altogether, what would become
ofus?
SERGEI SERGEEVICH AVERINTSEV, Corresponding Member of the
USSR Academy of Sciences, is a leading Soviet specialist in ancient and
medieval cultures and the author of some 100 published works, including
monographs on Plutarch and the literature of Antiquity (1973) and on early
Byzantine poetics (1 977). He is a member of the USSR National Commission
for Unesco.
13
