Calligraphy and typography
in Europe BY ROGER DRUET
Hittite hieroglyphic
inscription from the
ancient city of
Carchemish.onthe
upper Euphrates (10th
to 8th century BC).
	,
V -
ABr
Above, inscription in Phoenician script
on the tomb ofAhiram, king of Byblos
(10th century BC). The ancestry of
Western alphabets can be traced back
to the alphabet developed by the
ancient Phoenicians.
Below, letters from modern typefaces
in Greek (left) and Cyrillic (right).
Cyrillic, the alphabet used for Russian
and other languages of the USSR, as
well as Bulgarian and Serbian, is
derived from the Greek. It was
probably developed in the 9th century
AD by 2 Greek brothers often called
the "apostles to the Slavs", St. Cyril,
for whom it was named, and St.
Methodius. Cyrillic was later
developed into printing characters
which were simplified in the early 18th
century on the instructions ofPeter
the Great.
ABB
q6b
ALL typefaces, even the most modern digitized char¬
acters designed with the help of a computer, are
based on forms of writing. This link between writ¬
ten and printed characters is particularly noteworthy in the
history of European typographical design.
The Phoenicians and the Greeks, who invented the early
alphabets from which Western scripts derived, were seafar¬
ing and colonizing peoples who needed to carry precise and
legible messages over very long distances. Consequently the
priorities of Western writing were speed of execution and
simplicity of design.
The creation of phonetic alphabets (instead of ideographic
systems) using only twenty to thirty signs for the transcrip¬
tion of language was a decisive step in a process of abstrac¬
tion in which the Greeks played a leading role by consid¬
erably developing the Phoenician alphabet. The alphabet
they created is the basis of the Latin characters used in many
parts of the world today.
By the fourth" century BC, the Golden Age of Hellenic
thought, Ionic script had already developed the rectangular
form of modern capital lettering. During the Greek and
Roman classical era, writing acquired the harmonious and
balanced form which is known as lapidary because of its
resemblance to the monumental script used for inscriptions
in stone. This script with its -firmly chiselled grooves and
broad strokes which stood out well in sunlight and were
enhanced by shadow, answered a need for beauty and
harmony but also expressed imperial power. Latin capital-
letter script may be regarded as the basis of subsequent
developments in Western scripts and, later, type designs.
Cyrillic script, which was adopted by Orthodox Chris¬
tians for the Slavonic languages, particularly in Russia, em¬
ulated these upright, monumental styles of writing. System¬
atically used as a phonetic form, it became a widely
employed substitute for Latin script in the Slav countries.
The invention of Cyrillic script, derived from a Greek book
hand, is attributed to the ninth-century Greek missionaries
Cyril and Methodius, and was standardized by the Byzan¬
tine Emperor Constantine VII.
After the heavy quadrata, or square capitals, the basis of
all Latin scripts, and the Roman rustic capitals, an early form
of cursive script, writing evolved towards the rounded uncial
script. In the ninth century, Charlemagne imposed on the
Holy Roman Empire the form of small lettering now known
as Carolingian miniscule, which included most of the fea¬
tures of the lower case Latin alphabet. The official adoption
of this cursive script did not bring about the disappearance of
capital letters, but it was the dominant hand of Western
Europe throughout the ninth century and served as a model
for later innovators until the dawn of European printing in
the fifteenth century.
With the foundation of universities in Europe in the
twelfth century, parchment became scarce. A new script,
known as black-letter or Gothic, as angular and narrow as
the Gothic pointed arch, answered the needs of the moment

Printing was originally conceived as a process for
the mechanical reproduction of manuscript. Many
early printers came to typography through
calligraphy, and the work of some later
typographers has also been influenced by styles of
handwriting. Right, specimen Western scripts
from Roman times to the 18th century.
in that it took up a minimum of space. The expression of
thought seemed to be channelled through a kind of grid. This
design gave rise to two basic scripts: the rigid, vertical
Textura, used primarily for liturgical texts; and a more
flexible script, Rotunda.
In the fifteenth century, the angular Gothic script, having
been appropriated by the lettered classes in France, became
known as bâtarde or Bastarda. The invention and use of
spectacles also made it possible for writing to become small¬
er. It was not until the end of the sixteenth century that the
Germans introduced capital letters into the Gothic alphabet
for woodblock printing. Hitherto, the place of the "dropped
initials" initial letters at the beginning of a page or chapter,
which covered two or three lines of text had been left
blank, to be filled in by the illuminators.
For engraving, the Germans had adopted a spiky kind of
script, whose rather fussy, fractured style suggested its name,
Fraktur. The great painter and engraver Albrecht Dürer,
who thought that letters could be governed by mathematical
laws, undertook to impose a constructive discipline on
Gothic script. This admirable undertaking culminated in a
balanced appearance for each character.
Around 1440, the German printer Johannes Gensfleisch,
known as Gutenberg, of Mainz, took the remarkable step of
bringing together and organizing all the processes of print¬
ing: punch-cutting, making matrices, type-casting, compos¬
ing and the use of a hand press. Once the discovery had been
made, the art of printing spread rapidly. The Gutenberg
forty-two-line Bible (see back cover), the first great feat of
Western printing, was printed in Gothic lettering. Sub¬
sequently, Gutenberg increased his. range of typefaces to
almost 300 so that he could reproduce different scripts as
accurately as possible.
The humanist scholars of fifteenth-century Italy never
took to Gothic script. Petrarch considered that it looked
blurred from a distance and caused eyestrain close to, as if it
had been created not to be read, but for some other purpose.
The Italian Renaissance therefore turned for inspiration to
classical Antiquity, and calligraphers revived ancient monu¬
mental lettering, thus returning to a simplicity and clarity
that are still characteristic of printing today. The West,
influenced by its artists, pursued the chimera of "divine
proportion", the mathematical relationship believed to be
the key to beauty. Leonardo da Vinci sought it in the human
body, as did Dürer and the great French typographer Geo-
froy Tory, who studied the composition of letters according
to the proportions of the human body in the Champfleury
(1529), a treatise on type design.
An important event which encouraged a new approach to
printing was the sack of Mainz in 1462, which forced many
of Gutenberg's collaborators to leave the town. They took
the secrets of printing to several European countries.
Around 1470 one of them, the French engraver Nicolas
Jenson settled in Venice, where hé drew inspiration from
humanist scripts in designing a new type with wedge-shaped
Aa Lapidary (from 600 BC)
A Quadrata, Roman square capital
aA Rustic, Roman cursive capital
AAA Uncial, rounded capital (from 3rd century AD)
aA^ Carolingian miniscule (8th-9th century)
a
p3£
Goriic(12th-15th century)
Evolution from Textura (left) to Rotunda (right)
Capital revived for initials (15th-16th century)
a Bastarda vernacu'ar script (15th century)
Aa¿L Humanist classical revival (14th-16th century)
J%a Chancery cursive script (15th-16th century)
CL Roundedbook hand (17th-18th century)
Signature of Charlemagne, c. 800 AD.
The Emperor, who could not write,
merely added his own flourish to the
monogram painted for him by the
copyist.
Letter patterns from Champfleury,
the first theoretical treatise on the
designing of type (1529), by the
French printer Geofroy Tory, who
later became the royal printer of
King François I.
Ornamental capital letter, left,
from the Bible Historiale (c.
1380) attributed to a copyist
known as Pierre Comestor
("Peter the Eater"), is one of
the earliest European
depictions of a person wearing
spectacles. The invention of
spectacles made it possible for
writing styles to become
smaller.
11

is/ epíílolas mâdatc
asdeílinauíc. ita nt
ïmunitur.comeatu
Uuitionê accedunt.
as/ arbitratus omnia
rçcenri/ inftigat Bal
ratu dignamaggre
ir Demetrius.Quo '
ABC
abc
The type created by the French
printer Nicolas Jenson (c. 1420-
1480) and known as "roman" is
generally considered to be the first
consciously designed according to
typographical ideals rather than
manuscript models; Left, specimen
of text printed in Jenson's roman.
These drawings show a capital and
lowercase "a" in a typeface known as
Romain du Roi, which was
commissioned by Louis XIV in 1692 for
the exclusive use of the royal printing
works. The drawings, made by Nicolas
Jaugeon, a leading member of the
committee charged with the design of
the typeface, form part of a set
prepared for the guidance of the type-
cutter, Philippe Grandjean. The
committee turned away from the
principles of calligraphy and designed
each letter on a mathematical basis,
using a grid subdivided into tiny
squares.
Page from The Works of
Geoffrey Chaucer(\»%)
the crowning achievement
of William Morris'
Kelmscott Press. Critical of
the mediocrity of
contemporary machine-
produced books, Morris
reverted to the hand press,
handmade paper and
specially-made ink and
typefaces. His Chaucer was
printed in black and red,
and contained 87 woodcuts
by the leading English
painter and designer Sir
Edward Burne-Jones, plus
an abundance of borders,
initials and ornaments
designed by Morris
himself.
The first italic typeface was cut
around 1500 by Francesco Griffo
for the Venetian humanist and
publisher Aldus Manutius. The
design was based on the cursive
writing of the papal chancery
clerks. Left, modern Garamond
italic, named after its designer,
Claude Garamond (c. 1480-1561),
who was inspired by the
publications of Manutius. (This
issue of the Courier is set in
Garamond.)
serifs. This pure and beautiful style was known as roman, a
name which would in future be applied to typefaces with an
upright design. Among the heirs to his workshop in that
illustrious city was the learned Aldus Manutius, one of the



great figures in European publishing. His type designer,
Francesco Griffo of Bologna, cut the first example of a
sloping type which became known as Aldine and is today
called italic. It was based on the informal cursive writing
developed by chancery clerks to speed their work.
The sixteenth century was the Golden Age of calligraphy
in Europe, rich in great calligraphers such as Ludovico degli
Arrighi, Ugo da Carpi, Giovanniantonio Tagliente and Pala¬
tino in Italy, Jean Beauchenne in France and Roger Ascham
in England. As progress was made in copper engraving, so a
cursive script with slender finials (terminal hooks) emerged
and came to fruition in the work of Lucas Matherot and
Louis Barbedor.
In France, where the development of printing was influen¬
ced by the work of Geofroy Tory, the Estienne family was
prominent. One of its members, Robert Estienne, was print¬
er to King François I. He entrusted Claude Garamond with a
royal command to cut typefaces for editions of classical
Greek texts. The famous Grecs du Roi which resulted were
uncluttered and elegant. Garamond, the first commercial
typefounder, also designed the roman and italic typefaces
which bear his name and which played a leading role in
European typographical design until the end of the sixteenth
century.
In this great humanist movement, Christophe Plantin (see
page 14), a French bookbinder who became a citizen of
Antwerp and a printer, acted as a connecting link with the
Netherlands, where a great dynasty of printers, the El-
zeviers, had come to the fore and would be active until the
beginning of the eighteenth century. The Elzeviers gave their
name to an elegant wedge-serif typeface.
In 1692, during the reign of Louis XIV and classicism,
Abbé Nicolas Jaugeon of the French Academy of Sciences
was given the task of creating a new typeface. His design, cut
by Philippe Grandjean, was called Romain du Roi and was
reserved for the exclusive use of the Imprimerie Royale the
Royal Press. This cold, majestic script was first used in 1702.
The eighteenth century was an age of elegant typography
in Britain. The typefounder William Caslon cut a highly
legible typeface which is still in use today. Caslon was the
typeface in which a Baltimore printer issued the official
copies of the United States Declaration of Independence.
Another English printer, John Baskerville, who taught cal¬
ligraphy, designed a graceful, balanced typeface which revo¬
lutionized typography and is still popular.
In eighteenth-century France, Louis-René Luce, engraver
to King Louis XV, introduced the rational spirit of the
Enlightenment and the Encyclopedists into typographical
experimentation, while Pierre-Simon Fournier and François-
Ambroise Didot invented the point system of typographic
measurement. Both Didot's son Firmin and Giambattista
12

ABC
abc
AB<C
ab
Bodoni of Parma were inspired by Baskerville's work to
create very similar forms of austere lettering with strongly
contrasting thick and thin strokes. Their work influenced
nineteenth-century type design in several countries.
The development of lithography, a process of printing
from a stone surface invented in 1796 by the dramatist
Aloys Senefelder (see page 7), encouraged printing from
types based on calligraphic script with fine, supple curves.
From 1830 onwards, as a result of scientific and technical
advances and the development of industry and trade, a
dynamic form of typography came into being through the
work of typefounders such as Alexandre de Berny and
Théophile Beaudoire. Egyptian, with its slab serifs, and Fat
Face, still widely used in the press and advertising, were
highly fashionable typefaces.
William Morris, the poet and writer who made a major
contribution to the revival of English decorative art in the
late nineteenth century, was the leader of the Arts and Crafts
Movement which took inspiration from the styles of medie¬
val times. The work produced by his Kelmscott Press had a
strongly individual graphic personality and exercised wide
influence. In France, George Auriol and the painter and
engraver Eugène Grasset were among the masters of Art
Nouveau. The latter received support from the typefounder
Georges Peignot, who later, with his son Charles, produced
a range of typefaces which would dominate printing until the
advent of phototypesetting in 1956. Peignot, designed by the
French poster artist Adolphe Mouron Cassandre in 1937,
and Bifur, a shaded script of great originality, are among the
finest typefaces cut by the Deberny and Peignot typefoundry.
Today, although computerization is widespread, there is a
welcome revival of interest among young people in the art of
calligraphy, which is encouraging the search for and creation
of new designs. Outstanding modern designers of digitized
letters include the great German calligrapher Hermann Zapf;
Adrian Frutiger of Switzerland; Ladislas Mandel, José
Mendoza, Albert Botón, all of France; as well as the young
French designer of Arin, Franck Jalleau.
We are at the dawn of a new age of typography. Lettering
is no longer created by lead objects but by strokes of light.
Photocomposition systems can now provide higher screen
resolution, allowing sharper definition of characters, as well
as an immense variety of typefaces, offering great scope for
creativity. Soon, these machines will achieve a degree of
sensitivity close to that of handwriting, and will give typo¬
graphers a degree of control over the design of lettering far
superior to that of early electronic typesetting systems. But to
safeguard an entire heritage of craftsmanship, metal type must
not be allowed to disappear.
ROGER DRUET, a leading French typographer and calligrapher, has been
professor ofgraphic design and the history ofwriting at the Ecole Supérieure
des Arts Appliqués, in Paris, since 1960. He is the author ofnumerous studies
on the art ofwriting in ancient and modern times, notably La Civilisation de
l'Ecriture (1977).
C
Specimen letters of 2 typefaces designed in
18th-century Europe, Baskerville roman (far
left) and Didot roman (left). With the creation
of the typeface that bears his name, John
Baskerville (1706-1775) made a major
contribution to the development of English
fine printing. Another important step towards
modern typography was made in France, by
Firmin Didot (1764-1836), whose typeface is a
far cry from the flowing lines of earlier designs
which were natural to pen or brush.
A typeface known as Bifur,
designed by the French artist
Adolphe Mouron Cassandre in
1937, and cut by the Deberny and
Peignot typefoundry.
Above, Labyrinth (1981), a
photographic print by Albertas
Gurskas (born 1935), a graduate of
the Lithuanian SSR Art Institute.
Enlargement of a letter "w",
digitized for generation by
computer. When the letter is
printed at normal size, the "steps"
become, or should become,
invisible.
Letters from Arin roman (below right), a new
computer typeface designed by Franck Jalleau,
of France. The design, which won an award in
an international typographical design
competition held in 1987, moves away from the
square outlines of early digitized type and
returns to calligraphic sources. Below, a stu
for the companion italic face. AB£
abc
13
