The baptism ofKiev
BY BORIS V. RAUSCHENBACH 


A thousandyears ago,
the birth ofa Christian nation
A thousand years ago, in 988, the Slav principality of
Kievan Rus', or Kievan Russia, came into being as
one of a cluster of Christian States in Europe. Its
emergence was one of the far-reaching consequences of a bold
feudal reform of the State structures which was carried out by
Grand Prince Vladimir, who wished to put his principality on
the same footing as the developed feudal monarchies of that
time.
In 980 Vladimir was at the head of a loose federation of Slav
tribes, which could only be held together by the use of armed
force (or at least the constant threat of its use). In order to
strengthen this federation, the young prince took two impor¬
tant decisions. First, he settled in Kiev, intent on keeping his
hands on the reins of government, which his predecessors had
abandoned for months or even years while leading military
expeditions. Second, he endeavoured to unite the Slav tribes
ideologically as we should say today by means of a reli¬
gion common to them all.
Once established in Kiev, Vladimir began to build fortifica¬
tions to the east of the town, thus making it clear that he meant
to stay in the capital and defend it against nomads. It was
essential to the success of the radical State reforms that life in
the city should be peaceful and safe.
w t *9 ~
y f «M91

The Saviour in Glory, an icon painted by
Andrei Rublev around 1420 and today pre¬
served in the Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow.
Christ is depicted on His throne surrounded by
seraphim and the 4 symbols of the Evangelists
(see also colour page 21).
A thousand years ago, in 988, Vladimir, grandprince ofKiev, who had
recently been converted to Christianity, bade thepeoples over which he
ruled to follow his example, in order to consolidate their political and
spiritual union. Far left, imposing bronze statue in Kiev (4. 5 metres high
and standing on a pedestal 16 metres high) shows Vladimir holding a
cross in one handand his princely headgear in the other. The monument
was inaugurated in 1853. Vladimir later became the hero of popular
epics and was canonized by the Orthodox Church. According to the
Soviet specialist Sergei Beliaev, Vladimir was baptized in the baptistery
of the Uvarov basilica at the Byzantine town of Chersonesus in the
Crimea (near the modern city ofSevastopol). Left, drawing of a recon¬
stitution ofthe baptistery. Above left, verticalsection ofthe baptistery as
it was in the 10th century, showing the remains of the walls as they are
today. Drawings were executed as part of a project to rebuild the
baptistery.
To solve the second problem the unification of the allied
tribes he first of all gave "equal rights" to all the main tribal
gods (and consequently to those groups of the clergy that had
most influence). A traveller arriving in Kiev from afar could
see that the god of his own tribe was worshipped in Kiev as
well as the Kievan gods. Six heathen gods were worshipped in
Kiev; traces of these cults have been found by modern
archaeologists.
These measures taken by Prince Vladimir strengthened the
State. But it soon became clear that the path on which he had
embarked so successfully was actually leading nowhere.
There were two main reasons for this. First, even after Vladi¬
mir's innovations the heathen religion perpetuated the old
way of life. It suited a patriarchal system, but it was a major
obstacle to the formation of the new production relationships
of nascent feudalism. A new law, new customs, a new social
awareness and a new approach to the world were all needed.
The old paganism could not provide these things. But they
were all to be found in Byzantium.
The second reason was that Kievan Rus' could not attain
equality with the leading countries of Europe and the East, it
could not, to use a modern expression, reach "world class"
unless it borrowed from those countries a knowledge of
crafts, building techniques, science, culture and much else.
And all this, too, was to be found in Byzantium.
Vladimir's choice of religion was largely conditioned by

The "Chronicle ofRadziwill" (named after the
Lithuanian prince to whom it belonged) is a
late 15th-century illustrated manuscript con¬
taining over 600 miniatures, many of which
are based on far older models. Far right, minia¬
ture showing Princess Olga, the first pagan
ruler (945-964) ofKievan Russia to accept the
Christian faith. Right, miniature bearing the
date 1071 depicts an encounter between
Christians and pagans. At left are the prince
with his halberd and a bishop with his cross,
accompanied by their followers. At right, a
wizard in a long white robe with wide sleeves,
also accompanied by his attendants.
SfejL
&
! ~
» * l 7^-. ^- . »»
history, but it was also due to his wisdom as a statesman. Rus'
had already forged quite strong economic links with Byzan¬
tium, which was not far away. The Bulgarians, who were the
kinsfolk of the people of Rus', had accepted Christianity
about 100 years before, largely thanks to the work of Cyril
and Methodius, who had developed a Slav alphabet and
preached Christianity in the Slav language. Vladimir's deci¬
sion may well have been influenced by the fact that in the
Orthodox Church, unlike the Roman Catholic Church, peo¬
ple could worship God in a language they understood.
At this time Byzantium was still at the height of its glory.
The tradition of Antiquity still survived there. Homer and
other classical writers of Antiquity were studied in its schools,
and Plato and Aristotle lived on in the philosophical disputes
that took place there. The Byzantine form of Christianity met
the needs of a feudal society, and therefore fully conformed
with Vladimir's intentions. And at the same time it solved the
problem of providing a single religion for all the tribes of
ancient Rus'.
Neither Rus' nor Byzantium regarded the proposed accept¬
ance of Christianity as a purely religious step. Byzantium's
view, expressed in simplistic terms, was that since Rus' was
turning to the Orthodox faith and the head of the Orthodox
Church was the Byzantine patriarch and the emperor, Rus'
automatically became a vassal of Byzantium.
But the State of ancient Rus' was expanding and was already
quite powerful, and had fought Byzantium successfully sever¬
al times; it did not intend to play the role of a vassal. Vladimir
and his court had other ideas. They thought that the accept¬
ance of Christianity and the adoption of Byzantine culture
and skills along with Christianity should in no way diminish
the independence of Rus'. As the prince saw it, Rus' should
become a State friendly to Byzantium, but should retain its
entire sovereignty.
The introduction of Christianity was a gradual process;
authorities today believe that it took around 100 years a
very short time in view of the vast size of the country. The
Christianization of Sweden and Norway, which began about
the same time as that of Rus', took 250 and 150 years
respectively.
Vladimir's political reform released a potential that had
been gradually building up within the society of Rus'. The
rapid development of the country shows how timely the
reform was.
Master builders were invited to come from Byzantium to
Rus', where they erected stone churches and other buildings
and adorned them with frescoes, mosaics and icons. Russians
worked with them, learning skills of which they had known
nothing before. The next generation erected elaborate build¬
ings in the towns of Rus', with hardly any help from for¬
eigners. Changes took place in agriculture, too, and horticul¬
ture was introduced into Rus' at this time.
The clergy who had come to Rus' from Byzantium did not
merely conduct religious services in the new churches; they
also trained "national leaders" for the Church, and knowledge
and literacy spread widely as a result. Schools were opened,
and Vladimir made the children of the nobility attend them,
despite the mothers' protests. He sent young men to study in
other countries. A chronicle was begun. Like other developed
States, Kievan Rus' started to mint its own gold coins.
Little by little, ancient Rus' became a State with a new high
culture, although it would be wrong to think that it did not
have an authentic culture of its own in pagan times. This pagan
culture was to live on for a considerable time, and it imparted
certain unique features to the art of ancient Rus'. What was'
new was mainly that body of knowledge that had already been
acquired by cultured peoples throughout the world, ranging
from the works of Aristotle to techniques for building stone
arches.
But rapid as the changes of Vladimir's day were, his feudal
reform was not completed in his lifetime. More time was
needed, and Vladimir's work was finished by his son, Yaro-
slav the Wise. As the chroniclers say, Vladimir ploughed the
land, Yaroslav sowed the seed, and we (later generations) have
reaped the harvest.
Yaroslav was as zealous as his father had been in continuing
the reform. Like his father, he built fortifications to defend his
lands, this time mainly in the west. Like his father, he saw to it
that nothing held up the feudal reforms; and he showed just as



much energy in building, clearly striving to make Kiev the
equal of Byzantium (later Constantinople). He did much to
develop trade; and he began to strike silver coins as well as
gold.
Yaroslav's principal aim, however, was to build up a

z
©
s
genuinely Russian intelligentsia (insofar as such a concept can
be used with reference to that period). Vladimir had not had
time to do this. Literacy in itself was not enough; steps had to
be taken to ensure that Kievan Rus' did not have to "import"
Greek clergy, that it had its own scholars, writers and philo¬
sophers, and that it could, if necessary, wage an ideological
struggle, notably against Byzantine imperial ideology. It is
not surprising that Russian monasticism is first heard of in
Yaroslav's day.
Inventories dating from the fifteenth and sixteenth centur¬
ies (earlier ones have not survived) show that most of the
books in the monastic libraries were secular rather than
religious. There were chronicles, historical records, "itinerar¬
ies" or geographical works, philosophical and military
treatises, and classical works such as the History of theJewish
War by Flavius Josephus. A learned monk must indeed have
had an all-round education.
Chronicles such as The Russian Primary Chronicle and
polemical works (often with a definite political undercurrent)
were written in the monasteries. Books were copied, too. We
are indebted to copyists in the monasteries for the fact that we
can read the ancient chronicles that have come down to us
(works such as The Song of Igor's Campaign). Icons were



painted by masters such as Alimpi of Kiev. The Russian clergy
who replaced those from Byzantium were trained in the
monasteries.
In 1051, after the death of the Greek metropolitan of Kiev,
Yaroslav himself (acting without the emperor or the patriarch
of Constantinople) "having called together the bishops", for
the first time appointed a Russian metropolitan, Hilarión, a
priest in the prince's village of Berestovo. The Russian Ortho¬
dox Church was asserting its independence. Metropolitan
Hilarión was certainly a man of great ability. His work "On
Law and Grace", a remarkable example of the literature of
ancient Rus', was a trenchant ideological weapon in the battle
for the independence of Kievan Rus'.
The work of literacy teaching and school building con¬
tinued under Yaroslav (and not only in Kiev). We have
evidence that a school for 300 children was opened in Nov¬
gorod in 1030, at which children began to "learn to read
books". Schools for girls were founded. Gradually all sectors
of the population learnt to read and write, as we know from
Engraved on this white stone cross is the so-
called "Hymn to the Cross", an important
specimen of Russian writing in the 12th cen¬
tury. The cross once stoodnear the church ofthe
Intercession ofthe Virgin, on the riverNerl (see
photo 22, page 15), and is today preserved in
the municipal museum at Bogolyubovo. '

inscriptions that have been found on strips of birch bark.
Yaroslav himself "was diligent in reading books by night and
day", and he also "collected many books, translated books
from the Greek to the Slav language, and wrote many books".
Culture was spreading rapidly among the people of ancient
Rus'.
Civilized States cannot exist without written laws. Yaroslav
introduced a number of written statutes, including "Russian
Law". In a word, under Yaroslav, who completed Vladimir's
reform, Kievan Rus' became a' freely developing feudal State,
the equal of any State in the civilized world. It was surpassed
by no other country, either in economic and social structure
(feudalism, which continued to develop) or in culture, trade
or the arts of war.
The introduction of Christianity, which became the ideolo¬
gical basis of the feudal State system of ancient Rus', played a
progressive role in the early Middle Ages. The old division
into tribes was a thing of the past. A people had taken shape as
a State, and from it, in time, emerged the Russians, Ukrainians
and Byelorussians.
The earliest works of Old Russian literature
date from the late 10th century. Most of them
have come down to us in theform ofcollections
of texts known as Izborniki. Above, frontis¬
piece of the Izbornik of 1073, one of the oldest
of these manuscripts. Based on Bulgarian texts
translated from Greek, it was compiled for
Prince Svyatoslav Yaroslavich and constitutes
a kind of theological encyclopaedia containing
over 380 articles by 25 authors.
BORIS VIKTOROVICH RAUSCHENBACH is a Soviet Academician,
winner of the Lenin Prize and a member of the International Academy of
Astronautics. A specialist in mechanics, the theory of combustion and the
control of the orientation of spacecraft, he was closely involved in the
preparations for the first Soviet space flights. Among his published works are
a study on spatial structures in ancient Russian painting (1975) and an essay
on iconography as a means of conveying philosophical ideas (1985).
8
