Computerized typesetting
in China
BY XU LIAN-SHENG
THE technique of printing using mov¬
able type was invented by Bi Sheng
in China between 1041 and 1048 and
not, as is widely believed, by Johannes
Gutenberg in fifteenth-century Europe. The
type used by Bi Sheng was made of earthen¬
ware, but in later times in China it became
common to use wood, enamelware or metal.
With the development of movable lead type,
"hot metal" came to be used all over the
world for the mass production of printed
works.
The low cost of setting lead type, which
could be melted down after printing so that
the same metal was used over and over again,
made this technique the mainstay of the
printing industry for centuries. With the
rapid progress of photocomposition,
XU LIAN-SHENG, of China, is deputy director
of the Photosetting Centre of the China Research
Institute of Printing Science and Technology. He
also played a leading part in the design of China's
KY Microcomputer Photosetting System.
however, and especially the computerization
of typesetting in recent years, movable lead
type has inevitably become obsolete.
In China, setting movable type has always
been a complex and exhausting job because
of the huge number of characters in the
Chinese language. A typesetter has to walk
between five or six cases of type and reach
high and low in order to find and retrieve the
required pieces.
A modern version of this problem arises
with computerized typesetting. A regular
keyboard will suffice for entering into the
computer all the letters of Western lan¬
guages, but has far too few keys to enter the
thousands of Chinese characters.
Two methods can be used to solve the
problem. One is to make a large keyboard
with each key representing a Chinese charac¬
ter, the finding and entering of which are
done by an operator. The advantage of this
method is that the operator can see the char¬
acter to be keyed in. The disadvantage is that
the keyboard has to be very large and the
arrangement of the keys is extremely com¬
plicated. The operator takes a long time to
learn by heart the position of each character,
and searching among the mass of keys is a
laborious task.
The other method is to use a keyboard the
same size as that of a Western-language com¬
puter and enter each Chinese character by
striking more than one key in a certain pat¬
tern which reflects the construction of that
character. A number of systems have been
developed in accordance with this principle;
they all make use of either the vocal or the
written features of a given character.
An operator using the vocal method has to
transliterate the characters into the Chinese
Phonetic Alphabet and then key in the let¬
ters. For instance, to enter the word China,
which has two characters, the operator
strikes the letters making up the words
"Zhong Guo" (the phonetic pronunciation
of the word). The advantage of this method
20

Cases of metal type in the composing room of a
daily newspaper in China. The Chinese writing
system, which is ideographic rather than
alphabetic, uses several thousand characters.
©
Drawing of Wang Chen's movable wooden type
printing process, developed in the late 13th cen¬
tury, some 250 years after Bi Sheng's invention
of movable type. Right, a compositor typeset¬
ting with characters ingeniously arranged in
revolving typecases to enable rapid retrieval.
Left, brushing the back of a sheet of paper to
take an impression from the inked printing
block.
Illustration from Science and Civilisation in China, Vol 5, Part 1,
by Tslen Tsuen-Hsuln and Joseph Needham © Cambridge Uni¬
versity Press, 1985
An operator working on one of the first com¬
puterized typesetters for the Chinese language,
the KY Microcomputer Photosetting System
developed at the China Research Institute of
Printing Science and Technology.
Photo © Xu Lian-Sheng/Chinese edition of the Unesco Courier,
Beijing
A Chinese typewriter. The tray contains some
2,500 characters individually cast in lead and
arranged face up. Above is a sheet of paper on a
roller, and the typing mechanism, which is
moved into position above the required charac¬
ter. The operator then pushes a lever which lifts
the character out of the tray and forces it
against the inked ribbon.
is that anyone who knows the correct pro¬
nunciation of the character to be keyed in
can operate the machine without previous
training. The disadvantage lies in the high
rate of duplicated codes due to the fact that
there are so many homophones in Chinese.
Various methods of text input make use of
written features. All Chinese characters can
be broken down into basic structural com¬
ponents, which are few in number. If these
components are properly arranged on a
keyboard, any Chinese character can be
keyed in by grouping them. For example, the
word Jlj (country) is composed of 3£ and
\_\ . Both the number of key strokes needed
to enter a character and the rate of possible
duplicated codes can be reduced to a fairly
low level if the breakdown of the compo¬
nents is correct. Furthermore, the operator
does not need to know how to pronounce
the character. This method is clearly useful
since there are so many local dialects in
China that sometimes people who live fif¬
teen kilometres apart cannot understand
each other.
One practice commonly used to increase
operating speed is the word-group method,
whereby the operator strikes a single key to
enter a frequently used word or phrase.
Another problem is that Chinese text may
be set either vertically or horizontally (in
some magazines articles are set both ways),
and a good composing system must be cap¬
able of meeting these requirements. What is
more, a number of Chinese magazines pub¬
lish articles containing words or passages in
foreign languages, and so we also need a
system which can set Western language texts
as well as those in Chinese.
With regard to output the generation by
the computer of text in the required for¬
mat the biggest problem is how to cope
with the mass of data involved in processing
a huge number of characters each of which,
for the computer, has an information con¬
tent many times higher than that of an En¬
glish letter. Various methods have thus been
devised for compressing this information
into abridged form so as to take up less of the
computer's memory. This is an area in which
there is a need for further study and develop¬
ment.
Computerized typesetting in the Chinese
language has already made remarkable prog¬
ress and, as it comes to replace metal type¬
setting, will surely play an increasingly
important role in the Chinese printing
industry.
Below, Chinese ideograms printed using mod¬
ern metal type, in different typestyles and sizes.
Bottom, the basic elements of Chinese script,
from which all ideograms are constructed.
Illustration from Science and Civilisation in China, Vol 5, Part 1,
by Tsien Tsuen-Hsuin and Joseph Needham © Cambridge Uni¬
versity Press, 1985
ä $ t m pu si
S ft fi W rji m
* M « W nu si
* Jt # m 1$ «
tt * ti- äi m w
r. M 9 M rr »
) ~7
/ ¡
Tj V
21
