A legacy for all
BY FEDERICO MAYOR ZARAGOZA
Director-General of Unesco
THE cultural heritage of each
people is an expression of the
thousand and one facets of its
genius and of the mysterious continuity
which unites all it has created over the
centuries and all it has the potential to
create in the future. The preservation of
this heritage is an activity inherent in a
people's vitality and creativity.
The natural environment in which a
people lives also contributes to the sha¬
ping of its cultural identity. Works of
human creativity are set in landscapes
which are themselves sources of inspira¬
tion and beauty. The natural heritage is
the complement of the cultural heritage,
from which it is indissociable. It is of
fundamental importance for science and
for the conservation of plant and animal
species, which constitute an irreplace¬
able resource and are indispensable for
the maintenance of life on our planet.
The heritage, whether it be architectu¬
ral monuments and ensembles, land¬
scapes or nature reserves, is continually
exposed to many risks of deterioration,
resulting from such causes as the wear
and tear of time, irresponsible human
action, erosion, humidity, pollution,
rampant urbanism, and mass tourism.
In face of such dangers, which are
everywhere tending to become more se¬
vere, a new awareness of the need to
safeguard the heritage and a new desire
to co-operate actively to conserve and
present it to the public are beginning to
make themselves felt at world level.
Legislative, financial, technical and
administrative efforts deployed in this
field by different States have been given a
large measure of encouragement and
support from Unesco.
One of the most important of Unes¬
co's initiatives has been the framing of
the Convention Concerning the Protec¬
tion of the World Cultural and Natural
Heritage, which rests on the fundamen¬
tally new idea that such protection is not
the separate responsibility of each indivi¬
dual State in which there is a property
worthy of preservation, but a joint res¬
ponsibility incumbent on the whole of
humanity, which is the trustee of all the
great landmarks in the natural and cultu¬
ral history of the globe.
The Convention, adopted by the Ge¬
neral Conference of Unesco in 1972,
established a Committee of twenty-one
Member States which has the task of
examining, according to carefully defi¬
ned criteria, cultural and natural proper
ties of outstanding value which may jus¬
tify their inclusion on the "World
Heritage List".
States Parties to the Convention
nominate to the Committee properties
within their borders which they consider
to possess such outstanding value. In so
doing they undertake to protect the pro¬
perties in question. But, if their nomina¬
tions are accepted by the Committee,
they may also be eligible for certain
forms of assistance from the inter¬
national community under the World
Heritage Fund established by the
Convention.
The Fund, which is financed by
contributions from States Parties and
donations from other States, from insti¬
tutions and private individuals, makes it
possible to provide material or technical
support to those countries that need it. It
also makes possible the training of spe¬
cialized staff.
The success of the Convention in the
last fifteen years can be gauged from the
fact that 102 States have become Parties
to it, and that 288 properties have been
inscribed on the World Heritage List. It
is to be hoped that one day the List will
be fully universal and will constitute the
accepted reference for masterpieces of
nature and culture whose protection
concerns, henceforth, all countries and
all mankind.
For the Committee is not simply enu¬
merating cultural and natural properties.
It is attempting to create a world list
which will be as coherent and complete
as possible, following a thematic and
regional approach and reflecting the in¬
terdependence of cultures and the
complementarity of ecosystems in space
and time.
Inclusion on the World Heritage List
brings new prestige to the properties
inscribed there. For the people of a
country in which a World Heritage pro¬
perty is located such recognition is an
opportunity to take stock of the finest
elements of their heritage. But even more
important is the opportunity thus
offered to people of other countries to
discover and cherish these properties,
some of which are already well known,
others less so.
The compilation of the List makes it
possible to measure the extreme wealth
and diversity of this heritage. Faithful to
its mission, Unesco is thus contributing
to the discovery by each of the heritage
of all.
BY ALISON JOLLY
