René
CHAR
A tribute
BY EDOUARD GLISSANT
WHEN poets die, some part of the illumination
of the world dies with them; yet the rever¬
berations of their works open up new hori¬
zons. Aloof from the fads and ephemeral triumphs of
daily life, they bear witness to and, more often than not,
are the dynamic source of those deeper currents that
shape the course of the world. :
René' Char fashioned his writings from the French
language with the silent concentration of a turner work¬
ing at his lathe, inventing a form of expression which lies
somewhere between that of the pastoral poem and the
maxim. The phraseology is familiar and the formulation
is enigmatic yet evocative; and this draws him close to the
very source of the wisdom of the people, to the world of
writings based on popular oral traditions in which the
poet works the raw material of words with the same
simplicity as a potter works his clay. Poetry of this kind
thus stands at the interface of the spoken and the written
word, even if it owes its permanence to the written
dimension. To it could be applied the words that the poet
Jean Grosjean used about the Gospels when he declared
that "... they are manifestly spoken yet deliberately
written".
This strange marriage of a diamond-hard economy of
writing and the comfortingly familiar grace of the voice is
paralleled by the rapprochement that René Char made
between justice and beauty. A militant who fought
against the forces of darkness, he never resorted to sim¬
plistic anathematizing. In one of his finest and most
profound books of poetry, Feuillets d'Hypnos, written at
the time (1943-1944) that he was leading a resistance
group in the Vaucluse against the Nazi occupying forces,
he wrote: "We invite Liberty to sit down with us at all the
meals we share. The seat remains empty but a place is
always laid for her."
The source of the consistent quality of happiness and
well-being that is to be found in René Char's writings is
undoubtedly his passionate attachment to the Vaucluse, a
region from which he never strayed. In this land of
burning light, which gave him his love of painting and of
certain artists such as Braque, Miró, Lam and Vieira da
Silva, of intense silence, whose muffled echo can be heard
in the aphorisms and philosophical notes of his Recherche
de la base et du sommet, (1941-1965; "Search for the Base
and the Summit"), of the benison of sunlit waters and the
mute stirrings of olive trees, in this very special land René
Char put down the roots of that unquenchable desire to
create, to love, to go ever further, that makes him the
contemporary of each and every inhabitant of this planet.
The French poet René Char (1907-1988)
"Et qui sait voir la terre aboutir à des fruits,
Point ne l'émeut l'échec quoiqu'il ait tout perdu. "
(And he who has seen the earth come to fruition
Will never know defeat though all be lost.)
René Char
mmB^WÊÊ
tí
©
33
