Animals in Islam
by Abdelhamid S. Hamdan
THE two most important nights in the
Islamic year are Laylat al-Qadr (the
night of the determination), when
the Qur'an was revealed, and Laylat al-
'Isrä' wa al-Mi'räj (the night of the noctur¬
nal journey from Mecca to Jerusalem of
Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, and of
his ascension to heaven).
How was this miraculous nocturnal jour¬
ney from Mecca to Jerusalem accom¬
plished? How could the Prophet have co¬
vered the distance so quickly? Many histo¬
rians and commentators on the Qur'an tell
us that on that night the Prophet travelled
on an animal called al-Buräq, which trans¬
ported him at such a miraculous speed that
"in a single stride it disappeared from
view". The commentators refer to this
mount as a kind of horse, described as "an
animal halfway in size between a mule and a
donkey". Some of them add that it was
white with a long back and ears. The con¬
cept of al-Buräq was later developed and
given figurative representation. At a later
stage it was even given a human face.
Al-Jähiz (died 869), a noted Arab writer
on animals, wrote in his Kitäb al-Hayawän
("Book of Animals") that there is some¬
thing marvellous about a spider because it
knows how to spin a web without receiving
any training. According to tradition, a spi¬
der saved the Prophet Muhammad at a
moment of great danger during his hijrah
(migration) from Mecca to Medina. He had
taken refuge in a cave with his travelling
companion, Abu Bakr. Perceiving a
spider's web at the entrance to the cave, the
Qurayshites who were pursuing them aban¬
doned their search because a man could not
have entered the cave without destroying
the web. The spider is thus mentioned in the
Qur'an and lends its name to the 29th sürah
(chapter).
In Arabia, the cradle of Islam, certain
domestic animals such as the horse, the
camel and the goat played an important role
in the lives of Muslims, who attributed to
' them the qualities and defects of men. The
cock, for example, was said to be generous,
the lizard deceitful, the lion courageous,
and the bustard stupid. Moreover, a num¬
ber of Arab and Turkish tribes bore animal
names, such as Asad (lion), Kalb (dog) or
Quraysh (shark). Popular superstition attri¬
buted magical powers to certain animals
which were seen as the embodiment of evil
spirits. The metamorphosis of animals into
human form occurs both in folk tales of
fantasy and among the miracles performed
by saints. Some animal species have patron
saints who often take the form of the anim¬
als they protect.
A number of animals were, and still are,
associated with the practice of magic, and
many Arab scholars have written at length
about how to interpret the appearance of
certain animals in dreams. The desert was
populated with fabulous animals such as the
ghul (gorilla), which was also the animal
form assumed by jinn (spirits) when they
wanted to approach human beings.
In pre-Islamic Arabia, jinn were the
nymphs and satyrs of the desert. They rep¬
resented that side of nature which was un¬
subdued and hostile to man. They figured
prominently in popular literature, especial¬
ly in the first part of The Thousand and One
Nights where they often transform them¬
selves into animals such as monkeys, cats or
dogs in order to act in a hostile manner
towards human beings.
As for the ghuls, although these fabulous
animals were capable of constantly chang¬
ing their guise and appearing to travellers in
the most attractive forms, they could always
be recognized by their asses' hooves. This
ability to change form and colour became
proverbial.
Other fabulous animals, mainly birds
such as the 'anqa, rukh ("roc") and
simurgh, frequently appear in folk tales.
The 'anqa, which resembled the phoenix,
was associated with the Ashäb-al-Rass, a
pre-Islamic people who fell victim to this
bird, which became a scourge. The prophet
Hanzala ben Safwän is credited with having
put an end to the 'anqa s ravages. After the
coming of Islam the 'anqa was identified
with the simurgh, which plays a role in
Iranian mythology.
Animal tales in the folklore of certain
parts of the Islamic world, especially in
North Africa, form an important part of the
oral tradition. The central role is often
played by the jackal (Ibn Äwä), half wolf,
half fox.
Zoology was never a very popular subject
with Islamic scientists, and, despite the
translation in the 9th century of Aristotle's
Historia animalium by Yahyä ben al-Bitrik,
h The simurgh, a fabulous bird which appears
? in the allegorical poem The Conference ofthe
i Birds by the Persian Sufi mystic Farid addin
m 'Attär (d. c. 1220). Drawing is based on a
i detail from a 15th-century illustrated manu-
o script of the poem.
Illustration from a manuscript of Kalila wa-
Dimna, the Arabic version of a collection of
Indian animal stories designed for the
education of princes and attributed to Bid-
pai, a legendary Indian sage. It shows a
dialogue between the King and the Bird
Fanza in which the King says, "We have
betrayed you and you have taken revenge so
that we are now even. Come back to us and
have no fear." "No," says the Bird. "I will
never come back to you."
28

uy
S* ú\ué¿&h&^>ks^Jk&^*
.
^^¿m^j^m\^w^w^
Photo (£ BOtiotheque National«. Ptnt
29

The constellations of the Centaur and the
Lion as shown in The Book ofFixed Stars, by
'Abd ar-Rahmän as-Süfí (903-986). Follow¬
ing ancient Greek tradition, the author
represented the constellations by animal or
human figures or by objects.
it occupies a rather insignificant place in the
various theoretical classifications of the sci¬
ences. It formed an integral part of the
physical and natural sciences, and al-Fârâbï
associated it with the study of the soul. This
is probably largely due to the absence of
organized research and specialized works of
a genuinely scientific character. The
monumental work on animals by al-Jähiz
referred to above is a religious work, not a
book on zoology, and it consists largely of
literary references enriched by oral tradi¬
tions. The same can be said of the Hayät
al-Hayawân (c. 1371) by ad-Damïri (died
1405) which does not offer any new classifi¬
cation, merely reproducing that of al-Jähiz.
{^WA&itrf ¡ ft JE*
v
f
. a
r
")
Physicians and naturalists were in¬
terested in animals, but the only branches of
zoology that were thoroughly and systema¬
tically studied were hippology, hippiatry
and ornithology as applied to the training of
falcons for hunting.
Many animal species figure prominently
in pre-Islamic Arabic poetry, and camels,
horses and other animals continued to be
described in Arabic poetry after the coming
of Islam. Charming verses were written ab¬
out domestic animals, especially goats, cats
and birds. In later centuries the crow and
the lion remained favourite subjects of
poetry, the former symbolizing the sadness
of separation, the latter strength and audac¬
ity ideas dear to Arabs.
Where prose is concerned, the Kalila wa
Dimna, an Arabic translation of a collec¬
tion of Indian animal fables known in
Europe as The Fables of Bidpai, was a
revelation for many people. The original
Indian work was intended to teach wisdom
to princes by means of fables told through
the mouths of animals. This new literary
genre enjoyed great popular success, soon
became part of the Arab and Islamic liter¬
ary heritage, and inspired many writers and
artists.
Representations of animals are not a
prominent feature of art in Islamic coun¬
tries, because of the aniconic and abstract
decoration characteristic of Islamic civiliza¬
tion. Each species is treated differently, in
accordance with ideas derived from liter¬
ature, from daily life, or from their symbolic
and magical significance.
As early as the Ummayad period, animal
figures were being employed for their de¬
corative qualities and to glorify the reigning
power. Animal motifs such as lions and
birds of prey appeared frequently on royal
furnishings and were used to symbolize
royal grandeur.
This taste for animal motifs later became
ever more pronounced, reaching its peak in
Iran, Iraq, and Egypt, and later in Ottoman
Turkey, where scenes from daily life (hunt¬
ing, animal rearing and training) were fre¬
quently portrayed.
Muslim painters and miniaturists also
depicted animals, but in quite a different
spirit, producing highly stylized interpreta¬
tions which were not devoid of accuracy or
even of realism.
ABDELHAMID S. HAMDAN, Egyptian special¬
ist in the history of¡slam, is the author ofa number
of scientific studies on Islam and is currently
editing a series ofArabic manuscripts on history,
science and mysticism.
©
30
