Steel manufacture
The Chinese were the first to produce cast iron, and were also the first to
make steel from cast iron. This was fully under way by the second century
BC at the latest, and eventually led to the invention of the Bessemer steel
process in the West in 1856. Henry Bessemer's work had been anticipated
in 1852 by William Kelly, from a small town near Eddyville, Kentucky.
Kelly had brought four Chinese steel experts to Kentucky in 1845, from
whom he had learned the principles of steel production used in China for
over 2,000 years previously, and had made his own developments.
Iron, when melted and reformed into ingots, has a carbon content. This
determines the nature of the metal as cast iron or steel, whichever the case
may be. Cast iron is brittle because it contains a considerable quantity of
carbon, perhaps as much as 4.5 per cent. "Decarburization" is the removal
of some or all of this carbon. Remove much of the carbon and you have
steel; remove nearly all the carbon and you have wrought iron. The
Chinese used wrought iron a great deal, most notably perhaps in building
large bridges and aqueducts.
The Chinese invented the suspension bridge, often constructing such
bridges with chains whose links were of wrought iron instead of plaited
bamboo. Cast iron was called "raw iron", steel was called "great iron", and
wrought iron was called "ripe iron" by the Chinese. In order to make iron
"ripe", they clearly understood that the iron was losing a key ingredient,
and they described this as "loss of vital juices". But, without knowledge of
modern chemistry, they could not identify the ingredient as carbon.
The Chinese were not the first to make steel. But they did invent two
particular steel manufacturing processes, of which taking the carbon out of
cast iron was the first. The process of "decarburization" was accomplished
by blowing oxygen on to the cast iron ("oxygenation"). We read of this in
the classic Huainanzi, which dates from about 120 BC.
Making steel by this method was also called "the hundred refinings
method", since it was often done over and over again, the steel becoming
stronger each time. Swords made by this method were highly prized. The
back of the sword, not having an edge, would often be made of the more
elastic wrought iron, and the harder steel would be welded on to it to bear
the cutting edge for a sabre. The carbon content of the steel could be
adjusted depending upon how much oxygen was applied to the molten
iron.
Generally speaking, steel with a higher carbon content is stronger, but
then strength is traded against brittleness. Steel can have a carbon content
of between 0.1 per cent and 1.8 per cent. The Chinese could only make
empirical judgments on the qualities of steel obtained from certain num¬
bers of refinings. If very soft steel was desired, they could go on blowing
more oxygen in, removing increasing amounts of the carbon. And they
practised the world-wide technique of quenching, whereby steel that is
cooled instantly in a liquid when still either red- or white-hot preserves its
inner metallic micro-structure which it would lose if allowed to cool
slowly. On the other hand, cooling steel slowly (tempering) has other
advantages. The Chinese were great masters at manipulating their iron
materials in countless different ways to obtain the exact type of metal they
required.
Around the fifth century AD, the Chinese developed the "co-fusion"
process, in which cast and wrought iron were melted together to yield the
"something in between", which was steel. This is essentially the Martin and
Siemens steel process of 1863, though carried out 1,400 years earlier.
The process was in full swing by the sixth century, from which time we
have a Chinese description of it: "Qiu Huaiwen also made sabres of
'overnight iron'. The method was to bake the purest cast iron, piling it up
with the soft ingots of wrought iron, until after several days and nights, it
was all turned to steel."
We are given precise technical details by Song Yingxing in 1637:
"The method of making steel is as follows. The wrought iron is beaten
Chinese 17th-century print showing
artisans forging an anchor weighing
several tons.
12 _

into thin plates or scales as wide as a finger and around four centimetres
long. These are packed within wrought iron sheets and all tightly pressed
down by cast iron pieces piled on top. The whole furnace is then covered
over with mud (or clay) as well. Large furnace piston bellows are then set to
work, and when the fire has risen to a sufficient heat, the cast iron comes to
its transformation [i.e. melts] first, and dripping and soaking, penetrates
into the wrought iron. When the two are united with each other, they are
taken out and forged; afterwards they are again heated and hammered. This
is many times repeated."



In our own time, experiments have been carried out at the steel works at
Corby in the UK to reproduce the ancient Chinese steel-making techni¬
ques. The experiments were thoroughly successful. A very uniform steel
was obtained, with the carbon from the cast iron spread very evenly
throughout, and a genuine blending of the cast and wrought iron. The
original heating went up to 975°C, and the metal was taken out and forged
with a hand hammer. It was then heated for eight hours at 900°C and came
out beautifully.

