Tibetan brass globe lamp. The lamp is
suspended by 4 separate interlocking
rings which ensure that it always
remains upright.
if subjected to a violent shock. This meant that objects like ploughshares


The cardan suspension
The "cardan suspension", or gimbals, takes its name from Jerome Cardan
(Girolamo Cardano, 1501-1576). But Cardan neither invented the device
nor claimed to have done so. He merely described it in his very popular
book De subtilitate rerum (1550; "The Subtlety of Things"). It appeared in
Europe as early as the ninth century AD; but it was invented in China by
the second century BC at the latest.
This invention is the basis of the modern gyroscope, making possible the
navigation and "automatic pilots" taken for granted in modern aircraft.
Anyone who has been fortunate enough to enter a nineteenth-century
Gypsy caravan will have noticed affixed to the walls the brass gimbals that
hold lamps which remain upright no matter how violently the cart may jolt
on the road. These interlocking brass rings can be moved around as much
as you like, but the lamp suspended in the centre never turns over. This is
the basic idea of the "cardan suspension". A series of rings inside one
another are each joined at two opposing points, enabling them to twist and
turn freely. Consequently, if a heavy weight, such as a lamp, is positioned
upright in the centre, it will remain upright. Whatever motions might occur
to the rings around it will be taken up by the rings themselves, leaving the
lamp unmoved. By the eighteenth century, Chinese mariners were using a
gimbal-mounted compass. A ship's magnetic compass mounted in this way
was free of disturbance by waves.
The earliest textual reference to gimbals which has been found is in a
poem called Ode on Beautiful Women, composed about 140 BC. More
than three centuries later, about 189 AD, the clever mechanic Ding Huan
was given credit for inventing gimbals a second time.
Gimbals reached Europe after 1,100 years. And 800 years after that, the
English physicist Robert Hooke and others adopted its principle in a new
form, applying power from without rather than stabilizing a central
element within, to formulate that Western invention, the universal joint.
And it was this invention which resulted in the transmission of automotive
power in contemporary motor cars. I
11
