Fernando Pessoa
BY JOSÉ AUGUSTO SEABRA
This year has been marked by the
worldwide commemoration of
the centenary of the birth of
Fernando Pessoa, Portugal's greatest
modern poet and one of the great uni¬
versal poets of our time. The crowning
event of the celebrations was a tribute
paid to Pessoa at Unesco Headquarters
last June.
Pessoa may already be said to number
among the great tutelary poets adopted
by the whole of humanity: Homer,
Virgil, Dante, Camöes, Shakespeare,
Goethe, Pushkin, Whitman, Mallarmé,
Machado ... In any event, it is true that
the Pessoan galaxy is constantly ex¬
panding through the growing number
of languages into which the poet's work
has been translated. And notwithstand¬
ing his statement that "My country is
the Portuguese language", Pessoa wrote
a part of his work in English and even
tried his hand at French. Like the gen¬
eration of which he was the guiding
spirit, his horizons were those of the
world: "We are Portuguese who write
for Europe, for all civilization ; as yet we
are nothing, but what we are now doing
will one day be universally known and
recognized".
Such indeed, according to Pessoa, was
the goal of the generation of writers and
artists associated, under his leadership,
with the review Orpheu: "To create a
cosmopolitan art, transcending time and
space", in other words, "an all-arts-in-
one art", "in which the languor and
mysticism of Asia, the primitivism of
Africa, the cosmopolitanism of the
Americas, the exoticism of Oceania and
the decadent machinism of Europe
merge, converge and intermingle".
Through the different aesthetic and
poetic theories that he upheld and the
different identities or "heteronyms"
that he created for himself to embody
those theories each heteronym having
	 30 	
a name, a life and a certain conception of
poetry-Pessoa presented himself in a
wide variety of guises and revealed
Portugal in its multiplicity as a mirror of
the entire universe. Just as every nation
is "a world in its own right", so every
"good Portuguese is several persons at
once", bearing such names as those of
the poet's chief heteronyms, Alberto
Caeiro, Ricardo Reis, Alvaro de
Campos or Fernando Pessoa "himself",
not to mention the "semi-heteronym"
Bernardo Soares for whom "the uni¬
verse is also the Rua dos Douradores",
the street of the gilders in the commer¬
cial heart of Lisbon, his "home" where
he wrote the Livro do Desassossego
("Book of Unrest").
For Pessoa, as for Goethe, the par¬
ticular and the universal are the same. A
wharf in the port of Lisbon, whence
ships would set out on the great voyages
of discovery, was for him "the world in
a nutshell". Similarly, the heteronyms
were emblematic of the people of
Portugal, and in their imaginary lives
they relived the adventure of the
Portuguese in the world.
Ricardo Reis, for example, the eldest
of Pessoa's heteronyms, born, claimed
Pessoa, in Oporto in 1887-one year
before his creatorhad received a clas¬
sical education and been trained as a
doctor, expressed himself in Latinate
Portuguese, was imbued with a Hellenic
sense of beauty and exiled himself to
Brazil for political reasons, travelling
from north to south and from east to
west, and going back from the present to
the past in search of a traditio.
Alvaro de Campos, on the other
hand, supposedly born in Tavira
(Algarve) in 1890-two years after
Pessoa had received a modern educa¬
tion and been awarded a degree in naval
engineering in Glasgow, Scotland, was
attracted to futurism, journeyed to the
CONnNUED ON PAGE 3}
"The Poet Fernando Pessoa and his
Heteronyms" (1978), a painting by the
Portuguese artist Costa Pinheiro, illustrates one
of the most original aspects of Pessoa's life and
work-his creation of alter egos ("heteronyms")
whose poetry he wrote as well as his own. Pessoa
invented names such as Alberto Caeiro, Ricardo
Reis and Alvaro de Campos for these imaginary
poets, but they were more than just
pseudonyms. Pessoa endowed them with their
own life-stories, and an individual outlook, style
and conception of poetry so that their works
differed from his own-although taken together
they expressed different personalities which he
felt to exist within himself.
Pessoa's three major poetic heteronyms,
Alberto Caeiro, Ricardo Reis and Alvaro de
Campos, as visualized byJosé de Almada
Negreiros. Pessoa created other heteronyms,
including the writer Bernardo Soares, "author"
of the "Book of Unrest", and Alexander Search,
to whom Pessoa attributed some of his poetry
in English.

many poets
in one
Fernando Pessoa
photographed in the Baixa
(lower town),
the historic centre of Lisbon.
31

Extract from
Tabacaria ('The Tobacconist's')
I have dreamt more than Napoleon achieved.
I have clasped to my hypothetical heart more humanities than Christ,
I have in secret fashioned philosophies that no Kant ever wrote.
But I am, and perhaps for ever will be, the one who belongs in a garret,
Even though I live elsewhere;
I'll always be the one who wasn't born for that;
I'll always be the one who was gifted;
I'll always be the one who waited for someone to open the door in a wall where there is no door,
And who sang the song of infinity in a chicken coop,
And heard the voice of God in a blocked-up well.
Believe in myself? No, nor in anything else ...
Let Nature pour over my burning head
Her sun, her rain, the wind that tugs at my hair,
And as for the rest, let it come if it has to come, or let it stay put.
Cardiac slaves of the stars,
We conquered the whole world before we rose from our beds;
But when we awaken everything is opaque,
When we get up everything is alien;
We go out and the world is all the earth
Plus the solar system and the Milky Way and the unnamed boundlessness.
Alvaro de Campos
Translated by Michael Fineberg
\ftmv " ^
32

CENTENAIRE DE LA NAISSANCE DE



FERNANDO PESSOA
( ixnmtmonhao
-Mintupárnj**línfti«pt¥ni£jeiv
-M* ¡um n: b kngur pûnufpnc-
loonfry » [he p «iu(fuof Wi^-iuftf
2. Palais dc l'Unesco
7, Place Fontenoy 75007 Paris
Poster published to mark the centenary of
Pessoa's birth, which was commemorated at
Unesco Headquarters in Paris from 13 to
17 June 1988. Accompanying the reproduction
of a pen and ink portrait by Almada Negreiros is
the poet's statement "My country is the
Portuguese language".
Pessoa spent most of his life in the old quarters
of Lisbon, such as this street in the Bairro
Chiado.
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 30
Orient via the Suez Canal and then went
from south to north and from west to
east, in order to move on from the pre¬
sent into the future, with his avant-
garde aesthetics, his poetry of machines
and his inclination towards revolutio.
Fully in keeping with the underlying
pattern of the poetic drama enacted by
the heteronyms, Alberto Caeiro, the
Master, born in Lisbon in 1889, received
"almost no education" apart from
"learning to unlearn", and remained in a
village in the province of Ribatejo as a
"herdsman", plunged in the contempla¬
tion of things "outside time and space",
in the innocence oiinfans, characteristic
of the quintessential poet.
Fernando Pessoa "himself" was born
in Lisbon in 1888. After the death of his
father, he spent his childhood and
adolescence with his mother and step¬
father in South Africa, before returning
with his English education to Lisbon
which he would virtually never leave
again and where he would exercise the
profession of commercial translator.
Thus we see in Pessoa's life and work,
which in fact are one, a dual tendency to
put down roots and to strike off into the
unknown, the simultaneous appeal of
traditio and revolutio characteristic of
the Portuguese in general, of their atti¬
tude to life at home and abroad and of
the way in which they reconcile the
particular and the universal.
"I do not evolve, I TRAVEL," Pessoa
once wrote. But he travelled only "in the
grip of the imagination", even when
remembering real journeys, in particu¬
lar the sea voyages of the Portuguese
and his own, between Lisbon and the
Cape of Good Hope. Through the
workings of the imagination, the jour¬
ney gradually assumes a symbolic
dimension, becomes a spiritual, initia¬
tory quest, as is revealed in his esoteric
poems. For as he journeys, the poet
sheds each of his assumed identities:
Travelling! Losing country after
country!
For ever being someone else...
Thus he travels, irompessoa topessoa,
from nobody to nobody ("pessoa"
means "nobody" in Portuguese), from
mask to mask. For the poet, the per¬
sonality is no more than a "terminus"
to which one returns, where the point
of departure and the point of arrival
coincide in the infinite circularity of a
journey for ever beginning anew, like
that of the "clockwork train" in the poem
"Autopsychography" in which the poet
describes himself as a "fake" even when
he "experiences things for real".
In fact, Pessoa's entire work is an
endless, imaginary poetic journey a
journey through languages, literatures,
aesthetics, philosophies, religions and
world views which the heteronyms
adopt in turn, and in opposition to one
another. Here again the keynote is uni¬
versality. Echoes of myriad civilizations
and cultures resound throughout the
poetry and prose of Pessoa. Attracted
by all forms of knowledge and spir¬
ituality, irrespective of their origin, he
devoted endless commentaries to them.
Suffice it to recall here his ecumenical
pan-religiosity, embracing paganism
and Christianity, Judaism and Sufism,
Taoism and Buddhism. This was
marked by an esotericism which drew
its inspiration from the Rosicrucians
and the Templars and was given sup¬
reme expression in the messianism of a
"Fifth Empire" of universal peace and
fellowship in its Portuguese form,
known as "Sebastianism". Centred on
the myth of the return of King Sebastian
of Portugal, who died in the late six¬
teenth century at the Battle of
Alcazarquivir in Morocco, this messian¬
ism is seen mainly in Mensagem ("Mes¬
sage"), the only book in Portuguese
published in the author's lifetime (he
also published poems in English, but
most of his extensive work remained
buried in a trunk whose inexhaustible
contents were gradually revealed only
after Pessoa's death).
The title of that book, now available
in a bilingual Portuguese-French edi¬
tion in the Unesco Collection of Repre¬
sentative Works, clearly demonstrates
Pessoa's concern with universality it
was chosen at the last moment to replace
the original title "Portugal". May this
Message be, in accordance with the
poet's wishes, a message of hope for all
peoples, for all human beings.
JOSE AUGUSTO SEABRA, Portuguese poet
and essayist, is professor of literary theory and of
Portuguese literature at the University of Oporto
and a specialist on Fernando Pessoa. A former
member of parliament and Minister of Education,
he is currently serving as his country's Ambassa¬
dor to Unesco. Among his recent publications on
Pessoa are an introduction to the bilingual (Portu¬
guese/French) edition of Mensagem (published by
Librairie Corti, Paris, 1988) which features in the
Unesco Collection of Representative Works.
33

Fernando Pessoa:
a biographical sketch
1888: Fernando Pessoa born in Lisbon, son
of Joaquim de Seabra Pessoa, music critic,
and Maria Madalena Nogueira.
1893: His father dies of tuberculosis.
1895: His mother marries the Portuguese
consul in Durban (South Africa), and the
following year she and her son join him
there. In 1899 Pessoa begins secondary
education at Durban High School.
1903-1904: Passes the entrance examination
of Cape Town University, winning the
Queen Victoria Prize for English style.
Writes poetry in English under the names
("heteronyms") Alexander Search and
Robert Anon.
1905: Returns to Lisbon and settles there
permanently. Enrols at the Curso Superior
de Letras but ceases to follow the courses
there after 2 years.
1908 : Finds work as a commercial translator,
and exercises this profession until the end of
his life. Starts to write poems in Portuguese
and composes fragments of his great poem
Fausto. In 1910 Portugal is proclaimed a
republic, which Pessoa welcomes.
1912: Contributes articles on new
Portuguese poetry to A Aguia ("The
Eagle"), organ of the literary movement
Renascença Portuguesa ("Portuguese
Renaissance"), in which he prophesies the
coming of another great national poet, a
"Super-Camoes".
1913-1914: Writes O Marinheiro ("The
Mariner") and, in a single day, composes the
36 poems in the collection O guardador de
rebanhos ("The Herdsman"), which he attri¬
butes to his heteronym and "Master",
Alberto Caeiro. This, he would record
20 years later, was his "triumphal day". His
other major poetic personalities, Ricardo
Reis and Alvaro de Campos, would derive
from different facets of Caeiro. Pessoa initi¬
ates two movements, Paulismo and
Interseccionismo.
1915: The first issue of the avant-garde
review Orpheu, launched by Pessoa in col¬
laboration with Mario de Sá-Carneiro, José
de Almada Negreiros and other Modernist
poets and artists, causes an outcry.
1917: Using the heteronym Alvaro de
Campos, Pessoa contributes a manifesto en¬
titled Ultimatum to the first issue of the
review Portugal Futurista.
1918: Publishes two booklets of poems in
English, Antinous and 35 Sonnets. Together
Pessoa (right) with his friend Costa Brochado in the Martinho da Arcada café, Lisbon,
one of the literary meeting places that he frequented.
with Inscriptions (1920), they are issued in
one volume as English Poems in 1921.
1920: Meets Ophelia Queiroz and writes
love letters to her until their break-up a short
time afterwards. This is Pessoa's only
known affair of the heart.
1921-1922: Contributes a story, O ban-
queiro anarquista ("The Anarchist Bank¬
er"), and some poems which would later
be included in his book Mensagem, to the
review Contemporánea.
1924: Launches the review Athena, which
publishes his "Odes", attributed to Ricardo
Reis, and an essay on a "non-Aristotelian
aesthetic", signed by Alvaro de Campos.
1928-1931: On the establishment of the
military dictatorship in Portugal in 1926,
Pessoa publishes a political manifesto which
gets him into trouble with the censor. Re¬
news his relationship with Ophelia, then
breaks it off for good two years later. Pub¬
lishes the first part of a major prose work,
Livro do Desassossego ("Book of Unrest"),
which would only appear in its entirety
50 years later. Writes occult verse and the
poem Autopsicografia ("Autopsycho-
graphy").
1932: Further parts of Livro do Desassossego
published. Salazar becomes Prime Minister
and Pessoa writes satirical verses repudiating
the dictatorship.
1934: Publishes Mensagem and enters it in a
national competition. A minor poet wins the
award, Pessoa receiving only a "special
prize".
1935: In a letter to the critic Adolfo Casais
Monteiro, Pessoa explains the "genesis of the
heteronyms". His later poems are written in
French or English. His last written words
are in English: "I know not what tomorrow
will bring". Pessoa dies on 30 November in
the Hospital of San Luís dos Franceses,
Lisbon, where he is buried. In 1985, the
fiftieth anniversary of his death, his body is
removed to the Jerónimos Monastery.
1942: Publication begins of Pessoa's exten¬
sive work. Many of his manuscripts, which
he kept in a trunk now preserved in Lisbon
National Library, are still unpublished.
