<< i- . y « It & ¿ift¿
Steps
to
nationhood
- -' r . -'.

Begun in 1870 and completed in 1872,
the overland telegraph line between Adelaide
and Darwin accelerated communications
within the continent. Left, a ceremony held
at the planting of the first telegraph pole
near Darwin.
Below, the ruins of the 19th-century penal
settlement at Port Arthur, Tasmania
Bottom left, Hill End, a town in the New South
Wales goldfield, as it was in 1872.
Bottom right, a miner of gold rush days
panning for the precious metal.
nr i ' ' ' ' '
Australia's first settlers were the Aborigi¬
nals, hunters and food gatherers who
are believed to have migrated from
Asia 40,000 years ago. They lived undis¬
turbed for many centuries, during which the
only other visitors to Australia may have been
Indonesian traders who sailed to the con¬
tinent's north-west coast. Australia however
remained a mystery to the rest of the world
until less than 400 years ago.
Although a "Terra Australis"-a Great
South Land -was shown on maps as early as
the second century AD, its actual existence
was not confirmed until the 17th century as a
result of Portuguese, Spanish and Dutch mer¬
cantile expansion into Asia.
The first Englishman to visit the continent
was the buccaneer William Dampier, who
landed on the north-west coast of what is now
the State of Western Australia in 1688. In
1 770 Captain James Cook of the British Navy
sighted the east of the continent, charted it,
and after travelling up the coast landed at
Botany Bay.
The first European settlement of the conti¬
nent occurred on 26 January 1788, when
Captain Arthur Phillip landed at Sydney Cove
(now Port Jackson) near Botany Bay and
established a penal settlement. He took pos¬
session of the whole of the eastern part of the
continent which he named New South Wales.
The first white settlers were convicts and
their soldier guards and some tradesmen sent
to help establish the new penal colony.
Although at first struggling in a harsh, alien
land and dependent on supplies from Britain,
the colony began to reach inland from what is
now Sydney. The hinterland was explored,
farms were developed, and eventually the
colony became self-sufficient in most foods.
Extensive exploration in the 19th century
led to vast areas being opened for develop¬
ment and the establishment of new colonies
which subsequently became the States of
Victoria, Queensland, South Australia,
Western Australia and Tasmania, and the
Northern Territory.
Transportation of convicts from Britain to
New South Wales ended in 1840 and to
Tasmania in 1853, but the population growth
was spurred by the arrival of free settlers
attracted by the prospects of riches on the
New South Wales and Victoria goldfields and
the opportunities to take up tracts of land for
farming. Agrarian development burgeoned
and the mainstays of the economy became
wool, meat, wheat and gold.
While the alluvial gold mining industry de¬
clined towards the turn of the century, rural
industries continued to expand and are still
important in Australia's economy.
The growth of the population and of the
economy led to calls by each of the colonies
for self-government and for their own legisla¬
tures, which were granted by Britain. Prog¬
ress towards federation was inevitable and in
1 901 the six colonies joined in a federation of
States to become the Commonwealth of
Australia.
< tv-5 »-Í-.. . , .
^"'T^^S
