Printing and society
in China and the West
BY TSIEN TSUEN-HSUIN
Copyright © 1985,
Cambridge University Press
OFall the products from the ancient
world, few can compare in signif¬
icance with the Chinese inven¬
tions of paper and printing.
Paper was invented in China some time
before the Christian era. From early in the
second century AD its manufacture became
improved, using new materials and superior
techniques. By the third century it had be¬
come widely used in China itself and had
begun to migrate across the Chinese bor¬
ders; it reached the Western world only just
prior to the modern age. Printing from
wood blocks was first practised by the Chi¬
nese around 700 AD, and movable type was
used several centuries earlier than Guten¬
berg. Even the indelible ink of lampblack,
which has been manufactured in the West
under the misnomer "Indian Ink", can be
traced back to Antiquity in Chinese civi¬
lization. It was the introduction of these
ingenious elements that made possible mass
production of written records for wide
circulation.
Paper was not invented expressly for
writing, as has often been presumed. It was
extensively used in China in the fine and
decorative arts, at ceremonies and festivals,
for business transactions and records, mon¬
etary credit and exchange, personal attire,
household furnishings, sanitary and medical
purposes, recreations and entertainments. It
was not used for writing until perhaps early
in the first century AD, and even then did
not entirely replace the more cumbersome
bamboo and wood slips as the chief materi¬
als for making books until the third century.
But when it came, the use of paper enabled
books to be cheaper and more portable,
though their extensive production and wide
distribution was not possible until the in¬
vention of printing.
There is a long history of pre-printing
techniques in China, including the use of
seals for stamping on clays and later on silk
and paper, of stencils to duplicate designs on
textiles and paper, and of the inked impres¬
sions taken from stone inscriptions. All
these processes gradually led to more effi¬
cient methods of the mechanical multiplica¬
tion of copies and to printing. Movable type
was introduced by the middle of the elev-
The invention of papermaking is traditionally
attributed to Tshai Lun, a Chinese court official
who developed the idea of forming a sheet of
paper from the macerated bark of trees, hemp
waste, and rags.' In the 18th-century picture,
above, Tshai Lun is shown surrounded by 4
attendants and with brushes and writing tools
before him. In foreground are a pig and a chick¬
en. According to legend these animals were the
first to separate the wet paper sheets with snout
or beak.
Illustration from Science and Civilisation in China, Vol 5, Part 1,
by Tsien Tsucn-Hsuin and Joseph Needham © Cambridge Uni¬
versity Press, 1985
Setting wooden movable type at the Imperial
Printing Office of the Ch'ing court, around
1733.
Illustration from Science and Civilisation in China, Vol 5, Part 1,
by Tsicn Tsucn-Hsuin and Joseph Needham © Cambridge Uni¬
versity Press, 1985
enth century and multi-colour printing
some time in or before the twelfth century.
The movable type was first made of earthen¬
ware, but later various other materials, in¬
cluding wood, metal, and a variety of ce¬
ramics, were also adopted.
Because of the great number of characters
in written Chinese, woodblock printing was
used far more often than movable type for
book . production in China until recent
times. Wood blocks were simpler and more
economical, and could be stored easily and
were readily available when a reprint was
needed; movable type was preferred only
for large-scale production of voluminous
books. Nevertheless, both wood blocks and
movable type have gradually given way,
since the mid-nineteenth century, to the
modern printing press.
The prerequisites for a useful invention
included both the physical and the mental
readiness for the event; besides a creative
mind and a popular demand, proper materi¬
als and the essential basic techniques must
be available. Since all the material facilities
for the invention were present in Europe as
well as in China, why did the invention
occur in one civilization but not the other?
The early use of printing in China was
chiefly due to the early invention of paper,
the specialized use made of seals and rub¬
bings for duplication, the greater need for
mechanical aid in duplicating texts written
in a complex ideographic script, the standar¬
dization of Confucian texts used for civil
service examinations and, finally, the de¬
mand for great quantities of Buddhist scrip¬
tures which could not be met by hand-
copying. In the West, paper was not in¬
troduced until a rather late date, seals were
not used as duplication devices, rubbing was
not known until fairly recently, while print¬
ers were restricted by craft unions or guilds.
The relative simplicity of the alphabetic
script also lessened the need for a mechani¬
cal duplication aid.
Thus the materials and techniques neces¬
sary for the invention of printing were ei¬
ther not developed, or did not lead in the
direction of a printing process. Further¬
more, there was no such incentive or de¬
mand for huge quantities of copies as devel-
32

oped in connection with Buddhism; the
needs that did exist could be met by hand-
copying. Until all these factors were
changed in the middle of the fifteenth cen¬
tury, the threshold for the invention of
printing was not reached in Western society.
Printing facilitated the economical mass
production and distribution of books and
had profound effects upon European
thought and society in the late fifteenth and
early sixteenth centuries. It stimulated the
spirit of the Renaissance and the Reforma¬
tion, which in its turn promoted further
development of papermaking and printing
until there was a flourishing publishing in¬
dustry. It also helped to establish national
languages and indigenous literature, and
even to encourage nationalism itself; it pop¬
ularized education, spread literacy, and in¬
creased the chances of social mobility. In
short, almost everything in the progress of
modern civilization can be linked in one
way or another to the introduction and
development of printing in the Western
world.
Mass production of texts increased their
chance of survival or preservation and re¬
duced the probability of their loss through
neglect or the destruction of single collec¬
tions. But it did more than this. Wider
distribution of texts and the enlargement of
the reading public meant that the clergy's
monopoly of learning was challenged by
laymen, including lawyers, merchants,
tradesmen, and artisans, who became im¬
portant consumers of books. At the same
time, the pride of place hitherto taken by
religious works was gradually superseded
by texts of humanist authors. With this
increased readership and a broader spec¬
trum of subjects, scholars became more
aware of inconsistencies and contradictions
in hallowed texts, weakening their faith in
the validity of old views, and setting the
stage for the advancement of new learning.
The standardization of texts resulting
from printing stood in contrast to the cor¬
ruption that was bound to be present in all
hand-copied texts. The printing press does
not guarantee freedom from textual errors,
but the requirement for multiple proof¬
reading before sending to the press and the
distribution of errata to correct mistakes
after printing, paved the way for the im¬
provement of future editions. The editorial
functions of the early printers also brought
about a degree of systematization of book
format not to be found in the age of scribes,
and this gradually created a habit of system¬
atic thinking by readers, as well as promot¬
ing the organization of knowledge in many
diverse fields.
For their part publishers naturally en¬
couraged the growing use of the vernacular
which brought an expanding market. As
books became easier to publish in national
languages, printing stabilized the vocabu¬
lary, grammar, structure, spelling, and
punctuation of each, and, furthermore, pro-
% i\. : i ' < %.
The first portrayal of a Chinese bookshop can be
seen in this detail from a 12th-century painting
entitled "The Spring Festival on the River
Bank".
moted its use. Once fiction was printed and
widely circulated, the common language be¬
came firmly established; this, in its turn,
facilitated the eventual growth of specific
national literatures and cultures.
The popularization of education and the
spread of literacy were also closely related
to the expansion of printing. As books be¬
came cheaper and easier to obtain, more
people were able to gain access to the print¬
ed texts which eventually affected their out¬
look on the world and their position in it.
And, naturally enough, easier access to
printed material promoted the rise of litera¬
cy, which stimulated a still greater demand
for more books.
In general, printing in Europe from the
sixteenth century onwards was vigorously
expanded, supporting many drastic and rad¬
ical changes in thought and society. On the
other hand, the progress of printing in Chi¬
na and other nations in East Asia was com¬
paratively constant with modest changes
occurring within a stable tradition. These
diversities reflect the distinctive characters
of Eastern and Western cultures, especially
their attitudes towards material life.
Chinese society has long been dominated
by the Confucian tradition, which concerns
itself primarily with proper human relation¬
ships and social order by way of moral
teachings and ethics, rather than with pursu¬
ance of material advance and extreme
changes in society. The high degree of social
and cultural stability over long periods in
Chinese history, especially from the thir¬
teenth to the nineteenth century, contrasts
greatly with the constant turmoil of life and
intellectual unrest during the same period in
the West.
Such different environments in China and
the West were certainly bound to affect the
role of printing, and in this sense printing
was not only shaped by the political and
social conditions of the time; it also exerted
an equal effect on those conditions. n
TSIEN TSUEN-HSUIN, Professor Emeritus of
Chinese Literature and Library Science and Cura¬
tor Emeritus of the Far Eastern Library at the
University ofChicago, is a leading worldauthority
on the history ofChinese printing. He is the author
ofPaper and Printing (1985), part 1 of Volume 5 of
Joseph Needham's monumental Science and Civi¬
lisation in China (Cambridge University Press),
from which this article has been extracted. Notable
among his other works is Written on Bamboo and
Silk: the Beginnings of Chinese Books and In¬
scriptions (University of Chicago Press).
33
