PORTRAIT
"The political and journalistic world can boast of very few heroes who compare
with Father Damien ofMolokai. It is worthwhile to look for the source of such heroism."
GANDHI
FATHER DAMIEN, CITIZEN OF THE WORLD
1840-1889
I OSEPH de Veuster, who was born in a little
Flemish village in 1840, joined the Society of
the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary at Louvain,
Belgium, when he was twenty. At the age of
twenty-three, before he had even completed his
novitiate, he sailed for the Hawaiian Islands
where he was to devote his life to the care of
lepers. He died on Molokai Island a quarter of
a century later, after contracting leprosy himself.
In the mid-nineteenth century, Protestant
and Roman Catholic missions, as well as sizeable
minorities of Americans and Chinese, settled
among the Kanaka people of the kingdom of
Hawaii. This influx of people not only brought
new ideas and resources to the islands, it also led
to the introduction of diseases such as smallpox,
influenza, cholera, venereal diseases and, worst
of all, leprosy. In the hundred years between 1770
and 1870, the Kanaka population, which proved
to be terribly vulnerable to these diseases, plum¬
meted from 250,000 to 50,000.
Leprosy, in particular, spread like wildfire. In
the 1860s a policy of isolating those afflicted was
introduced, not only because of the fear of con¬
tagion, but because leprosy was such a disfig¬
uring disease that the authorities were afraid of
spoiling the archipelago's beautiful, peaceful and
prosperous image. Before long, those showing the
first symptoms were being systematically rounded
up and isolated on a peninsula of Molokai Island.
The Catholic missions were especially
concerned about the fate of the lepers. In 1873
it was decided that four young priests would
take turns to work on Molokai Island, thus en¬
suring that missionaries would always be present
there but would not have to endure a long un¬
broken stay in such a terrible environment.
De Veuster, who had taken the name of
Father Damien, immediately volunteered. He
organized a parish, set up associations, celebrated
the Eucharist, took confession, visited the sick in
their homes and administered the last sacraments.
He developed a popular liturgy for the celebra¬
tion of marriages and for processional use.
He took an interest in the material as well as
the spiritual aspects of life at Molokai and,
respectful of Hawaiian customs and lifestyles, did
his best to help develop the scarce local resources,
notably by putting pressure on the government.
In addition to his pastoral duties, Damien
performed a great service to the lepers by
reminding them of their sense of dignity and
treating them as human beings whose lives were
important, and whose sufferings, efforts, and
struggle against death had meaning and nobility.
There was a death in the community almost
every other day. Medical facilities were still
perfunctory. The risk of contracting leprosy
increased as the years went by. Damien, who
made little attempt to protect himself, eventually
succumbed to it. His own physical suffering
was his way of sharing that of the people
around him, and he said that it was nothing
compared to the frustration he felt before the
lack of understanding on the part of the religious
authorities, not to mention the incessant political
and doctrinal quarrels which followed him to
his grave.
But news of his struggle spread and his
work became widely appreciated. His fame
crossed the Pacific and he received moral and
financial support which helped him to care for
his lepers and to extract long-awaited sanitary
and humanitarian measures from the authorities.
The eyes of the world turned in compassion
to this remote island. Once synonymous with
horror, the name of Molokai came to evoke a new
challenge for humanitythat of vanquishing
leprosy while respecting the dignity of those
afflicted with it. Damien became the symbol of
this challenge.
In 1889, the year of Father Damien's death,
a fund was established in his memory in London,
under the patronage of the Prince of Wales. The
inauguration of the fund, the forerunner of the
British Leprosy Relief Association (LEPRA), was
soon followed by many other initiatives elsewhere
in the world. 47
