Russian poetry, from Pushkin to Osip
Mandelstam, exalts the love of liberty.
It thus has a natural place in the great
debate opened up by the French
Revolution...
Poetry,
freedom and
revolution
BY SERGEI S. AVERINTSEV
i
11. lina'."
:; .iîiiii
sL::
^
36
1 he Moscow Kremlin at the
. beginning of the 19th
century
1 ushkin (3rd seated figure
from left) at a literary
banquet given by a hooksdler

V
1789
An idea
that changed
the world
X AR from the tumult of the streets of Paris in
the fateful year of 1789, lay Moscow, rather like
a small country town with its steep streets glit¬
tering with golden domes and crosses. Moscow,
that highly orthodox and patriarchal capital city,
before the fire of 1812 still had reminders at ev¬
ery turn of days long before Peter the Great.
In the entrance hall of the aristocratic man¬
sion of Piotr Alexandrovich Soymonov, in¬
numerable candles gave off a festive glow. They
were the work of the daughter of the house, a
sensitive and intelligent little girl, not quite seven
years old. Her father was surprisedwhy all these
candles? She told him the reason: "In honour of
the storming of the Bastille and the release of the
poor prisoners!"
This little girl did not, however, throw in her
lot with the Jacobins. Sofia Petrovna (1782-1857),
whose married name was Svechin, belongs to the
history of nineteenth-century Catholicism. She
eventually left Russia because of her religious con¬
victions, and for decades her Paris salon was a
meeting-place for the cream of the Catholic in¬
tellectual élite: the liberals Montalembert and
Lacordaire, the Spanish traditionalist Donoso-
Cortès, and many others.
With her phrase "the release of the poor
prisoners" the child went straight to the point
and hit on what was to be the central theme of
Russian life and culture for the next two centu¬
ries. Barely a year after the storming of the
Bastille, and not unconnected with the fear and
panic spread by the events in France, the writer
Aleksandr Radishchev was arrested because of his
book Journey from St. Petersburg to Moscow,
which, like the Revolution itself, was a radical
postscript to the philosophical thought of the En¬
lightenment. On the road to exile, Radishchev
wrote the following lines, full of black humour:
To blaze a trail where none has trod before
For the fiery daredevils of the written word,
For the pure in heart, for Truth, I go in fear
To Siberia, to prison and to chains.
His premonition was correct. The trail was
blazed for many like him, and along it marched
a succession of new "daredevils of the written
word", to use his blunt, old-fashioned expression.
This, too, is one of the hallmarks of Russian cul-
Nladame Svechin as a
child". Sofia Petrovna
Soymonov (1782-1857), the
wife of General Svechin,
left Russia for France in
1816.
37

1 his portrait of the French
poet André Chénier was
made in prison by Joseph-
Benoît Suvée 10 days before
Chénier's execution.
38
ture. A century later, the journalist Vladimir
Korolenko declared that at the gates of heaven
every Russian writer would be asked how many
years he had spent in prison for the sake of truth.
And his contemporary, the literary critic Ven-
gerov, wrote a book with an eloquent title: The
Heroic Nature ofRussian Literature. From the ar¬
rest of Radishchev to the repeated exiles of Push¬
kin, the conscription of Pozhelayev and the
jailing of Dostoevsky, to the execution of
Gumilyov and the fate of other twentieth-century
writers condemned to the camps, the line runs
clear and unbroken.
The example
of André Chénier
The Russian people saw the poet primarily as a
martyr. How many Russian laments have been
composed, from Pushkin to Osip Mandelstam,
on the exile of Ovid? But the Roman poet was
the victim of the Emperor Augustus, and his fate
was less tragic than the fate of those involved in
the greater tragedy arising from the tangled web
of the Revolution and the rifts caused by its in¬
trinsic contradictions.
One poet of 200 years ago, who in the Rus¬
sian poetic tradition founded by Pushkin is im¬
bued with the martyr's special significance, is
André Chénier, the great poet of revolutionary
France. Chénier, the citizen-poet, was inspired by
the Revolution and condemned to death by the
Revolution, which sent him to the scaffold just
before the end of the Terror as a last expiatory
victim to be swallowed by the abyss before it
closed as in the ancient legends. Such a man was
André Chénier, or "Andrei" Chénier, as Push¬
kin called him in the fashion of the day, to be
imitated by twentieth-century poets such as Osip
Mandelstam and Marina Tsvetayeva. In Rus¬
sianizing his name, Russian culture adopted him.
Familiarity with the work and ultimate fate
of Chénier, both in France and abroad, had to
wait until 1819, when the first collected edition
of his poetry was published. And scarcely six
years later, the year of the Decembrist uprising
in Russia (1825), Pushkin wrote the long poem
André Chénier. At the time, throughout Europe,
tears were being shed over Byron's death; and yet
Pushkin, for whom Byron had meant so much,
neglected his memory to answer the call of
Chénier, who had entered the kingdom of the
dead "from the blood-stained block", "in terri¬
ble days".
At the heart of the poem lies Chénier's
monologue before his execution. Pushkin's voice
is in total unison with that of his hero, empha¬
sized by the fact that Pushkin quotes from his
own writings in the course of the monologue.
There is no serious divergence of views between
the two men, as Pushkin explains briefly and elo¬
quently in his notes on the poem. A poet, sim¬
ply because he is a poet, is bound to love Liberty,
and in particular that aspect of freedom which
the Revolution proclaims as essential:
/ salute you, my star of light!
I rendered glory to your celestial face
When, like a spark, it rose, and you were bom
in the midst of the storm,
I rendered glory to your sacred thunder
Scourging the foul citadel,
Scattering in cinders and shame
The ancient, arrogant power...
Pushkin rejoices that "arrogant power"
should be held up to scorn, and welcomes
resistance to "absolutism". But when the sover¬
eign is laid low and those who have vanquished
him are about to mete out his punishment, the
poet, because he is a poet, can no longer see him
as the sovereign and the enemy and is forced to
see him as a human being. Pushkin recounts how,
according to Henri de Latouche, André Chénier's
first publisher, Louis XVI sent a serene and dig¬
nified letter to the National Assembly, request¬
ing the right to appeal to the people against his
death sentence. That letter, signed on the night
of 17-18 January 1793, was composed by André
Chénier.

Poetry condemns
the death sentence
The guillotine had already put in an appearance
as the "criminal cleaver" in a profoundly subver¬
sive poem of Pushkin's youth, entitled "Liberty".
No poet can ever freely approve a death sentence
because the very soul of poetry, which is Liberty
itself, cannot survive in the spiritual atmosphere
generated by such sentences. Or so Pushkin fer¬
vently believed.
A century later, pleading for the pardon of
several condemned prisoners, Mandelstam sent a
selection of his verses to Nikolay Bukharin with
the note: "Every line of these poems cries out
against what you intend to do". He thus echoes
a sentiment which inspired a line of Pushkin's
poem Exegi Monumentum, in which Pushkin in¬
cludes among his merits as a poet the fact that
"He sought pardon for the fallen". Poetry can¬
not breathe in the atmosphere of death sentences.
To grow accustomed to it, and consequently to
become one with it, is possible only for "litera¬
ture" in a very limited and altogether odious sense
of the term. Fundamentally, poetry condemns
the act of condemnation, and at a stroke it con¬
demns "literature".
Later Mandelstam said: "There were two
Chénier brothers. The younger, who was con¬
temptible, belonged wholly to literature, and the
elder, sentenced to death, pronounced sentence
on that literature". Thus the tradition of Russi¬
an culture remains true to itself, and the thread
is unbroken from Pushkin to Mandelstam.
There have, of course, been Russian poets
who have renounced Pushkin's creed. The
greatest of these apostates was Vladimir
Mayakovsky, a poet whose stature is undeniable.
But willingness to celebrate violence spells sui¬
cide for poetry, and is followed, as a logical con¬
sequence, by the suicide of the poet himself...
For Marina Tsvetayeva, who also inherited
the mantle of Pushkin, the figure of Chénier in
the years of the Civil War was an absolute
paradigm:
André Chénier has gone to the scaffold,
And I am alive, and this is a great sin.
We must not forget that Pushkin's "creed"
took shape against the backdrop of the French
Revolution, and that it was inspired above all by
the example of Chénier. A return to Pushkin
meant, inescapably, a return to Chénier, whose
monologue in Pushkin can be summed up as fol¬
lows: the fervent love of Liberty as the ¡deal driv¬
ing force behind the Revolution brooks no
compromise, even under the threat of the Ter¬
ror; but the Terror must be condemned precise¬
ly in order to safeguard that driving force.
Chénier criticized the Revolution, not from
the outside, but from within. He took as his
starting-point the principles of the Revolution it¬
self, and used its own language, for he had felt
joy at its advent, and never denied that joy after
all his disenchantments. For Pushkin, this lent
great moral strength to Chénier's criticism and
added much weight to his example. And the en¬
tire Russian poetic tradition of the love of liberty
followed Pushkin in his veneration of Chénier
as the bard who sang not of Tradition, but of
Liberty.
Mandelstam's poem on the death of Commis¬
sar Linde, known to readers of Doctor Zhivago
as Commissar Hintz, is a remarkable hymn of
devotion to Chénier; but whereas in Boris Paster¬
nak's novel the circumstances of this death are
related with a great deal of realism and not
without irony tinged with sympathy, in Mandel¬
stam they are described with a passion that is
perhaps unexpected so long after Chénier's exe¬
cution:
Through civil torment in the dreadful years,
Aflame with noble wrath against the foe
You stride, a citizen, fearless, free and true,
Wherever Psyche beckons you to go.
And while the people, jubilant, may weave
For other men their wreaths of laurel, now
Russia will gladly brave the pits of hell
To lay at last her blessings on your brow.
The cadence of the Revolution
Russian awareness of the French Revolution has
always had a musical quality, a certain harmo¬
ny. It is no mere chance that the Russian
nineteenth-century work in which the subtle
wrath of the citizen comes closest to the French
revolutionary tradition is neither a political
pamphlet, nor a philosophical treatise, but some
personal memoirs in which the most direct
threads run between the conflicts of the soul and
the contradictions of the Revolution.
That work is My Past and Thoughts
(1861-1867), by the journalist and political thinker
Aleksandr Herzen. "Herzen, whose tumultuous
political thought will always have the cadence of
a Beethoven sonata", Mandelstam said of him.
This harmony alone saves the debate from being
conducted in a single dimension in that it draws
the contradictions together, if only fleetingly,
into a persuasive unity, according to Hegel's prin¬
ciple that "truth is the whole".
SERGEI SERGEEVICH
AVERINTSEV,
Corresponding Member of
the USSR Academy of
Sciences, is a leading Soviet
specialist in ancient and
medieval cultures and the
author of some 100
published works, including
a study of early Byzantine
poetics (1977).
1 he Russian writer
Aleksandr Radishchev
(1749-1802)
39
