INDIA Lilavati, gracious
lady of arithmetic
BY FRANCIS ZIMMERMANN
Detail of a manuscript copy
(date unknown) of a Sanskrit
text composed in 750 AD
and illustrated with
geometric figures.
Opposite page, sundial at
the open-air observatory at
Jaipur (India), built in 1728.
URING the eighth century AD, Arab
scholars working in India on Sanskrit mathemat¬
ical texts made two major discoveries which they
developed and later transmitted to the Western
world: the place-value notation of figures using
the decimal system coupled with the "zero" con¬
cept, and a trigonometry which incorporated the
use of sines.
It was not merely by chance that these major
advances in the fields of writing, calculation and
18
A simple problem taken from
the twelfth-century Indian
mathematician Bhaskara's Lilavati
('Arithmetic')
qsaf>i,jf<e$WT.^îiti'T>U5'î5r: fotfpá «m-
êrmja iwm wifa À ^isfe^^f ^ n
Example of the reduction of fractions
to a common denominator:
One-fifth of a swarm of bees flew towards a lotus
flower, one-third towards a banana tree. (A number
equal to) three times the difference between the two
(preceding figures), O my beauty with the eyes of
a gazelle, flew towards a Codaga tree (whose bitter
bark provides a substitute for quinine). Finally, one
other bee, undecided, flew hither and thither
equally attracted by the delicious perfume of the
jasmine and the pandanus. Tell me, O charming
one, how many bees were there?
Let x= the number of bees
x = x+_x t 3x([-l)+ 1
5 3 3 5
Reducing the fractions to a common denominator,
we get:
x = 3_x + 5_x + 3 x (5 - 3) + 1
15 15 T5 ^
x = 15
triangulation were made by Indian mathemati¬
cians; they all touched on matters of traditional
interest in India, whose scholars had always
shown a particular taste and talent for grammat¬
ical forms.
Mathematics, like all the other scientific dis¬
ciplines in ancient India, was subject to the con¬
straints and stylistic forms of the Sanskrit
language as well as to the demands of verse since
most scientific texts were written in verse form.
The great mathematical treatises, written in
Sanskrit, usually by a Brahman (a member of the
highest, priestly caste), consisted of a basic, often
cryptic, text made up of sutras or aphorisms, or
else of verses that were learned by heart. A stream
of prose commentaries explain the full meaning
of these ancient texts, confirming that they were
aphoristic in nature and deliberately conceived
as summaries of a master's teachings, expressed
in such a way as to stick in the memory of his
pupils.
Evidence of the early use of numbers, in the
sense of graphic symbols, is to be found in in¬
scriptions on stone or copper that have been
studied by archaeologistssuch as the numbers
4 and 6, for example, found in the Asoka inscrip¬
tions which date back to the third century BC.
They are very rarely to be found, however, in
proper mathematical texts. Arabic numerals, so
called because they were made known to the rest
of the world by Arab authors, are, in fact, of In¬
dian origin. In general, however, they were rarely
used in Sanskrit texts, in which numbers are writ¬
ten out in full or symbolized by alphabetical
codes. To be more precise, we must distinguish
clearly between the basic texts, generally written
in verse, and the prose commentaries which alone
provide us with information about the way in
which numbers were written down during the
actual process of calculation.
Numbers were set out vertically over sever¬
al lines, or at least this is what emerges from a
commentary written by Bhaskara the Elder in
629 AD on the Aryabhatiya. Unfortunately, the
life-span of Indian manuscripts was short, aver¬
aging only about three centuries. Written on

m
k m
r

paper or on palm leaves, they were a prey to mil¬
dew and insects. The manuscripts of Bhaskara's
commentary that have come down to us are
modern copies and cannot be taken as evidence
of the manner of writing of more ancient times.
The twelfth-century Bakhsali manuscript, which
is probably the oldest document in this sense,
shows calculations in Arabic numerals spread
over several lines and contained in cartouches, or
boxes, within the body of a mathematical text
written in Sanskrit.
The absence of graphic symbols and numbers
in the aphorisms and verses of the classic mathe¬
matical texts does not mean that symbolism is to¬
tally excluded, but that the symbolism employed
is grammatical or rhetorical in nature. Thanks to
the virtually limitless synonymical possibilities
of the Sanskrit language, numbers are represent¬
ed" by. literary phrases and metaphors. Thus,
nayana (eye) or bahu (arm) are the names of the
number 2. Agni (fire) means 3 (by allusion to the
three Vedic forms of ritual fire) and adri (moun¬
tain) means 7 (a reference to the seven mountains
of India of Hindu religious geography). The San¬
skrit words for "sky" or "space" stand for zero.
The order of the figures making up a number is
the reverse of modern numerical systemsfor
example, the number 23 would be written as
agninayana.
This symbolism is useful for writing in verse
form series of figures which today would be laid
out in tabular form. In India, as elsewhere, the
astronomical data in almanacs have for centuries
been presented in columns of numbers. But this
mode was an Arab invention and in the ancient
Sanskrit texts numbers were presented in the
form of a line or a verse of poetry.
Another form of numerical symbolism fre-
20
The ratio of the circumference
of a circle to its diameter (n)
sfrjxws' cTrTH^jpi srrmrw ïï^nnni
*|yrl¿MW^MWlH^>-clTmr(Ull«4: Il
caturadhikam satam astagunam dväsastis tathä
sahasrlnim
ayutadvayaviskambhasyäsanno vrttaparinähah
"Add four to one hundred, multiply by eight, add
62,000. This will give you the approximate value
(asanna) of the circumference of a circle with a dia¬
meter of two myriads."
This verse, written by the sixth-century Indian
mathematician Aryabhata, gives the oldest known
formulation of the approximate value of the ratio
that later became known as n :
circumference
diameter
62832
2C000
3.1416
quently used in astronomical and mathematical
texts is based on the Sanskrit alphabet. Several
such systems exist. The katapayadi system, which
is widely used in southern India, makes it possi¬
ble for very large numbers and trigonometric
tables to be expressed in the form of mnemonic
words, aphorisms or verses. The system is flexi¬
ble enough to enable such numbers to be ex¬
pressed in phrases which also have another
meaning. For example, the priestly injunction
acaryavag abhedya, which means literally "The
word of the Master must not be betrayed", is cod¬
ed writing of the number 1434160, a chronogram
for the 1,434,160th day of the era of Kali, the day
on which the philosopher Sankaracarya in¬
troduced 'certain reforms.
Did this poetic form of expression have an
influence on mathematical reasoning? Was there
some specific characteristic, something special in
the way of thinking or the social status of Indian
mathematicians which led them to shape their
teachings in a literary mould?
There has never been a caste or even a real
school of mathematicians in India. Mathemati¬
cians, if we class as such those who wrote or used
Sanskrit texts dealing with geometry, arithmetic
or algebra, worked in fairly close collaboration
with experts in Vedic and Brahmanic ritual. Brah-
mans or members of a high caste and steeped in
Sanskrit culture, they were classed among scien¬
tists zsjyotirvid, or "experts on stars". Mathemat¬
ical texts were usually inserted in treatises on
astronomy, and trigonometry only really came
into its own in the study of the angular distances
between stars.
Like all the Brahman sciences (the sastra),
lLleventh-century bronze
effigy of the god Shiva as
Vinadhara (master of
sciences and arts).
In Indian numerical
symbolism, the Sanskrit
word Rudrasya (the
5 faces of Siva) denotes the
number 5.
FRANCIS ZIMMERMANN,
French philosopher and
ethnologist, is director of
research at the National
Centre for Scientific Research
(CNRS).

mathematics had been developed primarily for
religious purposes, as an aid to the proper per¬
formance of ritual. We know nothing of the life
of the great Indian mathematicians, but we can
picture fairly accurately the ritualistic and scholas¬
tic setting within which they worked, so heavily
coloured by it is the style of Sanskrit texts. After
the pupils had memorized à text by repeating it
word for word, time and again until it was
"clasped to their bosoms" (until they had learned
it by heart), the teacher would provide them, oral¬
ly, with the illustrations, demonstrations and cal¬
culations that the text concealed. This was the
key that opened up the paths of knowledge and
an instrument of spiritual fulfilment.
The Lilavati, a text by the twelfth-century
mathematician Bhaskara the Learned, was tradi¬
tionally used for this purpose for arithmetic and
this explains why it terminates with a verse with
a double meaning in which Bhaskara compares
his Lilavati, his "gracious one" (it also means
arithmetic), to a woman endowed with all the
graces of the jati (a word which means both of
noble lineage and, in a technical sense, the reduc¬
tion of fractions to a common denominator).
"Joy and happiness in this world shall continu¬
ally increase for those who hold her kanthasak-
ta, close in their arms or clasped to their bosoms
(learned by heart by repetition)."
From ritual geometry
to Bhaskara's treatise
'The oldest of these texts that have come down
to us are the sulbasutras, "maxims concerning
measuring cords", which are believed to have
been written between the fifth and the first cen¬
tury BC. They are treatises which lay down the
rules for building altars used for Vedic ritual
sacrifices and made of bricks laid in accordance
with symbolic forms. The geometric construc¬
tions which are taught in these treatises are based
on knowledge of several special cases of right-
angled triangles (for example, with sides measur¬
ing 3-4-5, or 5-12-13, 7-24-25, etc.) and on the
general rule according to which "the diagonal of
a rectangle produces (by the construction on it
of a square) the equivalent of the product of both
the rectangle's length and breadth; and the di¬
agonal of a square produces (by the construction
on it of a square) twice its own area." Here,
however, the rule is not expressed as a theorem,
but as a maxim, as a formula to ensure the proper
functioning of ritual and as a building guideline.
The word sutra itself, which at first meant
"aphoristic in style", came, in the later treatises,
to mean a "rule" in the technical sense of a rule
for building.
There are no theorems in Indian mathematics,
only rules based on reasoning which starts from
an intuitive point of departure. The rules,
aphorisms and the mnemonic verses of the basic
texts are not the outcome of a demonstration but
rather guidelines for a geometric construction to
l\anda, the adoptive
father of Krishna, consults
an astrologer. Miniature
of the Kangra school
(late 18th century).
be carried out by the reader or the commenta¬
tor. Even in algebra, the typical line of reason¬
ing links areas to the products of factors and
implies the construction of a geometric figure.
It has often been said that the Indians were
algebraists rather than geometers yet, in fact,
throughout all the commentaries on the teach¬
ings of Aryabhata (sixth century), Brahmagupta
(seventh century) and Bhaskara (twelfth centu¬
ry), geometry was the source of the practical ap¬
plications of the rules of arithmetic and algebra.
A geometric space and a numerical ensemble were
taken together as two facets of the same reality.
The algebraic solution was grafted on to the geo¬
metric construction. To demonstrate was to dis¬
play the solution, to render it intuitively manifest.
As one commentator said: "A demonstration by
quantities should be made for the benefit of those
who do not understand the demonstration by
areas." Thus, in Indian mathematics, to reason
is to explain an intuition. 21
