The Mahàvamsa is a verse
chronicle which paints a colourful
fresco of Sri Lanka's early history.
Ever since it was written in the
sixth century by a Buddhist monk,
it has been periodically updated.
40

fc The Mahàvamsa,
Sri Lanka's #
non-stop epic
Left, a monk and his
pupil at Anuradhapura, Sri
Lanka. Below, frieze on the
stupa at Sanchi, India,
depicts worshippers around
the Bodhi-tree under which
the Buddha was sitting
when Enlightenment came
to him.
BY ANANDA W. P. GURUGE
IN the last twelve years a group of Sri Lankan
historians and linguists have been meeting regu¬
larly in Colombo to write their nation's histo¬
ry. They are engaged on a remarkable project,
for the history is being written in verse and in
Pali, a classical Indo-Aryan language which is
hardly used today except by the Buddhist clergy
and a small circle of eminent international
scholars.
The historians are bringing up to date Sri
Lanka's national epic poem, the Mahàvamsa or
"Great Chronicle", whose first thirty-seven chap¬
ters in nearly 3,000 Pali verses were composed
by a Buddhist scholar-monk named Mahanama
in the sixth century AD. Publication of the up¬
dated history is awaited with great interest in
Sri Lanka.
The origins of the Mahàvamsa can be traced
at least as far back as the fourth century BC. The
Aryan settlers who had migrated to Sri Lanka
from the Indus and Ganges basins of the Indian
sub-continent possessed an exceedingly keen
historical sense. They kept records of their ex¬
ploits and experiences not merely as ballads or
sagas of folk or literary interest but more syste¬
matically, as historical accounts seeking to assert
their cultural identity as a new nation in a new
land.
Monks who chronicled
the exploits of heroes
The dynastic history of at least two centuries was
already thus recorded before Buddhism was in¬
troduced in the third century BC. With the ad¬
vent of Buddhist monks, Sri Lanka was assured
of the continuing services of reliable and dedicat¬
ed historiographers and custodians of its histori¬
cal tradition.
Buddhism ushered in several centuries of in¬
tense literary activity. While the Tripitaka, the
Buddhist Canon, was preserved in Pali (a liter¬
ary form of the vernacular which the Buddha
used in his discourses), the commentaries élucidât- 41

42
ing it were produced locally in Sinhala. The
historical sections, known as Sihala-Atthakatha-
Mahàvamsa ("The Great Chronicle of the Sinha¬
la Commentary"), were periodically updated and
comprised information drawn from a number of
sources: early accounts, with mythical overtones,
of waves of Aryan migrations; a detailed and pos¬
sibly documented monastic tradition relating to
crucial events in the history of Buddhism; royal
records of secular and religious achievements in
the form of registers of meritorious deeds accom¬
plished for the benefit of the Buddhist faith on
the one hand, and the general public on the other;
panegyrics and heroic ballads which court poets
and wandering minstrels had produced to enter¬
tain royalty and edify the population.
In keeping with the ancient Indian tradition,
Sri Lanka recognized three categories of heroes:
Dharmavira (heroes of righteousness), Danavira
(heroes of liberality) and Yuddhavira (military
heroes). Many heroes from each category had dis¬
tinguished themselves in the history of the island,
and tales about them had become part of the liter¬
ary heritage.
An imperfect attempt to present this materi¬
al entirely in Pali verse was made in the fourth
century AD in an epic poem known as the
Dipavamsa ("Island Chronicle") whose author is
unknown. The imperfections of the Dipavamsa,
which include grammatical, stylistic and linguis¬
tic inelegance, result from the fact that Pali had
not yet become a literary language and from the
technical problems involved in organizing materi¬
al from different sources. Two centuries later, Ma-
hanama overcame these difficulties and his



Mahàvamsa became the epic poem par excellence
of Sri Lanka.
The main literary value of the Mahàvamsa lies
in its effective use of Pali verse to narrate the his¬
tory of the nation in a straightforward style, with
the expressed purpose of "generating the serene
joy and emotion of the pious".
Excluding the introductory chapters on
Buddhist traditions and history, the Mahàvamsa
is organized as three epics in one:
chapters six to ten: the Vijaya-
Pandukabhaya Epic on the founding and consoli¬
dation of the Sinhala kingdom in Sri Lanka;
chapters eleven to twenty: the
Devanampiyatissa-Mahinda Epic, which tells of the
introduction of Buddhism to Sri Lanka and its
consolidation as the state religion;
chapters twenty-two to thirty-two: the
1 he temple at
Anuradhapura, ancient
capital of the Sri Lankan
kingdom of the same name.
1 ilgrimage to Mount
Mihintale, Sri Lanka.
Legend has it that
Mahinda, son of the Indian
emperor Asoka, alighted on
the mountain around 250
BC when he came to
preach Buddhism
in Sri Lanka.

ANANDA W.P. GURUGÉ
is Sri Lanka's ambassador to
France and permanent
delegate to Unesco, where he
is a member of the Executive
Board. He is a specialist in
Asian and Buddhist cultures
on which he has written
several books, including The
Mahàvamsa: A New
Annotated Translation with
Prolegomena.
Dutthagamani-Abhaya Epic about the national
hero of the second century BC who reunified the
kingdom by liberating the regions under foreign
domination and left a lasting heritage of magnifi¬
cent monuments to the glory of Buddhism.
Instead of singling out these themes for iso¬
lated treatment, the historian in Mahanama
favoured a chronological narrative. Thus the
Mahàvamsa became a chronicle. The format and
style of the connecting chapters (i.e. chapters
twenty-one and thirty-three to thirty-seven) and
especially the last five chapters provided the
prototype for all later prolongations of the
Mahàvamsa.
25 centuries of written history
Including the current project described above,
there have been as many as seven efforts since the
thirteenth century to update the chronicle. As a
result, Sri Lanka enjoys the distinction of being
perhaps the only modern nation to have main¬
tained an unbroken written history over twenty-
five centuries. What makes this record exception¬
al is that its authenticity has been substantially
established by archaeological, epigraphical and
numismatic evidence and from external literary
sources.
Notable though it is for literary merit and
historical authenticity, the Mahàvamsa is essen¬
tially religious in character. The narration of the
good and evil deeds of kings and other historical
figures seems exclusively intended to draw a
moral. Most chapters end with either an admo¬
nition or a reminder of a basic doctrine of Budd¬
hism. The doctrines emphasized relate to
impermanence, wholesome and unwholesome ac¬
tion, detachment and the proper use of wealth
and power. True to his didactic role, Mahanama
displays an admirable degree of impartiality and
objectivity in assessing the careers and contribu¬
tions of various rulers, including usurpers and
invaders.
Notwithstanding the seriousness of purpose
that is shown in recording the eventful history
of a colourful people, the Mahàvamsa abounds in
"human interest" episodes relating to a wide spec¬
trum of human types. It reflects the noble and
the mean, the wisdom and the foibles, the sub¬
lime and the ridiculous which characterize hu¬
man behaviour at all times and in all societies.
The fact that the epic deals with real people and
not with fictional or depersonalized types adds
to the insights it provides into the strengths and
weaknesses of humankind.
Reconstructing the Indian past
The Mahàvamsa came to the attention of the in¬
ternational academic community in 1826 when
the Pali and Buddhist scholar Eugène Burnouf
translated it into French. His translation was not
published, however, as George Tumour, an En¬
glish civil servant resident in Sri Lanka, was in
the process of publishing the original Pali text
with an English translation. The Mahàvamsa was
to be of considerable value in reconstructing the
ancient history of India.
In the 1830s, the English Indologist James
Prinsep, the Champollion of Indian epigraphy,
deciphered the ancient Brahmi script and began
to read the edicts and pillar inscriptions of an im¬
pressive historical figure whose name appeared
in the inscriptions as "Devanapiya Piyadasi". No
Indian literary record or historical tradition shed
light on a ruler with such a name. Knowing that
the Sinhalas of Sri Lanka had a well-developed
historical sense, Tumour believed that their an¬


cient literary works could help epigraphists and
archaeologists. As he suspected, the Mahàvamsa
established beyond any doubt that Devanapiya
Piyadasi was Asoka, the third emperor of the
Mauryan dynasty, of whom the epic gives a full
account as the foremost patron of Buddhism.
Background information provided by the
Mahàvamsa, in addition to confirming Prinsep's
readings of the inscriptions, proved to be vitally
important for the pioneering research and discov¬
eries of archaeologists in India. On the basis of
evidence from the Sri Lankan epic alone, the
British archaeologist Alexander Cunningham was
able to identify the names and ascertain the sig¬
nificance of a number of holy persons whose rel¬
ics were enshrined by the emperor Asoka in the
stupas at Sanchi and Sonari in central India. The
Mahàvamsa and its predecessor the Dipavamsa
contained detailed information about the mission¬
aries sent to propagate Buddhism in Sri Lanka and
elsewhere under Asoka's patronage. When iden¬
tifying the events represented in the sculptured
gateways of Sanchi, the German art historian
Albert Grünwedel used the Mahàvamsa's account
of how Asoka sent to Sri Lanka a sapling of the
Bodhi-tree under which the Buddha was sitting
when Enlightenment came to him.
Last but not least, the Mahàvamsa has been
indispensable to the archaeologists and historians
of Sri Lanka for whom it has provided the
chronological framework into which their discov¬
eries can be fitted. Many monuments and reser¬
voirs have been identified only by using
information recorded in the epic. Confusions
created by inaccurate popular lore have been
resolved with the aid of the Mahàvamsa even be¬
fore supporting epigraphical evidence was found.
As many as 3,000 inscriptions hitherto studied
could hardly have been dated and interpreted in
any other way.
The efforts in international academic circles
to unravel the mysteries of the Mahàvamsa, on
the one hand, and the Sri Lankan project to bring
it up to date on the other, demonstrate the last¬
ing impact the epic has exercised over the centu¬
ries. One wonders whether the ancient scribes
who kept palace records and the monks who syn¬
thesized them into a historical narrative could
have had any idea of the distinction they were
thus bringing to their motherland. 43
