BY ILLAR MUUL



'Use them
or lose them5
A recipe
for sustainable use
of tropical forests
The gaur (Bos gaurus), a forest-dwelling bovine of Malaysia
Current estimates indicate that
about half the world's tropical
rain forests have already dis¬
appeared. The remainder are rapidly
being destroyed. Much of the blame for
this has been placed on the demand for
timber by industrialized countries. But
it seems that only about 15 per cent of
the felled trees are exported. World tim¬
ber demand has actually declined some¬
what in recent years and many timber
producing countries are finding that
only the most desirable wood, such as
species used for expensive veneers, is
worth cutting and hauling out of the
forests. Unfortunately, hundreds of
trees of lesser value are destroyed to get
access to the expensive trees, and the
building of roads, loading areas and log¬
ging camps destroys large tracts of
forest.
29

Watering seedlings at the tree nursery
of a forestry rehabilitation and diversification
project in north-eastern Thailand.
Another major cause of forest des¬
truction is a variety of agricultural
schemes. Tropical rain forests are quite
tolerant of limited traditional shifting
agriculture (see article page 26) and have
a great capacity to regenerate if not
over-exploited. But, when forests are
totally cut and replaced by monocul¬
tures, in many areas the relatively poor
soils cannot support more than a few
years of harvest. Rain washes away the
thin layer of topsoil. The harsh sun
bakes the remaining soil until it is too
hard to absorb the torrential rains of the
monsoons. Flooding occurs down¬
stream and hydroelectric generating
dams and irrigation schemes become
clogged with silt. Climatic changes
occur, accentuating the differences be¬
tween seasons with too much rain and
those with too little.
All these are sound ecological argu¬
ments for action to conserve the world's
remaining tropical rain forests. But with
rapidly rising populations hungry for
food and land, crippling foreign debt
repayments to make and with the terms
of trade turning against them, the de¬
veloping countries within whose terri¬
tories these forests lie have more im¬
mediate economic and social problems
to resolve. In these circumstances they
have little option but to attempt to sell
yet more timber and to clear more forest
for agricultural use even though they
know this to be against their long-term
interest.
How can these long-term assets be
saved? It needs to be demonstrated that
sustainable use of tropical forests will
provide more local and national income
than clear-cutting and low productivity
30

agricultural schemes, and that forest
conservation must be coupled with eco¬
nomic development.
The exhortations of conservationists
for further research need to be linked to
action to provide alternatives to present
misuse. The contribution of the tropical
rain forests to the maintenance of local
term profit. The goals are to protect the
species diversity that exists in those
forests and to expand the land areas
under protection. ICR's work is sup¬
ported by Unesco's Man and the Bio¬
sphere (MAB) Programme, which first
proposed the conceptnow accepted
by most conservation-oriented
A A forestry extension officer shows a member
of a commune in Hunan Province, China,
the correct method of planting tea oil seeds.
-^ Logs for export float down a river in Borneo,
Indonesia
climatic patterns, particularly rainfall
that maintains agricultural productivity,
needs to be convincingly demonstrated.
Above all, the economic payoff must be
immediate to forestall continuing des¬
tructive use of the forests.
Integrated Conservation Research
(ICR), a US ecological group, has
launched a series of programmes in
Malaysia and China which are aimed at
demonstrating that rain forests are more
valuable if used on a sustainable basis
than if cut down for immediate, short-
groups of coupling economic develop¬
ment with conservation.
The economic development aspect of
the ICR programmes is divided into
three main areas of effort: agroforestry,
ethnobotany, and natural history-
oriented tourism.
Increasing numbers of tropical eco¬
logists are becoming convinced that
multiple species communities are more
likely to survive and be more productive
than monocultures. This idea is fun¬
damental to agroforestry. An excellent
example of this in a very simple "com¬
munity" is to be seen in the Southern
Yunnan Province of China.
Rubber has been successfully grown
in Xishuangbanna, far north of its major
distribution in Southeast Asia.
However, in an unusually cold year,
many of the rubber trees died. Intensive
research resulted in a decision to plant
the rows of trees farther apart than is the
usual practice in areas farther south, to
allow better air circulation at the tree
bases. This enhanced tree survival be¬
cause lethal fungus, encouraged by cold
and damp conditions, did not reach
harmful levels.
Between the rows of trees, tea was
planted in order not to waste the space.
The tea plants became more productive
under the partial shade of the rubber
trees. The vegetation "community"
(two species) also supported a "commu¬
nity" of more than one hundred species
of spider. These were more efficient
than spraying in eliminating the pest
species of insect that feed on tea plants.
Money was saved by not spraying, the
product was cleaner and environmental
contamination with insecticides was
eliminated.
ICR will attempt to combine many
species in agroforestry schemes, includ¬
ing traditional and new food plants,
medicinal plants, commercially valuable
timber, fuel wood, and newly domesti¬
cated animals.
The most striking among the animals
is a species of forest-dwelling cattle
known as the gaur (Bos gaurus). These
magnificent animals are nearing extinc¬
tion as forests disappear and render
them more vulnerable to hunters. Their
meat is highly prized, low in cholesterol
and comprises 65 per cent of the carcass,
which often weighs nearly two metric
tons. Mohd Khan, the Director-General
of Wildlife and National Parks in
Malaysia, is very concerned about these
unique animals and has developed a pro¬
gramme for captive breeding to reintro¬
duce them to areas where they have
become extinct. He is also interested in
developing domestic strains for beef
production.
The Department of Veterinary Sci¬
ences in Malaysia has a programme of
hybridization of the gaur with domestic
cattle. The hybrids grow 60 per cent
faster than domestic cattle. The pure
breeds may, however, have an advan-
31

tage, partly because they are very heat
tolerant. They are the only species of
bovid that sweats. Moreover, their
sweat contains repellents against flies,
ticks, and other ectoparasites, which
means that they are less susceptible to
infectious diseases carried by these
parasites.
The most important characteristic of
this species, however, is that it does not
require grass for food. It is a browser ol
forest edge plant species. Consequently,
forests do not need to be destroyed to
propagate it. The forests are capable of
supporting herds of limited size without
irreversible damage to species diversity.
Embryo transplants into domestic cattle
are planned to accelerate the breeding
programme. Research support for this
programme is being provided by the
Smithsonian Institution's National Zoo
in Washington, D.C., and the Henry
Doorley Zoo in Omaha, Nebraska.
Plants used in traditional medicine
will also be used in the agroforestry
schemes. One plant, in the Trillium
group, is used by inhabitants of Yunnan
to help heal wounds, cure ulcers, and
stop bleeding after childbirth. The
Kunming Institute of Botany, at
Xishuangbanna, China, has isolated the
active ingredients from these plants.
Analyses have revealed their chemical
structure, and work is continuing on the
testing of the effects of these materials
and on the genetics and propagation of
the plants, which grow only in the
forests. Prospects for their commercial
propagation in agroforestry schemes are
very promising.
Schemes such as these attempt to de¬
monstrate the nature of the forest as a
resource. With research and education,
the productivity of these areas can be
diversified as the economic potential of
new species comes to light.
ICR'S programmes also involve natu¬
ral history-oriented tourism. Most peo¬
ple are interested in Nature, and natural
history tourism offers a potential source
of income at the national as well as the
local level. Moreover, both visitors and
the local inhabitants would come to bet¬
ter appreciate the value of natural
resources.
To make the forest species more ac¬
cessible for observation (and research)
special techniques will be used to bring
observers to the canopy level. This is
where the dynamics of the tropical rain
forest occur. Experience indicates that
animals are far less fearful of people
when they are encountered in the
canopy. On the ground, humans are
characteristically regarded as hunters
and are feared.
The technique consists of a series of
suspended walkways supported from
the crowns of the tallest (and strongest)
trees. The US MAB National Commit¬
tee has provided funding for these walk¬
ways for research purposes in Malaysia
and China. A section of the walkways
connects the system to a hillside. Conse¬
quently, one can walk into the canopy
horizontally without the necessity of a
vertical climb. Platforms in the tall trees
are used for observation and photo¬
graphy. Artificial lighting at night will
be used to observe species not active
by day.
Visitors to Kinabalu National Park in
Borneo will be able to see newly-
planned facilities, including an orchid
garden containing most of the native
species, a butterfly farm, and a deer
park. Nature trails allow them to see
many of the 3,500 species of trees that
occur on the island, a bat cave and a
magnificent waterfall. At the end of a
hard day they can soak away their
32

Walkways constructed high up in the forest
canopy and used by scientists for research can
also provide tourists with magnificent views
and new insights into the tropical forest.
weariness in natural hot springs that are
piped into tiled tubs.
The tours currently last two weeks,
but special arrangements can also be
made. Through tourism it is hoped to
demonstrate the immediate value of the
rain forests and to expand existing pro¬
tection schemes.
From the practical standpoint, the old
adage "Use them or lose them" seems to
apply to rain forests. It is hoped that
both economic developers and conser¬
vationists will benefit from sustainable
use of forest resources.
Much can be learned from the people
who inhabit these forests concerning
useful products. They are not the ones
who advocate destruction of forests and
replanting the land in monocultures. In
many cases they have a remarkable re¬
spect and regard for the forests, which
have provided them with the means to
survive for generations. With the des¬
truction of the forests they see their own
cultures and survival threatened.
ICR has offered to work with these
people in agroforestry schemes, using
species with which they are familiar.
Through these schemes the group hopes
to restore abandoned lands which were
formerly covered by rain forests, but
have been depleted of nutrients. Legu¬
minous plants which rapidly restore the
nutrients in soil have been identified.
These plants can also be used as highly
nutritious (17 per cent protein) fodder
for livestock, such as the gaur and the
mouse deer. Medicinal plants will be
included, together with a variety of food
plants. Assistance will be provided in
marketing.
If this can be achieved in China and
Malaysia, the forests will have paid their
own way. At a planning workshop held
in October 1988, ICR set a goal of self-
sufficiency within four years for its re¬
search and economic development
programme. Many of the several dozen
participants expressed scepticism. Eco¬
logists are not accustomed to thinking in
such terms. But more of us need to think
in these terms if we are to achieve our
goals of saving significant amounts of
tropical rain forests.
ILLAR MUUL, American ecologist and research
associate of the Smithsonian Institution, Washing¬
ton, D.C., is president of Integrated Conservation
Research (ICR), an organization which seeks to
integrate economic development with conserva¬
tion and research.
33
