The adventures ofAeneas chronicled in Virgil's great
poem the Aeneid make a powerful human drama
whose force is undiminished by time.
%
Aeneas, Rome's man
of destiny
BY JEAN-PAUL BRISSON
Aeneas leaves the burning
city of Troy, carrying his
father Anchises on his back.
Marseilles pottery, 18th
century.
Left, "Venus appears to
Aeneas and sends him
Cupid. " Detail of a fresco
by Giovanni Battista
Tiepolo (1696-1770) in the
Aeneid room of the Villa
Valmarana, at Vicenza
(Italy).
RITTEN between 29 BC and 19 BC, the
Roman poet Virgil's epic, the Aeneid, recounts
the adventures of the Trojan hero Aeneas, fruit
of the union of the mortal Anchises with the
goddess Venus.
Having miraculously survived the destruction
of Troy, Aeneas, accompanied by his father, his
infant son lulus and a handful of faithful com¬
panions, sets sail in search of the place, appoint¬
ed by destiny but as yet unknown to him, where
he is to build a new Troy. As his journey unfolds,
he comes to realize that the city's mysterious new
site is situated in Italy, in the region of Latium.
Warrings and wanderings
Before reaching his goal, however, he is fated to
wander the length and breadth of the Mediterra¬
nean for seven years. This is partly because the
utterances of the oracles, who purport to guide
him in his quest, are inevitably far from clear.
A false interpretation of one oracular message
makes him think for a time that his destination
is Crete until, warned of his error by the outbreak
of a terrible plague, he is forced to flee the island.
But the prime cause of his misfortunes is the un¬
relenting hatred of the all-powerful Juno, wife of
Jupiter, the king of the gods.
This hatred stems from an ancient incident
recounted by Homerthe famous judgement of
Paris, the Trojan who dared to award the prize
for beauty to Venus rather than to Juno. As
depicted at the beginning of Virgil's epic, the
queen of Olympus neither can nor wishes to for¬
get what she considers to be a personal affront
for which, through Paris, she holds all Trojans
responsible. She finds it intolerable that a small
group of Trojans should have survived her ven¬
geance and have the temerity to want to rebuild
a city that is for her accursed. No subterfuge that
may prevent Aeneas from achieving his aim and
ensure his final downfall is too low for her.
After seven years of wanderings, Aeneas lands
in Sicily where his old father dies. By now he
knows for certain how and where he will discover
the site to which destiny will lead him and it is
with confidence and a light heart that he sets out
for Italy. Seeing him so near his goal, Juno suc¬
cumbs to a murderous rage and bribes Aeolus,
the keeper of the winds, to unleash a furious tem¬
pest. The Trojan fleet is scattered and largely des¬
troyed; the few survivors are thrown up on the
African coast not far from Carthage.
Thanks to the intervention of Venus, anxious
to ensure the safety of her son, the sovereign of
those parts, the Phoenician queen, Dido, wel¬
comes the shipwrecked survivors with generous
hospitality. Taking advantage of these events in
a further attempt to detain Aeneas far from his
Italian goal, Juno, with the complicity of Venus,
thrusts the unfortunate Dido into the arms of her
Trojan guest.
Surrendering himself to the delights of a mad 23

passion, the Trojan hero forgets his predestined
mission for twelve long months. When Jupiter
imperiously takes him to task, however, he
remembers the duty fate has laid upon him and
leaves Carthage and the delights of love, setting
sail to the light of the funeral pyre on which the
despairing Dido has thrown herself.
A stop at Cumae gives Aeneas, guided by the
Sibyl, the opportunity to descend into the nether
regions where he encounters his father's shade,
who presents to him those who will play lead¬
ing roles in the accomplishment of Rome's fu¬
ture glory. Aeneas next arrives at the mouth of
the Tiber where the fulfilment of a prophecy con¬
firms that his long voyage is over. Recognizing
in him the foreigner his diviners have predicted
will marry his daughter Lavinia, Latinus, the king
of the region, welcomes Aeneas with open arms.
Juno, however, returns to the charge. Arous¬
ing Ihe jealousy of Turnus, a suitor of Lavinia
who cannot bear to find himself set aside in
favour of the newly-arrived stranger, she sets the
scene for a desperate struggle. A long series of
combats ensues in which the warriors of both
camps distinguish themselves by brilliant in¬
dividual exploits.
An epic that reinterpreted history
Finally, weary of the useless carnage, the two
sides make a solemn pact to leave the resolution
of their quarrel to the outcome of a single com¬
bat between Aeneas and Turnus. Aeneas, of
course, emerges victorious and at this point the
epic draws to a close. However, a number of
predictions inserted throughout the poem fore¬
shadow the future course of history that the epic
itself leaves untoldhow lulus, Aeneas' son, will
found the city of Alba from whence, 300 years
later, will come forth Romulus and Remus, the
twin founders of Rome.
The choice of such a subject offered many
advantages. In literary terms it demonstrates
Aeneas and the Shrine
of the Penates. " Detail
from the marble frieze
on the Altar of
the Augustan Peace, Rome
(1st century BC).
Virgil presents Dante
to Homer." Detail of a
fresco by the French painter
Eugene Delacroix
(1798-1863)
in the cupola of the library
of the Senate, Paris.
_ i'
r£rr l IL
24

fidelity to the Homeric tradition without being
a slavish imitation of it. Of the twelve books that
make up the epic, the first six, in which the hero's
perilous voyage from Troy to Italy is recounted,
conjure up in the reader's mind overtones of the
Odyssey; the last six, in which the war in Italy
incited by Juno is related, are an open evocation
of the Iliad.
Yet though the Homeric model was clearly
in the minds of both the poet and his readers, it
was used to tell a quite different tale. Further¬
more, while deliberately placing itself within the
context of Greek epic poetry, the Aeneid appears
to be an extension of it, since the action begins
at the precise point where it ends in Homer
with the capture and destruction of Troy.
Above all, the subject furnished political ad¬
vantages. The legend unfolded in the Aeneid
provided justification for Rome's complex rela¬
tionship with the Hellenic world, which involved
military and political domination coupled
with a certain cultural dependency. Representing
Rome as a resurgence of a Troy destroyed by the
Greeks gave the Roman conquest of Greece the
colouring of legitimate revenge. Virgil did not
miss the opportunity to put into the mouth of
Jupiter, in a lengthy prophecy addressed to Ve¬
nus, a proclamation that Rome would destroy the
most renowned cities of Greece, which were
responsible for the fall of Troy.
Yet Rome was indebted to Greece for this
justificatory legend, which has its roots in the
Iliad. By the end of the fourth century BC, at the
latest, Greek historians had given shape to the
myth of the arrival of Aeneas in Latium and of
his founding of Lavinium (today Pratica di Mare).
Thus began a subtle interplay between victor and
vanquished with the victory of Roman arms over
Greece finding justification in legendary tales
evolved in Greece itself.
JEAN-PAUL BRISSON,
of France, is professor
emeritus at the University
of Paris X, where he taught
Roman civilization and
literature. His published
works include Carthage ou
Rome ("Carthage or
Rome", 1973) and Virgile,
son temps et le nôtre ("Virgil,
his time and ours", 1980). 25

Not least of the advantages of Virgil's epic
was that it glorified Augustus, the first Roman
emperor. Adopted by Julius Caesar, Augustus be¬
longed to the Julian family which claimed direct
descent from Aeneas. The claims were support¬
ed by a phonetic play, obligingly echoed by
Virgil, on the name of Aeneas' son. From the
original "Ilus" (which simply means Trojan),
"lulus", then "Iulius", were derived. The philo- .
logists of old were very partial to such
approximations.
The predictions inserted throughout the epic,
foretelling the future grandeur of the descendants
of Aeneas, naturally referred to the one who was
foreseen to be the most illustrious among them
the emperor Augustus. Contemporary readers
had no difficulty in making the link between the
great future foretold for the descendants of the
epic hero and the new regime of their own day.
By the same token, this new regime no longer
appeared to be the result of chance but the fulfil¬
ment of an eternal destiny.
The war that Aeneas was compelled to wage
to secure a firm foothold in Latium also provid¬
ed the opportunity to foretell the coming of the
multi-cultural empire over which Augustus was
to rule. For in his struggle against Turnus, Aeneas
was aided both by a small Greek community
established on the site of the future city of Rome
and by an Etruscan prince. This coalition of
peoples of such diverse culturesLatin, Hellenic
and Etruscanwas already, in itself, a foretaste
of the cultural situation of historic Rome.
Furthermore, at the close of the epic, Juno
renounces her vendetta and accepts the defeat of
her protege Turnus on condition that the newly-
arrived Trojans in turn abandon their customs
and their language and merge with the native
population to constitute a single people. The
Aeneid concludes less with the vision of a bloody
fight to the death than with the promise of the
harmonious fusion of different cultures within
the framework of a political union. Thus the Vir-
gilian epic made Augustus, the prestigious descen¬
dant the oracles were united in telling Aeneas he
would sire, the guarantor of that fusion and that
union.
26
A poem for all time
Though it may have been a piece of topical
propaganda, placed within a historically limited
context, the Aeneid is well worth reading today
because it was written by a very great poet, a
genius of such stature that the style and the events
of his epic narration are rich in connotations and
implications that go far beyond the author's im¬
mediate purposes.
The modern reader will be all trie more at
ease with Virgil in that the hero of his epic is not
cast in the monolithic mould of the Homeric
model. Robots tirelessly performing feats of arms,
Homer's heroes maintain virtually unchanging
patterns of behaviour and feelings throughout his
narrative and the reader leaves them at the end
of the epic as they were at the beginning. Virgil,
however, endows his hero with the full panoply
of human psychological complexity, with doubts,
uncertainties and moments of despair.
The Aeneid breaks new ground in epic poetry
by its use of the narrative technique to reveal the
inner feelings of Aeneas. Instead of being related
by an aloof third person, the dramatic episodes
of the destruction of Troy and the hero's wan¬
derings in search of the site on which his city is
destined to be rebuilt are recounted by an "I"
still pulsating with the excitement of the events
through which he has lived. From the start, a
kind of intimacy is established between the hero
and the reader, to whom he seems to speak per¬
sonally. And this initial intimacy is reflected
throughout the narrative.
By introducing the psychological factor,
Virgil avoids the snare of a simplistic dualism

Aeneas tells Dido about
the disasters that have
befallen the city of Troy"
(1815). A painting by
Pierre Narcisse Guérin
(1774-1833).
Juno pleads with Aeolus
to unleash the winds
against Aeneas' boat. " A
painting by the Italian
artist Lucio Massari
(1569-1633).
between good and bad people. Dido and Turnus
are, it is true, formidable obstacles to the accom¬
plishment of Aeneas' mission and can be counted
among the negative characters in the epic. But it
would be too simple to leave it at that and Virgil
succeeds in portraying them with sufficient com¬
plexity to make them seem more worthy of com¬
passion than of enmity. His lines on Dido's tragic
suicide are among the most sensitive ever writ¬
ten by a poet of Antiquity and even today it is
impossible to read them without being profound¬
ly moved.
Finally, what makes the Aeneid an epic apart
is its initiatory connotations. The difficulties the
hero has to face to accomplish his mission are a
poetic transposition of the classic ordeals of an
initiation ceremony. Aeneas comes through these
ordeals not only as the victor but as a man trans¬
formed. The Aeneas who finally settles in Latium
is a new man, destined for a new life.
The rites and mysteries of the religions of An¬
tiquity may be of little interest to the modern
reader, but no-one can remain unmoved by this
lesson in self-transcendence, by this splendid ex¬
ample of a mastered fate. 27
