How Charles
Chaplin created
his "little tramp",
the outsider who
lurks inside
all of us.



Charlie Chaplin, stranger
	 and brother
BY MARCEL OMS
V^HARLIE Chaplin, who was born a hundred
years ago this year, was one of the world's best-
loved public figures, greeted by cheering crowds
wherever he went. Yet he also attracted suspicion,
dislike and even hatred.
There is a disturbing contradiction in these
two extreme responses, neither of which can be
said to be totally undeserved or totally justified.
Perhaps it is the fate of brilliant clowns to em¬
body both the white-faced clown and his stooge,
the auguste, and, when they abandon their
motley, to attract both love and hatred accord¬
ing to the temper of the times, as if they were
trying to reveal themselves, and us, as complete
human beings.
This kind of fundamental misunderstanding
came to a head in 1927, when Chaplin, attacked
by the gutter press and a wide sector of public
opinion, was defended from the fury of his crit¬
ics by the surrealists in a tract entitled Hands off
Love. This text, probably written mainly by
Louis Aragon, contains some admirable expres¬
sions of faith in the Chaplin myth: "Obedient
to the dictates of love, he has always been obe¬
dient to the dictates of love, that is what his life
and all his films unanimously proclaim." And the
text concludes: "Suddenly we understand the
place of genius in this world. It takes possession
of a man, makes him an intelligible symbol and
the prey of real brutes. Genius tells the world the
moral truth which universal folly obscures and
tries to suppress. So thank the man who, on the
vast screen of the West, over there on the horizon
where the suns are setting one by one, today
projects your shadows, great human truths,
perhaps unique moral truths, which are worth
more than all the Earth."
That same year, 1927, Chaplin made The Cir¬
cus. In this film featuring clowns, an equestrienne,
wild beasts, a conjuror and an acrobat, he rev¬
ealed his debt to the traditions of the sawdust ring
and paid tribute to the set pieces, classic acts and
conventions of the circus. A tramp on the run
from the police, Charlie takes refuge in the big
top, disrupts the show, unwittingly puts on a star
performance in the ring, and enters the magic
circle of the circus.
The Circus puts the Chaplin problem in a nut¬
shell. The hero tries to escape his fate and is
trapped inside the show that makes his name.
Then when he wants to escape from the show,
which is alienating him, he has to knuckle un¬
der. This skilful dialectic of rejection and attrac¬
tion encapsulates the Chaplin tramp character.
Although seemingly the most ordinary of men,
he is actually an outsider. He is a rejected out¬
cast, a wanderer desperate for affection, a tramp
destined to beg forever.
The public were loyal to Chaplin partly be¬
cause they recognized him for what he was and
identified with him and partly because they felt
the revulsion we feel for a side of ourselves that
we cannot accept. The surrealists who held out
a friendly hand to Chaplin the victim later strong¬
ly condemned his "sentimentalism". Luis Buñuel
reproached him for allowing himself to be "crip¬
pled by the intellectuals of the whole world" and
for "trying to make us weep with hoary sen¬
timental commonplaces".
38
Charlie the guardian ofan
abandoned child.

f
^H
daaaHBJhinl
\Born a hundred years ago
A master of
modern comedy
^^ ^^^
H
Jo-»? I -V
f!9H.
Stella
(WC3J^2itai%V- «MRS
tSkt*
î*£K«r*S;
41
"
aV
» h*"
'

40
FROM LEFT TO RIGHT:
The Pilgrim (1923)
The escaped convict .
disguised as a clergyman
preaches his first sermon.
The Gold Rush (1925)
Prospecting for gold in
Alaska, Charlie takes refuge
from a snowstorm in the
cabin of outlaw Black
Larson (right). Also driven
into the cabin is Big Jim
Mackay (centre) a
prospector who has found
gold.
The Circus (1927)
Charlie's accidents in the
ring make a hit with the
audience.
Such passions, contradictions and inconsisten¬
cies reveal the strength of the feelings which
Chaplin has aroused.
The 'little fellow'
Charles Chaplin first visited the United States in
1911 with Fred Karno's music-hall troupe. He
returned the following year and stayed on to ap¬
pear in vaudeville routines whose growing suc¬
cess owed much to the traditions of English music
hall. He soon established a reputation with a
number of classic sketches which he later adapt¬
ed for the cinema. Two of them, A Night in a
London Club and An Evening in an English
Music Hall, were built around the character of a
fractious drunk and could be constantly varied
depending on the reactions of the audience.
When he started out in films in 1914 Chaplin
played bit parts. The screen character for which
he is remembered did not yet exist. He was feel¬
ing his way, trying to find his style. After a long
period of improvisation in which he played ag¬
gressive, vindictive roles, he became a kind of bad-
tempered Harlequin kitted out in the ragged
clothes he remembered from his London days:
"I ended up by thinking of those Englishmen
whom I had so often seen, with their little black
moustaches, their bamboo canes, their ill-fitting
jackets. I decided to model myself on them."
Chaplin's famous duck-footed gait owed
something to Little Tich, an English music-hall
clown with huge, floppy feet, to a drunken old
ostler Chaplin had seen staggering around
Lambeth when he was a child, and to other come¬
dians from Karno's troupe such as Walter Groves
and Fred Kitchen.
Whatever inspired it, this faltering and un¬
certain appearance created the image of the soli¬
tary tramp which Chaplin never changed, even
when, or especially when, the character grew in
humanity, subtlety and range of emotion. "Man,
intoxicated with intelligence, dancing on the
peaks of despair", as the critic Elie Faure said of
Chaplin in 1922, immortalizing this initiation
into endless vagabondage: "Each of his feet, so

painful and so burlesque, is one of the two poles
of the spirit. One is called knowledge, the other
desire. By leaping from one to the other he seeks
that centre of gravity of the soul that we no soon¬
er find than we immediately lose again."
Chaplin's quest never ended, even if its course
sometimes disconcerted his warmest admirers.
Haunted by the spectres of a mentally unstable
mother and an alcoholic father who had once
stared at him without recognition in the street,
he channelled into his creation all the love which
had been denied him in his childhood.



Charlie the stranger
As well as performing in the melodrama that he
used as the mainspring of his dialogue with the
public, Chaplin was always an active and mili¬
tant witness of his times, starting with his early
campaigns in support of American intervention
on the side of the Allies in World War I. The
Bond, a not very convincing propaganda short,
and the masterpiece Shoulder Arms, both made
in 1918, were his contribution to the mobiliza¬
tion effort, but above all they were a denuncia¬
tion of the folly of war.
In these films Chaplin refined the character
whose mere appearance was a challenge to the
established order. He became increasingly a
"stranger" in the sense -that Albert Camus gave
to the word in The Myth of Sisyphus (1942):
"Strangeness creeps in: perceiving that the world
is 'dense', sensing to what degree a stone is for¬
eign and irreducible to us, with what intensity
nature or a landscape can negate us. ... Men, too,
secrete the inhuman. At certain moments of lu¬
cidity, the mechanical aspect of their gestures,
their meaningless pantomime, make silly every¬
thing that surrounds them."
Charlie has only to appear at a spa where he
is taking a cure, drunk from the first scene, and
a whole world of hidden vices, shameless gossip
MARCEL OMS,
French educator and
historian of the cinema, is
the author of several
published works, including
a recent study on the
French director Alain
Resnais (1988).
0tt& 41

42
FROM LEFT TO RIGHT:
Modern Times (1936)
Charlie is caught up in the
machine age.
The Great Dictator
(1940)
"Had I known of the
actual horrors of the
concentration camps, I
could not have made The
Great Dictator. I could
not have made fun of
the homicidal insanity
of the nazis. "
Limelight (1952)
The aging and despondent
music-hall artist
Calvero, who had once
been a great star.
and puritanical preaching is shattered (The Cure,
1917); an escaped convict, he disguises himself in
the stolen clothes of a clergyman, and all kinds
of hypocrisy are unmasked (The Pilgrim, 1923);
a jark-of-all trades in a pawnbroker's shop, he
dismantles and totally destroys a clock in order
to determine its value (The Pawnshop, 1916); on
the run again, he is taken in by a woman and her
pretty daughter whom he saves from drowning.
He wakes up next morning and, a victim of a
comedy of transposition in which each object
seems to suggest something else, he imagines that
the pyjamas he has been lent are prison uniform
and the bars of his brass bed are those of his cell.
Later he drenches the pretty girl's arrogant beard¬
ed swain with soda water, and at the end of an
apocalyptic final scene in which the ladies are
embroiled in a riotous mêlée, he wins the pretty
girlfor an all-too-brief moment (The Adventurer,
1917).
After skilfully denouncing capitalist duplicity
in City Lights (1931), Chaplin attacked the
alienation and loss of creativity produced by the
"mechanical gestures" of mass production in
Modern Times (1936). An idyllic digression in
which Charlie and the waif set up home together
in a shack is a grotesque yet touching variation on
the myth of the golden age which cannot blind us
to the fact that even this dream has become alien.
An artist's testament
The dream turned into a nightmare with the rise
of nazism. The Great Dictator (1940), Chaplin's
first talking picture, is a satire on Hitler (both
Chaplin and Hitler were born in the same month)
in which a Jewish barber is mistaken for a
dictator.
The myth of the clown is the tightrope walk¬
er's poetic response to the values of a world
which is hostile, indifferent and absurd. Chaplin
had perfectly adapted circus skills to the cinema.
His little tramp was an anti-establishment figure,
the caricature of a dandy; his poverty was the
other side of the coin of social success.

But Chaplin's testament is Limelight, made
in 1952, a film which is not so much an autobi¬
ography in disguise, as critics have said, but a lu¬
cid and serene reflection on the subject of origins.
The film, whose hero Calvero both is and is
not Charlie himself, is set in the places where
Chaplin grew up and at the time when he was
starting out in the cinema, and several members
of the Chaplin family acted in it. But in spite of
many autobiographical allusions, Limelight is
much more than autobiography. This nostalgic
look in the mirror in which wrinkles have etched
the face of youth could perhaps best be described
as a portrait of the artist as a showman. Again
words from Camus' The Myth ofSisyphus spring
to mind: "Likewise the stranger who at certain
seconds comes to meet us in a mirror, the familiar
and yet alarming brother we encounter in our
own photographs is also the absurd."
In a famous scene in The Gold Rush (1925),
all alone in his cabin on New Year's Eve after
the girl he has fallen in love with fails to turn up
to have dinner with him, Charlie faces up to a
kind of death. On a night when the rest of the
world is laughing and celebrating, the lonely out¬
sider spears two bread rolls with forks and makes
the miniature feet thus formed perform a dance.
It was in the midst of the festive season that
Charles Chaplin died, on Christmas Eve 1977. It
is tempting to write a scenario for his last exit...
On a snowy night the wind is howling against
the door of the wooden shack on the edge of the
cliff and the long drop into oblivion. The last log
is flickering out. With a shrug of the shoulders,
Charlie wraps himself in his shroud. He shakes
off the snow, kicks his heels, and with waddling
gait takes leave of the world.
43
