THE ONCE AND
FUTURE REVOLUTION
BY MAURICE AGULHON
THIS year France is celebrating the
bicentenary of the 1789 Revolu¬
tion and, to judge by the long list
of public functions and learned confer¬
ences already announced, the eyes of
most of the world will be upon her.
For France, this is the occasion for an
extra-special national day. Celebrated
each year on 14 July, the official nation¬
al day is, after all, a tribute to the Revo¬
lution to which it is directly linked. The
Bastille was taken by storm on 14 July
1789, and 14 July 1790; the first anniver¬
sary of this event, was also the occasion
of the grand and joyous Fête de la Feder¬
ation (a federation of communes set up
in many towns and villages to replace the
former local authorities). Indeed, the en¬
tire French panoply of national sym¬
bolism refers back to the Revolutionthe
tricolour, adopted in July 1789, the na¬
tional anthem, La Marseillaise, composed
in 1792, and La Liberté, the figure of a
woman wearing the famous red Phrygian
cap which became an official French em¬
blem at this period.
The French people of the day were
very conscious of the fact that France had
existed as a state for nearly a thousand
years and had already produced many
heroic, symbolic figuresgreat kings,
such as Philippe-Auguste, François I or
Henri IV, and great servants of kings,
from Jeanne d'Arc to Richelieu. The year
1789, however, marks the beginning of
the modern age of which the world of to¬
day is the direct continuation.
Since then, French public life has been
ordered by a written constitution and by
laws equally applicable to all. The peo¬
ple, through their elected representatives,
have shared in the exercise of power, and
basic rights and freedoms have been af¬
firmed, at least as an objective or an ideal.
1789 marks, not the birth of France, but
Earthenware figurine (1794-1795) which
represents Liberty bringing down despotism.
	 17

maw
rather her attainment of adulthood, of
reason and of freedom. That 14 July
should have been chosen as the national
day is very indicative of the extent to
which the desire to achieve the political
ideal is inherent in the French national
character.



Revolution as Enlightenment
Why are the events of 1789 seen and
celebrated as being more than simply an
incident in French history? It is because
Revolution is seen as having its own in¬
trinsic value.
What, then, it must be asked, is
"Revolution"? Contemporary thought,
especially perhaps in Europe, defines
Revolution in a rather abstract, formal
way as sudden and violent social and po¬
litical change. If we accept this view, then
the principal alternative to revolution is
reform, that is to say, gradual, non¬
violent change. Today, a humanitarian
ethos, which fortunately is fairly
widespread, encourages us to prefer the
reformer to the revolutionary.
^¿
Im*X4r C*.<tnf «uft?rÁLiÁrt,J«<</«r,A_rrvt,rf A*t, ten Liüm AvùJiffiArJrr )JrúÁ/ifUnur nJ/fiii
A lady from Mainz (in the present-day Fed. Rep. of Germany). Round her waist is a sash bearing
the words "Equality" and "Liberty" in French. Some of the city's intellectuals supported the
ideals of the French Revolution and unsuccessfully attempted to create a Republic of Mainz in
1792-1793.
Contemporary engraving of a Revolutionary committee meeting under the Reign of Terror
(1793-1794). Those who instituted it saw the "Terror" as an arm of national defence in face of
counter-revolutionary intrigues within France and the threat from abroad. 17,000 people are
estimated to have been executed, and 500,000 imprisoned, during this period of the French
Revolution.
This point of view, however, and this
interpretation of words, is quite recent.
Throughout the nineteenth century at
least, Revolution, in political terms, was
defined above all by its content, its
programme and its aims. And the alter¬
native to Revolution was Counter¬
revolution. Revolution thus meant
change for the better, change inspired by
faith in the possibility of progress, great¬
er rationality in the means used to achieve
it and having, as its final objective, great¬
er collective well-being. Just as clearly,
Counter-revolution meant resistance to
change by, and possibly the restoration
of, the former centres of power and
former social groupings, based on the
old values of authority, hierarchy and
tradition, often founded in religion and
often oppressive.
The repercussions that the events of
1789 had throughout the world were due
not to the fact that the change they
brought about was sudden, radical and
18

complete, but because it appeared to be
initiated in the name of positive values:
Liberty, Equality, Happiness, Justice.
France leads the way
Did the France of 1789 deserve her
reputation as an example to the world,
which earned her both hatred and
affection? At first sight this is debatable.
We need go no further back than the
eighteenth century to be reminded that
the idea of applying reason to the govern¬
ment of states or of societies was due to
enlightened despots such as Frederick II
of Prussia, the Empress Catherine II of
Russia, Joseph II, Emperor of Germany,
and Gustav III, King of Sweden. And the
notion that a political relationship could
be modified by the will of the people, or
that a government could be set up whose
legal power was based on the consent of
the governed, had been proclaimed in
1776 by the American Revolution.
The dominant ideas of the French
Revolution of 1789 were undoubtedly
closer to those of the American Revolu¬
tion than to those of enlightened despo¬
tism. Louis XVI could have been France's
enlightened despot. That he did not
take on this role can be put down to inde-
cisiveness, due perhaps to lack of personal
attachment to the philosophy of the day
(he was a pious believer whereas the
rulers named above were all more or
less agnostic) and alsothough this
may have been another aspect of his
religious convictions to his failure to
agree to break with the aristocracy. Thus
Louis XVI soon came to resist a nascent
Revolution that had vested hopes in him
and as a consequence lost control of it.
And, as soon as the Revolution was seen
to be in opposition to the King, the
formerly progressive, reforming Euro¬
pean monarchies became fiercely hostile
to it.
Declared a Republic in 1792, revolu¬
tionary France did not for all that follow
the American model. This was because
France remained a great state, an ancient
and a powerful state, which was soon
obliged by the exigencies of war to
strengthen itself still further.
The distinguishing feature of the
French Revolution was, perhaps, that it
emerged as the first synthesis of the two
great changes that preceded it, as the
point of convergence between the philo¬
sophy proclaimed by the American Revo¬
lution (Natural law and inalienable rights,
including the right to life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness) and the techniques
of rational administration that had been
tried out in the Old World.
However this may be, the world was
soon struck by the novelty of the French
experiment. The story is told of how
Kant, the philosopher of Koenigsberg, in
1789 changed the previously unvarying
route of his daily walk so as to hear more
quickly the news from France. And who
has not heard quoted the words of the
German poet Goethe on the night of the
battle of Valmy1: "From this day and
this place dates a new era in the history
of the world."
The French Revolution drew atten¬
tion not only because of its novelty but
also because France herself was promi¬
nent on the world scene. At the end of
the eighteenth century, all that could be
described as being on a world scale, that
is to say, everything relating to world
politics that was collective, rational and
interconnected, was to be found in
Freed slave from the Antilles, wearing around his neck the tricolour ribbon and a plumb level,
both revolutionary symbols. The French National Convention abolished slavery in 1794.
	 19

Europe of the North Atlantic. And in
this European world, France was the
most populous country (after Russia), the
most powerful and (after Great Britain)
one of the most advanced economically.
French was the main instrument of inter¬
national communication and the language
of the cultivated élite. This gave France
claim to a literary hegemony paralleling
that of Greece and then Rome. Exorbi¬
tant or not, this pretension, in addition
to other more objective factors, undoub¬
tedly helps to explain why the events of
1789 so strongly alarmed and shook the
world. And although the long periods of
warfare between 1792 and 1815 in some
respects limited the impact of 1789, they
also helped to prolong and propagate it.
The universal Republic
It is undoubtedly the case that,
throughout the nineteenth century,
France, as "the country of the Revolu¬
tion" or, to put it slightly differently,
"the country of the Rights of Man", was
to evoke a degree of enthusiasm among
the supporters of Progress and Liberty
matched only by her own messianic zeal.
Although French was then the univer¬
sal language of the educated élite, the mes¬
sage it bore was unreservedly universal.
Not a word in the text of the Declaration
of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen
was specific, all the assertions it made
were general and therefore could be ap¬
plied to any nation. The notions of
Liberty and Equality were enhanced by
the universality of their formulation.
Even the form of Republicanism adopt¬
ed by the French after 1792 followed the
same pattern. What, indeed, could be
more specific than a monarchy, which be¬
longs to a dynasty with a family name
and a geographical location and origin?
What could be more universal than a
Republic, an abstract term like Liberty
or Justice, and a collégial system directly
applicable everywhere?
By the middle of the nineteenth cen¬
tury, the most idealistic of the heirs to the
French Revolution had come to the con¬
clusion that the French Republic itself
was destined to disappear one day within
a World Republic. In evocation of this
grandiose, Utopian notion I quote not an
isolated dreamer but the most famous and
most venerated poet of his time, a man
whose poems were known by heart in
Republican France and on whom she
bestowed the highest symbolic and
political honoursVictor Hugo.
No anthem could be more revolutiona¬
ry or more universalist than the last poem
of his anthology Châtiments, dated 1853.
Le char de la monarchie ("The Royal Coach") sepia pen and wash drawing by Victor Hugo from
his years of exile.
Within the seed-bed of our present woes,
The Hymen of the brother-peoples grows...
Republic universal, you we acclaim
Today a spark, a- tiny flame,
Tomorrow the sun!
Nobody really believed, either in 1870
or in 1900, that this "Tomorrow" was
very near. But the fact that, by adopting
Hugo as their leading prophet, French
revolutionary thinkers allowed them¬
selves to indulge in such dreams has had
its consequences.
The magnificent tribute paid to Vic¬
tor Hugo at his death, in 1885, by the
Portuguese writer José Maria Eça de
Queirós, has recently (1985) been re¬
published. He had a profound admiration
for Hugo for many reasons both moral
and aesthetic. However, he admits that
Hugo perhaps went too far in his affir¬
mation of French messianism and that it
would be more reasonable to declare that
all the peoples of the world will take part
in "the final liberation of humanity".
This, however, is but a mild reproof and
he nonetheless holds it as evident that:
No country has contributed more than
France to fashioning from the rough bar¬
barian of the sixth century the cultivated
man of the nineteenth. France possesses to
the highest and purest degree the divine
spiritual qualities of sweetness and- light,
which are the most powerful agents ofhu¬
man education. No country, like France,
has taught the world the lesson ofequality;
and equality is, in truth, the surest hall¬
mark of civilization ...
It was in terms such as these that, at
the end of the last century, people out¬
side France were speaking of France. The
vaunted "spreading influence of the
French language and culture", due initial¬
ly to such literary figures as Corneille and
Bossuet, was given a kind of re-charge of
energy by the Revolution, and became as¬
sociated also with Voltaire, Mirabeau and
Victor Hugo.
A controversial model
Times, however, have changed, and
for two kinds of reasons that neither
20

Victor Hugo nor his extollers could have
foreseen. The French Revolution had
been a long, troubled affair interspersed
with the vicissitudes and drama of both
external and civil war. Doctrinal strug¬
gles, which at times interrupted the war
between the classes, set the partisans
against one another. Various constitution¬
al systems were tried out, rejected and
replaced, giving those ten years of French
history the appearance of a political test¬
ing ground, throwing up a whole stock
of models for the world to follow.
For a hundred years, in a host of coun¬
tries, many political figures who knew
French and were well informed and pas¬
sionately interested in French history,
borrowed French ideas and terminology:
the Right, the Left, political "clubs",
Jacobin, Montagnard, Thermidorian,
Bonapartist, Chouan, émigré, and so on.
The most popular and most radical phases
of the Revolution, those of the year II
(September 1793-August 1794) of the
Republican calendar, were to be of spe¬
cial interest (directly as well as indirectly
through the subsequent events of 1848
and the Paris Commune of 1871) to
socialist revolutions of the twentieth
century. In them, undeniably, can be seen
a further series of historical effects stem¬
ming from 1789. The French Revolution
could no longer be seen as simply a repe¬
tition of the message and aspirations of
the American Revolution. It became the
first in the series that was to lead to the
Russian Revolution.
This French Revolutionary
print, entitled
Citoyen né libre
("Free-born citizen"),
symbolizes the birth of
the new political man.

From this follow two consequences,
both of which tend to diminish the
impact of the French example. On the
one hand, the only possible link that can
be made between 1789 and its aftermath
and 1917 compromises 1789 in the eyes
of those who dislike radical social
struggles. On the other hand, for those
who have revolutionary aspirations, the
recent model of 1917 seems better suited
than that of 1789, which was formulated
long ago when the industrial revolution
was in its infancy. The internationalism
proclaimed by Marx, Lenin and Trotsky
was to blot out the memory of the
Universal Republic of Mazzini and Hugo.
From the universal to the specific
The Third French Republic, officially
inspired by the 1789 Revolution, acquired
a great colonial empire conquered by
force of arms but with a perfectly clear
conscience, in the sure knowledge that,
under the French flag, the Republic was
spreading a morally and intellectually su¬
perior message, an alluring message that
was both civilizing and French inspired.
This was but the French facet of a more
widespread phenomenon. At the begin¬
ning of the twentieth century, Europe
and North America, that is to say the in¬
dustrialized and developed world of the
day, dominated the other continents by
a combination of their material strength,
their cultural and technological superiori¬
ty and their liberal beliefs.
From this was to stem the last and
most important change in the status of
the Revolution of 1789 in the panorama
of world historyit fell victim to an anti-
Western counter-current.
How do things stand today?
The conditions which existed in the
last century and which promoted the
spread of French revolutionary ideas are
clearly much weakened if not virtually
non-existent.
France no longer ranks as a major
power.
French is no longer the main language
of international discourse.
Europe is no longer the centre of the
world.
The world has become a unified, inter¬
connected, inter-related whole with a bet¬
ter mutual knowledge which has upset
notions of a cultural hierarchy that were
formerly taken for granted. Western
liberalism is no longer held to be the only
acceptable form of civilization. Indeed,
we now speak of civilizations in the plural.
All this puts the message of 1789 in
a truer perspective and lessens its impact.
One has only to see how the great
decolonization movement, or, alterna¬
tively, the great uprising of the Third
World against the imperialism of the
North, has achieved its ends. At first it
seemed to be an uprising against France
(or against Europe and the West) in the
name of her, or their, own liberal
principlesdemanding from those who
had colonized in the name of the Rights
of Man the application to the colonies of
those universal rights. This then deve¬
loped into a desire to affirm national
differences, or national authenticity.
Rather than its own universal values, im¬
perialism found brandished in its face the
particular values specific to the oppressed.
Towards a new universality
Was this to be the final, definitive
moral climate of the world, with equal,
complete, but incommunicable cultures?
If this were so, if the Revolution of 1789
were no more than a fragment of French
folklore, and if the ideal of Liberty were
no more than a historical cover-up for
European hegemony, then there would
be no reason for a magazine such as the
Unesco Courier to exist.
Yet the Unesco Courier does exist, as
does Unesco and the United Nations
Organization and, for better or for worse,
the international community. If a few
common rules and a few common values
are accepted, then this means, at least
implicitly, that a philosophy universal in
application indeed exists.
This moral code of Justice and of
Liberty, this notion of Humanity united
by possession of a rationality common to
all, transcends all religious and national
specificities. For if this were not so, noth¬
ing would hold back the world from the
slippery slope that leads to head-on con¬
frontational crusades and the chaos of war.
Universality, that distant heritage from
the Enlightenment, is indeed the philo¬
sophy implicit in, or at least the working
hypothesis of, our international institu¬
tions. Why should we not recall for a
momentwith no outdated triumphalism,
yet without unnecessary deprecationthat
two centuries ago France was the setting
for a step forward in the journey towards
the making of humanity?
1. On 20 September 1^2, the French Revolutionary army halt¬
ed the invasion of Prussian troops at Valmy, north of Paris.
Editor
MAURICE AGULHON, of France, is professor
of modern French history at the Collège de France.
Among his published works translated into English
are Marianne into Battle: Republican Imagery and
Symbolism in France, 1789-1880 (1981), and
Republican Experiment, 1848-52 (1983), both from
Cambridge University Press.
Allegorical engraving from the French Revolution. Reason triumphant, with the support of
Nature, demonstrates that all men are equal. The black man holds the Declaration of the Rights
of Man in one hand, and, in the other, a decree according freedom to mixed races. At left, the
demons of despotism and injustice are fleeing.
22
