'CHRISTIANS AND SPICES'
The Portuguese in India BY JOHN CORREIA AFONSO
CAMOES masterpiece The Lusiads, Portugal's national
epic, tells the story of a small nation which in the space
of a little over a century carried its flag and its faith
far across the seas to Africa, to Brazil and as far away as Japan.
Singing of "heroes who, leaving their native Portugal behind
them, opened the way to Ceylon and beyond, across seas no
man had ever sailed before", it reminds us that Portugal played
an important part in unrolling "the Great Map of Mankind"
in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, beginning with Vasco
da Gama's great voyage to India in 1497-1498.
We do not deal here with the impulses behind the Age of
Discovery. Suffice it to mention that, according to British
historian Charles Boxer, the four main motives which inspired
the Portuguese were, in chronological order: crusading zeal;
desire for Guinea gold; the quest for Préster John*; and the
search for spices.
Whatever their motives, the Portuguese, by their discover¬
ies, not only extended the limits of the world known to Europe,
but contributed greatly to its more accurate representation. At
the end of the fifteenth century, a revolutionary cartographi¬
cal innovation was made with the introduction of a scale of
latitudes, and subsequently, following the great discoveries,
Portugal became the European centre for geographical and car¬
tographical knowledge. Alberto Cantino's famous planisphere
(1502) is the earliest dated map to delineate the Portuguese dis¬
covery of India (see centre colour pages).
However, the Portuguese did more than sail and chart the
seas. They also traded, and conquered and settled lands. The
domination of the Portuguese on the coasts and seas of Africa
and Asia is essentially and peculiarly connected with the be¬
ginnings of that maritime expansion of Europe and Christen¬
dom, which, above all else, marks off the modern from the
medieval world.
Here indeed was the beginning of a New Age, for before
the Iberian discoveries the most striking feature of the history
of civilization was the dispersion and isolation of the different
branches of mankind.
As Boxer points out, "it was the Portuguese pioneers and
the Castilian conquistadores from the western rim of Christen¬
dom, who brought together, for better or for worse, the wide¬
ly sundered branches of the great human family. They thus first
made humanity conscious, however dimly, of its essential
unity."
This unity was given new meaning by the bonds of trade.
Not only were the two hemispheres brought closer to each
other, but the European merchants engaged in coastal trade also
helped to bring parts of Asia closer to one another, linking In¬
dia, South-East Asia, China and Japan.
The Portuguese also showed Europe how to trade profita¬
bly in areas of advanced civilization, and although they were
not devoid of cruelty in their relations with native princes and
their peoples, their relations with native rulers were generally
speaking based on mutual respect and even "cousinly"
friendship.
Contrary to popular belief, the Portuguese were more con¬
cerned with trade than with conquest. In the sixteenth centu¬
ry, there were probably no more than 10,000 able-bodied
Portuguese in all Portugual's overseas territories. It would have
This illustration from the Casanatense Codex attests to the Portuguese
presence in China, which they reached in 1513.
Tilt« p» "
	 33

been foolish of them to believe that
India could be conquered and held by
such small numbers. And so the high-
sounding term Estado da India ("State
of India") in fact designated basically
a series of trading posts along commer¬
cial sea routes controlled by Portugal
in varying degrees.
If desire for commercial gain rather
than military or political motives was
the driving force behind Portuguese
expansion, this was allied to evangeli¬
cal and missionary zeal. The reported
answer of Vasco da Gama's men when
questioned at Calicut about the reason
for their long journey is well known:
"Christians and spices", they alleged¬
ly replied. This close association
between God and Mammon was the
hall-mark of the empire founded by the
Portuguese in the East, and, for that
matter, in Africa and in South America.
Catholicism of a rather autocratic
nature, and the fact that in territories
under Portuguese control no effort was
made to adapt Western Christianity to the culture and outlook
of the Indian people, has led many historians to regard Por¬
tuguese evangelism as a phase in and a tool of European expan¬
sion. Others maintain that the missionaries did to some degree
seek to divorce themselves from the political and economic am¬
bitions of their fellow-countrymen.
It is often claimed that there was.no colour-bar or racial
discrimination in the Portuguese colonies. This is an exaggera¬
tion. It is true that the Portuguese were usually more liberal
in this respect than the Dutch, the English or the French
colonizers. On the whole the Portuguese rulers took the line
that religion and not colour should be the criterion for full
Portuguese citizenship, and that all Asian converts to Chris¬
tianity should be treated as the equals of their Portuguese co¬
religionists. Yet for a very long time the religious orders in the
Portuguese possessions would not admit non-whites to their
ranks and, in India, among the Portuguese themselves, odious
distinctions were made between the Reinois (those born in
Portugal itself) and the Indiaticos (those born in Asia of
Portuguese parents). In India, the Portuguese kings usually
favoured the policy of inter-racial marriages initiated by Afonso
de Albuquerque, the conqueror of Goa.
Another reason for the greater permanence of Portuguese
influence in Asia was the wide acceptance of their language,
which became a commercial linguafranca in the East. Even the
Dutch, who defeated the Portuguese at sea, found that it was
futile to take drastic measures against the use of Portuguese,
which was "an easy language to speak and easy to learn".
Vasco da Gama sighted India on 18 May 1498, and two days
later dropped anchor a few kilometres north of Calicut, at the
port of Capocate. It was not till the end of the month that he
was received by the Zamorin (ruler) of Calicut who was far
from impressed by the gifts da Gama brought, although appar¬
ently pleased with the contents of the letters of which he was
the bearer.
A second Portuguese fleet, under Pedro Alvares Cabrai,
arrived in 1501. Cabrai became embroiled in a quarrel with the
Zamorin, and, learning that the ruler of the rival port of Cochin
hated the Zamorin and was eager to trade with the Portuguese,
Detail from a Flemish tapestry commissioned in the early 16th century by the King of Portugal.
A fine example of the influence of Oriental motifs on the European art of the period, it shows
some of the animals that Portuguese navigators brought back from their voyages.
he called at Cochin, established friendly relations there, and
loaded a cargo of pepper. Next he made friends with the Rajah
of Cannanore.
However, the most important event in the establishment of
the Portuguese Estado da India was the capture of Goa from the
forces of the Sultan of Bijapur in November 1510. Goa provided
the Portuguese with an excellent natural harbour and was better
situated than Cochin as a naval base. This conquest also convinced
the Indian rulers that the Portuguese meant to stay. Moving north¬
wards along the west coast of India, the Portuguese also acquired
the ports of Bassein, Bombay, Daman (Damào) and Diu.
The Portuguese were the first Europeans to establish them¬
selves in India, and the last to leave. Four and a half centuries
were to pass between the conquest of Goa and the lowering
of the Portuguese flag in that territory in 1961. During that
time they put down deeper roots than did the Dutch, the
English and the French elsewhere in India. One has only to
travel along the west coast of India to see the stamp of the
Portuguese presence. Religion, language, architecture, music,
cuisinethese are some of the areas in which we recognize
Lusitanian traits.
As the Portuguese chronicler Joäo de Barros wrote in 1540:
"The Portuguese arms and pillars placed in Africa and in Asia,
and in countless isles beyond the bounds of three continents,
are material things, and time may destroy them. But time will
not destroy the religion, customs and language which the Por¬
tuguese have implanted in these lands." Pretentious as this
prophecy may sound, it has, in fact, been substantially borne
out for four and a half centuries.
* Legendary sovereign thought in medieval Europe to rule a Christian kingdom
in central Asia. Later reports, especially by Portuguese explorers, situated him
in Ethiopia. Editor
JOHN CORREIA AFONSO, a Jesuit priest from Goa, India, is director of
the Heras Institute of Indian History and Culture, Bombay, and editor of the
Institute's review Indica. A former professor of history at Xavier College, Bom¬
bay, he has organized a number of international seminars on Indo-Portuguese
history. His published works include Jesuit Letters and Indian History (Oxford
University Press, Bombay, 1969).
34 	
