
Extraterrestrial
phenomena created
for the screen by
directors from
Méliès to Spielberg
often reflect human
fears and anxieties.


Creatures
from inner space
i
12
F it is accepted that science fiction is a literary
form that has existed since Antiquity, then ex¬
traterrestrial phenomena or "ETs", can also be
acknowledged as enjoying the same venerable sta¬
tus. Admittedly, the travellers in the ancient
Greek satirist Lucian's Vera Historia (True Histo¬
ry) and in the seventeenth-century French writer
Cyrano de Bergerac's L'Autre Monde (A Voyage
to the Moon with some account ofthe Solar World)
visited only the Sun and the Moon, the two most
familiar heavenly bodies. But the ET in Voltaire's
Micromégas (1752) came from the star Sirius
whence his rather special outlook. These imagi¬
nary creatures were simply a mouthpiece for their
creators' political, metaphysical or psychological
ideas.
Terrifying ETs which had lives of their own
first appeared in the late nineteenth century in
the stories of H.G. Wells. Their aggressiveness,
as in the case of the Martians in The War of the
Worlds (1897), was a reflection of the imperialis¬
tic currents of the time. This trend persisted for
several decades, at least in the Western world.
Around this time, the extraterrestrial made
its début in the cinema, then in its infancy. In
his celebrated film Le voyage dans la lune ("Trip
to the Moon", 1902), the French director Georges
Méliès depicted the Moon itself as being endowed
with life. After Méliès, who was primarily in¬
terested in magical effects, came the age of the
comic strip and the film cartoon. But the worlds
visited by Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers were
still very like the real world.
Then came the memorable day30 October
1938when Orson Welles terrified millions of
American listeners when he announced during
a radio programme based on H.G. Wells's War
1 oster for Spielberg's E.T.
(1982), in which a crew
member ofan alien
spacecraft is left behind
in a Los Angeles
suburb and makes friends
with a small boy.
BY CLAUDE AZIZA
ofthe Worlds that invaders from "Mars had land¬
ed. Behind these imaginary Martians it was pos¬
sible to glimpse the dark scourge looming on the
other side of the Atlantic.
The war followed, with its horrors and ob¬
sessions, including spy mania. Then, around 1947,
flying saucers began to be spotted at every street
corner. With the coming of the Cold War, hordes
of creatures from outer space invaded cinema
screens, setting a pattern for the next ten years
or more.
The scene was set in 1950 with Kurt Neu¬
mann's Rocketship X-M, which depicted Martians
who had lapsed into the barbarous practices of
the Stone Age. Thereafter, ETs were uniformly
belligerent and repulsive, from the slimy invaders
of Byron Haskin's The War ofthe Worlds (1953),
which was based on H.G. Wells's novel, to the
giant octopuses of Val Guest's The Quatermass Ex¬
periment (1955), the first in a series of adventures
featuring Professor Quatermass, and the
gelatinous mass in Irwin S. Yeaworth's The Blob
(1958).
Some films were less far-fetched, and some¬
times not without ambiguity. In Edgar G. Ul-
mer's The Man from Planet X (1951), the solitary
ET which lands on the Earth and dies there is
actually the forerunner of a coming invasion.
There are both good and bad ETs in Joseph New¬
man's This Island Earth (1955). Robert Wise's The
Day the Earth Stood Still (1951) is the only film
of the period with something positive to say, in
the sense that its hero, Klatoo, brings a message
of peace from another planet.
In the 1960s, détente was the order of the day.
Even though the hideous ET persisted here and
there, times were changing. Japanese films still
showed ETs avid for flesh, as in Inoshiro Hon¬
da's Chikyu Boeigun ("Prisoners of the Martians",
1958), Italian film-goers shuddered when they saw
Mario Bava's Terrore nello spazio (1965), and in
Britain hideous plants were intent on destroying
the human race in Steve Sekely's The Day of the
Triffids (1962), based on a novel by John Wynd-
ham. Americans, however, were already smiling
at the amorous antics of an ET and a pretty
rock'n'roller in T. Graef's The Teenagers from
Outer Space (1959), being moved by a strange

In The Day the Earth
Stood Still (1951), Klatoo
(centre) arrives on Earth
from another planet with a
message ofpeace.
CLAUDE AZIZA,
of France, teaches Latin and
history of the cinema at the
University of Paris III
(Sorbonne-Nouvelle). He
writes regularly on the
cinema for the French daily
Le Monde, and has
contributed to a special
issue of CinémAction
magazine on religious films
(October 1988) and to the
catalogue for the Festival of
Biblical Cinema held in
Paris in March 1988.
visitor in H. Green's The Cosmic Man (1959), and
splitting their sides with laughter at the blunders
committed by a Martian played by Jerry Lewis
in Visit to a Small Planet (1959). Had the ET
finally been tamed, domesticated, humanized?
People may have come to realize that political
enemies, whether within or without, were less
dangerous than the enemy stalking in their
unconscious. This was the message, albeit clothed
in symbolism, that was hinted at as early as 1956
in F. McLeod Wilcox's Forbidden Planet.
Aliens and monsters
ETs accordingly seemed to have been discarded
among the unused props, as films began to reflect
the realistic approach demanded by the conquest
of space. Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey
(1968) marked the end of an era of far-fetched sci-fi
films and raised metaphysical questions amidst a
profusion of scientific detail.
But what science fiction writers called the
"hard science" of the conquest of space did not
satisfy young film-goers who had grown up with
space travel and looked in vain for the fantasy
which their parents had enjoyed. In an effort to
win them over, there was a return to the epic
form. George Lucas's Star Wars (1977) rekindled
childhood dreams and revived medieval legends.
Only a short step separates the epic from mysti¬
cism, and that step was taken by Steven Spielberg
in his Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977),
in which he retold the Bible in his own fashion,
and subsequently in E.T. (1982), his version of the
New Testament. As the Christ-figure of the space
age with limitless powers, capable of dying and
of coming back to life, the film's hero brought
tears to American eyes. Would ETs now be part
of a world of wisdom and humanism? That was
unfortunately not to be, for new causes of anxiety
were starting to emerge.
The end of the millennium promised to be
apocalyptic. Fear of others was personified in the
"alien", a term which was to have considerable
success and was first used in 1979 in Ridley Scott's
film of that title, in which a monster from outer
space conceals itself in the entrails of its victim.
A year earlier, similar alien creatures had lived
off the brains of human beings transformed into
vegetables in Philip Kaufman's Invasion of the
Body Snatchers. In John Carpenter's The Thing
(1982), the creature is capable of adapting to and
assuming the appearance of all forms of life.
People can no longer trust each other and are
condemned to live with the threat of imminent
annihilation.
Aliens (the title, incidentally, of the sequel
to Carpenter's film, made by James Cameron in
1986) sprouted everywhere, harking back to the
tradition of the 1950s but borrowing the most
gruesome aspects of the popular horror film.
These films covered the whole gamutfrom the
metamorphosis of fathers (H. Broomley Daven¬
port's XTRO, 1986), to menaced progeny (Nor¬
man J. Warren's Inseminoid, 1980), vampires
from outer space (Tobe Hooper's Life Force, 1985)
and a ferocious monster (J. McTierman's Preda¬
tor, 1987). And then to cap it all along came Jack
Sholder's Hidden (1988), in which the Earth is
simply a vast outlet for the aggressive instincts
of an ET which even turns to bank robbery.
A few films have attempted to portray friend¬
ly child ETs (John Hough's Return from Witch
Mountain, 1978), meetings between human and
ET teenagers (Joe Dante's Explorers, 1985), and
understanding visitors who can restore lost youth
(Ron Howard's Cocoon, 1985, and its sequel,
Daniel Patrie's Return ofCocoon, 1988). ETs have
even taken the form of glamorous blondes that
Earthlings can marry, as in Richard Benjamin's
My Stepmother is an Alien (1988).
But, on the threshold of the 1990s, there is
a persistent sense of danger. It may be a danger
that has infiltrated society from within, as in John
Carpenter's They Live (1988), or it may come
from outside, from Martians seeking regeneration
through nuclear energy in the aptly titled televi¬
sion series Contamination, or the New War ofthe
Worlds, made by Colin Chilvers and Winrich
Kolbe in 1988. In the same year Tobe Hooper's
Invadersfrom Mars and Chuck Russell's The Blob
were again on the rampage.
Fortunately, there is some humour among all
these atrocities. In addition to Martians, a come¬
dy by Patrick Read in which the Martians, after
hesitating, decide to take control of Earth, F.
Brown's novel Martians Go Home!, a crazy farce
based on the fantasies of a science fiction writer,
is being adapted for the screen. Such fantasies in¬
spire the thousand-and-one metamorphoses of
ETs, those ambivalent creatures spawned by the
anguish, hopes and repressions latent in every
society. 13
