A colourful
kaleidoscope
BY PHILIPPE HAERINGER
22
AjIKE the continent itself, with its variety of cul¬
tures and climates, the streets of African cities are
rich in contrasts. Some, in sandy areas, are lined
with shrubs and treesmango, avocado, palm and
pawpawbehind which huts with sloping roofs
are concealed. In others the warm colours of
lateritic soil blend with those of the straw and
clay-daubed walls of flat-roofed houses facing
onto inner courtyards. In yet others the houses
are mainly in "carabotte" style (clapboard houses
often built in English cottage fashion). Painted
colonial white, they open out on to verandahs
and lawns. And then there are streets lined with
a succession of façades, some high, some low, of
often uncompleted cement houses, behind which
are overcrowded tenement courtyards.
The latter kind of street is typical of the port
and capital city of Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire (popu¬
lation between two and three million, one
hundred times greater than fifty years ago), or at
least of its working-class areas, in particular the
"old" Treichville district (developed in 1930),
Koumassi (1950) and the huge suburb of Abobo
which mushroomed around 1970. The dwellings
there are all the samestereotyped, ugly and
strictly functional. As a result of the land and ur¬
ban planning policies adopted, coupled with
population growth and economic expansion,
most of the inhabitants of Abidjan are tenants.
All these houses and courtyards contain rented
properties.
A playground for all
Against this somewhat bleak architectural back¬
ground, worsened by the eternal problem of road
maintenance (though the authorities have made
a major effort to improve the situation in recent
years), the often rutted, muddy, dirty streets of
Treichville, Koumassi and Abobo are, need it be
said, overflowing with life and human warmth.
In these streets which are usually nameless (at best
they have a number), life is intense and firmly
rooted in the present.
It has become a commonplace to evoke the
warmth and exuberance of the crowds which
throng the market-places of Africa and the multi¬
coloured costumes of the women. It is perhaps
less well known that the same animation reigns
in the more remote, less frequented streets. There
are no "dead" streets.
Why is this so? First of all, it is due to the
demographic pattern. The courtyards are full of
children for whom the street is an after-school
playground. Secondly, it is due to the very na¬
ture of these rented, collective dwellings in which
the living accommodation is little more than a
series of cells. As a result, domestic life opens out
on to the street and the neighbourhood. The
street is the playground of both child and adult
and the setting for quiet games of ludo, draughts
or awelé between two, or full-scale neighbour¬
hood tournaments. Games like these make up an
important part of the leisure-time activities of the
inhabitants of Abidjan. In one street in Abobo
there is a draughts school. In another there is a
carpenter who specializes in making tables for
bar-football, a game which has proliferated out¬
side bars in recent years and is also played in the
entrances to some of the courtyards.
Leisure activities such as these are for the
men, but in the life of the street women are even
more in evidence. Housewives, or young wom¬
en who cannot or do not want to leave home to
work, set up in the street as peddlers of knick-
knacks, fritters or grilled maize. Then there are
the water-sellers. There are no longer any public
water-fountains in Abidjan, but here and there
are private watering points at which water can
be bought. The spouts are high up so that women
r~'_
*
$Mr
r/> ',
.
i
<#
s <
w
: m
STREETSCAPES ^
ABIDJAN 1
Local market in the
suburb of Treichville.
f -m
tvVrttr
*fc»
Im
. . «*-.

24
rrom top to bottom:
Photographer's shop, Abidjan.
Women wearing multi¬
coloured costumes.
The workshops of many
small traders, such as this
knitwear manufacturer, are
open to the street.
Water is one of the wares
sold at this general store.
customers can fill their recipients without hav¬
ing to take them off their heads. Nearby are the
charcoal-sellers whose wares are in daily demand
for cooking, which is always done on wood or
charcoal. Also close at hand will be the "bou¬
tique", a tiny shop which sells matches, soap,
tomato purée and oil. For their supplies of vegeta¬
bles, fish and meat the women go each day to the
local market.
Calligraphy, trades and crafts
In recent years Abidjan has experienced an ex¬
plosion of crafts, services and trades. The econom¬
ic crisis has accelerated the natural tendency
towards diversification. Trades formerly concen¬
trated on the main thoroughfares are now tend¬
ing to spread throughout the city. Advertising for
them has become more arresting. Calligraphers
specializing in sign-writing and banner design are
in great demand. The art of window-dressing has
developed and new trades and new services are
springing up and prospering.
Dress-makers, for example, who formerly
plied their trade in the market-places or from
premises discreetly located in the depths of the
courtyards, are now opening up in streets oc¬
cupied by ready-to-wear boutiques with attrac¬
tive shop-fronts. Equally striking is the sudden
proliferation of private telephone kiosks, often
associated with such services as photocopying, ex¬
press typing facilities and the plastic covering of
identity papers. They are to be found alongside
small legal and tax advice bureaux and mini es¬
tate agencies, all of which were hitherto unknown
outside the main thoroughfares.
No less remarkable is the upsurge in the num¬
ber of private clinics and other health centres;
even the healers are opening their own "clinics".
Similar innovations are occurring in education,
where private enterprise is coming to the rescue
of the public authorities. In the streets of Abobo,
hoarding after hoarding proclaims the merits of
kindergartens, primary and secondary schools,
evening classes and workshops for apprentices.
An immense variety of crafts are practised in
African streets. In addition to repair men and
"mamy-foutou" (women seWmgfoutou, a dish of
bananas or yams), you will find hairdressers and
hair-braiders, photographers, tailors, shoemakers,
watch "doctors", mechanics, automobile electri¬
cians, coach-builders and welders, brick-makers,
blacksmiths, plumbers, glaziers and cabinet¬
makers, key-cutters, fan specialists, and many
more besides.
Beyond the street, the group
The animation of the street largely compensates
for the anonymity of the urban fabric. It creates
a hierarchy of streets and gives them a soul. It
creates more landmarks: a particularly striking
sign may be popularly adopted as a street name,
as in Aunt Solange Street or Symphony Bar
PHILIPPE HAERINGER,
of France, is director of
research at the French
Institute of Scientific
Research for Development
and Co-operation. Since
1988 he has led a project
designed to test methods of
comparing town planning
models in different parts of
the world. His publications
include two studies on life
in Abidjan.

Street. But everything is in a state of constant flux.
The people of Abidjan live in the present. What
room can there be for nostalgia?
It is true that in the old Treichville district
some property owners look back with regret to
the days when they first arrived. Similar feelings
are sometimes expressed in Koumassi and Abobo,
but they are far from being shared by the great
majority of the present population. Only a few
place names remain to evoke the early days,
names such as Avocado-tree, The Other Side of
the Tracks and Wireless (referring to a large tree,
a railway line and a radio transmitter), or the
name of the landowner or the village communi¬
ty which began the development (Ayébi, Agnis-
sankoi, and. so on).
It is not easy for the city-dwellers to identify
with such a new and uniform environment, in
which accommodation is mainly rented by a mo¬
bile and rapidly increasing population. Yet, be¬
yond the still vital ethnic ties, new links are being
established based on geographical proximity over
a wider area than the immediate neighbourhood.
The district, or even the arrondissement (today
called the commune) is supplanting the street.
The activities of groups or associations, whether
they are concerned with sport, games, music, sav¬
ing or investment, professional life, religion or
politics, are all mainly situated at this level.
In this way local loyalties develop, with the
inhabitants closing ranks against the threat of a
sector clearance, even though this alone may not
be enough to halt the bulldozers' advance, or to
demand the provision of amenities. But such in¬
itiatives never get very far. At one time the pub¬
lic authorities and international organizations
hoped that the city-dwellers of Africa would
themselves take a hand in the development and
upkeep of the streets of their cities, but these
hopes were swept away in the rising tide of ur¬
ban expansion.
Thus road maintenance and other infrastruc¬
tures remain the responsibility of the authorities.
Nevertheless these authorities can only view with
satisfaction the remarkable vitality of the trades
and crafts sector and the equally remarkable ca¬
pacity of the people of Abidjan, who come from
all over western Africa, to breathe life into their
city and live together in comparative harmony,
despite their many differences.
Muddy though they may be, the streets of
Abidjan are well worth lingering in.
A family restaurant where
the cooking is done in the
street to attract passers-by.
On the menu are local
dishes such as foutou.
25
