Jtff Skeletons at the feast
BY JAVIER PEREZ SILLER
A unique blend ofpre-Columbian
and Hispanic myths, Mexico's Feast
of the Dead brings together past
and present, devotion and mockery,
the commercial and the spiritual
IN October in the Mexican countryside, the
crows flock in their thousands to peck at the fresh
corncobs. The agricultural year has ended and it
is time for the people to gather in the fruits of
their labour and celebrate the fertility of the
earth. It is also time to prepare for the Feast of
the Dead.
This is the most important and popular of
all Mexican fiestas. On 1 and 2 November (All
Saints' Day and All Souls' Day), signs of the
coming festivities appear in the city streets. Imi¬
tation skeletons are stationed in shop-windows,
advertising a variety of products. Bakers sell the
traditional "bread of the dead", decorated with
*t4&
\:jÊ*Êt*ajSSfc*idfàSU

«7^
shinbones made of flour and eggs. Market stalls
are set up to sell toys, sweets and all sorts of
delicacies whose shapes evoke death.
Newspapers publish supplements containing
calaveras (death's-heads), illustrated verses in
which well-known public figures are shown dead
or in the great beyond. Continuing a tradition
which dates back to the end of the nineteenth
century, these verses with their musical cadences
usually lampoon politicians or comment on
current events and problems.
Children take part in the festivities. They run
through the streets asking adults for money "for
my death's-head" and show people objects they
have made. Some of them carry elaborately deco¬
rated cardboard coffins from which dancing skele¬
tons jump out, while others pierce holes in gourds
to make eyes, nose and a big toothy mouth, and
then light a candle inside them. Some even invent
stories about creatures beyond the grave, or
disguise themselves in cadaverous masks and go
out into the streets to frighten the wits out of un¬
suspecting people. In the elegant districts of large
cities it is common to find children and young
people celebrating Hallowe'en in American
stylea variation of the Celtic feast which origi¬
nated in Ireland. These carousers are the most
dangerous, for if they do not get what they want,
they bombard homes and shops with bags of
flour.
A bewildering range of toys are evocative
20
1%
\
Left, skull ofpolished
rock crystal
(15th 16th century).
Jtiight, the owl on this
pasteboard skull represents
wisdom.
Opposite page, the
macabre confectionery that
children love includes sugar
skulls with names
emblazoned across their
foreheads.
PRECEDING PAGE
An Aztec myth on the
cycle of life and death is
enacted to the sound of a
conch shell.
of death. They include calacas, wire and clay
skeletons which jump and dance; skulls that grin
when their jawbones are manipulated; jolly horse¬
men mounted on the skeletons of horses, and au¬
tomats which at the turn of a handle bring to life
the skeletons of acrobats, boxers, or tilicas
trembling, spineless joke skeletons. Many young
men buy one of these puppets for their
sweethearts. Others prefer to give sweets which
confectioners make specially for the occasion-
usually sugar or chocolate skulls with the be¬
loved's name written across the forehead.
The fiesta also gives rise to a variety of cul¬
tural activities. In the big cities people go to ex¬
hibitions on death in the pre-Columbian world
or to the theatre to enjoy the Calaveras de Posadas
or the traditional play Don Juan Tenorio by the
Spanish Romantic author José Zorrilla. On. the
night of 2 November wooden or cardboard
puppet-skeletons bearing topical captions are dis¬
played as part of a calavera competition held at
Mixquic, a township near Mexico City.
As well as festivities in the city streets and
competitions organized in the villages, there are
popular dances and fairs at which people eat their
fill, enjoy themselves, get drunk and defy death
because "life is worthless". The festivities can take
a violent and sometimes tragic turn when old
quarrels flare up amid the shouting and the fumes
of alcohol, and one or two of the living brutally
join the dead.

The combination of festivity and commerce
in the streets is the backdrop to more intimate
celebrations of the cult of the dead. During the
two days of the fiesta, people prepare to welcome
their dead, to honour their memory and perform
again the rites and ceremonies they learned in
their families. These rites vary according to the
traditions and social status of each family, but
they all feed the collective imagination by giving
shape to the mosaic of elements that make up the
"Mexican personality".
Such rites are performed in the privacy of the
home and the sacred atmosphere of the cemetery.
In elegant modern cemeteries, people bearing



flowers pay their respects at the graves of their
loved ones. But these moments of sadness and
nostalgia do not prevent them from joining in
the festivities in the street later at night.
Things are very different in the countryside,
where the festivities and rites are more
deeply rooted in the past and more closely
associated with the celebration of fertility. In this
the country people are perpetuating a blend of
several religions and in some very remote areas
they even recreate pre-Columbian traditions and
beliefs. Even so most of their rites are basically
Christian.
Visits from the dead
The principle is always the same: the living are
going to be visited by the dead, and preparations
are made to receive them. On 1 November,
known as the day of the Angelitos (little angels),
the souls of children and young people "troop
smilingly through the cornfields, as if they had
just been let out of school". They stay in the
houses for twenty-four hours and leave on 2
November when the adults arrive. During these
two days, doors are left open and families are
under the obligation to welcome all visitors and
friends, since "the souls like to arrive and find
a fiesta going on".
Imagine for a moment that we are watching
this ceremony in a small Mexican township...
A tightly packed crowd of women of all ages
surges through the cobbled streets. Some of them
are carrying their babies swaddled in black rebo¬
zos (shawls) on their backs. The men go on ahead,
accompanying the orchestra and singing tuneless¬
ly, while children amuse themselves by running
from one end of the procession to the other.
When they arrive at the cemetery, the people
spread out among the tombs, which are decorated
with wreathes of yellow cempasuchil (marigolds).
Dozens of lighted candles encircle the graves. The
whole scene is illuminated in a shining cloud in
which the scent of resin is mixed with the
fragrance of incense and flowers.
W Wl w* .f ^ 4* n
rfMiaftlf'
t* 0 1 * «I
jmfcr "| * ¿Um' ~
l * vi 1
^Ê^^^m. ffl^ ^ y _^^^^^^|
**S"^J 1
Er^l^^^^KpP
21

K^emetery on the island of
Janitzio, in Mexico's
Michoacán state.
JAVIER PEREZ SILLER,
Mexican sociologist and
historian, is a member of
the faculty of political
science at the National
Autonomous University of
Mexico. He contributed to
a study on festivals of death
published by Association
d'Idées, Paris, 1988.



At midnight, the church bells peal out,
announcing the arrival of the dead. At the same
moment rockets are fired and the orchestra starts
to play. There is widespread rejoicing and every¬
body joins in a hymn of welcome to the dead.
The living and the dead then go together
from the cemetery to the houses. In order to
ensure that the souls do not lose their way, the
path is marked out with flower petals from the
threshold to the heart of the dwelling. In its fur¬
thest recesses, framed by an arch of cempasuchil,
is an altar complete with an offering of everything
the deceased needs to recover from the journey:
a glass of water, succulent dishes including mole
(spiced meat), chocolates, atole (a cornmeal gruel
drink), "bread of the dead", alcoholic drinks such
as brandy, tequila, mezcal or pulque, cigars, a
pack of playing cards, and sweetmeats made of
pumpkin and sweet potato. There is even the
fragrant smell of incense and candles which burn
all night and cast their light on images of the
saints and photographs of the departed.
In the darkest corners of the room, the old
grandmother sits whispering. "Souls of my
ancestors, are you satisfied with what we have
done for you today? My sons have worked
hard this year and we have been well rewarded.
The harvest was abundant and the corncobs
are fat. Thank you for your help, for without
you the offering would have been small. How
is St. Joseph? Did he receive the masses I said
for him?"
People are said to be able to detect the
moment when the souls approach, since "the
flames of the candles flicker violently" and, once
the deceased have eaten, "the food no longer has
any taste". The family then asks the dead to stay
longer and eat and drink together "as in the good
old days".
The revival of Indian myths
The word "fiesta" is used to describe a wide range
of rites and celebrations which have sprung from
ancient Mexican culture and that of the Spaniards.
The myths evoked all set out to answer the same
questions, where we come from and where we
are going.
For the pre-Hispanic peoples, death had a
fleeting and ritual meaning. Life and death were
regarded as merely two sides of the same coin.
The dead carry on living in another plane of real¬
ity from where, with the help of the gods, they
will be reborn. Thus say the myths of the cycle
of the five Suns and that of Quetzalcoatl, who
dared defy the Aztec god of the dead and seek
the bones with which he had to create human
life from Mictlan, the underworld. At the same
time man is responsible for conferring life on 23

the gods themselves and for the renewal of the
cosmos. Once created, man becomes a creator.
From 1521 onwards, when the Spaniards
conquered Mesoamerica, this mythology was
combated by a kind of spiritual colonization as
the Catholic Church sought to replace "pagan"
rites and myths with its own. The new myths
claimed that man was created to worship God
and that his fate after death depended on whether
he had performed that task and on whether his
behaviour had conformed to the moral tenets dic¬
tated by the Church. In short, judgement was
passed on his acts.
While the descendants of the Europeans
adopted Christianity, a syncretic religion emerged
among the mestizos and the Indians. It was based
on the two sets of myths under the patronage of
such awe-inspiring images as that of the Virgin
of Guadalupe, Queen of Mexico and Empress of
America. But the Indian customs were banned
and remained hidden from prying eyes.
In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the
situation changed radically, and Indian myths
began to be revived. With independence, the
search for a national identity or "Mexicanity" led
intellectuals to extol the Indian past. With the
separation of Church and state, religious burials
were not allowed and the administration of
cemeteries passed into the hands of the govern¬
ment, weakening the Church's control over
burial rites. After the Mexican Revolution
(1900-1917), the Indian was regarded as a "nation¬
al asset" and attempts were made to revive Indian
myths. As a result, the government now partici¬
pates in the promotion of the Feast of the Dead.



The Feast's vitality was dramatically demon¬
strated in 1985. Some weeks before it was due to
take place, a violent earthquake destroyed part
of Mexico City and took a heavy toll of lives.
In the afternoon of 2 November, thousands of
people paraded through the city centre laying
offerings of flowers before the ruins of the tall
buildings which had been turned into tombs. Car¬
rying lighted candles, they arrived two abreast in
Zócalo square and, as if they were re-enacting the
Náhuatl cosmic myth, divided the square into
four parts. One group tendered an offering to the
Cathedral, which is on the site of the old Aztec
temple, while the rest held up placards of protest.
As well as an act of protest this was a spirited
gesture of mobilization against death, an ac¬
knowledgment of man's weakness before the
forces of nature and of his appeal to a divine
power. It was simultaneously a political, religious
and mythical action, but it turned into a fiesta
that gave expression to man's creative dimension
and to his ability to halt for a brief moment the
24 inexorable march of time.

