INTERVIEW
with Najib Mahfouz
Najib Mahfouz, of Egypt, is widely
considered to be the greatest living
writer in Arabic. Born in Cairo
in 1912, he was awarded
the Nobel Prize for Literature
in 1988 for his lifetime's output
of novels, short stories and plays.
Here he reflects on the Egyptian
cultural identity and more generally
on the impact on creative artists
of influences from outside
their own culture.
In the course ofits long history, Egypt has faced many chal¬
lenges stemming from its encounters with other cultures-
Greek, Roman, Byzantine, Arab, and Turkish. Since Bona¬
parte's expedition and especially since the British occupa¬
tion, Egypt has been at grips with the modern Western
world. This latest influence seems to be more profound and
significant than all those that preceded it. How has the
Egyptian identity emergedfrom this encounter? Has it been
weakened, strengthened, or transformed?
cultural encounter with the West was not a new
experience for Egypt nor for the Arab world. As you have
rightly pointed out, before the flowering of Islamic culture,
Egypt had been exposed to far-reaching influences from the
cultures of India, Persia, Greece and the Mediterranean
seaboard, not to mention that of ancient Egypt. All these
encounters with other worlds were rewarding and enriched
our traditional identity and classical culture. They added
vigour to our living organism rather than impoverishing it
or inhibiting its development.
There has been a fresh encounter with the West over
the past two centuries. In some respects this contact has been
negative. But if we look carefully at the results as a whole,
the positive features can be said to have outshone the rest.
Look what happened with literature. Western ideas and
writings were imported and we accepted them. Thanks to
them, we have created new and specifically Egyptian forms
of the novel, the short story and the essay. Naturally, our
narrative style has its origins deep in the Arab past, but we
can say that its roots have been renewed and given a fresh
lease of life by the currents of thought emanating from
Europe. Those currents have become so integrated into our
environment and culture that they can no longer be distin¬
guished from them. They have become so acclimatized that
they appear to have been here for ever.
...true artists can accept outside influences
which help them to achieve self-expression...

i
life
;JÊk
«VT-**,..
à*>

Many developing countries have close contacts with The characters in your writing seem to be moved by a
Western civilization. Because ofthisproximity some intellec- passion which tirelessly follows them through the old
tuals in these countries adopt attitudes that are even more quarters ofCairo. You invest them with a tremendous love
European than those of the Europeans themselves. So of life, yet at the same time they possess great serenity,
they produce works which are mere imitations ofEuropean Through them, wefeel that you are perfectly at peace with
models. Are Egyptian intellectuals susceptible to such yourself and, moreover, overcome with gratitude...
temptations? true. I have always given thanks for the almost
have passed through a number of stages in this respect, sacred privilege I have been granted of being able to "iden-
the first of which was the translation of European works tify" the human beings of this city which I know and love
into our language. The second stage was the adaptation of so well. Once those lives which go on around me enter my
those works and their integration into our environment, field of vision, they become characters, in other words they
in other words the "Egyptianization" of an alien cultural become creatures of my own flesh and blood. My gratitude
product. The third stage is that of maturity, when a writer's becomes a creative act.
own personality attains its full self-expression.
We have been strongly influenced by Europe, as Your novel Midaq Alley* is bathed in a religious
you say, and there have been imitators. But imitation is not atmosphere. Is this a reflection of your personal universe
art, nor is it a sign of cultural maturity. To my mind, true or one aspect of the reality that inspires you?
artists can accept outside influences which can be assimilât- "atmosphere" features in several of my works, but
ed in order to better express the truth that they bear within it is not a literary device nor a denominational choice: it
themselves. I suppose something similar to this occurred in is part of the reality I am describing and which is most often
both North and South America, for example. At the out- set in the old quarters of Cairo. An artist, to my mind, has
set, the old world may perhaps have been imitated, but later to depict that reality without distorting it. Without going
a specific literature was created which has in its turn in for fanaticism or ideological commitment and without
influenced European writers. In short, following a cultural speaking out in favour of one belief or another,
shock, external models may be copied at first, but it is
important to go beyond this stage and find richer outlets In view of the current growth of technology and the des-
for the expression of one's creativity. tructive purposes for which it is sometimes used, and of the
threat to nature all over the planet, what values are left?
Let us look at a cultural movement which followed a Do you think that religion can offer a response to these
different path. A number ofwriters in Arabic emerged in challenges and limit the risks of dehumanization?
the Americas early this century. They formed part of the -The progress made by science and technology has not
wave of immigration to the New World that took place always been negative. It has been of immense service to
from 1910, and they were known as the Mahjar (emigration mankind. Of course there are some destructive aspects, but
or exodus) writers. Did this emerging Arab literary I think that this process of dehumanization can be fought
movement have any influence in its turn on the Arab with the aid of two great forces: religion and art. Through
world? these forces it is possible to turn scientific progress to hu-
It had a considerable influence! It contributed to the man advantage. But I insist on the fact that there is no need
renewal of Arabic language and literature. I followed with to be afraid of scientific progress; science and technology
admiration the progress of the Mahjar writers, especially the are capable of correcting their own mistakes. One example
poets, and they left a profound impression on me. The fact can be seen in current efforts to produce non-pollutant ener-
that they were writing far from our own land did not gy. Progress cannot be stopped, but we must not surrender
diminish the great attraction they had for us. Their litera- to panic. I am optimistic that science, guided by a sense of
ture, born on another continent, has a very special flavour awareness, can constantly adjust its trajectory. Art and
and resonance that we greatly appreciate in the Arab world, religion are there to lighten the way.
Their works reflect the milieu in which they lived, they are
permeated by the landscapes and societies of the New World. interview by the Argentine writer and philosopher victor
To a great extent, they are at heart "American" writers. Massuh, a former Chairman of Unesco's Executive Board.
Through them, the Americas acquired a certain presence in	
my OWn WOrk and, generally Speaking, marked the recent * English translations of the works of Najib Mahfouz include Midaq Alley
i i i r 1 i f 1 n -n (Heinemann Educational Books, London, 1976) and Respected Sir
cultural renewal ol the Middle hastern countries. (Quartet Books, London, i986).
