GAUDI AND DALI.
Far left, in 1953
Salvador Dalí
examines a sheet of
paper being made by
hand for an edition of
the Book of
Revelation to which
he contributed an
illustration. Left,
Capricorn, lithograph
by Dalí from a series
on the signs of the
zodiac. Right,
Osificación matinal del
ciprés, a painting
executed by Dali in
1934.
of good judgement, they opted for the freedom of the spirit
and the creative imagination.
It is not surprising that Catalonia's main cultural attractions
and international tourist draws should be the architecture of
Gaudi in Barcelona and the Dalí Theatre-Museum in Figueras.
Each artist in his own way epitomizes the essential charac¬



ter of the region, and interprets its landscape, the forces of na¬
ture at work there and its traditional mythology.
Gaudi and the architecture of the fantastic
THE architecture of Antoni Gaudi (1852-1926) and the
painting of Salvador Dalí (1904-1989) have a distinctive
aesthetic power which raises many questions for those
who seek to understand the innermost meaning of their work.
Both artists have been described as geniuses, as creators
afflicted by madness, men whose minds were caught in the
hallucinations created by certain forms arising from the
subconscious. Admired and contested by their contemporaries,
they mocked the cultural tenets of their time and succeeded,
with bravado and originality, in creating an extraordinary world
of novel ideas which are now internationally acknowledged as
high points in the annals of art.
Both Gaudi and Dalí were natives of Catalonia, a region
which prides itself on dividing its people into two categories:
those who are balanced, serious-minded and well-behaved; and
those who are consumed by a kind of rage, who are impulsive,
' quick-tempered and wilful.
In their own region, Gaudi and Dalí are generally thought
of as belonging to the impulsive category, most probably
because, at some point in time, with the clearsightedness born
Antoni Gaudi was born into a family of craftsmen, from
whom he learned the secrets of the traditional trades and familia¬
rized himself with the techniques they used. He studied architec¬
ture in Barcelona, where he was awarded his diploma in 1878,
at a time when, in the wake of a cultural and political revival,
"modernismo" was starting to emerge in Spain as a movement
in architecture and the decorative arts contemporary with Art
Nouveau which spread throughout Europe in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Although he was rejected by the public opinion of his time,
he enjoyed the support of a prosperous and enterprising mid¬
dle class, which sought its identity in the extravagant buildings
he designed.
The secret of Gaudi's art is that he succeeded in grasping
the patterns present In nature and the organic world and was
capable of selecting from their infinite variety of shapes those
that could be transposed into architecture. He pursued this
course with great imagination: tree-trunks, branches, bones,
ribs, fishing nets and flowers all became ideas for designs which
he used in churches, parks, schools and other buildings.
All his work was based on logic and reasoning and was
thought out down to the smallest detail. Underlying the
exuberant fantasy of the shapes he used, there was always a
rational calculation and a far-reaching study of the loads and
forces involved and of the function of all the structural elements
32

THE ART OF EXCESS BY DANIEL GIRALT-MIRACLE
which he brought into, play. He applied this method of work¬
ing as much to the large columns supporting a façade as to the
tiniest ornamental details reproduced in ceramic tiles, glass,
wood or wrought iron. Essentially, he was seeking to achieve
a work of total art, in which the parts and the whole were in
harmony and conferred on the architecture a new and differ¬
ent personality, full of aesthetic meaning.
Dali on a tightrope between the real
and the imaginary
Salvador Dalí is a very similar case to Gaudi. He drew his
inspiration from the wild and secluded Costa Brava, with its
steep and rocky shoreline, and from the enigmatic landscapes
of the Ampurdan region constantly buffeted by the Tramon¬
tane, the northerly wind coming off the mountains.
After studying art in Madrid, where he was a contemporary
of Luis Buñuel, García Lorca, Rafael Alberti and other figures
of the Spanish avant-garde of the 1930s, he exhibited his work
in Barcelona, where his paintings and eccentricities made him
a celebrity. In 1928 he moved to Paris, where the Surrealist
group of artists and writers were so taken aback by his work
that the French poet André Breton declared that Dalí embod-
Below, fountain in the Güell Park, Barcelona, designed by the Catalan sculptor and architect Antoni Gaudi (1852-1926).
	 33


ied the Surrealist spirit: "the poetic and visionary images of his
paintings possess an extraordinary intensity and explosive
force."*
He invented an imaginary world. An authentic landscape
of the mind came to the surface through his depictions of "soft"
watches, boundless perspectives stretching into infinity, elon¬
gated staffs, human limbs exaggerated out of all 'proportion,
giraffes bursting into flames, gold coins and other forms that
made him a fitting exemplar of the "paranoiac critical" theory
embraced so enthusiastically by Freud and the painters and
poets of the time, whereby images were brought up from the
subconscious mind.
Dalí often claimed that his entire work was a projection
of his inner world, the representation of his subconscious, and
the obsessions and fantasies of an artist who turned his hand
with equal energy to painting, sculpture, literature, drama, stage
design, jewellery, film-making, the design of artefacts and public
"happenings".


The Dalí Theatre-Museum in Figueras, which was found¬
ed in- 1974, epitomizes the world of fantasy, theatrical effect
and over-brimming imagination inhabited by Salvador Dali, a
figure who was a source of interest to poets and artists, film¬
makers and scientists, philosophers and politicians, children and
adults alike.
Curiously enough, Gaudi and Dalí are two typically Cata¬
lan figures, each of whose names, in both origin and meaning,
define the form taken by their lives: "gaudi" (gaudir) means
to "enjoy" delving into interesting questions, while "dali" (delir)
signifies "being impelled by an overwhelming urge".
Such is the intense and passionate force of these artists who,
drawing inspiration from their native soil and driven forward
by their genius, became universal figures speaking through art,
the most universal of all languages.
* André Breton, Entretiens 191319S2, Gallimard, Paris, 1952
DANIEL GIRALT-MIRACLE, Catalan art critic and writer, is a former lec¬
turer at the University of Barcelona and the Autonomous University of Barce¬
lona. He is currently vice-president of the Internationa] Association of Art Critics
and Director of the Museum of Contemporary Art, Barcelona.
I n ,
n
!
Views of the Güell
Park, Barcelona
34
