THE
SCIENTIFIC
LEGACY
IT has long been wrongly assumed
that the idealisticeven mystical-
predilections of Indian thought must
have hindered the objective observation
and study of Nature. But a metaphysics
which asserts that only the Infinite Di¬
vine has absolute reality can also accept
the relative reality of the material world
seen from a practical, empirical per¬
spective.
The Indian tradition assumes that every¬
thing in the universe is significant to some
degree, and hence deserves careful study.
In recent years India's contribution to the
positive sciences, such as engineering,
The Jantar Mantar astronomical observatory
in Jaipur, Rajasthan.
The observatory was built in the early
18th century by the astronomer
king Sawai Jai Singh II.
metallurgy, chemistry and above all
mathematics, astronomy and medicine,
has gained wide recognition. Some
writers have indulged in uncritical glorifi¬
cation of "ancient wisdom", which is
supposed to have anticipated the most ad¬
vanced research of modern science. But
a more balanced estimate is gradually
emerging.
Indian mathematics go back to the
Vedic age, when the construction of are¬
nas for sacrificial ritual demanded ac¬
curate measurements. Pride of place in
Indian mathematics goes to Aryabhatta
(late fifth century AD) who elaborated
the decimal system which had been de¬
vised by his predecessors. Other famous
names are those of Brahmagupta, Ma-
havira and Bhaskara (of the seventh,
ninth and twelfth centuries respectively).
They understood the significance of posi¬
tive and negative quantities, solved many
complex equations, and evolved methods
of extracting square roots and cube roots.
	 33

.
*
&
y HD
"s-
3
\ S«
They showed profound insight into the
implications of zero (shunyà) and of in¬
finity. Bhaskara proved mathematically
that infinity, however divided, remains
infinitea truth which had been accept¬
ed on the metaphysical plane as early as
the 6th century BC in the Upanishads.
The Arabs are widely believed to have
adopted from the Indians the decimal sys¬
tem using the zero, and passed it on to
European scientists. India thus provided
indirectly the mathematical foundation
without which many important advances
in Western science and technology would
not have been possible.
In the field of astronomy, Aryabhat-
ta again emerges as a revolutionary
genius. He determined the length of the
Trilokachakra, the great cosmic being, is
shown in this 18th-century Tantric painting
from Gujarat, northwest India.
solar year as 365.3596805 days, which is
remarkably close to the modern estimate.
He asserted that the Earth rotates on its
axis and revolves round the Sun, a view
for which Galileo was persecuted by the
Catholic Church a thousand years later.
Another great astronomer was Varahami-
hira, a contemporary of Aryabhatta. He
was thoroughly familiar with Greek and
Roman astronomy, from which he adopt¬
ed many features including the signs of
the zodiac. Indian astronomers described
the procession of equinoxes, forecast
eclipses, and made amazingly accurate cal¬
culations of planetary movements
without the aid of telescopes.
While astronomy and mathematics
grew together, the progress of medicine
involved considerable knowledge of
chemistry and botany. The origin of
Ayurveda ("Science of Longevity") goes
back to the Samaveda. In the writings of
Charaka and Sushruta (first and fourth
centuries AD respectively) almost every
aspect of diagnosis and treatment was dis¬
cussed. The properties of herbs, seeds,
minerals and salts were studied carefully;
the importance of fresh air and water was
stressed; a code of medical conduct was
evolved; surgical instruments and tech¬
niques were developed. Yoga had an im¬
portant therapeutic side and yielded
valuable knowledge about respiration, the
circulation of the blood and the nervous
system, and about the physiological ef¬
fects of emotional and mystical states.
Indian medicine is based on the con¬
cepts of doshas ("humours") and gunas
("ingredients of Nature"). The first in¬
volves the study of the three vital fluids-
wind, gall and mucuswhich must be
balanced for good health. The second
concept presupposes three basic gunas:
sattva, rajas and tamas, associated with pu¬
rity, passion and apathy respectively. For
perfect health, sattva must dominate the
other elements. The physician tries to en¬
sure this by regulating diet, exercise and
medication.
The doctor has always occupied a
prestigious position in Indian society. A
spiritual preceptor or guru was also
looked upon as a healer. The idea of the
sanctity of all life also encouraged the de¬
velopment of veterinary medicine. Many
specialized treatises were written about
the treatment of horses, elephants and
other animals and birds. V.S.N.
34
