Although
sometimes drawn as
stereotypes,
German characters
in French films are



often portrayed far
more subtly.
Germans screened
through French eyes
BY RENE PREDAL
18
JL HERE is nothing in French cinema like Ger¬
mania anno zero (1947), in which the Italian direc¬
tor Roberto Rossellini portrayed the material and
spiritual ruins of post-war Germany. Nor is there
anything comparable to All Quiet on the Western
Front (1930), the American director Lewis Mile¬
stone's film version of Erich Maria Remarque's
novel about life in the German trenches of World
War I. There is certainly nothing similar to The
Desert Fox (1951), the film in which another
American director, Henry Hathaway, attempt¬
ed to restore the reputation of Field Marshal
Rommel.
French film-makers do not find it easy to put
themselves in alien shoes, especially when that
alien is a German. Similarly, German roles in
French films are almost always played not by
French actors but by actors of Germanic origin.
Whereas the English actor James Mason played
Rommel in Hathaway's film, the German roles
in Les dimanches de Ville-d'Avray (Serge Bourguig¬
non, 1963) and Lefranciscain de Bourges (Claude
Autant-Lara, 1968) were played by Hardy
Kruger. The bluff intriguing figure of Curt Jür¬
gens became familiar as the German in countless
French-made thrillers; Jess Hahn featured as a
German musician who became a tramp in the
Parisian summer of Le signe du lion (Eric Roh-
mer, 1959); and Gert Froebe was often cast in the
role of the fat, antipathetic German.
Erich von Stroheim carved out for himself
an unusual film career, playing noble, generous
soldiers in La grande illusion (Jean Renoir, 1937)
and Macao, l'enfer du jeu (Jean Delannoy, 1939)
and civilians driven out of Germany by the nazis
in films such as Les disparus de Saint-Agil
(Christian-Jaque, 1938) and Pièges (Robert
Siodmak, 1939).
The nazi as evil personified
French spy films made during the 1930s were
often set outside a specific historical time-frame,
and adversaries were generally treated with
xl scene from French
director Serge
Bourguignon's Les
. dimanches de Ville-
d'Avray (1963), which
describes the friendship
between a former German
pilot suffering from
amnesia (Hardy Kruger)
and a nine-year-old French
girl (Patricia Gozzi).
JTrançois Truffaut's film
Jules et Jim (1962) tells the
story of two friends, an
Austrian (Oskar Werner,
right) and a Frenchman
(Henri Serre) and their
constantly shifting
triangular relationship with
Catherine (Jeanne Moreau).

.
»r
is>
M
v»ÉÎ8r
ks£Ê
}
/
1*+*-:

1 he friendship between a
captured French officer
(Pierre Fresnay, left) and
the commandant of his
German prison (Erich von
Stroheim) is portrayed in
Jean Renoir's masterpiece
La grande illusion (1937).
chivalrous respect (Deuxième bureau, Pierre
Billon, 1935; Les loups entre eux and L'homme à
abattre, Léon Mathot, 1936-1937; Le capitaine
Benoît, Maurice de Canonge, 1939). Nazism
changed this situation totally.
A shadowy figure whose presence made it¬
self felt in deserted places and in the eyes of his
victims (Nuit et brouillard, Alain Resnais, 1955),
the nazi boss personified the horror of the con¬
centration camp, both in the extraordinary but
true odyssey of Martin Gray (Au nom de tous les
miens, Robert Enrico, 1983) and in Armand
Gatti's L'Enclos (1961).
In' Le sauveur (Michel Mardore, 1971), a
German played by Horst Bucholz passes himself
off as an English parachutist in order to penetrate
the Resistance. He succeeds in this by seducing
and then subjugating an adolescent girl whom he
induces to commit betrayals, with terrible con¬
sequences. In Jacques Rouffio's La passante du
Sans-Souci (1981), based on a novel by Joseph
Kessel, the odious Von Leggaert kills during the
war the father of a small boy whom he maims
for life. He also orders the execution of a liberal-
minded editor and his wife, who had given her¬
self to him in an attempt to save her husband.
Returning several years later as a successful in¬
dustrialist, he is killed by his former victim.
In Shoah (1985), Claude Lanzrnann questions
nazis who participated in the holocaust, and
Klaus Barbie is the subject of another cinéma-
vérité inquiry in Hôtel Terminus (Marcel Ophuls,
1987). Twenty years earlier there had already
been an evocation (this, though, was far from be
ing "direct" cinema) of the trial of Adolf Eich-
mann in La cage de verre (Philippe Arthuys, 1965),
as well as the disquieting Authentique procès de
Carl-EmmanuelJung (Marcel Hanoun, 1966), in
which the characters and the judgement were fic¬
titious but exemplary.
Whereas the Jewish tragedy was treated with
deep respect, the story of the Wehrmacht was
deliberately lampooned in a series of mediocre
comedies in which French cinema practised a clas¬
sic form of compensation therapy. The histori¬
cal fact was that the French army had been
defeated, and script-writers rehashed again and
again the story of isolated individuals who, in the
midst of general pandemonium, use their French
resourcefulness to run rings round German sto¬
lidity. In Papy fait de la Résistance (Jean-Marie
Poiré, 1983) a French grandpa works for the
Resistance under the very nose of fat Marshal
Von Apfelstrudel (Jacques Villeret); in La vache
et le prisonnier (Henri Verneuil, 1959), a French
prisoner of war, played by Fernandel, crosses
Germany with a cow; in La grande vadrouille
(Gérard Oury, 1966) Bourvil and Louis de Funès
succeed in crossing the enemy lines, as do the
squaddies in Mais où est donc passée la septième
compagnie? (Robert Lamoureux, 1973).
The occupation
"Occupation" films constitute a sub-category of
their own among French war films. Members of
the occupying forces appear in minor roles in
often interesting productions such as Léon Morin
20
RENE PREDAL,
of France, is professor of
communications science at
Stendhal University,
Grenoble. He is the author
of many books, studies and
articles on French cinema.
His most recent published
work is Dictionnaire des 900
cinéastes français
("Dictionary of 900 French
Film-makers").

1 he Gestapo raids a
French school in Louis
Malle's Au revoir les
enfants (1987), a film based
on an episode from the
director's own childhood.
prêtre (Jean-Pierre Melville, 1961) and Un sac de
bilks (Jacques Doillon, 1976).
However, in other films about the occupa¬
tion, such as Lacombe Lucien (Louis Malle, 1974),
Les violons du bal (Michel Drach, 1974), Les
guichets du Louvre (Michel Mitrani, 1973) and Mr
Klein (Joseph Losey, 1976), "the villains are not
German but French and their cruelty is less phys¬
ical than verbal and indirect ... There are no nazi
brutes, a decision which was less an evasion than
a desire to redefine the enemy ... since the Jews
of Paris lived in greater fear of being denounced
by the French than of German bullets."1
This statement is not always supported by the
evidence. In Les honneurs de la guerre (Jean
Dewever, 1961), for reasons of military honour,
a German officer refuses to withdraw without a
fight at the time of the pull-back of August 1944
and causes a pointless slaughter. And in Au revoir
les enfants (Louis Malle, 1987), the Gestapo tracks
down Jewish children to send them to the death
1. Quotation from
L'holocauste à l'écran,
by Annette Insdorf,
Editions du Cerf, Paris, 1985.
camps. Although Dewever treats the members of
the Resistance hidden in the church no better
than he does the German officer, Louis Malle
depicts a German officer who, to please a pretty
woman, sends packing a French militiaman who
wants to eject a Jew from the restaurant in which
they are dining.
Dissociated from their nazi leaders, the Ger¬
man people are often portrayed sympathetically
by French film-makers. In Le passage du Rhin
(André Cayatte, 1960) Roger, a wartime prisoner
at the Kessler farm in Germany, returns there of
his own accord to rediscover love and dignity.
In Le franciscain de Bourges, Claude Autant-
Lara pays a noble tribute to the saintly friar-nurse
Alfred Stanke. Edgardo Cozarinsky's La guerre
d'un seul homme (1982) gives a picture of occupied
France in which official shots from French news-
reels are combined with disillusioned comments
from the diaries of Ernst Jünger, a German officer
in Parisa unique example of a film in which the 21

leading character is a German portrayed "from
inside".
In a number of iconoclastic films, Germans
are even shown, despite the dramatic circum¬
stances, involved in flirtations, as in Jean-Paul
Rappenau's La vie de château (1965), or caught
up in a Cornelian dilemma, like the German in
Le silence de la mer (Jean-Pierre Melville, 1949,
based on a novel by Vercors), who is uneasy in
the role of occupier and turns away from passion¬
ate love to bury himself in solitude. The German
soldier in Hiroshima mon amour (Alain Resnais,
1959, from a screenplay by Marguerite Duras)
embodies youth and love, but also intolerable
suffering. So often the executioner, the German
here, on the contrary, is an expiatory victim of
the war.
Many French films, therefore, seek out the
man behind the German uniform. Even the
historical inquiry in Le chagrin et la pitié (Marcel
Ophiils, 1969) opens with the wedding in Ger¬
many of the daughter of a Wehrmacht captain
who as a young man had been stationed in
Clermont-Ferrand between 1942 and 1944, thus
attempting to bring together the army and
civilian society, past and present, without any
trace of manichaeism.
This insistence on human complexity is even
more evident in The Memory ofJustice (1976), a
film about the Nuremberg trials in which the
director, Marcel Ophiils, son of the German film¬
maker Max Ophiils and married to a German
woman who was a member of the Hitler Youth
organization, does not hesitate to implicate him-
Alain Delon and Juliet
Berto in a scene from
Joseph Losey's Mr Klein
(1976), a study on the
theme of identity,
indifference and the search
for truth.
c
~ mj /

hiiji Okada and
Emmanuelle Riva play the
lead roles in Hiroshima
mon amour (Alain
Resnais, 1959).
self directly. Nazism is thus shown in terms of
its impact on everyday life and not simply as an
ideological concept.
Philippe Nahoun's Une fille unique, which
also appeared in 1976, drew a complex and rather
disquieting fictional portrait. During the summer
of 1935, Sophie, bored and tired of her husband,
a militant communist, becomes attracted to Tho¬
mas, a young German Jew who accidentally kills
a fascist. Thomas comes to exercise a strange fas¬
cination on her. To a journalist who asked why
the young woman should be drawn out of her
humdrum life by a man who happened to be a
both a Jew and a German, Nahoun replied: "be¬
cause it was horrible to be a German Jew in
1935."2 After the black and white judgements of
other films, this work examines nuances that are
too often reserved for portrayals of national
heroes.
In Menaces (1939) Erich von Stroheim played
the role of a poor lodger in a small Paris hotel.
This was the first in a succession of characters
who projected an unexpected image of the Ger¬
man as vulnerable and humiliated. The story of
a former pilot who returns from the war suffer¬
ing from amnesia and attempts to recover a
precarious happiness with a nine-year-old girl,
Les dimanches de Ville-d'Avray, despite occasion¬
al stylistic affectations, is a sensitive film. This
man, a stranger to himself, joins forces with some¬
one else who is excluded from society in an at¬
tempt to build a better world.
Similarly, the character of the Austrian Jules,
m Jules et Jim (François Truffaut, 1962, based on
a novel by Henry-Pierre Roché), is richer and
more profoundly explored than that of his
French friend Jim. He is the first to be deceived
by the woman that they both love, and it is he
who is left when Catherine commits suicide, tak¬
ing Jim to his death with her.
Unlike the German tourist of Ascenseur pour
l'échafaud (Louis Malle, 1957), murdered by a
young car thief who finds him unpleasant, the
young geologist in La maison des borles (Jacques
Doniol-Valcroze, 1969) is the epitome of Ger¬
manic seductiveness; Matthieu Carrière glows
with sun-drenched romanticism opposite Marie
Dubois as the virtuous wife of a man who does
not deserve her.
On the whole, therefore, portrayals of Ger¬
mans in French cinema are less stereotyped than
one might have been led to believe.
. Philippe Nahoun in Cinéma 76, No. 215, November 1976. 23
