Hearthy home and rural
10
THE
FAMILY
PAST
AND PRESENT
NINETEENTH-CENTURY
RUSSIA

community
The Couple (1931), by the
Russian-bom French
sculptor Osip Zadkine
(1890-1967).
Asking her Hand in
Marriage, by the 18th-
century Russian painter
Mikhail Shibanov.
BY HÉLÈNE YVERT-JALU
The basis of peasant society in rural
Russia, the family long defended the
identity of an oppressed social group.
T .
JL HE population of the Russian empire at the
end of the nineteenth century was overwhelm¬
ingly rural. The 1897 census shows that, of a total
of 124.6 million people, 106.2 million (85 per
cent) lived in the countryside.
In 1913, on the eve of the First World War,
only 18 per cent of the population lived in the
towns and cities. It was sometimes difficult to
draw the line between town and village, as three-
quarters of the people were employed in
agriculture and there was a strong link between
the urban and the rural environment, largely
because of seasonal workers (otkhodniki) who
divided their time between the fields and the
factories.
It was not until 1962 that the urban popula¬
tion exceeded the rural population. This indicates
the importance of peasant society, which was
based on the family. "All the institutions, all the
distinctive characteristics of Russia, everything
which makes her different from the West, have
deep roots which must be disinterred in order to
understand the country's problems", wrote the
French historian Henri Jean-Baptise Anatole
Leroy-Beaulieu in 1881. These roots are to be
found primarily in the organization of the tradi¬
tional Russian family iij the rural environment.
The mir, a village commune
Traditional Russian peasant society was founded
on a unique institution, the agrarian community
known as the obshchina or mir. This was a form
of local government based on regular meetings
of the heads of peasant families (domokhozïanes,
literally, "masters of the house"). These men
shared the responsibility for village affairs, under
the direction of an elder, the staroste, whom they
elected. The peasants did not own their land.
Fields and meadows belonged to the communi¬
ty, which periodically redistributed them among
the families on the basis of the number of "souls"
or married men in each family. Neither women
nor single men were taken into account.
According to some historians, the mir form
of organization has ancient roots going back to
the time when the Slavs farmed collectively, in
large kinship groups, land held in common by 11

12
the group. This arrangement may have reflected
a specific mentality that was far removed from
the individualistic tendencies of the West. Other
historians believe that this institution may have
been a form of organization imposed on peasants
by the authorities for administrative or fiscal
reasons. Whatever its origins, among the Russian
peasantry the mir developed a community spirit,
the individual's attachment to the social group,
in particular the immediate family, and solidari¬
ty between different members of the community.
The head of the family was designated in ac¬
cordance with the male line of succession. The
responsibility passed from a father to his son or
to the eldest brother, and usually fell to the oldest
man in the household. A matriarchal system
might exist on a provisional basis in the case of
a widow with no adult men in the house.
As his family's representative at the village
assembly, the domokhozïane was responsible for
paying taxes and providing recruits for military
service. His domestic role was to manage com¬
mon property and to use the household's man¬
power to work the land, keep the stove supplied
with firewood, repair old buildings and construct
new ones, and maintain tools and equipment. He
was also the arbitrator in family quarrels.
In the early nineteenth century the "big fami¬
ly" commonly comprised between twenty-five
and thirty people. The dwelling, which together
with the outbuildings was known as the dvor
(literally, the "yard"), was also home to sons and
their families, unmarried daughters, and various
relatives and friends of the family.
By the end of the century, however, this kind
of arrangement was much less common. Married
sons, after living with their parents for a few
years, would leave the family home and set up
their own "hearth". Between 1880 and 1890, the
typical village had only seven or eight people in
each dvor. The 1897 census- for European Russia
gave an even lower average of 5.9 persons per
household in the countryside.
Marriage as a means
of access to common lands
The authority of the head of the household over
his family was similar to that of the emperor over
his subjects, a relationship cast in the image of
divine power. The autocratic power of the head
of the family is evoked by an ancient proverb
which says, "The master in his house is like the
Khan in the Crimea". The obedience due to the
head of the family was an extension of the respect
shown to old people. "Where there's white hair,
there's reason", says another proverb.
The power of the domokhozïane was not,
however, absolute, for it was customary for him
to consult the "family council" before taking par¬
ticularly important decisions. This council, con¬
sisting of the married men of the household,
could in certain exceptional circumstances have
him deposed for incompetence or unworthiness.
As in all hierarchical societies based on
patriarchy, it was the norm for men to dominate
women, older members to dominate younger,
and married people to dominate the unmarried.
The unmarried were not considered to be
people in the fullest sense, as indicated by some
of the words used to describe them: a single man
of whatever age was called malyi (a lad), an un¬
married woman was known as deyka (a girl). On
marriage they formed part of the adult domestic
community.
Marriage itself was a prerequisite to the use
of communal land. It could be said to replace a
coming of age ceremony, as indicated by the term
muzh, which was formerly used to refer to both
"man" and "husband". A bobyl, that is a peasant
with neither land nor family, was seen as an un¬
fortunate being overwhelmed by fate.
It is not surprising under these circumstances
that Russia had the highest proportion of mar¬
ried people in Europe. The 1897 census shows
that in the countryside, only 4 per cent of women
and 3 per cent of men aged between 40 and 50
years remained single. And people married
young. For a first marriage, the average age was
21.2 years for women, and 23.5 years for men,
at least two years younger than in France at the
time. Only those who entered monastic orders,
or the physically or mentally disabled, did not
marry.
The high mortality rate meant that widows
and widowers were common, but most men
remarried. A widower needed another wife to
take care of his motherless children and to help
out with the farming. A widow was unable to
benefit from her deceased husband's land and
became a heavy responsibility for the family. Left
alone, she was condemned to a life cf poverty.
The rituals surrounding a proposal of mar¬
riage show that matchmaking was a collective
rather than a private affair, masterminded by the
head of the family and supervised by the village
community. In taking a wife, a man furnished the
community with an extra pair of hands. The
young bride would leave her father's house and
move in with her in-laws. The ideal woman was
first and foremost a good worker.
Custom dictated that the suitor's parents send
svaty (matchmakers), relatives or friends of the
young man, to his proposed fiancee's mother and
1 he wall where icons were
hung in an isba, the
traditional wooden
dwelling of the Russian
peasant.

/i. Russian family
photographed at the
beginning of the century.
father in order to make inquiries and negotiate
the terms of the marriage. In practice it was not
unusual for parents to ask children for their opi¬
nion. Self-interest and sentiment were not
automatically at odds. But, even then, tradition
demanded that the fiancée should weep for her
single days and that she should voice the fears in¬
spired in her by a new life in the house of
"strangers".
Where several generations lived together, the
oldest woman carried out the duties of the
mistress of the house. In general she would be
the wife of the domokhozïane, who was respon¬
sible for organizing and sharing out the
housework between the various women of the
14 family.
These women lit and maintained the great
stove which took up almost a quarter of the isba,
or wooden dwelling, fetched water from the
village well, prepared meals for the family and
the animals, cultivated the vegetable plot behind
the house, looked after the farmyard, milked the
cows and made dairy produce, and collected ber¬
ries and mushrooms in the forest. In summer,
they helped out on a more or less regular basis
with work in the fields, which was the men's
main responsibility. The women passed the time
in the long autumn and winter evenings by spin¬
ning or weaving flax, hemp or wool.
They were allowed to build up their own
little nest egg through the sale of surplus wool,
cloth or dairy produce. In certain regions this was

HELENE YVERT-JALU,
of France, is a lecturer at
the University of Paris I.
She is the author of a
number of studies on
population questions, the
family and women in the
USSR.
known as their "casket" or "basket" (korobka).
Girls would take this money with them on their
marriage. When a woman died, her "casket"
would usually go to her daughters or her unmar¬
ried sisters, and in this way a system of in¬
heritance between women was established. On
the other hand, a woman had no claim on the
property of her father's family, nor on that of
her husband. Only sons had the right to inherit
from their father, and in return they had to look
after the needs of their aged parents.
The overall birth rate in European Russia
(49.5 per cent in the period 1869-1900) bears
witness to the lack of any birth control. Taking
account of factors which curbed people's natural
fertility, such as breast-feeding infants up to the
age of one or two years, or sexual abstinence dur¬
ing religious fasts and when the husband was
working away from home, it has been calculated
that a peasant couple would bring between eight
and ten children into the world, of whom almost
a third would die before their first birthday.
The country wife, working
woman and guardian of moral
and religious values
The peasant woman did not take any rest during
her pregnancy.' Children were born with the help
of the village midwife, and even the husband
would lend a hand if his wife was working in the
fields when her labour started. Rural life was hard
for a woman. Always busy, she worked harder
than the muzhik, or peasant, who in winter could
allow himself to sleep late in the warmth of the
stove. As the poet Nekrassov wrote:
The keys to female happiness
To our cherished freedom
Have been mislaid, lost
By God himself.
Foreign observers of this rural world have
often been shocked by the number of insulting
sayings about women, such as "Long in the hair,
short in the mind", or "The more a woman is
beaten, the better the soup". But accounts by
authors originating from the peasantry give the
impression that women were valued as indispen¬
sable partners in working the land.
There is even a Russian literary tradition
which regards women as superior to men, in the
sense that they embody purity, self-sacrifice,
humility, courage, enthusiasm for work, and
faith. In other words, they are seen as guardians
of moral and religious values.
A cosmic Christianity
In Russian society under the Tsars, and especially
in the villages, the Church had an enormous
influence. It defined good and evil, beauty and
ugliness, honour and shame. It kept the parish
registers where everyone's civil status was
recorded. Each birth, marriage and death
necessarily took on a sacramental nature,
permeating the whole of family life with religious
ritual.
One of the most important rites of the Rus¬
sian Orthodox Church, that of marriage, equated
the conjugal union with that of Christ and the
Church, thus implying that marriage was in¬
dissoluble. There were a few exceptions to this
rule. Divorce was permissible, for example, in the
case of adultery. The party recognized as inno¬
cent had the right to remarry. But the peasant
class were not often aware of this possibility.
The Russian people on the whole were deep¬
ly devout and the practice of religion was tightly
interwoven with their daily life through its many
festivals. The Christianity of the peasants could
be described as a "cosmic Christianity", linked
to the rhythm of the seasons and intermingled
with the traditions and beliefs inherited from the
pagan past. Though they were devout Christians,
the peasants still believed in domovoy, the spirit
of the house, leshy, the spirit of the woods, and
rusalki, the water sprites.
Deeply bound by its secular traditions, wary
of any change, this rural civilization was light
years away from the Westernized world of the
Russian intelligentsia. For a long time the
peasants were the focus of contradictory ap¬
praisals by the country's intellectual élite. Either
they were held in contempt and considered as
"rustics wallowing in filth and ignorance", or
they were idealized as "custodians of the most
unique aspects of Russian civilization".
Both these points of view were based on a
misunderstanding. Long humiliated, freed from
serfdom only in 1861, the peasants could only
resist pressure from the authorities and from
poverty by taking refuge in their community life,
with its rituals and beliefs which allowed them
to express their collective personality. For them
the family was a haven within which they passed
on their cultural heritage and stood up to all the
adversities that came their way.
«
ill
}
15
