A SILKEN BOND BETWEEN EAST
BY AHMAD HASAN DANI
The Buddha's first sermon. Arch-shaped stele in the Gandhara (Graeco-Buddhist) style, Lahore Museum.
THE Silk Road originated in the
early centuries of the Christian
era as a channel of trade in silk
and other goods between China and
India in the east and the Roman world
in the west. It has a permanent place in
world history as an important means of
contact between peoples and cultures and
a conduit for the two-way transmission
of ideas, science and technology, lan¬
guages and literature.
Such contact was not always easy to
maintain in the face of political pressures
and other hindrances, but when one
stretch of the route closed down another
would take its place. Several routes, both
overland and maritime, were actually fol¬
lowed by travellers between east and
west, and the expression "Silk Road" is
a symbolic one evoking an enduring spirit
of communication between peoples. It is
in order to rediscover that eternal spirit
that the project for the "Integral Study
of the Silk Roads" has been undertaken
(see the Unesco Courier, November 1988).
The Silk Roads project is a many-sided
undertaking. Some scholars will be retra¬
cing the various itineraries which con¬
nected China and the West and studying
the geography of the countries through
which they passed. Others will be focus¬
ing on the mechanics of road building and
transport technology and the ways in

AND WEST
which they were influenced by climatic
conditions and the physical barriers
which had to be overcome. Still others
will study the technologies used by differ¬
ent peoples for the exploitation of ma¬
terial resources, and analyse the social
systems, languages and literatures of these
peoples, as well as their folklore, their
myths and other aspects of their culture.
Population movements, the great
migrations that shaped the history of
entire regions, will also be studied. But
the individual travellers who made their
way along the Silk Roads will not be
forgottenthe artists, musicians and
craftsmen who were prepared to risk
their lives in pursuit of knowledge from
other cultures and societies, to which in
turn they contributed their own skills.
Love of adventure, a hunger for
knowledge about others, these were but
two of many motives which fuelled the
process of exchange between different
societies and helped to break down the
barriers which isolated people in differ¬
ent regions and to establish the bonds of
co-existence that make human progress
possible. This was the legacy of the Silk
Road and the spirit which brought it
into being.
Orient and Occident:
the first contacts
The foundations of the east-west
contacts, which were later channelled
along the Silk Roads, were laid in the last
few centuries of the pre-Christian era
with the formation of a number of Asian
states whose peoples exploited the
resources they found locally and compet¬
ed for trade. This quest for profit led to
a flourishing exchange of goods and the
movement of men from region to region.
Gradually, the peaceful conditions neces¬
sary for trade came into being. The
diverse peoples involved in this process
are vividly portrayed by the Greek
historian Herodotus, who describes how
their societies were organized, their ways
of life and their close relationship with
the Achaemenid empire in Persia.
One example of this commercial and
cultural exchange is that of the Aramaean
merchants who travelled through Central
Asia where their alphabetic script,
continued on page 8
The miracle of Sravasti. 3rd-century AD Gandhara bas-relief depicting the Buddha's most famous miracle which occurred in the ancient Indian town
of Sravasti (in the present-day state of Uttar Pradesh) where he lived and preached for part of his life.
	 5

Art on the move
Gold pendant resembling a Byzantine coin
(6th century AD), comes from the
archaeological site of Astana, near Turfan in
the Xinjiang region of northwest China.
This Chinese bronze from the Warring States period
(475-221 BC), unearthed in the garden of a house at Rome, is
thought to have reached Italy in the 1st or 2nd century AD.

Detail of blue silk damask cloth (13th-14th century), discovered in
the necropolis of Al-Azam, Egypt. Chinese artisans sometimes used
Arabic characters in the designs of silks bound for Egypt, in order to
gratify the tastes of their Muslim clients.
This bronze statuette of a deity (1st
century AD), from Alexandria or an
eastern province of the Roman empire,
was found at Begram, Afghanistan, the
site of one of the ancient capitals of
the Kushan kingdom.
Intaglio figure carved in carnelian (3rd-4th century AD), of
Mediterranean origin, which was found during excavations at the
port of Oc Eo on the southern coast of modern Viet Nam. The
Roman figure with upraised index finger may represent a
philosopher.


continued from page 5
Aramaic, influenced the evolution of
other alphabets such as Sogdian and
Kharoshti. Among the other peoples
described by Herodotus are the
Scythians, the "Indians", and the Persian-
speaking people who moved eastward,
where their language had a strong
influence on the ancient languages of the
region.
The meeting of the peoples of east and
west, the exchange of ideas and technol¬
ogies, and the two-way transmission of
languages and literature was made possi¬
ble for the first time by the Achaemenid
empire between the sixth and fourth cen¬
turies BC. People were attracted from
many points of the compass to the capi¬
tal of the empire, Persepolis, along roads
built by the emperor Darius. At the same
time, in the outlying central Asian
provinces, cities such as Balkh1, Samar¬
kand and Taxila, which later became im¬
portant staging posts on the Silk Roads,
were connected by overland routes and
developed as meeting points between east

and west. During this period the spirit of
dialogue between the peoples of east and
west was the primary form of the enrich¬
ment of human civilization.
The conquests of Alexander
the Great
Contacts between east and west were
facilitated in the late fourth century BC
by the conquests of Alexander the Great,
who overthrew the Achaemenid empire
and campaigned eastwards as far as India.
A Macedonian who became steeped in
Greek culture after his conquest of
Greece, and then an oriental monarch,
captivated by the idealism of the East,
Alexander was himself the embodiment
of cultural intermingling.
During his time the culture of the
Greek world was transmitted into Asia
in an unprecedented flow of men and
ideas, technologies, artistic trends and
architectural formulae, as well as drama,
poetry, music, religions and above all
language and literature. However, the
[
A«
.1 . liíiDffí
1wr*
*lr
Shiva with three heads. A bas-relief from the 12th-century monastery of Pandrethan, near
Srinagar, State of Jammu and Kashmir, India.
traffic was not only one-way. Alexander
and the scholars who accompanied him
met Asian philosophers, whose ideas they
took back to Greece along with tributes
of gold, cattle and artefacts which
enriched the classical world of the West.
Alexander founded several new cities in
Asia, and his men intermarried there,
introducing Hellenism but at the same
time becoming thoroughly Asianized and
integrated into the local population.
Shortly after Alexander invaded the
sub-continent, Chandragupta Maurya
seized the throne of the Indian kingdom
of Magadha, thus taking the first step in
the creation of the mighty Mauryan em¬
pire, which inherited both the Greek and
the Achaemenid legacy. The empire
reached its zenith during the reign of his
grandson Asoka (274-237 BC). Asoka,
who inaugurated an era of Buddhist mis¬
sionary activity that was to have a far-
reaching impact on central Asia and the
Far East, received many Greek envoys
and in return sent his own ambassadors
to the Hellenistic world.2
After its founder's death, Alexander's
great empire disintegrated into smaller
units including such peoples as the Bac-
trian Greeks, the Sogdians, the Parthians,
and later the Sassanians and the Scythians.
This fragmentation did not prevent the
movement of people and goods; on the
contrary, commercial activity was inten¬
sified as a result of advances in geographi¬
cal knowledge, which also encouraged the
movements of learned Buddhists, Zoroas-
trians, Manicheans and other mission¬
aries. The ruins of monasteries and other
religious centres provide a clue to the
routes they took. Cultural influences
spread along the river valleys of
Mesopotamia, Central Asia and India.
Archaeological excavations at Taxila on
the Indus and Ai-Khanum on the Oxus3
have shown how art and architecture of
that time drew on a wide variety of
traditions.
The growth of sea-borne trade
Another significant development,
thought to have taken place around 100 BC,
was the discovery of the monsoon, which
enabled ocean-going vessels to cross the
Indian Ocean from west to east in spring
and then to return in winter when the
8 	

winds reversed, laden with products of the
East. For the first time the Indian Ocean
had become a lake for ships travelling
between the Roman world, Indian ports,
and the coast of China.
The work of geographers such as
Pliny the Elder in the first century AD
and Ptolemy a century later testifies to
increasing knowledge of the world- The
anonymous author of the first-century
Periplus Maris Erythraei gives a detailed
description of the countries around the
Indian Ocean, their peoples, trade, im¬
ports and exports, climate and currency.
New sea routes were developed, ex¬
tending the range of the coastal shipping
that in ancient times had linked Egypt,
via the land of Dilmun (possibly Bahrein)
with the distant, eastern countries of
Magan and Meluhha, which may have
been located in the Indus valley. Sea
traffic along these new routes would
reinforce, and when necessary replace,
the overland Silk Roads.
China's opening to the West
Meanwhile, tribal conflicts on the
western borders of China had caused the
Qin Dynasty (221-206 BC) to build the
Great Wall of China as a defensive meas¬
ure. Chinese sources describe how these
tribes subsequently moved down the
Oxus valley and penetrated south of the
Kun-lun, Karakorum and Hindu Kush
mountains.
The rulers of the Han Dynasty
(206 BC-220 AD) which followed kept a
strict watch over these tribal movements
on their western borders, but they also
opened up for the first time the route to
central Asia and maintained close contact
with the mighty Kushan empire which
stretched from the Caspian Sea in the
north through the Oxus, Indus and
Ganges valleys to the Arabian Sea in the
south. The Kushan empire was so vast
that it also had close contacts with the
Roman empire. This period of close col¬



laboration between East and West helped
to create the propitious conditions for the
opening of the Silk Road.
Traces of intense cultural activity still
mark the routes that joined East and West
centuries ago. Ruins of ancient cities, such
as Kapisa (near modern Charikar) in the
heart of Afghanistan, tell a story of com¬
plex exchanges with other countries.
Rock carvings portray people wearing the
costumes of different tribes and rock
inscriptions speak of different peoples and
languages. In the,great ancient capital of
Changan {modern Xian), Buddhist
monks from Japan and Korea met learned
scholars from Sri Lanka, India and
Central Asia. Sculptures of Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas stand in spectacular natural
surroundings, most notably at Bamiyan
in Afghanistan, where there are two
colossal Buddha figures carved from the
An apsaras, a goddess-nymph of Indian mythology. Detail from an 11th-century fresco, Alchi
monastery, Ladakh, in which both Indian and Persian influences' cali be seen.
	 9

living rock and hundreds of man-made
caves, many of which bear traces of fine
fresco painting which links them with
contemporary caves in Xin-jiang
(Sinkiang).
The expansion of Islam
The rise of Islam in Arabia in the
seventh century triggered a profound so¬
cial and religious revolution among the
Engraved and embossed silver plate (4th century) showing Shapur II (310-379 AD), king of the
Sasanian empire of Persia, hunting wild boar. Merchants from Khorezm on their way to Europe
via the Caspian Sea and the Volga River may have brought the plate to Perm, in the central
Urals, where it was discovered.
mathematics, the new symbols of number
and the decimal system that became the
foundations of modern science. They also
disseminated the science of chemistry,
knowledge of the properties of metals and
of new Chinese technologies, and above
all medical information which opened up
great possibilities in the human and
biological sciences. Arab interest in
astronomy led to the development of new
concepts of the universe and of cosmogo¬
ny. In the fields of art and architecture
they allied the traditions of the past with
scientific and mathematical precision
and contributed new forms in building
and new tastes in decoration which
incorporated calligraphy and arabesque.
In this way the spirit of the Silk Roads
was carried on. As the caravans plied
from Khotan, Yarkand and Kashgar to
Samarkand, Bokhara and Merv and beyond
to the markets of the western world, or
further south through Balkh, Hamadan
and Damascus to Aleppo, or from China
westwards to the Caucasus and then on
to Istanbul and Venice, they kept alive a
dialogue between the peoples of east and
west, a process of mutual contact and co¬
operation that encouraged the peaceful
growth of human civilization.
1. Balkh: the ancient city of Bactra, capital of Bactria.
2. After conquering the kingdom of Kalinga (the modern
Indian state of Orissa), Asoka renounced war. The name
of Kalinga lives on in the Kalinga Prize for distinguished
popular writing in science which is awarded annually by
Unesco. The Prize was created in 1951 after a donation
from an Indian industrialist from Orissa. Mr. Bijoyanand
Patnaik.
3. Oxus: ancient name of the Amu Darya River, central
Asia, which flows into the Aral Sea. Editor
While the Han Dynasty ruled in China,
the Huns spread from the western
borderland of China and Mongolia into
the heart of Asia and Europe and down
to India. A loose confederation of peo¬
ples, the Huns built a vast empire in cen¬
tral Asia stretching from China to Persia
and from the Oxus to the Arabian Sea.
Many Chinese and western travellers
have left a vivid picture of the Huns'
horsemanship, polo-playing, weapons
and dress. The Huns were followed by
Turkic tribes who established states in
Central Asia which obstructed passage
along the old-established Silk Roads,
although the T'ang Dynasty which began
to rule China in 618 AD still managed to
send goods and people to the West.
Arabs, who expanded into Asia, Africa
and Europe. Their expansion also opened
up new vistas in science and philosophy
as they began to plumb the ocean of
knowledge contained in Greek manu¬
scripts and to translate them into Arabic.
Through their contacts with India and
China they also followed new develop¬
ments in mathematics, medicine and
astronomy and learned how to manufac¬
ture paper, gunpowder, ceramics and silk
and muslin cloth. The Arabs now became
the intermediaries in a dialogue which
extended from China to Venice and then
westwards to France, Spain and Portugal.
As well as passing on Greek science and
philosophy to the newly-developing
world of the time, they propagated Indian
AHMAD HASAN DANI, of Pakistan, Professor
Emeritus at Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad,
and honorary director of the Centre for the Study
of the Civilizations of Central Asia, is the author
of many books and articles on history and
archaeology. This article is adapted from a paper
presented by Professor Dani at the first international
seminar on Unesco's Integral Study of the Silk Roads
project, held in Osaka (Japan) in October 1988.
10 	
