^1789
An idea
that changed
the world
Chomin:
The Rousseau
of the East
BY SHIN'YA IDA
X HE Japanese writer, philosopher and politi¬
cian Nakae Tokusuke (1847-1901), more widely
referred to by his nom-de-plume, Chomin, which
means "a thousand million men of the people",
is best known for his remarkable translation of
Jean-Jacques Rousseau's Social Contract.
In fact, he made two translations of the book:
the first into the standard Japanese of the day,
which he wrote on his return from France in
1874, and the second into classical Chinese, the
language of scholars, which he completed be¬
tween 1882 and 1883, at the height of the move¬
ment for liberty and the rights of the people. His
contemporaries called him "The Rousseau of the
East", a nickname that has stuck.
French studies
Born in 1847, at Kochi, capital of the fief of Tosa
on the island of Shikoku, Chomin learned French
at Nagasaki, where he was sent with a bursary,
and then at Edo (now Tokyo), where he became
a pupil of Murakami Eishun, the father of French
studies in Japan. It seems likely that he read Mon-
signor Daniel's Abrégé chronologique de l'histoire
universelle ("Brief Chronological Outline of
World History") while studying under Muraka¬
mi, who was to publish a translation of it in 1871.
The year 1868 saw the collapse of the
Tokugawa Shogunate and the restoration of Im¬
perial rule, and it was during the first year of the
first Meiji era (Meiji means, literally, "enlightened
rule") that Chomin was admitted to Mitsukuri
Rinano's private school. Mitsukuri was the first
Japanese teacher of French to visit France, hav- 41

dâJÂMSM
1 he Emperor Napoleon III
and royal visitors to the
1867 Paris Universal
Exhibition. At right, the
brother of the Japanese
emperor.
SHIN'YA IDA,
of Japan, is a professor of
literature in Tokyo. His
doctoral thesis, on Nakae
Chomin and France, was
published in 1987.
42
ing the previous year accompanied Prince
Tokugawa Minbu's diplomatic mission to Paris
on the occasion of the World Exhibition. It is
very likely that Chomin read Victor Duruy's
Histoire de France ("History of France") whilst
at this school, since Mitsukuri quotes this work
in his Banxoku-Shinshi ("History of Modern
Times"), published in 1871. It is reasonable to as¬
sume, therefore, that Chomin's interest in Rous¬
seau and the French Revolution dates from this
period.



Discovering
the 'philosophes'
The decisive period in Chomin's life was his stay
in France in the early days of the Third Repub¬
lic, when the country was still suffering from the
ravages of the Franco-Prussian War and of the
Commune. Selected as one of the scholars spon¬
sored by the Japanese Government to accompa¬
ny the diplomatic mission headed by Iwakura
Tomomi, in December 1871, he remained in
France for two years.
Little is known of his life during this period.
He scarcely mentions it in his writings and refer¬
ences to it by his follower and biographer Kotoku
Shusui are both brief and vague. "Although he
was sponsored by the Ministry of Justice, my
master nevertheless studied philosophy, history
and literature, and I have heard that he skimmed
through many history books."
Our research on articles translated and pub¬
lished in the Seiri-Sadan ("Political and Moral
Science Review"), founded by Chomin and his
followers, indicate that while in France he prob¬
ably discovered the eighteenth-century philosophes
(Montesquieu, Voltaire, Rousseau, Mirabeau and
Condorcet) and the radical political writers
(Barni, Naquet, Jules Simon, Laboulaye and
Vacherot). Since passages from L'Histoire
parlementaire de la Révolution Française
("Parliamentary History of the French Revolu
tion"), by Bûchez and Roux, appear in transla¬
tion in the Review, it can be assumed that this
forty-volume work in octavo format was among
the "many history books" that Chomin
"skimmed through".
Rousseau reaches Japan
On his return to Japan in June 1874, Chomin
found his fellow countrymen in a state of fer¬
ment. Two former ministers, Itagaki Taisuko and
Goto Shojiro, both, like Chomin, from Tosa, had
just launched the Jiku-Minken-Unao ("Movement
for Liberty and the Rights of the People"). It was
at this time that Chomin translated Rousseau's
Social Contract (Min'yaku-Ron), thus placing a for¬
midable weapon in their hands. At the school of
French he had established (Furanau-Gaku-Sha,
later Futsu-Gaku-Juku) he gave commentaries on
Rousseau in his classes and the militants of the
movement, most of them young, passed the
manuscript of his translation from hand to hand.
"Weeping, we read the Min'yaku-Ron by Russo",
wrote one of these young men in a poem writ¬
ten in Chinese; at the same time, a Prefect for¬
bade the officials of his Department to read
Rousseau.
In May 1875, Chomin was appointed secre¬
tary to the Senate and assigned to the research
department. For a long time his role in this new
institution remained obscure. Following exami¬
nation of the Journal of the Senate, it is now
known that he had already been appointed secre¬
tary when the drafting office of the Constitution
was set up. He was, therefore, at the very heart
of the team preparing the draft constitution,
although in a relatively lowly capacity, since this
process involved comparing the constitutions of
different countries as and when they were trans¬
lated into Japanese from the French jurist
Edouard-Julien Laferrière's book Constitutions
d'Europe et d'Amérique ("Constitutions of Europe
and America").
At the outset, this draft constitution, com¬
pleted in mid-October 1876, provided for only
one legislative chamber, the Senate. How then
did it come about that, by the end of the year,
it included plans for the creation of a Chamber
of Deputies? We do not know whether Chomin
had a hand in this sudden change in state policy.
However that may be, he left the Senate shortly
afterwards, in January 1877.
Mention should be made of the presence in
the drafting office of Kawazu Sukeyuki, who
alone among Chomin's colleagues could read
French. In September 1876 Kawazu began pub¬
lishing his complete translation of Auguste Mig-
net's Histoire de la Révolution Française (1824;
"History of the French Revolution"). Thus
Rousseau and the Revolution were both involved
in the drawing up of the Japanese draft constitu¬
tion, which is considered to be more liberal in
many respects than the Constitution eventually
adopted.

The spirit
of the French Revolution
The second (1878) and third (1880) amendments
to the draft constitution were definitively reject¬
ed by the government ministers Iwakura Tomo-
mi and Ito Hirobumi, who dismissed them
scornfully as being mere "translations" or "re¬
hashes" of European and American constitutions.
Meanwhile, in April 1881, Chomin and his



friends founded the daily newspaper Toyo jiyu
Shimbun ("Liberty of the Orient"). The move¬
ment for the rights of the people was now at its
zenith. In his editorials, Chomin repeatedly called
for the immediate convocation of a National As¬
sembly which, like its French revolutionary
counterpart, would be empowered to draw up
a constitution. He stressed the need for "rigorous
reasoning" and "firmness of will". He counselled
his young readers against "inflammatory
speeches" or "blind, violent action". For him it
was not a question of doing "what France had
done before", but of "seeking its spirit rather
than imitating its actions".
If the French Revolution was to be "imitat¬
ed" only in its "spirit", what other path was there
to follow? Paradoxically, the one taken by the
British. Since, according to Rousseau's theories,
the British monarchy was compatible with the
nature of the Republic, Chomin preferred it to
the French Republican system. Whilst thus ad¬
vising calm and moderation, he did not fail to
point out that a revolution could break out even
in Japan, if the "high ups"members of the
court, ministers and noblespersisted in exercis¬
ing their authority without regard for the rights
of the people.
Japan on the brink
of revolution?
In October 1881, feeling itself threatened by the
rise of the popular movement, the government
oligarchy took the initiative, promising, in the
name of the emperor, to grant a Constitution by.
1889 and establish a Diet for the year after.
In February 1882, at the time when Ito, who
had been entrusted with the task of drawing up
the Constitution, was about to leave on a study
mission to Germany and Austria, Chomin found¬
ed his Political and Moral Science Review. The first
issue opened with the Declaration of the Rights
of Man of 1793 and in the second Chomin be¬
gan the serialization of Rousseau's Social Contract,
both of which he had himself translated into clas¬
sical Chinese.
Chomin's History ofthe Two Reigns in France
before the Revolution (Kakumei-zen-Furansu-Nisei-
Kiji, December 1886) was published three years
before the promulgation of the Imperial Consti¬
tution, the drafting of which was then approach¬
ing its final stage. In compiling this work Chomin
drew mainly on histories of France by Victor
Duruy and Henri Martin. But why did he stop
Inauguration of the first
Japanese railway line at
Yokohama (1872) by
Emperor Mutsuhito
before 1789 instead of writing, as one might have
expected, a history of the Revolution itself?
Chomin himself provided the explanation
when he revealed a clear dichotomy in his ap¬
preciation of the French Revolution. On the one
hand the Revolution was for him "an unheard-
of event in the annals of history which highlight¬
ed the causes of liberty and equality and which,
by transforming the situation of the European
states, succeeded for the first time in basing po¬
litics on the lofty principles of philosophy". On
the other hand, he saw "from the moment of the
convocation of the States General, the seeds of
growing conflict between the court and the peo¬
ple, conflict which inflamed passions and led to
extremes and excess". Primarily a philosopher
rather than a historian, he was more interested
in "the causes of the Revolution" than in its ac¬
tual unfolding, the ferocity of which he found
unbearable.
Chomin likened the French Revolution to "a
great drama" of which philosophers such as Mon¬
tesquieu, Voltaire, Rousseau and the rest were
"the authors" and in which the great revolution¬
aries such as the Abbé Sieyès, Mirabeau,
Vergniaud, Robespierre and Danton were "the
actors".
Yet how could the actors have staged "the
great drama" written by the authors? Only with
the backing of "public opinion, without which
the undertaking would have had no future and
would have ended up crushed by the mighty
power of the court". The final message that Cho¬
min leaves with us is surely this: addressing his
words "to those who foster a high ambition wi¬
thin the nation" he reminds them of the vital
necessity of "forming public opinion". This is
the key to everything.
