The itinerant poet pays his
annual visit to an Egyptian
village, with memorable
consequences...



The poet's tale
BY MAHMOUD HUSSEIN
W.
12
E were waiting impatiently for the return
of summer, for the rains to stop, for school to
liberate us from its constraints. Our families
would then let us run around the village streets
from daybreak until long after sunset, without
supervision or rebukeunless one of us got hurt
in a fight or an accident.
Summer also meant harvest time, and harvest
time meant weddings. All those who lived off the
land, from the smallest farmer to the wealthiest
landowner, were waiting for the harvest to be
gathered in and sold. This was virtually the only
time of the year when the peasants had any
money and could go to town and buy, each
according to his means, a trousseau for the future
bride. Only with her trousseau would a girl be
ready to leave her father's home for that of her
husband.
For the childrenat a time when radio was
rare and television unknownweddings meant
that troupes of musicians and actors would be
coming to the village. Above all they meant the
arrival of a visitor that we awaited with joyful
anticipation for weeks in advancethe poet.
The poet usually officiated at the "night of
the henna"the eve of the wedding, when the
hands and feet of the bride were painted with hen¬
na. The musicians would play all the next after¬
noon during the presentation of the trousseau
An Egyptian village
storyteller accompanies
himself on a stringed
instrument, the rabab.


14
And then the theatre troupe would follow in the
evening, associating the whole village with the
joy of the families which had just been linked by
marriage.
We thrilled to every instant of the festivities.
We loved the familiar music, unchanged since
pharaonic times; and we split our sides laughing
at the twists and turns of these comedies whose
plots turned on conjugal infidelity and just
punishment of the guilty. But for us the highlight
of the entertainment, the moment of jubilation,
was when the poet came on.
We talked about him in the singular, as if
there was only one poet, but actually he was
never alone. He had one or more partners, who
accompanied him on the viol or joined him in
reciting some couplets in time to a rhythm.
The arrival of the- poet
The poet usually turned up during the afternoon.
A few local dignitaries and nearly all the children
would be waiting for him by the roadside at the
entrance to the village. The former would greet
him with words of welcome, the latter with
cheering and clapping. Then, amidst cries of joy,
as if he were the future husband, he would be
escorted to the home of the host family.
There the poet was hidden from our sight.
But news of him constantly filtered out from in¬
side the house via a few well-informed friends
who were either members of the host family or
the kind of pushy children who go everywhere
even if they haven't been invited.
The reports were intermittent or continuous,



depending on the impudence of the inform¬
ers.. .right now the poet is drinking syrup or
coffee.. .now he's taking a nap to set him up for
the long evening ahead.. .now he's having his sup¬
per.. .he's tuning his instruments.
We seized upon this precious information
and discussed its every detail. Every snippet was
a sign that the long-awaited moment was drawing
closeror getting further awaywhen the poet
would at long last take the stage.
A moment increasingly rare and precious
since more and more families were hesitating to
invite the poet.. .and the minute that one family
finally did so we felt an unspoken anxiety spread
through the village and increase until the day of
the poet's arrival.
We also noted that special arrangements were
made in preparation for the evening entertain¬
ment; that meetings were held to try somehow
or other to divide up the space reserved for the
S - s
*,
V,
1 wo episodes from the Hilaliyya. Above, one of the
heroes of the epic, El Zeinati Khalifa (left).
audience between the people of our village and
guests from villages nearby; that the local police
were ready for action; that many guests from the
surrounding countryside, especially the young
ones, were armed with clubs and obstinately re¬
fused to hand them over, in spite of the objec¬
tions of the village dignitaries and elders.
Only gradually did we connect the tension
which reigned among the adults, and the precau¬
tionary measures they took, with the later events
which upset all their calculations and put paid to
their plans to keep events under control.
The performance took place in the village
square, where a platform was set up for the poet
and his troupe. Mats had been placed around the
platform for the guestswith the exception ofthe

1 he village of Takruna,
near Zaghwan in Tunisia,
the "Ifriquia" that features
in the epic poem of the
Banou Hilal.
omdah and the dignitaries, for whom seats of
honour were reserved, specially placed at points
where their occupants could leave the square at
the first sign of danger.


The poet appeared on the platform shortly
after the evening prayer, giving the guests time
to make their way to the square after performing
their religious duty. We children took our places
long before, as soon as the lighting of the street
lamps made the evening air shimmer magically.
We crowded as close to the platform as we could,
never giving a thought to what was causing so
much concern to those around us.
We greeted the poet with cries of joy, atten¬
tive to his slightest change of expression. Wé no¬
ticed the proud smiles which our warm welcome
brought to his features; and we even caught the
silent questioning glance which from time to time
betrayed his feelings as he glanced round the
square, as if to detect the places where danger
might be lurking.
Whoever he was, whatever his age, the poet
always told the story of Abou Zeid El Hilali
even though there are many other popular heroes
in the Arab and Egyptian repertoire, such as Seif
Ibn Yazan, Zir Salem, and Ali El Zeibaq. But the
epic of Abou Zeid El Hilali, the Hilaliyya, was
invariably chosen by the poet.
The Hilaliyya is the incident-packed epic
poem of the Banou Hilal tribe, one of those
which left the Arabian peninsula in the aftermath
of the conquests sparked off by the successors of 15

D i A
the Prophet, and moved north, east and west to
build what would become the Muslim world.
The poet (whichever one he was) never be¬
gan the story at the beginning, just as he never
reached the end. We would leave the square
without ever learning where the Hilalian advance
ended. The poet (always) opened and closed his
narrative somewhere in "ifriquia",* at the site
of a city whose people were determined to hold
out against the conquering tribe, whatever the
cost.
He related, in his own fashion, some of the
episodes of the confrontation between the be¬
sieged city and its assailants. The narrative was
punctuated by musical interludes in which the
heroes of the two sides spoke out in turn. Op¬
posing Abou Zeid was the chief of the surround¬
ed tribe, El Zeinati Khalifa. But there were
countless other characters, and anyone listening
to the tale for the first time had a hard time keep¬
ing up with it.



Many romances blossomed between the girls
of one camp and the warriors of the other, com¬
plicating the issues of a struggle in which the
audience's preferences gradually became
inextricably confused. The poet skilfully divid¬
ed his emotional flights between the two oppos¬
ing sides. Whenever he praised the courage of one
side, he went on to recount a new episode which
glorified the other. And when a Banou Hilal
woman declared her love for a Banou Khalifa
man, the poet immediately described the passion
of a Banou Khalifa woman for a Banou Hilal
man.
16
The storm breaks
The poet's art lay in his capacity to hold his
listeners' rapt attention by channelling their sym¬
pathies first to one side, then to the other.. .by
playing on their feelings of joy in victory and sad¬
ness in defeat, by striking a balance between the
tenderness of the love scenes and the violence of
the battle scenes, between the wisdom of the
elders and the audacity of the young.
But this skilled game of checks and balances
could not prevent the audience from splitting
sooner or later into two camps, one taking the
part of the Banou Hilal, the other that of the
Banou Khalifa. Moreover, the supporters of each
side were always virtually equal in number,
heaven knows why. It was as if they were mys¬
teriously reflecting the equilibrium sought by the
poet.
However, -from that moment, the tensions
which permeated the story began to spread
through the audience. The spectators became in¬
volved. As soon as the poet swung the story one
way, the supporters of that side shouted with joy,
while the supporters of the other side jeered their
disapproval.
The task of the poet became increasingly deli-
* In present-day Tunisia. Editor
1 he Egyptian village of
Qurna.
MAHMOUD HUSSEIN
is the pen name of two
Egyptian writers who have
published several books of
political sociology, most
recently Versant sud de la
liberté, Essai sur l'e'mergence
de l'individu dans le tiers
monde ("The Southern Face
of Liberty, an essay on the
emergence of the individual
in the Third World", La
Découverte, Paris, 1989).
J. * s
'iiÍ)
fill I i
cate, his mastery of the situation increasingly un¬
certain. The "night of the henna" rarely ended
with a round of applause. Instead of the audience
dispersing quietly into the night, and the poet and
his troupe peacefully settling into the beds which
had been prepared for them, the evening ended
in an explosion of violence.
It was impossible to pinpoint the moment
when emotion degenerated into confrontation.
Even today we search our memories in vain try¬
ing to establish the sequence of cause and effect
which suddenly turned the festivities sour. A
predictable but unfathomable chain of events led
to a conflict which was all the more strange and
brutal since it had been expected, planned almost,
for days. A word was uttered by someone in the
crowd, in a hollow, scornful voice. There was an
immediate menacing riposte, and a club was
raised, then two, then three...
In the twinkling of an eye, the storm broke.
Blows rained down from all directions. It was as
though the audience had been seized by an ir¬
resistible need to give vent to a terrible, long-pent-
up frustration. No one dreamt of asking where
this frustration originated nor how far things
would go now that the dam had burst.

The village dignitaries slipped away. The poet
and his companions tiptoed off. A cacophony of
police whistles pierced the nocturnal silence.
Street lamps were broken and went out. But the
scuffle continued in the darkblind, relentless,
breathless, until everyone was exhausted, until the



calming of the anger for which the poet's tale was
merely the occasion, its real reasons being buried
in the past, in the silent march of the centuries.
The passing of an era
The years have gone by. The city has removed
us from the slow rhythm of the country. Study
and travel, cinema and television, have slowly
reduced to a faint memory those evenings when
the heroic acts of Abou Zeid and Zeinati came
to life so vividly. The "night of the henna" is
celebrated less and less in the villages. As for the
poets, the children no longer wait at the road¬
side for them. They have gone, never to return.
Thanks to books and films we have disco¬
vered other epics; other heroes from many lands
compete for our affections with those of the
Hilaliyya. Certain episodes from different epics
seem to merge curiously with others, and a resem¬
blance between certain characters has appeared.
Coincidence, mutual influence, a common
source? How can one help but find in the be¬
sieged city of the Banou Khalifa a replica of the
city of Troy, and in numerous episodes of the
Hilaliyya a striking resemblance to parts of the
Iliad?
Surely the atmosphere in which the poets of
the Egyptian countryside recited their works is
comparable to that in which the ancient Greek
poets must have recited their epic songs? Didn't
the Greek poets of old also modify their narra¬
tive to suit their audience, expanding or com¬
pressing certain scenes in response to the
preferences they discerned in their listeners?
Perhaps that is what we miss today. In liter¬
ature and in film, we learn and understand thou¬
sands of new things each day, a thousand things
which only yesterday were beyond us. But we
do not find, nor will we ever find again, the col¬
lective embrace of a stifling square where we hung
on every word of an itinerant poet, whisked away
as if by magic to remote cities where we exor¬
cised the realities of the present by reliving
mythical times. 17
