BY ALAIN BONNAMY
/
In the heart
of an ancient capital
/AIRO does not possess a single noble street,
but a quantity of small ones that twist and turn.
This clearly shows that all the houses were built
at random, everyone building on the plot of land
that pleased him, without asking himself whether
he was blocking a street or not." These remarks
were made in 1657. How far do they apply to
Cairo today?
In the Cairo of the past there was no obliga¬
tion to respect the line of the street when build¬
ing. If a second house or site was acquired on the
opposite side of the roadway, the two plots were
simply joined upexpansion at the expense of the
public thoroughfare. In this way many streets be¬
came blind alleys which served as courtyards
where women gossiped, went about their domes¬
tic tasks, or supervised the games of their numer¬
ous offspring. At the entrance to the alleys, dogs
bared their teeth at would-be intruders.
A source of shade
Other customs made the streets even narrower.
Only a thin strip of sky could be seen between
the balconies with their moucharabys* jutting out
from windows on both sides of the street.
Benches and platforms were permanently in¬
stalled in front of shops and cafés. Merchants and
their wares even invaded the courtyards of
mosques, clung to the façades of monuments or
found a corner below the city walls. They took
over the roadway, forcing passers-by to make
long detours.
Save in exceptional circumstances, the
authorities were powerless to react against these
practices. On one occasion, the Fatimid caliph
al-Hakim had a large chandelier made and want¬
ed to have it delivered to the Amr mosque. To
make room for its passage, the obstacles which
encumbered the streets had to be demolished,
some roadways dug up, and façades and balco¬
nies knocked down. The same thing happened
in 1813, when the pasha's daughter got married.
Two days before the ceremony, police officers
inspected the streets through which the wedding
procession was to pass and ordered buildings
which would hinder the procession to be pulled
down. The narrowness of the streets could only
be justified by the shade they provided but, far
* A wooden latticework screen around a window which permits the
person behind it to see into the street without being seen. Editor
from being the chief reason for it, the shade was
often no more than a happy consequence of the
liberties taken with the streets.
From alleys to avenues
Today there are still two main categories of street
in Cairoopen and covered. There are many
kinds of open streets. A zukak is a blind alley;
an atfa or khanka is an alley without an entrance
gate and without shops, leading into a busier
street, often by steps or through a gateway.
A darb or hara is a local street closed by a
gate. It contains shops but is not more than two
or three metres wide. A sikka was originally a
palm-lined way, or a village street, but later the
word was used to indicate a main street. The
terms qasaba, tarik and shari are reserved for par¬
ticularly lively, rather spacious avenues where
people assemble to discuss business and engage
in trade. The word qasaba has come to mean a
metropolis or capital.
There are also the akaba, a climbing street;
the hadar, a descending street; the djisr, a road¬
way raised above the level of floodwaters; and the
suk, a street where shops or workshops specializ¬
ing in a specific product or service are found.
Proud of their pharaonic past, Egyptians
turned their backs on the thousand years of ar¬
chitecture which preceded their opening to Eu¬
rope after Bonaparte's expedition. Until recently,
the authorities were not much interested in
preserving this urban architectural heritage. Since
the nineteenth century, Egyptian town planners
have always been inspired by a desire for moder¬
nity, and took as their models the Paris of Hauss-
mann and, later, cities of the United States.
Contrary to what happens in some Europe¬
an countries, in Cairo the use of buildings has not
changed over the centuries. Not a single palace,
madrasah or mosque has become a town hall,
ministry, embassy or theatre. Many have decayed
beyond repair, but they are beginning to attract
renewed interest, and an archaeological depart¬
ment has been entrusted with their maintenance.
Palaces and mosques may have been reprieved,
but not more modest buildings, although it is
they which constitute the spatial texture of a
street.
What is the state of this ancient urban fabric
today? A survey carried out over twenty years
ago showed that 6 per cent of the old city was 31
.á^_

32
in a satisfactory condition, 12.5 per cent in a mid¬
dling condition, 36.5 per. cent less than satisfac¬
tory, and 45 per cent in a very bad state. The
situation has not improved since then. Three-
quarters of Cairo's pre-nineteenth-century build¬
ings have now deteriorated beyond repair.
Modernizers and pasticheurs
There are two schools of thought on how to
remedy this situation. The majority, anxious to
rationalize and modernize the old city, favours
the systematic alignment of streets, with cross¬
roads to facilitate the circulation of traffic. A few
mosques and palaces would be preserved like
pieces of sculpture in a glass case, but within this
framework property developers would be given
a free hand.
Others, whom I would call the "historian-
pasticheurs", regard the entire 400 hectares of the
old part of the city as a conservation area. They
would respect the existing fabric, restore what can
still be restored and, undaunted by the hazards
and constraints of pastiche, reconstruct what has
disappeared.
This solution has two disadvantages. The old
city is too closely packed and could not be opened
up sufficiently. Moreover, the project would take
too long and would be too costly and nearly all
the local people of modest or average income
would be driven out.
So, what can be done to revitalize the heart
of the city, which has become run down and
overcrowded and is underequipped to meet the
many needs of its inhabitants? In my opinion, it
must be restructured and renovated in depth,
despite all the inconvenience that implies for the
people living there. The shopkeepers, certain
1 raditional trades and
crafts in Cairo's al-Muski
Street.

craftsmen, property-owners and others who use
the area are the most likely to accept these dis¬
ruptions. Opening up this sector would reinte¬
grate it into the city centre, and there would
certainly be a big increase in the price of build¬
ing land.
However, so far as I know, no urban renew¬
al of this kind, wherever it has taken place and



under whatever kind of political régime, has yet
succeeded in keeping the poorer members of the
population in an old town centre, however regret¬
table and immoral this may appear to be.
The convivial Cairenes
Old Cairo enjoys a precious assetits public
spaces in which craftsmen can set out their stalls,
shopkeepers and itinerant traders can display
their wares, and the residents can sit down to eat
Al-Mu'izz Street. Top
right, the Qala'un
madrasah and mausoleum.
An old house near the
historic quarter ofBab
Chariya.
and enjoy life. This quality of life is a result of
the gregariousness and conviviality of the Cai¬
renes. But it also owes much to the layout of the
streets. The frequent breaks in their alignment
create spaces in between the flow of people in
street, courtyard, stairway and building. Any new
town planning project will have to preserve this
interstitial fabric, this symbiosis between open
and enclosed spaces.
Between complete order and utter chaos, a
certain degree of urban disorder must be
preserved. But how? By means of a geometrical
pattern that respects the complexity of the spa¬
tial organization. It would be grafted onto the ur¬
ban tissue which is to be preserved, making the
most of the existing space, and would harmonize
new needs with living social customs and prac¬
tices. In this way, perhaps, the old heart of Cairo
would beat again.
ALAIN BONNAMY
is an architect and film¬
maker. His film about
Cairo's City of the Dead,
Le Caire, la cité des morts
(1986), is being shown at
the Modern Art Museum at
the Pompidou Centre,
Paris, as part of an
international exhibition of
contemporary art entitled
Magiciens de la Terre (18
May-14 August, 1989). His
book on the same subject
will be published shortly. 33
