PROJECT TIGER
m
*** -^
But even the abolition of the prince¬
ly order did not improve matters.
Poachers moved in for the valuable tiger
skins, which two decades ago were worth
$4,000 each. Meanwhile, India's popula¬
tion explosion from 450 million at in¬
dependence in 1947 to over 800 million
today meant that people moved inexora¬
bly into the tiger's habitat.
Jim Corbett. Eight tiger reserves were in¬
itially created as part of Project Tiger, to
which the World Wildlife F\:nd donated
$1 million.
According to Bittu Sehgal, the
founder-editor of India's leading wildlife
magazine, Sanctuary, the idea behind



Project Tiger is basically very simple.
"Each reserve is demarcated into a core
Miniature from Jaipur shows a tiger shoot.
Forests, particularly in the Terai
region bordering India and Nepal, were
cut down to provide land for foodcrops.
Its cover and that of its prey destroyed,
the tiger disappeared from many parts of
India where it had earlier flourished in
large numbers. In other areas tigers
retreated further and further into such
forests as were left, often killing domes¬
tic cattle in their desperate hunger. By the
time alarm bells started to ring in the late
1960s, the tiger was on the verge of ex¬
tinction in India.
The 1969 world congress of the Inter¬
national Union for the Conservation of
Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN),
held in New Delhi, signalled an impor¬
tant turning point. The IUCN put the
tiger on its list of endangered species and
called for a ban on tiger hunting world¬
wide, to which India quickly reacted by
forbidding tiger-shoots. On 1 April 1973
an ambitious "Project Tiger" was official¬
ly launched by the Indian Government
in Corbett National Park (Uttar
Pradesh), named after the legendary Brit¬
ish hunter turned conservationist.
zone and a buffer zone. In the core, no
human activity other than forest protec¬
tion is allowed; here Nature is allowed to
administer itself. In the buffer, human ac¬
tivity is minimized, restricted to the ex¬
ploitation of 'minor' forest produce such
as grass, fruit, seeds, honey, and fallen
wood. The logic is that the core area, left
to its own devices, will quickly become
super-productive and that this productivi¬
ty will spill over to the buffer zone."
The results of the new strategy were
extremely encouraging. Slowly but sure¬
ly, the tiger started to make a comeback
in India. At Corbett Park, there were
only forty-four tigers left sixteen years
ago; today there are nearly 100. At Ran-
thambhor, a forest once owned by the
Maharajah ofJaipur and protected main¬
ly for tiger hunting, the number of tigers
remaining at the start of Project Tiger has
increased from fourteen to forty.
Thanks to Project Tiger, the tiger has
even made a remarkable recovery in the
Sundarbans, the 10,000-square-kilometre
delta partly in Bangladesh and partly in
India, where the Ganges, the Brah
maputra and the Meghna flow into the
Bay of Bengal. Here, in one of the world's
largest tracts of mangroves, an area where
the ecosystem was seriously threatened,
more and more woodcutters, fishermen
and honey-gatherers were being attacked
by tigers, who in the process of evolution
have become excellent swimmers and
whose diet now includes fish.
In 1973 Project Tiger was launched
over an area of 2,500 square kilometres
of the Sundarbans. At first, the authori¬
ties tried to exclude people entirely from
the core reserve, but this proved imprac¬
tical, and fishermen and honey-gatherers
continued to go there despite the risks.
So, in 1981, a new strategy was devised.
Electrified human dummies were placed
at selected points in order to condition
the tigers to fear man. When the dummies
were attacked by the tigers, the latter
received a shock powerful enough to
cause them pain.
The ploy seems to have worked. Since
then, the number of people killed by the
tigers has dropped considerably. At the
same time, since the inner core has been
protected, honey collection and fish har¬
vesting have increased by 300 per cent in
fifteen years.
As Sehgal says, Project Tiger is con¬
cerned not only with saving the tiger but
with ecology, the environment, and "sav¬
ing mankind itself". Today, the numbei
of tigers in India has risen to 4,000 and,
in the process, other creatures which
were on the verge of extinction in India,
such as the elephant, the stag, the one-
horned rhino and the wild buffalo, have
been given a new lease of life.
Above all, the Indian public is now far
more aware of how man's future on this
planet is closely linked with Nature.
Deforestation has certainly threatened the
tiger, but it has also been a cause of the
floods that recently ravaged much of
north and eastern India. The connection
would not have been made twenty years
ago, but it is being made now. That is a
step in the right direction.
RAHUL SINGH is editor-in-chief of The Sunday
Observer, India's largest Sunday newspaper,
published in Bombay and Delhi.
36
