INDIA'S
LIFELINE
BY ANEES JUNG
0
»
INDIA waits for the monsoon each
year the way a child waits for its
mother's breast. But unlike the child
that comes of age and stops waiting, more
than half of India depends on the mon¬
soon for its survival. When it fails the
land broods.
To awaken the monsoon, the peasants
in my mother's village would come sing¬
ing through the dust-filled tracks carry¬
ing a huge basket poised on a wooden
pole. A large bull frog would be seated
in the basket that was padded with neem
leaves. The cry oîHassana Hossana uyalo
would rend the still hot air. Children
would run out of sun-baked huts and
pour drops of precious water on the frog.
And by evening the clouds would roll in,
the heavens would thunder and there
would be rain.
Customs such as these have been part
of every Indian child's heritage. But now
the age of miracles seems to be over. One
child in Rajasthan I met a year ago had
not seen rain. He was six years old. His
mother, a young woman of thirty, had
begun to look like an older woman. She
had lost the lilt of her limbs, walking five
kilometres each day to fetch water for
drinking. Her well was dry, like all the
wells in her area.

The peacock is India's national bird and is
often depicted in the company of
Lord Krishna.
The monsoons had failed Rajasthan
for several years. The grass was brown.
All crops had been lost. Dead guava trees
were being cut for fuel. Even in the city
of Ajmer the taps would come to life only
once every four days, and then only for
a few hours. The Anasager lake looked
like a burning bowl of sand. The washer¬
women had disappeared from its shores.
The beating of their clothes had been si¬
lenced. On the edges of the city, in relief
camps, lean cattle stood with vacant eyes.
The animal most prized by the farmer
had been anointed with kum kum, the
auspicious red powder, and had been
abandoned. There was no fodder.
"We want food not money", said the
women who were hired to work in the
drought relief work programmes. Lack of
rain had killed the crops, aggravated in¬
flation, spiralled prices across the parched
land. In Madras, there were fist fights in
the lines of people waiting at communi¬
ty taps for water. Hordes of elephants
ambled away from the parched forests of
Tamil Nadu into neighbouring Karnata-
ka. In the unrelenting sun farmers in the
country beseeched gods, priests chanted
mantras in good faith, scientists wondered
why their sound vibrations were not stir¬
ring the atmosphere, seeding the clouds
and sending rain. Meteorologists scanned
the skies and put out intricate weather
charts. On the whims of the monsoon
rested major economic decisions. Politi¬
cal fortunes were staked on its success and
failure. On the promise of the monsoon
rested the survival of a vast land.
The Indian monsoon is not just
another word for rain. It is neither a
typhoon nor a spell of roaring winds. It
is a season whose name stems from the
Arabic word mausern. It is not rainfall
that determines and defines the monsoons
but the seasonal winds that shift direction
twice a year. If the wind is from another
direction there is no rain. There is a sum¬
mer monsoon and a winter monsoon.
But it is only the nimbus southwest winds
of summer that make a mausernthe
	 23

season of rains. It is preceded by the loo,
hot dry winds, days of intense heat and
a scorching sun.
When the pied-crested African cuck¬
oos fly back and the shrill cries of pea¬
cocks fill the air, people know that the
monsoon is days away. Peasants across
the land have their own ways of predict¬
ing the monsoon. The more intense the
heat, the more rain there will be, they
say. The coming of the rains is also
celebrated with intensity. People run out
and soak themselves in the rain like chil¬
dren. In the words of the famous fifth-
century poet Kalidasa, the clouds advance
"like rutting elephants, enormous and
full of rain. They come forward as kings
among tumultuous armies; their flags are
lightning, the thunder is the drum". It is
as great an event for the farmer as it is
for the singer, the poet. The heavy dark
clouds fill the canvases of miniature
painters. And for the poet, the dark tress¬
es of his beloved are like the waves of the
monsoon clouds. As long ago as the sixth
century the poet Subandhu in his
Vasavadatta welcomed the monsoons in
these words:
"The rainy season had arrived. Rivers
overflowed their banks. Peacocks danced
at eventide. The rain quelled the expanse
of dust as a great ascetic quells the tide
of passion. The chataka birds were hap¬
py. Lightning shone like a bejewelled
boat of love in the pleasure pool of the
sky; it was like a garland for the gate of
the place of paradise; like a lustrous gir¬
dle for some heavenly beauty; like a row
of nail marks left upon the cloud by its
lover, the departing day ... the rain was
like a chess player while yellow and green
frogs were like chessmen jumping in the
enclosures of the irrigated fields. Hail¬
stones flashed like pearls from the neck¬
laces of heavenly birds".
Some of the best evocations of the
monsoons are found in the baramasa
(twelve months), "lovers' calendars"
composed by the poets of north India, in
which feelings are expressed in harmony
with the seasons. In all Indian languages
innumerable proverbs stress the impor¬
tance of rains. Some proverbs instruct
farmers, others warn them of the nature
of rain. Ghagh, the learned Brahmin poet-
astrologer who composed many
proverbs, had this to say: "When water
in the pitcher does not cool, when spar¬
rows bathe in dust and ants take their eggs
to a safer place, you can be sure of a heavy
*2
i
Monsoon in Bombay. Stolen moments under
an umbrella.
A waterlogged street in Bombay during the monsoon. Theoretically the monsoon is supposed to
hit Bombay on 10 June each year. A delayed monsoon means national headlines.
downpour". His proverbs remain on the
lips of every peasant in the Hindi-
speaking belt of Uttar Pradesh and
Haryana. "Scarcity is only a missed mon¬
soon away", is a saying that lurks in the
mind of every Indian. For the Indian
monsoon remains unpredictable. It can
skip a region, flood another, tease a third.
It can, as the ancient proverb says, "fall
on one horn of a buffalo and not on
another". It can bless a land, but also
deny and destroy. It wears a new face
every season.
ANEES JUNG is a writer and journalist who has
edited the Indian magazine Youth Times and has
contributed to many publications in India and
overseas. Her most recent book, Unveiling India
A Woman's Journey, was published in 1987. She is
currently a columnist with The Times ofIndia and
is writing a book on Muslim women in India.
24
