INTERVIEW
The director of Gandhi and Cry Freedom reflects on
the topicality offilms about Third World countries and the
prospects for African cinema.
Richard Attenborough
How did you come to make a film about apartheid?*
I wanted to make a film about South Africa and com¬
missioned several scripts but until I read Donald Woods'
book I had not found a subject which I felt was sufficiently
pertinent or which contained sufficient optimism and hope
for the future. Nor had I found a subject which I felt had
a chance of reaching a sufficiently large number of people.
It seemed to me that to reach only an audience which was
already aware of what was happening in South Africa and
concerned about the situation there was a waste of time.
I wanted to reach people who were indifferent, who didn't
know what was going on and didn't care. It was only when
I read Donald's book that I thought I had found a subject
to which people in many parts of the world would find it
possible to relate.
Most important of all, of course, I wanted to reach.an
American audience because it was, I thought, in the United
States that a fundamental change of attitude towards the
administration of South Africa was likely to be most
influential.
A number of black peoplenot the majority by any
meansbelieve that I dodged the issue and that by not tack¬
ling the subject purely from a black African's point of view
I smudged the edges. I don't agree with that.
I think it is a well made and wonderfully acted film.
The script is immensely skilful, but it may be that my con¬
cern to reach a wider audience in fact resulted in a misjudge¬
ment. Whereas the picture will probably gross something
like $45-50 million worldwide it will gross under $10 mil¬
lion in the United States. I believed that Americans would
* Sir Richard Attenborough's film Cry Freedom (1987) is based on the writ¬
ings of a white South African editor, Donald Woods, who befriended a lead¬
ing black activist, Steve Biko. Biko was arrested and died in police custody.
When Woods attempted to get the truth about Biko's death told, he became
a banned person and was forced to flee South Africa with his family. Editor
go to see it and that black people in particular would be
angry with what is going on in South Africa. I thought that
the pictureeven if it wasn't as incisive as they might have
hopednevertheless had its heart in the right place.
It is fascinating that most black people in the United
States did not go to the movie. It did worse .business in
Atlanta than it did in Los Angeles, although it did terrific
business in Washington, which of course has a large black
population, so I don't really know whether I made a total
miscalculation in assuming that there was an audience in
America who would be interested in this kind of subject.
There is no question whatsoever that the film actually
affected the political debate in some countries and from all
I can gather it was justified in that millions of people have
been affected by it. But the fact remains that with hindsight
I am enormously disappointed in attendances in the States.
Cry Freedom was released at a time when a number of
films were coming out about Africa, just as a number of
films and TVfilms about India appeared around the time
when you made yourfilm Gandhi. How wouldyou account
for this interest in the Third World? Is the present crop of
films about Africa a reflection of nostalgia for British
colonialism or a desire to change apartheid?
It is very difficult to be certain. Suddenly an interest seems
to arise in science fiction, in detective stories, nostalgia,
historical subjects or love stories or whatever.
As far as Gandhi is concerned there is no question what¬
soever that the film opened up Indian material for serious
film-making. Gandhi was in the air for twenty years, and
the studios consistently maintained that nobody was interest¬
ed in India. When I went to see the head of one major stu¬
dio I was told "Who on earth do you think is interested
in a little brown man wearing a shirt and carrying a bean
pole?" It was only because of the enormous attention that

ttWät&i
»
âffPÇ*
"íCS^

This filmGandhi-
paved the way for an
examination of
imperialism, colonialism
and other related subjects.
Cinema people... began
to realize that if they
simply reflected what was
available on TV then the
cinema would die.
the film attracted long before it came out that financiers be¬
gan to think that the subject might have some potential. This
paved the way for an examination of imperialism, colonial¬
ism and other related subjects.
There is no doubt whatsoever that Indian independence
after the Second World War helped set the scene for indepen¬
dence in Africa, the emergence of the African nations, and
the weight of African opinion on the world stage. Because
of this weight there is a worldwide interest in Africa which
has nothing to do with cinema.
I also think that with the advent of television, cinema
has to some extent moved up a notch or two. The TV soap
operas, detective stories and hospital series now supply the
entertainment that is sought by vast numbers of people and
was previously supplied by the cinema. I think cinema
peoplenot the creative people who have always wanted
to do this sort of thing but the financiers and the
distributorsbegan to realize that if they attempted simply
to reflect what was available on the television screen then
the cinema would die. Cinema had to show something that
was more exciting and stimulating than television. The pos¬
sibility opened up of larger scale movies in non-familiar set¬
tings. India was non-familiar, Africa was non-familiar. Sud¬
denly a number of people like myself who were interested
in making that kind of film found the doors were easier to
push open.
Gandhi was such a success artistically and economical¬
ly that everybody assumed that a film made by the same
person or company about Africa would be just as success¬
ful. If you saw the number of ideas for films about China
which have arrived on my desk since the Italian director
Bernardo Bertolucci's Last Emperor ofChina then you'd real¬
ize how true it is that we in the cinema suppose that suc¬
cess will follow success. I don't think one should look for
any more social significance beyond that.
Do you think there is any kind of link between this post-
colonial nostalgia and the American experience as reflect¬
ed in the large number ofAmerican films about Viet Nam?
I think there is a hankering after the past. Even in India
itself there is a wish to look back to the "good old days",
however appalling they were really. There is sufficient in¬
terest and sufficient of a potential audience to justify those
movies being made. We want to discover how that era
evolved and how the paternalistic attitude of colonialism
manifested itself. But whereas I think there is a terrible sense

of guilt in the United States in relation to Viet Nam in the African knowledge and experience of film making is there
minds of a vast number of people, I think the sense of guilt and viable. African countries that want to create an in-
as far as empire and the UK are concerned is minimal. digenous movie industry should be discussing and trying to
understand all the problems involved. The build-up has to
Is it cheaper to film in Africa than to film in Europe, say, come slowly and it has to come out of a strongly-felt desire
or America? How important are the economics in film to create that indigenous industry. If the question is removed
making? into the political arena it will only scare off the financiers
They are undoubtedly very important. I want to make and create a counter-productive situation,
film about Thomas Paine. So I go to a distributor. The On Cry Freedom we had two or three people who were
distributor reads the screenplay and then he may say "Yes, passionate about movies but knew nothing at all about
this interests me". He then goes to the heads of his market- production. One of them, who became head prop man, I
ing and distribution divisions and says "How do you think would have no hesitation in using in the same capacity on
a picture on this subject will do in Europe? Has it got any any picture that I might make in Zimbabwe in the future,
chance in Japan? Where do we stand with this on subsequent
video?" He will then calculate that if the picture costs X In the meantime what happens to him?
dollars they have a chance of getting it back on the assump- He'll have to do something else. Few governments in the
tions made by the distribution people, which are of neces- world have actually accepted the desirability of fostering
sity conservative. The financial viability of a film is based cinema as the primary art form of the century. What is
on quite a small differential. A picture costing $15 million Africa facing? If you could get twenty minutes with Presi-
is acceptable and a picture costing $19 million is not. The dent Mugabe you could perhaps persuade him of the im-
company has to hold down the budget to a figure which portance of creating a film school or making sure that a
is viable. number of people came to a European school. But what is
For a number of years the majority of movies made in Mugabe doing? He's fighting for his country's life. Film
Africa were shot in Kenya. Now if you go and talk to the making has to come so far down on the list. And the heart-
budget people or the production people or the location breaking thing is that whereas I believe that the potential
managers they will say to you Kenya is tough because the really does exist to continue the work that has been begun
prices you have to pay there are very stiff. And so if you with the movies that have been made there, I think my props
are thinking of shooting in Africa you look for other coun- man is in terrible trouble. I get a letter from him every two
tries such as Botswana or Zimbabwe. The difficulty is that or three months asking whether I know of a picture coming
because of the tradition of film making in Kenya you've in. The terrible thing is that the situation has got to be turned
got a background of understanding of the problems involved, round and it must no longer be a question of movies coming
A degree of expertise has been built up. On Cry Freedom, in from outside but of Africans fostering their own cinema
which was filmed in Zimbabwe, if we had been able to find in some way. But because of the problems of Africa, the
a sensational location manager who understood filming who difficulties and the existence of South Africa in its present
was black and who lived in Zimbabwe we would have em- form, the chances of this are very remote. They've estab-
ployed him. He would have known ten times more and un- lished central film laboratories in Zimbabwe and I think
derstood ten times more what our requirements were than many people there really see the potential of cinema. But
somebody from outside who knew nothing about Zim- I think one of the greatest problems facing this totally
babwe. But the difficulty is that you do not find a high lev- understandable desire to say "We are black Africa and we
el of expertise, no one has had an opportunity to acquire will make our own movies" is that there will not be a suffi-
the experience. cient indigenous return from what is made. Somehow or
I believe that the African continent is so exciting, so full other a number of movies will have to be made that can
of drama, so devastating in its imagery that there is no ques- find specialist audiences around the world and bring returns
tion whatsoever that if the African countries themselves are of foreign currency.
prepared to acknowledge that they have to make certain con¬
tributions, then the potential for building up indigenous Unesco Courier interview by Chris Vieler-Porter
