BY ASSIA DJEBAR
0
An Algerian film¬
maker and writer
reflects on the
image and self-
image of people in
Third World
societies and
especially
on women's new
perceptions
of the world.
34
NE night in December 1976, in a farm rent¬
ed from some peasant farmers 70 kilometres from
Algiers, with a team of seventeen technicians and
two actors, I was shooting an interior night
scenea man looking at his sleeping wife.
Nothing very special about that! Nothing
special about the action... except for the duration
of the look (a minute and a half), or rather of the
double lookmyself, the technicians, and later
the film audience, looking at the man, the Other,
looking at an Algerian woman lying heedlessly
asleep, like a Venus in an Italian Renaissance
painting. It was as if all art (at that time Arab cine¬
ma could, objectively, be said to be at a stage of
development similar to that of Florentine or
Venetian painting of the Quattrocento) had to
begin by going through this first discovery of
how another personthe Otherlooks at a
woman in an unguarded moment and how, in
turn, we look at him looking at her.
In the film, La nouba des femmes du mont
Chenoua, the woman is lying on the marital bed,
her hair bound up in a red scarf; only the pure
lines of her face are visible. I had worked out the
décor down to the last detailthe silky glimmer



of the bedclothes and the pillows contrasting with
the rough whitewashed walls, the carpets on the
floor, and wool, lots of wool all around. Enve¬
loped in the wide bed, the sleeping woman seems
passive, serene. Then, from her few disordered
movements, we gradually sense the beginnings of
a struggle against a nightmarethe memories, as
we will later learn, of a wartime past.
Stolen glances
What of the onlooker, the man motionless in the
doorway of the bedroom looking at his wife?
Will he join her on the bed? No. Though there
is desire in his look (is not the explicit or implicit
impulse of desire an essential ingredient of true
cinema?), it is not observed with sufficient insis¬
tence to suggest shared pleasure, the promise of
intimate union.
The Other's way of looking at the desirable
woman, a look on which we too are spying, is
not the look of a voyeur. Slowly and with increas¬
ing intensity (a minute and a half can be a very
long time), he is, despite himself, contemplating
his impotence and the pain of separation. It is a
look which faces up to and makes more distinct
the dividing line between a couple, between the
sexes.
I should, perhaps, have indicated earlier that
the man is immobilized in a wheelchair which
he has propelled along the wall to the open door.
Even at a distance, the woman fascinates him. His
hand grips the door-frame. Behind the camera,
I capture the movement of the seated man as he
struggles to rise, inch by inch, his face in profile
twisted by the effort, and in the background the
bed, the sleeping woman with the red kerchief-
two masks, one so near, the other so distant.
Long after, I began to wonder if it was really
just by chance that I had decided to shoot this
interior night scene. At the time I had sought
only the pleasure of composition, as much in the
manner of a painter as of a film director. Had

Behind the veil Women on both sides
of the camera
I not chosen the scene in spite of myself? After
all, for me as a writer, as a film-maker, or simply
as an Arab woman, was not the real problem the
painful search for an answer to the question as
to the nature of the Other's look at woman, in
a culture in which, for centuries, the eye had been
closely guarded? One eye only existed, the eye
of the master of the harem who forbade all visual
imagery and invoked religious taboos to reinforce
this dominance. The look of the Other, unless
it is the look of a voyeur (an aggressive, invasive
look), perceives nothing but the image of the
woman, a mirage enshrouded in poetry and
melancholy.
By looks possessed
This whole question of what it means to be
scrutinized by others is a paramount concern of
Arab cinema today. Yet I feel it is relevant to go
beyond the personal experience I have described
above, and to speak of the placing, in the not too 35

1 hotos taken during the
filming ofLa nouba des
femmes du mont
Chenoua. Left, the
director, Assia Djebar, with
one of the actors. Above,
Algerian village women
who appeared in the film.
36
distant past, of entire societies under the micro¬
scope of the alien eye of the colonizer. Arab, Afri¬
can and Eastern cultures were all thus checked,
recorded and "illustrated" by the scrutiny of the
dominator.
This other eye was that of the Western artist
(the painter of battle scenes, then the orientalist
painter of fantasies, of caravans, bedouins,
dancers, children begging against a background
of sand dunes and ruined mosques), and then of
the traveller-photographer of the years between
1880 and 1900, when the great colonial empires
were at the height of their power. This period
saw a profusion of postcards, which were
despatched in their thousandspictures of beau¬
tiful, more or less scantily clad "fatimas" across
which, or on the back of which, tourists, soldi¬
ers and short-stay residents inscribed their mes¬
sages with apparent indifference.
Thus, for about a century and a half, as in
the days of pagan magic, people were
"possessed"both in the sense of being dominat¬
ed and of being trickedby the annexation of
their image in an operation in which they took
no part. People communicated with each other
on pictures of Arabs or Blacks who themselves
were excluded from communication. Did they
really look at the persons represented? No. Their
images, and their apparent difference, became a
pretext for the circulation of ideas, words and ba¬
nalities without their being even symbolically in¬
volved. The innermost identity of the persons
thus observed was even more totally rejected. It
was as if their difference were no more than a
matter of fashion, of folklore, a mere décor. For
decades, a whole genre of "colonial cinema"
flourished, ranging from documentary to fiction
films; once successful, it has today completely dis¬
appeared. It was as though, everywhere at that
time, blind cameramen were filming mirages.
The look unveiled
And then, suddenly, women began to open their
eyes and look around them. Women who until
then had no right to look, who walked with
lowered eyes, their faces, their foreheads, their
entire bodies enveloped except for a tiny orifice
left so that they could see a few paces ahead. At
last they had a right to the world outside,
to schooling, to study, to space. They forgot
themselves so far as to contemplate the sky, trees,
nature, foam on the waves, to observe the city
streets and crowds, to look at othersother
women, all humanity.
I venture to return to my own modest ex¬
perience of scrutinizing intensively over a period

of time, because, for me, the strength of the cine¬
ma lies in its scrupulous, meticulous examination
of ways of looking, in its way of looking at those
who cannot look and of encountering those,
whether men or women, who look for the first
time.
Let us, therefore, go back to the first scene
of La nouba des femmes du mont Chenoua. A
woman is standing with her back to the audience;
all that can be seen of her is her hair and the out¬
line of her head against a wall. She rubs her fore¬
head against the stone wall; perhaps, through
impatience or helplessness, she has just banged
her head against it. Any explanation is possible,
since she refuses to let us see her, rejects me, re¬
jects the camera's scrutiny. Yet this is how I chose
to show her.



She walks on, searching, persisting in her re¬
jection of the audience. Suddenly her voice breaks
out, and with it all her inner feeling of revolt:
"I speak, I speak, I speak!" Then silence. "I
don't want anybody to see me," she says.
And then she adds, and we understand that
the man is also there in the room, waiting:
"I don't want you to see me."
Thus, the heroine of the film, who will live
out her life before us in the next two hours, be¬
gins by proclaiming her refusal to be looked at.
Then she turns and faces us, because, above all,
she wants to speak, to communicate. Perhaps she
is unaware that it is difficult to speak out in front
of others, or that to speak into the void and into
the silence is even more difficult. Yet her desire
to express herself is manifest: "I speak, I speak,
I speak!"
In other words the screen might be no more
than a ribbon of darkness, a non-image pierced
from time to time by the distant profile of a
woman to remind us that the woman is there;
only her voice occupies time-space, to become a
real presencea word preceded by her shadow.
My conclusion is that films made by
womenfrom the Third World as well as from
the Old Worldare an expression of a desire to
speak. It is as though film-making means for
women a new mobility of voice and body, of a
body unobserved and therefore unsubordinated,
with a rediscovered autonomy and innocence. As
a result, the voice takes wings and dances. At last
the outsider is seeing with her own eyes.
Looks exchanged
In La nouba des femmes du mont Chenoua, the
young woman architect who returns to the land
of her childhood does indeed begin to speak, and
she goes out too, rediscovering old haunts. As she
wanders her eyes seek out places, houses, rivers,
even those that have run dry, and forests, even
those that have been burnt down. She meets
other women who look at her in their turn. And
through this exchange of looks, often slow, some¬
times furtive, or simply blank, with the blank-
ness of waiting, dialogues are opened concerning
the present and the past. And all around, these
women among women are accompanied by the
pervasive presence of scores of idle, noisy, laugh¬
ing children and their uncertain bursts of song.
As I follow the heroine, I look at the other
women. Or rather, I watch her, a young indepen¬
dent woman, savouring her rebirth. I watch her
discovering the other women. As she looks at the
peasant women her look opens the flood-gates of
speech, until then firmly closedwomen's talk
about the banalities of daily life and about the
still vivid past, about the embers of memories still
painful despite the balm of forgetfuless. "How
can I weep, when I have no tears left?", exclaims
an old peasant woman, with a dried up face but
a proud bearing.
A woman looks at other women. And in that
look desire plays no part. The barren gap between
human beings disappears, conversations inter¬
weave. Returning home as dusk falls, the young
woman is enveloped in the warmth of those who
have spoken to her. It is as if the voice always
preceded the body and the eyes and thus, far from
the rapine of voyeurism, in these half-blind fum-
blings were to be found love, tenderness and
recognition.
Can it be simply by chance that most films
created by women give as much importance to
sound, to music, to the timbre of voices record¬
ed or captured unawares, as they do to the image
itself? It is as though the screen had to be ap¬
proached cautiously and be peopled, if need be,
with images seen through a look, even a short¬
sighted, hazy look, but borne on a full, com¬
manding voice, hard as stone but fragile and rich
as the human heart.
1 ostcards of the colonial
period showed "beautiful,
more or less scantily clad
fatimas' ... on the back of
which tourists inscribed
messages with apparent
indifference".
ASSIA DJEBAR,
Algerian writer and film¬
maker, is the author of
many short stories and
novels which have been
widely translated. Her first
film, La nouba des femmes
du mont Chenoua
(1976-1977) won the
International Critics' Prize
at the Venice Biennale
in 1979. 37
