Macunaïma,
the eternal outsider
From a Brazilian
film-maker, a fable
about individualism
told through the
astonishing
adventures of a
protean hero.
I
BY ANTONIO RODRIGUES
14
N a structured, well-defined society it is easy
to pick out the outsider, the person who is differ¬
ent from everyone else. In France, the United
Kingdom or the Federal Republic of Germany,
the cinema returns repeatedly to the theme of im¬
migration, turning out naturalistic films about
second-generation immigrants. The latter are seen
as foreigners, outsiders, since a clear, if arbitrary,
line of demarcation still separates them from the
local population.
The situation is more complicated in emerg¬
ing countries or in mixed societies. In Brazil, for
example, on the outer edge of the Western world,
a variety of races, cultures and ways of life which
span the archaic and the modern coexist side by
side. Brazil is European in its language, its legal
code and some of its customs, but African in its
beliefs and patterns of everyday life. In this
melting-pot almost anyone could see his neigh¬
bour as an outsider and no one is truly represen¬
tative of any particular social category.
The film Macunaïma, made in 1969 by Joa-
quim Pedro de Andrade (1932-1988), has become
a classic of modern Latin American cinema pre¬
cisely because it succeeded in conveying the cu¬
rious state of "generalized otherness" that exists
in Brazil. One of the merits of the filma fable
in which, provided that you can interpret a few
clues, Brazilian society can easily be recognized
is that it can be understood by and is attractive
to film-goers who have only a superficial
knowledge of Brazil.
The hero, Macunaïma, is a black man born
into an Indian tribe. One day he decides to set
out with his brothers for the big city. On the
way, he walks through a magic fountain and
miraculously turns white (one of his brothers,
who arrives too late, only has the palms of his
hands and the soles of his feet turn white). On
reaching Rio de Janeiro, he has a number of ad¬
ventures. He marries a woman guerrilla fighter,
is widowed and then tries to steal a talisman from
a rich giant. Finally, tired of it all, he returns to
the jungle with a whole range of consumer goods
(air-conditioners, refrigerators, etc.). Caught up
once more in a life of idleness, he ends up being
devoured by a river siren.
The film is an adaptation of a novel of the
same name by Mario de Andrade, published
in 1928. However, the director filled out the
story with new episodes (those concerning the 1 oster for Macunaïma.

GRANDE ÓTELO PAULO JOSE JRRDB- ffl&
ÄUNflii
£¡¡L RODOLFO AREN« W^ON CO"
TA GOSTOSO,
CORAÇÂQ.TA?
! \!A V

16
NLacunaïma's mother
carries her young son on
her shoulders.
Alacunai'ma's mother and
sister-in-law outside a straw
hut.
Alacunai'ma's enemy, the
capitalist (left) throws a
party.

guerrillas were of topical interest in Brazil in
1969), and left out passages in the book that were
primarily of linguistic interest. Furthermore, he
adopted the typical stylé of a certain class of
comic film popular in Brazil, particularly in the
sequence dealing with the birth of Macunaïma
and in regard to the physical appearance of the
giant.
Thus the mainspring of Macunaïma, in the
words of its director "a Brazilian film devoured
by Brazil", is otherness.
In turn Indian, Black and White, savage and
city-dweller, proletarian and profiteer, Macunaï¬
ma never belongs to a clear-cut category. He is
always an outsider, even though he seems at ease
in all situations. The notion of otherness implies
a clash between cultures, a confrontation, or at
least a sense of difference. In Macunaïma there
is no clash. The hero goes from one extreme to
the other, from a poverty-stricken tribe to the
financial district of Rio de Janeiro, a city which
he reaches in a truck full of immigrant workers
and in which he mixes with prostitutes, terrorists
who die through their own carelessness (they do
not know how to handle their bombs), and
greedy industrialists. However, Macunaïma is not
just a passive, disillusioned onlooker observing
the world in which he finds himself. Even though
his primary objective is the search for easy pick¬
ings (he becomes a kept man and, to acquire
riches, attempts to steal the giant's talisman), he
takes part, in his own fashion, in the life of the
very different circles in which he moves.
This social mobility and his succession of ap¬
parently disconnected adventures find their own
logic within the context of an extravagant, ex¬
uberant fable. The film tells a story with a be¬
ginning, a middle and an end, with episode
following episode in a far from haphazard
order. Macunaïma is a piece of story-telling rather
than the illustration of a thesis.
The only world to which the hero really be¬
longs is his family, which consists of the entire
tribe into which he was born. Outside this fami¬
ly he constantly finds himself face to face with
a world which he distrusts and in which he sees
only adversaries. Macunaïma takes each succes¬
sive adventure as it comes. A brothel or the
guerrilla girl's hiding-place are for him no more
than provisional, interchangeable stopping-places,
where, with no concern for others' motives, he
looks to his own immediate interests. It is as if
the words of the truck driver who took him to
Rio are still ringing in his ears: "Now it's every
man for himself and the devil take the hindmost."
He is the eternal outsider, never putting down
roots or becoming integrated anywhere. He is the
At the end of the film,
Macunaïma (right) returns
to his tribe from Rio de
Janeiro with a load of
modern gadgets.
new arrival, always embarking on some new en¬
terprise which will never be carried through to
the end. Macunaïma never acquires any more
than a superficial knowledge of those he meets
and himself remains unaffected by these encoun¬
ters. He looks no further than the immediate, all-
devouring present, until the day when he him¬
self is devoured. Not knowing what he is seek¬
ing, he follows his chosen path unquestioningly.
The comic tone of the film and its presenta¬
tion as a fable conceals a deeper truthwe are
hostile or indifferent to outsiders because we do
not know what motivates them. Macunaïma is
not a solitary hero in the style of the wandering
cowboy or lawman of the western; he lives only
for the moment and is constantly having to save
his skin in a world which, in the words of the
director of the film, "is essentially cannibalistic".
For Macunaïma, as for all those without code
or creed and entirely absorbed by themselves,
other people are always an impenetrable mystery
and the world is opaque. Everyone else is
"Them".
ANTONIO RODRIGUES
is a Brazilian film critic
based in Paris.
