The street
of the glazed tile
factory
BY PIERRE CLEMENT
VISITORS to Beijing stroll through broad
avenues where it is hard to keep a sense of direc¬
tion. They look in vain for the animation of small
shopping streets. Following first a horizontal then
a vertical line, like the cursor in an electronic
game, they go from north to south and east to
west, unable to escape the grid pattern and the
obstacles it creates to taking short cuts. Every¬
where there are walls, the walls of the Forbid¬
den City and its surrounding districts, house walls
and the screen walls inside gateways.*
The modern town planner has shattered this
geometrical vdream. Even broader avenues have
been traced, so many of them that Beijing is now
enclosed in five concentric circles of ring roads.
And the old horizontal city, with its closely
woven tissue of houses, its inner void of housing
compounds and their courtyards, is now being
replaced by a vast building site of tower blocks
in which it is impossible to discern any kind of
urban order.
An image of power
Beijing is above all a city that reflects power. This
was already the case in the thirteenth century un¬
der the Yuan or Mongol dynasty, which adopt¬
ed the square model of the ancient Zhou capital.
* The brick screen walls, or yingbi, located inside the entrance gate
to housing compounds, were seen as a protection against evil spirits
3 O and prevented curious passers-by from looking inside. Editor
Liulichang Street during
and after reconstruction
work.

39

40
It remained so under the Ming (fourteenth-
seventeenth century), who rebuilt the city in the
fifteenth century when they brought back their
capital from Nanjing (Nanking) in the south to
Beijing.
The town planners of northern China always
confined trading activities to a specific area in
order to keep better control of the flow of people,
and goods. Nowadays, in the Beijing inherited
from the Qing dynasty (seventeenth-twentieth
century), these areas of free circulation revolve
around the Forbidden City, in the East and West
Markets, or lie outside the inner city (also known
as the Tatar City) at the southern end of Tianan¬
men Square, beyond Qianmenthe southern
road leading to Dashalan Street, a masterpiece of
late nineteenth-century commercial architecture.
Liulichang Street, to the west, was a testimo¬
ny to artistic life under the Qing dynasty in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, until recent¬
ly when it became the site of a reconstruction
operation that is original to say the least.
Liulichangjie, or the street of the glazed tile
factory, derives its name from an Imperial facto¬
ry established there at the beginning of the Ming
dynasty to provide the many materialsbricks,
glazed tiles, roof and window decorations-
required to build the Imperial palace when the
capital was transferred to Beijing. This establish¬
ment was demolished at the end of the Qing dy¬
nasty, but in the meantime the district had
attracted booksellers, printers, vendors of paper,
brushes, ink, ink stones, seals and other equip¬
ment used by scholars, sellers of calligraphies and
paintings, bookbinders and antique dealers. The
district became a meeting-place for artists, scho¬
lars and foreigners, who crowded into its almost
200 shops.
A showpiece for tourists
Like the rest of traditional Beijing, the district
around Liulichang Street comprised low,
wooden-framed houses with grey brick walls and
tiled roofs of the same colour, opening onto in¬
ner courtyards surrounded by carved panelling.
Of course, the district had become very dilapi¬
dated, but rather than renovate the old frame¬
work, it was decided to raze the old buildings and
reconstitute them using modern materials and
traditional techniques, combining a desire for the
new with a concern for archaeology.
The project, which was carried out jointly by
Beijing Municipal Council, which owned the
land, and the Ministry of Culture, got under way
in 1978. The first phase of the operations provid¬
ed for the reconstruction of fifty-four art and an-
PIERRE CLÉMENT,
French ethnologist, is a
staff member of the French
Institute of Architecture
and a teacher at the Paris-
Belleville School of
Architecture. The author of
Architecture du paysage en
Extrême-Orient ("The
Architecture of the
Landscape in the Far East",
1987), he has translated into
French a study of the
Chinese house by Liu
Dunzhen. He has organized
an exhibition on Beijing at
the French Institute of
Architecture, and is
currently preparing another
on Shanghai.
tique shops. Only one house built in 1920 and
one nineteenth-century house with a courtyard
located behind a large calligraphy shop, were
spared by the demolishers.
Continuity of style
The West has learned to respect old stone,
original materials and authenticity of style. In the
Far East, however, whether in Japan, Korea or
China, prestigious buildings made of perishable
materials have always been periodically recon¬
structed. While new materials were used, old tech¬
niques continued to be practised, and the original
forms were reproduced. The permanence of the
model took precedence over the use of authen¬
tic materials.
In the case of Liulichang Street, the architects
used the results of historical research to help them
design buildings of the late Qing dynasty. They
made extensive use of concrete for pillars, beams
and other structural elements, but the concrete
was concealed by a rich decoration of bricks, tiles,
carved wood, paintings, lacquerwork and gilding.
All the specialists in the region were mobilized
to help with the project. The reconstitution is
painstaking and ornate, and if the decoration is
still rather garish, the brightness of the fresh paint
will be mellowed by the patina of time. This
first phase of the project cost some twenty mil¬
lion yuan, a sum whose magnitude shows the im¬
portance attached to the operation by the Chinese
authorities.
The fifty-four shops of the new Liulichang
Street, renamed the Street of Culture, today ply
their trade in souvenirs, crafts, antiques, antiquar¬
ian books, paper, brushes and paintings. The
reconstitution applied only to the outer skin of
the district, which was removed by the bulldoz¬
ers. The depth, substance and authenticity of the
area and the conditions under which it developed,
were all ignored. Bruised and battered, the street
is losing the memory of its past, and its former
spirit has gone. This is why Shen Zhanxiang, a
Chinese town planner, has suggested that the ex¬
periment should be regarded as a historical mis¬
take never to be repeated.
Will his warning be heeded? In the meantime
similar projects have been started in other cities.
A street in Xi'an has been "recreated" in the style
of the T'ang emperors (seventh-tenth century).
Similar reconstructions in the old style have also
been effected in Kaifeng and Tianjin. The move¬
ment is spreading elsewhere. In Paris, at the con¬
fluence of the Seine and the Marne, the idea of
building a Chinese city on similar lines is already
being aired.
