...A FRAGILE HERITAGE
Above, the old wing of the Ambrosian
Library in Milan (Italy). It was destroyed by
bombing in 1943, together with 50,000 books.
BY JUAN CARLOS LANGLOIS
UNPARALLELED "producers"
and "consumers" of manu¬
scripts, the nineteenth and twen¬
tieth centuries witnessed an explosion in
writing and literary creation.
The mass of notebooks, jottings,
sketches and musical scores that their cre¬
ators have bequeathed to us are a heritage
of extraordinary diversity. They testify
to an age of intense intellectual activity
and creative expression which shaped the
modern outlook and will leave a mark on
the people of the twenty-first century and
beyond.
Systematic study of original manu¬
scripts has enriched our understanding of
contemporary literature. It enables
specialists to trace the creative process
by making a kind of X-ray of an author's
activity.
Unfortunately there is a risk that
most of these documents may have less
chance of survival than older manu¬
scripts. They are endangered on many
counts. To take one example, since the
middle of the last century wood pulp has
been the main material used in the
manufacture of paper. The end product
yellows, becomes brittle and deteriorates,
and the life of contemporary manuscripts
is today reckoned at between thirty and
fifty years. The use of carbon paper and
photosensitive material makes preserva¬
tion even more difficult.
Some inks contain acid products
which attack paper; others are too solu¬
ble and are diluted by humidity. New
types of pens and pencils are inimical to
certain preservation techniques.
The effects of air pollution in the big
cities where museums, libraries and
archives are concentrated, compound the
traditional threats caused by inappropri¬
ate lighting, damp and adverse tempera¬
ture conditions. With the growth of literary
and historical research, manuscripts are
more widely consulted. This poses an
additional preservation problem.
Several international meetings have
been held to examine this problem,
notably a symposium on the safeguard of
the written heritage of the twentieth
century organized at Unesco's request by
a non-governmental organization,
ALLCA, which was held in Paris in Sep¬
tember 1987 and attended by specialists
from twenty-one countries. These meet
ings have concluded that this priceless
heritage is threatened all over the world
and have recommended that urgent meas¬
ures be taken.
It has emerged from these meetings
that the systematic drawing up of inven¬
tories is one preliminary step to action
at national or international level. Such in¬
ventories would make it possible to iden¬
tify and locate manuscripts whose
safeguard should be given high priority.
An assessment should be made of their
state of preservation and of the measures
most needed to protect them. At the same
time, the specialized facilities available
should be listed.
Such initiatives should bring home to
the international community that its ac¬
tive co-operation in this field is needed
before the end of the century. Various
forms of action could be envisaged, such
as the launching of safeguard campaigns,
the exchange of information, the
strengthening of infrastructures at nation¬
al and international level, the standardi¬
zation of cataloguing methods, the use of
micro-reproduction techniques and the
establishment of an international system
of exchange of reproductions thus
produced.
No specific international resolution
has so far been adopted for the preserva¬
tion of contemporary manuscripts, and
experts have concluded that suitable in¬
struments for their protection must be
drawn up as soon as possible.
Thus the preservation of contemporary
manuscripts can become an important field
of international cultural co-operation. It
would be paradoxical if our generation
cannot protect a precious heritage which is
common to all cultures and is the basis of
the historical memory.
JUAN CARLOS LANGLOIS, Argentine artist,
was for several years director of Unesco's Interna¬
tional Fund for the Promotion of Culture. He is
currently serving on the editorial committee of the
Archives Collection.
	 5
