Lines of descent
ira^SMJÊsatSÊÊÊiÊÊÊÊÊÊÊ^ÊÊÊ^ÊKÊÊÊÊÊim^ÊÊmÊa^^a^
' *$&** ";,.*'' c.
* f '
4-'
-
'
i
fi *T 1 ]
W& il
w
/ 'TT
1
\
! 1 W jju. À
il rM ^^ÊËzr-
f ^
A ^1 Vcia^w K^ B
10 ^
i 1
4k * - 1
la - j
Ém \Mk
m h
r
mJ T
fui i .
F
22
THE
FAMILY
PAST
AND PRESENT
AFRICA

BY MANGA BEKOMBO PRISO
Chief Togo and his
offspring at Ouahigouya
(Burkina Faso).
Ashanti queen mother
(Ghana). This polished
black wooden sculpture
(height 40 cm) was placed
on the altar of the
ancestors.
MANGA BEKOMBO
PRISO,
of Cameroon, is a sociologist
with the French National
Centre for Scientific Research
(CNRS) and the Ethnology
and Comparative Sociology
Laboratory of the University
of Paris X, where he is
engaged on research into
lineal kinship systems and the
development process in
Africa. He was co-editor of
Marriage, Fertility and
Parenthood in West Africa,
published in 1978 by the
Australian National
University, Canberra, and a
contributor to a recent
Unesco work, Famille, Enfant
et Développement en Afrique
(1988).
Modern legislation in Africa is tending
to encourage individualism and weaken
social cohesion. The traditional African
family is adapting to new circumstances
and proving more resilient than once
seemed likely.
T
A HE children of a modern Western family
belong legally neither to the family of the father
nor to that of the mother; they are, first and
foremost, the children of a couple. In the most
widespread of the African kinship traditions,
however, lineal kinship systems are the rule and
the children are attached to one or other of their
parents' families. The father and the mother are
therefore not both members of the family to
which their children are linked.
There are two main unilineal kinship
systemsthe matrilineal and the patrilinealbut
in certain cases the interconnections are so exten¬
sive as virtually to constitute bilineal systems.
Societies in which matrilineal kinship systems
are the rule are of two kinds. In one, marriage
as an institution is unknown and is replaced by
what might be called "recognized cohabitation".
This system, which is comparatively rare, is
found among the Senufo of Côte d'Ivoire and
Burkina Faso. In the other, which covers a much
wider cultural field (Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana,
Nigeria, and the Congo Basin), marriage is
recognized and the wife leaves her home to live
in the home of her husband or her father-in-law.
In this case, the mother's brother rather than the
natural father is considered to be the true father
of the children.
Patrilineal societies are by far the most com¬
mon, and it is with them that we are primarily
concerned here. In contrast to modern societies
which tend to stress the natural, biological link,
African traditional societies lay emphasis upon
a contractual social link based on the notion of
the "parental role", which may be played by
several people.
All the true sisters of the "genetrix" (natural
mother), and women of the same age group, may
be considered to be her children's "mother".
Similarly, children will address all the genitor's
brothers and close friends as "father". The child
is, above all, the child of the lineal group to which
he or she belongs. Members of the paternal or
maternal clan, as well as the husband's other
wives, share in rights and duties with regard to
the child.
As well as the importance attached to the
child/maternal uncle and brother/sister relation¬
ships, the particularly loving, "friendly" relation¬
ship between grandparents and grandchildren 23

should also be noted. The grandson is the mir¬
ror image of the grandfather and thus becomes
the "little husband" of his grandmother. Similar¬
ly, the granddaughter who bears her paternal
grandmother's name becomes the "mother" of
her own father. These relationships are more than
just a game and people around them adopt at¬
titudes towards the children which correspond
to the status of the personages the children enact.
24
Marriage strategy
The organization of a marriage involves a number
of phases. First of all, the head of a group of mar¬
riageable young men offers the head of the poten¬
tial bride's clan a series of services or gifts of food
or other objectsincluding a particularly valuable
one, which is wrongly called the dowry and in
exchange receives the desired girl. The first group
then decides which of the boys will marry the
girl, while the second group decides who is to
receive the dowry and thus, in his turn, be in a
position to acquire a wife. ,
By virtue of the dowry paid, the husband's
clan acquires right of paternity over children of
the marriage. In return, the bride's clan obtains
an extension of its territorial rights and the right
of intervention in the affairs of the clan to which
it has become linked through the person of the
bride. Normally, the dowry goes to the bride's
brother, preferably born of the same mother and
her immediate senior or junior. Otherwise it goes
to another brother from the maternal home or
to another son of the same father, or to a cousin.
The brother who receives the dowry will
have a special relationship with his sister's
children. His wife, bought with this dowry, is
obliged to be submissive in relation to the sister-
in-law thanks to whom she was able to get mar¬
ried. In some societies in central Cameroon, the
two sisters-in-law are regarded as husband and
wife and address each other in these terms.
The new bride sets up home on the territory
of her husband's clan, usually on the father-in-
law's property where the son may have his own
huts. She is received by her mother-in-law who
completes her education, teaches her the customs
of the family and, later, declares her fit to manage
her own "kitchen".
The mother-in-law refers to her daughter-in-
law in the same terms she uses in speaking of her
husband's other wives who are junior to her.
Wives of this category belong by right to the
female founders of the householdusually the
first two wives. The ambition of these founding
wives is to produce a line, if not a lineage, with
a distinct name. To do this they have to gather
together as many young women as possible who
will produce many childrentheir sons' wives
and other women, generally from their own
former village, whom they bring and eventually
place at their husband's disposal.
The man attempts to obtain other women
from households that are already established.
African traditional
societies lay emphasis upon
a contractual social link
based on the notion of the
parental 'role', which may
be played by several
people. "

Thus, polygamy is as much the business of the
husband as of his consorts and seems to be less
an expression of the man's power and wealth than
a means of perpetuating a form of society.
Polygamy makes it possible to achieve two
apparently opposed objectives. It signifies a man's
ascent in the social hierarchy (the man most en¬
vied is the man at the head of the largest com¬
munity), and it also tends to divide that
community into matrifocal-based households
each seeking autonomy (lineages attached to a
single founder-wife).
In the traditional African setting, marriage is
a matter of considerable importance. It is through
marriage that the constituent elements of socie¬
ty reproduce themselves and that groups and in¬
dividuals further a complex strategy. Women play
a crucial role in this process, since they gather
together and control other women as wives and
companions for brothers, sons and husbands.
The community
and its households
The African family to which this process gives
rise is an extended family which may consist of
fifty to a hundred people living in a single
domestic community. The men of the communi¬
ty form a sub-group organized in a hierarchy
based on social position and order of birth. The
hierarchical aspect is, however, moderated by a
collective sense of the equality of all who can
claim descent from the same ancestor.
The women's group consists, on the one
hand, of the unmarried girls and widows of the
lineage and, on the other, of women introduced
into the community by marriage. The women's
sub-group is organized into a hierarchy based on
age and also, for the wives, on the order of ar¬
rival and status conferred upon them by the ritual
of marriage.
Thus the adults of the community consist of
the male group, linked by blood, and the female
group composed of women from different
families who are united by a common duty of
solidarity with the group that accepted them.
The children have different prospects before
them. The boys will remain to ensure the con¬
tinuation of the lineage. The girls will leave to
found new lineages but without breaking with
their parents. For although a woman remains an
outsider in her husband's family, she maintains
close links with her group of origin within which
she retains both duties and privileges.
In practice a woman spends as much time
with her parents as in her adopted group and re¬
mains very independent of her husband. Her hus¬
band may have the right to repudiate her for
misconduct or sterility, but she too can decide
to leave her husband on the grounds of lack of
security or incompatibility with his way of life.
In the latter case her brothers and fathers must
assume responsibility for the consequences.

The woman who founds a household is con¬
sidered to be the mother of all the children born
in it, including those born to her husband's other
wives. The children of the "same mother" rank
in the hierarchy in accordance with the
chronological order of their mother's marriage
and the importance of the ritual with which the
household was founded. The autonomy of the
household increases with the age of the first-born
son, the father's heir presumptive, and the arrival
of other women and children. The eldest son will
thus become the head of the household of which
his "mother" is the mistress.
The household can thus be seen as a specific
area in which the mother, the son and the
mother's brother occupy the leading positions.
In traditional African societies, despite
decades if not centuries of contact with the out¬
side world, the totality of social relationships, in¬
cluding economic relationships, are governed by
kinship. Social scientists who imposed blueprints
for the evolution of these societies that were in¬
spired by European history have been surprised
by the durability of this phenomenon. According
to these blueprints, a small degree of industrializa
tion, accelerated urbanization, the introduction
of schooling and conversion to Christianity and
the insertion of African countries into the world
political and economic order should have brought
a complete upheaval in the family structure.
However, the old attitudes and practices have
not disappeared; they have simply been adapted
to suit the conditions of modern life. The authori¬
ty of the leaders of the lineages remains
sociologically stronger than that of the state.
Polygamy persists, even if it is now practised
more discreetly, with wives being dispersed in dif¬
ferent places. The rules of the unilineal kinship
system are still applied despite modern legislation
which recognizes the family as consisting only
of two parents and their children.
Many legal dispositions, primarily those
relating to the individual ownership of proper¬
ty, are profoundly impregnated with modern no¬
tions of individualism which clash with the
African tradition whereby the community is the
main component of all identity.
The step from the right of the family com¬
munity to occupy land to private, individually
owned property has dealt a blow to the cohesion
Damming a stream in
Burkina Faso. The elders
are repairing tools beneath
the palaver tree.
26 -jß**t§

of the family group. Now the eldest son is no
longer content to manage a shared land heritage;
he is tempted to appropriate it for himself by
establishing the title deeds in his own name. In
so doing he runs the risk of becoming engaged
in a long and tortuous legal process in which he
will be in opposition to his brothers and sisters.
This often leads to the breaking up of the
patrimony into separate parcels of land, or its li¬
quidation. These frequent legal procedures break
the previously indestructible link that united the
members of the community among themselves
and with their ancestors.
Furthermore, the appearance of the modern,
centralizing state has rendered superfluous many
of the functions of the family head. The transmis¬
sion of title deeds and responsibilities has become
less important than that of goods and property
left by bequest. This makes it important to
distinguish between biological children who are
entitled to inherit directly, from the brother's
children (in patrilineal societies) and from the
sister's children (in matrilineal societies).
The new African family
All this is leading to a strengthening of the pro¬
cess of individualization and to the break-up of
traditional family unity. This does not mean,
however, that the traditional African family is be¬
ing transformed into the small, Western-style,
nuclear family. Rather it is giving rise to single-
parent families built around either the father or
the mother. The movement towards in¬
dividualization clashes with the need to be a part
of a network of solidarity which, for the most
part, remains the lineage. Some individuals join
associations based on age or social position which
offer their members social assistance and
psychological support.
These few examples demonstrate the limits
of change in the social and family fabric. This
resistance to change may be explained in terms
of an underlying rejection of individualistic
ideology or of the limitations of state power. It
seems likely, however, that the encounter bet¬
ween Western ideology and traditional social
values will give rise to new family structures
fashioned by a society undergoing a rapid
transformation.
Students walking home after
school near Addis Abeba, Ethiopia
27
