BY VASCO GRAÇA MOURALUIS 


DE CAMOES
The eventful life and times of Portugal's great epic poet
Possibly the most faithful of the few surviving portraits of Camôes is this copy of a work, now
lost, by his contemporary Fernäo Gomes.
THE little that is known about the
life of Luis de Camôes can be
summed up in a few lines. He was
probably born in Lisbon in 1525, but
even this is not known for certain. Noth¬
ing is known about what he studied or
where (possibly in Coimbra) and next to
nothing about his life until he set sail for
the Orient, where he spent seventeen
equally obscure years. A few biographi¬
cal hints can be gleaned from his writings.
It seems, for example, that he had a rather
hectic love-life, and it was perhaps be¬
cause of his way of life that he was
banished from the court as a young man.
He is known to have served as a soldier
in Ceuta, Morocco, around 1547-1548
and to have lost his right eye there.
In 1552, he spent several months in
prison in Lisbon for taking part in a
brawl and after his release in the spring
of 1553 embarked for India on three
years' service, as was the rule at the time.
While in India, he took part in a number
of military expeditions. Sometime be¬
tween 1556 and 1558, he set out for the
Far East, perhaps as a junior official
responsible for taking care of the effects
of people who died on the voyage. It is
not known with certainty whether it was
on the outward or return voyage that he
was shipwrecked in the Mekong estuary,
swimming ashore carrying nothing but
his manuscript.
When he returned to Goa, he was
again thrown into prison. After his
release he lived on the island of Mozam¬
bique between 1567 and 1569, returning
to Portugal in 1570 in a state of dire
poverty. By then, however, the text of
his epic poem was virtually ready for
publication.
He published Os Lustadas (The Lusiads)
in Lisbon in 1572, and then two short
poems in 1576. In 1572, the king granted
him a small pension, but Camôes later
had to submit a claim for arrears of
payment.
Nothing more is known about his life
in Portugal after 1570. He appears to have
been the butt of epigrams composed by
authors who were in favour at court,
which may suggest tha.. he was envied
either on account of the stature of his
work or because of his pension. He may
then have gone through a mystical,
"penitential" phase if, as is supposed,
his magnificent verse commentary on
Psalm 137 ("By the waters of Babylon")
was written after The Lusiads. In 1574,
a short but enthusiastic critique of his
work was published, in which the author,
Pero de Magalhäes Gândavo, wrote:
"Look at the work of our celebrated poet
Luis de Camôes, whose fame will outlast
time.
We know neither the precise date of
his death (sometime between 1579 and
1580) nor the location of his tomb in the
Santa Ana church, which was destroyed
in the Lisbon earthquake of 1755. Not a
single manuscript in his own hand has
survived, and even the portraits of him
are disputed.
In the sixteenth century, The Lusiads
was twice translated into Spanish, and
there appeared a collection of his unpub¬
lished writings, editions of his lyric
poetry (1595 and 1598) and two more edi¬
tions of The Lusiads, one (severely muti¬
lated) in 1584 and the other in 1597.
From then on a strong and still continu¬
ing interest began to be taken in Camôes'
life and work and attempts began to be
made to decipher the mysteries in which
they were veiled.
Camôes lived during the last phase of
Portuguese expansion, at a time when his
country was on the verge of decline and
17

CS
L V S I A D A S
de Luis de Ca-,
n-.oes. i
com rmviuECio
REAU
,l.-Jt>0i.i.it.
t.! vm te/j dt ¿Intimo
Oi^tlm^imptßn.
I 1 !
I
a«OS LVSIADAS
p E LVIS DB
' Canto primeiro,
S armas , & os ba-
Till ifjuttJu,
VlMJaOudtntityw l*f-
\ i. j,
' Par mtrtí mwi Jf v>tti s*
ttt^áJól,
fjßnm , âoth iltm Ji Ttjuetim,
Em /^"ífíj Ci'jçwrroj rtfor^éánt,
MMJhftpmitiaafvpbvÊuii*.
Etntrrgciltrmu tJifiiirjt <**-
Htm 1¡¿m , fw umajuihurjo.
E Umlm u mtmtr'usjd « ufki
TU<iwltti'Hm>qiit/<>iMMU<m,h
A ht, o l*fttw , if Jl ttrtil Wi 11^«
JV A£r«A,(fd* AJu/mluM Jtujjl^iJt,
E *i*fMa f*tf d'" >ékre¡tt
St tf^oiía try iiMvtt Ittrrtânta.
(jnlMjo t\p*lh.ny f ' tokfjitf.
Se j unitmt 4fda o ci¿enht¡ cr "lr.
A L'Qm
cal data, while emphasis was placed on ex¬
perience and new ideas which would
prove the Ancients wrong.
An age offerment
Frontispiece and opening page of the first edition of The Lusiads published at Lisbon in 1572. The
work is now in the National Library, Lisbon.
political collapse. His death one or two
years after the defeat of Alcazarquivir
(1578) more or less coincided with Por¬
tugal's loss of independence to Spain, a
situation which was to last until 1640.
Yet, at the same time, Camôes lived
through a period of intellectual activity
which has a remarkable place in the so¬
cial, cultural, economic and political his¬
tory of Portugal, Europe, and the world.
The values enshrined in the classical
humanism of the Renaissance, which be¬
gan to spread through Europe from Italy
at the end of the fifteenth century, came
to be blended with echoes from the teach¬
ings of the Dutch humanist Erasmus and
with the multifarious debates and con¬
flicts sparked off by the Reformation and
by the growing theoretical and practical
consolidation of centralized power. The
geographical discoveries brought in their
wake a mass of new information about
the extent and true appearance of the
world. They led to encounters with many
other peoples, and brought into contact
a profusion of different cultures and civili¬
zations. Much-coveted produce and new
sources of wealth arrived daily in the
ports of Europe. The secrets of the planet
were gradually being discovered. The cir¬
culation of printed information was in¬
creasing.
These upheavals brought with them
a growing sense of unease which was
reflected in the arts by a transition from
classicism to mannerism, in politics by in¬
creasingly authoritarian forms of govern¬
ment, and in civil and intellectual life by
censorship, the repression exercised by
the Inquisition, the concealment of un¬
orthodox thinking, and fear. But they
also led to rapid changes in customs, at¬
titudes and social structures, greed, the
discovery of new ways of making easy
money, changes in patterns of consump¬
tion, and the depopulation of inland areas
due to the attraction exercised by com¬
mercial life in the capital and overseas.
Science in turn began to concern it¬
self with the quantifiable aspects of the
world and with the criticism of empiri-
The voyages of discovery opened up
new and often contradictory ways of
thinking, and new and sometimes
startling horizons beckoned to those with
a taste for adventure and enterprise, will¬
power and daring, speculation and
wealth, travel and danger, freedom of ac¬
tion and fatalism. The times incited men
to live dramatic lives in an age in which
the most clear-sighted of them saw the
Portuguese venture as a form of Euro¬
pean expansion whose common denomi¬
nator was the propagation of the
Christian faith, even though, like
Camôes, they criticized the divisions
among the Christians and claimed for
Portugal the role of prime agent of
Catholicism outside Europe. Camôes was
undeniably the poet of a system of values
proper to the European culture and civili¬
zation of his age.
The dominant ideology took full
measure of the universal impact of the
Portuguese discoveries, compared them
and found them superior to the legendary
exploits of the heroes of classical Anti¬
quity, and wished to hear them celebrat¬
ed in the classical form of the epic poem.
The voyage of Bartolomeu Dias round
This depiction of Lisbon in the 16th century appeared in a great atlas, Civitates orbis terrarum
("Cities of the World", 1577), published by Georg Braun and Frans Hogenberg.
18

the Cape of Good Hope in 1488, four
years before that of Columbus, revolu¬
tionized geographical concepts and
marked the threshold of a new era. Ten
years later, the voyage of Vasco da Gama
made an even more radical contribution


to the transformation of European civili¬
zation and world history. In the ensuing
decades there were many other Por¬
tuguese voyages of major importance. But
there was no creative work of art to extol
the feats responsible for these sweeping
changes.
A poet of his time
It was against this background that
Camôes lived and wrote his epic and lyri¬
cal work, in which so many contradicto¬
ry elements coexist: tradition and
innovation; Platonism and Aristotelian-
ism; erudition and raw experience;
mythology and Christianity; piety and
cruelty; feudal nostalgia and the concept
of the modern state; a sense of order and
disorder; joy and anguish; the Renaissance
and Mannerism. In Camôes, there is a
tension between the concept of man as
a "mean creature of clay" and the gran¬
deur of his accomplishments on a global
scale, between the frail microcosm who
can overcome obstacles when aided by
heaven or by valour and daring, and all
the harm that can befall him if he be¬
comes the mere plaything of the occult
forces of Nature, fortune or destiny.
At sea by such rough storms and griefs
forespent!
So many a moment when Death stands
alert!
Ashore such strife and treacherous intent,
Where horrible necessity can hurt!
How can weak man escape the harsh event,
And how misfortunefrom brieflife avert,
Where calm Skies range not nor take arms
alway
Against so mean a creature of the clay?
The Lusiads,* I, 106
However, a similar tension also exists
between Camôes' national pride and his
harsh and biting criticism of the very hu¬
man reality whose praises he is singing:
Alas! my Muse, alas! because my lyre
Is wholly out oftune and my voice hoarse,
Not from my song, but knowing I must
quire
Alwaysfor a people who are deafand coarse.
The favour which sets genius all on fire
My land grants not to song, but runs
perforce
After its envious lusts and brutishness,
Sunken in harsh, depraved, and gross
distress.
The Lusiads, X, 145
These antagonistic ideas are repeated
again and again throughout the complex
structure of a poem in which the symbol¬
ic linking of different levels of meaning
represents a striking and innovative feat
of literary "engineering".
Thus Camôes' account of the Por¬
tuguese discoveries is based on the unique
relationship which he established be¬
tween the tradition of classical Graeco-
Roman culture as it was expressed in the
Clockwise from top: Frontispiece of a Spanish
version of The Lusiads published in 1580 and
the earliest editions in English (1655), Italian
(1658), French (1735) and Dutch (1777).

literary forms imported from Italy and
the renewal of the literary language, and
the historical events of his time, especial¬
ly the information accumulated about the
great ocean voyages.
Camôes made use of the epic form in
a new way, so that actual geographical
regions and mythical regions, real or con¬
temporary time and mythical or absolute
time, historical events and cosmic desti¬
ny, were all welded together and "con¬
taminated" one another. Even the hero,
who, in the grand tradition of the classi¬
cal epic, personifies an entire people, is
here not so much Vasco da Gama alone
as a host of figures represented by the
"illustrious Lusitanian breast, to which
Neptune and Mars bowed down in obe¬
dience". With those figures are connect¬
ed a series of events, facts, individual and
collective deeds indissociable from the
course of Portuguese history.
Camôes witnessed the world-shaking
events of his time with classical eyes in
both life and literature, blending the mag¬
ic of paganism with the tenets of the
Christian faith and indeedin a daring



and brilliant stroketransporting the
mainsprings of his plot to the plane of ac¬
tion of the pagan gods who symbolized
the forces of Nature, some favourable and
some hostile to the Portuguese venture.
At the same time, however, he wit¬
nessed the planetary revolution of his
time with a modern outlook that enabled
him to reject earlier models and to strike
a new balance between what his genius
could extract from them and what the age
required him to introduce and treat in an
original and concrete manner. His aim
was to set the literal truth of recent histor¬
ical events and exploits against the legen
dary character of the ancient epics and,
in so doing, to underscore the role which
the Portuguese had played in the discov¬
ery of the world ("... and if there are
other worlds, they will reach them ...").
He clearly saw the revolution of his
time in terms of the then geocentric view
of the structure of the universe, and this
enabled him to construct one of the most
moving episodes in the poem, that in
tvwipyv¥V?ifv»»yv.Wv.-yv»¥»»»»yi>
Two illustrations from an edition of The
Lusiads published at Madrid in 1639. Above,
portrait of Vasco da Gama, the hero of
Camôes' epic. Below, the gods meet in
council, an episode from the poem.
^*«**«** *«****«****»***$ ***!******«*«*
j.
which Vasco da Gama's sailors are wel¬
comed to the Island of Love by the god¬
dess Thetis and the navigator is allowed
to cast his eyes on the "universal
machine" and to know the future in a
cosmogonie vision which is the culminat¬
ing point of the apotheosis of love and
glory, rewards reserved for heroes:
This universal vast machine you see,
Ethereal, elemental, He could found
By deep, high wisdom of infinity,
Who no beginning has, or mete or bound.
He, in His circle set eternally,
The whole sphere's well-smoothed surface,
hedging round,
Is God, Whose nature none can comprehend
For human wit cannot so far extend.
The Lusiads, X, 80
An encyclopaedic work
	 24 	
Since Camôes was singing of real
things rather than of "vain and fantastic
exploits that are false and deceitful", he
attached the highest importance to histor¬
ical narratives and authentic eyewitness
accounts of voyages by Vasco da Gama
and other navigators, to details of navi¬
gation, technology, the calendar, wind
systems, climates, natural phenomena,
peoples and their customs, and to the ac¬
curacy of other aspects of Portuguese
history.
Thus, apart from its inestimable liter¬
ary and aesthetic merits, The Lusiads is a
kind of encyclopaedia or compendium of
much of the theoretical and practical
knowledge available in its author's life¬
time. It contains information on history
and geography, anthropology, technolo¬
gy and scienceranging from flora and
fauna to astronomyand especially on
the data gathered as a result of the ocean
voyages and discoveries. Even when he
refers to such natural phenomena as
waterspouts and St. Elmo's fire, it can be
assumed that he does so because they
were recorded by Joäo de Castro
(1500-1548), a Portuguese naval officer
who made important contributions to the
science of navigation.
Almost every time he describes peoples,
landscape, geography, the exotic features of
Africa or the Orient, or incidents during
Vasco da Gama's voyage, he bases his ac¬
count on a chronicle, travelogue or some
other document in an attempt to achieve
strict accuracy combined with the mytho¬
logical transpositions mentioned above.

Two Africans from the Cape of Good Hope. This illustration and those on pages 30 and 33 are
from a mid-16th-century codex by an anonymous Indo-Portuguese painter who depicted peoples of
Africa and the Orient with whom the Portuguese came into contact during their voyages. The
manuscript is preserved in the Casanatense Library, Rome.
As the poet of the discoveries and of
the epic of modern man, Camôes did not
lose sight of the two main driving forces
behind maritime expansion. The first of
these was the propagation of the faith,
which was not to be construed exclusive¬
ly as a crusading ideal dictated by the
Ottoman threat to the eastern approaches
to Europe, but also as the starting-point
for the dissemination of a European cul¬
ture. The second was the organization of
trade on a worldwide scale for the benefit
of all peoples. Camôes was a European
poet in the temporal sense, in that he en¬
hanced, used and re-created a cultural
heritage many centuries old. In a spatial,
geo-political and economic sense, he was
also a European poet who singled out
Europe as a region with specific ties of
solidarity and interests.
This is why Camôes saw the voyage
of Vasco da Gama not only as an expedi¬
tion "to the greater glory of God" but
also as a commercial venture, at the out¬
come of which the navigator presented
the ruler of Calicut with proposals for en¬
gaging in peaceful trade to the mutual
benefit of the King of Portugal and
himself:
And ifthou wilt with treaty and with pact
Ofpeace and friendship, open and divine,
Trade out of superfluity enact
Between his country's merchandise and
thine,
Thus greater gain and plenty to attract
(For which in toil and sweat men chiefly
pine);
Unto thy realms, then there will surely be
For him great glory, and great wealth for
thee.
The Lusiads, VII, 62
This epitomizes the idea of trade be¬
tween distant peoples as a source of
wealth and abundance, of profit and
glory. Here again, Camôes' viewpoint is
highly topical, in that he extols the skills
and dignity of enrichment through trade
based on the principle of reciprocity
(while also seeking to impose moral con¬
straints on such trade). Vasco da Gama
showed determination and discipline in
executing the orders given by the king,
who became one of the world's leading
traders when the era of major trading net¬
works began.
Camôes lived a full life. For seventeen
years, he knew the fluctuating fortunes
of a voyage to India, went to war,
travelled to the Far East and experienced
exile, adversity, disgrace, suffering and
despair. In short, he paid a personal toll
for the great discoveries.
Traces of his experience can be found
in a number of main themes of The Lu¬
siads. Equally skilled with the sword and
the pen, he bitterly laments the oblivion
or injustice of which he is the victim. He
mentions the shipwreck he survived. He
refers to the crises of his love affairs,
which he personifies in the pathetic figure
of the giant Adamastor and in the perse¬
cution of the nymphs on the Island of
Love by the soldier Leonardo Ribeiro.
He asserts his awareness of his genius and
abilities and his readiness to continue
singing to the present and future glory of
his native land.
The entire corpus of Camôes' work,
with its hundreds of lyric poems, its let¬
ters and plays, highlights the contradic¬
tions inherent in a man who was torn
between nostalgia for a supreme harmo¬
ny and an acute sense of the absurdity and
confusion of the world, between an af¬
firmation of the values enshrined in hu¬
man liberty and a sense of outrage at
being nothing more than a puppet in the
hands of fate, and between the inescapa¬
ble and everlasting presence of unhappi-
ness and the all too fleeting moments of
life and human happiness. The ultimate
contrast is that between the evil of the
present and the good of the past, which
inspires some of the most poignant fea¬
tures of Camôes' work.
* Translation by Leonard Bacon from The Lusiads
ofLuiz de Camôes, published by the Hispanic Soci¬
ety of America, New York, 1950.
VASCO GRAÇA MOURA is a Portuguese writer
who has published a number of studies on Camôes,
the most recent of which is Os penhascos e a serpente
e outros ensaios camonianos ("The Rocks and the Ser¬
pent, and Other Essays on Camôes", 1987). He is
currently serving on the National Board for the
Celebration of the Portuguese Discoveries and as
Portuguese Commissioner for the Seville Univer¬
sal Exhibition of 1992.
	 25
