INTERVIEW
Federico Mayor
Federico Mayor' was elected Director-General of Unesco for a 6-year term in
1987. He had previously served as rector of the University of Granada, president
of the Spanish Society of Biochemistry, founder-director of the Madrid Centre for
Molecular Biology, Spain's Minister of Education and Science, and as a member
of the European Parliament in Strasbourg. On the occasion of the 25th session of
Unesco's General Conference, he sets forth here his reflections on the role of the
United Nations system in the world today.
Although public opinion in most countries may be aware
ofthe existence ofthe United Nations system, it is not always
very sure ofthe system's use in practical terms. Do you really
think that the UN system is indispensable?
The system is even more necessary today than it was in
the past. In 1945 it responded to a bitter, lucid analysis (lu¬
cidity and bitterness often go together) made in the after¬
math of a disaster. Today it responds to an acute awareness
of the increasingly global nature of problems which we can
only face together.
The system has not solved all the problems with which
it has been confronted, far from it. But it has shown itself
to be increasingly irreplaceable as a meeting place, as a forum
of conciliation and reconciliation, as a place where new ap¬
proaches can be sought, and avenues of co-operation care¬
fully explored. It is, fundamentally, the seat of a new identity,
that of the "global village". A pluralistic and multiform
village which regroups, and must protect, all cultural iden¬
tities, the infinite diversity of peoples, and the irreplaceable
originality of each community.
Contrary to what is often thought, the United Nations
system was not constructed ex nihilo, arbitrarily established
in 1945 on the decision of a handful of idealistic visionaries.
It is the prolongation of a long history. It is the outcome
of a historical process that began in the late nineteenth cen¬
tury whereby an increasing number of individuals, currents
and nations have become aware of the need to create com¬
mon structures of consultation and co-operation on an in¬
ternational scale.
This awareness was a response to new realities: people
were starting to realize that the world was one: communi¬
cations were intensifying; commercial, industrial and finan¬
cial interests were no longer confined within national and
even continental frontiers; information was beginning to
cross the oceans on a regular basis. This emergence of a world
system called for the organization of mutual consultation
on a worldwide scale.
So the system was created in response to a need?
The human species is the only one which is endowed with
the distinctive faculty of creativity. There are always some
far-seeing persons who take timely initiatives in response
to new challenges.
The first institutional international structurethe
League of Nationswas created after the First World War.
This terrible convulsion revealed that the world was not only
a market to be shared but a heritage to be protected. Some
statesmen, but also philosophers, scientists and writers,
thought then that it would be useful to have two distinct
organisms, one to settle political differences (the League of
Nations) and the other to promote intellectual and cultural
co-operation (the International Institute of Intellectual Co¬
operation).
Of course, when I speak of heritage I am not only
* Author of many scientific publications, several books of
poems, and an essay entitled Mañana siempre es tarde
(Espasa Calpe publishers, Madrid, 1987).

t
i
-

_
i
aaffLa^
',}
thinking of our physical heritagethe natural, environmental,
artistic and architectural heritagebut also of our common
spiritual and intellectual heritagethe fruits of knowledge,
human rights, the universal values and principles.
But the League of Nations was not strong enough to
resist the hurricane of fascism in the name of all this. The
Second World War was a much more serious warning for
humanity. Not only were the death and destruction it caused
out of all proportion to those of the earlier war; not only
did the scale of the conflict gradually extend to five conti¬
nents; in addition, the explosion of two atomic bombs
showed to everyone that for the first time in history
mankind had endowed itself with the means of self-
annihilation. A third world war could mean the extinction
of the human race.
Until then, all warsall conflictshad had their win¬
ners and losers. Now all sides faced the threat of losing. War
became a nonsensical proposition. Almost imperceptibly the
civilization of war gave way to the civilization of peace, not
through an access of virtue but through fear of the power
now commanded by the technology of destruction. The cul¬
ture of peace was to be born, not of the wisdom of men
but of their infinite distress. It was at this turning point-
to my mind perhaps the most important in human history
that the United Nations system was established.
Much more ambitious than the League of Nations, the
UN set itself the goal of extending the field of co-operation
to all nations and to many fields of intellectual, social, eco¬
nomic and humanitarian activity. The United Nations Or¬
ganization is the political organ of this system, which is
completed by a range of international organizations, agen¬
cies, programmes, funds and commissions: Unesco for edu¬
cation, science and culture, the WHO for health, Unicef for
children, the ILO for problems related to work, the High
Commissioner for aid to refugees, the FAO for food and
agriculture, etc.
Of course, the successes great and small, the spectacu¬
lar and less spectacular achievements, the inadequacies or
the failures, of the organizations of the United Nations sys¬
tem are closely dependent on the state of mind of the com¬
munity of nations and especially on the aptitude of the most
influential states to agree to ensure that a desire for concili¬
ation prevails. If these favourable factors exist, the United
Nations family can fully exploit the dynamics of multilateral
co-operation and promote the elaboration in common of
solutions which cannot be found individually.
This, I think, is the real purpose of the work of the Unit¬
ed Nations. The UN is there to remind us that we belong
to a single species and inhabit a single planet. What would
become of us if we were ever to forget this?

You speak of the organizations and agencies belonging to standing. But this certainly does not mean that everything
the United Nations system. Some people may accept the in all cultures is of equal worth, and that it is impossible
needfor institutions to promote international consultation to transcend cultural specificities. There is no naivety in
with a view to co-operation and regulation in politics, Unesco's approach: cultures are not untouchable entities;
health, agriculture orfinancial affairs, but what about cul- they are the product of a history. Each one has its highlights
ture? Is there not a contradiction between the idea of and its dark corners, its grandeur, its impulses towards the
organization-with its rules, programmes and choices-and sublime and its dreams of fraternity, but also its less posi-
the idea ofculture, which is by definition synonymous with tive inclinations. Our role is to appeal to what is best and
creation, that is, with freedom and spontaneity? most fully human in all of them, to what, naturally, produces
Clearly Unesco's mission is not to intervene in the a spirit of peace,
processes of creation but to encourage the conditions in
which cultural activities can develop and bear fruit. But first Given these considerations, how would you define the pur-
of all we must distinguish between some different meanings pose of Unesco's work?
of the word culture which often tend to be confused. - It is to cut across cultural pluralism and give weight to
At first culture was set in opposition to nature, to whatever brings men closer together, whatever is universal
differentiate man the creator from animals which can only in each culture. To do this, it is necessary to begin at the
obey natural laws. The word has also been used to distin- beginning, with the basic idea that each culture, which is
guish between the education of the mind and the produc- often in its turn a melting pot of other cultures, has its own
tion of goods by manual labour. Different definitions of genius, its own trademark in the history of human civiliza-
culture have been formulated, some extensive, some less so. tion, the identity mark whereby it recognizes itself at each
For some, culture only includes the sublime masterpieces moment of its trajectory, and whereby it can also be recog-
of thought and creation; for others, culture englobes nized by the rest of the world,
everything-from the most sophisticated products to beliefs, I am a Catalan; I profoundly love my country and the
customs, ways of living and workingwhich differentiates language in which I have always addressed my parents. This
one people from another. This second meaning was adopt- culture, the fruit of several civilizations, defines our specific
ed by the international community at the intergovernmen- profile. I know that only if I can develop it without hin-
tal Conference on Cultural Policies which was held in Venice drance, can I work for the unity of Spain, for the strength-
in 1970. In 1982 a second Conference, "Mondiacult", which ening of all the other national cultures. In the past, ignorance
was held in Mexico City, ratified this "active" approach, of this fundamental truth has often been at the roots of con¬
tempt for others. There are grounds for thinking that in
This definition has been criticized by some intellectuals on the future mutual consultation will become easier to the ex-
the grounds that it may tend to privilege the most trivial tent that peoples will have learned to know themselves; to
rather than the highest expressions ofthe mind, and to stress understand their motivations, their ways of being and their
the values specific to each people-those which separate respective scales of values; and to discover that over and
them from others-instead ofthe universal values ofTruth, above these specific expressions they share great common
Good, Beautywhich bring men closer together. aspirations and ideals which often coincide on essential
I think this criticism is aimed at the wrong target. It is matters.
based on a misconception of the frame of reference of our This is why Unesco's primary mission in the field of
definition, which is of a practical, operational order. In the culture is naturally, as expressed in its Constitution, "to de-
United Nations system, in which different philosophies velop and to increase the means of communication between
coexist, the bases of agreement are bases of action, of ac- ... peoples ... for the purposes of mutual understanding and
tion which is of course guided by the major principles on a truer and more perfect knowledge of each other's lives",
which the entire system rests. Unesco seeks to promote contact and meetings between
Definitions are points of departure. And in cultural co- artists, craftsmen, intellectuals, painters, educators, architects,
operation, the only possible point of departure is recogni- writers and poets from all regions and all countries, and to
tion of diversity and respect for this diversitywhich is the publicize the discussions and conclusions that emerge from
basic form of respect for the dignity of individuals in differ- these encounters. These people constitute the principal
ent cultures. More specifically I will say that each person wealth of humanity. They can not only enlighten us about
is biologically and socio-culturally unique and that recog- the meaning of the past but also and above all about the
nition of this uniqueness is the sine qua non of mutual under- possible shape of the future. It is in collaboration with

non-governmental organizations, associations of profession- to the blossoming of creativity, to the stimulation of learn-
als, artists and creators that Unesco draws up and executes ing, to the broadening of horizons and the mutual enrich-
its cultural programmes. ment of the sources of inspiration available to every artist.
I never tire of saying that the most perfect monument At the same time it fosters a more profound understanding
is the human being; that the most preciousand the most of the universal significance which artists can find in their
threatenedcultural works are the minority languages, the own cultures,
oral traditions, the songs, dances and customs of the many
countries which do not yet participate in the great cultural The relationship between deeper mutual knowledge, in-
concert of the world. I strongly insist on this. Just as the creasing cultural exchanges and the strengthening ofpeace
freedom of artists must be protected, so the survival of the is not obvious to everyone. There is a striking
arts, folklore and popular cultures must be ensured. These number of conflicts between neighbouring peoples which
two imperatives go together. know and communicate with each other. And the two
world wars broke out in Europe, between peoples who
Major Unesco activities such as the rescue ofAbu Simbel shared essential cultural values and benefited from ad-
and Borobudur are well known. Today there is much talk vanced means of communication,
ofan agreement between the different Cambodian parties It is often neighbouring peoples, neighbouring cities,
concerning Unesco's role in the conservation ofAngkor Vat. which find mutual understanding most difficultbecause
Unesco is ready to act as soon as circumstances permit, they confront each other face to face and each is tempted
But its work in the field of culture goes much further than to become immersed in its own traditions and despise those
the rescue of monuments and sites. Unesco administers three of others. Mutual understanding is not automatically
international juridical instruments of major importance: the produced by the political or commercial contacts established
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the between peoples. These contacts may just as easily lead to
Event of Armed Conflict; the Convention on the Means conflicts as to agreements, depending on whether the reflexes
of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and of fear, suspicion, and mutual contempt are fostered, or the
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property; and the Con- aptitude, latent in all peoples, to appreciate truth and beauty
vention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural wherever they may be found, to respect the diversity of ideas
and Natural Heritage. and styles, to prefer tolerance and seek conviviality.
Unesco is also concerned with the translation and pub- Take the nazi ideology, for example. How was it en-
lication of literary masterpieces from many countries, with grafted onto German culture? By perverting the noblest
listing, recording and diffusing a unique collection of pieces aspects of that culture, by exalting only the fibres of self-
of music from all over the world.... In many countries to- love. The nazi leaders ignored the humanism of Kant, the
day, books, records and radio and television broadcasts give universalism of Goethe, the generosity of Beethoven. They
increasing exposure to works from other countries, to the systematically proclaimed racial superiority and the morbid
realities and problems of the most diverse regions. Slowly cult of violence, striving to accustom their compatriots to
but surely the universal is entering the daily life of every- the idea that all German history led naturally in that direc-
one. This is one of the important and appreciable aspects tion. Similarly they also had to falsify German history by
of Unesco's work. reducing it to racial confrontation; by keeping alive
memories of past wars and emphasizing everything that
What of cultural creation in the strict sense? denigrated others, to whom they imputed the responsibility
It is and can only be the province of individuals who are for Germany's misfortunes; thereby justifying future
absolutely free to follow their own inspiration, conscience revenge. Today all that seems mad, unreal.
and talent. Nothing should thwart or censor this freedom. In this respect, it is interesting to recall an experiment
On the contrary, everything possible should be done to pro- in which Unesco was directly involved. Just after the war,
tect it and allow it to flourish. I would say that the place one of the tasks our Organization embarked on was the re-
for Unesco's action is before and after this freedom. On the vision of history books through the identification of factual
one hand, it is concerned with denouncing possible viola- errors and biased judgements. Historians from both sides
tions. On the other, with encouraging the optimal condi- in the recent conflict took part in the project. They got down
tions for its creative exercise. to work with plenty of good will. But the experiment was
It is clear that the free circulation of ideas and works a failure. They differed not only on the interpretation of
from all cultures is one of the conditions most favourable the facts, but sometimes on the very existence of certain facts.

What conclusions do you drawfrom this? Had the war left
so deep an imprint on people's minds that it was unrealistic
in its immediate aftermath to hope to achieve an objective
view of things?
I think it was much too soon. But the evil ran far deeper.
As I suggested, the war had ploughed land which had al¬
ready been prepared. It had opened far older wounds, dug
deeper into furrows traced by earlier wars, by manipulating
culture and history. The same thing has happened since in
many other conflicts, even if their protagonists have not
gone so far as to advocate a final solution.
War has deep roots in the past of many peoples. To ex¬
tirpate these roots a constant and courageous effort in the
service of truth is needed. Political leaders are naturally called
on to play a decisive role in this process. But they are not
alone. Philosophers, artists, film makers and journalists all
contribute, whether they know it or not, to the extent that
they arouse interest, respect and admiration for the culture
of others as well as for their own.
Here Unesco can take the lead as an instrument of
mobilization and movement on the world level. Scientists,
and teachers in schools and universities, must also take part
in this effort. The unfettered circulation of scientific and
technological information throughout the world is an ir¬
replaceable vehicle of intellectual complicity and practical
mutual assistance between researchers of all regions. The ex¬
change of experience between educators from all over the
world is also gradually spreading the conviction that each
one of us is the repository of a precious portion of truth....
And that no one, absolutely no one, possesses the whole
truth. It is on this difficult borderline between doubts and
certainties, between self-respect and respect for others, that
we must stand if we are to serve freedom and promote a
permanent creative tension.
On the eve of this new phase in world history which
is opening beneath the emblem of a culture of peace, edu¬
cation and access to knowledge must become the common
destiny of all without exceptionno longer the privilege of
certain persons in certain countries. This is our dream. The
dream of a new page to be written in a new language formed
day after day by free citizens expressing their thoughts and
creativity without constraint. A language that reflects an
authentically peaceful state of mind; a language shorn of all
exclusivity and segregation. A language which may be at last,
uniquely, a vehicle for culture.
