Under the roofs
of Paris
sOME Paris streets, such as Rue du Renard (Fox
Street) and Rue du Chat-qui-Pêche (Street of the
Fishing Cat), have names that recall the once-
famous signs that used to hang in them. Others
have rural names, like the Rue du Chemin-Vert
(Green Lane) which at one time meandered be¬
tween vegetable or the Rue des Belles-
Feuilles (Fairleaf Street) of which glimpses could
be had over the wall surrounding an old property.
Yet others evoke crafts and trades, such as the
Rue de la Lingerie (Linen-Drapers Street) and the
Rue du Rouet (Spinning-Wheel Street), or life in
the old days: people crossed the Seine on the fer¬
ry from the end of the Rue du Bac (Ferry Street);
stocks of paving-stones were piled up in the Place
des Grès (Stone Square); a crucifix stood at the
end of the Rue de la Croix-Nivert (Street of the
Cross of Nivert), at the Croix Rouge (Red Cross)
crossroads and in the Rue Croix-des-Petits-
Champs (Street of the Cross of Littlefields).
Many Paris streets are named after prominent
personalities. Landowners often gave their names
to streets that crossed their land. Rue Beaufils and
Rue Baudelique are typical examples. Local
authorities paid tribute to those who had ren¬
dered service to the community by naming streets
after them. The former commune of Vaugirard,
for example, named Rue Fondary after one of its
mayors. A person's fame was often sufficient rea¬
son for a street to be named after him. Three ar¬
chitects are thus honoured in Rue
Théodore-Ballu, Rue Auguste-Perret and Rue
Mallet-Stevens.
The latter, a little street in the 16th Arron¬
dissement designed by the great French architect
Robert Mallet-Stevens, is very modern in style.
Completed in 1927, it consists of five villas and
a caretaker's house. Today the existence of this
architectural masterpiece is threatened by the en¬
croachments of speculators.
The Rue de Rivoli is another of the many ar¬
chitectural shrines which give Paris its characteris¬
tic appearance. From the Louvre to the Place de
la Concorde, the street is striking in its unifor¬
mity and classical restraint, with over 300 iden¬
tical arcades pinpointed at night by individual
hanging lights. The regularity of these freestone
façades gives an impersonal, majestic effect which
was deliberately sought by the architects Pierre
François Léonard Fontaine (1762-1853) and
Charles Percier (1764-1838) during the redevelop¬
ment of the Tuileries district at the end of the
eighteenth century.
BY ANNE-MARIE
CHATELET
A typical Paris roofscape.
Inset, the city as shown in
an early 17th-century
engraving.
ANNE-MARIE
CHATELET,
French architect, is
currently completing a
doctoral thesis on Parisian
primary schools from 1870
to 1914. In 1985 she
organized an exhibition (for
which she also wrote the
catalogue) on the same
theme. She is a regular
contributor to the Bulletin
of the French Institute of
Architecture, for which she
has planned two issues: on
housing in Paris in the
early 1980s (1985) and on
the city of Lisbon (1988).

HB
44£S
r
** k^f i
.W^rsE.
EBB
» *1 Í J*~
i~ V

' Tí Lit . J

í rint depicting demolition
work carried out between
1852 and 1855 before the
construction ofRue des
Ecoles, Paris.
A comer of old Paris, Rue
Frédéric Sauton. In
background, one of the
spires of Notre-Dame
cathedral.
Left, Rue Mallet-Stevens,
in the 16th
Arrondissement of Paris,
was designed by the French
architect for whom it is
named. Far left, the
classical lines ofRue de
Rivoli.
During the nineteenth century, Rambuteau
and Haussmann, who were successively Prefects



of the Seine Departement from 1833 to 1870, gave
Paris the appearance that it has today. They
rebuilt the network of main thoroughfares, car¬
rying through, in fifty years, the most ambitious
road-plahning project in the history of the capital.
A number of routes were opened up to the
outskirts of the city in areas then still little deve¬
loped. New precincts sprang up, like the Europe
district planned in 1826 and then gradually built
up on the site of the old Tivoli gardens. Six roads,
each named after a capital citythe Rues de Con¬
stantinople, de Madrid, de Vienne, de Londres,
de Berlin (now de Liège) and de Leningrad radi¬
ate from the Place de l'Europe, which bridges the
maze of railway lines that run into Saint-Lazare
station. The profile of their opulent apartment
blocks, faced in freestone, conforms to a planning
regulation that links the height of a building to
the width of the street. This resulted in the typi¬
cally Parisian curb roofs with grey-blue slates,
since the steepness of the roof precluded the use
of tiles. The same regulation led to the recessing
of the fifth floor, with an inevitable balcony at
the level of the cornice, and gave rise to a uni¬
form rhythm in which the vertical punctuation
of the windows contrasts with the seemingly in¬
finite cornice line, continued from building to
building.
Some of the new thoroughfares cut through
the heart of densely populated areas and involved
considerable demolition. This, however, was
necessary to improve communications, security
and public health, as well as to embellish the cap¬
ital. Along the great north/south axis, constitut¬
ed by the Boulevard de Sebastopol and the
Boulevard Saint-Michel, the same kind of
nineteenth-century-style buildings are to be
found. These roads, however, are but gashes in
the living urban flesh behind. A stroll round the
labyrinth of narrow streets behind the Place
Saint-Michel, where the Rues de la Harpe, de la
Huchette and du Chat-qui-Pêche intertwine,
reveals buildings of another age, with bulging
walls, narrow façades and windows that on each
storey are smaller than on the one below.
What should we look for in this maze of
streets? The ones reputed to be the longest or the
widest? Those that have survived the hand of
Haussmann or those that bear witness to his
work? Those whose rich outlines were the work
of a single architect or those that offer a mosaic
of styles? Those whose cobbles we walk with
familiar tread or those to which we go with the
reverent step of pilgrims?
The poet Raymond Queneau gives an answer
in these lines:
There are streets that are tubes
There are streets that are arches
There are boulevards dowdy
And others all crowdy
With cars, vans and coaches
There are squares dodecagonal
Some simply infernal
There are sausage-shaped avenues
Where the beetles are ravenous
Canals quite Venetian
And islands West Frisian
Bridges and alleys and dead-ends and quays
Highways and courtyards and footpaths, all
these
For a multiple, motley mosaic of modes
You cannot beat Paris's system of roads...
*Courir les Rues, by Raymond Queneau. Published by Gallimard,
Paris, 1967. 45
