INTERVIEW
The French author Jean-Claude Carrière is an internationally known dramatist and screenwriter
who has produced over fifty screenplays, notably for Luis Buñuel and Andrzej Wajda. Some years
ago he adapted for the stage the great Indian epic the Mahabharata. Here he talks about this
remarkable project which took over a decade to complete.
Jean-Claude Carrière
The Mahabharata, the Great History of Mankind
How do you set about making a work like the Mahabharata number was gradually diminished by death. Nevertheless,
accessible to a European or an American? he continued with his work, alone and without reward,
Over the past two or three centuries the West has sue- finally dying at his task. Someone else took up the burden,
ceeded in bringing large numbers of Japanese, Africans, but he too died. The epic has never been completely trans-
Patagonians to a sympathetic understanding of Shakespeare, lated into French. The only complete translation in a non-
Mozart and Picasso. There is no reason why the reverse Indian language is an English translation made by Indians
should not be possible, that Westerners in turn should not and completed in about 1900. In the 1930s, some Ameri-
become attuned to the Shakespeares, the Mozarts and the cans in Chicago embarked upon a new translation, but were
Picassos of other cultures. There are, however, a number obliged to abandon it uncompleted.
of barriers between cultures which are particularly difficult Amazingly, until 1985, the general public in Europe still
to surmount because they are invisible. knew nothing of the Mahabharata.
Take Europe for example. People are still immured
within a cultural fortress. For years other cultures have been 1985 was the year ofthefirst theatricalperformance, direct-
kept at bay. It wasn't until the beginning of the twentieth ed by Peter Brook, of your adaptation of the epic.
century that some avant-garde artists began to break down Yes. The play, The Mahabharata, was performed that
these walls. year at the Avignon festival for the first time. Lasting nine
Before then, from the eighteenth century onwards, there hours, it was performed either in sections on three differ-
had been a handful of solitary pioneers who had set out in ent evenings, or, occasionally, which the actors preferred,
' search of other worlds. It is astonishing to think that the in a single performance lasting all day or all night. The com-
Bhagavadgita, the most famous text in all the East, was not pany consisted of twenty-five actors and included sixteen
translated into English and French until the end of the different nationalities.
eighteenth century, just a few years before the French For three years, the show, in French or in English, was
Revolution... performed to packed and appreciative houses all over the
Internal resistance, especially religious resistance, was world. We soon realized that, in addition to the charm of
fierce. In the fifteenth century, the monk Luis de León was the story, Peter Brook's inspired directing and the talent
imprisoned for five years for translating The Song ofSolomon of the actors, some profound element in this tale from afar
into Spanish, despite the fact that it was a part of the Bible, touched a chord in a totally unprepared Western public in
Bringing into Europe texts foreign to Christian culture was a direct and lasting manner.
an act of heroism which could be undertaken only by people Was it the unmistakable sense of impending doom hang-
of exceptional stature. ing over the world? Was it the unwavering search for the
As for the Mahabharata, it remained unknown in Europe true meaning of doing what was right? Was it the subtle,
until the end of the nineteenth century. To translate the sometimes savage, game of dice with destiny? Was it,
Mahabharata was, it should be noted, a very considerable perhaps, that comic-pathetic vision of characters who for-
undertaking. The epic is fifteen times as long as the Bible, get their divine origin to face up to what the Greeks of the
The poor fellow who embarked on the first French trans- same epoch called "problemata"those questions and con-
lation worked at the task for twenty-five years, on a sub- flicts of daily life in the resolution of which myth gives way
scription basis. At first he had 200 subscribers, but their to tragedy?


In Sanskrit Maha means "great", or "total". Bharata is,
first, the name of a legendary sage, second, the name of a
family or clan. Thus the title of the epic can be understood
as "Great Epic of the Bharata Dynasty". But Bharata can
also, by extension, mean "Hindu", or, more generally,
"Man". Thus the story is no more and no less than "The
Great History of Mankind".
In fact; the central narrative of this "great epic of the
world" concerns the long, ferocious struggle between two
related families, the five Pandava brothers, and the Kauravas,
1 he arrival of Queen
Gandhari. This photo and
those on pages 7 to 9 show
scenes from the stage
version of the
Mahabharata (Paris, 1985)
adapted by Jean-Claude
Carrière and directed by
Peter Brook.
\Jpposite page, the five
Pandava brothers.
who number one hundred. This family quarrel, which arises
and intensifies regarding dominion over the world, cul¬
minates in a titanic battle in which the fate of the entire
world is at stake.
How did you summon up the courage to take on such an
immense task? Did you start by reading the text and, ifso,
did you read it in English or in Sanskrit?
It all came about through a mixture of accident and
design. The accident was a chance meeting with an expert in
Sanskrit, Philippe Lavastine, who today is nearly eighty years
old. He invited Peter Brook and me to his home one evening
and began to talk about the Mahabharata in his own genial,
lively manner.
We knew virtually nothing about the subject, our
knowledge being limited to a reading of the Bhagavadgita
made all the more superficial in that we had read it as an
individual document apart from the Mahabharata, of which
it is fully a part. As we sat facing Lavastine, Peter asked him:
"Who is this Arjuna who is mentioned in the Bhagavadgita,
and why does he go to pieces before Krishna talks to him?"
"I shall have to tell you about Arjuna," Lavastine replied,
"but telling you about Arjuna, well..." It took him several
months.
Once or twice a week we would spend a marvellous
evening with Lavastine during which he would recount the
epic to us. Later, I went back to see him on my own and
began taking notes. Like the Greek bards of old, Lavastine
was an exceptionally gifted storyteller. He spoke, he gestic¬
ulated, he laughed, he became the poem.
After four or five months, I was beginning to have a
picture of the work as a whole and to grasp its extraordi¬
nary complexity, its multiple levels of meaning, in which
respect it can only be compared to the works of Shakespeare.
It ranges from the heights of mystic speculation to irresistible
farce. The whole gamut of human emotion and thought is
there portrayed like a rich bouquet.
The effort needed to enter into- the mysteries of the
Mahabharata is commensurate with its complexity. Anyone
approaching it by reading, without preparation, is likely to
put it aside after the first twenty pages. We were lucky that
we came to it not by reading but through the agency of a
storyteller.
Then came the time when you really had to get down to
work...
Within a year I had written a first draft play based on
the Mahabharata, even before getting down to reading it.
I was well aware that this play would never be performed,
but it enabled me, as it were, to harvest the results of my
initial labours. I wanted to see if it was possible to make
an adaptation for the theatre while keeping to the formula
of the epic poem, that of a narration by a storyteller. It was
still no more than a narrative not yet prepared for the

theatre, but at least it gave me a time scale and I knew that
the whole story of the Mahabharata could be contained
within a performance time of between five and ten hours.
From this point on, Peter and I knew that we wanted to
"do" the Mahabharata. We had committed ourselves.
The preparatory stage spread over a period of eleven
years, from 1974 to 1985. We continued working on other
things, for the theatre and the cinema, but for both of us
the Mahabharata had become a travelling companion,
whether we were together or apart.
We began the "big read" in 1980. 1 had a photocopy
of the French translation and Peter had one of the Indian
version in English. Each of us started reading individually,
but whenever we had a chance of seeing each other, we ex¬
changed views and shared our joys.
It takes a year to read the Mahabharata in its entirety,
but as we were doing other things at the same time, it took
us somewhat longer. The epic took over our lives. We had
constantly before us this huge white whale, this Moby Dick,
this bright vision; and as we went along, we discovered ex¬
traordinary things that even Lavastine had not told us about.
Then, in 1982, we said to ourselves: "Now is the time
for us to do a joint read-through." It took us six or seven
months, reading together every day in company with Marie-
Hélène Estienne who was collaborating with us. Compar¬
ing the two versions, French and English, we eliminated all
the passages that we felt we could do without (about a third
of the text) and we reread the remainder making a detailed
comparison of the translations. Whenever a problem arose,
we consulted an expert in Sanskrit and went back to the
original text.
By August 1982, we had completed our joint reading
and we had a rough idea of what we wanted to include-
not in theatrical terms, but in terms of content. We also
knew, for example, that we would telescope the events of
the three tourneys that figure in the Mahabharata into one.
Similarly, where the epic recounts two episodes of exile in
the forest, only one would feature in the play. The first ele¬
ments of the theatrical version were beginning to take shape.
At this stage we felt well enough prepared to go to India.
We knew the characters and we could discuss the work with
the Indians on the basis of an almost equal level of back¬
ground knowledge. Starting in 1982, we made a series of
enthralling trips to India to examine all the ways in which
the Mahabharata is staged therein the various dancing
schools and among certain tribes, according to the traditional
Teyyam, Kathakali and Yaksagana dance-drama forms. We
spent a long time working with various troupes. What we
were trying to assess was the presence of the epic in the life
of India today and the precise level of energy required by
each sequence.
What exactly do you mean by that?
India taught us, above all, that a certain dose of vitality,
of necessary energy, has to be put into a show. Not too
much, not too little, just the amount required so that it never
becomes solemn or didactic but remains a lively, lived ex¬
perience. The great lesson we learned from India can be
summed up in two words: "respectful familiarity".
In addition, we wanted to integrate into our vision all
the images of India, from the maharajahs' palaces to the
shanty towns. I made one trip, accompanied by Peter and

Chloe Obolensky, with the sole aim of visiting one cloth-
seller after another. Strange as this may seem, the warp and
weft, the very texture of a piece of cloth, can help an author
to write more trulyor more concisely.
During these trips, did you remain merely a spectator
absorbing impressions?
No, I also began writing. First, however, I made lists
of words that I forbade myself to use. Words are never in¬
nocent. They exercise their own tyranny and a writer has
to be very aware of this when adapting a text from another
culture.
One has to beware of words which violate, which betray
the text because they are too culturally loaded, because they
exert their own exclusivity, because they erase certain ideas
and images and conjure up others. I could not, for example,
use such words as "knight", "sword", or "sin", or, for more
subtle reasons, "silhouette" or "unhorsed".
Take the word "unconscious". If I had used this word
I would have been perpetrating an imperceptible, but abso¬
lute, irreparable betrayal. In Hinduism and Buddhism there
is a perfectly understood and defined meaning of "uncons¬
cious" which has not the remotest connection with the Freu¬
dian sense of the word, with its sexual connotations, as it
is understood today in the West. In India it is known that
a human being thinks without knowing that he is thinking
and that his consciousness is more widely extended, in all
directions, than his thought.
This concept is rendered in Sanskrit by an expression
which might be translated as something like "the secret
movements of the Atman", Atman meaning "soul", "vital
breath", or "innermost essence". Obviously one cannot put
a phrase like that baldly in a play, any more than one can
translate it by "unconscious". I searched high and low for
an equivalent, which I eventually found in the works of the
great African writer Hampâté Bâ.
Reading his novel Wangrin's Strange Destiny, I found
two very simple words placed side by side: "deep" and
"heart". Juxtaposed, they seemed to me to form a magical
phrase and I used it three or four times in the play. It goes
very well, as when Krishna says to Bhishma: "Do you not
feel it, in your deep heart...?" Imagine how it would have
come across if Krishna had said: "Do you not feel it, in your
unconscious...?"
Later, when reading la potière jalouse (The Jealous Pot¬
ter's Wife), by Claude Lévi-Strauss, I found the same image
of the "deep heart" in a translation from an Amerindian
text. Did he discover it directly, or did he get it, like me,
from Hampâté Bâ? I was much moved to come across it and
to ponder on the beauty of such a linguistic voyage.
You had to eliminate certain words outright from your
vocabulary. Were there other words that, on the contrary,
you made greater use of?
Yes, simple, accessible words which travel across
\Jpposite page, Arjuna and the son
of King Virata go to war.
1 he princesses' night of love.

cultures without difficulty. Wide-ranging words like
"blood", which means the red liquid flowing in our veins,
the link of kinship, or quality (we refer to a thoroughbred
horse as a blood-horse); the word "heart", which means the
organ that circulates the blood, but also courage (as in the
phrase "take heart") or sincerity (as in heartfelt); the words
"life" and "death". All these are inoffensive, unaggressive
words which have their place in texts which pass readily
from one culture to another.
While keeping the original names of the characters, I
elected to eliminate most Sanskrit words and to find equiva¬
lents. However, I made a few exceptions. I kept the word
"Dharma", for instance, because it is central to the whole
theme. After all, it was to "inscribe Dharma in the hearts
of men" that Vyasa wrote his epic. The concept of Dhar¬
ma is of ancient Indian invention. Dharma is the law which
governs the order of the world. It is also the secret, personal
law of behaviour that each one of us carries within and
which must be obeyed. The Dharma of each individual, if
respected, is the guarantee of the cosmic order. If the Dhar¬
ma is protected, it in turn protects; but if it. is destroyed,
it destroys.
This reciprocity between the singular and the multiple,
between the particular and the general, is peculiar to and
lies at the very heart of Indian thought, as expressed in the
poem; a reciprocity which today, as in the past, evokes many
echoes.



Was it yourpurpose, in choosing these key words, to mark
out the space within which two cultures could sing in har¬
mony with each other, and the one within the other?
Absolutely. I was marking out a territory.
Would you say that the series of trips you made to India
helped you to rediscover the truth of the Mahabharata
because it was there that it was created?
I would say the "truths" of the work, or at least some
of its truths. There is no "single" authentic interpretation
of the Mahabharata. Ask a Hindu holy man from the south
and a marxist professor from Calcutta about it and you will
get different replies, both of them interesting. We do not
claim, finally, to have given "the" truth of the work, simply
one version among manyour version, in the West, in the
1980s.
Nor do I think that we should limit ourselves to com¬
mentaries on the work, interesting as they may be. As the
French specialist on Indo-European mythologies Georges
Dumézil said: "...the essential thing is that it should be beau¬
tiful." In our view, this vast epic, unfolding with the subtle
majesty of a river of inexhaustible riches, defies all analysis,
whether structural, thematic, historical or psychological.
Doors are continually opening, which lead on to other
doors. The Mahabharata cannot be held in the hollow of
one's hand. There are many ramifications. Sometimes seem¬
ingly contradictory, they succeed each wther and intertwine,

Interview with Jean-Claude Carrière
The Mahabharata,
the Great History of Mankind
56
but we never lose the central theme of a looming threat,
to which everything starkly points. We are living in a time
of destruction. The question is, can we avoid it?
What guidelines did you follow in making your adapta¬
tion of the work?
Our first preoccupation was to avoid sacrificing any of
the levels of the work. The Mahabharata says that Krishna
is one of the avatars of Vishnu. Some of the characters be¬
lieve this, others do not. In India there have always been
divergent views on this. For a marxist, Krishna is a phan¬
tasm, for a rishi, a Hindu holy man, he is a god. We take
no sides in the argument since we must eliminate no view¬
point on the basis of this or that a priori judgement. The
uncertainty expressed in the original work has to be respect¬
ed, that's all. Some members of our audiences must be able
to see divinity in Krishna; others must be allowed to doubt it.
Very often in the Mahabharata Krishna does not know
what is going to happen. How can this be? As a god is he
not omniscient? I had a discussion on this point with
Shankaracharya, one of the great living holy men of southern
India. I put the question to him in a number of different
ways, but he eluded it good-humouredly. I asked him how
it could be that, during a battle, Krishna did not know what
was happening on the battlefield as a whole, and that he
could be surprised and even worried. Could a god or a man-
god have human weaknesses? To which Shankaracharya
replied with a smile and said something like: "It is a human
weakness to think so."
When you began writing, did you start at the beginning
of the poem?
No, I started making a patchwork, by writing certain
scenes. In the Mahabharata there are a number of set pieces
or obligatory scenes, such as the one in which Kunti con¬
fesses to Kama that she is his mother. I knew that sooner
or later I would have to write scenes such as this. However,
there were other sequences that were in the form of narra¬
tive in the original and which would have to be turned into
scenes by creating dramatic situations, confronting one
character with another and seeing if anything emerged. A
good third of the scenes in the play are not scenes in the
original poem.
I began, like a dancer, with the set pieces, while still try¬
ing to find the right forms of expression. It took a long time.
I wrote the first scenes either in Paris or in India. I read them
immediately to Peter Brook, to our close collaborators and
to our musicians when they were there. I remember hav¬
ing read scenes in airports between two flights, and one even¬
ing in Madras, in a taxi caught in an interminable traffic
jam. That is how our Mahabharata came into being, in dribs
and drabs, written sometimes on a grubby paper tablecloth
in a café. When I read them out, I could sense whether the
scenes worked, what should be kept in, what should be left
out and what would have to be reworked.
The time came when I had a first draft of all the set
pieces. I then turned to the others, those that had to be in¬
vented, and this was much more difficult. Peter asked me
to take part in the auditions with the actors, to go through
a three- to four-page scene with them as if I myself was an
actor. For Peter and his assistant it was a way of audition¬
ing both the actors and the scene. So I had to take the plunge.
That way you have a much better idea of what works and
what doesn't work. There were scenes that I wrote straight
off, in ten minutes, in which not a word was changed. Then
there were others that I wrote and rewrote twenty-five times
without ever achieving a perfect result.
Finally, there was a really harrowing period. The open¬
ing date for the show was already fixed, auditions were start¬
ing for the actors and I still had not found an overall
structure to hold the whole play together. There was a story,
related in a series of scenes, but how could all these scenes
be made to hang together? I still hadn't found the solution.
We were only four months away from the date fixed
for the first rehearsals. I decided to take a break in the south
of France, in the country house of some friends of mine.
There, for the only time in my life, something quite in¬
describable happened to me, something one reads about in
books without really believing it: inspiration.
It was three o'clock in the morning. Normally I sleep
well, but that night I couldn't sleep. There was something
on my mind. Suddenly, and I couldn't tell you how it hap¬
pened, I saw the first twenty minutes of the play, from which
everything else would follow.
It was the dialogue between the child and the old
storyteller with which the play opens:
-"Can you write?"
-"No, why?"
Then the arrival of Ganesha and the beginning of the
story, everything unfolded before my eyes as if I were a
member of the audience. It was quite extraordinary. I jot¬
ted everything down. The theatrical key had been found.
It was based on a trianglea storyteller, a god and a child
and on an uncertainty: which of the two, Ganesha or
Krishna, had invented the other? The narrator and his

listener would see the characters acting out their lives before jected to many alterations and additions. Nevertheless, one
them, could touch them and speak to them. I had the can sense that it is a single work written by a single author,
keystone of my edifice. With relief, I fell asleep. The next Georges Dumézil was also of this opinion,
morning I telephoned Peter and told him about it. "No need I think that this is an important point to make, because
to look any further," he said, "you've got it." the introduction of the notion of an author brings with it
a specifically human element. And this is the point at which
Was it really all over? we deviate from the path of revealed truth to enter the world
Yes and no. The overall structure, the theatrical foun- of the epic. In a certain fashion, for better or for worse, an
dation, was in place. But there was so much left to do. I epic helps a society to become organized. It is the great corn-
attended all the rehearsals, making a thousand and one cor- mon saga, drawing inspiration from the god's, but already
rections to meet the problems the actors encountered. Then, talking about man. This is surely a vital stage in the found-
at every stage, when the performances started, when we ing of a society. Each of the characters in the Mahabharata
made the English version, when we wrote the television has a divine alter ego at first. Little by little they forget that
series, when we went on to the film to which we were put- they are the children of gods; they begin to face up to the
ting the finishing touches, there were many things to review, most trivial and mundane problems and, in so doing, they
For example, it was only when writing the screenplay for become mere humans. This, in a sense, is the function of
the film that I found the solution to a problem I had been the epicto cut the cords that bind the leading actors to
unable to resolve in the play. Today, if it had to be done the heavenly world of the gods and set their feet firmly on
over again, I would write it differently. the ground, to set them face to face with their problems
as individuals and then as citizens. The law, and indeed laws,
Has this tremendous experience left you with any specific aided and reinforced by the prestige of poetry, have to be
ideas about or overall impressions of the Mahabharata or established. In the chaos of the human world, a lasting, co-
ofihe epic form in general? herent order has to be sought and given some apparent
Georges Dumézil thought that the Mahabharata was an justification,
adaptation in epic form of a fifth Veda (ancient Hindu scrip- This seemed very clear to me from the Mahabharata, as
ture) which has been lost. I have neither his erudition nor it does from the Iliad and from the Odyssey. It was the guid-
his authority, but I have come to the same conclusion. While ing concept behind the writing of the play and its direction,
reading the Mahabharata and the Vedas, I could'sense a link At the beginning, Peter Brook's setting was light, ethereal
between them but also a difference. It is not easy to ana- and unreal, bathed in divine grace. Gradually it grew heavi-
lyse; one has to try to feel these things, even when one er, subject to the weight and gravity of life on earth, to end
doesn't altogether understand them. unambiguously in the mire. The earth, as a character, plays
The Vedas are ascribed to no author. They are revealed a progressively more important role. We see a society be-
texts which simply proclaim the truth. All cultures have coming organized and then rent as it cuts itself off from its
similar texts, written or oral, which proclaim the truth, celestial youth,
which tell the people where they came from, what their place
is on this earth and how they must live to maintain that How do you feel after this experience?
place. When an author takes a hand, because he invents, be- In The Conference ofthe Birds, by the Persian poet Farid
cause he creates, he deviates from the path of truth, introduc- od-Din 'Attar, three butterflies discuss the nature of a candle,
ing an untruth or an error, and in a sense becomes an exile The first one approaches it to have a look and comes back
from the community which sees itself reflected in that mythi- saying: "It is light." The second butterfly goes closer, burns
cal truth. its wing and comes back saying: "It burns." The third
Epic poems deviate cautiously from the revealed, mythi- butterfly goes even closer, flies into the flame and does not
cal truth and even from legendary history. An epic is truly return. It has learned what it wanted to know, what it alone
a creative work, the work of an author, even though it at- knows. But it cannot tell the others. This parable cannot
tempts to keep in contact with the myth. The Mahabharata be bettered. There is always a third and last circle to enter,
is, indeed, the work of a creative writer. We can be sure and if you do so you can no longer talk about it. You know,
of this, even though we may not know anything about the but you cannot communicate what you know to anyone
author, because from the beginning to the end of the poem, else,
someone has, as it were, taken events in hand. At the end
we find threads that can be traced back to the beginning. So the theatre is merely the second circle?
And the style of writing is the same. Written down and I recently read a beautiful Persian poem which said:
copied many times between the fourth century BC and the "Last night a voice whispered in my ear: 'No such thing
third century AD, this vast epic has, of course, been sub-, exists as a voice that whispers in the ear at night'."
57
