THE ARAB WORLD Where geometry and

algebra intersect Historian of science Roshdi Rashed on
the Arab contribution to the history of
mathematics
1 he city of Baghdad as
depicted in a Turkish
miniature of 1534.
How would you describe the beginnings ofArab
mathematics?
Arab research into mathematics seems to have
begun early in the ninth century when, in Bagh¬
dad, the movement to translate the great Greek
authors into Arabic was at its height. For in¬
stance, Al-Hajjaj ibn Matar made two translations
of Euclid's Elements and Ptolemy's Almagest, and
Hilal ibn Hilal al-Himsi translated the first four
volumes of Apollonius of Perga's Conies. Sever¬
al works by Archimedes, Pappus and Diophan-
tus, among others, were also translated in the
same century.
This major undertaking was noteworthy for
two very important features, in that the transla¬
tions were made by leading mathematicians and
were inspired by the most advanced research of
the time. For example, volumes V to VII of Apol¬
lonius' Conies were translated by the great
mathematician Thabit ibn Qurrah, who died in
the year 901. Moreover, all the indications are
that Qusta ibn Luqa was prompted to translate
the Arithmetica of Diophantus around 870 on ac¬
count of studies already being carried out on in¬
determinate analysis.1
Many other examples could be cited to
demonstrate the close links between such trans¬
lations and the innovative research already being
done at this high point in the dissemination of
Hellenistic mathematics in Arabic.
Al-Khwarizmi is the best known of the Arab
mathematicians.What was his contribution to
mathematical thinking?
It was at this time, in the ninth century, at
the Baghdad Academy, or "House of Wisdom"
as it was known, that al-Khwarizmi wrote a
work that represented a new departure in terms
of both content and style. This was the Kitab
al-jabr wa'l muqabalah ("The Book of Integration
and Equation"),2 from which algebra emerged
for the first time as a separate and independent
mathematical discipline. This was a crucial
development, and was recognized as such by
al-Khwarizmi's contemporaries, as much for its
new mathematical style as for the nature of its
subject-matter and above all for the rich promise
it held out for further advances.
In terms of style, it was both algorithmic, in
that the author set out a series of computational
procedures, and demonstrative. A new mathemat¬
ics had to be devised that was general enough to
be capable of handling different types of formu¬
lation while existing independently of those for¬
mulations. In al-Khwarizmi's work, an algebraic 37

Detail from a treatise on
equations by Sharif al-Din
al-Tusi
(late 12th-early 13th
century). The manuscript
dates from 1297.
expression could refer to a number or to an irra¬
tional quantity or to a geometrical magnitude.
This new mathematics and its combination of the
demonstrative and applied approaches was a strik¬
ing innovation for the thinkers of the time.
The novelty of the conception and style of
al-Khwarizmi's algebra, which did not hark back
to any previously known tradition, cannot be
over-emphasized. The new algebra already afford¬
ed a glimpse of the enormous potential for ap¬
plying one mathematical discipline to another
that lay ahead from the ninth century onwards.
In other words, while algebra, by virtue of its
widespread scope and the new concepts it in¬
troduced, made such applications possible, their
number and variety were thereafter constantly
to change the face of mathematics.
Al-Khwarizmi's successors increasingly ap¬
plied arithmetic to algebra and vice versa, arith¬
metic and algebra to trigonometry, algebra to the
Euclidian theory of numbers, and algebra to ge¬
ometry and vice versa. All these applications
-
-
-
-
a»
-
-
'- -
^
38
paved the way for new disciplines or at least for
new chapters in the history of mathematics.
Could you give us a significant example of the
encounter between arithmetic and algebra?
One example that springs to mind is the con¬
tribution which Arab mathematics made to clas¬
sical number theory.
By the end of the ninth century, the most im¬
portant Greek texts on arithmetic, such as Eu¬
clid's own volumes on the subject, the Introductio
arithmeticae of Nicomachus of Gerasa, and the
Arithmetica of Diophantus of Alexandria, had all
been translated. Further chapters in the theory
of numbers were opened in the wake of these
translations and could in a sense be said to have
been a reply to them. For example, two signifi¬
cant steps were taken in respect of the theory of
amicable numbers. The first of these led, in the
context of Euclidian arithmetic, to a new set of
findings, while, as a result of the application of
algebra to the theory of numbers, the second step
culminated some centuries later in the creation
of a field of number theory that owed nothing
to the Greeks. We can look into these two aspects
more closely.
Although Euclid put forward a theory of per¬
fect numbers at the end of Volume IX of his Ele¬
ments, neither he nor Nicomachus of Gerasa had
developed the theory of amicable numbers.3
Thabit ibn Qurrah, who translated the work of
Nicomachus and revised a translation of the Ele¬
ments, decided to work on this theory. He came
up with and demonstrated, in pure Euclidian
style, a remarkable formula for amicable num¬
bers which now bears his name.
If we disregard the mystique which had sur¬
rounded amicable numbers and look only at the
mathematics, it has to be acknowledged that, up
to the end of the seventeenth century at least, the
history of amicable numbers merely consisted of
a passing reference to Ibn Qurrah's formula and
its transmission by later mathematicians. These
included such Arabic-speaking mathematicians as
al-Antaki, al-Bagdadi, ibn al-Banna, al-Umawi and
al-Kashi, whose differing origins in both time and
place clearly show the widespread dissemination
of Ibn Qurrah's formula, which crops up again
in the work of Pierre de Fermât in 1636 and in
that of René Descartes in 1638.
The second step is noteworthy for the fact
that the celebrated physicist and mathematician
Kamal al-Din al-Farisi, who died in 1320, wrote
a paper in which he deliberately set out to demon¬
strate Ibn Qurrah's formula, but by a different
path. Al-Farisi based his new demonstration on
a systematic knowledge of the divisors of a whole
number and of the operations that can be applied
to them. However, this demonstration involved
a reorganization which gave rise not only to a
change in the perspective of Euclidian arithmet¬
ic, but to the promotion of new topics in num¬
ber theory. It accordingly became possible to
speak of a non-Hellenistic area in number theory.

Ç»V-r a» aaa* tW aV* .Jr"*1"»- **"
t^vaW ^*Aaou_ya«AaÎ4a. q r-*at ar
Ci*-'. aVvaí. üfL-yCtt í/*» Í»-C lfr.ll»»* .»»V V
aKi -î,i *_<*<* a»»*» ait^ ar*air-«**
P/ - -
r,»w*iiV.«*.a^r ^ x	^
. '^Maaaal AtM .. i-\j-&
(lihail'UMfclSti««-»»!«'!««*
f\ «alita* » »V** ^aa, r»" f
_}fV|^ 5.W.I Clavan« r^íHt ^í-VvCKfíf fc
-'a. a. ..a 3aC ,aT~aaa. *-tl5 aij*t r4 Xe.
i?t*lfcZL» i*yr\¿ifi¿^iixight, part of a Latin
translation of al-
Khwarizmi's treatise on
algebra in a manuscript
dating from 1145. Far
right, a commentary on
Euclid's Elements of
Geometry by Nasir al-Din
al-Tusi (1201-1274).
(15th-century Persian
manuscript)
In order to make it possible to engage in this
new study of divisors, al-Farisi had to establish
explicitly certain facts that had only been latent
in Euclid's Elements. He also had to make use of
the advances in algebra since al-Karaji's time in
the tenth and eleventh centuries, and especially
of combinatory methods. Hence, al-Farisi's ap¬
proach was by no means confined to demonstrat¬
ing Ibn Qurrah's formula, but enabled him to
embark on a new study involving the first two
arithmetical functions: the sum of the divisors of
a whole number and the number of those
divisors.
This style, which applied algebra and com¬
binatory analysis to Euclidian arithmetic, was still
prevalent in Europe in the seventeenth century,
at least until 1640. The analysis of al-Farisi's con¬
clusions and of the methods he used thus goes
to show that, by as early as the thirteenth centu¬
ry, it had been possible to produce a set of propo¬
sitions, findings and techniques that had hitherto
been ascribed to the mathematicians of the seven¬
teenth century.
What about the new relationship that was
established between algebra and geometry?
We have already seen that the mathematical
landscape was no longer the same from the ninth
century onwards; it was transformed and its
frontiers were rolled back. Greek arithmetic and
geometry became increasingly widespread. In ad¬
dition, non-Hellenistic areas were developed wi¬
thin the corpus of Hellenistic mathematics itself.
The relationship between the old disciplines was
no longer the same, and a host of other group¬
ings were formed. This changing pattern is cru¬
cial to an understanding of the history of
$_*, A-aî.*f rt -J»» af « .)* a* a.ta
(it- j,""aa j_--4-^ J)t>-~a .a«^»-
a^a~ afcaWai (A*»*5*.^« Üa*¿ t>«»« ,?U>Jaa, ûa&a)
<««*naH ïùijv.nv» mV ACaVtCaaVâaJaV v-«-«aît"a-j
.v-^ä^£~i; Ait lifT^cvieZte^S-tgl T¿+~r'X
lf*r-*,'',J,'**,;i-* n*-!««.« *
. wl
H*&>jB
ifHaa JVÄ- f~t a.» va« J*J.tV f-z'
*-<f**$cip£»4?f~*
Líi*í -»»S «~a«-â Ha-.'^f-^fc; JL» Caa»î.	» ia-a<Aaa*< .afra) « Jf_
* . ,.*" ** ^TtÍT*" »TÜ*!*1 a^-ta-?*»^» ai/» n-falj
/^Y
I A
V
\i.'v.v73-«.v
'.4Vc-*.^C''v
; a« -i~ »/»-a^-4 '"
Xa-i'rfjJP^ij/^-iJjiJ^Jlï/i^ui/j i
jJgVj-a-o-j Ja> Aíjt-á-yatJj. JlaiJj.aP
¿jai > *"g/Ù ' 't-ilr'lijSplJ S Ja a¿>
^Ja> a»a-l^aiacii't^'^<a*> -{J^
Ja^j^tr>aWW^/WJ>^'>>'aWU>-
mathematics generally, for the new relationship
between algebra and geometry gave rise to tech¬
niques of enormous potential.
The mathematicians of the tenth century em¬
barked on a two-way exercise in conversion
which had never previously been envisagedthe
translation of geometrical problems into the lan¬
guage of algebra, and vice versa. They translated
into algebraic terms solid problems that could not
be constructed with ruler and compass, such as
the trisection of the angle, the two means, and
the regular heptagon. Moreover, algebraists and
also geometers such as Abu al-Jud b. al-Leith,
when faced with the difficulty of using radicals
to solve a cubic equation, were able to turn to
the language of geometry and apply the intersect
ing curves technique to the study of this type oi
equation.
The first attempts to provide a basis for these
conversions were made by al-Khayyam (c.
1048-1131). In his bid to go beyond the specific
cases represented by a particular form of cubic
equation, al-Khayyam developed a theory of al¬
gebraic equations of a degree less than or equal
to three which at the same time provided a new
model for the formulation of equations. He then
studied cubic equations using conic sections in
order to reach positive real solutions for them.
In order to construct his theory, al-Khayyam had
to visualize the new relationship between algebra
and geometry in clearer terms before being able
to formulate it. From then onwards, the theory
of equations appeared, albeit still tentatively, to
bridge the gap between algebra and geometry.
In his celebrated treatise Algebra, al-Khayyam
produced two remarkable findings which histori¬
ans have wrongly attributed to Descartes. These
ROSHDI HASHED,
of France, is director of
research at the National
Centre for Scientific
Research (CNRS). He is the
author of many studies on
the history of Arah
mathematics. Several of his
articles were published in
Entre arithmétique et
algèbre, Recherches sur
l'histoire des mathématiques
arabes (ï.es Belles Lettres
publishers, Paris, 1984).
39

f?Mi
ïït
IUH
m
-

Left, the Istanbul
observatory is shown in
this Turkish miniature
dating from 1581.
JKight, title of a
manuscript of 1228 which
sets forth the theory of
amicable numbers
formulated by Thabit ibn
Qurrah (d. 901).
1. The last five books of
Diophantus' Arithmctica are
principally devoted to the
solution of indeterminate
equations, i.e. those with more
than one variable and a large
number of solutions. Editor
2. The word algebra is derived
from the title of this work which
was translated into Latin many
times in the Middle Ages and had
a strong influence on medieval
Western science. The word
algorithm, which designates any
method of computation (such as
the decimal system) involving a
series of steps, is derived from the
Latinized form of al-Khwarizmi's
name. Editor
3. A number is perfect if it is
equal to the sum of its own
divisors (for example 6 = 3 + 2
+ 1; 28 = 14 + 7 + 4 + 2 + 1).
Two integers form a pair of
amicable numbers if the sum of
the proper divisors of one is
equal to the other. This is true of
the numbers 220 and 284, which
were for a long time the only
known pair of amicable numbers.
are the generalized solution of all third-degree
equations by means of two intersecting curves,
and the possibility of performing a geometric cal¬
culation by defining a unit length, which was a
fundamental concept.
Some fifty years after al-Khayyam, his suc¬
cessor Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi made a further step
forward. In an attempt to demonstrate the exis¬
tence of the point of intersection of two curves,
he arrived at the problems of finding and separat¬
ing the roots of the equation and of dealing with
the conditions under which they existed. In ord¬
er to find a solution he defined the notion of max¬
imum values for an algebraic expression and tried
to find concepts and methods for determining
such "maxima".
This not only led al-Tusi to the development
of concepts and methods, such as derivatives, that
were only to be named as such at a later date,
but also compelled him to change his approach.
He discovered the need to use local procedures,
whereas his predecessors had only considered the
overall properties of the objects being studied. All
these findings and the theory embracing them are
obviously important and have often been at¬
tributed to mathematicians who only came sever¬
al centuries later.
These are the main features of the dialectic


between algebra and geometry. To complete the
picture, however, two impediments which
slowed down the progress of the new mathemat¬
ics should be mentioned. These were a reluctance
to use negative numbers as such, at a time when
they had not yet been defined, and the shortcom¬
ings of symbolic notation. Both issues were to
preoccupy later mathematicians.
In political historiography distinctions are made
between Antiquity, the Middle Ages, the Renais¬
sance and modern times. Do you think that this
breakdown is relevant in an account of the his¬
tory ofmathematics, and especially of the Arab
contribution?
It is true that "medieval" mathematics has been
contrasted with "modern" mathematics. The first
historical corpus, covering Latin, Byzantine and
Arab mathematics, and Indian and Chinese
mathematics as well, could be distinguished from
another body of work which came into being
with the Renaissance. I don't feel that this
dichotomy is relevant in either historical or
epistemological terms. Arab mathematics clear¬
ly represents a continuation and outgrowth of
Hellenistic mathematics, which was its breeding-
ground. This is also true of the mathematics
which grew up in the Latin world from the
twelfth century onwards. Finally, the work ac¬
complished in both Arabic and Latin (or Italian)
between the ninth century and the early seven¬
teenth century cannot be split into separate
periods.
On the contrary, all the indications are that
the type of mathematics involved was the same.
This is borne out by the fact that we can now
compare the work on algebra and numerical com¬
putation produced by al-Samaw'al in the twelfth
century with that of Simon Stevin in the six¬
teenth century; al-Farisi's findings in number the¬
ory with those of Descartes; the methods used
by al-Tusi for the numerical resolution of equa¬
tions with that of François Viète in the sixteenth
century or al-Tusi's search for maxima with
that of Fermât; al-Khazin's work on integral
Diophantine analysis in the tenth century with
that of Bachet de Meziriac in the seventeenth cen¬
tury, and so on. If we were to disregard the work
of al-Khwarizmi, Abu Kamil, al-Karaji and others,
how could we understand the work of Leonardo
of Pisa and the other Italian mathematicians in
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, or the
mathematics of the seventeenth century?
True, the later seventeenth century was
marked by the emergence of new methods and
new areas of mathematical interest in Europe.
However, that break did not necessarily occur all
of a sudden, nor did it take place at the same time
in every discipline. Moreover, the dividing lines
seldom coincide with the works of different
authors, but often cut right across them. In num¬
ber theory, for example, the innovation did not
lie in Descartes' and Fermat's use of algebraic
methods, as has been claimed, since they simply
rediscovered al-Farisi's findings. The break can
actually be identified within Fermat's own work
around 1640, with his invention of the "infinite
descent" method and his study of certain quad¬
ratic forms.
It was really from the mid-seventeenth cen¬
tury onwards that the tangled threads come
together and the main breaks in continuity are
identifiable. The contribution made by the Arab
mathematicians thus fitted into a coherent pat¬
tern which grew up between the ninth century
and the first half of the seventeenth century.
41
