A city
of towers
. .an(^
traditions
BY SARAH ZARMATI
IN 1878, an Englishwoman named Isabella Bird
toured Japan on foot, horseback and by sedan-
chair. On her arrival at Shiganawa station (then
one of Tokyo's two railway stations), she noticed
that the houses, temples and public buildings
were all low and in many cases enveloped in a
profusion of greenery. In this great city, which
already had more than 800,000 inhabitants, there
was no sign of smoke nor of factory chimneys.
When she saw the blue waters of the bay and the
fishing smacks drawn up on the shore, she ex¬
claimed "Where is Tokyo?".1
Today Tokyo has over 10 million inhabitants
and the only green spaces are to be found in a
few parks, in temple precincts and around the Im¬
perial palace. Almost all its districts bristle with
tower blocks, while industrial development and
expressways have covered over the waterways,
the beaches and most access roads to the bay,
whose water is now grey. Nevertheless people
still wonder "where is Tokyo?" and especially
how to find their way around there.
There seem to be two independent networks
of streets in Tokyo. There are the functional and
impersonal major arteries, with their imposing
tower blocks, dense traffic and multicoloured
neon signs. There is also a labyrinth of alleys and
passages lined with low-roofed houses, narrow
streets where the pedestrian still takes precedence
over the motorist. The usual landmarks such as 15

16
major axes, vistas and monuments, that help vi¬
sitors to find their way around a city, either do
not exist or are hard to find. Instead of joining
the different parts of the city, many of the prin¬
cipal streets seem to separate and isolate them.
A conglomeration
of villages
Another of Tokyo's distinctive features is its lack
of a centre, although it bears only a very superfi¬
cial resemblance to that other great city without
a centre, Los Angeles, whose linear development
seems to have been determined by the railway
and later by the automobile. In Tokyo, the major
axes between districts were built after the earth¬
quake of 1923, when the city already had more
than 3 million inhabitants. There is no focal point
partly because Tokyo has developed through the
gradual amalgamation of a number of villages,
which have, unusually, survived intact in the
heart of the modern city.
At one



with nature
Except in the old cities of Nara and Kyoto,
modelled on Changan in China, the geometric
city layout has never been favoured in Japan.
Japanese town planning seems to have been a
response either to military needs, with impasses
and mazy streets built as obstacles to invading
forces, or to have been influenced by factors such
as the natural features of the site, a wish to inte¬
grate with existing buildings and to meet the
changing needs of the population. Whereas many
Western cities have a linear plan which reflects
the primacy of motor traffic, the pedestrian has
always been paramount in Japanese town plan¬
ning. The primacy of nature can still be felt in
Tokyo, where the few vistas are not aligned with
monuments but with natural features such as
Mount Fuji or Mount Tsukuba.
The French scholar Augustin Berque has said
of traditional Japanese town planning that "the
logic of the streets adds to the impression of
movement, of getting somewhere", that "the
journey is more important than the destination",
and that "this weakening of the transit function
subordinates the street to the district which it ir¬
rigates."2 The neighbourhood is the basic unit in
(organized children's
games in Tokyo's Kakigara
district. The street had been
closed to traffic for the day.
1 ea ceremony at the
wisteria festival,
Kameido Tanjin.
SARAH ZARMATI,
American landscape
specialist, is adviser to the
Franco-Japanese Co¬
operation Programme for
Urban Development and a
consultant with the
National Landscape School
at Versailles, France. She is
a member of the editorial
board of Paysage et
Aménagement magazine,
and (with Catherine Royer)
the author of a book on
French parks and gardens
from 1900 to 1945, to be
published later this year.

Tokyo. The cultural and social life of the city can
only be understood in terms of each neighbour¬
hood, especially its small traditional streets.
Community spirit
The streets of Tokyo, like those of other Asian
cities, are crowded with market stalls, and daily
life spills out of accommodation which is often
cramped. Pot plants adorn the pavements and
streets as well as windowsills, and casually-dressed
local people can often be seen sitting outside chat¬
ting with their neighbours or taking the air on
fine evenings.
Many community events take place in the
street. Each district organizes traditional festivals,
called matsuri. In Europe, festivals often take
place in public squares, whereas in Japanese ci¬
ties they tend to take the form of a procession.
A festival begins in the temple. A procession then
emerges from the sacred precincts and wends its
way through the streets of the neighbourhood be¬
fore spreading out into spacious avenues. Big
crowds take part in these festivals, and even on
the main roads traffic slows down or stops while
the procession goes by.
The use of public areas for community ac¬
tivities takes other forms. In spring, garlands of
plastic flowers are hung on telegraph poles and
lamp standards to herald the flowering of cherry
blossom and wisteria. Every day, ubiquitous loud¬
speakers announce the end of school and other
events of general interest. Advance warnings of
air pollution are also made by loudspeaker. Each
neighbourhood also has its kooban (small police
station) for maintaining order and providing
visitors with information.
As a result of growing concern about earth¬
quakes and fire, the city authorities are being led
to sacrifice these little streets with their low
wooden houses in favour of wide avenues with
more fire- and quake-proof buildings.
Is one of the most lively features of Tokyo's
traditional way of life destined to disappear?
1. Unbeaten Tracks in Japan, by Isabella Bird. Charles E. Tuttle Co.,
Tokyo, 1973.
2. Vivre l'espace au Japon, by Augustin Berque. Presses Universitaires
de France, Paris, 1982.
1 op, taiko drums are
beaten to celebrate the
flowering of the azaleas in
the Shinto shrine at Nezu.
Above, traditional picnic
under the cherry trees in
Ueno Park.
17
