Gilgamesh,
the king who did not wish to die
After the death of his friend
Enkidu, Gilgamesh is forced to
accept that he too must die one
day. An epic composed thirty-five
centuries ago tells how Gilgamesh,
his dream, of immortality
shattered, comes to terms with the
human condition.
Oerigraph by the German
artist Willi Baumeister
(1889-1955) illustrates two
lines from the Epic of
Gilgamesh: "One double-hour
he travelled; Dense is the
darkness and there is no
light."
18
\Jpposite page, the hero
Gilgamesh is shown holding
a lion cub in this 8th-
century-BC Assyrian bas-
relieffrom the palace of
Sargon II at Khursabad
(Iraq).
%RITTEN over thirty-five centuries ago, the
ancient Mesopotamian epic of Gilgamesh is the
oldest extant epic in world history. Not only is
it an immortal triumph of literary creation, it is
also one of those vivid, venerable documents in
which the innermost thoughts of the most an¬
cient of our forefathers are still discernible
through the mists of the past.
Written in Akkadian, a language distantly
related to Arabic and Hebrew, and inscribed on
clay tablets in impressive, wedge-shaped cunei¬
form script, it covers eleven tablets, each of which
contains about 300 lines; a twelfth tablet was
added later. So far, over a period of more than
a century, about two-thirds of the work has been
recovered as additional fragments have been
found by chance during excavations in the
archaeologically-rich soil of Iraq. Today, despite
the gaps which remain, we can follow most of
the incidents and vicissitudes of the narration in
their sequence. Above all, we have a clear picture
of the scope and significance of the work.
We also know enough to realize that, from
the eighteenth century BC, the author, about
whom we are otherwise totally ignorant, drew
his inspiration from even more ancient folktales,
at least some of which had circulated as short,
individual legends. He succeeded in bringing
together these scattered threads and weaving them
into a coherent, original whole which has come
down tO'.us in the form of this grandiose, tragic
epic.
The human condition
The author took as his hero Gilgamesh, the cen¬
tral figure of these tales, a former monarch of the
country, who must have reigned in the ancient
city of Uruk in the middle of the third millenni¬
um BC. His name tells us little and we have no
other information about him apart from what is
recounted in the old legends. Yet despite his royal
title, duly brought to the reader's attention
throughout the epic, Gilgamesh figures in the nar¬
rative neither in a political or military role for
his battles and victories nor even as a national
hero. He is portrayed simply as a man, as a pre¬
eminent model and representative of each mem¬
ber of the human community.
Throughout the work, his over-riding con¬
cern is neither with conquest, the retention of
power and glory, nor with the prosperity of his

BYJEANBOTTÉRO
country and the diffusion of its culture, but with
the desperate search for a solution to the most
terrible of all problemshow to face up to death.
The Gilgamesh epic is first and foremost an ac¬
count of the drama of the human condition as
personified by the ancient king of Uruk, with his
adventures, dreams, hopes, sufferings and his final
acceptance of failure.
With total mastery of his art, the author
depicts the drama of the king's rise and fall. The
first six tablets portray his rise to the summit and
the remaining tablets his downfall. The epic may
have been set down in writing by order of Gil¬
gamesh himself on his return from his lengthy
travels, "weary and worn" after having "seen all
and committed everything to memory". He
wanted to pass on to posterity the essential les¬
son of his life.
The admired and prosperous king of Uruk
is at first depicted as a virtual superman, conscious
of his strength, convinced of his superiority and
tyrannizing the world around him. Alerted by
the grievances of the people, the gods decide to
intervene. They place the matter in the hands of
Enki, the most intelligent among them. Resorting
to a psychological subterfuge, Enki causes the cre¬
ation of a kind of double and counterpart to Gil¬
gamesh, a rival of equal stature and strength who
will strip him of his feeling of uniqueness and
turn him away from his excesses.
A memory, perhaps, preserved in legend, of
ancient antagonisms between the refined city-
dweller and the uncouth, "primitive" nomad, this
double is a "savage", born and raised on the
steppe beyond the limits of the civilized world.
His name, Enkidu ("creature of Enki") recalls his
origins.
Learning of the existence of this phenome¬
non and wishing to draw him to his presence, Gil¬
gamesh sends to him Lascivia, one of many
courtesans given up to the delights of "free love",
a major prerogative of the advanced civilization
of the city. Lascivia seduces Enkidu and converts
him to the ways of city life. The first encounter
between Gilgamesh and Enkidu is far from cor¬
dial. With each of them burning to assert his su¬
periority, they "grappled, with each other,
snorting like bulls". Later, however, "they kissed
one another and formed a friendship", for the
author deliberately sets out to transform the "ser¬
vant" of the legend into the intimate friend and
companion of Gilgamesh, his alter ego. 19

20
The two friends
Together the two companions embark upon the
great and dangerous adventure of the "Cedar
Forest". Popular tradition may have preserved
the memory of an immemorial urge which in¬
cited the people of Mesopotamia, a flat, bare land
of clay and reeds, to venture out to distant moun¬
tains in search of wood for building, stone and
metals. So Gilgamesh and Enkidu head towards
the northwest, towards Amanus and Lebanon.
Already the secret desire to transcend death by
the achievement of fame and glory is taking
shape: "IfIfall, " says Gilgamesh, "I will establish
a name for myself... An everlasting [name] I will
establish for myself."*
In several long stages, of which we have few
details except that each of them is marked by a
dream of good omen experienced by Gilgamesh
and interpreted by his friend, they reach the dark,
silent, mysterious immensity of the forest. Ac¬
cording to legend, the forest is guarded by the
fearsome giant Huwawa (or Humbaba), whom
the two friends finally overcome.
At this point the author, aware of misfortune
brewing quietly in the background, just as a dis¬
tant, scarcely audible murmur presages the com¬
ing of a storm, tells of the heroes' first error, the
first weight placed on the scales that will deter¬
mine their destiny. After hesitating as to the gi¬
ant's fate, they finally kill him. Free now to act
as they please, they cut down vast numbers of
the sacred cedarsthus committing their second
error. Loading the tree trunks on a boat, they sail
down the Euphrates and back to Uruk, where
they are received in triumph.
The two friends are now at the pinnacle of
their glory. However, a further incident occurs
which the author skilfully presents as a success,
but which, added to the two earlier events, will
be fraught with consequence. The goddess Ishtar
suddenly falls in love with Gilgamesh. Aware of
her fickleness, Gilgamesh rejects her advances in
scathing terms. In revenge, she asks her father,



Anu, king of the gods, to send against Uruk the
"Bull of Heaven", in the guise of which, accord¬
ing to legend, a terrible calamity had previously
been visited upon the city..
Gilgamesh and Enkidu slay the monster and
cut it to pieces. But falling once more into the
snare of excess which so often entraps the vic¬
torious, they compound this affront to Ishtar
when Enkidu throws one of the beast's haunches
in her face and threatens to make her a necker¬
chief of its entrails. Unaware of the imminence
of his downfall, Gilgamesh marks his triumph
with a brilliant celebration held in his palace. In
a drunken outburst, he declares himself to be "the
most splendid among the heroes, the most glori¬
ous among men."
Just as in life, in which our greatest successes
often foreshadow and set off a train of events
which leads to defeat or disaster, it is at this point
that the errors of the past have their combined
effect, that the gods react and the storm breaks.
At the start of the seventh tablet, after a terrible
nightmare in which he sees the gods in council
condemn him to death, Enkidu suddenly falls ill,
goes into a gradual decline and realizes that he
is going to die. He curses the courtesan who, by
raising him to a higher station in life, set him on
the road to misfortune, and expires in the arms
of his despairing friend. At first Gilgamesh is un¬
willing to believe that he is dead, refusing even
to heed the hideous appearance gradually taken
on by the dead man's corpse "until the worm fell
upon his face". For the first time the hero is ex¬
periencing real death and seeing the unbearable
image and presentiment of his own death con¬
jured up by the sudden extinction of his friend:
When I die, shall I not be like unto Enkidu?
Sorrow has entered my heart.
To rid himself of the thought with which he
is now obsessed and to find the remedy for death,
whose true face has been so cruelly revealed to
him, Gilgamesh sets off in quest of the secret of
eternal life.
'The gift of life everlasting'
He knows that the gods once gave the gift of ever¬
lasting life to one man, Utanapishtim ("I have
found life") the sole survivor of the Flood, thanks
to whom the continuance of the human race had
been assured. But after granting him this privilege,
the gods had set him apart from other mortals,
sending him to the end of the earth. Gilgamesh
decides to go and seek out Utanapishtim and to
learn from him the secret of this signal favour.
Arriving after an amazing, interminable jour¬
ney at the shores of the last distant sea separat¬
ing him from his goal, he encounters a mysterious
nymph, Siduri (the ale-wife), who lives in that iso¬
lated region and who warns him of the futility
of his quest:
Gilgamesh, whither runnest thou?
The life which thou seekest thou wilt not find.
[For] when the gods created mankind,
They allotted death to mankind,
[But] life they retained in their keeping.
Thou, O Gilgamesh, let thy belly be full;
Day and night be thou merry;
Make every day [a day of] rejoicing.
Day and night do thou dance and play.
Let thy raiment be clean,
Thy head be washed, [and] thyself be bathed
in water.
Cherish the little one holding thy hand,
[And] let thy wife rejoice in thy bosom.
This is the lot of [mankind]...
But lost in his dream of eternal life, he does
not heed her words and continues on his way.
When at last he finds himself in the presence of
Utanapishtim, he asks him outright how he ob¬
tained this miraculous favour of the gods. In re¬
ply, Utanapishtim recounts the story of the
Flood. He tells how the gods decided to destroy
the race of men they had created to serve them,
JEAN BOTTERO,
of France, is director of
studies in philological and
historical sciences at the
Ecole Pratique des Hautes
Etudes, Paris, and a
specialist on ancient
Mesopotamian civilization.
Among his recent published
works are Mésopotamie:
L'écriture, la raison et les
dieux ("Mesopotamia:
Writing, Reason and Gods",
1987) and, with Samuel
Noah Kramer, Lorsque les
dieux faisaient l'homme:
Mythologie mésopotamienne
("When the Gods made
Man: Mesopotamian
Mythology", 1989).

Kjilgamesh and Enkidu destroy the
Bull of Heaven and other monsters.
Plaster cast from an early
Mesopotamian cylinder seal
(2400 BC).
1 he story of the Flood as it is
recorded in the Epic of Gilgamesh.
Babylonian tablet from Nineveh
inscribed with cuneiform writing
(7th century BC).
but who had multiplied and whose noise prevent¬
ed them from sleeping.
Aware of the difficult situation the gods
would find themselves in once men had all
vanished, the god Enki, acting on his own, ar¬
ranged for one man to be spared, with all neces¬
sities, in a boat that would save him from the
Deluge. It was for this reason alone that the grate¬
ful gods had promised Utanapishtim that he
should never die. It was hardly likely that
Gilgamesh would ever find himself in a similar
situation.
Moreover, to show Gilgamesh that he is not
really made for everlasting life, Utanapishtim
challenges him to remain for just six days without
yielding to sleep, that daily rehearsal of death. Gil¬
gamesh takes up his challenge, but falls asleep on
the very first day. There is nothing left for him
to do but to depart, his dream shattered, with
nothing to show for all his efforts and sufferings:
For whom have my hands become weary?
For whom is the blood ofmy heart being spent?
Gilgamesh returns home and the author of
the epic, briefly depicting Uruk as a splendid opu¬
lent city, seems intent on bringing his hero, and
through him all men, back to the joys of this life,
which are, as the nymph Siduri had proclaimed,
"the lot of mankind".-
* Quotations from The Gilgamesh Epic and Old Testament
Parallels, by Alexander Heidel, Phoenix Books, University
of Chicago Press, 1963. 21
