BY IBN IYASRIVALRY 


IN THE RED SEA
Portugal's impact on the fortunes ofMamluk Egypt
¿r\
^¡Jrfk^~,t
"Arab merchants inhabiting the strait of Mecca, on the side of Arabia", the inscription on this illustration from a Portuguese codex is testimony to
the Portuguese presence in the Red Sea in the 16th century (see caption page 25).
Ibn Iyas, born in 1448 in Cairo, was the author of
a 6-volume history of Egypt, totalling over 3,000
pages. The chronicle opens, as was the custom at that
time, with the creation of the world and closes in
1522, shortly before its author's death.
During the last period recorded by Ibn Iyas,
Mamluk Egypt was experiencing her final days of
glory. The Egyptians were faced with a dual
challenge. To the north-east, Ottoman Turkey was
exerting growing pressure as a prelude to her
domination of the entire Islamic world. To the
north-west, Portugal, whose ships had rounded
Africa, thus gaining access to the trade routes of the
Indian Ocean, was threatening to destroy the
commercial lifeline which linked Egypt and the
Arab world with southern Asia.
In 1498, three ships under the command of Vasco
da Gama had dropped anchor at Calicut,
on the south-west coast of India.
The first European ships to reach India, they were
followed by fleet after fleet of Portuguese
merchantmen. In 1500, an Egyptian fleet lying
off Calicut was bombarded by the Portuguese,
and Portuguese vessels were stationed at the outlet
of the Red Sea to bar the way to Egyptian and
Arab ships bound for the Indian trade routes.
Egypt was to concede defeat on both counts. She
lost control of the seas at around the same time as
she relinquished her political independence to
Constantinople. For four long centuries, Egypt
would be shown on the maps of the Ottoman
empire as a mere administrative division.
We publish below an extract from Ibn Iyas'
lively and detailed account of this
dramatic turnabout in the history of Egypt,
in which he concentrates on the effect that the
Portuguese were having on Arab trade and on
Egyptian life.
30 	

RABÍ II 9II* (September 1505): The sultan formed an
expeditionary force to resist European incursions along
the coast of India. A large number of soldiers were
mobilized and the preparation of equipment was actively
pursued.
Djoumada II (November): This force included reservists



and Mamluks of the sultan's guard, most of whom were
Maghrebians, black archers and Turkomans. The sultan added
masons, carpenters and labourers to their number to build for¬
tified towers and a wall to surround the city of Jeddah. On Mon¬
day 6 (4 November) the army corps which had been assembled
for the Indian expedition left Cairo, to the cheers of a great
crowd. Husayn Mouchrif commanded the Mamluks, the Tur¬
komans and the Blacks, and the Maghrebians were under the
orders of Nour al-din Maslati. These troops, who had to travel
to Jeddah by sea, left Cairo to embark at Suez. By order of
the sultan, they were accompanied by a number of vessels load¬
ed with provisions and weapons.
Safar 912 (July 1506): News was received of the detachment
on its way to India to resist the European incursions. As soon
as he arrived at Jeddah, the commander-in-chief Husayn had
begun to construct towers along the coast, with the collabora¬
tion of Sonqour, the armourer, and Maslati, the Maghrebian.
This was the wisest thing to do, and the constructions were
very fine. The same army seized the port of Suakin unopposed,
the spices stored there were confiscated and the population
deported. The sultan greatly rejoiced at these successes.
Dhoul-Hidjdja (April-May 1507): The courier of the pil¬
grimage came back to report that the Egyptian army had
entered Mecca and had made the Pious Halt at Arafat. He added
that the Europeans were still making forays along the Indian
coast; that Husayn, the commander in chief of the army bound
for India, had begun the construction of towers on the shore
near Jeddah as well as round the city itself; and that ships were
ready to leave for Aden. The sultan appeared pleased with this
news. Later, the audacity of the Europeans knew no bounds:
over twenty of their ships dared to enter the Red Sea, attack¬
ing the Indian merchant vessels, lying in ambush to intercept
the convoys, and seizing cargoes, with the result that the impor¬
tation of many goods was interrupted. Because of this it was
very difficult to procure turbans and muslin veils in Egypt.
It was said that the Europeans had succeeded in breaching
the sea wall built by Alexander the Macedonian, son of Philip.
This breach had been made in a stretch of land separating the
sea route to China from the Mediterranean. For years the
Europeans had been desperately trying to widen this opening
to allow their vessels to enter the Red Sea. Such had been the
beginnings of this commercial, war.
Cha'ban 914 (December 1508): It was learned that the army
sent to India under the command of Amir Husayn had won
a victory over the Europeans who were overrunning the Indian
Ocean. A great quantity of booty had been taken. On the orders
of the sultan, who was overjoyed with this news, the sound
of drums resounded for three days together. Husayn asked for
reinforcements to bring the European troops to their knees.
11 Moharram 915 (1 May 1509): The chamberlain, Ala ad-
din, left for Tor to oversee the construction of vessels inten¬
ded for the Indian expedition.
Safar 915 (June 1509): It was learned that the army in India,
commanded by Husayn Mouchrif, had suffered a crushing
defeat. The Europeans had wiped it out and had plundered all
its ships. The sultan appeared extremely dismayed by this news.
Safar 916 (May 1510): An envoy from the Prince of
Cambay, Mahmoud Shah, together with other Indian nobles,
brought missives in which these princes insisted that troops
should be sent to the Indian coast, which was overrun with
European pirates. The audacity of the Europeans knew no
bounds and, following their victory over Husayn, the
commander of the Egyptian expeditionary force, they were
contemplating settling in the country.
Thursday, 30 Ramadan 918 (9 December 1512): This day
saw the return, after an absence of almost seven years and three
months, of Amir Husayn, the same who had led the Indian
expedition. In the course of his campaign he had fought
engagements with the Europeans and had thus been faced with
many tribulations and untold dangers. It will be recalled that
he had been responsible for the construction of the surroun¬
ding wall and towers at Jeddah and that these were fine pieces
of workmanship. At that time he had taken on the role of gover¬
nor of Jeddah and had shown himself to be arbitrary and
conceited. A tax of ten per cent had been imposed on merchants,
and the people, who had greatly suffered under his injustices,
had found him intolerable. He had established friendly rela¬
tions with certain Indian princes and, on his return to Egypt,
he brought back an envoy from King Mozaffar Shah ibn Mah¬
moud, Prince of Cambay, whose father had recently died. This
diplomat had come to ask the caliph to accord diplomatic cre¬
dentials to Mozaffar Shah. The sultan issued courtly robes to
Amir Husayn and to this envoy, and they left the Citadel in
solemn procession.
Year 920 (1514): No cargo was delivered at the port of Jed¬
dah because of the European corsairs sailing in the Indian
Ocean. It had been at least six years since merchandise had been
unloaded in the port of Jeddah.
Contemporary portrait of Afonso de Albuquerque, early 16th-century
governor of the "State of India", at a time when Portuguese activities
in the Indian Ocean were leading to commercial and military rivalry
with the Islamic countries of the region, as documented by Ibn Iyas.
	 31

Mombasa (in present-day Kenya) as depicted in an engraving from
Civitates orbis terrarum (see lower photo page 18). The city, fortified
by the Portuguese in the 16th century as part of their trading network
around the Indian Ocean, was a centre of Portuguese and Arab rivalry
for over a century.
Thursday, 13 Djoumada 1 920 (6 July 1514): A detachment
was assembled to go to India with the aim of resisting the Eu¬
ropean attacks, which we had heard were again on the increase.
Thursday, 20 Djoumada I 920 (13 July 1514): The gover¬
nor of Jeddah made it known that the Europeans were con¬
tinuing their attacks on the Yemen coast and that they had just
taken Kamaran, the trading-post for Indian merchandise in the
Red Sea. General Husayn begged the sultan to send reinforce¬
ments before the Europeans occupied the entire Yemen coast.
Moreover he feared that there would be an attack on Jeddah.
Monday, 12 Djoumada I 921 (24 June 1515): The sultan
took up quarters at the Hippodrome to review the fifth regi¬
ment. More than 600 of these soldiers were conscripted to go
to India; among their number were young recruits, Mamluks
of the sultan's guard, veterans and reservists. Having been told
of the ravages that the Europeans were constantly perpetrat¬
ing in the Indian Ocean, which was overrun with European
ships, the sultan decided to have some twenty ships built at Suez,
and to load them with weapons, guns, and cannons, as well as
with other engines of war. Salman the Ottoman was appoint¬
ed admiral of this fleet, with many seamen under his command,
both Ottoman and Maghrebian, in all 2,000 men, perhaps more.
Having picked the soldiers, the sultan asked them to leave as
soon as possible.
The month of Cha'ban 923 (August 1517): This month
saw the return of the Ottoman admiral, Salman, who had ac¬
companied the flotilla sent to India by Sultan Ghauri. It was
then learned that this admiral had had Husayn, the governor
of Jeddah, thrown into the sea. This was the outcome of an
old quarrel, going back to the reign of Ghauri. After the lat-
ter's death, Salman, now the more powerful of the two, had
killed Husayn: such at any rate was the rumour. Salman brought
back a certain number of Europeans captured in the Indian
Ocean, where they were engaged in a trade war and were in¬
tercepting merchant ships traversing those waters. Admiral
Salman, together with Husayn, had conquered several Indian
towns, which had brought them untold riches.
The month of Djoumada II 924 (June 1518): According
to sources in Mecca, European corsairs were sailing in the Red
Sea and intercepting merchant ships. The sharif had sent a report
to the prince of the amirs, governor of Egypt, requesting him
to send an expeditionary force as soon as possible, because fears
were mounting of a surprise attack on the port of Jeddah, and
the Muslims could not prevent the city's defeat.
Ramadan 925 (September 1519): It was learned from Mecca
that the presence of around forty European vessels had been
reported in the Red Sea, in the vicinity of Jeddah, which were



attacking and intercepting merchant ships. In the light of this
information, the prince of amirs, governor of Egypt, after a
review of Circassian Mamluks and other troops, designated
some 300 soldiers, both Mamluks and volunteer horsemen, to
escort the pilgrims and to establish a garrison at Jeddah in order
to resist the Europeans in the event of a surprise attack.
Thursday 28 Ramadan 925 (23 September 1519): This was
the day of departure for the corps bound for the port of Jed¬
dah. The contingent which started its march this day was made
up of Circassian Mamluks and Turkomans, in all some 300 men
who had been taken from these two regiments. The comman¬
der was an Ottoman named Husayn, commander of the light
cavalry. They went to Suez, from whence they embarked on
the Red Sea for Jeddah. The destructive raids of the Europeans,
who were sailing in the vicinity of the port ofJeddah and were
terrorizing merchants, were much spoken of at this time.
* Islamic chronology, reckoned from the date of the hijrah (Hegira), the Pro¬
phet's journey from Mecca to Medina. Editor
The central regions of the Portuguese "State of India", including India
itself, Persia, Arabia and the Red Sea, are shown on this Portuguese
map from an anonymous book of seamanship published in 1560 and
preserved in the archives of the Ministry of Finance, Lisbon. Fortified
ports such as Goa, Hormuz and Aden are also indicated.
32 	
