The spirit of
'89
BY TAHAR BEN JELLOUN
IS it possible to dispense with revolution and its violence, its terror
and its achievements? Is it normal to think that human rights and
democracy bear the stamp of a time and locality specific to one social
and historical setting? Is it logical thus to deny them their principal
quality, their universality? How is it possible to import consumer goods,
cultural debris and weapons from Europe and at the same time to re¬
fuse to import principles that are as important as flour or sugar? There
are those who accuse Europe, which wants to generalize respect for
human rights and the establishment of democratic political systems,
of wanting "to perpetuate colonial domination"!
What was revolutionary in the achievements of 1789 was their
universal aspect. The human condition may vary from continent to
continent, but there is everywhere and at all times a need for these
same rights. The abolition of slavery was not a minor affair of concern
to a few wretched serfs. It concerned the whole of humanity, without
exception.
We on the sidelines"inhabitants of the suburbs of history... the
uninvited guests who have come in through the servants' entrance of
the West, intruders who come to watch the spectacle of modernity just
as the lights are about to go out. Always late, we were born when his¬
tory was already running out..." (Octavio Paz)look with envious,
ambitious eyes at the memory of others, trying to cleanse the history
of the Revolution of its faults, its injustices and its ugliness. Of the past
two centuries of French history we wish to remember only the pains¬
taking work and the patient advance of the rights inscribed on the col¬
lective mentality of man, whether he be from here or elsewhere, and
with all his differences and similarities.
Yet the road travelled by human rights has been stained with the
blood of European wars and of colonial brutality and then by the hu¬
miliation of man through the violation of his cultural and religious
values. It is as though, to fashion and consolidate itself, Republican
France had to pass through a phase of barbarism. We remain attached
to principles. We cultivate the historical memory, short though it may
be, with its baser moments expunged, so that respect for mankind may
become a right with which no government will be able to compromise.
This right should be inscribed on the very heart of the body politic
by the force of its universality.
If this is achieved, perhaps children will no longer be victims of
famine, drought, disease, work or prostitution. Perhaps men and wom¬
en will no longer have to suffer the humiliations of poverty or be held
hostage to fanaticism and intolerance which like to make people be¬
lieve they can provide answers to serious problems.
For all of this "our thirst for consolation can never be slaked" (Stig
Dagerman), nor our desire for coherence satisfied. We want to cry out:
"stop selling arms while at the same time celebrating human rights and
the bicentenary of the Revolution! Be consistent: the prosperity of some
cannot be built on the misery of others! Crimes are being committed
while you sing the praises of democracy."
1789 is a memory that belongs to the universal heritage; it is in¬
scribed in all of us. We are born with this memory, that is, with the
hope of liberation. Many die without ever having known it.
La Batalla ("The
Battle"), oil on canvas
by the contemporary
Argentine painter
Ana Eckell
TAHAR BEN JELLOUN,
Moroccan writer and
journalist, was awarded
the Goncourt Prize in
1987 for his novel La nuit
sacrée, an English
translation of which is
scheduled for publication
later this year by
Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.
