^.1789
An idea
that changed
the world
An idea
and its
destiny
BY FRANÇOIS FURET
The French Revolution proclaimed the
principles of liberty and equality as
universally valid, but the application of
these abstract notions in different societies
has inevitably led to tensions and
compromises. Today, 200 years later,
these issues are more topical than ever.
In this interview with the Unesco
Courier, the noted French historian
François Furet, whose work has opened
up new perspectives on the Revolution,
examines the concept ofthe universality
of man and his rights in the world
context. 51

La République (1794),
earthenware statuette by
Joseph Chinard. With her
right hand, the figure
unveils a tablet inscribed
Droits de l'homme
("Rights ofMan").
52
PREVIOUS DOUBLE PAGE
1 he Storming of the
Bastille". 18th-century
French school
X HE French Revolution was an attempt to
legislate in the name of universality. Its aim was
the emancipation not only of the French but of
all mankind. To this extent it was an event that
was not merely of national but also of interna¬
tional scope, not simply a political but also a
philosophical revolution.
One of the ambiguities of the revolutionaries'
ambition to emancipate humanity springs from
the fact that their vision of the world was very
eurocentric. When the French spoke of the
universal, they meant by that the bulk of Europe
together with the European appendix consisting
of the newly-independent former British colonies
of America. This was the extent of their horizon.
The whole of the nineteenth century con¬
tinued to be marked by eurocentrism, even for
men like Marx, who spoke of the universe whilst
thinking of Europe. Between Britain, Germany
and France everything was covered. Even within
Europe it was better not to go too far south or
too far east so as not to mar the concept of univer¬
sality. There can, then, be no doubt about it, the
French Revolution legislated in the name of Eu¬
ropean man.
Ambitions bordering on folly
There is, however, another sense in which tht
notion of the universal must be understood: its
abstraction. There is nothing tangible about
universality; it is an abstraction just as universal
man is abstract man. The Revolution declared
that man had no reason to enter into society un¬
less that society guaranteed him the autonomy,
the liberty and the rights which were his before
he entered into the social contract. In other
words, for the Revolution, the essence of man
is his liberty, his autonomy and the fact of his
acceptance only of laws imposed by himself. So¬
ciety must guarantee to each individual all the
rights that are his by virtue of his status as a man.
This is an extraordinary ideal, completely gener¬
al and therefore entirely abstract.
Thus these rights are formal, abstract and
deduced as it were from the natural state of man.
The ambitions of the Revolution, as we can see,
bordered on folly, since they were in contradic¬
tion with the true state of society and of man.
Therein, in large part, lies its tragedy: in the enor¬
mous contradiction between the universal rights
it proclaimed as being inherent in the status of
man and the actual state of society with its poor
and its rich, its dominators and its dominated.
Equality: dream or reality?
Born of the Revolution, modern democracy has,
over the past two centuries, been marked by the
permanent tension engendered by the affirmation
of abstract, universal rights and the experience
of the reality of rights imperfectly achieved. Take,
for example, the notion of equality. This too,
naturally, is an abstract notion, since people are
not equal: both nature and society only turn out
individuals who are unequal, whereas the ambi¬
tion of society is to produce individuals who are
equal. Are they not equal as citizens?
Absolute political and social equality implies
absolute despotism. The only hypothetical situ¬
ation in which people could be strictly equal
would be one in which a single person is placed
over all the others to force them to maintain their
equal status. Not a very enviable situation!
Liberty always produces inequality. This is why,
more and more, we are obliged to see the state
as a compensatory mechanism for the correction
of certain inequalities. It seems to me that the hall¬
mark of a free society is the maintenance of the
difficult, uncertain balance between the growth
of the state and the liberty of the individual.
In the past 200 years there has not been one
example, not even among the most liberal socie¬
ties, of a diminishing state. Look, for example,
at the United States, France, or the United King¬
dom. All these states are growing. Why? In the
name of equality, because each time that a new
right is given to a section of the citizenry, a new
state organism has to be created to guarantee that

/..r.- '/(Sf.'/e.. y.,t. i.'/i ,.'.>v.íí
\ W.7C. . *7-' > « ,'.'/.-. r".' . i .VI.'.
i lanting a "tree of
liberty" to the
accompaniment of the local
band, in the presence of the
mayor and members of the
National Guard. Gouache,
18th-century French school
fr«*fe
right. The advance of equality is necessarrily
linked to growth of state mechanisms, with all
that this entails in the way of contradictions be¬
tween the area of state intervention and the area
left free to individual initiative.
The rights of the citizen
or civil war?
As the world became more universal, particular¬
ly through the processes first of colonization and
then of decolonization, the constituent tension
of the French Revolution, between the formal
and the real, the universal and the particular,
again came to the surface. The democratic move¬
ment can be identified with the struggle to reduce
these tensions. Is the Declaration of the Rights
of Man and of the Citizen anything other than
a declaration of a permanent state of civil war
whose purpose is to allow people to become what
they are notthat is to say equals? The dynamic
of democratic societies has consisted essentially
of the progressive integration of those excluded
from equality. And each action in this direction
is the cause of new tensions.
Les femmes des trois
ordres ("Women of the
Three Orders"), a
revolutionary print
showing a peasant woman
burdened with a nun and
an aristocrat.
53

54
1. Indian women demonstrating for
their country's independence, around
1930. In the centre, hands linked in
front of her, is the wife ofMahatma
Gandhi
2. Nlembers of the Kuomintang
("National People's Party") of China,
founded by Sun Yat-sen, in the Paris
workshop of sculptor Paul
Landowski, around 1930.
Landowskys statue of Sun Yat-sen
was erected at Nanking.
3. Sad Zaghlul (1857-1927), founder
of the Wafd national party in Egypt,
speaking around 1920 at a Cairo
demonstration calling for the
withdrawal of British troops.
4. I rocession in Moscow on the
50th anniversary of the October
Revolution of 1917
5. 1 roops of the revolutionary
leaders Pancho Villa and Emiliano
Zapata ride into Mexico City,
December 1914.

In the France of 1848, for example, the
problem of the right to work was raised and the
question was asked as to whether property was
a right and, if so, how far it was compatible with
equality. These are very real contradictions.
Property is clearly a right since without it man
is marked out to become a victim of the state.
But if property is too unevenly distributed it cre¬
ates such great social inequality that it eliminates,
for very many, all hope of exercising that right.
Here we have a clear example of the contradic¬
tions resulting from the Declaration of 1789.
This tension, which was the vehicle of all that
constitutes the historic value of the Revolution,
ended up by spawning criticism of the Revolu¬
tion. A current of thought developed which re¬
jected the ideology of rights as being abstract, false
and merely a cover for an iniquitous society and
a mask for bourgeois individualism.
In 1917, a revolution broke out in Russia
which aimed to go beyond these contradictions.
Basing itself on a critique of the rights of man,
its objective was to replace the abstract by the
tangible and formal democracy by the dictator¬
ship of the proletariat. It wanted to resolve the
problem of inequality by abolishing the law of
the market-place and the liberty of the individual.
A strange but necessary
compromise
Thirty years later, the world found itself in a cu¬
rious situation. At the end of the Second World
War, the two conflicting concepts of 1789 and
1917 were obliged to come to terms with one
another.
Among the victors in the war were lined up,
on one side the democracies of Western Europe
and America, more than ever attached to the con¬
cept of human rights after the victory over
nazism, and on the other the Soviet Union, which
had been created on the basis of the opposite
postulate. And the two sides were obliged to
come to an understanding.
Together they had just established the Unit¬
ed Nations system and they had to find some
common ground. This was to be the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, proclaimed in
1948. The Declaration was the outcome of an odd
but necessary compromise, largely negotiated by
the French jurist René Cassin on one side and
the Soviet diplomat and lawyer Andrey
Vyshinsky on the other. The result was a reflec
tion of their dialoguea balancing game between
two opposing conceptions. It was, nevertheless,
based on a humanistic and democratic ideal, since
the United Nations was founded on the negation
of nazism, that is to say on the notions of law
and liberty.
In order to achieve an agreement, the
Western jurists had to agree to the introduction
of so-called "real" rights. The Declaration of 1948
contains, for example, the notion of the right to
a minimum necessary for life. It was, indeed, an
extremely difficult notion to make a reality in
the poorest countries, and the inclusion of the
right to an adequate standard of living as a hu¬
man right only served to underline the precari¬
ous nature of these rights.
At the prompting of the Soviet camp there
was also a great debate on whether or not the
right to property should be excluded from hu¬
man rights. This was clearly not possible from
the standpoint of the Western powers. Finally,
the Universal Declaration of 1948 bears the stamp
of the contradictions that hovered over its birth.
Its text was meant both to prescribe norms and
to be concrete, to be both universal and specific.
But the more specific definitions you include in
the notion of universality, the more you reduce
its scope. Four decades have gone by since the
Declaration was proclaimed, but the debate goes
on and continues to develop over the contradic¬
tory ideas that are woven into it.
'We must think of ourselves
as free and equal'
For example, there is the great argument as to
whether liberty and equality are fact or fiction.
It is true that people are free and equal to the ex¬
tent that they are no longer subjugated or reduced
to slavery. They are free in body and mind and
free to follow their personal interests and to come
to agreements between themselves. On the other
hand, this liberty and equality are limited, indeed
compromised, in so far as they conceal social, cul¬
tural and individual inequalities and situations in
which one class is exploited by another.
In this sense it can clearly be seen that there
is something false in the notions of liberty and
equality. But from there two conclusions are
open to us. It can be saidand this is my personal
positionthat it is true that we are not all free-
and equal, but we have to think of ourselves in
society as being both free and equal. And the fact
that we are obliged to think in this way changes
the fabric of the social world and creates that ten¬
sion of which I have spoken and that dynamic
that is inherent in democracy.
On the other hand, we can come to the
Marxist conclusion that, since liberty and equal¬
ity are no more than lies, we must go beyond
them, abolish the system that is based on them
and bring about a society radically different from
that of 1789. Since modern democracy is merely
a bourgeois dictatorship in disguise, we should 55

56
replace the power of the bourgeoisie by the pow¬
er of the proletariat. In this way, since the
proletariat is not an exploiting class, we shall free
society and mankind of all exploitation.
The emergence
of the individual
What seems to me to be inaccurate in this view
of things is the equation of modern democracy
with the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. This is
not historically true. The French society of 1789
was neither very bourgeois nor really capitalist.
The point that I have made in my books is pre¬
cisely that the French Revolution cannot be con¬
sidered merely as the rise of the bourgeoisie. The
Revolution marks, above all, the emergence of
modern individualism, a process much more all-
embracing than the emergence of a class, since
it transforms the entire social fabric in which the
bourgeoisie is but one element, even if, little by
little, this element is beginning to dominate the
rest.
Evidence that individualism is not simply a
bourgeois quality comes from those countries
that have eliminated the bourgeois economic dic¬
tatorship and where the demand for individual
liberty continues to exist. In the Marxist socie¬
ties of today, the notions of human rights, of the
market-place and of formal democracy are return¬
ing to favour. In other words, the concept of bas¬
ing society on the rights of the individual, far
from being a bourgeois lie, is a genuinely univer¬
sal notion which fulfils a universal hope. There
will never be true equality between all people,
but the idea of equality will always be there on
the horizon. That is what we have to live with.
That is what makes things happen.
The controversy between formal democracy
and class dictatorship is, however, far from be¬
ing over, if only, perhaps, because the message
of the class struggle has got across better than that
of democracy in many non-European societies.
For historical reasons, criticism of rights has been
more successfully propagated than the concept
of rights. The concept of rights was taken with
them by the colonizers and imposed by the gun.
The rights were those of the victors and it was
natural that they should be seen by the van¬
quished as a cover for their domination.
In many non-European countries it might be
said that there was a spontaneous upsurge of
Marxism in the twentieth century, because the
Marxist critique was, if one can put it that way,
inscribed on the very experience of the peoples
of those countries. Or rather, the non-universality
of rights was inscribed on their flesh. The
colonists brought with them both the concept of
rights and the critique of that concept. To the
peoples they colonized, the critique seemed the
better founded of the two, since it coincided more
directly with the reality they were living through
and offered a possible justification for the violence
of their resistance.
I am, of course, talking in terms of general
tendencies. In terms of what actually happened
things were not so clear-cut. At the time of the
colonial shock these societies were essentially pre-
individualisticthe individual was still closely at¬
tached to family, tribe and community. But the
colonists introduced the individualist view of the
world. As a result one world was superimposed
on another, one tied in to traditional links of
solidarity, the other turned towards the ideolo¬
gy of modern democracy, one society dominat¬
ed by the tribal chiefs and village headmen, the
other, superimposed, spreading the word of
universal suffrage.
From all this was to emerge the Revolution¬
ary Institutional Party in Mexico, the Wafd na¬
tional party in Egypt, the Kuomintang in China,
and the Congress Party in India. These were liber¬
al options whose practical achievements remained
limited, which is why this phase was overtaken
by another dominated by the ideology of the class
struggle and revolution. Recently, however, there
seems to have been a swing back to the idea of
rights and democracy.
The democratic dynamic,
a dynamic of conflict
In those places where it had been thought possi¬
ble to draw a line through the rights of the
modern individual, an often tragic economic sit¬
uation has arisen. The pre-capitalist structures
were broken down, but since they have not been
replaced by capitalist market structures, dramat¬
ic difficulties have been experienced. Sometimes
it has not even been possible to provide enough
food for the inhabitants of the towns, or even
for the peoples of the rural areas. The produc¬
tivity of labour has been destroyed and, as Marx
rightly pointed out, the productivity of labour,
the capacity to create wealth, is one of the sanc¬
tions of history. Without these attributes and
without taking into consideration man's relation¬
ship with nature there can be no history.
People are beginning to become aware that
there is no such thing as an historical short cut.
After the communal society we have to go
through the stage of the individualistic society.
We have to come to terms with its tensions.
We have to accept that modern societies are
conflictual societies, and live with the fact
that the democratic dynamic is a dynamic of
conflict.
Beyond a certain point, that raises the ques¬
tion of the governability of modern societies.
French society, to take one example, is not easy
to govern. As soon as a new tension arises, every¬
one takes to the streets. That is what liberty is
and modern society has to learn to live with it.
This is, perhaps, one of the biggest hurdles to be
overcome in any societynot to cling to certain¬
ties, but to accept uncertainties, the unforeseen
and the risks the future holds.
1
Rouget de Lisle singing
the Marseillaise for the
first time. " Painting by
Isidore Pils, 1849. Rouget
de Lisle, an Engineer
captain, composed the
words and music of what
later became the French
national anthem while in
Strasbourg in 1792.

The price offreedom
What conclusions, therefore, can we come to
about the fate of the ideas of the Revolution af¬
ter 200 years? Its basic ideas seem to be gaining
ground, yet the difficulties they face if they are
to be put fully into practice are immense.
In the Western societies in which these ideas
have long been accepted, a number of negative
aspects are starting to appear. It is true that these
are countries in which it has become pleasant to
live, because they have found an acceptable
balance of sorts between the liberty of the in¬
dividual and action by the state. But this balance
has been achieved at a very high price. People are
losing interest in community affairs and are less
and less involved in public affairs and the
problems of others. There is less and less solidar¬
ity. All this is very negative. People seem to be
looking after their own interests and this leaves
a great void and a general feeling that something
is lacking in life.
Elsewhere in the world, individual aspirations
concerning liberty and the concept of human
rights are making a strong come-back and are ad¬
vancing on all sides. Yet how are these countries
going to escape the dilemmas specific to com¬
munal societies and find answers to the problems
of the productivity of labour? These are questions
that still await reply.
I should like to conclude by expressing the
hope that the celebration this year of the bicente¬
nary of the French Revolution will be a great
learning experience and will cause people every¬
where to become aware of the real issues and ten¬
sions related to this event. May it help, despite
all the differences and all the contradictions that
exist in the world today, to advance the idea of
the universality of humanity and of human rights.
FRANÇOIS FURET,
French historian and writer,
is director of the Raymond
Aron Institute in Paris.
Among his books translated
into English are Interpreting
the French Revolution
(Cambridge University
Press, 1981) and In the
Workshop of History
(University of Chicago
Press, 1985). He has
recently published La
Révolution 1770-1880
(Hachette, 1988) and, with
Mona Ozouf, a critical
dictionary of the French
Revolution (Flammarion,
1988).
57
