ROMANESQUE TREASURES
OF CATALONIA BY EDUARD CARBONELL I ESTELLER
IK < *^
An outstanding
example of Catalan
Romanesque
architecture, the 11th-
century monastery of
Sant Père de Rodes is
located in a
mountainous setting
near Gerona.
ARTISTIC styles tend to be strongly associated with the
countries where they originated (as in the case of Renais¬
sance art in Italy or the Gothic style of northern France)
or with the countries where their most important works were
produced (such as Baroque painting in Spain).
But styles are also associated with certain countries for other
reasons. Thus the Romanesque style is associated with Catalo¬
nia although, judged in terms of the numbers of high quality
works found there, Gothic would seem to be a more represen¬
tative Catalan style. Furthermore, many works of architecture,
sculpture and painting from the Romanesque period in Catalo¬
nia are largely inspired by foreign models from southern France
and, especially, from northern Italy.
Catalonia's association with Romanesque art stems from
the fact that the country's historical origins and the affirma
tion of its nationhood date from the tenth and eleventh centu¬
ries. There are two factors in the art of this period which, I
believe, explain this sense of beginning and affirmation. These
are an early form of Romanesque based on the indigenous forms
of a previous tradition, and an internationalist ambition.
The pre-Romanesque tradition
Apart from the main trends in Romanesque architecture
represented by the Lombard style of northern Italy, remarka¬
ble buildings were being constructed in Catalonia in the early
decades of the eleventh century which continued an earlier style.
29

A major monument such as the monastery church of Sant Pere
de Rodes at Gerona, consecrated in 1022, represents a continu¬
ation of the great international architecture of the previous cen¬
tury, the most typical example of which is the church of Sant
Miquel at Cuxa, on the northern slope of the Pyrenees, which
was associated with the Benedictine abbey of Cluny in Burgun¬
dy, France.
Sant Pere de Rodes church is notable for the presence of
classical architectural features, such as the superposed order of
the columns and the monumental quality of the construction.
This continuation of pre-Romanesque art is also represented
by two outstanding early eleventh-century illuminated bibles
from the monasteries at Rodes and Ripoll, which are preserved,
respectively, in the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris, and the Vati¬
can Library, Rome.
Meanwhile, the architectural trend from Lombardy reached
Catalonia and became widely influential. The Lombard type
of construction dominates the architectural landscape of the ear¬
ly Romanesque period in Catalonia with such remarkable build¬
ings as the church of Sant Pere de Casserres, the monastery of
Santa Maria at Ripoll, and the building which is to my mind
the paradigm of this style, the collegiate church of Sant Vicenç
at Cardona (Barcelona).
Inspiration from Italy and France
The international character of Romanesque art is another
feature which associates it with Catalonia, whose outward-
looking spirit during the Romanesque period was an expres¬
sion of political and religious assertiveness. This is reflected in
the importance of religious centres such as Ripoll and Cuxa
Left, Romanesque frescos in the apse of the church of Sant Climent de
Tahull, Lérida. The central figure of Christ Pantocrator (All Powerful)
rests His feet on the world. On either side of His head are inscribed
the first and last letters of the Greek alphabet, alpha and omega,
symbolizing the beginning and end of Creation. These paintings,
executed in 1123, rank among the finest examples of Catalan
Romanesque art.
and the cathedrals of Vich, Gerona and Barcelona. These were
cultural centres of European importance frequented by people
like Pietro Orseolo (991-1008), Duke of Venice, and the monk
Gerbert of Aurillac (c. 945-1003), who became Pope Sylvester II.
Catalan Romanesque sculpture and the best Catalan
Romanesque painting also reveal foreign influences. The chief
examples reflect Italian and French styles but sometimes there
is also a short-lived Islamic influence.
The splendid series of paintings in the church of Sant Quirze
de Pedret, and the wall paintings from the churches of Santa
Maria and Sant Climent de Tahull, were undoubtedly the work
of artists who followed the great Italian school of mural paint¬
ing. In sculpture, the influence of the workshops of Roussil-
lon, southern France, and later of those of Languedoc, especially
the great centre of Toulouse, is manifest in the capitals of
columns at Vich cathedral and in the imposing portal of Santa
Maria monastery at Ripoll.
International influences are also evident towards the end
of the twelfth century, in the cloister of Tarragona cathedral
which is possibly the work of artists from the last Toulouse
workshops. Like the Daurade in Toulouse or Master Antela-
mi's work in Parma, northern Italy, the Tarragona sculpture
represents the swan song of Romanesque art, which was to give
way to Early Gothic from northern France.
30 	

Catalan Romanesque art produced many works of outstand¬
ing beauty. Apart from those already mentioned, typical ex¬
amples include the cathedral of Seu d'Urgell at Lérida,
completed in 1175 by Raimundus Lambardus according to
Italian models, the collegiate church of Sant Joan de les Abadess-
es at Gerona, consecrated in 1150, and the magnificent cloisters,
rich in sculpture, in Gerona cathedral, the church of Sant Pere
de Galligant, also at Gerona, and the Benedictine abbey of Sant
Cugat del Valles near Barcelona.
This late style can also be observed in painting, especially
panel painting, but in this case with a Byzantine influence from
southern Italy which reached the studios of Roussillon painters.
Church iconography and the decorative arts
After such early works as those of Sant Joan de Boi, which
recall the Carolingian style, a high point was reached around
1100 with the paintings at Sant Quirze de Pedret and, a little
later, with the Tahull ensemble which dates from 1123 and is
executed in a more geometrical style. The link with stylistic
trends from the other side of the Pyrenees is evident in such
works as the apse paintings from Santa Maria de Mur (now in
the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, USA) and in the paintings
preserved in the church of Santa Maria de Barbera.
Sculpted figure of Christ in Majesty adorns the tympanum of
a mid-12th-century doorway in the monastery church of Santa Maria
at Ripoll, Catalonia.
Catalan panel painting of the late twelfth and early thir¬
teenth century is in some respects comparable only to that of
Italy in the rich decoration it provided for liturgical furniture,
altar frontals, canopies and apse beams.
Also outstanding are the great carved wooden figures such
as that of Christ in Majesty, rendered with great intensity, lean¬
ing on the cross, attired in noble garments; the Mother of God
on the sedes sapientiae; and sculptured groups including those
representing the Descent from the Cross.
The most important centres for the production of illumi¬
nated manuscripts were at Vich and Ripoll and, later, in the
cathedral of Tortosa, at Tarragona, and in Barcelona cathedral.
A high degree of excellence was also achieved in crafts, es¬
pecially textiles (in such works as the eleventh-century tapes¬
try of the Creation in Gerona cathedral), and the
Limoges-inspired art of enamel-making, most of whose products
are preserved in the two richest museums of Catalan
Romanesque art, the Museum of Catalan Art in Barcelona and
the Episcopal Museum at Vich.
EDUARD CARBONELL I ESTELLER, professor of art history at the Au¬
tonomous University of Barcelona, has published many studies on medieval
and Romanesque art, and notably on Catalan art of the high Middle Ages. He
is currently serving as director-general of the cultural heritage of the autono¬
mous region of Catalonia.
The late 12th-century cloister of Tarragona cathedral may have
been built by stone-masons from Toulouse in southern France.
31
