71 in the sky
BY JEAN-CLAUDE MARTZLOFF
22
PREDICTION OF CELESTIAL
PHENOMENA WAS A
MAINSPRING OF EARLY CHINESE
MATHEMATICS
T
V-/HINESE mathematics", defined by the
Chinese themselves in ancient times as the "art
of calculation" (suan chu), covers a vast range of
practices and currents of thought that grew up
in China between the first millennium BC and
the fall of the Manchu dynasty in 1911. After that
date Chinese mathematics became westernized
and the traditional practices were virtually im¬
penetrable to those without specialized training.
Divination, astronomy
and mathematics
Although writing already played an important
role in China at the time of the composition of
the earliest canonical writings (the "classics"
which were always so essential in the training of
intellectual élites), mathematics was not then con¬
sidered to be a body of knowledge that it was
necessary to record in specialized texts.
It seems, however, that mathematics was in¬
strumental in the emergence of what the sinolo¬
gist L. Vandermeersch has judiciously called
"divinatory rationality". Beginning with oracles
in the form of tortoise shells, animal bones or the
leaves of the Chinese yarrow, the prognostics
made using this form of divination were based
on the interpretation of all manner of natural
signs, especially meteorological and astronomi¬
cal phenomena such as rainbows, halos, winds,
meteors, positions and conjunctions of stars,
eclipses and sunspots. This magical worldview did
not however exclude recourse to purely rational
investigations. The diviners attempted with some
success to fit all their' 'observations into numeri¬
cal and arithmetical schemes devised for the
recording of memorable past phenomena and the
prediction of certain recurrent events. Some
predictions of periodically recurring celestial
1,420 stars are depicted on
this polychrome sky map
made in 1453. The map
forms part of a panelled
ceiling in Beijing's
Longfu temple.


1 he legendary emperor
Yao requests the
astronomers Hsi and Ho
to establish the calendar
'and pay tribute to the
heavenly bodies. Engraving
from the late Manchu
period (1905).
phenomena began to be confirmed by observa¬
tion, and led to the birth of the calendar and
mathematical astronomy.
Each successive dynasty in China made its
mark by introducing a new system for comput¬
ing the calendar so that the historical events
recorded by annalists could be reassessed and fu¬
ture events predicted. The ruling class therefore
needed qualified personnel who specialized in
calendrical and astronomical calculations. A body
of imperial chronologers thus gradually came into
being, serving both as historian-annalists and
astronomer-calendrists.
The continuing requirements of Chinese dy¬
nasties down the ages explain why the search for
appropriate methods of predicting the most visi¬
ble celestial phenomena (conjunctions of stars, oc¬
cultations, eclipses) was foremost in the minds of
mathematicians.
However, as the astronomer-calendrists of
24
egresa gffWHgtfi^^KSg
imperial China usually had a lowly social status,
and as their knowledge was handed down from
father to son, their activities were often denigrat¬
ed and looked upon simply as a static way of up¬
holding tradition.
The overwhelmingly dominant factor in the
history of Chinese mathematical astronomy is the
extraordinary durability of conflicts between rival
schools. From the beginning of our era to the six¬
teenth century, the Chinese calendar underwent
no less than fifty reforms. However, these con¬
flicts turned out to be more constructive than des¬
tructive in that they were almost always settled
by the concordance between observed reality and
the predictions.
Unfortunately, very few works devoted ex¬
clusively to mathematical astronomy have sur¬
vived. Monographs written by non-specialists,
abridged versions of which were included in the
annals of successive dynasties, are practically all
that remain.
The social background
of Chinese mathematics
During the Han dynasty (206 BC to 220 AD),
another branch of mathematics appeared, this
time recorded in specialized manuals. Collections
of problems and their solutions were organized
in chapters according to their practical applica¬
tions. The descriptions in these texts are often so
detailed and realistic that it is almost possible to
reconstruct from them entire chapters of Chinese
social and economic life at a given period.
Whether they are about tax collection, corvée
labour, weights and measures, currency, the con¬
struction of dykes or canals, the management of
manpower, land or river transport, policing
or military logistics, no practical detail was
neglected. Generations of "civil servant-
mathematicians" were trained for the imperial
bureaucracy by the study of such manuals.
The Tang dynasty (618 to 907 AD) set up an
examination system whose syllabus included
mathematics as well as letters. Although least im¬
portance was accorded to mathematics, study of
the subject at the Guozijian, the "College of the
Sons of the State", lasted seven years and was
based on a classic textbook, "The Ten Mathemat¬
ical Manuals" (Suanjing shi shu). In 1084, under
. the Southern Sung dynasty, this text was print¬
ed. Yet after 1230 mathematics was banished from
the examination syllabus for good, in favour of
literary subjects.
Paradoxically, the high-water marks of '
mathematics are not to be found in the short
periods when the teaching of the subject was
institutionalized. On the contrary, the most
remarkable advances took place when the empire

Diagrams illustrating problems in spherical trigonometry
examined by the astronomer-mathematicians Kuo Shou Ching
(1276, left) and Hsing Yûn Lu (1600, right).
was divided, in time of war and bureaucratic
breakdown. During the Warring States period
(453 to 222 BC), the Moists (followers of Mo-tzu
who challenged the dominant Confucian ideolo¬
gy) developed the rudiments of theoretical geo¬
metry, but their method had little influence on
the main current of mathematical thought. The.
greatest mathematician of ancient China, the de¬
tails of whose life are unfortunately unknown,
was Liu Hui, who elaborated several mathemat¬
ical theorems at the time when China was split
into three kingdoms (220 to 265 AD). During the
Mongol conquest in the thirteenth century,
a wealth of original achievements took
root, flowered, and were quickly consigned to
oblivion.
The last and greatest of the Sung mathemati¬
cians was Zhu Shijie (fl. around 1300), a wander¬
ing scholar who travelled far and wide teaching
the results of his research. Also during these
Lid ofa coffer dating from around the beginning
of the Warring States period (c. 433 BC).
The Great Bear (at centre) is surrounded by the names
and symbols of the 28 lunar mansions.
troubled times, the hermit Li Zhi (1192-1279) or¬



ganized a private group devoted to the study of
the mysteries of the world and of numbers, which
led to the development of algebra in China. And
in the nineteenth century, shortly after the
Opium War, when the Chinese empire was over¬
taken by major disasters, Li Shanlan (1811-1882)
failed his literature examinations and dedicated
himself to the joys of mathematics. He discovered
an astonishing series of perfectly correct formu¬
lae which were to baffle even a twentieth-century
mathematician of the calibre of Paul Turan of
Hungary.
The reasons behind these sudden and short- 25

lived flashes of brilliance are poorly understood.
Perhaps political anarchy freed the intellectual
élite from the obligation of preparing the sterile
mandarinate examinations. Confucianism, the
dominant ideology, relegated mathematics to a
minor role. Those who were attracted by the sub¬
ject could therefore give free rein to their intellec¬
tual curiosity without great risk. Even in stable
times, however, many Confucian scholars used
their leisure hours to study mathematics. From
the eighteenth century onwards, more and more
philologists and specialists in textual criticism
dreamed of turning mathematics into a branch
of history. Some of them tried their best to use
mathematical astronomy to authenticate the clas¬
sics. They wanted to define by calculation the
historical reality of natural events recorded in an¬
cient documents (especially eclipses of the Moon
or the Sun). Others enthusiastically studied "con¬
crete sciences" such as economics, hydraulics,
civil engineering or architecture. Out of these ex¬
cursions along lonely and difficult paths there
sometimes grew a taste for pure mathematics, in¬
dependent of any particular application.
Contact with other cultures is also of impor¬
tance in the history of Chinese mathematics: with
India during the first millennium AD as Budd¬
hism was being preached abroad; with the Arab
\jilt bronze equatorial
Moon dial. Qing Dynasty
26 (1744).

COUNTING-ROD NUMERALS OF ANCIENT CHINA
The use of counting-rod
numerals, which may have
originated with the UNITS
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
arrangement of actual rods
laid out on a flat board,
HUNDREDS
TEN OF THOUSANDS I II III IUI lllll T T ¥ ¥
developed in China around
the 3rd century BC. Units
were noted vertically, tens
TENS
THOUSANDS ___
	 = = J_ _L =!= =
horizontally. The value of
the signs was determined
by their position: THE NUMBER 34,567
WRITTEN AS:
III = lllll J. T
and Persian peoples at the time of the Mongol
expansion; and with European missionaries from
the late sixteenth century onwards. Although
many similarities can be seen between mathemat¬
ics in China and in other cultures before 1600,
it is unclear whether this is a sign of actual in¬
fluence or simply of parallel development.
For example, the Chinese symbol for zero,
which was written as a small circle as it is today,
appeared for the first time around 1200 in astro¬
nomical tables and could have been of Indian ori¬
gin. A number of ancient and medieval
mathematical games, whether from the Hellenis¬
tic or the Arab world, India, Europe or China,
have a surprising family likeness. Very similar
mathematical techniques existed at the same peri¬
od in China and in Greece. To cite but two ex¬
amples, Euclid and Liu Hui both discovered
methods of determining the volume of a pyramid;
Archimedes and Liu Hui found the volume of
a solid by the intersection of two orthogonal
cylinders.
Even if these parallels do indicate the trans¬
mission of influences, Chinese mathematics had
an internal coherence and developed indepen¬
dently.
Geometry without parallel
In traditional Chinese mathematics there is no
geometrical reasoning based on axioms, postu¬
lates, definitions and theorems. There are no ab¬
solute truths in the manner of Euclid, but only
relative and provisional truths. In geometry, there
are no angles nor even any parallel lines, but only
lengths, areas and volumes. Neither is there any
algebra in the Arab style, nor the search for the
roots of equations using radicals or intersecting
curves. And there is no "rhetorical" algebra en¬
shrined in prose or verse.
Yet Chinese mathematics is based not on
purely empirical procedures but on heuristic prin¬
ciples. The emphasis is on the answer itself, rather
than on explaining the intermediate stages in get¬
ting there, which are taken for granted. For ex¬
ample, one of the cardinal rules of Chinese
geometry stipulates that the surface or the volume
of a figure remain the same after it has been
broken up and re-assembled, even though the
number of the fragments is potentially infinite.
This type of principle does not at all exclude the
recourse to an axiomatic system, but it is true that
Chinese geometric figures were not usually ab¬
stract ideals. They were, rather, like tangible
pieces of a puzzle that can be distinguished by
their colour and manipulated at will. Chinese ge¬
ometry basically relies on a shrewd and
meticulous examination of a problem to reveal
certain results. This method is not only impor¬
tant in the calculation of areas and volumes, but
also in bringing out certain properties of the right-
angled triangle, in calculating the total of a series,
in resolving equations or systems of equations,
and in the visual proof of mathemathical identities.
What is more, Chinese geometry sees noth¬
ing wrong (as Euclid would have done) in resort¬
ing to calculations or any other method that may
be useful to solve a given problem. This attitude
shows Taoist influence, and Chinese mathemati¬
cians of the third to the fifth centuries AE
declared their boundless admiration for Zhuang-
zi, the father of philosophical Taoism. This ec¬
centric sage had rejected the use of language as
a notably effective way of reaching the truth, on
the grounds that the fallacious arguments of the
sophists showed its limits.
He had concluded that all attempts to reach
the truth founded on discursive argument, that
is to say on a method capable of engendering
manifestly false conclusions, would be doomed
to failure. Hence the tendency of Chinese
mathematicians, influenced by Taoism, to place
only limited faith in the power of language. On
the other hand they tended to make use of all the
means at their disposal, without ever ignoring the
evidence of their senses. This is why they were
JEAN-CLAUDE
MARTZLOFF,
French sinologist, is a
researcher with the
National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS).
He is particularly interested
in the exchanges between
Chinese science and other
scientific traditions. He is
the author of a history of
Chinese mathematics
{Histoire des mathématiques
chinoises, Masson publishers,
Paris, 1987).
27

28
so fond of calculations and all kinds of manipu¬
lations, so long as they could avoid putting them
into words. Only as a last resort did they have
recourse to discursive arguments.
How did mathematicians apparently so ob¬
sessed by the concrete have produced sophisticat¬
ed results? In fact the practical nature of Chinese
mathematics does not imply any lack of abstrac¬
tion in their thinking. On the contrary, some of
the results obtained from manipulating their puz¬
zles presuppose great ingenuity and a remarkable
capacity for abstraction.
Moreover, Chinese mathematicians often
deliberately distorted reality, as they could not
easily teach their subject using as examples the
increasingly complex problems of daily life. This
is why many Chinese mathematical problems
conceal purely fictitious situations behind a
veneer of practical reality: values which are im¬
possibly large or small, or that make no sense
(fractions of men); data arranged in an arbitrary
manner, as when areas are added up with volumes
and prices; inversion of known and unknown
values as when calculating the dimensions of ob¬
jects from their volume, or capital from the in¬
terest gained, or quantities of goods from the
share received by each person. Obviously such
methods opened up very much more interesting
situations from the mathematical point of view.
Chinese algebra developed on this "fictional
territory". In the oldest manuals are many cal-
culatory formulae for resolving limited classes of
problems. In extreme instances, each problem
constitutes a specific case. Later, generalized
procedures appear by which an increasingly wide
range of problems could be solved, so fictitious
situations were no longer required.
All this could not have taken place without
Chinese computational methods, which were
based on mechanical aids. The abacus is perhaps
the best known of these, but it appeared at a
late date (around the fifteenth century). Chinese
mathematicians relied above all on the manipu¬
lation of counting-rods (chousuan), which were
arranged to represent the various coefficients
of numerical equations. Mathematical problems
transferred to arrangements of counting-rods
were, so to speak, divorced from their practical
context and taken into the realm of abstraction.
This method of calculation by tabulation is
generally known as fangcheng (fang meaning
"square" or "rectangle" and cheng meaning "di¬
vide up") and involves arranging the counting-
rods to form a square or a rectangle (a matrix).
Two types of rod were used, red and black or
positive and negative, representing the com¬
plementary forces which controlled the Chinese
universe, yin and yang.
Here we have an "instrumental" algebra
which dispenses with all discursive methods of
argument. This is its strength, but also its weak¬
ness, as during the manipulations of the counting-
rods, calculations vanish without trace as soon
as they are completed. This "art of the rods" is
like the art of a musician who plays without look¬
ing at the score, and it is no coincidence that some
Chinese mathematicians explicitly compare
mathematics with music.
Calculations and manipulations are the bas¬
ic ingredients of a form of mathematics which
has never felt itself to be bound by any dogma,
and which at various phases of its history has
syncretized many elements from other cultures.
I he gelosia or grating
method of multiplication as
shown in a Chinese book
of 1593.
O m -y.
asjs
H
ffl
t
S\
M
A it
XA f
/A
III/
/>
V V +
A
x Ixight, detail from a 12th-
century Greek manuscript
of Euclid's Elements.
	
^ oO f HJUpt GOV
t f turtèhp«
n
M-*^1 u
£i-*Ti p »P TIT? <*4
W (cOI»i'»P-*OCK.«
J-7 pop («UXJUUf
of IM CjO |»T* CT» *
rt'ífuxoa¿\£i.
|K^AS TP* r
\377lWp*wf-jLCj
£ u-Vb/ajui oíTóuf i
	 .* l "-¿írL.
TH> «T>"7r» woccüTí
rv**«»eiVM.*»M-
