The Lusiads FROM NATIONAL EPIC
TO UNIVERSAL MYTH
"fe'**¿3Ea
£&*U
Imaginary portrait of Camôes is taken from a French edition of The Lusiads published in Paris in
1817 with illustrations by European artists.
THE Western maritime discoveries
of the fifteenth and sixteenth cen¬
turies, in which Portugal played
a leading role, were the culmination of
an odyssey which had begun in ancient
times. They extended the bounds of the
adventure embarked on long before by
the Phoenicians and the Greeks to all the
seas of the world. The cycle of modern
discoveries was symbolically closed in
1520 by Ferdinand Magellan, a Por¬
tuguese navigator who sailed for the King
of Spain. After him there began an era of
methodical, scientific exploration of what
the twentieth-century poet Fernando
Pessoa called the "endless sea", the mare
nostrum of the Romans enlarged to
global dimensions.
If this image exaggerates the real mar¬
itime area traversed by the navigators of
Portugal, Italy, Spain and other European
nations between the beginning of the
fifteenth century and Magellan's voyage,
it epitomizes the difference between the
voyages of the Ancients and those of the
modern era. In the first decade of the six¬
teenth century, Westerners acquired firm
evidence that the Earth is round, and
knew from "knowledge which owes
everything to experience"to quote a
BY EDUARDO LOURENÇO
line of The Lusiadsof a sea that extend¬
ed from Europe to Japan and from
Greenland to Tierra del Fuego.
This knowledge was acquired the hard
way, after more than a century of sporad¬
ic but methodical exploration whose
modest beginnings led to the reconnais¬
sance of the south Atlantic and the entire
west coast of Africa. Underlying this
exploration was the dream of sailing
round a continent which was still little
known to Europeans, in order to reach
the Indies. The most amazing feature of
this enterprise was that it should have
been pursued for so long by a single coun¬
try, Portugal, which often employed
foreigners (Genoese, Catalans, even
Castillans) in its service, while ether,
much richer and more powerful nations,
which also possessed a maritime tradition,
made no attempt to follow suit. The main
reason for this was that most of the
Portuguese voyages were not private un¬
dertakings like those of the great
Genoese, Catalan and Venetian shipown¬
ers of the same period, or of the later
French and English navigators, but a kind
of state enterprise, even though their
initiator was a prince, Henry the Navi¬
gator, and not the king.
The Portuguese maritime adventure
was modern both in its means and in its
results, but paradoxically it was
"medieval" in character. By this we mean
that it was simultaneously technical, mer¬
cantile and religious in character! When
Camôes wrote his epic a century and a
half after the beginnings of maritime
exploration, in a context that was already
fully modern, this medievalism still domi¬
nated his vision of the world.
The aim pursued by the Portuguese
navigators was tantamount to a crusade.
The Christian cross emblazoned on the
sails of their caravels was more than
merely symbolic. At that period, from a
really "modern", bourgeois standpoint
like that of the Genoese or the Venetians,
such an emblem would have been seen as
an obstacle to communication with peo¬
ples of other cultures and religions. But
the Portuguese voyages of exploration in
the fifteenth century were undertaken on
the initiative of an institution that was
both religious and military, not to say
militant. Later the enterprise became
"royal" and therefore more "secular"if
such a word had any meaning in the Por-
26

tugal of that time. But the religious aspect
of the discoveries was always present.
This is what made them an extremely
complex episode in the history of
Western culture.
No one understood this complexity
better than Camôes. He celebrated the
discoveries both as an extraordinary ad¬
venture of the human spirit, a fantastic
acceleration in our knowledge of the
universe and its mysteriesin other
words, a challenge assumed by men
against the godsand as a crusade by
Christian man, bearer of a faith that had
recently been assaulted in other parts of
Europe.
A unique poem in European as well as
Portuguese culture, The Lusiads has always
provoked perplexity as well as admiration
among figures as various as Cervantes and
Ezra Pound. It was written at a turning
point in history. Its context is the end of
the Renaissancea twilight era full of
energy and sensualitybut also the dawn
of the baroque age, with its ambiguous
interplay between day and night. Camôes
combines glorification of the daring
modernity of his countrymen's maritime
exploits with a fascination for ancient cul¬
tural models. Yet this attraction is far
from passive. Indeed, it contains an ele¬
ment of challenge. Literally and figurati¬
vely, The Lusiads stands at a crossroads in
history when the West, and especially the
Iberian peninsula, was hesitating between
exposure to a new historical situation, of
which the discoveries were themselves
the signal, and withdrawal into ethical
and religious certainties which had been
shaken by the material and conceptual
upheavals of the Renaissance.
Camôes emphasizes above all the chi¬
valrous aspects of the Portuguese disco¬
veries. But this chivalry, unlike that
evoked by the Italian poet Ariosto
(1472-1533), is realistic rather than dream¬
like. He rejects the moral disorder which
conquering expansion brought in its
wakethe unbridled ambition, the cor¬
ruption, the abuse of power, whose devas¬
tating effects he saw for himself in the
East.
Above alland this is where the poem
elevates a national epic to the dignity of
a universal mythhe was not content to
transpose the Portuguese voyages into a
heroic episode in the history of planetary
discovery. He transmuted them into a
kind of noble hymn to Eros, a naturalis¬
tic but also neo-Platonic version of the
great Italian poet Petrarch's "Triumph of
Universal Love", in which the Portu¬
guese in a sense play the role of Argo¬
nauts. Petrarch's celebrated theme, still an
colours of a new alliance between
peoples.
Of course, the poem is marked by cer¬
tain Western prejudices. It belongs to an
era in which religious militancy was par¬
ticularly fierce since Westerners felt that
their faith was threatened. Despite this
inevitable eurocentrism, and thanks to its
universalist impulse, its ethical force, and
its treatment of the whole range of
human physical and spiritual experience,
The Lusiads is far from being a mere
eulogy of the Portuguese discoveries as an
episode in the history of a people. Even
more than a great hymn to a glorious
moment in the destiny of Portugal, it is
the epic of the European movement to
new shores, to infinite possibilities in
space and time.
abstract vision, becomes in the hands of
Camôes fully dionysiac, a link and a place
of harmony not only between Heaven
and Earth but between humanity
hitherto divided by space, race and pre¬
judice. All Nature participates in the feast
which crowns the exploits of Vasco da
Gama's sailors. In the "Island of Love"
episode, what begins as a hymn of natio¬
nal rejoicing becomes an epic of love, in
which spirit and senses mingle. The
heroic adventure, man's struggle with
hostile elements, ends allegorically on this
island, a dream of paradise where the
force and violence of war assume the
colours of love, and love assumes the
EDUARDO LOURENÇO, Portuguese essayist
and literary critic, won the Prix Européen de l'Essai,
awarded by the Charles Veillon Foundation of Lau¬
sanne, in 1988. He has taught in several European
universities and from 1965 to 1988 was professor
of literature at the University of Nice, France. His
published works include a number of studies on the
poet Fernando Pessoa.
Above, an illustration from the 1817 French edition of The Lusiads. It shows a scene described
towards the end of the poem, the arrival of Vasco da Gama and his men on the "Island of Love".
Below, a scene from the film A Ilha dos Amores (1982) by the Portuguese director Paulo Rocha
which was inspired by the same episode.
27
