The future
of the family
The future of the family in the Middle East and North
Africa was discussed at an international seminar held at
the University of Tunis between 20 and 23 February 1989.
The seminar, organized by Unesco and the United Na¬
tions Population Fund (UNFPA), will be followed by 4
other meetings on the same subject as part of prepara¬
tions for the International Year of the Family which will
be proposed for 1994 at the General Assembly of the
United Nations in New York later this year.
JL HE Tunis meeting was attended by twenty-
four participants and forty-eight observers from
many countries of the region and from different
social and professional backgrounds (teachers,
doctors, journalists, film-makers) and academic
disciplines (history, sociology, economics,
education).
The meeting reached the following conclu¬
sions. The region stretching from Mauritania to
Pakistan, across the Arabic, Iranian and Turkish
cultural areas, is still largely dominated by the
model of the endogamous extended family, an
authoritarian, strongly hierarchical and close-
knit social institution.
However, from the second half of the nine¬
teenth century, contact with European col¬
onialism exposed this model to major social and
economic shocks which tended to make it more
flexible and led to a diversification of family
types according to their degree of integration in¬
to modern life.
Two subjects received special attention at the
meeting: family migrations and relations bet¬
ween men and women. Migration was con¬
sidered, like the media and tourism, as an
essential factor in acculturation. The families of
migrants experience a dual processslow
disintegration in their country of origin, and
adaptation to their host country.
As for relations between men and women,
the meeting noted a change in practices concer¬
ning the choice of partner, age of marriage, con¬
ditions of divorce with important psychological
and even pathological consequences.
There was general agreement that the fami¬
ly is slowly but continually changing; that it will
certainly remain the basic unit of society; and
that the Western-type nuclear family is not
necessarily a model to be imitated.
The changes which are today taking place
in the family may not always be perceptible to
an outside observer, and a superficial impression
of rigid continuity with the traditional order is
sometimes given. But profound changes in
customs and ideas are continuing to take place,
sometimes causing tensions to erupt in the in¬
dividual or collective mind. 25
