INTERVIEW
A noted Brazilian writer talks to the Unesco Courier
about the originality of his country's culture
Jorge Amado
m Where peoples and cultures
have mingled
In many respects Brazil is a microcosm, a mixture ofpeoples If you look into the ancestry of any black-skinned Brazilian,
and sensibilities drawn from all over the world-all his or her mother or father, grandparents or great-
bumanity in a nutshell. It is also one country, with one grandparents, you will always end up by finding a white
government and a set ofnational institutions. Which ofthese ancestor somewhere.
two aspects do you consider the most important in your
countrydiversity or unity? Is it possible to speak of a Are there any pure whites?
Brazilian people and a Brazilian culture? - Among the immigrants of long standing, there are perhaps
In my opinion, one can speak of a single people, with some in the south, but they are very few and far between
its own culture, born of the intermingling of all the races and difficult to find. There are some pure whites among the
who have passed that way. recent arrivals, first-generation immigrants and their
children. But the next generation begins to mix with the
Which are these races? others, to become integrated.
First of all, of course, there were the Indians. Then came Finally, we should not forget the Arabs, above all the
the Europeans, mostly the Portuguese. But gradually the Christian Arabs who came from Lebanon and Syria. They
groups from Europe became more diversified. By the fif- were often referred to as Turks, because their countries were
teenth century Portugal itself already had a very mixed then provinces of the Ottoman empire.
population. Among the people were those who were known
as the Moors. There were also the "new Christians" as they Surely all these different peoples cannot just have fused
were calledjews fleeing from the Inquisition who, although peaceably into one? There must have been inequalities,
they had been converted, were still being persecuted. In ad- power struggles. , .
dition, there was a large Dutch colony. Of course. There were political, economic and social strug-
Then there were the Africans, brought in as slaves. With gles which were aggravated by ethnic and cultural dif-
them, racial intermixture began to accelerate. Anxious to ferences. The black peoples, for example, soon revolted
split up the original tribes, the slave-owners would buy against their conditions and there were large-scale conflicts,
groups of slaves of different tribal originsa Yoruba, a Several black republics, settlements known as quilombos,
Bantu, a Congolese. were even set up in the mountains by rebellious slaves. One
of them lasted nearly forty years and repulsed the attacks
So the slaves interbred among themselves; but did they also of four successive government armies.
interbreed with their white masters? After the abolition of slavery, successive new waves of
Yes. The Portuguese interbred very readily and this mix- immigrantsItalians, Germansarrived to work in the cof-
ing was so widespread that today there are no pure blacks, fee plantations. Finally on this point I would like to say that,

m
I
^í^^íjí
/

absorb racism in the mixture of races mm a
although the history of Brazil has included its share of in- desire to intermingle. It is a way of looking at life that is
equalities and conflicts, there has never been a break in the to be found at the heart of all the various forms of expres-
process of ethnic and cultural intermingling. That is what sion, but nowhere in such striking fashion as in Carnival,
is typical of Brazil. And from it all a Brazilian culture was when everything blends together, within each one of us and
born, based on the Portuguese language which was spoken between us all. For a Brazilian, Carnival is the greatest
by all. festival in the world.
What are the main components of this new culture? Is this attitude reflected in the field of religion?
- The European, African and Indian elements all play an - Absolutely. There is syncretism in religion just as there
irreplaceable part, but I am inclined to feel that the source is syncretism in art. And once again the African influence
of its vitality is Africa. The Brazilian soul emerged from the has been the determining factor. The Africans brought with
confrontation between Portuguese melancholy and African them their vision of cosmogony, their gods and their cults,
joie de vivre. The Portuguese are pessimists, full of doubts which came up against and combined with each other, since
and preoccupied with death. Africans exude life, are at ease members of different tribes lived together. In turn, these
with themselves physically and with nature and know how various contributions mixed with Catholicism, because, on
to laugh, celebrate and enjoy themselves. They brought their arrival, the Africans were immediately baptized.
a rhythm and a vital energy to the new culture which are Thus, in Brazil, we are all Catholics, even if at heart we
immediately recognizable. If you hear Brazilian music or are fetishists, animists or Protestants. Even the gods have
watch a Brazilian dance, you will see it straight away. intermingled and Carnival is also the carnival of the gods.
African gods have shown amazing powers of survival, even
Is this African contribution evident in allforms ofexprès- during the dark night of slavery, when the slaves, forcibly
sion of Brazilian culture? converted to Catholicism, obviously could not honour their
At first, the European contribution was predominant in gods as such. So they identified them with Christian saints,
written forms of expression, but the African influence Take, for example, the Catholic feast of Saint Anthony,
gradually came to permeate them. The first great Brazilian Just like the whites, the blacks used to say "we are going
poet, Gregorio de Matos, was a mulatto. In the eighteenth to celebrate the feast of Saint Anthony", but, in fact, they
century, most writers were mainly of white origin, but there were celebrating the feast of Ogun, a popular black god of
were also some of black origin. It was, however, already metal and of war. Gradually, the saint and the god fused
becoming difficult to differentiate between those of black together.
or white origin. The greatest Brazilian novelist of the nine¬
teenth century, Machado de Assis, was also a mulatto, a fact So there is no racism in Brazil?
which sums up nicely what I am trying to say. There was, and still is, some racism. In Brazil, as in other
Of course, the dominant cultural influence varies from parts of the world, racism rises to the surface or erupts
region to region. In the Amazon, the mixture is whenever different ethnic groups find themselves in a situa-
predominantly Indian, to the north-east black, in the south tion of conflict. Nevertheless, Brazil is not a racist society,
white. Nevertheless, it is everywhere a mixture and because any tendency towards racism is countered by a
everywhere there are truly Brazilian components. general tendency towards intermingling and syncretism. In-
One has only to look at the nine countries which sur- stead of being deep-rooted, institutionalized and encouraged,
round usArgentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, racism tends rather to be defused by the movement towards
Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuelato understand the mixing, by this drive which accommodates differences and
importance of this typically Brazilian cultural adaptability, weds opposites. Mixture is the key word of Brazilian culture.
Despite their common language and the desire for unity they My sons are of Italian blood through their mother. My
all feel, they remain nine distinct countries, whereas Brazil, grandmother was Indian, my great-grandfather was black,
which is of continental size, has maintained its unity. Of and my name has definite Arab connections. And I am corn-
course, there are many reasons for this, but, to my mind, pletely at ease as a Brazilian, with a feeling that I come from
the determining factor has been this ability to intermix, this all over the world and am so much at home in Brazil. Let

/ havefought all my life
with this hope in mind
me tell you an amusing anecdote about my name. One day
I received a letter from the embassy of an Arab country.
My secretary telephoned and found herself talking to the
cultural attaché at the embassy, who insisted that I should
"correct" my name. It should not be written "Amado", but
"Hamadou", since, according to him, it is a name of Arab
origin. From the beginning of the period of colonization,
many Portuguese families with the name of Amado came
to Brazil. How far back do they go? Probably to the Arab
conquest of the Iberian peninsula. They may also, perhaps,
have been of Jewish origin. A resume of humanity, you
might say.
So, for you, intermingling is the sole antidote to racism?
Absolutely. From a very early age I have had to fight
against a variety of injustices and prejudices and, in par¬
ticular, against racism, which is without doubt the most con¬
temptible of all prejudices. I am convinced that, in the long
run, there is only one real solutionto absorb racism in the
mixture of races.



In situations where thepolitical or economic climate is un¬
favourable to certain peoples or to certain social classes,
can this intermingling be any more than the cultural
crushing of the weakest by the strongest?
Economic and political weakness must not be confused
with cultural weakness. Even when it is in the keeping of
an oppressed community or class, a culture can preserve its
values and even impose some of them on its oppressors. This,
as I have pointed out, is what happened with the black
peoples of Brazil, even though they were reduced to slavery.
The same is true of the black peoples of the United States.
From Antiquity, we have the example of Greece helleniz-
ing the culture of her Roman conquerors and occupiers. And
in more recent times, have not India, Pakistan and Egypt
succeeded in preserving, and, indeed, reviving and revitaliz¬
ing their cultures in face of their contact with Western
colonial culture?
What is the situation in Brazil today? Has this interesting
process of interbreeding finally abolished racism?
We have just celebrated the hundredth anniversary of the
abolition of slavery. That is to say that only a hundred years
ago black or mainly black people were still slaves. Things
have progressed enormously, but a lot remains to be done.
The white/black divide still coincides to some extent with
the division between the very rich and the very poor, and
this does not exactly favour the growth of fraternal feelings.
This means that we must do all we canthrough
democratic political struggle, social reform and cultural
actionto resolve these problems and bring people closer
together. In the cultural field, in particular, we must fight
the cult of violence in television and the cinema. It is not
a matter of prohibiting films that glorify violence but of
creating new works that glorify its oppositelove, friend¬
ship and solidarity. It is a difficult path to follow, but, in
the long term, I believe it to be the right one.
After all, in spite of everything things have improved,
have they not, since the world began? I do not know
whether one day a world will exist in which man will no
longer be the enemy of man, and in which difference in skin
colour will count for no more than difference in agea
world in which all men are brothers. But we have to fight
on in the hope that this will come about. Otherwise we are
left with nothing but anguish and wretchedness. I have
fought all my life with this hope in mind. Of course, I have
had some disappointments and some painful moments,
under the dictatorship and when I had to change my mind
about certain ideas that I had long held sacrosanct. But I
have never given up that hope. Had I lost it, I would not
have been able to continue the struggle, to write. It would
have been the end of everything for me.
Can you give us an image of hope?
Yes. The image of Carnival. All those fair-skinned, brown-
skinned, black-skinned people, who sometimes talk of the
segregation of the races but who come together, dance
together and finally marry each other!
