^ , The Pavilion
BY LAURENCE CAILLET
The Japanese greet the New
Year with a time-honoured
religious ritual inspired
by the myth of the water of youth
X OR many years the West pictured Japan as a
land of geishas and cherry blossom. Today this
once-familiar image has been displaced by that of
a country of contrasts between old and new, a
land of samurai and motorcycles.
It would be wrong, however, to see tradition
and modernity as opposing forces in Japan, a
country which ever since the seventh century has
been a centralized state and where time-honoured
community traditions have actually served to
encourage, not hinder, modernization. The
picturesque and joyful festivals which periodically
strengthened community ties have survived
industrial development and still attract pilgrims
and tourists. And although their purely religious
function has atrophied, they still transmit the
centuries-old syncretic beliefs of Great Vehicle
Buddhism and of Japan's indigenous religion,
Shinto, the Way of the Gods.
Japan's main festive period was and is the
New Year, which under the ancient lunar-solar
calendar was celebrated shortly before spring
ploughing. This was the time of the festival of
the water of youth, a rite which is generally
known as Omizutori (the drawing of water) and
whose observance is traditionally believed
necessary to bring about the return of spring. The
best description of the meaning of Omizutori is
found in a haiku by the poet Riôta (1718-1787):
Drawing of water!
The water of whirlpools warms
From this day also.
Every year since the eighth century the
festival has been celebrated at the Buddhist
LJance of the bodhisattvas

of the Second Moon

monastery of Tôdaiji, at Nara, an ancient capital
of Japan. Today it takes place in the first and
second weeks of March, at a time corresponding
to the second moon of the old calendar.
In the Pavilion of the Second Moon, a vast
wooden building on the top of a hill to the east
of the monastery, twelve monks meet to honour
Kannon, the bodhisattva of infinite compassion
and mercy. Guided by giant torches whose em¬
bers are collected by the faithful as talismans, they
return to the pavilion fifteen nights in succession.
They walk around the altar, tirelessly intoning
hymns of praise and penitence. From the prayer
room, which is separated from the holy of holies
by a long veil of transparent linen, the pilgrims
can see the outsize shadows of the monks praying
for the peace and prosperity of the world.
On each of the fifteen days of ritual, six serv¬
ices are celebrated at specific moments of the day
and night. Through ten or more hours of incan¬
tation to Kannon, of chanting and ritual kneeling,
the participants seek to expiate sins committed
the previous year and to accumulate merit.
The thousand circumambulations
Almost every night, special ceremonies are held
as part of the penitential rites. According to the
"Illustrated History of the Origins of the Pavilion
of the Second Moon", the oldest manuscript of
which dates from the sixteenth century, a Tôdaiji
monk named Jitchû celebrated the feast of the
drawing of water for the first time in 752. When
he reached the paradise of the bodhisattvas, Jitchû
contemplated their ceremonies and asked how
they could be imitated and performed by men.
The bodhisattvas replied as follows: "A day and
a night here correspond to 400 human years. And
so it is all the more difficult, in the short human
time-span, to perform the rites according to the
rules and to carry out the thousand circumam¬
bulations solemnly, without overlooking any
detail. Furthermore, how could men reproduce
these rites without a Kannon with a living body?"
Jitchû then said: "The ceremony must be speed¬
ed up and the thousand circumambulations per¬
formed at a run.... If I call on him with a sincere
heart, why should a Kannon with a living body
not come?" And he returned to transmit these
rites to men.
Because of the difference between human
time and godly time, the monks run a strange race
around the altar dedicated to Kannon on the last
three days of each of the two weeks of ritual. At
first the monks walk very slowly, rolling up the
sleeves of their robes and their stoles; then they
fasten the lower parts of their garments to their
legs. Meanwhile, the curtain concealing the holy
1 orches illuminate the
Pavilion of the Second
Moon.
Intoning the name of
Kannon to the
accompaniment of the
sistrum.

mum» '¿#1
m
r »»
11
.ûyJ .-
LAURENCE CAILLET,
French ethnologist, is a
researcher with France's
National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS).
Her publications include a
study on the water of youth
ritual in Japan entitled
Syncrétisme au Japon
Omizutori: le rituel de l'eau
de jouvence (Paris, 1981),
and a book on annual
Japanese festivals and rites. 27


of holies is lifted so that the crowd of pilgrims
suddenly sees the splendour of the rites and ex¬
periences a joy equal to that felt by Jitchû when
he reached paradise. Bells are loudly rung during
this part of the ceremony.
Suddenly all noise ceases, and in the astonish¬
ing silence that follows, all the monks begin to
run barefoot around the altar. One of them
abruptly leaves the group and rushes into the
antechamber of the prayer room where a woo¬
den board known as the plank of prostration is
fixed parallel to the floor by a kind of spring. He
leaps onto the plank, striking it energetically with
his knee, and then returns to his place. Each time
the monks go around the altar, one of them runs
and strikes the plank with his knee, the part of
the body which symbolizes the forehead, elbow
and knees, with which the worshippers must
touch the ground as a sign of penitence. Eventu¬
ally the pace slackens, the curtain falls, the into¬
nation starts again, and the silhouettes of the
monks are only visible as grey shadows.
On other evenings, the gods themselves come
and dance, disguised as eight monks whose faces
are masked by their hair. The first to arrive is
the water divinity, who skips and runs with tiny
steps and sprinkles the prayer room with lustral
water. Next come the god of fire, who scatters
embers, and the god Keshi, who sprinkles grains
of rice cracked in the fire. Everyone dances and
leaps to the noisy rhythm made by three other
gods with a rattle, a conch shell and a bell. Two
more brandish a sabre and a willow rod to drive
away evil spirits.
The well of the god Onyû
During these nights of dancing the water of youth
is drawn and distributed to the pilgrims. What
is the origin of this ritual? The "Illustrated His¬
tory of the Origins of the Pavilion of the Second



Moon" records how "In the province of Wakasa,
Onyû, a god who possessed the river Onyû, lin¬
gered while out fishing and arrived late at the rites
of the twice seven days and seven nights. Pro¬
foundly regretful, the god said to Jitchû the monk
that as a sign of contrition he would make the
lustral water spring near to the place of the feast,
and at that very moment two cormorants, one
black and the other white, suddenly rose from
the rock and perched on a nearby tree. From the
traces of these birds sprang water of incompara¬
ble sweetness. Stones were laid there and it be¬
came the spring of lustral water, aka-i..."
And so, on the second day of March, the
priests of the sanctuary of Onyû pour into the
river a phial of lustral water which is supposed
to flow through an underground channel and
reach the spring of the Pavilion of the Second
Oil
. :: i! i
*
j
Loi
ir"*
Distributing holy water to
the pilgrims.
Left, the penitential ritual
Moon during the night of the twelfth to the
thirteenth.
On that night, at two o'clock in the morning,
the "master of esoteric rites", wearing a brocade
hat, leaves the pavilion and turns towards the hill
where the miraculous spring is located. With him
is a faithful layman wearing a hermit's white
robe. He is followed by monks bearing magic
rods to which conch shells and bells are fastened.
The conch shells are sounded and then, guided
by a lay torch-bearer, everyone goes down the
steps leading to the spring. At that moment, an
orchestra begins to play ancient Chinese music
and the monks pray for the water to gush out.
Today the spring is concealed beneath a
flimsy building with a grey-tiled roof, the four
corners of which are adorned with birds. Some
think the birds are pigeons, others that they are
messenger cormorants of Onyû, the god of fish¬
ing and sovereign of the waters which according
to Japanese beliefs form a reservoir of longevity,
if not of eternity. He is also associated with cin¬
nabar, the essential component of the elixir of im¬
mortality which the Taoists of China and Japan
tried to concoct in ancient times.
Only the hermit and the master of the eso¬
teric rites enter the building which covers the
spring. The water, carried three times in buckets
to the Pavilion of the Second Moon, is poured
into a wide tub of light-coloured wood which is
immediately covered with a white cloth and
offered to Kannon. From that day on it is dis¬
tributed to the thousands of pilgrims who flock
to receive in the palms of their hands a few drops
of this extraordinary liquid which encourages lon¬
gevity and is a panacea for all ills.
In spite of its extreme solemnity, this rite is
not very different from that with which peasant 29

Left, the shadow ofa monk falls
on the altar curtain.
i\ight, the plank ofprostration.
Oelow right, rice cake offerings to Kannon.
families welcome the spring. On the eve of the
first day of spring, the master of the house, his
eldest son or a specially chosen servant rises while
it is still dark. He dons a traditional kimono and
bows before the altar of the household gods after
sprinkling himself with a few drops of purifying
water. Then he puts on new straw sandals and
goes to the nearest spring. Beside the spring or
on the lip of the well, he offers the water-god rice
cakes and, while reciting a magic formula, draws
with a new ladle and bucket the first water of the
year.
Without speaking to the people he meets on
his way, he returns home and places the freshly
drawn water on the household altars. Then he
awakens the members of the family and each one
drinks tea brewed with this water of youth which
as far as possible compensates for the aging caused
by the New Year. According to tradition, peo¬
ple become a year older at New Year, not on
their birthday.
The origin of this marvellous water is
described in the following story from the
southern island of Miyako: "Once, long ago,
when men settled on the beautiful island of



Miyako, the Sun and Moon wished to give them
an elixir of immortality and sent them Akariya-
zagama, a young servant with red hair and a red
face. On the night that marked the changing of
the season, Akariyazagama came down to Earth
with two buckets, one of which contained the
water of immortality and the other the water of
mortality. The Moon and the Sun had ordered
him to bathe men with the water of immortality
and to bathe the snake with the water of death.
As Akariyazagama, tired after his long journey,
put down the buckets beside the road and uri¬
nated, a great snake appeared and bathed in the
water of immortality. Weeping, Akariyazagama
had men take a bath of death and then returned
to heaven. When he described how he had carried
out his mission, the Sun was furious and said to
him: 'Your offence against men is irreparable...'
"Since then, the snake is reborn when it sheds
its skin, whereas men die. However, the gods
took pity on men and wished to enable them, if
not to live for ever, at least to grow somewhat
younger. And so each year, on the night before
the day of the feast of the new season, they send
from heaven the water of youth. That is why
even now, at dawn on the day of the feast of the
first season, water of youth is drawn from the
well and all the family bathes in it."
The water of youth which rises at the foot
of the Pavilion of the Second Moon, like that
which bubbles up in family wells, thus comes
from the other world. It is carried by waves from
the distant land of the gods, the land of Tokoyo,
a world both sombre and luminous, a land of
abundance and immortality, but also the resting
place of the dead on the other side of the sea.
Penitence and the absorption of holy water
are two facets of a single hopeless desire to ob¬
literate the wear and tear of time and establish
in the world of men something of the eternity
which is the prerogative of the gods. 31
