The Christianization of Kievan Russia
The Millennium celebrations
The thousandth anniversary of the intro¬
duction of Christianity to Kievan Russia
was widely celebrated during 1988. This
report on the highlights of the year's
events has been written for the Unesco
Courierby Monsignor Juvenaly, Metropo¬
litan of Krutits and Kolomna, a leading
figure in the Russian Orthodox Church
and a member of its Holy Synod.
AT a meeting with Patriarch Pimen
and the Holy Synod of the Russian
Orthodox Church on 29 April
1988, Mr. Mikhail Gorbachev, general
secretary of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
noted that the State and the Russian Church
have "a common history, one birthplace and
one future".
The programme of celebrations for the
millennium began in June with an assembly
of a Local Council of the Russian Orthodox
Church, which was held in the Trinity and
St. Sergius monastery at Zagorsk, near Mos¬
cow. The Council was attended by ecclesias¬
tical dignitaries and lay representatives from
Orthodox dioceses around the world. En¬
voys from many other Christian Churches
were present at the opening ceremony.
The Council canonized nine Russian
saints; adopted the Statutes of the Russian
Orthodox Church aimed at promoting the
religious life in society today; and issued a
number of appeals and messages to all Rus¬
sian Orthodox Churches, to all Orthodox
Christians practising the old rites, and to
Christians all over the world.
The centrepiece of the Moscow events was
an open-air service at the Danilov monas¬
tery, celebrated before a congregation of
many thousands by clergy from Orthodox
churches in many parts of the world, led by
the Patriarch of Antioch. The monastery,
returned to the Church by the Soviet State in
1983 and since restored, is today the spiritual
and administrative centre of the Russian
Orthodox Church.
Later in June, in a new district of Moscow,
Patriarch Pfmen laid the foundation stone of
a church dedicated to the Holy Trinity to
mark the millennium of Russian Orthodoxy.
The celebrations continued in other his¬
toric religious centres such as Kiev, Vladimir
and Leningrad. Open-air services held in all
these cities drew crowds of worshippers.
In Kiev, the cradle of Russian Orthodoxy,
the festivities took on a special meaning. The
Kiev caves, partly natural and partly man-
made structures excavated in the eleventh
century, once sheltered the first Russian
monks, hermits who had adopted the ascetic
way of life. As none of the city's cathedrals
was large enough to accommodate the
Kievans and pilgrims who wished to com¬
memorate the millennium, a service was held
in Lavrskaya Square, near the entrance to the
Far Caves, by'a number of high dignitaries of
the Russian Orthodox Church. Afterwards,
clergy and guests entered the holy caves,
where psalms were sung in honour of the
saints who had lived and died there.
Later, a service of thanksgiving was held
on the hill crowned by the statue of Prince
Vladimir I of Kiev, who in 988 AD accepted
Christianity on behalf of Kievan Russia.
Thousands of Christians gathered for the
service on the slopes overlooking the place
where, a millennium ago, the mass baptism
of the people of Kiev took place. Canticles
were sung by the choirs of St. Vladimir
cathedral and Odessa theological seminary.
This service was the outstanding event of the
millennium, although celebrations con¬
tinued nationwide, in all the dioceses of the
Russian Orthodox Church.
