SCIENCE AND SOCIETY
International co-operation in space
BY DAVID SPURGEON
Canadian scientific journalist based in Ottawa
I WENTY years ago, US astronaut Neil
Armstrong became the first human to
set foot on the Moon. His arrival there
was heralded in the West as the win¬
ning of what was popularly called "the
space race".
In those early days of the space age
we used to hear a lot about the "space
race". Competition between the two
giant space-faring nations, the Soviet
Union and the United States, was
the order of the day. Today that is
changing. The new watchword is co¬
operation. Competition certainly still
exists between the great space powers,
but international co-operation is now
the vogue.
Today, instead of talking about rac¬
ing back to the Moon or on to Mars,
the Soviets and the Americans are at
least thinking about the possibility of
going there together.
The joint statement after the Soviet-
US Summit in 1 988 noted that the two
countries "agreed to expand exchanges
of space science data and of scientists...
They noted scientific missions to the
Moon and Mars as areas' of possible
bilateral and international co¬
operation".
Other kinds of collaboration in
space are already well underway. The
recent ill-fated Phobos probes of the
Soviet Union, destined for the moons
of Mars, for example, were Soviet-built
and launched, but they carried instru¬
ments and employed scientists from
Austria, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, the
Federal Republic of Germany, the Ger¬
man Democratic Republic, Finland,
France, Hungary, Ireland, Poland, Swit¬
zerland and Sweden. And the USA
provided radio tracking. Similarly, cos¬
monauts from twelve countries (Bulgar¬
ia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, France, the
German Democratic Republic, Hungary,
India, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, Syria,
and Viet Nam) have flown on Soviet
spacecraft.
The major current US manned
space prioritythe Space Station
48 Freedomis a co-operative venture be
tween that country and Canada, Europe
and Japan. The Space Station will pro¬
vide a permanent manned research
laboratory and spacecraft servicing and
repair facility in space. It will also func¬
tion as a transportation depot from
which spacecraft can depart to distant
parts of the solar system.
Although the United States is the
project director and senior partner, the
US National Aeronautics and Space Ad¬
ministration (NASA) calls the Space Sta¬
tion a "genuine partnership" which
involves "friends with common in¬
terests". The Europeans and Japanese
are each providing a habitable module,
while Canada is building a Mobile Ser¬
vicing System.
Other space-faring nations are co¬
operating not only with the Big Two,
but among themselves. Canada has
partnerships with France, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Japan, Sweden,
the United Kingdom and the USSR.
Japan has co-operated with the USA in
projects other than the Space Station,
and with the European Space Agency,
and intends to conduct research joint¬
ly with Malaysia and Thailand using data
from Japan's Marine Observation Satel¬
lite, MOS-1.
Countries that have conducted
space activities now include, besides
those mentioned above, the Arab
States, Australia, Brazil, China, India and
Indonesia. Most of these, too, have
been collaborative ventures.
The USSR has been particularly ac¬
tive in trying to promote international
space agencies. In June 1988, for the
third year in succession, Soviet delegates
at the United Nations sponsored the
idea of a World Space Organization.
Connected with the United Nations, the
WSO would concentrate its efforts on
peaceful space exploration and preven¬
tion of extension of the arms race to
space. It would develop such projects
as the use of space platforms to moni¬
tor global change and, later, manned
interplanetary missions.
The most comprehensive collabora
tive space activity of all will be the
celebration in 1992 of International
Space Year (ISY). In April 1988, NASA
hosted a meeting at the University of
New Hampshire to which it invited
representatives of twenty-three space
agencies around the world. The agen¬
cies formed an organizationSpace
Agency Forum for the International
Space Year (SAFISY)to meet regular¬
ly to co-ordinate ISY activities, particu¬
larly those associated with studying the
Earth. Such activitiesthe use of space
observations and complementary
ground-based studies to better under¬
stand our planetwill be a feature of
the ISY.
One of these activities will be an ef¬
fort to search among existing data on
the Earth to try to determine whether
there are unequivocal signs that human
activity has been responsible for warm¬
ing of our planet Earth. A US project
planned to study another global change
is the Upper Atmospheric Research
Satellite, scheduled for launch in 1 991 .
It will measure processes in the upper
atmosphere that control the loss of
ozone.
Topex/Poseidon, a joint US-French
project to measure with great accura¬
cy the depth of the oceans, is scheduled
for launch in 1 992. This will help scien¬
tists learn more about global ocean cir¬
culation. It is to be coupled with
Scatterometer, a device to be flown on
a Japanese satellite in the mid-1990s,
which will measure wind stress on the
ocean surface. Together, Topex/
Poseidon and Scatterometer will help us
understand the coupling between the
oceans and the atmosphere.
Finally, to study how the at¬
mosphere and the Earth interact as an
integrated system, a platform will be
placed in polar orbit by the US Space
Station, carrying a comprehensive set
of equipment called the Earth Observ¬
ing System. This will be complement¬
ed by another platform provided by the
European Space Agency and still
another from the Japanese.
Platforms in polar orbit can see the
entire Earth rotating under them. In
time, geostationary platforms (which re¬
main stationary in orbit with respect to
a position on Earth) will be added to fo¬
cus instruments on a single region on
the Earth's surface. Together, they will
provide comprehensive, long-term
measurements of such factors as the
Earth's vegetation, cloud and snow
cover, ocean currents, and even the
production of the simple plants
(phytoplankton) that are the food
source of marine animal life.
All these studies will be com¬
plemented by satellite and ground-
based studies from around the world
particularly through the International
Geosphere-Biosphere Programme of
the International Council of Scientific
Unions (ICSU).
THE SOVIET SPACE
PROGRAMME
In recent years, the Soviet space
programme has been far more active
than the US programme. The American
newsmagazine Time said in its cover
story on 5 October 1987: "In sheer
numbers of launches per year, the
Soviets inched past the US in 1 967, 66
to 58, and have stayed in front since."
Since then, Soviet cosmonauts have
set the long-term space flight record,
two of themVladimir Titov and Musa
Manrovstaying there for a full year.
And in 1988, along with the first, un¬
manned, launching of their Buran re¬
usable spaceship, the Soviets conducted
89 other space missionscompared to
26 by the rest of the world combined.
Major successes were also scored
with Soviet unmanned missions to Ve¬
nus and Comet Halley: the Vega Project
had broad international participation-
six socialist and three market-economy
countries and several international
scientific organizations. The Vega
probes soft-landed on Venus to deter¬
mine the composition of the surface,

and balloon probes radioed back data
on the planet's atmosphere.
Later, the Vegas entered the enve¬
lope of Halley's comet to obtain the first
large-scale ¡mages of the comet's
nucleus, from a distance of 8,000-9,000
kilometres. Later again, the West Euro¬
pean spacecraft Giotto, and two
Japanese spacecraft, Suisei and
Sakigake, joined in, with Giotto pass¬
ing even closer to the nucleus520 to
550 kilometres from it.
US MISSIONS
TO VENUS AND JUPITER
After the Space Shuttle Challenger
disaster in January 1986, the US
programme began to pick up momen¬
tum again. Its first interplanetary probe
in a decade was launched on 4 May
1 989. That spacecraft, Magellan, is due
to visit Venus to map the surface, in¬
cluding its land forms and geological
features, using radar. Its findings are ex¬
pected to help answer fundamental
questions about the origin and evolu¬
tion of the planet, which can then be
compared with that of Earth.
Also this year, the Galileo mission
is scheduled to set off on a six-year
voyage, never before attempted, to
Jupiter and its satellites. It will parachute
a probe that will make measurements
Artist's impression of Space
Station Freedom, an
international manned space
complex scheduled to be
placed in orbit in the
mid-1990s. A Space Shuttle
can be seen preparing to
dock.
Soviet Energiva rocket and
Buran Space Shuttle on the
launching pad.
^H I
P^>. aljF^5 IT*
r \
car ^
a*
of the chemical composition of Jupiter's
atmosphere and of those of its satellites.
Galileo will also make measurements of
the Jovian magnetosphere.
The US programme has other
major scientific missions scheduled for
the near future. These include two of
what are known as the Great Observa¬
tories: the Hubble Space Telescope and
the Gamma Ray Observatory. Both are
scheduled for launch early in 1990.
The Hubble telescope will carry
both an optical telescope and ultravio¬
let instruments. It will investigate the na¬
ture of processes occurring in stars and
galaxies, study the history and evolution
of the universe, and confirm the univer¬
sality of physical laws. The Gamma Ray
Observatory will study objects that emit
gamma rays and investigate such
phenomena as neutron stars and black
holes.
Also scheduled for 1990 launch by
the USA are the Cosmic Background Ex¬
plorer and the Roentgen Satellite. The
Cosmic Background Explorer is designed
to measure the remnants of cosmic
microwave radiation believed to date
from the explosive event (the Big Bang)
that some theorists say created the
universe, and will thus have implications
for our understanding of its origin and
fate. The Roentgen Satellite will study
X-ray emission from stars and galaxies.
OBJECTIVE MARS
TheJirst part of a project named Ves¬
ta, which the Soviet Union, France and
the European Space Agency are jointly
planning, is also tentatively scheduled
for the beginning of the 1 990s. Vesta,
a follow-up of Vega, will make a
detailed study of several asteroids and
a comet. Which ones will depend on the
time of launch.
By far the biggest goal for the
Soviets is Mars, first for unmanned ex¬
ploration, and later for manned flight.
One version of such a mission has been
described by Novosti Press Agency's
scientific analyst, Oleg Borisov.
The first stage is planned for
1994-1996, using the rocket Energiva
to loft sophisticated equipment to the
surface, including rovers, drilling units
and balloons for atmospheric studies.
The next mission would come be¬
tween 2000 and 2005, with a lander
bringing back samples of Martian soil
for analysis. If the first two phases were
successful, the first manned flight would
take place between 2005 and 2010.
Borisov reported: "Soviet research¬
ers, pioneers of this mission, call for an
international effort, for participation of
some European countries and the US".
At least one Soviet writer, Vladis¬
lav Shevchenko, a physicist and
mathematician, has repeatedly publi¬
cized the advantages of a manned lu¬
nar base. Last year, through Novosti
Press Agency, he led his article with the
declaration: "It is probable that the
Soviet Union and the United States will
co-operate in exploring Mars and the
Moon".
Last April, according to the US pub¬
lication Aerospace Daily, NASA's Ad¬
ministrator, James C. Fletcher, said that
a US-USSR manned mission to the
Moon was more attractive in the near-
term than a similar voyage to Mars.
Whatever is decided about such
eventual missions, it seems certain we
can look forward to more internation¬
al co-operation in spaceand as a result
more detailed knowledge of the
universe.
49
