OF CARAVELS AND
CARTOGRAPHERS...
An age of innovation in nautical science and technology
Above: a Portuguese mariner can be seen navigating with the aid of a compass on the deck of a
16th-century ship in this engraving by Jan van der Straet. Right: 17th-century Portuguese vessel
of a later type than the caravel, the craft which was widely used on the great 15th-century
voyages of discovery and was the main Portuguese innovation in shipbuilding.
	 10 	

BY LUIS DE ALBUQUERQUE
*
'y-
.
THE scientific and technical de¬
velopments which took place in
sixteenth-century Portugal had
their roots in the Atlantic navigation of
the previous century or, to be more pre¬
cise, in the conditions created by ocean
navigation and the new possibilities it
opened up.
Around the middle of the fifteenth
century, navigators began to study sea
currents and wind directions as a first step
towards understanding the geography of
the great oceans. Improvements were also
made in shipbuilding techniques, and in
the accuracy of navigational instruments.
The art of cartography developed in Por¬




tugal during the early years of the centu¬
ry, initially inspired by Mediterranean
(Italian and Majorcan) models, but even¬
tually acquiring an originality of its own
and gaining acceptance in other countries,
especially France and Japan. Ptolemy's
geographical theories, which enjoyed a
revival of popularity from the second
decade of the century, were soon being
revised in the light of new information.
Sailing the high seas
The study of currents and winds and
their variations began when Portuguese
merchant and exploratory ships ventured
ever further south along the west coast
of Africa. The outward voyage was not
particularly difficult, but the winds and
currents encountered on the return jour¬
ney frequently slowed down the ships or
brought them to a complete halt. The ef¬
forts made to overcome these obstacles
had three important consequences. Initial¬
ly, a technique was evolved for dealing
with a head or beam wind by going about
or tacking, then a lighter vessel better
suited to this type of navigation was
designedthe caravel. Eventually, return¬
ing sailors realized that they would reach
their destination more quickly by head¬
ing out into the open sea to avoid the
problem zones. This manoeuvre, which
no doubt accounted for the frequent stops
in the Azores, is referred to by modern
historians as "the return by the open sea",
whereas in the fifteenth and sixteenth cen¬
turies it was called the "Guinea return"
or the "Mina return". (On the way back
from Sao Jorge de Mina, the Portuguese
trading-post on the Gold Coast, now
Ghana, ships would change course and
head northwest until they reached the
approximate latitude of Lisbon.)
These navigational tactics, which ob¬
liged ships for the first time to take to the
open sea, were bound to confront pilots
with unexpected problems. Even when
Mediterranean ships sailed beyond the
Strait of Gibraltar to the Channel or
North Sea ports, they hugged the coast¬
line and could check their position vir¬
tually every day by reference to a point
on land. On the other hand, the return
voyage by the high seas from Guinea, and
later from the Gold Coast, to Lagos (in
Portugal) or Lisbon, involved sailing
"blind" for anything from three weeks
to two months. The best moment to
change course and head eastwards
towards the Portuguese coast could be in¬
dicated by the winds, the currents, the
colour of the water, or the sea-birds, but
this kind of "natural" indication could
be extremely unreliable. A means had,
therefore, to be found to check the ship's
position every day in the absence of any
landmark.
Meridians and magnetism
At first pilots calculated the meridian
altitudes of the stars (the Pole Star and
certain others, and also the sun). Then,
at some point in the ocean, with the aid
of sextant or astrolabe (later replaced by
the quadrant), they compared these celes¬
tial observations with the altitudes of the
same stars at their meridian transit above
Lisbon or some other fixed point of
reference.
Initially this procedure was nothing
more than an adaptation of a method
which John of Hollywood had recom¬
mended in his thirteenth-century treatise
Sphaera tnundi, for measuring the length
of one degree of a meridian.
11

-f*.
This technique was a major innova¬
tion in the history of navigation, in that
it enabled latitude to be determined
almost daily on board ship. However,
early-sixteenth-century navigators still
lacked a means of determining longitude,
which would have made it possible to fix
the ship's exact position. If some of them
came up with the wrong solutions in
their experiments, others would point
out their errors, thus enabling different
problems to be solved.
Even erroneous calculations were put
to immediate use. Convinced that longi¬
tude was in direct linear relation to the
Earth's magnetic declination, the Por¬
tuguese navigators of the sixteenth cen¬
tury noted all the values of this
declination (which they would later use
as "sightings" or indicators of their posi¬
tion). These accumulated data would
prove useful to the English pioneer
researcher, into magnetism, William
Gilbert, and the Flemish mathematician
Simon Stevin, when, towards the end of
the century, they were studying
phenomena connected with the Earth's
magnetism, theories regarding which
were still at a rudimentary stage.
Portolan charts
The art of navigation had made rapid
strides in the second half of the fifteenth
century. Pilots had quickly learned to de¬
termine latitude from the altitude of stars,
or from that of the sun using daily decli¬
nation tables (showing the distance of the
sun's zenith north or south of the Equa¬
tor on any given day). Apart from these
basic data, they possessed readings of the
number of leagues covered by different
wind-zones (from one compass point to
another) and by one degree of latitude,
as well as timetables of tides at various
points along the coast. The earlier naviga¬
tional techniques, improved and adapted
to the new methods, were also still in use.
All this information was recorded in
the navigation manuals and charts known
as portolans. The first two of these
anonymous guides were published at Lis¬
bon in 1509 and 1516, with some differ¬
ences between the two editions. Based on
sailing experience, they contained the
data already mentioned, together with the
latitudes of the places most frequented by
navigators and an occasionally inaccurate
translation ofJohn of Hollywood's trea¬
tise, in which pilots learned the rudiments
of cosmography.
One of the oldest maps depicting Portuguese
voyages of discovery. It was produced in
1485 by the Portuguese cartographer Pedro
Reinel and shows for the first time the
African coastline as far as the point reached
by Diogo Cäo.
Despite some inconsistencies, these in¬
novative works, the oldest of their kind,
gained widespread acceptance and were
wholly or partially imitated until the six¬
teenth century. Some extracts from them
were even translated into French, En¬
glish, Italian and German.



Caravels, carracks and galleons
Fifteenth- and sixteenth-century navi¬
gation had an equally strong impact on
shipbuilding. When the first forays took
place beyond Cape Bojador, there was as
yet no typical vessel, as different designs
were being experimented with. But once
voyages of coastal reconnaissance, or the
exploration of river estuaries, became
more frequent, the caravel (or rather
caravels, as there was never a standard
model) became the type of vessel
preferred by explorers, because it was fast
and lightqualities which shipwrights
were determined to maximize.
Caravels still formed part of the first
fleets to reach India in the early sixteenth
century, but they were gradually replaced
by the larger, heavier carracks and
galleons which could transport more car¬
go. However, caravels continued to be
built in the Portuguese shipyards, not
only for the reconnaissance missions be¬
gun in the Atlantic in the fifteenth cen¬
tury, but also, owing to their lightness,
to provide fast connections between the
forts scattered along the route to India.
Around this time also, ships began to be
equipped with a superstructure which
enabled cannon to be mounted in them.
The oldest treatises on shipbuilding
that have come down to us, by Fernan¬
do Oliveira, Joâo Baptista Lavanha and
Manuel Fernandes, are documents of in¬
estimable value for the history of naval
architecture.
Progress in cartography
Two significant events sum up the
contribution that the transoceanic
voyages made to scientific geography.
Firstly, about a year after Bartolomeu
Dias completed the voyage which virtu¬
ally proved that the Atlantic and Indian
oceans were connected, the German car¬
tographer Henricus Martellus drew a map
of the African coast as far as the Rio
Infante (not far from the Cape of Good
Hope, which Dias had named the Cape
of Storms), based upon the data collect¬
ed by Dias and his predecessors. For the
areas beyondthe Gulf, the Red Sea and
Ceylon (present-day Sri Lanka)
Germanus relied on the Ptolemaic model.
Equally important was the publication
in the fifteenth century of a Latin trans¬
lation of Ptolemy's Guide to Geography,
which had been forgotten throughout
most of the Middle Ages. Reprinted in
1475, the Geography reached its seventh
This page from a manual for use by
navigators forms part of an atlas produced in
1571 by the Portuguese cartographer Fernäo
Vaz Dourado.
12 	

The Portuguese were the first sailors to use the astrolabe, a device for taking the altitudes of
celestial bodies, as a navigational instrument. This 16th-century example is preserved in Lisbon's
Maritime Museum.
edition in 1490. It reappeared in 1507, and
the eleventh edition, published in Stras¬
bourg in 1513, included new maps, the
tabulae novae, which showed the config¬
uration of all the lands and inhabited
islands which had been recorded by navi¬
gators up to that time.
A planisphere included in the Stras¬
bourg edition is modelled on the anony¬
mous Portuguese map of the world, the
so-called Cantino map (after Alberto
Camino, the Italian who purchased it in
Lisbon). Although not dated, it was prob¬
ably made in the early autumn of 1502.
The Equator and the two Tropics are
represented for the first time on this map
(see centre colour pages). Later, on a map
of the Atlantic which has been dated at
1504, Pedro Reinel incorporated a scale
of latitudesthe first in the history of car¬
tography.
Portuguese sixteenth-century cartog¬
raphy won wide recognition, not because
of its revolutionary nature, but because
it showed with some degree of accuracy
many parts of the world which were
previously unknown, or little known, in
Europe. Portuguese cartographers were
also to be found at this period in Spain
(Jorge Reinel and Diogo Ribeiro), France
(Lopo Hörnern and Bartolomeu Velho)
and England (Diogo Hörnern), where
their work was generally very well paid.
Dutch engraved cartography of the late
sixteenth century also made occasional
use of the services of Portuguese car¬
tographers such as Luis Teixeira, found¬
er of a dynasty of map-makers which
flourished until the end of the seven¬
teenth century.
The discoveries recorded in guide¬
books and travelogues
The achievements of the Portuguese
voyages of exploration were to culminate
in the discovery of Brazil, the opening of
a complex network of maritime routes in
the Indian Ocean, the occupation of
Malacca and the penetration of the
western Pacific, followed by the Por¬
tuguese arrival in China and the Moluc¬
ca Islands and finally in Japan. Many
men, driven by the pursuit of wealth and
profit, no doubt, but also curious and
observant, travelled through previously
unknown lands and cities, cast anchor in
faraway ports, mixed with peoples who
differed from them in language and cus¬
toms, and discovered many kinds of fau¬
na and flora. All these discoveries were
passed on in works that are remarkable
for the accuracy of their information and
the understanding and respect they show
for people's myths and beliefs.
Around 1513, for example, A Suma
Oriental by Tomé Pires, an apothecary
who died in China, provided not only bo¬
tanical observations but a veritable com¬
mercial guide to the Orient. Duarte
Barbosa produced a similar work in 1518,
and Francisco Alvares wrote a mono¬
graph on Abyssinia which was published
in 1540. In 1587, Gabriel Soâres de Sousa
completed a wide-ranging treatise on the
Indians of the Brazilian coast, the scien¬
tific rigour of which would do credit to
a modern ethnologist. Father Gaspar da
Cruz wrote about China and Hormuz,
an anonymous author left a description
of the Moluccas, and Garcia da Orta and
Cristóvao da Costa produced excellent
studies of the medicinal plants of the East.
If we add to this list, which is far from
exhaustive, the texts on the art of navi¬
gation which were written in the same
period, if we think of the role played by
the portolans, travelogues and, especial¬
ly, the innumerable marine charts, and if
we point out that some of these works,
in translation, found their way into the
priceless collections of the Italian
geographer Giovanbattista Ramusio and
of other scholars, we gain at least some
idea of how a small country, with a
population of less than two million,
participated in the birth of the modern
era and in the irresistible European
expansion that was destined to last for
four centuries. The Portuguese and their
cultural and geographical neighbours thus
contributed to the construction of the
world in which we live.
LUIS DE ALBUQUERQUE, Portuguese specia¬
list in the history of science, is Professor Emeritus
at the University of Coimbra. A member of the
Portuguese Academy of History and of the
International Academy of the History of Science,
he has published over 800 works including Historia
dos descobrimentos (1985), Navegadores, viajantes e
aventureiros portugueses (1988) and, in English,
Nautical Instruments (1988) and Astronomical
Navigation (1988).
	 13
