JAPAN IN EARLY
PORTUGUESE MAPS BY ALFREDO PINHEIRO MARQUES
m
This 16th-century Japanese screen showing the arrival of the Portuguese in the Land of the Rising Sun is a typical example of Japanese nanban
art in which European ships, figures and goods were depicted.
LATE medieval Europe possessed only sketchy knowledge
ofJapan, and such fantastic and muddled information as
existed was largely culled from a single source, The Book
ofMarco Polo. Although the Venetian traveller never reached
the Japanese archipelago, he wrote about a mythical land,
Cipango, which Christopher Columbus was hoping to find on
his first voyage in 1492.
The Portuguese were the first to discover the sea route to
India and the Far East, and sometime in the early 1540s a group
of adventurers which included the famous Fernào Mendes Pinto
(author of an exciting travelogue, Peregrinaçao) became the first
Westerners to set foot on Japanese soil. Their arrival marked
the start of an exemplary cultural exchange which was to last
for almost a hundred years, and which was a source of mutual
enrichment to Japanese and Portuguese alike.
Cartography was one field in which this encounter between
cultures found expression. The Portuguese were at that time
the European masters of navigation and of mapmaking tech¬
niques. As they became more familiar with the Japanese ar¬
chipelago, they included it on their charts and maps and
14 	

thus helped to make Japan known in
Europe, where these maps were much
sought after.
A Portuguese, Tomé Pires, was also
the first Western author to use the name
Japan ffampon) in a non-cartographical
work, A Suma Oriental (1512-1515). Ac¬
cording to Professor Armando Cortesâo,
the first accurate depiction of Japan in
European cartography after the coun¬
try had been visited by Westerners is
on an anonymous Portuguese map
(c. 1550) preserved in the Vallicelliana
Library in Italy. This is also the first
European map on which the name
Japan appears.
Japan had previously been depicted
conjecturally on a number of Europe¬
an maps, notably the Insularium illus-
tratum by the German cartographer
Henricus Martellus (c. 1490) and in the
work of a number of Portuguese car¬
tographers such as Francisco Rodrigues
(1515), Pedro Reinel (c. 1517) and Lopo
Homem-Reinéis (c. 1519), based on secondhand information
gathered in the Orient, in Malacca and in Indochina.
In the 1550s and 1560s, the Italian cartographers Paolo
Forlani and Giacomo Gastaldi drew maps which were based,
not on Marco Polo's reports but on information from the writ¬
ings of St. Francis Xavier, the Spanish missionary who preached
Christianity in Portugal's Asian possessions. But these maps
had no great following, unlike those of the Portuguese, which
were widely copied and became the model for the representa¬
tion of the Japanese archipelago in Western cartography. At
this time the influence of two Portuguese mapmakers, the
brothers Lopo and Diogo Hörnern, was widely felt. Between
1560 and 1580 another Portuguese, Bartolomeu Velho, produced
a series of maps in which the orientation and configuration of
the Japanese islands were depicted with increasing accuracy. In
1569 the Flemish cartographer Gerardus Mercator combined
Gastaldi's map with the anonymous map of the 1550s. In 1570
Abraham Ortelius of Antwerp followed Bartolomeu Velho's
model when including Japan in his world atlas.
Meanwhile, another type of map of Japan was being
produced by Portuguese cartographers, showing the archipela¬
go in the form of four crescent moons with their extremities
turned towards the south. This model appears for the first time
in the anonymous Portuguese atlas which accompanies the
Livro de Marinharia (Book of Seamanship) de Joâo de Lisboa,
published around 1560. Although less accurate than Bartolomeu
Velho's map, this model came to predominate and was widely
accepted in Europe, where it was diffused by Fernab Vaz
Dourado (a Portuguese cartographer born in Goa of an Indian
mother) in the many atlases he produced between 1560 and
1570, and thus is often known as the "Vaz Dourado type".
Towards the end of the sixteenth century, more accurate maps
were being produced by the Portuguese cartographer Luis Teixeira,
and these were further refined by his son, Joäo Teixeira Albernaz,
during the first half of the seventeenth century.
The Portuguese were responsible for making known the im¬
age of Japan in Europe, but this was not a one-way process. On
the contrary, it is thought that Japanese maps were used as sources
by the Portuguese, especially in the earliest period and notably in
the work of Lopo Hörnern, in which the influence of Japanese
Y
ZZf - *
/
%
ZZZ-^rV'. Z--:Zy'\
^
Dfe
Detail, above, from a mid-1 6th-century map by an anonymous
Portuguese cartographer may be the oldest depiction of Japan in
European cartography. The map is now in the Vallicelliana
Library, Rome.
Japan is more accurately shown in this map drawn by the Portuguese
cartographer Bartolomeu Velho in 1561 (Library of the Academy of
Fine Arts, Florence).
	 15

-.*̂
x
maps of the "Gyogi" type can clearly
be seen.
Moreover, as Professor Kazutaka
Unno of the University of Osaka has
shown, the development of modern
Japanese terrestrial and marine cartog¬
raphy was based on Portuguese naviga¬
tional maps rather than on those of the
Dutch, as had formerly been thought.
This influence became apparent in the
sixteenth century and continued to
bear fruit for 200 years, even after Por¬
tuguese relations with Japan had come
to an end.
This mutual influence in cartogra¬
phy is surely one of the most interest¬
ing aspects of the cultural exchange
between two nations, so different and
yet so close, which set an example of peaceful and fruitful
dialogue between civilizations of Orient and Occident in the
sixteenth century.
,1 -
^
R.
/) A
ALFREDO PINHEIRO MARQUES, of Portugal, is professor of history at
the University of Coimbra. His most recent publications include Origem e desen-
volvimento da cartografía portuguesa na época dos descobrimentos (1988), and,
in English, The Dating of the Oldest Portuguese Charts (1989). He is currently
preparing an International Bibliography on the Discoveries and Overseas Encounters
and serving as scientific coordinator on the Portuguese Commission for the
Seville Universal Exhibition of 1992.
Maps on this page show the increasing accuracy with which
Portuguese cartographers depicted Japan. Map below dates from 1571
and shows Japan in the form of a half moon. It is now in the
Portuguese National Archives, Lisbon. In the map above, produced in
1640 by a cartographer of the school founded by the Teixeira family,
Japan is much more correctly depicted (Library of the Port of Toulon,
France).
! A I . A N C A DOj j
16 	
