The voyages of discovery strongly influenced the Late Gothic form of Portuguese architectural ornamentation known as the "Manueline" style, in
which marine and nautical motifs are prominent. Above, pillars and vaulting of the Jerónimos monastery in Lisbon, one of the most typical
examples of this style.



PORTUGUESE ART
IN THE MARITIME ERA
BY RAFAEL DE FARIA D. MOREIRA
DURING Portugal's Golden Age
of Discoveryfrom the conquest
of Ceuta, Morocco, in 1415, to
the death of Prince Henry the Navigator
in 1460 Portuguese art was predominant¬
ly Gothic, then the common aesthetic
standard throughout the Western world.
Yet this was not the exuberant, florid
Gothic of the great French cathedrals, but
a simpler, more down-to-earth, less eru¬
dite and intellectual version, closer
perhaps to the vernacular and to the less
ornamental architecture of the mendicant
religious orders and of the Cistercians. In
modest buildings such as the still essen¬
tially Romanesque Hermitage of Our
Lady of Guadaloupe, near Sagres, and
constructions built to a serene, rigorous¬
ly geometric design (such as the lesser
cloisters of the monasteries of Batalha and
Tomar) it is possible to detect the per¬
sonal tastes of Henry the Navigator. His
was a classical ideal of beauty which
found its full expression in the canvases
of the court painter Nuno Gonçalves
whose paintings exude a powerful mystic
force and a sentiment of respect for the
value of the individual (see pages 2 and 8).
It would, however, be a mistake to
take this Franciscan humility as a sign of
weakness. According to Reynaldo dos
Santos, the polyptych for Säo Vicente, six
panels painted by Nuno Gonçalves for
the See of Lisbon between 1460 and 1465,
as the city's tribute to the leader of the
conquest of Morocco, "reflects a new vi¬
sion of Nature and of man". As redolent
of Mediterranean humanism as it is of
nordic realism, this work is one of the
masterpieces of European painting.
Moreover, the buildings in English Late
Gothic style (such as those built by the
French architect Huguet between 1402
and 1438 at the monastery of Batalha), the
Tuscan-style paintings that Prince Henry
seems to have admired so much (proba¬
bly the work of Joâo Gonçalves who in
1432 painted the fine Renaissance frescoes
35

in the Abbey of Florença) as well as the
Moorish style of the Royal Palace at
Sintra where King Joäo I (1385-1433)
received foreign envoys and visitors
(among them the great Flemish painter
Jan van Eyck) in exotic surroundings
suited to his status as "Lord of Ceuta",
are all contemporary aesthetic manifesta¬
tions whose cosmopolitan nature is an
expression of human diversity and
receptivity.
Once feudal dominion over the
Maghreb had been established, the sea¬
borne thrust towards India became
Portugal's national goal. Old legends
were revived, fuelled by medieval
accounts of fantastic voyages, of the
conquests of Alexander the Great and
tales of Troy which pictured Asia as a
region of fabulous wealth inhabited
mainly by Christians. To the subjects of
King Joäo II (1455-1495), an alliance with
Préster John was not only a possibility
but a necessity in the context of expan¬
sionist ambitions in which greed for gold
became inextricably mixed up with the
goal of recapturing Jerusalem and spread¬
ing the Christian message.
This ideal undoubtedly had a strong
influence on the arts and on the collec¬
tive "cultural imagination". Even before
the "discovery" of the sea route to India
(which was not achieved until Vasco da
Gama landed at Calicut in 1498, although
after 1486 it was considered only a mat¬
ter of time), the mere expectation of such
a great feat was enough to provoke a
heightened tension in the final phase of
the Gothic in Portugal. The situation in
the arts at the end of the fifteenth centu¬
ry, with its experiments in the incorpo¬
ration of the exotic (through such hybrid
forms as Afro-Portuguese ivory art) and
the lavish ornamentation favoured by the
artists at court, could be seen as a prepa¬
ration for Vasco da Gama's "encounter
with history".
There has been much discussion about
oriental influences on the development of
the distinctively Portuguese style, known
as Manueline art as a tribute to King
Manuel I (1469-1521) who gave it the
standing of official style of the kingdom.
It has rightly been pointed out that direct
contact with Indian art would only have
occurred after the process of conquest
was well advanced. It was, however, an
"imagined India" rather than any direct
influence from the subcontinent that
proved suck an irresistible fount of im¬
pressions and experiences.
Whatever its source, Manueline art
was first and foremost a royal, Christian
art, strongly linked to the medieval tra-
This window in the Convent of Christ monastery at Tomar is a masterwork of Manueline art.
Tomar was the headquarters of the Order of Christ, which played an important part in the
Portuguese voyages of discovery.
dition and to a system of mythical values
of which this style claimed to be the
definitive statement. It was a "modern"
art form in the sense that it adopted con¬
temporary thought as a strident and eu¬
phoric affirmation of faith in history.
Nothing could be more instructive than
to observe the way in which the king had
himself portrayed in these worksas a
man, kneeling in the divine presence as
a humble donor; as a king, in the regalia
of one of the Three Kings or as King
David, that is to say, as one who leads the
way to an era of greatness.
Let us take as examples of this com¬
plex symbolic framework reflecting the
Manueline notion of modernity two
related monuments (both recently in¬
scribed by Unesco on the World Heritage
List) in which the intervention of King
Manuel can be seen. Along the River
Tagus on the outskirts of Lisbon, at
Réstelo, the point of departure of succes¬
sive fleets on their voyages of discovery,
the huge Jerónimos monastery houses the
tombs of the king and his family, guard¬
ed by a small extravagantly decorated
fort. There, at the gateway to the ocean,
at the most westerly point of Europe, the
monastery (begun in 1501) and the Tower
of Belém (1514) are monuments to the
wealth and invincible power of the king
who ordered their construction.
Further north, at Tomar in central
Portugal, stands the Monastery of Christ,
built by the military Order of Christ,
which played an important role in the
voyages of discovery. In 1510, the origi¬
nal rotunda of the church was extended
by the addition of a huge nave, the
proportions of which were identical with
those of the Sistine Chapel in the Vati¬
can and which was intended, like the Sis-
tine Chapel, as a setting for great and
solemn ceremonies. The famous window
in the upper part of the west façade is an
epitome of the aesthetic message of
Manueline art, a piece of religious and
political rhetoric transposed into stone.
However, the Golden Age announced
by the ideologists of the Portuguese court
and visually expressed by the artists of the
time was to lose its attractionand the
Manueline style was to lose its topicality
with the turning of the page marked by the
end of the great discoveries (without any
of the millenarian prophecies being ful¬
filled) and with the bloody consolidation
of Portuguese power in the East.
Lord of the trade routes from Brazil
to Japan, first maritime power of the
modern era and one of the greatest of all
time, Portugal alone could be compared
to the Roman empire. Was Manueline art
to serve as a model for a new form of ar¬
tistic expression of the might of Christen¬
dom? Just as Portuguese power declined
throughout the sixteenth century, so too
did Manueline optimism wane; it was to
be the post-medieval spirit of the Italian
Renaissance that would satisfy the need for
a new form of artistic expression.
RAFAEL DE FARIA D. MOREIRA, of Brazil,
is a lecturer in the history of art at the New Uni¬
versity of Lisbon. He is the author of a monograph
on the Jerónimos Monastery, Lisbon, a thesis on
16th-century Portuguese architecture, and many
specialized articles. An expert on military architec¬
ture, he is preparing a history of Portuguese fortifi¬
cations around the world for publication in 1990.
36
