As a follow-up to our June 1989
issue ("1789: An idea that changed
the world"), we publish this
assessment of the portrayal of the
American Indian in 17th- and 18th-
century French literature.
Descriptions of Indian life were used
by the philosophers of the
Enlightenment as a powerful and
subversive means of expressing
criticism of French society.
Rljafrfr
1k x e-\
k
*$ï^w. 1 F.
,
JL HE discovery of the New World was a power¬
ful influence for change in the social structure of
the ancien régime. The American Indians had made
their appearance in French literature in the six¬
teenth century in the writings of Montaigne, but
it was not until the following century, when France
in her turn ventured into colonization, much later
than Spain, Portugal and Britain, that there emerged
a corpus of travellers' tales in which the Indians took
pride of place.
The first French incursions into North Ameri¬
ca were linked to the fur trade. The Indians of
Nouvelle France had no fabulous cities bursting with
riches to arouse the greed of the European new¬
comers and, in the early days, there was no urge
to acquire land at all costs. Under these circum¬
stances, the Indian was seen as an indispensable
trading partner. He was an equal whom the Europeans
hoped soon to fashion into their own likeness.
With this in mind, from 1632 onwards, the
Jesuits found themselves taking on an evangelizing
role, the success of which depended on the seden-
tarization of the main tribes (with the exception
of the Hurons who were already sedentary and in
JÍVí"- ^1
fe i
L
1; S f M
ijÊt^^F
f 1
«t.
spyf
. ^
wKr aat^a^k
Wl "à *8k.
_j; / y W' f j( Jt'ajfl p
'' , Àà à
rV F
iffYM
f
Jean-Jacques Rousseau, a
portrait by the British
painter Allan Ramsay
(1713-1784).
In 1839 the French king
Louis-Philippe
commissioned from
Théodore Gudin
(1802-1880) this painting
showing the discovery of
the St. Lawrence river
by the French explorer
Jacques Cartier.
whose midst a number of missions were soon
established), and on learning Indian languages. From
then until 1672, the Jesuits sent back to France Re¬
lations (narrative accounts), describing their expe¬
riences in the New World, which met with huge
success. The Indians were unquestionably the leading
characters in these accounts. Their physical
appearance, qualities, defects and beliefs were
described at length, with an infectious curiosity and
sympathy.
The Jesuits were not to remain for long the only
ones interested in the Indians. In the eighteenth cen¬
tury a profusion of texts appeared which confirmed
or contradicted each other. The French traveller and
writer Baron de la Hontan was perhaps the first of
those whose avowed aim was to make a critical as¬
sessment of his contemporaries. In 1703, he
published Voyages du Baron de la Hontan dans
l'Amérique septentrionale ("The Travels of Baron de
la Hontan in North America"). His work was so
successful that it was reprinted twenty-five times bet¬
ween 1703 and 1758. In his Dialogue ou entretiens
entre un sauvage et le Baron de la Hontan ("Dialo¬
gue or Conversations between a Savage and Baron
de la Hontan"), the baron ridicules the evangeliza¬
tion project and reports the words of an Indian,
Adario, who takes issue with the dogmas of the
Catholic Church and then attacks the person of the
king: "... we are born free and closely united, each
as important as anyone else, whereas you are all the
slaves of one man."
In 1724, outraged by the opinions of La Hon¬
tan, Father Joseph Lafitau published Moeurs
des sauvages amériquains comparées aux moeurs des
premiers temps ("Customs of the American Savages
Compared to those of Ancient Times"), a laborious
comparative history of the Indians and the ancient
Greeks designed to demonstrate that the peoples of
the New World were not devoid of religion. He also
aimed to correa the thrust ofJesuit accounts which
had affirmed the lack of any religious beliefs among
the peoples of Canada, so as to convince metro¬
politan France of the need to convert them. Above
all, his book was a vigorous counter-attack against
the views put forward by Baron de la Hontan who
sought additional justification for his atheism in the
standpoint of the Indians.
The Indian as a critical tool
The year 1770 saw the publication of Abbé Raynal's
monumental Histoire philosophique et politique des
établissements et du commerce des Européens dans les
deux Indes ("A Philosophical and Political History
of European Colonies and Trade in the Two In¬
dias"), to which Diderot has been shown to have
made a large contribution.1 Raynal made use of the
Indians as an instrument of criticism, the virulence
of which mounted as edition succeeded edition
between 1770 and 1798. The divine right of
monarchy, property and inequality were all roundly
condemned:
"The inequalities of status which we consider
so necessary .to the maintenance of societies is, in 45

the eyes of a savage, the height of folly ... but what
strikes them as an infamy, as a degradation below
that of wild beasts, is that men, who are by nature
equal, should degrade themselves so completely as
to become dependent upon the desires and whims
of a single man."
Everywhere, and especially among the
philosophers of the Enlightenment, the Indian is
used as a powerful means of expressing criticism of
French society. When Rousseau wrote his Discours
sur l'origine et lesfondements de l'inégalitéparmi les
hommes ("A Discourse upon the Origin and Foun¬
dation of Inequality Among Mankind", 1755), he
did not draw only upon the English example;
since 1750, many works had been written on America
and Rousseau had read Lescarbot, Lafitau and
Baron de la Hontan. From these texts he drew in¬
spiration for his theory of the natural goodness of
man, a commonplace of eighteenth-century litera¬
ture.2 He radicalized and gave a political dimension
to what had previously been limited strictly to the
field of observation.
Nevertheless, the Indian did not represent the
same idea to all the philosophers of the Enlighten¬
ment. In this regard, Voltaire, Rousseau and Diderot
cannot be lumped together, their ideas being often
irreconcilable. The Huron Indian in Voltaire's
story L'Ingénu ("The Innocent") was far from
gentle in his condemnation of French customs and
politics, but his viewpoint is biased in that he was
a false "Noble Savage", being of French parentage.
Voltaire used his Huron to refute Rousseau's
theories on education (L'Ingénu became a savage
although he was naturally a Frenchman), as well as
those of Lafitau on the European origin of the
Indians.
Furthermore, the Enlightenment philosophers
did not exalt the merits of the same Indians; some
preferred the tribes of the north to those of the
south, and vice versa, and the picture they painted
of the Indians varied according to whether they were
progressives (like Diderot) or not (like Rousseau).
Most of them, however, derided the activities of the
Jesuits, who were ferociously caricatured by Voltaire
in L'Ingénu. In this tale surprise is expressed that
the Hurons are not all Catholics. "Haven't the
Reverend Fathers convened them all?" asks
Mademoiselle de Saint-Yves ingenuously (or
perfidiously?).
However opposed to the Jesuits the majority
of the authors of certain travellers' tales and the
philosophers of the Enlightenment may have been,
it cannot be denied that the seed of the ideas they
expressed on inequality, the monarchy and property
was contained in the Jesuits' Relations.
Painstaking and scrupulous observers as they
were, the Jesuits noted down everything they saw.
No doubt they wanted to reform the Indians, but
they also hoped to learn lessons from them that
could be applied to the French. They were thus the
46 first to make comparisons between the two societies
and to weigh their respective values against each
other; and in this confrontation French society did
not always come off best. The Jesuits could not but
approve of the frugal life-style of the Indians and



of their generosity, which was a corollary of the
absence of private property and the concept of
profit. Thus their readers gradually became
accustomed to the idea that man could be happy,
free and equal, without a king, without laws and
without codified rights. The effect of all this on their
contemporaries was undoubtedly detrimental to the
interests of the monarchy, since their eulogies of a
democratic form of government was an implied criti¬
cism of the monarchical system.
Three themes, which were continually being
developed and radicalized throughout the eighteenth
century, appear in the pages of the Jesuits' Relations:
criticism of the monarchy, man's relationship with
nature and the Indian's right to speak out, and
thence his right to power.
The Indians as Republicans
In Nouvelle France, though not in France itself, the
Jesuits were opposed to royal power. They dreamed
of setting up in Canada a system such as they had
launched in Paraguay and Californiaa Jesuit
theocratic state which was often seen as a socialist
state in embryo. They were the first to see the
Indians as "Republicans" in the mould of the
ancient Romans.
For them this assimilation justified their boost¬
ing of the republican governmental system of the
Indians whose egalitarian values and spartan rigour
brought into question the France of the day. Father
Brébeuf, who lived among the Hurons from 1634
until his death, at the hands of the Iroquois, in 1649,
wrote two Relations about the Hurons. In the 1636
version he described in detail their system of govern¬
ment, whose democratic nature he lauded. He relat¬
ed that the Hurons had two chiefs, one for war and
one to take care of internal affairs. The "captains"
of the sub-divisions of these two authorities were
elected on the basis of "their intelligence, populari¬
ty, wealth and other qualities which earned them
esteem in the Land".
In case his meaning was not sufficiently clear,
Brébeuf took care to contrast Huron society with
that of France: "They attain this level of advance¬
ment partly by inheritance and partly by election.
They are not normally succeeded by their own chil¬
dren but by their nephews or their grandchildren.
Even for them succession to these petty kingships
is not automatic, as is the succession of the Dauphin
to the throne of France or of French children to
the heritage of their fathers; it is dependent upon
their having the necessary qualities, on their accept¬
ing the honour and on their being acceptable to the
whole Country."
In this system Brébeuf detected "the spirit of
all republics" and he also praised the freedom of
speech which was the rule among the Indians and
which he saw as being indissociable from the im¬
portance placed on oratory:
"So accustomed are they to this that, since most
of them have good minds, they become alert and
train themselves wonderfully, to the extent that vir¬
tually all of them are able to discuss and reason- clear¬
ly, and in well-rounded phrases, those things about
which they have some knowledge. The Councils
which are held in the villages almost every day, con¬
cerning all kinds of events, are yet another way in
which they learn the art of discourse. Although the
elders hold the centre of the stage and the decisions
taken depend upon their judgement, anyone who
so wishes may attend and everyone has the right
to express an opinion."
The Jesuits' position with regard to nature was
more complex and contradictory. Although they ad¬
mired the way in which the Indians lived in har¬
mony with their natural surroundings, the Jesuits
nevertheless wanted to "civilize" them, in other
words to destroy their privileged links with nature.
Paradoxically, however, they also tried to keep
the Indians away from Europeans. This is where the
widespread notion of the corrupt civilized man first
arose. Although they lived precarious lives, the
savages were better than their European counterparts
and, once convened, would be superior to them.
In praising Indian children, "more lively and more
intelligent" than French children, the Jesuits were
giving their seal of approval to the Indians' "natur¬
al" way of life.
Finally, the Jesuits let the Indians have their say;
and often what they had to say turned into an in¬
dictment.
"These skilful dialecticians," wrote Gilbert
Chinard, "were so enamoured of well reasoned argu¬
ments that they could not help reporting at length
the disquisitions addressed to them by Indians hos¬
tile to their influence. At times they even admitted,
sotto voce, that perhaps their interlocutors were
right."3
The Indian free-thinker
In 1634, while spending the winter with a group of
Montagnais, Father Lejeiine crossed swords with the
witch-doctor in the course of a series of oratorical
jousts in which he did not always come off best. The
witch-doctor evaluated Christian dogma and turned
Lejeune's own arguments against him. When the
Jesuit extolled the merits of life in the next world,
the witch-doctor confessed that he was afraid of dy¬
ing, but assured his opponent that if "I believed that
the other world was so full of delights, I would kill
myself so as to enjoy it". But when the Frenchman
replied that God forbade us to kill ourselves, the
witch-doctor taunted him, as Lejeune reported:
" 'Well, in that case don't kill yourself, I shall
kill you to please you, so that you may go to
Heaven and enjoy the pleasures of which you speak.'

Illustration from Baron de
la Hontan's book
"Dialogue or Conversations
between a Savage and
Baron de la Hontan"
(Amsterdam, 1704), in
which the author ridicules
the evangelization of the
North American Indians
through a fictitious dialogue
with the Indian Adario.
CHANTAL
DE GRANDPRÉ,
of Canada, is a lecturer in
the literature of Quebec at
the university of Paris X.
She is the author of many
articles and studies
including an essay on
American literature written
in collaboration with Denis
Egan and published in the
encyclopaedia Clartés
(Paris, 1988).
I smiled and replied that I could not accept that any¬
one could take my life without sinning. 'I see very
well,' he replied mockingly, 'that you do not want
to die any more than I do.' "
Quite apart from the fact that the Indian of the
Jesuits was in no sense a "Noble Savage", it was the
Jesuit, the European, who cut a childlike figure, with
no patience, no sense of humour and, above all, no
oratorical talent.
The mythology of the western film has ac¬
customed us to the idea of Indians mumbling halt¬
ingly in the language of the colonists. The Relations
of the Jesuits, on the contrary, portrayed them as
being highly eloquent and stressed the linguistic in¬
competence of Lejeune at whom the Indians scoffed
because he could not express himself correctly in
the Montagnais language. "In the end I told them
that I was a child and that children make their fathers
laugh with their stutterings," he wrote.
The multiplicity of these accounts of scenes from
Indian life, in which the writers are bold enough to
demonstrate the inefficacy of European speech, is
indicative of an overturning of values. By revealing
to their contemporaries the Indian as a critic rather
than as a "Noble Savage", the Jesuits showed that
French society could also be held up to judgement.
This subversive image of the Indian transmitted
in travellers' tales and in the Relations was to con¬
tribute to the ferment of thought of the Enlighten¬
ment. In the writings of a Montesquieu or a Voltaire
(who had the Jesuit missionary Charlevoix as his
source) it strengthened the conviction that the
widening of geographical horizons entailed a
broadening of the mind. Despite their hostility to
the Jesuits, many "philosophers" (Montesquieu,
Grimm, Raynal) saw the "socialist" experiments in
Paraguay in a favourable light. From Montaigne's
essay on "cannibals" to Rousseau's Discourse on In¬
equality, the Indian's role as a social and political
critic grew increasingly important in Western ideol¬
ogy. And this fascination with the Other contribut¬
ed in no small measure to the great explosion of
1789.
1. Michèle Duchet, Diderot et l'histoire des deux Indes ou
l'écriture fragmentaire (1978).
2. Gilbert Chinard, Influence des récits de voyages sur la
philosophie de Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1911).
3. Gilbert Chinard, L'amérique et le rêve exotique dans la
littératurefrançaise au 17e et au 18e siècle (1913, reissued
1970). 47
