5,000 YEARS OF
INDIAN CULTURE
BY VISHWANATH S. NARAVANE
THE development of Indian cul¬
ture can be compared to the
progress of a river from its
Himalayan home, through forests and
wastelands, orchards and farms, villages
and cities. The river assimilates the waters
of many tributaries, its environment
changes, yet it remains the same. Indian
culture shows a similar combination of
unity and diversity, continuity and
change. In the course of her long histo¬
ry, India has witnessed many changes,
made many adjustments, and assimilated
elements from many sources, without
breaking the continuity.
India is a land of varied landscapes and
climates, of many races, religions, lan¬
guages and cultures. But they all have an
unmistakably Indian flavour. The source
of this unity is elusive. It can be felt, but
it defies analysis. In his famous book, Dis¬
covery ofIndia, Jawaharlal Nehru gave a
sensitive and fascinating account of his
search for the unity at the root of India's
amazing diversity.
The Indus Valley civilization
(3000-1800 BC) shows anticipations of
ideas and art-forms later regarded as typi¬
cally Indian. This is clear from the ar¬
tefacts yielded during excavations at
Harappa and Mohenjodaro. A statue of
a man in meditation suggests the practice
of Yoga. The smooth surfaces of a male
torso in stone suggests, by its absence of
muscular tension, the classical Indian con¬
cept of inward energy. A deity depicted
on a clay seal is very similar to some later
images of Shiva. And a little copper
dancing-girl wears bangles of a kind that
can be purchased today at a wayside
bazaar in India. Recent research has
shown that the influence of this culture
The temple of Gangotri, near the source of
the Ganges in the Himalayas, is an important
Hindu centre of pilgrimage.

extended to distant regions of northern
and western India, and that the Indus Val¬
ley people had close contacts with the
Dravidian civilization which flourished in
southern India long before the coming of
the Aryans.
Some time between 2000 and 1600
BC, a branch of the vast Aryan family,
usually referred to as Indo-Aryans,
migrated to India. They brought with
them the Sanskrit language, and a religion
based on sacrificial ritual honouring dei¬
ties symbolizing elemental forces of Na¬
ture, such as Indra, god of rain and
thunder, Agni (Fire) and Varuna, lord of
the seas, rivers and seasons. Hymns ad¬
dressed to these and other deities were
collected in the four Vedas. The oldest of
the Vedas is the Rigveda (1500-1200 BC)
in which there is a quest for the Supreme
Reality underlying all multiplicity. This
trend was strengthened in the dialogues
of the Upanishads (900-600 BC). Vedic
poetry is marked by lofty ideas, literary
beauty and a movement from external
ritual to inward experience.
Two religions outside the Vedic tra¬
dition emerged in the sixth century BC.
The Buddha's personality, and his emp.ha-
sis on love, compassion and harmony,
profoundly influenced Indian thought
and culture, though Buddhism as an or¬
ganized religion struck deeper roots out¬
side India. Jainism, founded by Mahavira,
stressed truth and non-violence, and made
significant contributions to Indian art and
philosophy.
In 326 BC, Alexander of Macedón
crossed the Indus and won a decisive bat¬
tle. Although he soon turned back, his
invasion influenced Indian culture by in¬
itiating contacts with the Graeco-Roman
world. Six years later, Chandragupta
Maurya tried to unite the scattered
kingdoms and republics of India in a cen¬
tralized empire, with the capital at
Pataliputra (modern Patna in Bihar). His
grandson, Ashoka (reigned 273-237 BC),
recoiling from the horrors of war, be¬
came an ardent Buddhist. The message of
compassion and gentleness was inscribed
on rocks and highly polished stone
columns. The capitals surmounting the
columns are fine pieces of sculpture.
Kings of the Shunga dynasty (185-149
BC) were orthodox Hindus, but there
was a strong Buddhist revival under
Kanishka, the Kushan king who ruled in
north-western India (78-101 AD). The
Gandhara style of Buddhist sculpture,
üpfl*
<r ,
Seal of the Indus Valley civilization, also
known as the Harappa culture (c. 2300 BC).
The inscriptions remain undeciphered.
strongly influenced by Graeco-Roman
art, developed under the Kushans.
Another centre of Buddhist art was
Mathura (south of Delhi).
Pataliputra again became the centre of
political and cultural activity during the
Gupta Empire (319-540 AD), which has
been described as the golden age of
ancient Indian culture. Some of the
Gupta kings, such as Chandragupta and
Skandagupta, were poets and musicians.
Kalidasa, greatest among Sanskrit poets
and dramatists, lived during the reign of
Chandragupta. The Buddha images of
Sarnath, and the frescoes painted in the
caves of Ajanta in western India, are
among the artistic masterpieces of this
age. The decline of the Gupta Empire was
followed by political fragmentation. King
Harsha of Kannauj tried to stem this
process, but after his death in 648 AD in¬
dependent kingdoms arose in Kashmir,
Bengal, Orissa and many other regions of
southern as well as northern India.
Culturally, this was a very rich peri¬
od. The Cholas, Pallavas and Rashtraku-
tas of south India built the superb temples
at Tanjore, Mamallapuram and Ellora.
The Sun Temple of Konarak in Orissa
and the Shiva Temple at Khajuraho in
Central India were built in the eleventh
century. In all these temples, sculpture is
an integral part of the architecture. In
literature, Sanskrit was gradually being
replaced by regional languages such as
Bengali, Marathi, Hindi and Punjabi. In
the south, Tamil, Telugu and Kannada
had developed their literary traditions.
The Vedanta philosophies of Shankara
(eighth century) and Ramanuja (twelfth
century) exerted a deep influence. There
Bronze statuette of a dancing girl from Mohenjodaro (c. 2500 BC)

was, however, a conservative trend in so¬
cial and religious life. The caste system,
originally based on differences of apti¬
tude, became rigid and oppressive.
The establishment of Muslim rule at
the end of the twelfth century was a turn¬
ing point in India's cultural history. An
initial period of conflict was inevitable be¬
cause of the radical differences between
Hinduism and Islam. But a process of ac¬
commodation soon started. Sufi mysti¬
cism, philosophically close to Vedanta,
was one of the meeting points. Many
Muslim kings, at Delhi and in regional
kingdoms, were patrons of Indian litera¬
ture and music, and participated in Hin¬
du festivals. After the foundation of the
Mughal Empire (1526 AD) the trend
towards integration was strengthened.
Under the wise and tolerant rule of Ak-
bar (1556-1605) the foundation of a na¬
tional culture was firmly laid. The Hindu
and Muslim traditions, while retaining
their distinct identities, influenced each
other deeply.
Islamic architecture in India was at
first austere and simple. But the builders
Greek presence in India led to the
development of the famous Gandhara school
of art. This Gandhara head dates back to the
Kushan period between AD 78 and 144.
soon started adopting decorative ele¬
ments, including the lotus motif, from
Hindu temples. Conversely, many tem¬
ples built in medieval India have Islamic
features, such as the dome, the arch and
screens carved of stone and marble. Indi¬
an architecture reached its apex during
the reign of Shah Jahan (1627-1658), who
built such masterpieces as the Pearl
Mosque at Agra and the Taj Mahal, "the
dream in -marble".
In painting, too, there was a blend of
the two traditions. Inspired by Bihzad
and other great Persian artists, painters
at the Mughal court created a new style
of miniature painting. Combining the
technique and subtlety of this style with
the religious and aesthetic spirit of India,
painters of the Rajput School made their
own distinctive contribution.
One of the greatest geniuses of
medieval India was Amir Khusrau: poet,
musician, linguist. He invented several in¬
struments played in classical Indian
music. His poetical experiments led to the
emergence of Urdu, one of the major
Indian languages. The sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries were exceptional¬
ly rich in devotional poetry in regional
languages. Nanak, the founder of
Sikhism, Tulsidas, whose Hindi version
of the Ramayana epic is recited and read
by millions even today, Kabir, whose
poetry transcended all sectarian
differencesthese and other saint-poets
preached a universal religion based on
tolerance and love.
The Mughal Empire declined rapidly
during the first quarter of the eighteenth
century. Meanwhile, Europeans were
making inroads into India: the Por¬
tuguese, the Dutch, the French, and final¬
ly the British who emerged victorious. By
the end of the eighteenth century, Brit¬
ish authority was firmly established. The
introduction of English education and the
work of Christian missionaries had a deep
impact on the cultural and religious life
of India. Calcutta, the new capital, be¬
came the centre of Western thought, fol¬
lowed by Bombay and Madras. Some
educated Indians, in their excessive zeal
for European culture, turned away from
their own heritage. But a reform move¬
ment, founded by Raja Ram Mohan Roy,
A torana or ceremonial gateway of the great
Buddhist stupa at Sanchi in Madhya
Pradesh state.

ushered in a spiritual and cultural renais¬
sance. The leaders of this movement,
known as the Brahmo Samaj, stressed the
deeper truths of Hindu and Muslim scrip¬
tures, while accepting progressive ele¬
ments from Western thought. Another
source of inspiration was Shri Rama-
krishna (1836-1886), who regarded differ¬
ent religions as paths leading to the same
goal, and his famous disciple, Swami
Vivekananda (1863-1902), who is remem¬
bered as India's first spiritual and cultur¬
al ambassador to Europe and America.
Though politically subjugated, Indian
culture retained its dynamism. In the lat¬
ter half of the nineteenth century, politi¬
cal, historical and social themes were
taken up by novelists and dramatists.
Ghalib, the great Urdu poet, and Bankim
Chatterji, the Bengali novelist, made rich
contributions to Indian literature. Out¬
standing musicians, many of whom were
Muslims, kept alive the tradition of clas¬
sical Indian music. The katbak school of
dance was developed at Lucknow and Jai¬
pur. Later, there was a renaissance in In¬
dian painting, initiated by Abaanin-
dranath Tagore and other artists of the
Group of monolithic temples at Mamallapuram, Tamil Nadu. They were hewn out of the rock in
the 7th century A.D.
Bengal School. Plays based on mytholog¬
ical as well as modern subjects were staged
at Calcutta and Bombay.
Meanwhile, under the leadership of
the Indian National Congress (founded in
1885) the movement for independence
Detail from a twice-lifesize sculpture from the Sun Temple of Konarak in Orissa, built in the
13th century by King Narasimha Deva.
Dancing Shiva Nataraja from Kuram. Pallava
dynasty, 9th century.
was gaining strength. The sense of patri¬
otism thus aroused was reflected in the
literature of that age. When Mahatma
Gandhi returned to India, after his heroic
struggle against racism in South Africa,
a new chapter was opened in India's life.

!
"
K
The Mahatma touched every aspect of In¬
dian life, though his main concern was
with social and political issues. Some of
the greatest writers of that period
Bharati in Tamil, Premchand in Hindi,
Sharat Chatterji in Bengaliexpressed
Gandhian ideals in their poems and
novels.
Indian culture in the twentieth centu¬
ry was dominated by the towering genius
of Rabindranath Tagore, one of the
greatest poet-philosophers in world his¬
tory. Tagore left the stamp of his perso¬
nality and work on every field of
creativity: poetry, music, drama, novel
and short story, even painting. He was
the first non-Western writer to be award¬
ed the Nobel Prize for Literature. He
founded the international university,
Vishwa-Bharati, and anticipated many
modern concepts in education. An entire
generation of Indian writers and artists
was influenced by Tagore. Gandhi and
Tagore are rightly regarded as the mak¬
ers of modern India.
Eighteenth-century miniature shows Akbar,
the greatest of the Mughal dynasty of
emperors who ruled India between 1526 and
1761, presenting a pearl necklace to his son
Salim. Akbar came to the throne in 1556 at
the age of 13 and ruled for 50 years,
extending the empire from Kabul in the west
to Bengal in the east.
4M1
Miniature showing the emperor Shah Jahan
and his wife Mumtaz Mahal in whose
memory he built the Taj Mahal, begun
in 1632, a year after her death,
and completed in 1647.
8 	

On 15 August 1947, India became an
independent nation. Thus, in Jawaharlal
Nehru's words, India had "kept her tryst
with destiny" after a century of struggle.
The partition of the country on the ba¬
sis of religion, the bloodshed that fol¬
lowed, and then the assassination of
Mahatma Gandhi, were painful shocks.
But the trauma was soon overcome and
India began building her future as a sover¬
eign country taking her rightful place in
the community of nations.
Since independence, India has made
significant progress in many areas of cul¬
ture. In almost all the fourteen major lan¬
guages of India (fifteen including English),
creative literature of the highest order has
been produced. Satyajit Ray is recognized
as one of the greatest film directors in the
world. In classical music, Ravi Shankar
and Ali Akbar Khan; in painting Jamini
Ray and M.F. Hussain; in classical dance,
Balasarasvatithese are only a few among
the outstanding artists who have enriched
Indian culture in recent decades.
Selectivity, assimilation and adjust¬
ment have characterized Indian culture
throughout its long history. It has con¬
fronted and overcome many periods of
crisis and uncertainty. Today there are
new challenges, demanding new adjust¬
ments. Ours is the age of science and tech¬
nology. How to preserve whatever is of
enduring worth in the spiritual and aes¬
thetic tradition that has stood the test of
fifty centuries, and how to reinterpret
that tradition in the contemporary con¬
text: that is the question which the
thinkers, artists and writers of India have
to deal with. Their ability to handle this
task in a balanced and imaginative man¬
ner will determine the future course of
Indian culture.
VISHWANATH S. NARAVANE is a former
head of the departments of philosophy at the
universities of Allahabad and Poona. He now
regularly lectures on Indian cultural history and
philosophy at universities in the USA. He is the
author of a number of works on Indian cultural
history and thought, including Modern Indian
Thought (1979) and Munshi Premchand: His Life and
Work (1982). .
PI I III I
I, K At
,_,	
The Golden Temple, Amritsar, the holiest of Sikh shrines. The Sikh religion, which combines
elements of Islamic and Hindu beliefs, was founded by Guru Nanak (1469-1539).
Balasaraswathi, one of the greatest exponents
of Bharata Natyam, the classical dance of
Tamil Nadu which originated in ancient
south Indian temple rituals.
