ANCIENT
GREECE The Odyssey of reason
BY BERNARD VITRAC
^? [
^V
JU* CK.«CT«P ft %J>Cj\omJ~¿4J'.~
\
~-S
*> P «P i* OT5 *TT>E O p o P r-, o p 3 -y -
rfp»p
"N al ^ « \
»XKe-j^ftnT _
J * n p it*« t(^y-^ t "p f" °"~^
OOP«
\ *
PÏiTB'^Tr^lup»»' i^opflö tí ^
°t?YM q- .fUpojoT»w 7«íM- ^
poucoC
» e ^m *** riV»jiTiáMcTcr
/-O J V « ^"TV a. /
*« *7n çT^i'^TÔW-* ° *!**£
Ä" cr/oç-^i*IU»p:COH M4 poC » î*-K.o
«CCI t «p r»«rt%JL.YV0i;.X0.4-1 "»
r^y. eu r»p co trtjo oe y^uu
** I TTTCjO P o-j "^tp o»u.ulOL^| tftr
«k>«^*i e ***** y «u c^n^¿,,
"CÍ^Lx
T is scarcely necessary to recall the importance
of the role played by the mathematics of ancient
Greece in the development of this discipline in
the West. The very words "mathematics" and
"mathematician", or their equivalents in most
European languages, are derived from the Greek
word meaning "to know" or "to learn". Before
the classical era, however, when it took on the
specialized meaning that it has today, the Greek
word mathema meant "that which is taught", in
other words all branches of knowledge.
The teaching of mathematics
We know very little about the teaching of
mathematics in ancient Greece. It seems that
some philosophical schools played a major part
in the training of mathematicians, at a time when
intellectual specialization was still the exception.
During the classical era there is reference to
the existence of "scientific" schools, such as those
at Chios and Cyzicus. However, we do not know
whether these schools offered general or special¬
ized education, or whether they were anything
more than groups of scholars gathered around a
famous teacher.
As with medicinefor the existence of
schools of which there is earlier and more solid
evidenceit seems that family background may
have had an influence on professional training.
We have few biographical details about the
early mathematicians, but we do know that
Archimedes was the son of an astronomer, that
Hypsicles' father was a mathematician, that the
geometers Menaechmus and Dinostratus were
brothers and that Hypatia, the only Greek wom¬
an mathematician about whom we know any¬
thing much, was the daughter of the
mathematician Theon of Alexandria.
In the centralized states of the Near East of
ancient times, the need to train a class of scribes
and functionaries was recognized at an early stage..
The Greece of the classical era, however, consist¬
ed of small, independent city-states, continually
warring among themselves, or of loose, clan-like
associations, and had no need of organized educa¬
tional systems such as those of Egypt, Babylon
or China.
Although trade, land surveying and naviga¬
tion demanded a certain minimum knowledge
of mathematics, and although elementary calcu¬
lation was taught in schools, the Greek city-
state paid scant attention to the intellectual and 29

technological education of children and youths.
Schools, some of which were to achieve consider¬
able renown, were the fruit of private initiatives.
The two great Athenian masters of the beginning
of the fourth century BC, Isocrates and Plato,
each founded his own educational
establishmentIsocrates a school of rhetoric and
Plato a school of philosophy.
Both of them regarded mathematics as an in¬
dispensable tool for intellectual development and
valued the "mental gymnastics" and concentra¬
tion this discipline required. But their approaches
to mathematics differed. Isocrates thought that
mathematics, like the adversarial debates that
young people were so fond of, should develop
"well-formed minds", even if the subject matter
I ythagor
(6th century BC) as
depicted in a 16th-century
engraving.
was of little value to the citizen, who, ideally,
would devote himself to political life. Plato,
however, whilst recognizing its propaedeutic
value, saw mathematics as a preliminary to the
study of philosophyin other words, of Platon¬
ic idealismand also as a method of selection,
since the mathematics and the philosophy he
taught together constituted a form of intellectu¬
al asceticism essential to his project for political
reform.
The third and second centuries BC witnessed
a considerable development in the mathematical
sciences. Most of the works that have come down
from this period are those of mathematicians
more or less closely linked to Alexandria, the cap¬
ital of the Greek Ptolemaic dynasty which ruled
Egypt from 306 to 31 BC. It is known that the
Ptolemies adopted a broader policy of state
patronagepreviously restricted to a few in¬
dividuals, often poetsby creating a number of
institutions, the best known of which were the
Alexandria Library and Museum. These new in¬
stitutions undoubtedly gave an impetus to liter¬
ary studies. That they had an effect on scientific
development is probable but less certain, but the
favourable climate they created could only be
beneficial to it.
However, we do not even know if the great
scholars of the time, whose presence in Alexan¬
dria is well documentedHerophilus of Chal¬
cedony, Euclid, Strato of Lampsacus, Aristarchus
of Samos, Eratosthenes of Cyrene, Apollonius of
Pergataught their disciples or. gave lessons or
even lectures, whether under the auspices of the
Museum or privately. Indeed, it was only in the
time of the Roman Empire that the Museum was
to operate as a university, to be copied in this at
Ephesus, Athens, Smyrna and Aegina.
Alongside pure mathematics, in the Greek
tradition, there was also a corpus of mathemati¬
cal texts that might be termed "calculative"
similar to those to be found in Egyptian, Babylo¬
nian or Chinese mathematical writings. For ex¬
ample, a body of comparatively late mathematical
texts, attributed to Hero of Alexandria, was com¬
piled and used right up to the Byzantine era,
probably for the training of technicians. As in
Babylonian and Egyptian texts, the problems set
refer explicitly to a factual situation, even if this
is merely a teaching device.
Nothing like this is to be found in the classic
treatises of Euclid, Archimedes or Apollonius,
who showed scant regard for practical applica¬
tions. Euclid's exposition of the theory of num¬
bers even manages to avoid reference to
numerical examples. The works that have sur¬
vived seem to indicate a strict separation between
pure research and practical applications. Yet even
though the two are so clearly distinguished, the
same authors gave equal attention to both "pure"
and "applied" mathematics.
That section of Greek mathematics which,
by convention, we have designated as "pure" had
four basic characteristics:

1 hales of Miletus (late 7th-
early 6th century BC).
17th-century engraving.
BERNARD VITRAC,
of France, teaches mathematics
and is (with James Ritter) co-
director of a scries of
publications on the history of
science entitled Histoires des
sciences, published by the
Presses Universitaires de
Vincennes (University of Paris-
VIII). The author of a study-
on medicine and philosophy at
the time of Hippocrates (1989),
he is currently preparing a
translation with commentary
of Euclid's Elements, the first
volume of which will be
published later this year by-
Presses Universitaires de
France.
Deductive presentation: the classic treatises,
such as Euclid's Elements, are organized on deduc¬
tive lines. The results are proved by demonstra¬
tion, either from results previously achieved, or
on the basis of principles established from the
start. This might be described as a semi-axiomatic
approach, which emphasized the logical, ineluc¬
table aspect of mathematics. It should, however,
be noted that this is often difficult to dissociate
from the rhetorical aspect, which had the advan¬
tage of compelling the attention of the student,
aimed at psychological and pedagogical effective¬
ness, and concentrated on the necessary objective
structure of reasoning.
Geometrical orientation: even when they
were concerned with the theory of numbers,
statics or astronomy, those treatises that were
demonstrative in style were basically geometric
in their approach. Ancient mathematicians had
introduced various symbols to designate numbers
and fractions and also employed certain abbrevi¬
ations, although these did not constitute a com¬
plete set of algebraic notations such as we use
today.
However, it was in the use of geometrical
figures that the Greeks went farthest in their ex¬
perimentation with the use of "representative"
symbols. The possibility of breaking figures up
into elements, of establishing rules of construc¬
tion that could be quoted, and the revelation of 31

I V/ m',^*
.# >'
1
aa^	J	)	^
'"
W.
T\ '
A ffi
_tL.l_J	 1IU .- >-,i.I.
" 1
rVTvV
>-
u Kfl
- v-
at^-'-l .. v - ±tPv ta '
-, -. ^"-.r;/Y-Y^ vCT-
h*-4 ¿fcv
Y*»
5*1
il
' I .'
*fii
'ii
Sis».
32
-Y
.a^
^riy?
!y/,
p*
.L-1-'i ~-v t#
J
-M m
'M
¡^> JrawîM
* ^^
fY ?/;/*
tV"
at *VS.
r 	' ^^
-: '
a«> *^4. ^n^atttSrí''Sël* » mnnwiHi^iMHiyinipi mmiia i m iiiiPi il iwii *,
«H
yyy^y;
'a-
-ut
" î
IJel
ir >~
.YtVp Vrr-
	.
rr
;tt
t- . J».i-ai . aw . ¿i ¿* rj , aaa. 1 «rv*!a»**JV<F

*«1 -d4» î Äfc*^-^*m««« «41 ««(** Js.
. . .-,' ' ';. li «lÄl
. *
properties which seemed already to be "present"
in the figures, all these features were perfectly
suited to the method of deductive exposition.
The ideal of disinterested science: the love
of knowledge itself was the driving force behind
the study of mathematics.
Mathematics and philosophy: the develop¬
ment of mathematics was contemporaneous with
the development of philosophy.
Philosophers
and mathematics
These developments in mathematics were
paralleled by the opening of a methodological and
ideological debate on the sciences. The classifica¬
tion of the sciences proposed by the Greek
astronomer-mathematician Geminus (see box
page 34) affords a good example. His classifica¬
tion assumed the existence of a body of scientif¬
ic knowledge already fairly well developed and
very varied. It adopted a differentiation between
the sciences which favoured abstract study, which
it detached from possible practical applications.
According to Aristotle, mathematics was the
study of properties that could be "abstracted",
from the objects of the physical world. Further¬
more, like all the demonstrative sciences, it was
based on principles, so that one science could
presuppose another and, in Aristotle's words: "be
subordinate to another." Optics, for example,
was "subordinate" to geometry. Thus there was
a logical hierarchy of the sciences. This had to
be distinguished from the division, commonly
stressed by Greek authors, between "practical"
and "disinterested" mathematics. Only the lat¬
ter, according to Aristotle, was worthy of inclu¬
sion in a liberal education. "To be free" was an
end in itself.
The art of embellishment was superior to
practical technology, but disinterested science, an
end in itself, was the supreme activity. For Plato,
the mathematics developed by the Barbarians,
prestigious though their civilizations might have
been, ranked as mere arts, since they were en¬
cumbered by the constraints of necessity.
Greek philosophers thus based their argument on
a mixture of methodological and ideological
considerations.
Though treatises on optics and astronomy
adopted the style of geometrical exposition, the
deductive method being particularly suited to the
elimination of anything that smacked of the "tan¬
gible" and the "practical" (see box page 34), it
is not easy to see how Greek mathematicians
managed to identify themselves with this way of
looking at their activities. Moreover, though it
is tempting to do so, we should refrain from con¬
fusing the modern distinction between "pure"
and "applied" mathematics with the ancient di¬
vision between "intelligible" and "tangible",
since the concepts do not coincide.
Evocation of the ideal of "disinterested science" 33

PRECEDING PAGE
1 he Death ofArchimedes.
In this mosaic found at
Herculaneum, the Greek
mathematician is shown
drawing geometric figures
when surprised
by a soldier of the Roman
army which took Syracuse
in 212 BC. When called
on to give himself up,
Archimedes is said to have
replied, "Do not disturb
my circles".
leads on to the problem of what motivation there
was for the advancement of mathematics. A dis¬
tinction has to be made between external forces
and what might be described as internal in¬
fluences. Among the former, an important role
was played by optics and astronomy, which we
classify as physics but which the ancients included
in mathematics. To these should be added statics,
the science of equilibria.
What is known of the internal influences?
Perhaps they are to be found in the prefaces with
which, from Archimedes onwards, author/
mathematicians seem to have introduced their
works. What emerges from these prefaces is that
far from being the product of psychological
characteristics peculiar to the Greek mind, dis¬
interested research presupposes the existence of
a community of mathematicians all abiding by
certain standards.
First and foremost, these mathematicians felt
under no obligation to justify the fact that they
were practitioners of science for its own sake; that
went without saying. At the most they might ac¬
knowledge that they had opted for mathematics
rather than for "physics" or "theology" because
it was a more certain and rigorous discipline that
was "stable" (unlike physics), yet nevertheless
"accessible" (unlike theology).
34
Geminus' classification
of Mathemata
Others, among them Geminus, claim that
mathematics should be sub-divided in another
fashion. On one side they place tangible things, or
anything connected with them. No doubt they
would call intelligible the subjects of contempla¬
tion that the soul elaborates within itself, cutting
itself off from things material. They rank arithmetic
and geometry as the two first and most important
sectors of that form of mathematics that deals w ith
that which is intelligible. With regard to the
mathematics which covers things tangible, they
designate six sectors: mechanics, astronomy, optics,
geodesy, canonics and logistics.
On the other hand, for them, unlike others,
tactics is not worthy to be considered a part of
mathematics, even though at times it involves logis¬
tics, as in the enumeration of troops, and geodesy,
as in the surveying and the division of land. Even
less do they consider either history or medicine to
be part of mathematics, despite the fact that the
authors of historical works often refer to mathe¬
matical theorems to indicate climatic conditions or
to calculate the size of a town, its diameter and its
perimeter, and that physicians use these procedures
to throw light on many matters within their com¬
petence. The value of astronomv to medicine has
been made perfectly clear by Hippocrates and all
those who studied the seasons and regions.
Proclus, Commentary on Book I of Euclid's Elements, 38.
During the Hellenistic era, mathematicians
formed an "international" community whose
members were scattered around the shores of the
Mediterranean (Greece, Asia Minor, Egypt and
Sicily). They maintained personal contacts, either
by paying each other visits or by circulating their
latest works. Above all, they would set each other
problems, solve those that were sent to them, or
criticize solutions submitted by others which
they considered to be flawed. By this means some
of them acquired a commonly recognized status
of authority. Publications were submitted to their
judgement which they in turn circulated to others
considered worthy to receive them. Among them

also were a few impostors who would be un¬
masked by the expedient of setting them impos¬
sible problems which they would claim to have
solved. These contacts, of course, remained per¬
sonal and were not made within the framework
of any form of institution in the modern sense
of the term.
The ideal of "disinterested mathematics"
seems, in short, to have been linked to the exis¬
tence of a group within which problems of rival¬
ry and competition were not altogether unlike
those characteristic of the modern scientific com¬
munity. The comparison should not be pressed
too far. There is, for example, a marked differ
ence in scale between the ancient and the modern
communities. The number of scientists, and in
particular of mathematicians, in the Hellenistic
era certainly never exceeded a few hundred. Like¬
wise, there can be no doubt that, in the absence
of any true form of institution, the community
they formed was a very precarious one. From the
Roman era onwards, the best authors (Ptolemy,
Pappus) were concerned, so it would seem, only
with perfecting results already achieved. The
rivalry and the search for new theories that
marked the preceding era had apparently disap¬
peared.
1 he famous lighthouse
known as the Pharos of
Alexandria is pictured in
this engraving made
in 1801.
35
