A trip along
the Séptima
BY ANNE BERTY
18
X HE Carrera Séptima, more commonly
referred to as the "Séptima", Bogota's Seventh
Avenue, is the Colombian capital's busiest
thoroughfare. In this one avenue are encapsulat¬
ed the personality, the history, the culture and
the daily life of the city, which was founded in
1537 by the Spaniard Gonzalo Jiménez de
Quesada.
This vast, thirty-kilometre-long axis, which
links the richest residential area to the north with
the poorest working-class district to the south,
is also a huge barometer of the social and eco¬
nomic climate of a conurbation with a popula¬
tion of four and a half million, swollen by the
urban explosion of the last forty years.
From Bolivar Square to the old district
of La Candelaria
A thoroughfare like the Séptima is no place for
the pedestrian and the traffic is so dense that
casual strolling is discouraged. However, in the
older districts of Bogotá, the Santa Fé of coloni¬
al times, the Séptima still has a certain human
dimension where it links Bolivar Square with the
Candelaria district, whose carefully restored patri¬
cian houses recall the days of the viceroyalty of
New Granada.
Bolivar Square, or Plaza Mayor, remains the
heart of Bogota's civic, political and religious life.
The Capitol, the Town Hall, the Law Courts and
the Cathedral, representing the four essential ele¬
ments of public life, each occupy one of the four
sides of this huge square, whose stone buildings
exemplify the austerity of colonial town
planning.
Encompassing the styles of every epoch of its
history, this architectural ensemble has witnessed
many historic events. It was the scene of such
glorious occasions as the Declaration of Indepen¬
dence of 20 July 1810 and celebrations of the vic¬
tories of Simón Bolívar, as well as of various
bloody insurrections.
After being long neglected and discredited,
the Candelaria district, with its narrow streets and
ANNE BERTY,
French architect and an
official at her country's
housing ministry, is the
author of a book on
Colombian architecture and
was co-organizer of an
exhibition on the same theme
which was held at the
Pompidou Centre, Paris, in
1980.

BOGOTA
I anoramic view of the
Carrera Séptima, the
30-km-long thoroughfare
which blends the
architecture of Bogota's
colonial past with bold
modem designs. Above, the
Septima's business district.
19

1 ark Towers,
Independence Park, Bogotá,
was built by the architect
Rogelio Salmona between
1968 and 1972.
20
regular, geometric layout, has been revitalized by
intellectuals, artists and cultural organizations.
From the outside, its manzanas (blocks), most of
which are square and divided into long, uniform¬
ly rectangular solares (lots), reveal nothing of their
interior spaciousness. The usually austere, anony¬
mous appearance of these blocks underlines the
fundamentally inward-looking nature of the
buildings of which they are composed.
The few openings that the houses present to
the street are hidden behind fine balconies of slat¬
ted wood or ornamental grilles. Thus domestic
life is shielded, not only from outside eyes, but
also from too open an outward-looking view
which would reduce its intimacy. The life of the
household is organized around a central patio,
which is surrounded by arcades and galleries and
is the focal point of all circulation within the
house, as well as providing the rooms with some
of their light.
The decoration of the floors, the intricate
woodwork of the galleries, the gardens enclosed
with whitewashed cob walls and the presence of
plants and flowers throughout the house, create
in the heart of the city a peaceful and harmoni¬
ous environment.
The splendid chequer-board of La Candelaria
Colonial-style mansions
in the Candelaria district.

reaches out to the foothills of the Eastern Cor¬
dillera, the natural limit of the "Sabana (savan¬
na) de Bogota", the city's grandiose site. The
proximity of the mountains and the working-class
district to the south lends a picturesque and some¬
what anachronistic air of animation to this area
only a few blocks away from the presidential
palace and some of the major cultural and touris¬
tic points of interest. Donkeys passing by laden
with eucalyptus branches, bundles of wood,
bunches of flowers, and other goods, are a
reminder that Bogota has been swollen by the ex¬
odus from rural areas, and that thousands of
former peasants are struggling to survive in the
city.
Chicha and agua de panela
A host of small boutiques and craftsmen's work¬
shops bring life to the Candelaria district. Much
frequented, they relieve the solemnity of the
colonial-style residences and keep alive old tradi¬
tions. A bar sign hanging in a patio is a reminder
of the chicha (beer made from maize) stalls the
aristocratic families used to keep on the ground
floors of their houses in colonial times and in the
early days of Independence. Further on is one of
1 he cathedral on Bolivar
Square, outlined against the
foothills of the Eastern
Cordillera of the Andes.
the last aguadepanelaria, where a drink sweetened
and coloured with "panela" (sugar-loaf made
from raw sugar-cane) was served, as well as the
famous santafereño chocolate. Everywhere there
is a diversity of small businesses: tiny bookshops,
antique shops, cabinet-makers, shoemakers,
tailors and many other small artisans' stalls.
Returning to the Séptima and passing north¬
wards through Bolivar Square, the village at¬
mosphere gives way to the forms and symbols
of a modern cityglass-clad towers and concrete
skyscrapers. From one end of the avenue to the
other, even on the same sidewalk, there is a strik¬
ing juxtaposition of the relics of a still recent past
and the more aggressive indications of modernity.
This itinerary, in keeping with the spirit of
Bogotá today, evokes a series of contradictory
emotions. It includes a magnificent tower block
in international style, a hamlet with Victorian
overtones and a building cleverly drawing inspi¬
ration from the Bauhaus. One of the finest ex¬
amples of the new Colombian architecture, Park
Towers, was built in Independence Park between
1968 and 1972 by Rogelio Salmona. It
subtly takes advantage of the light and verdure
of the site, and echoes the majestic contours of
the landscape. 21
