CAMOES AND BRAZIL
BY JOSUÉ DE SOUZA MONTELLO
ta*i . t/>r»if
WMÚI lt«»a* ^^Mk JU
Portuguese colonization of
Brazil began after the arrival of
Pedro Alvares Cabrai in 1500.
In the 16th century settlement
was limited to the coastal plain.
Penetration into the hinterland
in the 17th and 18th centuries
was largely carried out by
groups of adventurers known as
bandeirantes, who went far
beyond the limits which the
Treaty of Tordesillas (1494) had established to
divide Portuguese and Spanish spheres of influence
in the Americas. "A country the size of a
continent" thus came into being, with almost
half the area and half the population of South
America. At the beginning of the 19th century the
new state obtained independence virtually without
conflict, and Dom Pedro, son of the king of
Portugal, was proclaimed emperor.
Despite the violence inherent in any form of
conquest, in the 15th and 16th centuries the
Portuguese gave priority to sea-borne trade as
opposed to military occupation. In the 17th century
they began to consider the region as a second
.->?<«-.
f . [y*t*4tr*f'1atttmi 3
i
41
C M\b.t.<
b. t >;i« f* * K- I
m
Ships of Pedro Alvares Cabral's fleet which reached Brazil in 1500 are shown in this illustration
from the Livro das Armadas, preserved in the Academy of Sciences, Lisbon.
homeland rather than simply as an overseas
colonial market. According to the Brazilian social
anthropologist Gilberto Freyre, this process of
integration is due to the fact that at the outset of
her age of global expansion Portugal had been
enriched by cultural and ethnic interchange between
Europe and Africa.
The writings ofLuis de Camôes play an
important role in the fraternity of Portuguese and
Brazilian cultures. In the view of Brazilian writers
such as Manuel Bandeira and Josué de Souza
Montello, Camôes' work is a familiar landmark in
the cultures ofall the Portuguese-speaking peoples
and a bond between them.
28 	

BRAZIL does not figure largely in



the corpus of Camôes' writings,
yet the great Portuguese poet has
had a profound and highly significant in¬
fluence on Brazilian literature, both
directly and through the numerous
studies that have been made of his work.
The imprint of Camôes is evident in
the clarity of the heroic, eight-line stan¬
zas of Prosopopeia, an epic poem inspired
by the impressions evoked by a new
land and new people, by Bento Teixeira,
one of our earliest poets and considered
by some as the father of Brazilian liter¬
ature. In his Historia Concisa da Liter¬
atura Brasileira, in the introduction to
a chapter on the most important
authors of the colonial period, Alfredo
Bosi, one of the most knowledgeable
specialists in this field, writes: "There is
constant imitation of Camôes' Lusiads,
including the use of the same textual
structure, mythological allusions and
even specific turns of phrase."
The greatness of a poet lies not only in his own writings but
also in the works he inspires and in his acceptance as a model-
as though his contemporaries and successors want to revolve wi¬
thin his orbit. Permeating the different literary trends, from ba¬
roque to romanticism, from realism to symbolism, and even to
modernism, the undisputed influence of Camôes has affected
poet, essayist and critic.
Joachim Maria Machado de Assis (1839-1908), as great a poet
as he was a writer of prose, did not hesitate to admit Camôes'
influence. Nor did Alberto de Oliveira (1857-1937) who, by vir¬
tue of his masterly handling of the strict formalism of Parnassi¬
an verse, his vision, the breadth of his poetic work and the
technical competence with which it is executed, has become ac¬
cepted as the leading Brazilian of this school, in any way dis¬
count the ascendancy of Camôes.
The following anecdote illustrates the great devotion to
Camôes of the author of Cançôes Románticas (1878). One day,
while at the Brazilian Academy of Letters, Oliveira was stricken
with a sudden respiratory problem. His doctor, Professor Aloysio
de Castro, immediately came to his aid, but, instead of proffer¬
ing him the usual medicaments, he quoted a line from The Lu¬
siads and then asked from which stanza it came. Whereupon,
Alberto de Oliveira, who by then was an old man, recited in
a low and quavering voice the entire section of The Lusiads from
which the line came. Then, suddenly, with a smile on his lips,
he informed the doctor that his malaise had disappeared.
At the time of the rise of Modernism, Manuel Bandeira
(1886-1968), originally a poet of the Symbolist school, wrote the
following sonnet, inspired by Camôes' poetry, while in a sanato¬
rium in Switzerland in which he found himself in the company
of the French poet Paul Eluard.
When the nostalgic humours of your race
With heavy doom clouds do the soul downweigh,
Seek still the glory time cannot efface
In the heroic beauty of your lay.
Genius through misfortune brought to grace
Warrior poet, Nature's non-pareil,
Love of the homeland, Portugal, blessed place,
In you there burns with fire as bright as day.
wmxww*
Motifs inspired by the Americas, including representations of Brazilian Indians, appear in
Portuguese art from the 16th century onwards. Above, allegory of the Americas on painted and
glazed tiles (azulejos) is in the Municipal Museum at Viana do Castelo, Portugal.
While yet ring through our minds the fiery lays
Of that proud stock who dangers did defy
On every continent the cross to raise.
For want of soldiers, poets, shall not die
The tongue in which you boldly sang in praise
Of mighty deeds of arms and blazons high.
In my opinion, this short poem is the most beautiful tribute
rendered to the work of Camôes by Brazilian literature, through
the medium of one of its greatest contemporary poets.
What are the essential merits of Camôes' work? In the first
place, its rich variety of forms of expression, brilliantly adapt¬
ed to the poet's own feelings and to the sensibility of the peo¬
ple to which he belonged, at a time when Portugal was
consolidating its expansion. At times, the care Camôes devotes
to poetic expression and his continual concern for innovative
techniques make him seem surprisingly modern.
Having scoured the literature written in Portuguese in search
of a refinement comparable to that of Camôes, I can only con¬
firm that Portuguese poetry from medieval times to the present
day has been extraordinarily enriched by that clarity which is
one of the essential characteristics of Camôes work.
Finally, here is another revealing anecdote. In his book Vida
e Morte do Bandeirante ("Life and Death of the Bandeirante"),
which is a compilation, based on a variety of legal documents,
of the major episodes in the conquest of the hinterland of Brazil
in which Portuguese, Spaniards and Brazilians took part,
Antonio Castilho de Alcántara Machado (1901-1935) refers to
the literary works mentioned in these documents, whether in
wills or in inventories. There he found the works of Camôes
alongside those of Quevedo; the epic, lyric poet beside the Span¬
ish master satirist. And one bandeirante did in fact write his
will on the back of a page of The Lusiads.
JOSUE DE SOUZA MONTELLO, Brazilian writer, has published many
novels, plays and social and political studies which have earned him literary
prizes both in Brazil and abroad. A member of the Brazilian Academy of Letters,
the Portuguese Academy of History and the International Academy of Portu¬
guese Culture, he is currently serving as his country's Ambassador to Unesco.
29
