THE PHILOSOPHICAL
TRADITION
Upavarta wood, near the town of Kusinagara,
northern India. This is where the Buddha was
reputedly cremated after his death and his
ashes dispersed.
PHILOSOPHY is an integral part
of the Indian tradition, and reflects
vividly one of the main features of
that tradition: unity underlying diversi¬
ty. When Prince Siddhartha, the histori¬
cal founder of Buddhism, renounced his
palace in search of wisdom in the sixth
century BC, he learnt that there were
forty-eight philosophical schools, from
naturalism and realism at one end to real¬
ism and mysticism at the other. The San
skrit term for philosophy is darshana,
literally "viewing" or "seeing". Truth is
one, but it is multi-faceted and can be
"seen" from different perspectives.
Diverse darshanas or philosophical
schools complement rather than con¬
tradict each other. This implies intellec¬
tual tolerance.
One of the unifying factors underly¬
ing divergent schools is the conviction
that philosophical knowledge is not an
28

end in itself but a means to inner trans¬



formation leading to liberation (mukti or
Nirvana). Even those who created high¬
ly specialized and technical philosophical
systems accepted the common goal of
liberation. It was assumed that
philosophical insight is only one aspect
of the highest wisdom which includes the
moral purity of the sage and the sensitiv¬
ity of the poet and the artist. A further
point of agreement among philosophers
(except materialists) is the view that liber¬
ation, the goal of wisdom, cannot come
through an external force, such as "Des¬
tiny", but through our own deeds and
thoughts (karmas) spread over a succes¬
sion of lifetimes.
The Jaina philosophical school accepts
the existence of many types of substances
(dravya), the main distinction being that
between inanimate substances (pudgala)
and living substances (jiva). All living be¬
ings are souls, ranging from the lowest
forms of life to the highest, the perfected
beings (tirthankaras) who transcend finite
attributes and attain absolute knowledge
(kaivalya). The tirthankaras represent the
highest reality, and there is no place for
God in Jaina philosophy.
Buddhist thought, in its early phase,
was mainly ethical, since the Buddha had
avoided metaphysical issues, devoting his
attention to the problem of Suffering.
However, the Buddha's emphasis on the
universality of the law of causation and
the impermanence of all phenomenal
things opened the way for metaphysics,
particularly after the emergence of the
Mahayana school. Nagarjuna (c. 150-250
AD), the greatest among Buddhist
philosophers, founded Shunyavada (The
Doctrine of Emptiness). If Reality is to
be grasped in its essential nature, all finite
concepts and attributes must be "emptied
out".
Turning to the Hindu tradition, in the
earliest Vedic hymns (c. 1500-1200 BC)
we already find the monistic trend that
has subsequently dominated Indian
thought. There must be, behind all mul-
kAfti.
Illustration from an 18th-century
Yoga manuscript
tiplicity, a single reality which is called
by different names. In the Upanishads,
sacred texts composed many centuries
later, the vision is turned inward and the
one Universal Spirit dwelling in each in¬
dividual (the Atman) is declared to be the
same as the Supreme Reality (Brahman)
at the root of the universe. Still later, in
the Bhagavadgita ("Song of the Lord",
c.200 BC) an attempt was made to syn¬
thesize different philosophical and reli¬
gious perspectives into the "Six
Doctrines".
These six systems of Hindu philo¬
sophy are traditionally grouped in three
pairs: Samkhya and Yoga; Nyaya and
Vaisheshika; Mimansa and Vedanta.
There are fundamental differences
between them, though formally they all
A Parsi coming of age ceremony. The followers in India of the prophet Zoroaster, the Parsis are
fire-worshippers. Their name means "Persians" and they are descendants of Zoroastrians who
emigrated from Persia to escape religious persecution in the 8th century AD. This tiny
community (less than 100,000 today) has made significant contributions to India's industrial
development.

accept the authority of the Vedas,
Upanishads and the Bhagavadgita.
Samkhya is dualistic. It accepts two in¬
dependent realities: Purusha (Spirit) and
Prakriti (Nature). The former is pure
Consciousness, the latter is the principle
of energy. They do not meet, but the
very nearness of Purusha stirs Prakriti.
The balance between the three main in¬
gredients of Prakriti is disturbed, and the
universe evolves. Yoga accepts the
philosophical foundation of Samkhya and
applies it to the practical side of Self-
realization. The aim of Yoga is to undo
the distorsions caused by the mind, so
that the true nature of Spirit may be real¬
ized. This can be achieved through medi¬
tation, for which one has to equip oneself
through bodily and mental control.
The Nyaya ("Analysis") school deals
with logical propositions and fallacies,
and examines the sources of human
knowledge. Vaisheshika discusses differ¬
ent categories of substances. It asserts that
all substances are composed of four types
of atoms which are eternal and in¬
divisible.
The Mimansa ("Enquiry") school
deals with causality and offers a
philosophical justification for the authori¬
ty of the Vedas and Vedic ritual. Vedan-
ta ("the End of the Vedas") represents the
crowning glory of classical Indian
philosophy, the culmination of the Ved¬
ic tradition. Vedanta has many schools,
the most influential being Monism, or
"Non-dualism" (Advaita). Ramanuja (d.
1137) asserts that the world, and the hu¬
man individual, though not identical with
God, are within the Divine Whole. The
great philosopher Shankara (c. 788-820)
offers a more complete and absolute
Monism. Brahman or the Absolute is the
only true reality. The human self (jiva) is
identical with Brahman, while the world
(jagat) is a mere appearance. The self and
the world are seen as separate because of
a mysterious, cosmic power (Maya, "illu¬
sion") which causes ignorance.
Shankara's Advaita Vedanta doctrine has
dominated Indian thought for twelve cen¬
turies. Its prestige can be judged by the
popular saying that no other philosophy
can challenge Advaita, "just as all living
beings in the forest are silent when the
lion roars". V.S.N.
Muslims at prayer outside an overflowing
Bombay mosque. Muslims make up India's
second largest religious community.
30
