Marina, Sarah, Michel
'Conventional' marriage in Europe
today is facing competition from new
forms offamily life shaped by the aspira¬
tions ofboth partners to an equal chance
offulfilment.
IYIaRINA is thirty-three years old and is the
mother of five-year-old Sarah. She is expecting
a baby boy. Starting off with no money, no in¬
fluential contacts and relying solely on her own
courage, tenacity and intelligence, and on some
limited funding from the French Ministry of
Culture, she has created her own theatre com¬
pany which she runs singlehanded, selecting the
repertoire, organizing tours both in France and
abroad, and hiring and training the members of
the troupe.
Marina is not married, but when she goes off
on tour she entrusts Sarah to the care of Michel,
Sarah's father, or to Jean, her lover and the father
of the child she is expecting, but who does not
live with her. The friendship between Marina and
Michel has survived not only the ending of their
period of cohabitation but also the new liaison
with Jean. There is no jealousy between the two
men and they take turns, in perfect harmony, to
look after Sarah during her mother's absences.
Whenever they are free to do so, they give Marina
a hand when she is putting on a show in Paris
or in a town in the immediate suburbs that is
close enough for them to get to after work.
How many couples are there in Europe that
have had the same kind of success in finding fulfil¬
ment while breaking the conventions which
make cohabitation the criterion of existence as
a couple and the sacrifice of her professional life
the condition of a woman's personal happiness?
Their number seems to be increasing. But before
we examine these new family life-styles let us take
a look at the general situation of the family in
Europe.
Research carried out in twelve countries of
Eastern and Western Europe shows that, in
families where the parents are married, the wife
always spends more time than the husband on
domestic tasks and the education of the children.
In France and the United Kingdom, for exam¬
ple, the women of the household devote four or
five times more time per day than their husbands
to these tasks. Even when the women have a pro¬
fessional activity, the gap is still three times
greater. Similar discrepancies are to be found in
34 many East European countries.
The time spent on domestic and educational
tasks increases, of course, when couples have
children. But the wife always spends much more
time on domestic duties than the husband. When
his wife has a professional activity, the husband's
participation is greater, but it remains only
"help" and can in no sense be seen as equal
sharing.
The husband as breadwinner
Although 43 per cent of married women in
Europe are gainfully employed, the proportion
falls far short of that of gainfully employed men,
which ranges from 78 per cent to 90 per cent ac¬
cording to the country concerned. Husbands are
more often the family breadwinners than wives,
who, when they do work outside the home,
generally earn much less. Wives work part-time
much more frequently than husbands. In some
countries (the United Kingdom, Ireland, the
Netherlands and the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many), the presence of young children in the
home reduces by ten times the likelihood that a
woman has outside employment. In other coun¬
tries (France, Belgium and Denmark), the number
of children rather than their age is the determin¬
ing factor.
Despite the progress noted in recent years,
attitudes towards role-sharing within the family
are evolving only slowly. In 1987, 41 per cent of
Europeans said that they were in favour of
families in which both parents had an occupation
which both found equally absorbing and in which
domestic tasks and child care were equally shared.
Some 29 per cent preferred a situation in which
the wife had a less demanding activity than the
husband and 25 per cent preferred a family in
which only the man went out to work.
The search for happiness and
new family life-styles
The traditional division of tasks between the sexes
does not seem to please all Europeans. A grow¬
ing number of men and women are looking for
life as a couple outside conventional marriage.
Throughout Europe the decrease in the mar¬
riage rate is offset by an increase in the number
of unofficial unions. In France alone, which is
still far behind the Scandinavian countries, 10 per
cent of all couples (that is to say about one million
couples) live together in these free unions.
Among young couples living in the Paris conur¬
bation and in which the male partner is under
twenty-five years of age, the proportion is as high
Small Family (1986), a
lithograph by the Greek artist
Arghyro Paouri.
THE
FAMILY
PAST
AND PRESENT
EUROPE

andJean BY ANDREE MICHEL
v^ 35


In Europe, there has
been an increase in the
number of single-parent
families, in which the
children live with only one
of the parentsin most
cases with the woman."
36
ANDREE MICHEL,
of France, is a research
director at the French
National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS),
where she founded a study
group on sex roles, the
family and human
development. Among her
many publications are
Sociologie de la famille et du
mariage (Presses
Universitaires de France,
1986), Le féminisme (PUF,
1986) and Down with
Stereotypes! Eliminating
Sexism from Children 's
Literature and School
Textbooks (Unesco, 1986).
as 50 per cent. A quarter of these French couples,
of all ages, have and bring up children. More
young women than men of equivalent class prefer
these unofficial unions, since this new life-style
seems to them to be more egalitarian.
The men and women of Europe are no longer
prepared to put up with unhappy marriages.
Since 1965, there has been a big increase in the
number of divorces throughout the continent.
Yet divorce is much more frequent in the nor¬
thern countries of Europe (Scandinavia) than in
the southern countries (France, Italy, Spain). Ex¬
cept in Ireland, where divorce is still forbidden,
the authorities in most countries have made
divorce procedures easier, although legislative
changes have lagged behind changing public
attitudes.
One consequence of these changes has been
an increase in the number of single-parent
families, in which the children live with only one
of the parentsin the majority of cases with the
woman (90 per cent in France, 93 per cent in
Denmark). In the view of the European Parlia¬
ment, the single-parent family must be considered
as a "family unit" and must not be subject to any
"discrimination"."'
With the increase in unofficial unions, the
number of children born out of wedlock has in¬
creased significantly. In 1980, 40 per cent of
Swedish children were born to unmarried
mothers, a status all the more acceptable to public
opinion in that social reforms have favoured the
single parent with a child. In France, the number
of children in this situation increased by 50 per
cent between 1982 and 1986 to reach a total of
about 171,000, or 22 per cent of all births, a sure
sign of a profound change in attitudes and
behaviour. The traditional situation of the
woman being abandoned by the child's father is
becoming less widespread. Along with this a new
pattern is emerging in which the child is
acknowledged by the father. In 1980, in France,
50 per cent of children born outside marriage
were acknowledged by the father, as compared
with 22.5 per cent in 1968.
Except in Scandinavia, European law-makers
continue to treat couples living together outside
marriage unfavourably in comparison with mar¬
ried couples, but in most countries an attempt
is being made to lessen discrimination against
children born out of wedlock. In Ireland, for ex¬
ample, reforms tending in this direction were
passed in 1986.
How is life organized in single-parent
families, most of which are the outcome of
divorce or separation? In at least 90 per cent of
cases the custody and upbringing of the children
are entrusted to the mother. The husband is
obliged to pay a maintenance allowance to the
wife for the upkeep of the children. In some
countries (Luxembourg, Denmark, France) the
authorities may even pay the share of a defaulting
husband so that a wife without resources and
with children to support is not left unprovided
for.
More than in the past, European law-makers
are taking note of the desire of the couple for
equality of status and the growth in the number
of women entering the labour market. Denmark
has even gone so far as to give equal parental
authority to both partners, whether or not they
are married or living together, so as to meet the
aspirations of single fathers who, if there is a
separation, have many fewer rights than the
mother over the children. In France, alternating
custody of the children is on the increase.
Overcoming loneliness
Where does Marina, whose story we outlined
above, fit into this scheme of things? She and her


daughter can hardly be considered a single-parent
family since, strictly speaking, the paternal role
played by Michel, Sarah's father, and Jean, the
father-to-be of the expected child, excludes them
from this category. There are many other forms
of family that are equally hard to categorize. Be¬
ing neither legal marriages, unofficial unions nor
single-parent families, they figure in none of the
statistics and in no sociological data.
Most European countries are experiencing an
increase in the number of people, especially
young people, living singly. In France, in 1985,
records showed that 27 per cent of men between
the ages of 30 and 34 and 26 per cent of women
in the same age group were living singly. What
kind of a life do they lead? Are they hardened
bachelors withdrawn into themselves and im¬
mured in solitude? Or have they created around
themselves, as a substitute for the family group,
a social network from which they draw the af-

fective and social support necessary to maintain
their personal equilibrium?
Among them are those who do not live with
their partners, each member of the couple living
in his or her own home, but both putting a pro¬
portion of their resources into a common fund
so that, if they have children, they can between
them fulfil this new financial commitment.
There are also cases where members of the
same sex live together. They may be a homosex¬
ual couple, friends or people linked by the need
for mutual economic assistance (the unemployed
or those who cannot find or afford accommoda¬
tion). The growing number of "households" (in
the statistical sense of the term) consisting either
of a single person living alone or of two or more
people of the same sex, covers a multitude of
diverse forms of social life, all of which are
substitutes for the traditional family framework.
Despite change,
parent/child solidarity
persists
This variety of horizontally developing family
forms contrasts with the stability of the vertical
relationships within a family group and the per¬
manence of intra-family solidarity.
All surveys show that the desire to live a hap¬
py life within the family group remains pre¬
eminent. Young adultsmothers and "new
fathers"derive the greatest satisfaction from
bringing up their children. And at parties held
to celebrate the rites of passage (birth,
adolescence, marriage, death) families gather
together to renew their links of social solidarity.
This solidarity shows no signs of disappear¬
ing. Young adults benefit from the support of
their parents in many circumstancesduring their
studies, on marriage and in the early stages of life
as a couple, on the purchase or fitting out of a
home or of a house in the country. The same
solidarity may be in evidence later, on the occa¬
sion of a major unforeseen expense, illness or in¬
terruption of work due to an accident or
unemployment. In return, in their old age parents
are helped by their children, who visit them fairly
regularly and may even give them financial help.
Today the individual European considers that
he or she has a right to happiness. Very often
there springs from this a refusal to enter into or
remain within the rigid framework of the fami¬
ly or of marriage with its fixed conventional
codes. A further consequence of this is the ever
more widespread practice of defining for oneself
a life-style in which the search for personal hap¬
piness can be fulfilled.
Europeans are now less willing to allow
legislators to set rules of behaviour for their
private lives and tend to reject legal discrimina¬
tion between those who are married and those
who are not married, between those who are
divorced and those who are not, between
1 he desire to live a happy life
within the family group remains
pre-eminent. Young adults-
mothers and 'new fathers'derive
the greatest satisfaction from
bringing up their children. "
* *' s-
lit
heterosexuals and homosexuals and between
legitimate children and "natural" children.
The notion is spreading in Europe that
human rights are not exclusively political rights,
but also concern the liberty of individuals to
choose the form and content of their private lives,
particularly with regard to the identity of their
partners, the right to divorce, the number of
children they have, and contraception. These are
the issues in a struggle that is spreading in all
European societies, at least in those where social
movements, often inspired by women, are
fighting against the survival of patriarchal stan¬
dards now thought to be incompatible with the
rights of the individual and with happiness.
* "Femmes d'Europe: 10 ans", in Femmes d'Europe, No. 27, June 1988 37
