Samba time!
M,
38
LENTION the word "carnival" and every¬
one thinks immediately of Brazil. Two weeks
before the festival begins, all important business
is postponed until after the four frantic days
during which the whole country grinds to a halt
and everyone takes time out to dance. At carnival
time the press, radio and television talk about
nothing else. And when Brazilians travelling
abroad are asked about their country, the subject
of carnival always crops up sooner or later. In
short, it would be impossible to imagine Brazil
without its carnival, an event unique in scope and
in the collective passion it arouses.
Less well known is the increasingly impor¬
tant role played in the carnival by Brazil's samba
schools, the first of which was founded in 1928
at Mangueira, a suburb of Rio de Janeiro. Many
more schools were started, but at that time they
had no direct connection with the carnival.
Products of the poorer quarters with high black
populations, they played no part in the festival,
which took place in the centre of Rio and was
celebrated by the middle class. Poor people who
wanted to take part in the carnival did so virtually
in secret; they were even chased away by the
police when they attempted to sing and dance in
the centre of the city.
The samba, however, soon made itself felt as
a particularly vital form of expression of black
identity, which by then had survived three and
a half centuries of slavery. It spread rapidly to
thefavelas (shanty-towns) in the hills around Rio
de Janeiro. Soon the samba had its own public
parades and then, in 1935, the Rio authorities
gave official standing to the carnival in its popular
form.
The samba schools were given subsidies from
the public purse, ceasing to be informal groups
and developing into organizations which received
monthly subscriptions and had their own
premises, articles of association and elected boards
of directors. A federation of samba schools was
established and only its members could take part
in the parades. The growing interest of the state
in these parades, coupled with general public
demand for exciting spectacles, speeded up this
process of "bureaucratization".
In the 1970s, the schools became full-blown
show-business companies operating permanently
throughout the year. The transient glory of the
parades is the product of a continuous effort of
which the spectators are quite unaware. The time
is long past when the schools thought about the
carnival only a day or two before it began.
Today the schools get far more of their
income from balls and rehearsals (many of which

BY SERGIO ALVES TEIXEIRA
\
The story of the
samba schools which
make the Rio
carnival one of the
world's most
colourful and
exciting spectacles
Left, the "Children of
Gandhi" samba school at
the carnival of Salvador de
Bahía, Brazil.
Opposite page, Rio
carnival parades. 39

40
are open to the paying public and attract as many
as 15,000 spectators), from the commercial
exploitation of their cultural product, and from
the patronage of the bankers behind the bicho (a
kind of lottery), than they do from the monthly
subscriptions paid by their members.
The institutionalization of the schools has
also changed the profile of their staff. Most of the
accountants, lawyers and administrators that they
have hired come from a different social back¬
ground from that of their founders and the
schools have had to adapt to their viewpoints.
The largest schools now aim to set themselves up
in modern premises similar to those occupied by
clubs patronized by the middle classes.
Two Brazilian writers, Amaury Jorio and
Hiram Araujo, have memorably described the
exciting moments before the carnival begins.
"The abre-alas, the leading float that symbolizes
the school, is in position. Between it and the
allegorical floats that follow come the dancers.
The carnival committee is busily at work. The
leading figures slowly take up their positions. The
musicians tune their instruments. When the com¬
mand is given, the leading singer, high up on his
float, intones the samba-enredo, the theme of the
samba. In accordance with custom, the entire
school listens as he sings it through once and then
the musicians take up the melody and everyone
starts to sing, repeating the samba two or three
times without moving as they await the arrival
of any latecomers. Then suddenly, as if by mag¬
ic, the whole school moves off. This is the be¬
ginning of the most beautiful spectacle of popular
art in the world. As though out for a stroll, form¬
ing a procession, dancing and singing the samba,
diffusing joy and rapture, the school parades
before us."
The 'sambadrome'
Tiered seating was erected when the spectacle had
developed sufficiently to attract large crowds who
were prepared to pay. to. see it. An area was
blocked off by means of temporary fencing so
that only those who had paid an entry fee could
watch. This roused considerable protest from
those who could not afford to pay.
In 1984, for the first time, the parades took
place in a fixed purpose-built locationthe
"parade causeway", or "sambadrome" as it is
popularly known. Thirteen metres wide, 700
metres in length, the sambadrome is located on
the Avenue Marqués de Sapucaí and can accom¬
modate 85,000 spectators. It is the work of
Brazil's most famous architect, Oscar Niemeyer.
The causeway comes into its own on carnival
Sunday and Monday when, at nightfall, the top-
ranking samba schools parade for an hour and
a half each.

An explosion of colour,
Rio 1989.
SERGIO ALVES
TEIXEIRA
is a Brazilian anthropologist
who teaches at the Federal
University of Rio Grande
do Sul, Porto Alegre. His
publications include studies
of rites of passage,
cockfighting, and the
significance of feasts and
festivals.



Everything is strictly regulatedthe marking
system followed by the jury, the parade time
allotted to each school, the minimum number of
participants, the dimensions of the allegorical
floats, the theme of the samba, the individual and
collective figures that are to illustrate it, and the
order of presentation of the items.
Today, each school organizes its parade
around a theme of its own choice, but this was
not always the case. Freedom of choice was the
rule at the beginning, but, from 1939 until the
end of the 1960s, successive dictators imposed
themes illustrating the history of the nation.
Then, in response to pressure from an increas¬
ingly demanding public, the schools recovered
their freedom of choice.
Samba themes dominate not only the parades
themselves but the entire musical content of the
carnivalat the balls, in the streets, on television,
radio and on records. They have become products
of the culture industry.
Television gives the carnival exceptionally
wide coverage. Not only does it transmit nation¬
wide programmes on the parades staged by Rio's
top samba schools, it also screens regional balls
and parades both locally and nationwide. In 1989,
an estimated 65 million viewers watched these
transmissions.
Another key innovation has been the appear¬
ance of the carnavalesco, the specialist organizer
of parades. He conceives the theme, designs the
effigies and the allegorical characters, sees to it
that the necessary accessories are at hand, selects
the materials to be used, chooses the colours, is
responsible for the overall direction of the spec¬
tacle, rehearses the performers and, more recent¬
ly, even has his say in the wording of the samba
themes.
Many of these carnival experts are intellec¬
tuals who have studied choreography, the arts and
folklore. Under their direction the parades have
become grandiose spectacles, not so much
through the number of performers taking part
(between 3,000 and 4,000) as through the richness
of the colours and the ordered movements and
rhythms they have introduced.
This new sumptuousness has won far from
unanimous approval, and many a purist critic has
called for a return to the original, simple
tradition. Yet, miraculously, the changes have not
extinguished the ardent emotions and joy of the
ordinary samba-lover. All those unknown men
and women, the real driving force behind the
carnival, who are willing to spend up to three-
quarters of their annual salaries just to enjoy these
few days of fantasy, still thrill to the mysterious
vibrations of the carnival. "It is as though I have
entered the gates of heaven. Were I to lose my
balance, I should lie down and weep." 41
