A NEW POLICY
FOR EDUCATION BY ANIL BORDIA
EDUCATION was given high
priority after India gained in¬
dependence in 1947. The new
Constitution called on the State to pro¬
vide free and compulsory primary edu¬
cation and gave the federal government
the responsibility for maintaining stan¬
dards in higher and technical education.
By a subsequent amendment to the Con¬
stitution, education was also declared to
be a concern of the provincial govern¬
ments. India opted for a planned econo-
Primary school classes are often conducted in
the open air.
my, and each five-year plan indicates the
directions for educational development.
Dramatic expansion of education has
taken place since independence. The
number of primary (including upper
primary) schools has tripled and enrol¬
ment has increased from about 30 per
cent to 80 per cent. The increase in the
enrolment of girls at primary level has
been particularly impressive, from 17.7
per cent in 1950-1951 to 64.6 per cent in
1986-1987.
Increase in enrolments has been even
more spectacular in secondary education,
and the number of schoolteachers has ris¬
en from 750,000 to 3.7 million. In higher
and professional education, the number
of institutions and enrolments has in¬
creased eightfold, and in technical educa¬
tion about tenfold.
In 1964, the Government of India ap-
16

pointed a commission to advise on the na¬
tional pattern of education and on the
general principles and policies for educa¬
tional development. Four years later, an
education policy formulated on the ba¬
sis of the commission's recommendations
called for a transformation of the educa¬
tion system which would relate it more
closely to the life of the people; a con¬
tinuous effort to expand educational op¬
portunity; a sustained and intensive effort
to raise the quality of education at all
stages; an emphasis on the development
of science and technology; and the culti¬
vation of moral and social values.
The most remarkable change which
took place after the adoption of the 1968
Education Policy was the establishment
of a common structure of education. This
consisted of ten years of common school¬
ing for all children, followed by two years
of higher secondary education and a
three-year degree course.
In 1985, the Central Government
again reviewed the educational situation
and decided to initiate a new National
Policy on Education, which was debated
extensively by students, teachers and peo¬
ple in all walks of life before it was passed
by the two Houses of Parliament in
February 1986. A detailed Programme of
Action was completed a few months later
to ensure that the policy would be im¬
plemented without delay.
The 1986 education policy envisages
a national system which will take deter¬
mined action to bring about universal
primary education and promote the
spread of adult literacy, thereby helping
A class in a village school, Uttar Pradesh.
to reduce inequalities. The education sys¬
tem will be based on a national curricu-
lar framework which contains a common
core as well as components specific to
each region. The core will cut across sub¬
ject areas and will be designed to promote
such values as India's common cultural
heritage, egalitarianism, democracy and
secularism, equality of the sexes, protec¬
tion of the environment, observance of
the small family norm, and the scientific
approach. Pace-setting schools called
Navodaya Vidyalayas will provide quali¬
ty education to particularly gifted chil¬
dren, irrespective of their families' means,
and will promote excellence as well as
Bombay. A photography class in progress.
equity and social justice. The 1986 policy
also emphasizes the need to raise the level
of investment in education from about
4 per cent of national income in 1986 to
6 per cent by 1990 and even higher
thereafter.
Soon after assuming office in 1984,
Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi announced
his decision to launch a National Litera¬
cy Mission (NLM) to bring functional
literacy to some 80 million illiterate peo¬
ple in the 15 to 35 age group. The teach¬
ing of functional literacy is designed to
achieve a variety of goals, including self-
reliance in literacy and numeracy; the de¬
velopment of awareness among the poor
and the illiterate of the causes of their
deprivation; the acquisition of skills to
improve economic status and general
well-being; understanding of the values of
national integration; conservation of the
environment; women's equality; and the
small family norm. NLM also stresses the
importance of post-literacy and continu¬
ing education.
A number of important initiatives
have been taken as a result of the new na¬
tional policy on education:
* A nationwide programme for the
improvement of primary education facil¬
ities, including reorganization of teacher
training, is now under way.
* New curricula have been written for
primary and secondary education and
new textbooks and teaching materials
have been prepared.
* Special programmes have been
launched to improve science teaching, in¬
troduce computer literacy and promote
awareness of environmental issues.
	 17

A class of medical students examine a patient.
Almost every city in India with a population
of over two million has a medical college
and teaching hospital.
* By 1988, 256 Navodaya Vidyalayas
had been established.
* Approximately 500,000 students and
500 voluntary agencies were involved in
the National Literacy Mission in
1987-1988. Several districts and big cities
such as Delhi, Bombay, Bangalore,
Madras and Ahmedabad are launching
campaigns to eradicate illiteracy by the
end of 1990.
* A statutory body, the All India
Council of Technical Education, has been
created to maintain standards for institu¬
tions of technical education and to
modernize technical education to prepare
the workforce needed for rapid techno¬
logical and scientific change.
ANÏL BORDIA has been involved with the
administration of education in India for about
15 years and is currently Education Secretary in the
Government of India. He was closely involved in
the preparation of his country's new education
policy and is responsible for its implementation.
