%u
l$ ray^gts' i/ ,*
tó^v*
*
^ ,
iri '
3B«
PH
':- y
»P
Haaf afiittiaffli
i
1
Zj-. ZS -S » a/ .
,¿,c^-/ k¿**~r%<J mó&u&A ¥áL*&4i%..,,_ ^ , p^í^^> ^vr-^4
iiftffi.i ty/^é-S' $vá¿sx
mmmm

Written almost a thousand years ago, The Epic of the
Kings tells the story of the Iranian people from the
time of the world's creation. National epic, landmark
in world literature and a profound expression of the
Iranian soul, Ferdowsi's masterpiece is still read and
recited throughout Iran.
I
The Epic
of the Kings
BY NAHAL TADJADOD
Ferdowsi and the three poets
of the court of Ghazni, the
ancient capital of the powerful
empire of the Ghaznevids, in
what is now Afghanistan.
I he first part of Ferdowsi's
poem The Epic of the Kings
describes how Jamshid, king of
Iran, taught men how to make
weapons of war, to spin and
weave, and to build houses
and ships. Left, a 17th-century
miniature showing Jamshid
giving a lesson in
craftsmanship.
N a square in Teheran, the capital of Iran, there
is a statue of Ferdowsi: the poet holds his Epic
ofthe Kings (Shah-nama) in his hand and gazes at
the peaks of the Alborz mountains. When I was
young, my parents often took me to this place
and while they looked on attentively I recited
these lines by Ferdowsi:
I have toiled painfully these thirty years. I have
restored Iran to life by my verse.
Henceforth I cannot die; for I live, having
broadcast the seeds of my verses.
These words were engraved in the memory
of the child I was then and I know that they have
shaped my innermost identity. There is nothing
astonishing in that. For almost a thousand years
Ferdowsi's poem has been read, recited and
copied in Iran. Even today it is recited in the cafés.
Early on it became our national epic.
Why has it always been so popular? Not
because of the originality of its subjectthe
history of ancient Iran from the time of its first
mythical king to the last sovereign of the Sassanid
dynasty in the seventh century ADnor because
of the novelty of its content. "What I will say,
all have already told," Ferdowsi claimed. The
poet transmitted; he invented nothing. He drew
on old oral traditions and on ancient texts such
as the Avesta, a holy book of the eighth century
BC, or reworked somewhat earlier tales on the
same theme.
The first monument
of Persian literature
This immense poem of 50,000 couplets appeared
in the tenth century, at a key moment in the
history of Iranian culture. Since the fall of the
Sassanids, the literary language of Iran had been
Arabic. Middle Persian, the main vehicle of
Sassanid civilization, was disappearing. At this
moment, a young literature in an Iranian idiom-
Persianemerged in the east. Ferdowsi's poem
would be its first masterpiece.
The Epic of the Kings does not describe the
deeds of a single hero or king nor even a long
adventure. It begins with the creation of the
world and relates the history of fifty reigns on
three distinct planes: the mythical, the epic and
the historical.
The first part relates civilizing myths. The
Pishdadians, the "first created", teach men to
clothe themselves, to work metal, to master fire,
to tame animals and to organize themselves in
society. After ruling for 700 years, King Jamshid,
succumbing to pride, has to yield his throne to
a demoniac creature, the tyrant Zahhak who will
rule for a thousand years. His malign power will
finally be conquered by the justice-loving
Faridun. These heroes, who personify the conflict
between the forces of darkness and light,
constitute a religious theme which is typically
Iranian.
The second, longest and most truly epic part 29

of the poem evokes the reign of the Kaianid kings.
Here, in the centrepiece of the poem, light has
triumphed. Rostam is the champion of all the
heroes who live at the Kaianid court. Prodigious¬
ly strong, loyal to his king and faithful to his
country, he is the terror of the enemy. This peri¬
od is marked by interminable wars against Turan,
a central Asian country whose ruler Afrasiyab is
the sworn enemy of Iran.
In the final part, the poet presents a number
of historical figures but in a rather fantastic light.
He gives a notable account of the conquest of
Alexander the Great (Sekandar), based on the
Alexander legend of the Orient. The ending, even
closer to history, tells of the exploits of the Sas¬
sanid rulers until the end of the dynasty.
Faridun and Zahhak:
the just man and the tyrant
The story of Zahhak the tyrant, told in the first
and most brilliant part of the poem, extols the
sufferings of a martyred people.
The courageous but wayward son of King
Mardas, Zahhak is led astray by Eblis, the devil.
After making a pact with Eblis, Zahhak usurps
the throne. Revealing himself to the king in var¬
ious forms, the devil extends his power further
each day. One day Eblis presents himself in the
guise of a cook. "The diet is not varied," he says,
"for flesh is not eaten," and he wishes Zahhak
to eat all kinds of viands, both birds and
quadrupeds. When the devil, who has gained Zah-
30
Sekandar (Alexander the
Great) is seen visiting the
emperor of China in this
15th-century miniature
illustrating an incident
from The Epic of the
Kings.
NAHAL TADJADOD,
Iranian Sinologist, is the
author of a doctoral thesis
on the influence of
Buddhism on Chinese
Manichaeism which will be
published shortly by
Editions du Cerf, Paris. She
is currently participating in
Unesco's Silk Roads Project.
hak's confidence, embraces him, a black serpent
thrusts its head out of each of the tyrant's shoul¬
ders. Whenever he cuts them off they sprout
anew like two branches of a tree. Then Eblis ap¬
pears again, this time disguised as a physician, and
proposes as a remedy that Zahhak should eat two
human brains each day.
Thus for a thousand years the demons cause
evil to reign and no one dares talk openly of good.
But one night Zahhak dreams that he is laid low
by a young prince who strikes him with a bull-
headed mace and drags him in chains to Mount
Damavand. Plunged in darkness, the world was
as black as a raven's wing. The tyrant consults
the Mubads, the Zoroastrian priests, who read the
stars and tell him that his vanquisher, who is not
yet born, will be called Faridun. "He will hate
you, for his father will die at your hand and you
will also kill the cow that will serve him as nurse.
To avenge the cow he will take up the bull-headed
mace."
Mad with anxiety, the king hunts everywhere
for traces of Faridun. The blessed child is born
at the same time as the most marvellous of cows.
He is entrusted by his mother to the keeper of
the park where the nurse-cow lives, and is
nourished with her milk. One day Zahhak hears
of the park and the cow, kills the fabulous animal
and rushes to Faridun's house. He finds no one
there. Overcome with fear, Faridun's mother has
taken her son to Mount Alborz.
At the age of sixteen Faridun learns of his ori¬
gins from his mother and decides to fight the
tyrant. In anguish Zahhak convokes all the elders
of the land to seek their support. "I desire you
to subscribe to a proclamation on my behalf that
as commander in chief I have sown no seed but
that of uprightness. ..and that I would never fail
to maintain justice." All consent except one man,
Kava the Blacksmith, who rises in protest. "I am
Kava, seeking for justice. Most of the wrong done
to me comes from yourself. It is you who cons¬
tantly thrust the lancet into my heart. Why do
you inflict harm on my children? I had eighteen
alive in the world, and now only one remains."
Overcome with astonishment and fear, Zahhak
restores the man's remaining son to him and asks
him in exchange to add his testimony to the
proclamation. Kava reads the proclamation, tears
it into pieces, and tramples them underfoot.
Kava leaves the palace and the people crowd
around him. Fastening a blacksmith's leather
apron to a spearhead, he calls on the people to
free themselves from the tyrant's yoke. Followed
by a multitude of the stout-hearted, Kava the
liberator sets out in search of Faridun, who agrees
to lead the popular rising. The people of the city
and the army mass before the palace, whose
guards dare not resist. Faridun rides into the
palace without striking a blow and seizes the royal
crown. Attacked by Zahhak, the young prince
shatters Zahhak's helmet with his bull-headed
mace. At that instant the angel Sorush appears
and stops Faridun killing Zahhak. "Do not strike

^C3''
VtVV
him down," he says. "His time has not yet come.
Tie him securely inside the mountain." Faridun
then drives the tyrant into the mountains and
wishes to strike off his head, but the angel Sorush
appears again and tells him to leave the captive
in fetters on Mount Damavand to endure an eter¬
nal agony.
A poet of human grandeur
In the person of Faridun, an era of enlightenment
and justice succeeds a long period of obscurity
and tyranny. Here Ferdowsi returns to pre-
Islamic traditions; he takes this idea of an eternal
combat between good and evil from Zoroastrian
eschatology. The interminable wars between Iran
and Turan are the reflection of this. But Ferdowsi
does not profess a naive dualism. He shows that
these two principles coexist in everyone: human
beings can do good as well as spread evil.
Thus, after a thousand years of tyranny, light
and good seem to triumph: the new king, man¬
dated by heaven, serves his people devotedly. But
evil persists, it has not ceased to exist. This is what
the angel means when he twice prevents the
tyrant from being put to death. Zahhak is final¬
ly fettered on the summit of Mount Alborz as
if to show by his existence that the victory of
good over evil has not yet been won.
Ferdowsi bases his poem on the implacable
force of destiny. This quintessentially epic theme
echoes the sense of fatality which is so deeply an¬
chored in the Iranian soul. And yet his charac¬
ters are still men, torn and tortured by doubt and
sensitive to the misfortunes of the age. They are
to be pitied rather than condemned. Zahhak, the
bloody tyrant, the symbol of cruelty, does not
act freely; he has, after all, sold his soul to the
devil. He is merely an instrument. As a great trag¬
ic epic poet, Ferdowsi thus creates terrible situa¬
tions in which a man is led to kill his brother,
or a father kills his son. Links of kinship add gran¬
deur and resonance to the combat waged by the
individual against higher forces.



The Epic of the Kings is still a living epic for
Iranians because it is profoundly in tune with the
Iranian soul. The Iranian peasant, even if he can
neither read nor write, responds to the exploits
of Rostam, the hero par excellence, and weeps
to think of his sufferings when he is compelled
to kill his own son to defend his country.
Neither good nor ill will lastfor ever: thefinest
thing is to leave good deeds to be remembered by.
Ferdowsi's voice still speaks to us across the
ages.
Quotations from the Shah-nama in this article are taken from
the translation by Reuben Levy which was published as The
Epic ofthe Kings by Routledge & Kegan Paul (London, 1967)
and features in the Unesco Collection of Representative
Works. Editor
Above, an episode from
The Epic of the Kings in
which the great folk hero
Rostam slays the dragon
with the help of his valiant
horse Rakhsh. (15th-century
miniature.)
31
