THE BURDEN
OF FEAR
by Vitali Korotich
Editor-in-chief of
Ogoniok, Moscow
I
N 1986, our magazine had less than 300,000
subscribers. Today, there are 4.5 million. It is
the kind of magazine that can only exist in a
country where the government is inefficient.
We receive an enormous quantity of letters
which people should send to government
ministers, if they had confidence in them.
Instead they write to us, journalists who work
for the popular press and, within an unstable
power structure, bear the enormous burden
of responsibility for what is going on in the
country.
People are still living in fear. They are
paralysed with fear. I think that if Unesco
organized a conference on hatred, all that
hatred which has brought together or divided
Europe, much would be learned. Societies have
been built on hatred and contempt for those
who live differently. Only very slowly will we
be able to free ourselves from hatred and fear.
In Eastern Europe we stopped taking an
interest in each other decades ago. For a very
long time, what was happening in Poland,
Czechoslovakia or Bulgaria was of no interest
to Soviet readers. Now that we are facing up
to reality, it is important that we should
understand one another, that we should
approach each other in a new way. We must
help one another to safeguard our newly-
acquired freedom for, it must be emphasized,
the conservative forces understand one
another much better than do those who aspire
to democratic reforms.
We need newspapers and magazines which
could circulate freely in several countries at the
same time. It seems to me essential that we
should start producing European TV
programmes right away. This is highly rele¬
vant to the immediate problem of our survival
and the attitude we ought to have towards one
another.
As yet we have no law on the press in our
country. As in some other countries, much
depends on the goodwill of the people and on
that of the authorities. We must fight to
obtain coherent legislation to guarantee the
freedom of the press, which is still subject to
censorship and other pressures. We are also
facing serious material problems, such as a lack
of paper. The weekly Argumenty i Fakty, which
with a print-run of 33 million has the largest
circulation of any magazine in the world, is
regularly unable to supply hundreds of thou¬
sands of its subscribers through lack of
newsprint. When the circulation of our maga¬
zine began to rise we had to reduce the
number of pages and colour inserts. And
although it is supposed to be a weekly, it actu¬
ally takes over a week to print, with the result
that it appears after our publication date. We
are told that this is the printer's fault, which
is probably true, but it worries me to see tech¬
nical problems like these hindering the
progress of democracy today.
Extract from a contribution to the Informal East-West
Press Meeting held at Unesco Headquarters, Paris, 27-28
February 1990.
A Soviet evening paper rolls off the press.

