How to stop
the golden
dream of
rapid mobility
from
becoming
a guilt-edged
nightmare
10
JEAN-FRANCIS HELD,
French writer and journalist,
has been editorial director of
the French weekly L'Evénement
du Jeudi since it was launched
in 1984. He is the author of
several works of fiction and
of essays, some of which are
devoted to the social impact
of the automobile.



The automotive age
BY JEAN-FRANCIS HELD
'ELE bounds from the earth. (...) When I bes¬
tride him, I soar. (...) My horse is my mistress."
With these words the Dauphin of France, a vain¬
glorious nincompoop, extols the virtues of his
charger on the eve of the battle of Agincourt, in
Shakespeare's play Henry V.
If one is going to talk about horsepower,
what could be more natural than to start with
the horse? When trying to unravel the mysteries
of modernity, why not go back to the Hundred
Years War? Speed has always been the stuff of
dreams, especially the dreams of males anxious
to extend the range of their puny legs by don¬
ning seven-league boots. From the days of
Pharaoh's chariots to those of the stage-coaches
that opened up the American West, people have
always wanted to break the barriers of distance.
Even today, echoes of the horse-mad Dauphin's
Shakespearean paean to his charger can still be
heard in bars the world over, but today the Dau¬
phin's successors sing the praises of Porsche or
Ferrari.
The automobile has universalized the dream
of mobility and speed. The open road, a steering
wheel, the promise of superhuman energy
waiting to be unleashed by a touch of the right
footall this adds up to much more than the
simple process of getting from point A to point
B. It evokes prospects of escape from the weight
of collective and material responsibilities. Space
is dominated. Time is mastered. The horse is a
gift of nature and, as the saying goes, one should
never look a gift horse in the mouth. The
automobile is an artefact, a purpose-built reflec¬
tion of the human will. No other object has been
so richly charged with meaning. It has been dwelt
on by literature, by the cinema and even by
modern art. The automobile typifies man, and
vice versa. If, after a nuclear cataclysm, some
skilful archaeologist of the future were to unearth
from a garage-tomb a collection of automobiles
that had escaped destruction, he would be able
to deduce from them everything that we were.
\
^
'
m

Like father, like son.. A recent example of the representativity
of the automobile is the Trabant, a vehicle
that has become a symbol of the reunification
of the two Germanies and earned itself a place
in the world's museums. The Trabant embodies
the failure of totalitarianism and the frustrations
to which it gives rise, just as the Mercedes and
the BMW symbolize the success of capitalist
free enterprise, with all its wealth and its often
relentless pride. Before the First World War,
the President of the United States, Woodrow
Wilson, perceptively declared: "Nothing has
done so much as the automobile to encourage the
spread of socialist ideasit symbolizes the
arrogance of wealth." On the other side of the
coin, the Trabant symbolizes the humiliation of
poverty.
A standardized symbol
Before that, however, the automobile had become
a Western fetish. The Third World and the
former colonies are still entranced by the Mer¬
cedes, the Peugeot and the Land Rover, in the
former German, French and British possessions
respectively. Time has changed virtually nothing.
Although the Japanese may conquer the market,
the magic of these European makes still retains
a profound, indelible cultural impact. After the
rifle, the automobile has been seen as a means of
becoming strong, rich and fast-moving, like the
Whitesa kind of neo-colonialist vehicle.
Automobiles used to reflect cultural and
national differences, but the switch from custom-
building to mass-production has gradually ironed
out differences in personality. Little survives of
a specifically Latin, Germanic or British approach
to making cars. Once upon a time it was impos¬
sible to confuse the ethos of a Bugatti or an Alfa
Romeo with that of a Bentley or a Mercedes.
Ettore Bugatti (1882-1947) ridiculed the Bentleys
which regularly defeated his blue-liveried
thoroughbreds on the Le Mans circuit: "They are
the fastest trucks that have ever been made," he
scoffed. Today, all racing-cars look alike and are
built to the same specifications.
The same goes for the average car, which con¬
forms to economic, technical and commercial
imperatives dictated by the stateless computer. It
is almost impossible to tell if one is in a Fiat, an
Opel, a Renault or an Austin. The romance has
gone. Unhampered by tradition, Japan makes
good automobiles, that is all. Only the United
States still makes a few limousines that bear the
true American stamp, but for how much longer?
Libido at the wheel
The automobile may have become standardized,
but not the way in which it is used. Tell me how
you drive and I will tell you who you are. Drivers
differ by virtue of their temperament and even
their sexwomen drivers are more detached, less
deadly than the more competitive male. But
above all ways of driving reflect cultural differ¬
ences. The Italians, the Germans, the French and 11

12
the British have a style of driving which reflects
their national ethos. More recently-motorized
countries are gradually developing their own.
With a longer history of driving behind them,
the Americans (if we discount the occasional
gangster exploit or James Dean-style folly) con¬
trol their libido on the highway. Nevertheless,
throughout the world, controlled or not, the
demons are there, not far beneath the surface.
A man dreams that he is at the wheel of a
sleek, powerful, red convertible. He comes to a
slope that extends as far as the eye can see. The
engine starts to cough and splutter, and the man
wakes up, sweating with fear. There's no need
to have read Freud to know that the libido is the
key to the dream. Psychoanalysts know what
place the automobile occupies in the landscape
of our unconscious. Man identifies with it as an
instrument of power, an extension of his realm.
To touch its metal body is to commit an act of
aggression. To obstruct its passage is a castrating
challenge to the omnipotence of his Ego.
There is another aspect to the eroticization
of the automobile. In all Westernized societies,
the automobile is a seductive object like the stag's
antlers, the lion's mane or the peacock's feathers.
Beautiful cars fascinate the ladies, not always the
most prudent amongst them.
The link between the automobile and desire
is flagrant and advertisers exploit it. Twenty years
ago, the gradual shrinkage of the huge American
limousine to more moderate, almost European,
dimensions, coincided with a reduction in the size
of the enormous bust-lines of magazine pin-ups.
None of the sociologists who study the vicissi¬
tudes of the automobile considered this to be
mere coincidence.
You are not convinced? Ask yourself, then,
why it is that the vast majority of European
drivers scorn the automatic gear change, while
the Americans have overwhelmingly adopted it.
This is simply because virility symbols differ
to each his own gear lever.
Things start to go wrong, the man/machine
relationship becomes poisoned and the love affair
turns sour when man's real or imaginary frustra¬
tions take over the automobile and turn it into
A 1960 Cadillac Sedan.
a refuge, a compensation, even a weapon. The
automobile holds such an important place in
people's dreams that one might expect the dream
to become a nightmare. Sometimes a driver
incensed by a "challenge" from his enemy the
man in the other carbecomes so exasperated
that he seeks "revenge" by carrying out dan¬
gerous, potentially fatal aggressive manoeuvres he
would not even dream of as a civilized pedestrian.
The children scream with fright, the siren of the
ambulance can already be heard? To hell with
it. ..overtake or bust!
It is possible to be mad about cars and see
them as the most wonderful toys ever invented,
and stillespecially todayask a few questions.
They have become too much of a good thing.
The reasons for this metamorphosis are clear even
if the remedies for it are not.
When dreams come true, they usually bring
disappointment. At the time of the Bugatti,
roughly speaking between the two World Wars,
the automobile was inaccessible to most people.
Even in the 1950s, Europeans who saw films like
The Grapes of Wrath could not understand how
it was possible to be very poor and still have a
car. For them the automobile was something that
tomorrow would bring, along with freedom, hap¬
piness and middle class status. Then, twenty years
after the United States, the rest of the Western
world became wealthy and acquired its own
automobiles. But alas, when everyone is
privileged, privilege ceases to exist. From being
the few, drivers became the many. They took it
badly. Disenchantment gave birth to collective
neuroses that have become part of daily life, so
common, in fact, that those who deplore them
are voices crying in the wilderness.
This disenchantment undeniably exists. What
happened to the wonderful, exclusive gift we
were once promised? In ten years the number of
automobiles in the world has increased by 30 per
cent. If we discount the poorest countries where
the automobile age is still a dream, the increase
is staggering70 per cent in Spain, 51 per cent
in Japan, and so on. The tide is rising less steeply

in the industrialized countries of Europe, which
were already approaching saturation pointin
France alone, traffic has increased by 5 per cent
and there has been a 2.5 per cent increase in the
number of automobiles.
The 'right' to drive
If theoretically almost everybody can own a car,
it is impossible to let loose at the same time on
the public highway all these hundreds of millions
of vehicles. The traffic jams would be enormous.
Rampant individualism is thus a thing of the past,
especially in the towns. A social approach to the
automobile is needed, and this inevitably involves
restrictions. It is very badly received by drivers
who cling tenaciously to the "right" to drive at
all costs.
Yet, insidiously, little by little, the absolute
freedom of the motorist has been eroded. The
two oil crises provided a pretext for the aboli¬
tion of many privileges. With some difficulty
speed limits were imposed, the wearing of seat
belts was made obligatory and paid parking in
urban areas was introduced. The automobile has
been brought down to earth, curbed and, theo¬
retically, is losing its status as a sacred cow.
One large oil company even ran a brief cam¬
paign to remove the car "from its pedestal"
the antithesis of the famous "put a tiger in your
tank" slogan invented by one of its competitors.
For the first time some dared to talk about safety
rather than performance, but all too often the
message fell on deaf ears. To keep up sales,
automobile manufacturers continue to produce
fast vehicles which are totally unsuited to daily
traffic conditions, and succumb to the temptation
to use aggressive advertising whilst knowing full
well that nobody buys a vehicle capable of speeds
in excess of 200 kilometres an hour so as to be
able to travel at 130 kilometres an hour with the
rest of the herd on the motorways.
There are many automobile civilizations. In
the United States, with the exception of a few
paranoiacs, people obey the rules and remain
good citizens even when they are at the wheel.
This is not yet the case in France, for example.
Although in other respects a highly civilized 13

The longest limousine
In the world, made to order
for the American actor
Sylvester Stallone.
country, France enjoys the grim distinction of
more than 10,000 road deaths each year.
And yet this hecatomb is not the worst
symptom of the wayward misuse of the automo¬
bile. You only die once. But where neuroses
abound and where frustrated individualism
remains all-powerful, daily life becomes sheer
hell, with monster traffic jams, waste of time and
money, heightened nervous tension, weekends
transformed into endurance tests of patience. A
sense of civic responsibility gives way to exasper¬
ation. People break the law, cheat, become aggres¬
sive, and the authorities, which turn a blind eye,
find their respectability compromised. This is bad
for democracy. What can be expected of the
citizen who, desperately seeking release, each day
becomes one ant among many in an ant-hill gone
wild?
14
A long process
of psychotherapy
The automobile must change its ways. Indeed, it
has already done so, but not always for the better.
The free-wheeling days of the past are long gone.
We have mistakenly felt obliged to build cities
for the car. Los Angeles is not really a success.
The great cities of the world, ancient and
modernRome, Paris, Mexico, all of themhave
been spoilt and polluted by the ubiquitous
automobile.
What is to become of this abomination, the
much-desired automobile? Is it for ever doomed?
Not necessarily. But if we are to cure ourselves
of the automobile disease we shall need stringent
remedies and a long course of finely-tuned
psychotherapyin short, political courage.
Restrictions will doubtless have to be
imposed. The frustrated will have to be taught
to consider the welfare of all. The flood of
individual vehicles will have to be stemmed so
as to make way for public transport, swarms of
convenient taxis and all those forms of transport
which our obsession with the automobile has
reduced to the last resort of the poor. We will
have to show that we can travel along other roads
than the saturated public highways on which rage
and resignation are the rule. Finally, we must
make the automobile what it once was, an instru¬
ment of happiness.
Once again signs of hope can be seen in the
United States. The Americans have learned and
accepted the rules of mass transportation. They
have, as we have seen, learned good behaviour
at the wheel. They have begun to make a distinc¬
tion between the automobile as an instrument of
work and as a source of pleasure. The ingenious
system of car pools, whereby neighbours share
their cars for driving to work, is one example.
(W

.	
'i ' -
This is an idea with a future, though it will raise
the hackles of those who would rather share their
wives than their precious cars. Nikita Khruschev
had another good idea when he thought of
creating huge car-hire centres rather than
providing each Soviet citizen with his or her own
narcissistic talisman/vehicle. How far off that
seems...
We shall have to learn, or rather relearn, to
have fun with automobiles away from roads used
for transportation. We should play with the
veteran gems of days gone by, when the automo¬
bile was still a wonder; hold races on purpose-
built tracks with racing-cars, lawn-mowers, steam¬
rollers; go for drives in the desert without dis¬
turbing other people. As for the practical,
utilitarian side of things, it would be better to
travel in mobile music rooms, the last refuges of
conversation, rather than in the ferocious tanks
let loose on our highways and boulevards.
A gloomy prospect? Not at all! This could
be the salvation of the automobile. ..and our own
salvation too.

