o K
On 10 December 1948, the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. The Assembly called upon all member states to publicize the text
of the Declaration and "to cause it to be disseminated, displayed, read and expounded principally
in schools and other educational institutions".



In order to make the Declaration accessible to children, the World Association for the School
as an Instrument of Peace (EIP), an international non-governmental organization founded in 1967,
asked teachers and students of the faculty of psychology and educational sciences at the
University of Geneva (Switzerland) to simplify the language. Some extracts are published below.
TEACHING HUMAN RIGHTS AT SCHOOL
Original version (in light type)
Simplified version (in bold type)
ARTICLE 1
All human beings are bom free and equal
in dignity and rights. They are endowed
with reason and conscience and should
act towards one another in a spirit of
brotherhood.
When children are born, they are free
and should always be treated in the
same way.
LAUREN (age 4)
JUDITH (age 4)

ARTICLE 2
Everyone is entitled to all the rights and
freedoms set forth in this Declaration,
without distinction of any kind, such as
race, colour, sex, language, religion, polit¬
ical or other opinion, national or social
origin, property, birth or other status.
Furthermore, no distinction shall be
made on the basis of the political, jurisdic¬
tional or international status of the country
or territory to which a person belongs,
whether it be independent, trust, non-self-
governing or under any other limitation of
sovereignty.
...everyone has the right to possess or
to take advantage of all that has just
been said:
even if they do not speak your
language
even if they do not have the same
colour skin as you
even if they do not think like you
even if they do not have the same
religion as you
even if they are poorer or richer
than you
even if they are not from the same
country as you.
NICOLAS (age S)
ARTICLE 7
All are equal before the law and are enti¬
tled without any discrimination to equal
protection of the law. All are entitled to
equal protection against any discrimination
in violation of this Declaration and against
any incitement to such discrimination.
The law is the same for everyone: it
should be applied in the same way
for all.
ARTICLE 3
Everyone has the right to life, liberty and
security of person.
You have the right to live, to live in
freedom and in safety.
U

u
ARTICLE 26
1) Everyone has the right to education.
Education shall be free, at least in the
elementary and fundamental stages.
Elementary education shall be compulsory.
Technical and professional education shall
be made generally available and higher
education shall be equally accessible to all
on the basis of merit.
2) Education shall be directed to the full
development of the human personality
and to the strengthening of respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms.
It shall promote understanding, tolerance
and friendship among all nations, racial
or religious groups, and shall further the
activities of the United Nations for the
maintenance of peace.
3) Parents have a prior right to choose the
kind of education that shall be given to
their children.
You have the right:
to go to school
to take advantage of compulsory
education without having to pay
anything
to learn a profession or continue
your studies as far as you wish.
At school, you should be able to
develop all your talents and you
should be taught to get on with
others, whatever their religion or the
country they come from.
Your parents have the right to
choose how you will be taught, and
what you will be taught at school.
48 MARTA (age 4)
ARTICLE 27
1) Everyone has ¡me right freely to partici¬
pate in the cultural life of the community,
to enjoy the arts and to share in scientific
advancement and its benefits.
2) Everyone has the right to the protection
of the moral and material interests result¬
ing from any scientific, literary or artistic
production of which he is the author.
Whether you are an artist, a writer or
a scientist, you should be free to share
the work with others and to profit
from what you have done together.
Your works should be protected
and you should be able to benefit
from them.
ARTICLE 29
1) Everyone has duties to the community
in which alone the free and full develop¬
ment of his personality is possible.
2) In the exercise of his rights and free¬
doms, everyone shall be subject only to
such limitations as are determined by law
solely for the purpose of securing due
recognition and respect for the rights and
freedoms of others and of meeting the just
requirements of morality, public order and
the general welfare in a democratic
society.
...you have duties towards the people
you live amongst, who also allow you
to develop your personality.
The law does not take anything
away from human freedoms and
rights, but it allows everyone to
respect others and to be respected.