African masks 


Keys to the spirit world
BY OLA BALOGUN
I
Above, ceremonial mask of
the Marka people of the Niger
river, Mali.
Right, Bambara headdress,
Mali.
Opposite page, Senufo mask,
northern Côte d'Ivoire.
26
OLA BALOGUN
is a Nigerian writer and film¬
maker. His recent work
includes two documentaries,
River Niger, Black Mother
(1989) and Children of Africa
(1990).
T may well be, in the final analysis, that art is
essentially a means of reconciling the world of
forms that surrounds us with our perception of
these forms. In this sense, art carries us beyond
the kind of cognition that we require for
everyday life by providing opportunities to
accede to heightened levels of perception and
experience.
If this definition of art is correct, then we can
perhaps go further to state that in essence, artistic
creativity involves the act of opening doors to a
level of knowledge and experience that transcends
our surface perception of the world around us.
It is as if we spent most of our lives groping
through a forest of dark objects, which are sud¬
denly illuminated from time to time by the light
that is thrown by works of art, or as if the forms
and sounds that we are accustomed to in everyday
life acquired new depths and dimensions through
the transformation of our cognitive abilities by
the process of creating or perceiving art.
What doors do African works of art open for
us, and how do such doors function? Although
there is no single form of art that can be defined
as "African art", there are a number of styles and
approaches which flow from the creative genius
of the peoples of Africa, and which, taken col¬
lectively, can be seen to belong to the same family
of art. To understand the function of African art,
let us take the mask as an example.
Power objects
Where does art end and religion begin? In Africa,
masks are not mere carvings. They are "power
objects", in the sense that they are a means of
access to an invisible world inhabited by the
divinities, spirits and ghosts which are held in
African cosmogony to share the universe with
mankind.
Just as many peoples in other parts of the
world have developed a religious iconography to
represent the divine, Africans use masks in the
course of religious rituals and ceremonies to estab¬
lish communication between human beings and
the spiritual world, which 'is imperceptible
through normal means of cognition. It is impos¬
sible to understand the stylistic conventions of
carved African masks unless we keep their pur¬
pose in mind.
First of all, African masks are not intended
to mirror real forms. They are designed to reflect
the essence of what they stand for. A mask is not
a reproduction of an object, but a sign that stands
in lieu of the invisible. Since it is a sign, the artist
may encapsulate in his carving the attributes of
the spirit-object that he has set out to represent,

or simply give free reign to his imagination in
order to capture the idea of the divinity or spirit
that is to manifest itself through the mask. Either
way, his task is to achieve a kind of abstraction
that stands in lieu of an outward form.
At the same time, the mask is a face through
which the divinity or the spirit who temporarily
inhabits the body of the masquerader looks out
on the world. In this face, shapes and forms are
often expressed as geometrical relationships. Why
should the eyes of the divinity not be triangles
that stand in a balanced relationship to a cube that
stands for a mouth? Or why should the mask
itself not be surmounted by other forms that
extend skywards in intricate spirals? And for that
matter, why should the face not sit on top of the
head, gazing forever skywards, or be replaced by
the graceful sweep of a sleek form that represents
the spirit of the antelope? Why should the artist's
conceptual freedom be limited?
Free expression
Sometimes the mask tells a story, like the Yoruba
gelede (a secret society) mask that may have sit¬
ting atop its helmet-like form a football player
with a ball at his feet, or an aeroplane that once
caught the eye of the sculptor. Why not? The
mask is after all a window into a dream-like world
in which many strange things exist side by side.
It leads us into the sculptor's imagination, as well
as into the age-old artistic and cultural traditions
that guide his creativity.
Even though the artistic and cultural heritage
from which his work flows is generally well
defined, the African mask carver enjoys almost
unlimited creative freedom. Even where he seeks
to reproduce a pre-existing model that has been
enshrined by tradition as the perfect representa¬
tion of a spirit form, he is still at liberty to add
his own variations and flourishes.
But is this art? Where is beauty to be found
in the strange world of abstract forms and signs
that is so characteristic of African masks? Tradi¬
tionally, the African artist is obsessed by the
rhythm, balance and harmony of forms. On
examining a mask closely, one cannot help being
stfuck by the care and thought that has gone into
ensuring that volumes and shapes are
symmetricalwhen they are not deliberately
made to confront each other in patterns contrived
to produce a visual shock.
The same conceptual freedom that traditional
African sculptors achieve in masks is also found
in carvings of decorative or ritual objects. In some
sculptures, however, such as the famous bronzes
of Ife and Benin, the purpose of the work of art
is to provide a faithful reproduction of the forms
that surround us. Here art sublimates life in its
own way...
Beauty in art is not necessarily dependent on
a faithful imitation of nature, an approach that
the world has absorbed through exposure to
African art. 27
