A PARTICULAR
VIEW
OF AMERICA
BY OLIVIER ZUNZ
I
32
T has often been observed that Americans
experience their history as if it had been mapped
out in advance, as if the future were only an op¬
portunity to improve institutions that are already
solidly established. The key idea, rooted deep in
the nation's consciousness, is the exceptional na¬
ture of the American experience. As the orator
and politician Daniel Webster put it, addressing
the House of Representatives in 1826:
"Whatsoever European experience has deve¬
loped, favourable to the freedom and happiness
of man; whatsoever European genius has invented
for his improvement or gratification; whatsoever
of refinement or polish the culture of European
society presents for his adoption or enjoyment,
all this is offered to man in America, with the
additional advantages of the full power of erecting
forms of Government on free and simple princi¬
ples, without overturning institutions suited to
times long past, but too strongly supported either
by interests or prejudices, to be shaken without
convulsions."
American historians still continue to high¬
light the factors that make their history so ex¬
ceptional. In this they are pursuing the endless
debate on the respective roles of consensus and
conflict, on what unites Americans and what
keeps them apart.
The progressive historians of the early years
of the century set out, in a way, to "democra¬
tize" the country's history. They disputed the
traditional acceptance of the American consensus
and instead stressed the dynamics of domestic
conflicts. Frederick Jackson Turner, for example,
considered that the American character was born
of the strained relations between the seaboard and
the frontier, while for Arthur M. Schlesinger the
tensions were between city and countryside, and
for Charles Beard they were between social
classes.
But the generation of historians writing after
the Second World War turned back to the issue
of consensus. The historians of the 1950s redis¬
covered Alexis de Tocqueville, the author of
Democracy in America (1835-1840), and tried to
define the forces uniting Americans. Louis Hartz,
for example, replied to the German historical
economist Werner Sombart's celebrated question
as to why there was no socialism in the United
States by drawing attention to the lack of long¬
standing feudal constraints, the virtual absence of
class as a motive force in the new nation, and
hence the flexibility of a social system that was
both open and unifying.
The historians of the last twenty years, dis¬
satisfied with these generalizations which in their
view are too theoretical, have been intent on ex¬
ploring as many real-life situations as possible.
With the broadening of the scope of history as
a discipline, the concept of national character has
for the moment lost its explanatory value, while
new areas of research such as the history of the
family and of labour, or urban history, have made
it possible to dispense with a unifying link. The
contrast between consensus and conflict now
seems to be too simple. The national framework
has become inadequate for grasping such major
issues as the economy of the slave trade, migra¬
tion patterns or the development of industrial
capitalism. But key ideas do not die all that easily,
and this concept of the national character, as
amended, is enjoying a fresh lease of life. The con¬
cept is deeply rooted in American life, but where
did it come from?
The first Puritan settlers left an indelible mark
on American history. Their new country was
supposed to set an example to the Old World of
a better society, destined by Providence to serve
Above, Verdict of the People
(1855), a painting by George
Caleb Bingham (1811-1879)
which evokes the festive air
of the early American voting
tradition.

Below, picking cotton on a
Mississippi plantation.
Nineteenth-century
American engraving based
on a painting by
W.A. Walker.
as a model for other nations. That was the mis¬
sion of the American people, as evoked by the
famous declaration made in 1630 by John Win¬
throp, one of the chief figures among the Puritan
founders of New England: "Men shall say of suc¬
ceeding plantations: the Lord make it like that
of New England: for we shall be as a City set
upon a Hill, the eyes of all people are upon us."
The ideal of a self-sufficient egalitarian Puri¬
tan community, centred on religious life and
governed by collective decision-making, may well
never have been fulfilled, not even during the first
generation. Nevertheless, the role of the "com¬
munity" in American life was spelt out from the
outset and served as a reference for following
generations.
In colonial America, two ideological and
social worlds existed side by side and sometimes
mergedthat of the Puritan and that of the
Yankee, born of the challenge which the conquest
of a new territory represented. In New England,
the egalitarian settler villages contrasted with the
trading ports where moral principles were cons¬
tantly eroded as social barriers grew up. Settle¬
ments on the frontier itself were dominated by
a handful of businessmen, such as John Pynchon
in Springfield or the Willards of the Merrimack
Valley, who were more concerned with acquiring
land and gaining ready access to markets than
with seemly behaviour and religious observance.
In the South, of course, the plantation econ¬
omy soon superseded the modest smallholdings
of the original settlers. The republican ideology
of individualism was therefore quick to impose
itself at the expense of community spirit. Well
before blood flowed at Lexington and Concord,
Massachusetts, at the beginning of the War of In¬
dependence, the Puritans had been turned into
Yankees.
The revolution and the intellectual turmoil
caused by the break with Britain once again
prompted Americans to define where they stood
politically, as can be seen from the legal and
philosophical treatises of John Adams and the de¬
bates on the Constitution. Although Americans
rejected the British system of government, they
realized that they could only place their trust in
an elite which had demonstrated its worth. In a
crucial innovation they opted in favour of elected
representatives, citizens who would be exposed
to the possibility of corruption but who were ex¬
pected to abide by certain rules and could, if
necessary, be repudiated.
Once they had won their independence, the
Americans continued to define their position by
extending their territory beyond the Allegheny
Mountains and by developing the economy,
formerly geared solely to the Atlantic trade,
towards the interior of the country. Thomas
Jefferson was intent on creating a nation of in¬
dependent rural landowners in the West: "Those
who labour the earth are the chosen people of
God, if ever He had a chosen people, whose
breasts He has made his peculiar deposit for sub¬
stantial and genuine virtue."
The period when the pioneers rolled back the
frontier contributed most to the formation of the
national character, in the sense in which that term
is usually understood: the practical and inventive
side of the Jacksonian "common man", that "or¬
dinary man" who was always ready with expe¬
dients, not very keen on the arts but skilled at
A wagon train of settlers
crosses the Rocky
Mountains, early 19th
century.
33

One of the first automobile
assembly lines at the Ford
factory in Detroit
(Michigan), 1913.
34
OLIVIER ZUNZ, American
historian, teaches at the
University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, USA. He is
the author of The Changing
Face of Inequality: Issues in
Black Literature and
Criticism and Urbanization,
Industrial Development and
Immigrants in Detroit,
1880-1920, both published
by University of Chicago
Press, 1982, and Making
America Corporate,
1870-1920 (forthcoming).
succeeding in whatever he undertook. Frontier
Americans were sometimes rough-hewn, but they
were productive, matter-of-fact, forward-looking
and quick to help one another out. The quality
of life in the new communities depended on a
sense of belonging to institutions. Tocqueville
found this quite amazing, commenting that:
"Government does very little in England, and pri¬
vate individuals do a great deal; in America,
government interference has virtually ceased, and
everything is done by the joint efforts of individu¬
als." Thus the frontier community did inherit
something from its Puritan forebears.
The end of innocence
Was the United States in the mid-nineteenth cen¬
tury composed of many small, loosely linked
communities, or of a few large groups, or had it
become a homogeneous nation?
The war between the North and South is at
the heart of any discussion of national character.
Historians have now gone beyond the debate on
whether the Civil War was inevitable and have
recently begun to raise new aspects of the social
and cultural history of the South in an attempt
to understand the distinctive features of a civili¬
zation built on the master-slave relationship and
the way in which the South kept up racial dis¬
tinctions in defiance of all egalitarian principles.
Political historians also have taken the conflict
between North and South out of the context of
the struggle for or against emancipation and set
it in a wider struggle for American legitimacy,
with each camp claiming the republican heritage
as its own.
Reconstruction of the Union and the transi¬
tion to an industrialized and bureaucratized ur¬
ban nation engaging in worldwide conflicts have
triggered off fresh debates on the end of Ameri¬
can innocence and hence on the end of the ex¬
ceptional nature of its history. The successive
transformations of American society, and the se¬
vere blow dealt by the Great Depression, may
sometimes have caused cracks in the edifice, but
they have also helped to redefine and even in
some cases to strengthen the ideological structure
founded on the exceptional nature of America.
What could be saved of the national character in
a society that was becoming increasingly complex
and powerful, and increasingly inegalitarian?
The pioneer industrialists of the nineteenth
century, such as Francis Lowell who built his tex¬
tile mills at the falls on the Merrimack river, at¬
tracting a labour force of New England farmers'
daughters, dreamed of creating a prosperous and
conflict-free industrial society. There was to be
no "Manchester of America". By the end of the
century, however, large-scale industry was em¬
ploying an unskilled workforce of immigrants
fresh off the ships from Europe.
Was anything left of the Lowell ideals in
Carnegie's Pittsburgh or Ford's Detroit? Fear of
social corruption governed the ideological reac¬
tion of the Protestants to urban proletarianiza¬
tion. The victims of poverty were seen as a threat
to society. Cities became missionary territory.
Only the idea of an open society, whose most
able members could win their place in the sun
by overcoming the barriers of language and
prejudice, could replace the unattainable dream
of a poverty-free society.
A share in the national heritage
The main problem of American social dynamics
was still to be resolved: how to form a homogene¬
ous society from its heterogeneous parts. Some
historians suggested prosperity, which could be
said to have served as a foundation for democracy,
as a linking theme. Others saw the many oppor¬
tunities for individual social advancement as the
key to the equilibrium of American society. Yet
others laid emphasis on the workers' right to
vote. In Europe, demands for the right to vote
added a political dimension to the struggle waged
by the proletariat, but the granting of that right
in America defused the political struggle and
buried class consciousness. For some, social
equilibrium has never been seriously threatened
by the diversity of the American people, since
they all enjoy prosperity, whereas for others a

At the turn of the century,
a group of immigrants waits
patiently for a ferry to take
them from Ellis Island to
New York.
balance has been maintained through the skill
displayed by the governing class in warding off
conflicts.
In the mid-twentieth century, America redis¬
covered a strong sense of "togetherness". Im¬
migration controls from the 1920s onwards made
for a more homogeneous society in which the
"melting pot" seemed to have become a reality.
The period of prosperity which followed the Se¬
cond World War and the decline of the European
and Japanese economies left the way clear for the
country's expansion. The level of affluence was
such that intellectuals could speak with confi¬
dence of the end of ideologies. Currents of
thought that had hitherto been separate ran
together to give the country a new sense of
strength and homogeneity. The search for the na¬
tional character was renewed, prompted by the
historians of consensus.
But history is always more complicated than
the sometimes deceptive moments of national
union might suggest. The intellectual explosion
of the 1960s, the country's embroilment in Viet
Nam, the Watergate crisis, the battles about the
legitimacy of the welfare state and the extension
of civil rights, the rediscovery of ethnic heritages,
and women's struggle for equalityin short, the
realities of the "divided society" quickly under¬
mined the idea of consensus.
On the other hand, the idea of there being
a national character has proved more resistant,
for it is over a particular view of America that
political and social battles have beenand are still
beingfought. Where is legitimate America, sym¬
bolized by the Statue of Liberty, with its dual sig¬
nificance of republican liberty and national
diversity? Who can claim America's history as
their own? When these questions are raised, it is
all too often forgotten that the very concept of
unity, so ardently sought after, implies by defi¬
nition the concept of diversity. The two are in¬
separable. All the groups of people which have
helped to build the country since the seventeenth
century claim their share of the national heritage.
American history is, successively, the story of a
compromise between disparate elements, conflicts
between those same elements, mutual unaware-
ness, fragmentation and, at times, consensus.
Reducing it to one or other of these formulas
would be to deprive it of its lifeblood.
*
Ty
«\
.V«
ifh u k*
v -----
A
j***
