Theology in colours:
the language of icons
BY RICHARD TEMPLE
Above, Christ dressed In the
robes of an ancient Greek
philosopher. Detail of a
16th-century Russian icon.
Opposite page left: Christ
Pantocrator. Russian icon,
16th century.
Opposite page right: "Know
thyself", calligraphic design
by Hassan Massoudy.
Ahe conversion of the Slavs in 988 AD brought
Byzantine culture as well as Christianity to Rus¬
sian lands. And Byzantium in its turn had been,
through Alexandria, the heir to Graeco-Roman
civilization. Thus it can be said that medieval
iconsthe product of early Christian and Byzan¬
tine artappear at the end of an unbroken line
rooted in classical traditions.
Because of this it has been said that Byzan¬
tine art was in a state of permanent renaissance,
always turning towards classical ideals in order
to solve its aesthetic problems. We can see aspects
of this tradition in icons which depict Christ and
the apostles dressed in the robes of philosophers
of ancient Greece, and in others which show
evangelists in the pose, the architectural setting
and even the clothes in which classical authors
had been depicted. When we look beyond the
dream-like and fantastic architecture in Russian
icons, we can distinguish the forms of Greek
colonnades, pediments or atriums.
Built as it was on early Christian and
Hellenistic foundations, medieval Byzantine and
Russian art thus embraced principles of form,
proportion, symbolism and colour that go back
to the great treasure houses of ancient knowledge.
This knowledge was the essential source of energy
of Christian culture and provided the wealth
of thought and beauty that nourished the living
tradition of icon painting for over a thousand
years.
This knowledge postulated certain universal
principles about God, or the Absolute, about the
world and Creation, and about man. It was com¬
plemented by a body of philosophical and reli¬
gious teaching which was at first communicated
orally and later expressed in books and in var¬
ious forms of religious art, including architecture
and painting. At the highest level, the art of
imageryiconographyis a vehicle for
philosophical and theological ideas. It is in this
sense that icons have been defined as "theology
in colours".
Beauty in icons has to be seen in this perspec¬
tive. Medieval artists had no conception of beauty
for its own sake, which is a Romantic idea dating
from the early nineteenth century. For them, as
for the artists of Antiquity, beauty was an
attribute of the Good, which was Plato's name
for one of the highest realms of the universe.
Christians, who inherited the Platonic view
of the cosmos, described the realm of the Good
as that of the "Heavenly Powers and Principali¬
ties". The teaching behind religion and
philosophy, which can be found in the symbolic
imagery of sacred literature and also in icons, is
aimed at bringing the divine Good down to man
on Earth and at the same time raising man to the
level of the Good.
For some, the purest expression of these ideas
was given by Christ to his immediate followers,
without the help of books or images. His mes¬
sage was intended to help humanity pass through
the crisis of the collapse of Graeco-Roman civili¬
zation and to usher in a new era. Orthodox Chris¬
tianity takes, from Greek philosophy the view of
the universe as what the sixth-century monk St.
John Climacus called a "ladder of divine ascent".
According to this view, the cosmos is a hierarchy
with God at the highest point. He is the Pan¬
tocrator, the Ruler of the Universe; Earth is far
below, in the shadow, threatened by Death, by
Satan and darkness. Man stands on Earth. His
physical body is held there but, because of the
spark of divine fire in his soul, he yearns to ascend
towards the angels and archangels, the starry fir¬
mament, the powers and principalities of the
divine world where he rightly belongs.
A spiritual voyage
According to mystical tradition the idea that man
is "made in the image of God" means that we
carry the universe within ourselves. The life of
the soul can be understood as an inner journey
that takes place, not in the three-dimensional
world and in time, but in the spiritual universe
within us.
In the Middle Ages the imagery of icons
served to illustrate some of the key events that
man must inevitably encounter in his spiritual
life. Christ said that we must be "reborn of the
spirit", and the events described in the Gospels
and illustrated in icons can be understood in
terms of the spiritual world. The image of the
Nativity, in which a ray of light descends from 35

the higher world and illuminates the dark cave
of the lower world into which Christ is born, is
therefore not so much a literal description of an
historical event as a commentary on the meaning
of spiritual birth.
Icons are best understood as abstract rather
than pictorial art, as psychological images
speaking through symbolism and allegory. Time
does not exist in icons and is replaced by eter¬
nity. In the same way space is not limited to the
three dimensions of our ordinary world. Icons
take us to a world of many more dimensions than
our physical senses can perceive.
All icons are diagrams of the universe.
Whether we understand by this the universe out¬
side ourselves (the macrocosmos) or the universe
within us (the microcosmos), the symbols have
the same value. God and the world of the Abso¬
lute are expressed by a hand extending from the



circle in the upper part of the icon; the firma¬
ment or celestial world by a plain gold back¬
ground; the angelic or spirit world by winged
angels; man (signifying the soul) by Christ and
36 ii i
the saints ascending and descending, or by war¬
riors struggling with the forces of the lower
world.
From the icon Christ gazes deeply into the
soul of the onlooker with a compelling and per¬
sonal regard. Within the nimbus around His head
are letters meaning "I AM". This is an appeal to
what lies most deeply within us. Christ does not
address the thoughts and feelings of our outer
selves; He calls to the hidden, inner self.
The asceticism of the icon painter
Plato's idea of Truth, Goodness and Beauty as
equivalent concepts representing the highest ideal
can be used to help us assess the quality of icons.
If the universe created by God has order, propor¬
tion, harmony and balance, and if these are the
product of Truth, Goodness and Beauty, then all
these qualities must be found in works of art that
celebrate God's Creation. Such works of art will
manifest beauty, as well as goodness and truth,
because they are themselves part of that creative
process and conform to its laws.
Icons are works of art of this kind when they
are painted by a man who has by an inward
ascent found divine order within himself. This
can only be achieved through scrupulous spiritual
discipline. The person must train himself to con¬
centrate exclusively on contemplation, prayer and
inner silence and never let himself be distracted
by idle thoughts and day dreaming. He must
achieve complete self mastery through what the
monks on Mount Athos called "voluntary
suffering". This self training gives inner power
and purity which provide the psychic strength
that brings a man or a woman nearer to the divine
light.

Right, the Nativity. Russian
icon, 16th century.
Opposite page above: the
Annunciation, Russian icon,
c. 1500.
Opposite page below:
St. Mark the Evangelist
depicted as in portraits of
pre-Christian writers. Russian
icon, 16th century.
Such a person aims to establish permanent
contact with the higher self, or at least the ability
to concentrate himself there when necessary. If
he becomes an icon painter, his art is bound to
express beauty, as well as truth and goodness,
because these qualities will be reflected in every¬
thing he does, just as the presence of light dispels
shadow.
The law governing the effect of light on dark¬
ness applies equally to the spiritual and to the
physical world. It is the same law with two
aspects, one visible and sensory, the other
invisible and psychic. Icon painters could use this
principle to illustrate the invisible in terms of the
visible. This accounts for what otherwise seems
illogical in the icon. For example, the absence of
shadows indicates a luminous world where God
is present and therefore there can be no outside
source of light. The beings depicted are them¬
selves sources of light.
Icon painters inherited from Hellenistic
philosophy the idea that the world was created
by the entry of spirit into matter, and they
believed that light was primarily spiritual. They
also understood that its component elements are
colour. Knowing that the law of spirit and matter
operates at all levels, they could demonstrate by
their use of colour the descent of the Divine Spirit
into the world of humanity. Their art was a phys¬
ical celebration of this divine manifestation, both
in the cosmos and in themselves.
When looking at icons today, we may be
reminded that this incarnationthe birth of
Christ within manis still a possibility.
RICHARD TEMPLE
is a British specialist on icons
and their restoration. The
director of the Temple Gallery
in London, he is the author of
Icons and the Mystical Origins
of Christianity (Element Books,
Longmead, UK, 1990). 37
