In this vivid eyewitness
account written in the heat
of events, a historian
captures the atmosphere of
Berlin when the wall was
breached late in 1989 and
reflects on the wider
significance of this great
symbolic event of our time
THE
WRITING
ON THE
WALL
BY ROBERT DARNTON
© Robert Darnton, 1990
0,
12
'N the morning of 10 November 1989, when
both Berlins woke up wondering whether the
first flood through the wall had been a dream,
the West Berlin tabloid Volksblatt ran two head¬
lines, shoulder to shoulder, on its front page:
"The Wall is Gone" and "Bonn Demands the
Destruction of the Wall".
Both were right. The wall is there and it is
not there. On 9 November, it cut through the
heart of Berlin, a jagged wound in the middle of
a great city, the Great Divide of the Cold War.
On 10 November, it had become a dance floor,
a picture gallery, a bulletin board, a movie screen,
a video cassette, a museum, and, as the cleaning
lady of my office put it, "nothing but a heap of
stone". The taking of the wall, like the taking
of the Bastille, transformed the world. No
wonder that a day later, in Alexander Platz, East
Berlin, one conqueror of the wall marched in a
demonstration with a sign saying simply
"1789-1989". He had helped dismantle the cen¬
tral symbol around which the post-war world had
taken shape in the minds of millions.
To witness symbolic transformations on such
a scale is a rare opportunity, and it raises many
questions. To begin with the most concrete: what
happened between 9 and 12 November, and what
joes it mean.-'
'Goodbye to all that'
The destruction of the wall began in the early
evening of Thursday 9 November, soon after the
first wave of East Berliners, or "Ostlers" as they
are called by the West Berliners here, burst upon

the West. One Ostler, a young man with a knap¬
sack on his back, somehow hoisted himself up
on the wall directly across from the Brandenburg
Gate. He sauntered along the top of it, swinging
his arms casually at his sides, a perfect target for
the bullets that had felled many other wall jum¬
pers, like Peter Fechter, a young construction
worker, who was shot and left to bleed to death
a few feet in front of Checkpoint Charlie on 17
August 1962. Now, twenty-seven years later, a
new generation of border guards took aim and
firedbut only with power hoses and without
much conviction. The conqueror of the wall con¬
tinued his promenade, soaked to the skin, until
at last the guards gave up. Then he opened his
knapsack and poured the water towards the East,
in a gesture that seemed to say, "Goodbye to all
that".
A few minutes later, hundreds of people, Os¬
tlers and Westlers alike, were on the wall, em¬
bracing, dancing, exchanging flowers, drinking
wine, helping up new "conquerors"and chip¬
ping away at the wall itself. By midnight, under
a full moon and the glare of the spotlights from
Paintings on the wall.
13

ROBERT DARNTON,
American historian and
journalist, is Davis Professor
of European history and
director of the Program in
European Cultural Studies at
Princeton University, New
Jersey, USA. He is the
author of a number of books
on European history and
culture, the most recent of
which are Revolution in
Print: the Press in trance
1775-1800 (with Daniel
Roche, University of
California Press, Berkeley,
1989) and The Kiss of
Lamourette: Reflections in
Cultural History (W.W.
Norton, New York, 1989).
The present essay will form
part of a book, Berlin
Journal, 1989-1990, to be
published by W.W. Norton
in 1991.
14
the watchtowers in no-man's-land, a thousand
figures swarmed over the wall, hammering, chisel¬
ling, wearing its surface away like a colony of
army ants. At the bottom, "conquerors" threw
stones at its base or went at it with pickaxes. Long
slits appeared, and the light showed through from
the East, as if through the eyes of a jack-o'-lantern.
On the top, at the centre of the tumult, with the
Brandenburg Gate looming in the background,
an Ostler conducted the destruction, a sickle in
one hand, a hammer in the other.
By Saturday, chunks of the wall were circulat¬
ing through both Berlins. People exchanged them
as souvenirs of what had already taken shape in
the collective consciousness as a historical event:
the end of the Cold War. A sidewalk entre¬
preneur sold bits of wall from a table on the
Ku'damm: 20 marks for a piece of the past. At
one point, an East Berliner walked by and ob¬
jected, with a smile on his face: "You can't sell
that. It's our wall. It belongs- to us."
Like any powerful symbol, the wall has ac¬
quired many meanings, and they differ signifi¬
cantly from West to East. The wall even looks
different, if you study it from one side and then
the other. Seen from the West, it is a prison wall,
which encloses the East Berliners in totalitarian¬
ism. Tourists climb on observation towers and
shudder deliciously at the spectacle: the mons¬
trous, concrete structure, the no-man's-land be¬
yond itwhich, until 1985, was mined and rigged
with rifles that fired automatically at anyone who
dashed acrossthe barbed wire, the dog patrols,
the turrets with armed guards staring back
through binoculars, and the second wall or the
windowless buildings on the far side of the dead¬
ly, desolate, open space.
East Berliners see a different wall. Theirs is
painted in patterns of light and dark blue, clean,
bright, and free of all graffiti. It shuts off the view
of the repressive apparatus beyond it. If you lose
your way or stray into outlying areas in East Ber¬
lin, you can drive along the wall for miles without
noticing that it is something more than an ordi¬
nary part of the urban landscape.
'We are the people! We're staying here'
Just after the metaphorical fall of this wall, I visit¬
ed an East Berlin friend on his side of the city.
A non-party intellectual who has supported the
demonstrations and opposed the regime through¬
out the current crisis, he had one word of advice:
"Don't tear down the wall. We need it as a pro¬
tective barrier. It should be permeable but it
should stay up. One of the great mistakes in Ber¬
lin history was to tear down the customs wall in
which the Brandenburg Gate was embedded in
1867. After that the tragedies of the modern age
began."
A young professor from Leipzig had made
a similar remark two months earlier. She
described the wall as a dike against dangerous
influences from the capitalist world. I had thought
she was repeating a party line, but the same idea
can be heard on East German television, in pubs,
and in the streets now that the East Germans are
debating their future openly and the wall has
changed its nature.
Westerners commonly imagine that East Ger¬
mans are hungering and thirsting for the chance
to earn large salaries and to spend 'them on the
consumer goods that are available in the West.
Yet a more significant refrain was chanted by the
hundreds of thousands who remained home,
demonstrating in the streets of Leipzig, Dresden,
and a dozen other cities for weeks before the
storming of the wall: "We are the people! We're
staying here!" Between 500,000 and a million peo¬
ple chanted that theme in the climactic demon¬
stration of 4 November in East Berlin; not a nose
was bloodied, not a window broken.
The demonstrations have operated as an Es¬
tates General in the streets, sapping legitimacy
from the Party and transferring it to the people.
In conquering the wall, the people brought that
process to a climax. But then they faced a
problem: what are they to do if nothing stands
between them and the West?

h 1 -i .' S T*¿ *
' alH
¿.JKPi
S ,lka- ïjfe
ä':*i3E
-
Sfl¡Kj
II '"îf'ia"-
\ 7\ " apjt .M-
. e **5 4L
V*."**
-,
S
The wall
Stone after stones.
V JMS VH Ä ''''aAkJiJH
ÏnS5 JL
your mighty bulk
	3 will fall.
"^M ^Jt*^ Stone after stone
[wfr*f :*--
A
^ü^^ ' J^' - m W^^^^M the false
; -
-4
^K Maa^B^aaM ' ' ^^l
1
^ despotic
frontier
., will yield.
We shall remove
^^ ^ Ü * all trace
}
V
' f
Y " of your ugliness.
The winter was long
but yet again
the dream of a people
has toppled walls.
Liberty
though a latecomer
always wins in the end.
>
!
Federico Mayor
'Charlie's retired.
10 Nov. 1989'
On the Western side, the wall carries its own
commentary, because it has been covered with
layers of graffiti for years. "Tear along dotted
line"; "Make love not wall". Here the wall has
been taken over by tourists, who often treat it
as a neutral surface for spray paint: "Lisa ti amo";
or whose high-mindedness says little about the
divisions of Berlin: "Essex University condemns
all forms of political oppression".
In places the palimpsest reads like a dialogue,
in which the present answers the past with a com¬
forting reflection: the wall has fallen, even though
it is standing before your eyes as a surface on
which the writer sprays his assertion of its non¬
existence. "A pity that concrete doesn't burn."
"It falls, though."... "This wall will fall." "We
saw it fall, Nov. '89." The graffiti sound trium¬
phant, even when they joke, as in this message
sprayed near Checkpoint Charlie: "Charlie's
retired. 10 Nov. 1989."
The messages are essentially the same: they
distinguish between totalitarianism and liberty.
The theme is reinforced by the Checkpoint
Charlie Museum, which displays devices used to
escape under, over, or through the wall, and by
crosses set up opposite places where persons were
gunned down while attempting to escape.
This sense of heroism and suffering is under¬
cut by souvenir shops which sell wall postcards
and wall trinkets in a kind of fairground that has
grown up between the old Reichstag, which is
now a museum, and the breach in the wall
opened opposite Potsdamer Platz, which was
once the busiest traffic centre in Europe and is
now an enormous field covered with mud and
weeds. The postcards were snapped up by the
Ostlers who swarmed through the area after 9
November and who were fascinated by views of
the wall that they had never seen. But the ven¬



dors had displayed the postcards on stands out¬
side their shops, and the East Berliners, who had
never seen goods exposed so openly, assumed
they were handouts and walked off with them
without paying.
To the Ku'damm and back
One of the radical groups in West Berlin tried
to march against the flood carrying a banner
which proclaimed "Your liberty is that of the
West German banks". But the marchers were lost
in the waves of Ostlers, who swept through the
wall echoing the chant of the first wave, which
The Berlin wall around
1962.

arrived on Thursday: Zum Ku'damm, zum
Ku'damm und dann wieder zurück (To the Kur¬
fürstendamm, West Berlin's elegant shopping
avenue, and then back again.) The zurück was the
crucial term in the refrain, because the East Ber¬
liners did not come simply to buy up or sell out
but rather to see the forbidden city with their
own eyes and to return home.
The Federal Republic offered 100 marks
(about $50) in "greeting money" to every visitor
from East Germany, and many banks stayed
open on Saturday and Sunday to provide cash.
Individuals also stepped in to help. One West Ber¬
liner stood outside a break in the wall and hand¬
ed out 50 mark notes, for as long as his supply
held out, to every Easterner who came through.
Another came across a teenage girl crying in front
of the McDonald's on the Ku'damm. She said that
all her life she had wanted to eat a McDonald's
hamburger, and now she had no money. He
pressed a 50 mark note into her hand and she dis¬
appeared, into paradise.
The incoming Ostlers collided with waves of
well-wishers from the West, who thrust drinks
into their hands, loaded them down with pizzas
and sausages, took them for rides through residen¬
tial neighbourhoods, and put them up overnight.
Ostlers were given free rides on all buses and sub¬
ways, reduced prices in restaurants and movie
theatres, free admission to discotheques. They
pressed their noses against store windows display¬
ing fine clothing and Mercedes. And when they
had some marks, they spent them for the most
part on tropical fruits unavailable in East Berlin;
on toys, relatively shabby on the other side of
the wall; on books, many of which had been for¬
bidden; on Coca Cola; and on a wide variety of
cosmetics, trinkets, and flowers.
Above all, the two populations of Berlin
sought to make contact with one another. In ex¬
changing hugs, drinks and flowers, they were per¬
forming a collective ritual. As the Volksblatt put
it, "In the night when the gates opened, it seemed
as though there were no more East Berliners and
West Berliners. Everyone felt as though they be¬
longed to a huge family, and everyone celebrated
the festival accordingly".



Living in the shadow
of the wall
To someone unfamiliar with Berlin, it may be
hard to imagine how successfully the wall had
divided the city. Soon after 1961, when the wall
went up, the million or so inhabitants on the
Western side and the two million or so in the East
began to lose contact. By 1989, a whole genera¬
tion had come of age within the shadow of the
wall. Most of them never crossed it, even from
West to East when that was allowed. They ac¬
cepted the wall as a fact of life, as something in¬
exorable, built into the landscape, which was
there when they were born and would be there
when they died. They left it to the tourists, took
it for granted, forgot about it, or simply stopped
seeing it.
Before the fall, an old woman was inter¬
viewed on her balcony, which overlooked the
wall from the West. She spent hours every after¬
noon staring into no-man's-land. Why did she
look so hard at the wall, day after day? the report¬
er asked, hoping to find some expression of Ber¬
lin's divided personality. "Oh, I'm not looking
at the wall at all," she replied. "I watch the rab¬
bits playing in no-man's-land." Many West Ber¬
liners did not see the wall until it ceased to exist.
Little by little West Berliners had come to
regard the wall as a source of support. Thanks
to its presence, the government in Bonn poured
billions into Berlin, subsidizing everything from
the Philharmonic orchestra to teenage jazz
groups. A whole population of under-employed
intellectuals grew up around the Free Universi¬
ty, which now has about 60,000 students. As resi¬
dents of West Berlin, they are exempt from the
draft, and they also are able to drink beer and
A human tide flowing
1 6 from East to West.

1
-
*ï
raf 1« ..
talk politics in pubs throughout the night; for
West Berlin is the only place in the Federal
Republic of Germany where the pubs can stay
open past midnight, the only place where you
can order breakfast in the afternoon. Many of
these free-floating intellectuals became free¬
loaders. They lived off the wall; and they may
face greater economic difficulties than the Ber¬
liners in the East.
To Berliners, therefore, the wall means some¬
thing very different from what it means outside
the city. Most of them realize that their local bar¬
rier is bound up with larger divisions, the Oder-
Neisse line in particular and the general dividing
line between Warsaw Pact and NATO countries.
Having gone to bed one day in a world with clear¬
ly defined boundaries, they woke up the next in
a world without firm national borders, without
balanced power blocs, and even without obvious
demarcations of time, because it suddenly seemed



possible to bring the curtain down on the Second
World War. They are living a truism of anthro¬
pology: the collapse of boundaries can be deeply
disturbing, a source of renewal but also a threat
to a' whole world-view.
The mood remains euphoric, nonetheless. In
East Berlin especially, the idea has spread that in
conquering the wall the people seized power. The
demonstrations in the streets sapped the legitima¬
cy of the regime. Combined with the subsequent
haemorrhaging of the population across the bord¬
ers, they brought the government down, without
a shot fired.
We may never know the details of what hap¬
pened inside the crumbling power structure of
the German Democratic Republic. But whatever
produced the occasion, the force that broke
through the wall was there for all to see on the
night of 9 November. It was the people of East
Berlin, with nothing but their convictions, their
discipline, and the power of their numbers. They
took possession of the wall physically, by pour¬
ing through it, climbing on it, and chipping it
apart. They did the same thing in West Berlin it¬
self. They occupied space, swarming through the
Ku'damm, filling the buses and pubs, parking
their tiny Trabants on the noblest sidewalks, and
returning triumphantly to the East with a flow¬
er for a girlfriend or a toy for an infant.
It was a magical moment, the possession of
a city by its people. On Thursday 9 November,
under a full moon, between the shadow of the
Reichstag and the menacing bulk of the Branden¬
burg Gate, the people of Berlin danced on their
wall, transforming the cruellest urban landscape
into a scene of hilarity and hope.
A fiery eruption of joy.
17
