Guarani genesis
Gateway of che Jesuit
Hlhrion of San Ignacio Mini
(Argentina), sculpted by
Guarani craftsmen
(17th-18th century).



*> ' v.t tf
The intricate
cosmogony of
South America's
'forest theologians'

Xhe French anthropologist Pierre Clastres once
wrote that the Guarani Indians of South Ameri¬
ca are "the theologians of the forest". It is cer¬
tainly true that their conception of the creation
reflects the subtlety and the complexity of their
thought.
The Guarani cosmogony, unlike most others,
does not postulate the pre-existence of a Creator.
Genesis takes place in several complex stages,
beginning with the self-creation of the supreme
deity Namandú. In the midst of the primeval
darkness, Our Father-the Ultimate-the Foremost-
the Primordial "caused his own body to emerge"
from the original chaos. This self-creation ema¬
nated from a radiancethe divine wisdom-
located in what was to become Namandú's heart.
The majestic process unfolds like the bur¬
geoning of a tree. All the imagery used to describe
it is borrowed from the plant worldfeet are
plants, arms are branches, fingers are leaves, and,
crowning all, the head is a magnificent tree-top
in full leaf.
The second stage of creation is anthropogen¬
ic, although it does not concern the origin of
human beings as such, but of speech, their dis¬
tinguishing attribute. A fragment of the divine
word, speech will enable the Guarani, the "Chos¬
en", to communicate with the divinity and to
enjoy the distinctive condition of the gods-
immortality. This divine yet human speech, the
cement of society that forms and shapes the com¬
munity and ensures its collective solidarity, is
called ayvú, to distinguish it from ñe'e, the speech
used in human relations.
The next stage involves the creation of the
four principal gods, who will help Namandú in
his arduous cosmogonie task. Each of the four
is allotted a specific field of action: Namandú
Great Heart is the master of words; Karai is
master of the flame, of the fire of the sun; Jakairá
is master of the fog that moderates the heat and
of the revitalizing mist; Tupâ is master of water,
of the sea and its extensions, of rain, thunder and
lightning. Each of these gods creates for himself
a companion known as the "true mother".
The pillars of the sky
The fourth and final stage in the creation con¬
cerns the genesis of the first land, the land of man
and woman, of plants and animals. A blue pindó
or palm-tree arises in the centre of this land-to-
be. (The colour blue symbolizes the sacred.) The
tree is sustained by four other palm-trees spread
out in the directions of the four winds and of time
(in Guarani, a single word, ara, covers these two
concepts). Five blue palm-trees, like the fingers
of a hand, thus support the bedrock of the earth.
Then comes the creation of the firmament, which
also rests on four pillars, with a fifth added to
prevent the heavens from shifting when buffeted
by the winds.
With the creation of the first earth comes a
piecing together of its different componentsthe 19

aquatic world, the subterranean world, the dry
land, day and night. The existence of these
separate entities became perceptible as animals
gave them shape. Thus, the serpent outlines the
surface of the land; the song of the "little coloured
cicada" gives birth to sound; the girino beetle
gives life to the waters as it skims above them in
acrobatic flight; the green grasshopper creates the
prairies, since, wherever it alights on the ground,
the grass begins to grow; the armadillo is "the
first to violate the bedrock of the earth" with its
burrowings; night falls when the owl, "mistress
of the shadows", closes her eyes in sleep.
At last the moment comes for Namandú to
create man and woman. This act of genesis is not
described. Our Father-the Ultimate-the
Foremost-the Primordial grants "wisdom" to the
"Chosen" and orders the god Jakairá to place the
halo of life on their heads so that "the revitalizing
mist shall crown the heads of my sons and my
daughters". He commands Karai to "lodge"
within his beloved daughters and sons "the
sacred, beautiful flame", and he enjoins Tupâ to
implant the "fountain of freshness" in the "heart
of hearts" of his human creations.
The Fall
His task accomplished, Namandú withdrew to
his eternal abode, leaving in the hands of his
helpers the destiny of his creationthe first earth,
perfect, devoid of evil, on which man and gods
lived in harmony. So long as they observed the
rules that led to perfection, the humans could
hold their heads as high as the gods and share with
them the supreme attribute of immortality.
The timeless time of eternity came to an end,
however, when man failed to observe these rules
and lapsed into animality. The Fall was brought
about by a serious transgression, incest, commit¬


ted by Jeupié with his father's sister, in flagrant
violation of the Guarani kinship laws.
The punishment that followed was the des¬
truction of the first earth, which disappeared
RUBEN BAREIRO
SAGUIER,
Paraguayan writer and
specialist in the Guarani
culture and language, is a
researcher at the French
National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS).
His publications include
studies on linguistics and
collections of poetry and
short stories.
20
under the waters of the flood. The sole survivors
of the cataclysm, however, were those who had
committed the crime of incest. Through the
power of prayer and ritual incantations, they
managed to swim to an eternal palm-tree where
they escaped death by climbing into the safety
of its branches. Not only did they survive, but
Jeupié, "the master of wicked love", acquired
divine status and became the head of a category
of minor gods.
What an astonishing transformationinstead
of being punished, the guilty one found himself
promoted to a higher rank! By committing incest,
Jeupié had, in effect, defiantly rejected his human
condition and thus had placed himself beyond the
law, making himself the equal of the gods who are
above guilt and for whom nothing is prohibited.
Our Father-the Ultimate-the Foremost-the
Primordial encountered many difficulties in
creating a new earth. Many of his acolytes refused
to take on a task doomed to failure. In the end,
Jakairá agreed to create a new, imperfect earth,
knowing full well that it "already held the seeds
of rupture and of the misfortune of our sons and
of the last of our children".
The rupture between the divine and the hu¬
man worlds was confirmed with the inauguration
of the "imperfect earth", the "land of woeful
life". Man lost the immortality inherent in his
dual human/divine status and had to resign him¬
self to his new condition as a mere mortal. But

Guarani Indians of
Paraguay.
this rupture left its mark upon his ancestral
memory and added a further dimension to Guara¬
ni mythologythe unrelenting search for yvy
maraey, the land without evil, itself a part of the
world in which we live, where it may be possi¬
ble to regain immortality in life and, perhaps, also
after death.
This search retains all its immediacy for the
Guarani people, who still, from time to time, set
out on messianic wanderings.
An enduring symbolism
It is interesting to observe how religious syn¬
cretism has welded together the symbolism of the
Guarani and Catholic cultures.
In Paraguay widespread interbreeding has
ensured the social and biological survival of the
indigenous people and of certain elements of their
culture. The Guarani language, for example, was
generally used throughout the colonial period and
is still predominant in Paraguay today.
Evangelization, however, was relentlessly
pursued to achieve "the necessary extirpation of
indigenous idolatry". Rigorous orthodoxy
demanded conversion of the indigenous popula¬
tion to "the true religion", a task unwaveringly
carried out by the Society of Jesus. In the Jesuit
missions, for over a century and a half the scene
of an extraordinary social experiment, the Indians
were kept occupied with art and craft activities
to "save them from idleness". The art they prac¬
tised, however, was intended essentially to con¬
vince and convert. Under the strict control of the
Jesuits no room was left for their "disciples" to
exercise their powers of imagination. They were
considered to be "excellent copyists" but devoid
of any creative talent.
However, close examination of the paintings,
altar-pieces, images, statues and buildings of this
periodespecially of the decorative details, which
was left mainly to the disciplesreveals a number
of elements taken from the mythical universe
of the Guarani. Baroque, the then dominant aes¬
thetic trend, lent itself to the discreet introduc¬
tion of various forms of indigenous symbolism.
Thanks to the fluid rhythms and the profusion
of detail characteristic of the baroque period,
Guarani animism surreptitiously found its way
into the nooks and crannies of the official art
forms. In one piece of sculpture depicting the
angel of the Annunciation blowing a trumpet, for
example, the angel is portrayed standing on a
pindó palm, the same tree which, in Guarani
mythology, supported the first earth and the fir¬
mament.
It was above all during the eighteenth century,
when their confidence that the conversion was
complete led the evangelizers to soften their
intransigence, that plant themes proliferated in
the works of the indigenous people employed by
the missions. The works of this period feature,
in addition to plant-life, saints whose hair-styles
recall the jeguaká, the decorative mark of "the
Chosen", which in turn is reminiscent of the self-
creation of Namandú, whose flower-decked
headthe triumphal plume was the crowning
symbol of Guarani theogony.
21
