F R M
THE INTERNATIONAL AFRICAN INSTITUTE
A 'hunger for books'
[A "hunger for books" in develop¬
ing countries is one of the cultural
challenges of the age and "threatens
to undermine efforts to promote
universal literacy, education for all
and access to culture".1
The situation is especially serious
in Africa, which "through lack of
funds and chronic foreign exchange
constraints is becoming a tragically
bookless society".2 While in most
developing countries the number of
books published per million inhabi¬
tants grew slowly from 1 960 and ac¬
celerated during the 1980s, in Africa
this did not happen. Although the
number of titles published in Africa
almost doubled between 1960 and
the end of the 1970s, it fell during
the 1980s.
Apart from the fact that teachers
and pupils in African schools often
lack basic materials, many African
academics are denied access to inter¬
national research in their fields. A
BY PETER LLOYD
number of university libraries have cut
their subscriptions to periodicals to a
fifth of the level of the 1970s. New
books cannot be purchased and are
often unknown in the area to which
they refer. Many local journals estab¬
lished in the 1 960s and 1 970s are no
longer being published. African
scholars are being increasingly mar¬
ginalized. "A generation of students
is now being taught by lecturers who
are unable to gain access to current
research and scholarship."2
Alleviating Africa's book famine
is one of the major concerns of the
International African Institute (IAI), an
international non-governmental or¬
ganization with consultative status at
Unesco and UNICEF. The Institute
seeks to publicize the results of
research by African scholars both
within and beyond the continent and
facilitate their access to the work of
Africanists in the rest of the world.
It publishes directories, bibliographies,
50
International co-operation is founded on a network of daily
contacts, exchanges and initiatives which create bonds of
solidarity between men and women all over the world. In
addition to the intergovernmental agencies of the United
Nations system, hundreds of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) today form part of this network. These organizations
exist thanks to the dedication of people with similar professional
interests or common aims who wish to share their experience
and combine their efforts. Our regular feature "Forum" gives
them an opportunity to talk about their activities.
monographs on ethnology, history,
sociology and linguistics.
The London-based IAI (formerly
the International Institute of African
Languages and Cultures) was found¬
ed in 1 926 as a centre of information
on African ethnology, linguistics and
social sciences, to organize research
in these fields and to present its
results in a useful form.
The Institute is financed by mem¬
bers' dues and donations from
governments and non-governmental
bodies. It also receives research grants
from African and European govern¬
ments, foundations and Unesco.
Members, both individual and cor¬
porate (universities, museums,
libraries, bookshops, seminaries,
governments and institutes) are
drawn from some ninety countries.
The most prominent of the Insti¬
tute's publications is the quarterly
Africa, now in its sixtieth year and still
one of the leading journals on Afri¬
can affairs and culture. It brings an
inter-disciplinary approach to the so¬
cial effects of development. Many of
its contributors are African scholars,
and even greater participation is be¬
ing sought from them. The journal's
policy is to give, increased coverage
to African publications in its book
reviews and articles.
The Institute tries to make its
publications available at moderate
cost throughout Africa By organiz¬
ing seminars, workshops and other
projects, inviting donations and con¬
tributing to co-operation between
publishers, it is attempting to break
the vicious circle in which many Afri¬
can scholars are trapped.
1 Third Medium-Term Plan (1990-1995),
Unesco, 1990
2. The African Book World and Press. A
Directory, Hans M Zell Publishers, London,
4th edition 1988
The International African
Institute
Lionel Robbins Building
10 Portugal Street
London WC 2A 2 HD
