In a developing country, the daunting costs
of launching an independent publication
Senegal
The price
of a free press
by Babacar Touré
I
24
N January 1986, a dozen young Senegalese jour¬
nalists founded an independent press group, Sud-
Communication. Almost two years later, they
launched Sud-Hebdo, a weekly which has now
become a yardstick for the African media and a
symbol of hope for the many journalists in Africa
who are endeavouring to throw off the shackles
of the official press.
With limited means and the trust of its
increasingly faithful readers as sole support, Sud-
Hebdo was keen to play its part in consolidating
democracy in Senegal, which would be meaning¬
less without a genuinely free and responsible
press. It also wanted to provide a platform for
certain sections of society excluded from the state-
run media by their non-conformism.
But the battle is far from over. In Senegal,
nothing is done officially to gag the press, but the
economic situation is so bad and the press sub¬
sidy system in the private sector so sketchy that
any attempt to go it alone without attaching
oneself to some group or coterie is tempting
Providence.
High overheads
To escape the clutches of the tax authorities, Sud-
Communication has officially declared itself a
"groupement d'intérêt économique" (joint-
venture consortium), which, however, has the
drawback that Sud-Communication is not per¬
mitted to make a profit: all surplus moneys gener¬
ated by its activities must be reinvested in the
company. But owing to lack of resources, it
cannot for the time being consider setting up a
limited liability company, which although admit¬
tedly more of a target for the tax authorities,
would be better equipped to attract finance.
Turning to the practical side, Sud-Hebdo does
r^j
Jà ià
I] ^L i
m 0^^.
fl
1 '*\Ü-H M
Hi, V I
¡3M. **^4P
A Journalist records
a radio Interview for a
programme on living
conditions in Niger.
BABACAR TOURE,
Senegalese journalist, is
editorial director of the Dakar
weekly newspaper Sud-Hebdo.
Co-founder of Vivre Autrement,
the first French-language
consumers' magazine in Africa,
he is a member of the
management committee of the
West African Union of
Journalists.
not own its premises but rents two facing apart¬
ments in central Dakar, consisting in all of six
rooms with utilities. One serves as the newsroom,
the remainder being occupied by the administra¬
tive and secretarial staff. Lack of space has meant
that a kitchen has been requisitioned to house the
equipment. The monthly rental for the two apart¬
ments is 350,000 francs CFA*.
In many countries, the press enjoys preferen¬
tial rates for telecommunications, but in Senegal
it is regarded as an ordinary customer, subject to
the same system as everyone else. Sud-Hebdo has
therefore had to drop the idea of a telex and con¬
fine itself to a subscription to the International
Press Agency, which supplies national news as
well as dispatches from Agence France Presse.
This onerous monthly subscription (Sud-Hebdo
has to go and fetch the news from the agency)
amounts to 58,500 francs CFA per month. The
bi-monthly telephone bill comes to 400,000 francs
CFA on average, while the electricity bill is about
60,000 francs CFA. To offset the shortcomings
of its communications system, Sud-Hebdo
recently equipped itself with a small computer
hooked up to the telecommunications system and
a fax terminal, thus further adding to its
overheads.
Although to begin with Sud-Hebdo employed
only a dozen people, this number has had to be
substantially increased in order to produce a
quality product within very tight deadlines. The
staff currently consists of eight permanent jour¬
nalists and two photo-reporters, ten freelances,
two sales representatives, four word-processor
operators and three support staff. Their salaries
come to over 3.8 million francs CFA per month,
to which 450,000 francs CFA have to be added
for equipment and ancillary costs.
Each issue, which usually has a print-run of

SË£*£I^
yj
C'EST
mmeist
An editorial conference at
the Senegalese weekly
Sud-Hebdo. At head of
table, Babacar Touré, the
editorial director.
10,000, therefore costs 306 francs CFA, but is sold
for 300 francs CFA.



In Senegal, there is only one distribution net¬
work, namely that of the Press Distribution
Agency (ADP), a subsidiary of the French com¬
pany Hachette. This de facto monopoly (legally,
this sector is open to competition) enables ADP
unilaterally to set exorbitant commission rates,
36 per cent of the selling price in the case of Sud-
Hebdo. Together with other independent
newspapers, we have tried on a number of occa¬
sions to shake free of ADP, but have failed owing
to lack of sufficient resources to compete against
such a well-established company, which does its
utmost to beat off competition from potential
rivals.
Selling at a loss would be less absurd if the
shortfall was met from advertising revenue. But 25

Below, the newsroom of a
Zambian paper.
Bottom, production of a
rural newspaper In the
United Republic of
Tanzania.
this is not the case. The weight of tradition, the
persistence of archaic management methods and



the backwardness of the economy mean that
advertisers in Senegal still regard buying space in
a newspaper as charity, on a par with alms giving.
This is why a newspaper with the reputation of
Sud-Hebdo earned a mere 40,000 francs CFA per
month on average in 1989 from advertising.
These problems would have been less serious
if Sud-Hebdo had a substantial number of sub¬
scribers, but unfortunately it does not. This is not
through lack of interest on the part of readers,
but because there are no preferential postage rates
for newspapers, which are treated as ordinary
mail.
A newspaper sold by subscription at just
under 300 francs CFA can therefore cost 450
francs CFA when postage is added. Using four
mopeds, we have tried to set up a home delivery
26
service, currently serving about a hundred sub¬
scribers.
Fortunately, Sud-Hebdo has a good sales
record (83 per cent of the total copies printed on
average) and has its own desktop publishing
system (three micro-computers and a laser
printer). This equipment, which is a first for any
newspaper in sub-Saharan Africa, makes it pos¬
sible to save on photocomposition and layout
costs. Outside workphotocomposition for
other newspapers, brochures, theses and books
also brings in 1,970,000 francs CFA per year.
Proclaiming freedom of the press is one thing,
implementing it another. Although it can be
affirmed in principle, in practice it may be res¬
tricted, intentionally or unintentionally, unless
the necessary steps are taken to translate it into
reality.
The Union of Senegalese Information and
Communication Professionals (SYNPICS) has
several times drawn the attention of the authori¬
ties to the deplorable situation of the press,
resulting in the amendment, in 1986, of the Press
Act in force since 1979. A Fund for the Promo¬
tion of the Press was set up but never actually
came to anything. What is more, the Act does
not even stipulate how the Fund is supposed to
function and what criteria are to determine the
allocation of the resources it is supposed to
administer.
Media professionals have also called for a
more equitable distribution of advertising
resources between the state-run media, foreign
publicationswhich take the lion's shareand
the private national press, which is not subsidized.
The grossly unfair contract imposed by the ADP
has always been condemned, but to no avail.
Many newspapers are urgently demanding
tax exemption for the chief items involved in
their production, and also preferential telecom¬
munications rates, again without much success.
Worse still, the new National Printing Centre (a
company in which the state is a majority share¬
holder) recently raised its already prohibitive rates
by 34.2 per cent without warning. As a result,
many newspapers, including the national
monthly radio and television magazine, are now
being printed abroad.
Sud-Hebdo, which in January 1990 had
expanded to twelve pages, was three months later
forced to slim down to eight pages again. It is even
thinking of reducing the print-run, of shedding
some of its staff (already in short supply), and of
reducing costs which cannot be pared down any
further as things stand. In April 1990, Sud-Hebdo
and two other independent weeklies, Wal Fadjri
and Le cafard libéré, held a joint press conference,
followed up by the publication of a joint editorial,
to encourage the authorities to pay greater atten¬
tion to the problems of the press. Senegalese
media people today have had just about as much
as they can take.
* 300 francs CFA (Communauté Financière Africaine)
1 US dollar.
approx.
