'WE LOOK
INTO THE FUTURE
WITH
APPREHENSION
AND HOPE'
by Ivan T. Frolov
Editor-ln-chlef of
Pravda, Moscow
MrLORE than ever before, an honest word
freely spoken has a special value for us today....
Even the most bitter truth can motivate people
to perform great feats, while gift-wrapped lies
peddled by the media can breed nothing but
apathy. When words do not square with
everyday reality, they can cause a painful
dualism in the public mind and breed
hypocrisy and double standards.
The objective of perestroïka, or restruc¬
turing, in the Soviet Union is not only to over
haul the economy and improve the social sit¬
uation but to cure the moral ills of society. The
mass media have a special role to play in this
new situation.... Every newspaper, magazine,
radio programme and TV network should
stimulate discussion of the most sensitive issues
in the life of society. Recent developments
have not been uncontroversial and not all
editors welcome their new-found freedom.
Many topics considered taboo in the past are
now being widely debated, but the low level
of culture and lack of civic responsibility pro¬
voke destructive urges and sow confusion in
the minds of people rather than motivating
them to constructive action.
Pravda is published by the Central Com¬
mittee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, and its main objective in the conditions
of glasnost, or openness, is to keep its readers
informed about the life of the Party both at
grass-roots level and at the top.... We had to
overcome a lot of opposition before the paper
began to provide extensive coverage of
meetings of the Politburo, the supreme organ
of the Central Committee, on a regular basis.
In a totally unprecedented development, the
paper published a verbatim report of the
February 1990 Plenary Meeting of the Central
Committee, which was marked by a heated dis¬
cussion of the most sensitive issues in the life
of the country. We are convinced that this was
the right thing to do. We trust our readers and
do not want to conceal difficult problems.
Genuine freedom of speech is unthinkable
without genuine trust between a newspaper
and its readership.
Our main objective is to promote innova¬
tive ideas generated by perestroika, the policy
of the Communist Party and the moral revival
of society.... Our readers expect us to tell them
the truth, complete and undisguised, and we
should avoid sensationalism. In fact Pravda
which means "truth"should speak with the
voice of truth as Lenin understood the word....
What are the prospects for the future and
for the last decade of the twentieth century?
What new developments can we expect this
year? We look into the future with apprehen¬
sion and hope. We are concerned because many
acute problems have not been resolved. The
most pressing problems are to cure the
country's ailing economy, improve the situa¬
tion for consumers, defuse social tensions and
resolve ethnic conflicts.
But we believe that there is hope too, and
it is not just wishful thinking. This hope is sus¬
tained by the success of perestroika and the real
changes brought about by the political and
economic reforms and a new moral climate in
the country. 33
