ANNIVERSARY
Franciscus Skorina,
scholar-printer of the Renaissance
BY M. BOTVINNIK AND V. SHMATOV
Iranciscus Skorina, archetypical
figure of Byelorussian culture, was
the first to translate, provide a com¬
mentary, print and publish the Bible
in the language of the east Slavs.
He was born 500 years ago into a
fur and hide trader's family at
Polotsk, a city known to have existed
since the ninth century. His educa¬
tion began there, but it was at
Cracow University from 1504 to
1506 that he studied the "seven
liberal arts"grammar, logic, rhetor¬
ic, music, arithmetic, geometry and
astronomy as well as philosophy.
There is no further trace of him
until 1512, when he took his doc¬
torate in medicine at the University
of Padua in Italy. Medical practice did
not appeal to him, however. Model¬
ling himself on St. Luke, who after
healing men's bodies dedicated him¬
self to healing their souls, Skorina
embarked on the translation of the
Scriptures into the Slavic language.
In 1517, he left for Prague, where
he spent two and a half years. His
first publication was a psalter, at that
time used as a reading primer, fol¬
lowed by his translation of twenty-
two books of the Old Testament,
which he called "The Russian Bible".
This was a considerable achieve¬
ment, as the work consisted of 2,400
pages of text, forty-nine engravings.
and hundreds of decorative vignettes,
initials and finíais. Skorina wrote
twenty-five prefaces and twenty-four
postfaces which were something
more than mere commentaries on
the text; they provided clear and top¬
ical interpretations of biblical al¬
legories and parables. In this way
Skorina introduced his readers to the
humanist ideas of the great Renais¬
sance thinkers.
The format adopted for his Bible
was remarkably simple, with a clear
and legible typeface. He avoided cer¬
tain rarely-used characters and liga¬
tures, and employed the minimum of
diacritical marks to make reading
easier. The layout was more function¬
al than decorative, with illustrations
closely linked to the text which they
helped to clarify.
It is not surprising that Skorina's
works were very popular, yet they
shocked some Church dignitaries. He
is thought to have been accused of
heresy and obliged to leave Prague
and go back to his own country. In
Wilno (Vilnius), capital of the great
principality of Lithuania, he set up a
printing press (the first in what is now
the USSR) in the house of a Byelorus¬
sian patron of the arts, and in 1 522
published a computus, a set of tables
for calculating movable dates in the
ecclesiastical calendar, followed in
1525 by an edition of the Acts of the
Apostleshis last known printed
book.
In 1525, Skorina abruptly left Wilno
and set out on a long journey from
town to town and from patron to pa¬
tron which eventually took him back
to Prague, a city dear to his heart. He
seems to have looked after the royal
botanical garden there, one of the
richest in Europe, but after the middle
of the century all trace of him is lost.
M. BOTVINNIK, Soviet historian, is a
researcher at the Institute of Arts,
Ethnography and Folklore of the
Academy of Sciences of the
Byelorussian SSR He is co-author of
"Franciscus Skorina, Humanist, Civilizer
and First Printer" (1989).
V. SHMATOV is a researcher
at the Institute of Arts, Ethnography
and Folklore of the Academy of
Sciences of the Byelorussian SSR. He
has published some 90 studies on the
aesthetic aspects of Franciscus
Skorina's publications and on
Byelorussian graphic design of the 16th
to 18th centuries.
From left to right: title page of the
Russian Bible printed by Franciscus
Skorina between 1517 and 1519,
and illustrated pages from the
Books of Exodus, Genesis, and
Kings.
