The master-chronologers
of IslamBY ABDESSELAM CHEDDADI
i:

36
A he most striking feature of Islamic historical
writing or tarikh is its sheer volume. Only a small
part of it has so far been published and new texts
are continually being discovered. From the
second half of the first century of the Hegira
(late seventh ' century AD) to the thirteenth
century (nineteenth century AD) the writing of
Islamic history continued almost without a break
wherever the Islamic faith was professed. The
language used was primarily Arabic, but there
were also writings in Persian, Turkish and
Malay. Although essentially written by Muslims,
it also attracted Christian authors, especially in
Egypt and Syria.
A second important feature of Islamic histori¬
ography is its very great diversity. It comprises
forms and genres ranging from vast universal or
general histories and monographs to annals, dy¬
nastic and genealogical tables or lists divided into
tabaqat (classes), as well as biographical diction¬
aries and local histories. It also covers many fields:
religious, political, administrative and social life;
scientific, literary and artistic activities; schools
of thought and ideological trends; travel, the
topography of cities, monuments; natural dis¬
asters, famines, epidemics....
The historians who worked in this tradition
were also curious about non-Islamic civilizations,
western and northern Europe, India, China, the
Far East and Africa. They were interested in any
information relating to man, his relations with
his social and cultural environment and his rela¬
tions with God. Ibn Khaldun (see page 39) noted
that they wrote just as much for the "crowds"
and for "simple folk" as for "kings" and "the
great". This view of history as universal in scope
and the attempt to reach a wide audience
prefigured modern approaches to the subject.
A grasp
of time
A further point of similarity with modern histori¬
ography lay in the importance attached very early
on to time and to chronology. From the first to
the fourth century of the Hegira (seventh-tenth
century AD) a vast amount of knowledge about
time was amassed in Islamic culture. Drawing on
earlier Arab tradition, it incorporated Persian,
Indian, Greek and Egyptian material and also
leaned on the work of astronomers and geo¬
graphers. The masterly conspectus achieved by
al-Biruni in the first half of the fifth/eleventh cen¬
tury is impressive for its tone of objectivity. It
represents the most extensive and most rigorous
survey of knowledge about time that we possess
up to the modern era.
Muslim historians benefited greatly from this
knowledge. From the second/eighth century on¬
wards it gradually became common practice to
give dates, to follow a chronological order and
to provide tables. For most of the facts reported
by historians it became a virtually absolute rule
to note the year, month and day when they
occurred. This contrasts with medieval histori¬
ography in the West where it was not until
the eleventh century AD that a unified chrono¬
logical system began to be widely accepted and
where, as late as the fourteenth century, the
chronology of the main historical events was still
uncertain.
Originality
and limitations
The originality, but also the limitations of Islamic
historiography lie in its conception of historical
information (khabar). Khobar means the fact, the
event, as incorporated into discourse, related in
a "story". The historian does not deal in raw
facts. He starts from a given which is the story
at
/
JmiîUM?/>
I " ,",; * aa '
S'¿jhsWjisAr,^'i¿)'*>jj,/j>l> i

y.Jkift) tf$4W^cfo*'-?^.
1 t'fj¿»s}i*S/'J¿* iZ*>iH*
, . .1 ' "^' a-*r- y ' .' ' 1 ' . '.'
Above, manuscript page
from a collection of prose
and verse biographies of
Sufi saints, written by
Hosayn Bayqarah
(1469-1506), the last of the
Timurid sovereigns of
Persia.
Left, illustration from a
Turkish manuscript
recording a journey
(1605-1606).
Right, page from a 12th-
century Arabic manuscript
describing the customs of
China and India.
ABDESSELAM
CHEDDADI
is a Moroccan historian who
teaches at the faculty of
education sciences at Rabat.
An authority on Ibn
Khaldun, he has translated
into French the great Arab
historian's autobiography
(Sindbad publishers, Paris,
1984) and extracts from his
history (Sindbad, Paris,
1987).
as reported by written or oral tradition, or by
a living witness (who may be the historian him¬
self). His most important task is therefore to
authenticate or validate stories by subjecting ac¬
counts and channels of transmission to critical
scrutiny. The historian does not seek to discover
or establish facts but to gather, classify and or¬
ganize information while making sure of its va¬
lidity. The intrinsic truth of stories was a
relatively minor concern until Ibn Khaldun, who
based historical criticism on knowledge of the
laws of 'umran (the human order, society).
Bound to accept traditional sources, often
down to the finest detail, the historian could in¬
corporate them into a wide variety of genres or
organize them at will within more or less
voluminous compilations, but he could not for¬
mulate them in his own way, reconstruct them
or recast them according to his own perspective.
In Islamic historiography then, the past is not
reconstructed as it was by some Greek histori¬
ans, nor is there any theological history as there
was in the Christian Middle Ages. This accounts
for its widely acknowledged impartiality and also
for its stationary conception of time, which con¬
tains in itself no potential for change or progress
but simply gives external order to a sequence
of events. It was Ibn Khaldun again who, in
considering the emergence, evolution and decline
of vast human groups such as the Arabs,
Berbers, Persians and the Rum (Greeks, Romans
and Byzantines) added a new dimension to this
vision.
Three major periods
The first major period of Islamic historiography,
which extends up to the third century of the
Hegiria, is crowned by at-Tabari's chronicle
Tarikh ar-Rusul wa al-Muluk (History ofProphets
and Kings) (see page 38). A calendar based on the
Hegira soon came to be adopted generally. The
isnad method, whereby the names of those who
transmitted information from generation to
generation are cited, was first developed for the
purposes of the religious sciences and then applied
to the biography of the Prophet, to stories of the
Muslim conquests and gradually to all kinds of
stories.
The earliest historical writing appeared and
sometimes crystallized in a number of genres,
including maghazi and sira (the biography and
deeds of the Prophet),^^ (Muslim conquests),
ahdath (major political events), akhbar al-awa 'il
(stories of pre-Islamic kings and nations), ayyam
al- '<zr¡2¿>_ (stories of the Arab past), ansah, ma'athir
and mathalib (genealogies, exploits and failures);
biographies of scholars, lists of teachers, politi¬
cal and administrative chronicles, history of the
Umayyad and 'Abassid dynasties, and collections
of secretaries' letters. It gradually became the
usual practice to date facts and events precisely
and to follow a chronological order.
Numerous compendiums were published,
37

At-Tabari
Mt TABARl (839-923) did not invent Islamic histori¬
ography but he is its most illustrious figure. His Tarikh
ar-Rusul wa al-Muluk (History of Prophets and Kings)
long served as a model. This chronicle, which relates
the history of the Islamic world year by year in the
first three centuries of the Hegira, was continued by
later authors, and many abridged versions and
adaptations were made of its account of the pre-
Islamic period. It was incorporated in other general
surveys such as Ibn al-Athir's al-Kamil (The Complete
History) in the thirteenth century AD and Ibn Kathir's
al Bidayah wa an-nihayah (The Beginning and the
End) in the following century.
At-Tabari was trained as a jurist, traditionalist and
historian. For close on thirty years he journeyed
through the cities and countries of the Middle East
in a quest for knowledge which took him to the
greatest scholars of his time. He was interested not
only in history, Qur'anic exegesis and the traditions of
the Prophet, but also in grammar, ethics, mathematics
and medicine. His fame also rests on his monumen¬
tal Tafsir, or commentary on the Qur'an.
His History, which is the culmination of a process
which can be traced back to the first century of the
Hegira, is guided by a constant concern to show how
each item of information has been passed down
through an unbroken line, which is subjected to crit¬
ical scrutiny. He applied a strict chronological order
to the raw material of history, and gave a more am¬
ple and finished form to the universal history
sketched out by ad-Dinawari in his Akhbar at-Tiwal
(The Long Stories) and by al-Ya 'qubi in his Tarikh.
At-Tabari's Tarikh ar-Rusul wa al-Muluk is
described as a history of the world from the Creation
up to the author's own time. In fact, as he explains
in his preface, it is first and foremost a history of the
relations between God and His creatures, whether
of obedience and gratitude or of rebelliousness and
revolt. Its main protagonists, after Iblis/Satan and
Adam and his sons, are the prophets and kings.
Biblical history is included, and neither Graeco-Roman
and Byzantine history nor Persian history is neglected.
It is an irreplaceable mine of information. The
author cites his sources for each fact reported and
in many cases reproduces the accounts in which they
are mentioned, thereby giving us access to early
materials that are now lost. In the words of the
historian Franz Rosenthal, at-Tabari in his History
demonstrates "the scrupulousness and untiring in¬
spiration of the theologian, the precision and love
of order of the jurist and the perspicacity of the poli¬
tician versed in law".
ABDESSELAM CHEDDADI
38
such as al-Waqidi's Maghazi, Ibn Ishaq's Sira, Ibn
Sa 'd's Tabaqat, ad-Dinawari's Akhbar at-tiwal, al-
Baladhuri's Ansah al-ashrai and al-Ya 'qubi's
Tarikh. Together this constituted a vast histori¬
cal literature, relatively little of which has sur¬
vived but whose existence is attested by the titles
listed in subsequent bibliographies, like Ibn an-
Nadim's Fihrist, completed in 377 of the Hegira
(998 AD).
The second period, known as the classical
period, is marked both by the accentuation of
these various tendencies with, however, some
slackening of the isnad method, and by the emer
gence of new genres. After at-Tabari, but less in¬
fluential than he, al-Masudi composed the Gold¬
en Meadows, another universalist history.
From the fourth century of the Hegira on¬
wards the writing of history became a more or
less official activity involving greater use of na¬
tional or provincial archives. This period was
notable for the work of a line of historians start¬
ing with Hassan Ibn Thabit Ibn Sinan as-Sabi and,
later, Miskawayh's Tajarib al-umam (History ofthe
Buyid Dynasty), continued in the following cen¬
tury by Abu Shuja'.
The history of cities developed into a major

Ibn Khaldun
* ^aiVaja* ^J Jv Jj^i-a .L*!.*
_ -aaa.^v¡^u)-a¿aT^...r,"'-W
L-a^l,J.VLa*i^rïJjî,||"Ji.>-"'li^.yi*
- . -¿«Váíli^a'VlVlAl/ayUlj^t^-,
j ftfU-a'^t^ilajaa' aJjÇa^aar'V
^ajaü-^-U'aV1 -5<ai%i.-)ij>;)tjij^,.r
-yAaaL-OW^b^JWa'.aaa. ¿jG-^Tj**,
'4,~^?^£jjM-t-t.^, ».-Vr JaK aaU, f
*-a>a-JT>J». íV'í'1'''-' ~*¿fij¡>
FV>a5C->>l'l.^jJaiJ- »a^i'P'*>^i
a- a- - .a,. ^Jaaa. ,aaJi-,*a> av>>.-^-a
piyjiA'a -;,-i,j^ft -^j¿«v, z>
aJ^í^rfJJjUaVaflfaJJ,!;^^ * -
J(aia/l^^¿yV-»ii>Ja>VVrsju»'a J!ai»'lV>'
jaïl/Kika-ijI^'j J>/VaJi-/MJ*J--^'-a
j~~..Jj*¿,~ a>-ja.,,;-ija/aTJ. »t<<'V»
Above, page from a vellum
manuscript dated 1733 of
Ibn Khaldun's Introduction
to History.
Left, illustration from the
autobiography of Babur
(1483-1530), the founder of
the Mughal empire of
northern India.
Ibn khaldun was one of the greatest historians and
thinkers of all time. He wrote a long autobiography
thanks to which we are familiar with the details of his
life. Born in Tunis in 1 332, he came from a line of senior
government officials and scholars of Andalusian origin,
descended from ancient Yemeni Arab stock. He received
a thorough religious, literary and scientific education at
the hands of the most eminent scholars in the Maghrib.
During his adolescence Ifriqiya was conquered by the
Marinid king Abu al-Hasan, who entered Tunis in 1 348.
The following year his father and mother were carried
away by the Black Death. In 1352 he went to Fez where
he stayed for some ten years and served as private secre¬
tary to the sultan Abu Salim. But neither there nor in
Granada, to which he travelled in 1 362, nor later in Be-
jaia or Tlemcen, did he manage to lead a stable life or
to achieve his political ideal. He did however acquire
detailed knowledge of court life and the workings of the
state and observed the world of the Arab and Berber
tribes.
In 1 375, at the age of forty-three, he withdrew from
public life in order to devote himself to science. In the
castle of Ibn Salamah, near Frenda in Algeria, he wrote
the first version of the Muqaddimah (Introduction to His¬
tory). The need for more extensive documentation forced
him to leave his refuge. He returned to Tunis where he
taught and completed the first version of the Kitab al-
'Ibar, his monumental history of the world. But,
fearing the intrigues of his enemies, he left the Maghrib
for good in 1384 and settled in Egypt. In Cairo he was
given an introduction to the Mamluk ruler as-Zahir Bar-
quq and took on teaching and judicial duties, while con¬
tinuing to work on his voluminous opus. Five years before
his death in 1406, during the siege of Damascus, he met
the Mongol Timur, of whom he left a striking portrait.
Ibn Khaldun's concerns were primarily those of a
historian. Wishing to give a comprehensive account of
his age which might serve as a model for future histori¬
ans, dissatisfied with traditional methods of authenticat¬
ing and verifying facts, he formulated a theory of society
on which all his historiography was to be based. In the
Muqaddimah he laid the foundations of what would to¬
day be called anthropology. Here we can give no more
than a glimpse of the rich fund of concepts he brought
into play.
Central to his theory of society is the concept of 'um¬
ran. For lack of a more adequate term, this can be trans¬
lated as "civilization", but only if this word is stripped
of any connotation of an opposition between "ad¬
vanced" societies and "primitive" societies. A more
radical concept, based on the religious idea of the Cre¬
ation, 'umran designates the fact of human life, the hu¬
man order in general. Fundamentally equal and free,
human beings are God's creatures, and as such are the
rulers of the Earth, but they differ from one another by
virtue of their living conditions, which are themselves de¬
termined by geographic and climatic conditions. The term
also denotes the forms of social life or, in a more res¬
trictive sense, urban life with its dense concentration of
humanity, contrasting with life in mountain or desert
regions.
In 'umran Ibn Khaldun distinguishes two states,
which are at the same time the two main stages in hu¬
man evolution. Badawah, the original agro-pastoral
phase, close to nature, satisfying only the barest needs,
yields to hadarah, the complex urban stage which gives
rise to surpluses, in which society fulfils itself and achieves
its purpose. It is the fate of 'umran to oscillate in accor¬
dance with an implacable law between these two poles.
For Ibn Khaldun, mulk (power) was the basic factor
responsible for social and historical dynamics. As a source
of the highest prestige, it is the goal of all human aspi¬
ration and desire, spurring-men to action. Precarious by
nature, it passes from one group to another, from one
nation to another. As a means of distributing economic
surpluses and structuring society, it has a pivotal role in
the transition from badawah to hadarah. Around this
central principle of social life Ibn Khaldun structured his
history. In studying the Arabs and Berbers he concerned
himself with those nations that successively held pow¬
er. His narrative traces the rise of political groups from
their Bedouin status to the heights of power, and their
subsequent downfall.
These concepts tie in with many others, which in¬
clude, in the social sphere, cohesion ('asabiyah), kinship
(nasab), protection (walah, istinah), honour (nu 'ra); in
the political sphere, constraint (ikrah), coercion (Qahr),
domination (ghalab or taghallub), prestige (¡ah); and in
the economic sphere, means of subsistence (ma 'ash),
gain or profit (kasb), value (qimah) and work (a 'mal).
The concepts he employs, the laws governing the
functioning of Arab-Berber society which he identifies,
and the bird's-eye view that he provides of many aspects
of Islamic history, are still indispensable tools of anthropo¬
logical and historical research into Islamic society. Far
from being superseded, this rigorous, coherent set of
theories continues to be a mine of scientific knowledge
for modern researchers.
ABDESSELAM CHEDDADI
genre. Many works were produced, the best
known of which is al-Khatib al-Baghdadi's His¬
tory ofBaghdad. Biographical dictionaries relat¬
ing to religious and intellectual life became more
sophisticated and more numerous. They includ¬
ed lists of poets and other specialists, directories
of scholars belonging to different juridico-
religious schools, catalogues of writers and lives
of saints. In the various regions of the Islamic em¬
pire a thriving historiographical tradition thus
took root.
In the mid-fifth century of the Hegira politi¬
cal upheavals in the Islamic world were not
without an effect on historiography. A third peri¬
od began, marked by an ebb in production until
the mid-sixth century. Syria then came to the fore
for a while with historians like Ibn at-Tayyi, Ibn
Abi ad-Dam and Ibn an-Nazif, who wrote univer¬
sal histories, followed soon after by Ibn al-Athir,
the author of al-Kamil (The Complete History).
Then it was the turn of Egypt to produce major
historians such as Ibn Hajar, al-Maqrizi, al- 'Ayni,
Ibn Tighribirdi, as-Sakhawi and as-Suyuti. The
same period saw the birth in the Maghrib of Ibn
Khaldun whose pioneering work was admired in
his time but who had no successors. 39
