THEODOR
MOMMSEN
A FIERY PATRIOT
A:
14
historian of Antiquity who was also one of
the greatest writers in the German language,
Theodor Mommsen (1817-1903) made profoundly-
original contributions to knowledge of ancient
Rome. His History ofRome (Römische Geschichte),
the first three volumes of which were published
between 1854 and 1856, earned him the Nobel
Prize for Literature in 1902.
Mommsen was the first historian to apply to
the study of history an array of disciplines ranging
from jurisprudence, linguistics and the history of
literature, to epigraphy, numismatics and ar¬
chaeology. The History ofRome is at once a po¬
litical, cultural, economic and social history. In
his Römisches Staatsrecht (1871-1888; "Roman
Constitutional Law"), he drew a picture of the
Roman state which was long accepted as
authoritative. For Mommsen, the Roman state
was based essentially on the interaction between
the magistrature, the senate and the community
of citizens. From this relationship sprang public
and criminal law, which Mommsen was also the
first to study systematically (Römisches Strafrecht,
1899; "Roman Criminal Law"). In Mommsen's
eyes, however, the key institution was the magis¬
trature, both in the Roman republic and in the
monarchy of early Rome.
Mommsen transformed the study of Antiq¬
uity both through his writings and through his
capacities as an organizer by endowing scientific
investigation of the past with the ambition and
the opportunity to produce great instruments of
research. He was the originator of the Corpus
Inscriptionum Latinarum, and played a major role
in the production of that monumental collection
of Latin inscriptions.
His History ofRome was written in the years
which followed the failure of the revolution of
1848. Hopes had evaporated of seeing Germany
united by the forces of liberalism and democracy.
Mommsen, who attached very great importance
to German unification, was profoundly affected
by this. At that time he supported the policy of
Prussia being carried out by Bismarck and at first
enthusiastically welcomed unification when it
was achieved in 1871.
He saw a historical parallel between Rome
and Prussia. The role of Prussia was to bring
about German unity just as the mission of Rome
had been to unify Italy. For him there was a
resonance between the history of Rome and the
times in which he lived.
He regarded Julius Caesar as the architect of
the Roman state, and believed that under Caesar's
rule the freedom of the Roman citizen was
guaranteed by what he considered to be an ideal
balance between government, law, unity and free¬
dom. But the evolution of the Roman empire
under Augustus, especially the loss of liberties,
brought Caesar's plans to naught, and his dream
of creating a great Italo-Hellenic nation never
came to pass. Mommsen's work ended with the
death of Caesar; the volume which was to deal
with the history of the principate, the first stages
in the reign of Augustus, never appeared.
If Mommsen did not pardon the Roman em¬
perors, he was equally critical of Bismarck for
divesting German unity of its democratic dimen¬
sion and depriving parliament of political power.
He despaired of the attitude of the German bour¬
geoisie which was satisfied with power and
prosperity, and was content to do without civic
liberties. "I have always been a political animal,"
he wrote in his testament, "and wished to be a
citizen. This has not been possible within the
framework of our nation, where the fate of the
individual, even the best, is that of regimentation
and political fetishism."
As a historian, Mommsen was a man of his
time. Even if we no longer assign a purpose to
history, as he did, we can reflect on his concep¬
tion of one of the historian's duties. "Whoever
writes history and especially the history of the
present," he wrote, "has a duty ofpolitical educa¬
tion. He must help those for whom he writes to
choose and define their future attitude to the
Theodor Mommsen
(1817-1903).
Julius Caesar
(100 or 101-44 BC).
state. HINNERK BRUHNS
Otto von Bismarck-
Schönhausen (1815-1898).
