The
microcomputer
has become
an important
support for
new forms



of literacy
Z - \ ?*$ . *{
L. A # ^
/ ^
The PC and the 3 Rs
i
By Kenneth Levine
N a century of almost continuous technological
innovation affecting all the major media of human
communication, the last decade has been partic¬
ularly marked by rapid and striking developments
in telecommunications and the power and cost-
effectiveness of computers. Until recently, the
inculcation of reading and writing skills has been
the pre-eminent and unchallenged objective of
almost all programmes of basic education the
world over, but it is natural that sophisticated
technical developments should prompt some
reflection about the future significance of literacy,
for both individuals and societies.
Among the many issues that arise, we can use¬
fully concentrate our attention, in turn, on three.
Do "traditional" literacy and the medium of
print retain their importance in the face of com¬
petition from new modes of transmitting infor-
Optical fibres (above),
glass filaments no thicker
than a human hair, are
revolutionizing
telecommunications.
mation, and if so, how will they be altered? What
degree of change is likely to take place in the level
and spread of skills constituting literacy? Should
the new media be seen as benign and potentially
democratizing forces, or as sinister additions to
the armouries of already powerful élites and
bureaucracies? We can simplify our task some¬
what by selecting the impact of the personal com¬
puter on literacy as the main example under
scrutiny.
Before tackling these specifi'c questions, there
are two preliminary considerations of a general
kind. The first is an obstacle to sound reasoning
that must be removed. Many of the forecasts and
scenarios that are being dispensed by contem¬
porary commentators contain a debilitating flaw
in their analysis. They assume that the new tech¬
nologies usher in a set of predetermined social and 33

economic consequences that are universal and
irresistiblean assumption often referred to as
"technological determinism".
Many of the scenarios, whether optimistic or
pessimistic in tone, consist of the extrapolation
and generalization of trends from a particular
technical development in a particular society. In
predicting what will happen when that technol¬
ogy emerges in, or is transferred to, other soci¬
eties, little or no allowance is made for the
34
mediation of local economic, political and social
processes.
The second consideration relates to literacy
itself. Literacy is not a unified skill but a plurality
of different capacities. A pedant would insist that
we speak always of "literacies" in an effort to
accommodate the fact, for example, that people
"literate" by all of the conventional benchmarks
may nevertheless not be able to read or write in
"foreign" languages, or even use many of the
specialist applications of writing and print avail¬
able in their own natural language (for example,
notations for music or chemical compounds, pho¬
netic alphabets, proof-reading marks, maps,
timetables, engineering plans, meta-languages for
logical, mathematical or computing purposes).
One of the indirect impacts of new technol¬
ogies is that they alter prevailing social definitions
of the skills (and the level of the skills) that con¬
stitute literacy. It is important clearly to distin¬
guish improving or declining rates of literacy
from shifts in the way in which it is being con¬
ceived and defined.
Let us now take up the question of the dura¬
bility of traditional literacy. One reliable meas¬
ure of its continued importance is the level of
consumption of printed paper, which has shown
steady increases in both developed and develop¬
ing societies over the past decade. Partly through
its close connection with techniques of
bureaucratic organization and project manage¬
ment, the incorporation of reading and writing
into all spheres of life and into a vast assortment
of mundane transactions is at work on a global
scale. The situation is broadly similar for "serious"
writing and publication. Despite the forecasts that
Computerization of the
workplace: (above) India;
(right) Zaire.
have been repeatedly made over the last fifty years
concerning the imminent eclipse of "book cul¬
tures", the statistics show that the market for con¬
ventionally published works has held up in the
face of the expansion of ostensibly "rival" media
such as recorded music, television and video.
Software that takes
the drudgery out of writing
There are several reasons for viewing the advent
of micro-computers as an important support for
the literacy/print combination. The potential of
this kind of equipment as a literacy aid, mainly
within the framework of conventional schooling,
has been recognized for some years. Unfortunate¬
ly, the first generations of computer software for
use in literacy training were, in general, pedes¬
trian in conception, offering little more than drill
exercises on a display screen rather than on paper.
The greatest contribution to literacy studies so
far has come from word processing software
which has eliminated much of the drudgery as¬
sociated in the past with the creation of finely-
tuned and error-free texts, allowing the novice
and the experienced author alike to concentrate
on the creative process and to experiment freely.
Spelling checkers, now often integrated with
word processing software, represent a useful half¬
way house on the road to high-level literacy: they
allow the learner to eliminate errors (and mis¬
types) that would, if uncorrected, detract from
the polish and authority of the resulting text. In
future, grammar and style checkers will extend
this kind of facility, although at present they are
generally crude and unreliable. As significantly

KENNETH LEVINE,
of the United Kingdom, is a
lecturer in sociology at the
University of Nottingham.
He is the author of The
Social Context of Literacy
(Routledge & Kegan Paul,
London, 1986).
more powerful hardware and software become
available, the quality of such aids will improve
drastically. Many creative possibilities are also
opened up by the way in which the micro¬
computer can be used as the heart of a "hyperme¬
dia" system that is to say, as the device that con¬
trols the generation of a "performance" involving
text, graphics and sound that is structured inter¬
actively according to the responses of the learner
to the programme.
New ways of learning
The linking of micro-computers to telecommu¬
nications networks is another area of immense
potential, particularly for the study of foreign lan¬
guages. Pupils can send messages to their peers
across continents quickly and relatively cheaply,
adding spice and interest to language studies and
frequently providing the contacts that lead to col¬
laboration on projects and exchanges of person¬
nel. This kind of "electronic mail", which
involves an amalgam of the characteristics of face
to face interaction, telephone contact and letter
writing, has the hallmarks of a distinctive medi¬
um of communication with a unique blend of in¬
timacy, informality and distance.
One of the most important characteristics of
these latter developments is that they promote
a participative form of learning; they permit (and
frequently require) the learner to have a pro¬
active role in decisions about how the pedagogic
project is to be approached, and they are gener¬
ally congruent with a philosophy of releasing the
learning process, as far as possible, from the
physical boundaries of any specific educational
institution.
The next issue concerning possible changes in
the constituent skills of literacy is an important
one with two principal aspects. The first is that
change in the print-bearing medium does direct¬
ly alter the character of reading and writing skills,
but in most cases, only at the margins. Thus, to
the extent that micro-computers become standard
classroom teaching aids, some elements of "com¬
puter literacy" such as familiarity with keyboards
and basic knowledge of the capacities of word
processing systems and their associated equipment
will increasingly be incorporated into popular ex¬
pectations of what literacy signifies, in much the
same way as use of the electronic calculator is be¬
ing assimilated into notions of numeracy.
The second aspect concerns the probability
that, in many societies, "inflation" will lead to 35

i 1* -
gliü&vaí HU1^01 ?w?inlrH
» * -t. LtJL j, o o
-', FfFPT rj F F f £
* t * ni* .
WiA^ ,hîr^V°X YiM°V O
36
Above, musical notation,
16th century.
Left, diagrams of the
structure of the atom, from
New System of Chemical
Philosophy (1808-1810), by
the British chemist and
physicist John Dalton.
a rise in the threshold of the minimum accept¬
able standard of reading and writing (a standard
often referred to as "functional literacy"). This
inflation occurs because literacy is never a purely
instrumental skill; possession or lack of it univer¬
sally carries implications for the individual's
social standing, so there is a tendency to seek the
highest level of attainment possible, irrespective
of the difficulty of the materials that will be
written or read.
Literacy is also the means to gaining educa¬
tional qualifications that can secure entry to
remunerative and prestigious forms of employ¬
ment. In the face of competition, some candidates
for such posts will choose to invest in higher lev¬
els of literacy in order to acquire the advanced
qualifications that give them an advantage over
their rivals. Over time, others will copy their ex¬
ample, until everyone finishes up in their origi¬
nal relative positions. To achieve any advantage,
an individual must now make a further invest¬
ment in literacy and qualifications, fuelling an in¬
flationary spiral of standards. The general
implication of this spiral is that there will be a
need to enhance the attainment targets in many
programmes of basic education and also to offer
more comprehensive provision for intermediate
and advanced language studies.
Finally, are the new technologies essentially
democratic and egalitarian, or threats to civil
liberties and personal freedoms? It has been ar¬
gued, for example, that tools such as desk-top
publishing, which can greatly facilitate the
production of low-cost documentation such as
newsletters and teaching materials, will empower
many marginal and scattered minority groups,
giving them for the first time a collective voice
and identity. It has equally been argued that the
capacity of national governments to acquire the
most powerful available means of information
storage and processing leads to ever greater dangers
of centralized control and cultural uniformity.
As suggested at the start of this article, ab¬
stract generalizations in this area are likely to be
unsound. As with technology generally, in benign
hands the new tools of literacy are themselves be¬
nign. The ends to which they are applied are a
political and cultural consideration determined
within each host society. There is, however, one
significant global aspect: the cost of the new in¬
formation systems, although falling rapidly in real
terms, represents yet another potential source of
inequality between the developed and the de¬
veloping nations.
The new information technologies cannot be
looked to for a once and final solution to the
problem of world literacy. Indeed, we must ac¬
cept that this problem is not of a kind that lends
itself to final eradication since literacy and illiter¬
acy are both relative rather than absolute condi¬
tions. The least literate in any society will always
be seriously disadvantaged, while the fluent will
increasingly demand opportunities to acquire
specialist technical or foreign language literacies.
In all probability, new technologies alone cannot
cope with this rise in expectations, but if they
are developed and implemented in a manner sen¬
sitive to local needs and conditions, they can
make a more than modest contribution to meet¬
ing the literacy aspirations of a new century.!
