THE LONG
ROAD
TO
DEMOCRACY
BY ALAIN TOURAINE
I ' V
N.
N*
N,
\
The Door Project (1985),
detail of a work by SITE
(Sculpture in the
Environment), a group of
New York architect-
sculptors.
X HE twentieth century has not been kind to
democracy. For seventy-five yearsfrom the be¬
ginning of the First World War in 1914, to the
opening up of the Berlin wall in 1989 it seemed
set to be a century of revolution, liberation and
development. However, these objectives, on
which so many hopes were pinned and which
were the rallying points of so many powerful
popular movements, are in their very essence anti¬
democratic, since they demand unity against a
common enemy or a specific obstacle, whereas
democracy is by nature pluralist.
This paradox is very hard for us to accept,
especially if we live in what has been called the
Third World. It is equally difficult, especially if
we come from the Western world, to abandon
the dream we nurtured for the twentieth
centurythat of seeing the spirit of democracy,
born first in Britain, in the United States of
America and in France, extending first to such
neighbouring countries as Germany, Italy and
Spain, then to the countries of Central and
Eastern Europe, to Latin America and, finally,
to the rest of the world.
In the twentieth century, ideologists from the
richer countries have declared that economic
growth, political democracy and personal happi¬
ness go hand in hand, but this saccharine opti¬
mism has been brutally dispelled by historical
reality. Weimar Germany, the country which
perhaps more than any other was the standard-
bearer of modernity, foundered and sank into
nazism. At the same time, voices of protest in the
colonized countries were a forceful reminder to
the great Western nations that the methods with
which they held sway over a large part of the
globe were far from democratic.
On the other hand, the revolutionary anti-
capitalist, anti-imperialist movements, created in
the name of oppressed peoples and classes, were
soon seen to have been imposed on half the coun¬
tries of Europe by a foreign army and scarcely
merited their self-assumed titles of "people's
democracies". For their part, many of the regimes
that emerged after decolonization also became
dictatorships, often dependent upon foreign pro¬
tectors. The poor countries followed not the road
to liberty but that which led to authoritarian,
totalitarian regimes. Again, some of the most
developed countries swung over to the various
forms of fascism which engulfed the world in the
Second World War; they also imposed colonial
regimes and encouraged social inequalities over
large areas of the planet.
Today, this picture of the situation during the
first half of the century certainly appears to be
too bleak. Democracy has survived, it has taken
root and spread in the West and has even regained
much lost ground, particularly in Eastern Europe
and Latin America. But serious reflection on the
state of democracy must go further than such
blandly euphoric observations. Democracy and
development do not always go hand in hand;
they may even advance in diametrically opposed 19

The Dance (right)
and The Slaves (below)
1970, by the Senegalese
artist Souley Keita.
20
ALAIN TOURAINE,
French sociologist, is
director of studies and
director of the Centre
d'analyse et d'intervention
sociologiques (CADIS) of
the Ecole des Hautes Etudes
en Sciences Sociales, Paris.
He has published many
books and articles on
sociological theory and the
sociology of development,
especially with reference to
Latin America.
directions. This must be the starting point for a
proper examination of the dramatic history of the
twentieth century.
Defining democracy
Democracy is in no way associated with wealth
or poverty; if we seek the elements that favour
its advancement, we discover that it is very closely
related to a country's capacity for endogenous
development, that is to say, to the formation of
active members of society who are motivated by
the modern values of rationalism and individua¬
lism and who discuss among themselves questions
about the allocation and use of the community's
resources.
Democracy cannot be defined solely in terms
of institutions, or, in a more limited way, of safe¬
guards. There can certainly be no democracy
without the free election of those who govern or
without the right of the majority to remove from
power those whom it has not invested with
power or those from whom it has withdrawn its
confidence. This is purely a matter of definition
and there is no point in discussing democracy if
by that word is meant anything other than the
free choice of leaders by the people. What can
be done is to identify and explain the reasons for
the presence of this kind of political system. Here
a distinction must be made between endogenous
(democratic) and exogenous (voluntarist, anti¬
democratic) development.
When a society comes up against insurmount-
îaJ-iS

able internal obstacles to its modernization, it has
to mobilize, in both the literal and figurative
senses of the word, behind leaders who plead the
higher interest of the state or the nation and who
seek to justify their actions in the name of science,
history, a god, or the people. Development can¬
not be democratic in such a society if the old
resists the new, for in this situation a vanguard
or élite has to escape the pressure of the old order
and lead it forcibly towards the future. Usually
this involves the energetic mobilization of the
community against enemies who are always por¬
trayed as external enemies, whether they be a
colonial power, great land-owners, traditional be¬
liefs or forms of family organization. Defined in
this way, voluntarist, exogenous development
calls for national unity, whereas democracy re¬
quires plurality of opinion combined with a dual
check on social conflict through appeals to ration¬
ality and freedom.
In what circumstances do development and
democracy overlap? When can endogenous de¬
velopment be said to exist? As many authors have
said since the eighteenth century and particular¬
ly since the time of the German economist and
sociologist Max Weber, endogenous moderniza¬
tion presupposes a secular approach which
detaches social life from a naturalistic or religious
view of the universe, is based on practical reason,
and makes respect for the individual the keystone
of its ethic. It also presupposes the autonomy of
civil society vis-à-vis the state; and this in turn-
as many analysts, starting with Jean-Jacques Rous¬
seau, have pointed outimplies a certain equali¬
ty of conditions and thus the existence of an
egalitarian principle, which may be religious or
republican. Finally, it presupposes a structured
civil society, whose members can be represented
and therefore organized in such a way that polit¬
ical forces can be "representative"; this is the
most visible and concrete expression of
democracy.
Such a condensed analysis may seem too ab¬
stract, but, being confined to essentials, it clear¬
ly situates the problem of democracy and gives
a precise meaning to the seemingly surprising
proposition with which I beganthat demo¬
cracy and development may find themselves in
mutual opposition.
Two worlds
The history of recent centuries has been that of
a gradually widening division between a world
capable of endogenous development, and there¬
fore of democracy, and another world (dominat¬
ed, moreover, by the first), engaged in exogenous
development, along a traditionalist, populist or
even national-revolutionary line traced out in
authoritarian fashion by a ruling national or
foreign élite.
In the first of these two worlds are to be
found not only the central core of modern,
democratic countries, but also a number of'
peripheral countries where development, and
democracy, are fragile. Many countries general¬
ly considered to be in an intermediate position,
such as India and some Latin American countries,
in fact belong to this category.
The second of the two worlds consists of two
distinct groups. On the one hand there are the
modernizing, authoritarian states which proclaim
the concepts of rationalization and secularization
borrowed from the first world (for example, the
communist countries). On the other hand there
are states in which the ruling élite calls for unity
and talks of the destiny of a people, a communi¬
ty, a nation (for example, the Third World coun¬
tries). Thus we have four categories of countries
grouped in two pairs: a central core of countries
of endogenous development (group 1); moderniz¬
ing, voluntarist, authoritarian countries (group
2); peripheral countries with limited endogenous
development (group 3); the "new-community"
countries (group 4).
This century has seen, first, an accelerating
shift of initiative from the countries of group 1
to those of group 2 (beginning with the Soviet
Revolution), then to the group 3 countries (with
the accelerated modernization of the intermedi¬
ate countries) and, finally, to the countries of
group 4 (the real Third World countries, aroused
by nationalistic, community, and even sometimes
theocratic movements). Then, in a second phase, 21

came the almost simultaneous collapse of all the
models of voluntarist, exogenous development,
the triumph of the democracies, and the increas¬
ing attraction of the democratic model for the
countries of groups 2 and 3 and even, in some
cases, of group 4.
Once the opposition between democratic, en¬
dogenous development and authoritarian, ex¬
ogenous development is recognized, it is easy to
see that the most difficult task is to transform an
exogenous impulse into an endogenous develop¬
ment mechanism. These terms may seem far from
the historical realities as we perceive them; but
they are not. Bismarck's Germany, the Italy built
by Cavour, the Japan of the Meiji era and even,
for a time, the Turkey of Kemal Ataturk, suc¬
ceeded, following action initiated by the state, in
creating a class of independent actors on the so¬
cial scenebusinessmen, trade unionists, adminis¬
trators and scientiststhus combining the
dynamism of modernization with an autonomous
civil society and setting in motion what
economists term "self-sustaining growth".
However, this process has only succeeded in
societies in which major factors conducive to en¬
dogenous development already existed, as well as
the preliminaries of modernizationa develop¬
ing education system, freedom of thought, free¬
dom of trade, and concentration of capital. The
longer the path to be followed the greater the risk
that the authoritarian mobilization of a society
will become an end in itself and will be diverted
into despotism with the creation of new inflexible
structures and new privileges. In place of ration¬
alism, planning and education comes the instal¬
lation of a powerful nomenklatura, a rigid
bureaucracy and the rejection of innovative ideas.
The turnaround is even more marked where
affirmation of nationhood becomes virtually the
sole objective. Where an abundance of natural
resources enables a country to survive severe eco¬
nomic disarray such nationalistic tendencies can
take extreme forms.
The last third of this century, and in partic¬
ular the period which began with the 1980s, has
been dominated by these powerful regressive
processes, which are finally leading on the one
hand to the destruction of communist regimes
and on the other to the deterioration of national
liberation movements into corrupt, authorita¬
rian regimes serving the interests of privileged
clienteles.
Meanwhile, temporarily thrown off balance
by the oil crises and by the rapid rise of real in¬
comes and social benefits to the detriment of in¬
vestment, the central core of democratic countries
are again calling on their capacity for endogenous
development. A wave of new technologies is
appearing; education, research and, it must be
admitted, armaments programmes are being
strengthened.
Ways out of crisis
This turnaround is giving rise to a rebirth of the
democratic theme and to the decline of the idea
of revolution. In 1989 France celebrated the bi¬
centenary of a Revolution which it saw as the
forerunner of democracy, not as the harbinger
of the Soviet Revolution.
In Latin America, the further south one looks
the more the revolutionary ideal is giving way
to aspirations for democracy. In Chile, the gener¬
al desire to avoid a total rupture has led to the
triumph of the more moderate elements of the
opposition.
22
Liberté (1948), a tapestry
designed by the French
artist Jean Lurçat
(1892-1966) incorporates a
text by the poet
Paul Eluard.

it
i
ilk1
T¿e .oiirs Come Down
(1989), ink on paper,
weaving and collage, by the
Swiss artist Nicole Dufour.
A
It is in the East European countries, however,
that the most spectacular turnaround is taking
place. In the German Democratic Republic,
Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland, the
democratic "repertoire"to use Charles Tilly's
apt expressionis supplanting the revolutionary
menu. Violence in the streets, the storming of
official buildings, the use of arms, is giving way
to appeals for free elections and an absence of
killing and vengeance. A society is rebuilding
itself, while inflammatory appeals to the people,
to the earthy forces of the proletariat, are heard
no more. In the autumn of 1989, mankind lived
through some of its finest hours and the destruc¬
tion of the Berlin wall put an end to the era
of revolutions which had begun two centuries
earlier with the taking of the Bastille.
These were moving, inspiring sights for all
those who believe that man creates his own his¬
tory rather than being subject to the laws of fate,
whether they be the laws of tradition or of what
we call "progress". We must not, however, naively
interpret this as a "happy ending" which will see
all the nations which had lost their way return
to the strait and narrow path of democratic
modernization. It is true that these nations are
emerging from a dictatorship which was supposed
to be the dictatorship of the proletariat but which
became that of a party and of an ideological
machine and a police state. Yet this does not give
them automatic entry into a democratic system.
Other ways out are possible, and the deeper the
political and economic crisis the more open
they are.
The first way, other than that leading to
democracy, will lead to chaos, if the decomposi¬
tion of the old order prevents the formation of
a new system. There would be a certain terrible
logic in such an outcome for regimes that have
prevented the formation of active members of
society and thus leave behind them a social
vacuum often destined to be filled with political
infighting.
After the fall of its dictator, Romania, where
a diversified, autonomous society has never ex¬
isted and where power has been held by a suc¬
cession of dictatorships and hereditary rulers,
appeared to be on the brink of chaos.
The second way leads to an extreme form of
economic liberalism. If there are no social actors,
if the old regime has stifled the forces of libera¬
tion, if those responsible for running the econo¬
my are incapable of adapting to the demands of
the market, many voices will be raised in favour
of market forces as society's sole guide and for
a massive injection of foreign capital, goods
and methods. In 1990, when Poland adopted
a policy of raw liberalization, prices soared
and the standard of living of ordinary people
collapsed yet the government became more
popular than ever. It seemed as if the entire
country was aware that the old conception of
man must disappear so that a new kind of
man could be born of the constraints and oppor¬
tunities of the market.
In Latin America, this appears to be the most
tempting policy. There is a call for a return to
outward-looking development, for increasing the
gap between a modern sector which can become
integrated into the world market and an infor¬
mal, marginal, poor sector. The most extreme
example of this exaggerated duality is the trade
in drugs, which is Latin America's biggest trans¬
national undertaking and which, even if the
farmers who earn more for growing coca are
included, concentrates resources in the hands of a
few, while the rest of the population is entrapped
in crisis, violence and corruption resulting from
the outflow of capital.
At the same time, the economies of the cen¬
tral core of democratic countries are experienc¬
ing a growing imbalance between capital
movements and trade in goods and services, the
former having become between twenty and fifty
times more important than the latter.
A third way is that taken by societies whose 23

24
^iSíÓM
Computer Automatic
Electronic Machine for
Calculating (1978), acrylic
on canvas by the Ethiopian
artist Boghossian Skunder
(Art Against Apartheid
Collection, see page 38).
active members are defined not by their produc¬
tive role but by their defence of a collective iden¬
tity. Nationalist movements are arising on the
ruins of voluntarist, modernizing, authoritarian
policies. In the Soviet Union, Armenians and
Azerbaijanis have become embroiled in a civil
war which could be duplicated in other Soviet
republics as well as outside the Soviet Union.
Those who thought that nationalism was a spent
force that would be replaced by class struggles
within a modern economy were sadly mistaken.
The Austrian Marxists of the late nineteenth
century and the Leninists themselves failed in
their attempts to associate social with national
struggles. Leninism-Maoism was the most power¬
ful political movement of the mid-twentieth cen¬
tury, but the union of the anti-capitalist and
anti-imperialist struggles that it hoped to create
under the leadership of a communist party was
soon seen to be an artificial one. Revolutionary
groups became bogged down in terrorist activi¬
ties which were a feature of the break-up of
Leninism in Uruguay and Argentina, as they
were in Turkey and Iran.
In addition to these non-democratic paths
there is also the possibility of a militaristic reac¬
tion on the part of threatened regimes which,
maintain themselves in power solely by repres¬
sive measures, thus ensuring their own eventual
self-asphyxiation.
None of these possible solutions can be con¬
sidered democratic, since, in each case, political
choice disappears and the absolute power of the
dictator is replaced by another form of absolute
power, that of the centres of decision that govern
the market, that of extreme nationalist groups or
that of violence.
Enemies of democracy
While it may be true that democracy is not a
form of society but a political regime, a govern¬
ment cannot be called democratic simply because
it raises the standard of living, increases the level
of school enrolment or the life expectancy of the
population. There is no democracy if there is no
choice between the representative groups within
a local or national community. What are the rules
of the game if there are neither players nor play¬
ing field?
Most of the world today is firmly attached
to the democratic ideal, as is shown by the fall
of military regimes in Brazil, Argentina, Uru¬
guay, Paraguay and Chile, the end of the monop¬
oly of communist parties in Poland, Hungary,
Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria and, to some extent
also, in the Soviet Union and Romania, as well
as the disappearance of leftist tendencies opposed
to the principle of parliamentary elections in the
Western countries.
All these developments are in conformity
with the general principles on the basis of which
I have attempted to define democracy the recog¬
nized existence of a society not subject to absolute

state power and as little segmented and hierar¬
chically arranged as possible; the recognition of
rationalization as a key factor in social conflicts
which should combine opposition of interests or
ideas with the notion of the general interest; and
acceptance of the ethical principle of the abso¬
lute right of individuals to the widest possible
freedom of belief and action.
Political philosophers have long sought a
sufficient basis for democracy in institutional
arrangementsfree elections, the separation of
powers, the absence of personal privilegebut
these are descriptions of democratic institutions
rather than an analysis of the fundamentals of
democracy. What I am showing here is that the
existence of democracy depends first of all upon a
double limitation of political and social power by
acknowledgement of rationality and its constraints
and by reference to some form of natural law.
Democracy also requires the greatest possible
social integration and, at the same time, the exis¬
tence of groups of ideas and interests which can
be represented.
In other words, social and cultural segmenta¬
tion are just as much enemies of democracy as are
an overriding appeal to a unifying principle or the
subordination of society to a voluntarist state
which itself takes the place of the active members
of that society.
The need for active participation
in public life
All the prerequisites for the existence of democra¬
cy that have just been mentioned are of a similar
nature. Democracy is possible in so far as the
population of a country constitutes a politically
active whole. It is weakened or disappears where
political choices are determined by a non-social
logicloyalty to a national spirit, the integration
of a community, the will of a ruler, even moder¬
nization itself. Those who equate democracy with
a market economy are just as mistaken as those
who qualify as democratic a regime that emerges
from a revolution or a national liberation move¬
ment supported by the majority of the popula¬
tion. Where there is much abstention from
political life, where national unity is undermined
by strongly marked ethnic, regional, language, re¬
ligious or life-style differences, or where there is
great social inequality, it is difficult to form a po¬
litically active system, a forum for debate and free
political institutions.
Of course, we must not confuse countries that



are less than perfect democracies with those that
are dragged down into chaos and disarray or with
those that overtly sanction forms of discrimina¬
tion or segregation. The fall of a dictatorship does
not automatically entail the installation of a
democracy; this depends primarily on the
democratic spirit, on the ability and the desire to
participate, through free and representative insti¬
tutions, in the creation and application of the law
by citizens and under their control.
How far we are from those anti-social theories
of democracy which explain democracy in the
wealth of a nation, in its beliefs or even in its size.
How urgent it is to seek every possible means to
increase political activity and the ability to debate
and make choices and to combine diversity of in¬
terests with social integration.
We have learned in the last few years, and even
more clearly in the last few months, that democra¬
cy is more opposed to than associated with revo¬
lution, that it requires a great capacity for
endogenous modernization and that, if it is to
be strong, it must reduce social and cultural gaps,
but we are still not sufficiently convinced that
it requires above all a strong participation in
public life.
Some are even tempted to support the notion
that political passion is a threat to democracy and
that a degree of apathy contributes to the smooth
running of institutions. This idea is as unacceptable
as the opposing viewpoint which confuses
democracy with mass demonstrations, for it has
the effect of reducing democracy to freedom for
those who play an active role in economic life.
There is, in fact, no democracy where political
life is subject to any logic other than its own.
Democracy is based on the most active possible
participation by the greatest possible number of
people in the making and application of political
decisions.
Libertad y las Americas
(1986), pastel on paper by
the American artist Rupert
Garcia. Inspired by
Delacroix, the allegorical
figure of Liberty leading the
People is here transposed to
the context of the Americas.
25
