s.
/TONEHENGE is the most famous prehistoric place
in Europe. Like the pyramids of Egypt and the Great
Wall of China, it is one of the few archaeological sites
known the world over. What is Stonehenge? Why does
it deserve to be celebrated?
Stonehenge is the ruin of a single stone building.
It stands on grassland, on the handsome undulating
chalk downs of southern England, about 120 kilometres
west of London. Nearly half the great blocks of stone
which its full design needs have disappeared, taken away
to make bridges, broken up for building stone; or
perhaps the full design was never completed. Seen from
the ground today, Stonehenge is a confusion of stones,
many of them neatly trimmed to a clean shape. Some
stand upright, as high as 6 metres above ground.
Others, a little smaller, bridge across from one upright
to another. Others lie broken or half-buried in the
grass. Seen from the air, or studied in a plan, the stones
show themselves to have once been arranged geometri¬
cally, the majority in two circles and in two U-shaped
settings, so the basic design of the place is straightfor¬
ward enough.
Stonehenge is not large. Its main part is 30 metres
in diameter and there are less than 200 blocks in the
full design. But the blocks themselves are remarkable.
They weigh many tonnes, and show in protected places
the traces of the mason's work, where they were ham¬
mered and rubbed into shape. In other places, less
sheltered, their rough surfaces betray the force of 40
centuries of British summers and winters which have
worn and coarsened the rock. The larger blocks come
from sandstone deposits about 45 kilometres to the
north of Stonehenge, and the smaller ones from beds
of volcanic rocks in Wales, 200 kilometres to the west.
The experts are at present arguing as to whether pre¬
historic people dragged the stones from Wales, or
whether the swirling ice of glaciers had conveniently
delivered them by natural causes near to Stonehenge.
Although Stonehenge is a stone building, it is not
built with walls and arches. Each column is a single
upright stone, buried into a chalk foundation to hold it
in place. Each horizontal is a single stone also, held in
place by a peg carved on the top surface of the upright
which fits into a matching socket under the horizon¬
tal. This is the technique of the carpenter.
Who built Stonehenge? That we do know. Radio¬
carbon dating, the scientific method on which the pre¬
historic chronology of Europe depends, shows that the
main part of Stonehenge is about 4,000 years old,
though portions are several centuries older or youn¬
ger. This is many hundred years before the Roman em¬
pire reached out from the Mediterranean to the north,
so one can be sure that Stonehenge was built by the
inhabitants of the ancient British Isles, rather than in¬
vaders from the south. They too were responsible for
building several hundred other stone circles across the
islands, some larger than Stonehenge and some smaller,
but none so complex in layout or built of such neatly
shaped blocks. And right across northwest Europe,
from the Atlantic coast of Spain to the Baltic Sea, peo¬
ple at that time were in the habit of building tombs,
temples, and lines of stones out of great blocks. All these
monuments archaeologists call megaliths, from the an¬
cient Greek words for "great" and "stone", because it
is the massive size of the blocks that impresses.
How did they build Stonehenge? When some fallen
stones were lifted back up during the 1950s, they were
so heavy that the largest mobile crane then available
in Britain was needed. Yet the builders of Stonehenge
had no powered machinery; their kit was made of stone,
of soft chalk, and of trimmed tree trunks and branches.
They must have had ropes to pull the stones; we
believe that these were twisted from strips of cow hide.
It would have taken many hundreds of people many
long days to shift the stones across country to the site,
to hammer at the hard surface to trim the shape and
make the pegs and holes for the joints, and to

manoeuvre each stone into place with chalk ramps or
wood packing.
What was Stonehenge for? The care taken in its
building, and the vast expenditure of labour that it in¬
volved, make it evident that it was of the greatest im¬
portance. Stonehenge could not have been a houseit
never had a roofor a place to keep animals. It was
not a mundane building whose purpose is simply prac¬
tical. Its meaning was spiritual, it was some kind of holy
or sacred place. In short, it was a temple.
As centuries passed, the importance of Stonehenge
faded. None of the Roman authors who reported on
the state of Britain 2,000 years after it was built make
a mention of it, and in the end it was forgotten com¬
pletely. The name Stonehenge is medieval, and indi¬
cates the period when it was noticed again. So we have
no direct record of just who or what was worshipped
at Stonehenge, and why this particular spot was chosen
to be made sacred.
The evidence of Stonehenge itself, pieced together
by minute study and archaeological observation, gives
some clues. First, there is the exactness of the design,
judged to a precision of a few centimetres and carried
out on a grand scale: this is the work of some command¬
ing experta person who today would be called an ar¬
chitect. Second, there is the execution of the design and
the great effort this would have required from small
and scattered communities of subsistence farmers: this
was a community venture which made demands on all.
Third, the space inside the Stonehenge circles is not
large: it would hold at most 300 peoplemany fewer
than the number involved in the building. One thinks
of the common structure of sacred buildings, with an
outer area open to all, and a special inner place reserved
for the priests, where more holy matters are celebrated.
The central area of Stonehenge, surrounded by stone
uprights that close it off from the open area outside,
is similar in area to the choir of a medieval European
cathedral.
There is another clue. Stonehenge is designed to
fall symmetrically around an axis that runs from south¬
west to north-east. And from the north-east entrance
an avenue, visible on the ground as eroded earth banks,
runs across country on that same north-eastern axis.
That axis is aligned in the direction of sunrise at the
summer solstice, 21 June in the modern calendar, the
longest day of the British year. A small number of other
megalithic monuments seem to have similar align¬
ments: the Newgrange mound in western Ireland, a
little older than Stonehenge, is aligned to sunrise at
the winter solstice, the shortest day of the British
winter. The conclusion is obvious: Stonehenge was a
temple of the sun.
Modern astronomers, looking at the position of
individual stones and calculating how they might relate
to movements of sun and moon, think that Stonehenge
is more than a temple; it is some kind of observatory
where exact study of the heavens was made, the move¬
ments of sun and moon tracked, and their eclipses
predicted. Archaeologists, knowing that alignments can
arise by chance and doubting that prehistoric Britons
were any kind of white-coated scientist, are not con¬
vinced. I am not sure myself even that the sun was wor¬
shipped at Stonehenge, although the miracle of its daily
rebirth in the eastern dawn each morning must have
had a full place in prehistoric Britons' view of their
life and world. Notice that Christian churches are
aligned towards the east, towards sunrise in fact: yet
Christianity is not the worship of the sun.
We do not know exactly what was worshipped at
Stonehenge. We do not know if everyone in the com¬
munity went to it, or only a special few men or women
or children or old people. We do not know if worship¬
pers entered it in joy or terror. We do not know if
worship filled their lives or meant their deaths. But we
do know that Stonehenge was a religious place, a
sacred site.
CHRISTOPHER CHIPPINDALE,
British archaeologist, is editor
of the international journal
Antiquity and a curator at the
University of Cambridge
Museum of Archaeology and
Anthropology, United Kingdom.
	r
Stonehen
BY CHRISTOPHER CHIPPINDALE
