A living eternity
BY AYYAM WASSEF
Xhe desert, place of all beginnings, should
perhaps be our point of departure. If we are to
glimpse the secret of those who built for eternity,
perhaps we should rediscover the desert as it was
before the pyramids were built. I am no historian
and I say "perhaps" to authorize myself to
imagine this legendary starting point, to visualize
the birth of ancient Egyptian art.
There are countries where this type of anal¬
ysis of aesthetic activity seems to conform to their
topography. Egypt is one of them. The land of
Egypt is,. basically, a tabula rasa on which the
course of the Nile, from south to north, and that
of the sun, from east to west, provide the co¬
ordinates of an ideal map, which already existed
before it was known to man. Geometry is not
the fruit of reasoning alone. Here shapes stand
out against the even planes of the desert, in the
pure, limpid light, with the precise beauty of a
definition. The timeless horizon is spanned by
the cyclical movement of the sun and cut by the
flowing river, a living constant between two
banks of eternity. In this land of constants, geom¬
etry is born of the ritual encounter of light and
space. Symbol of symbols, this hallowed
encounter spawns and reveals the very essence of
aesthetics. "O Ra whose rays created the eyes of
all living creatures..."
Dayr al-Bahrithe hallowed vision
The tall cliff face of the western mountain rises
up on the left bank of the Nile. The mountain
is an affirmation of all that the desert is not. The
timeless desert is a gaping, motionless immensity,
open to the winds. The slightest breeze fashions
landscapes or carves out pathways that are cons¬
tantly erased. The fluid chaotic sliding of the sand
acts as a form of self-suppression that is time itself
(or its absence, which amounts to the same thing).
Simultaneously encompassing past, present and
future, the desert is fully aware of the absolute
present of abstractions. The desert has no
memory, no history and is open to all eventuali¬
ties. It is the zero point of history, even the his¬
tory of the Earth itself.
In contrast, a mountain is solidity itself. A
mountain has a memory, conserving the furrows
gouged by the wind and accepting their suc¬
cessors. It is a monument, a record of history, a
cryptogram of time. A mountain can be visual¬
ized, but the desert always eludes our grasp. Like
any inert solid, a mountain can be imagined.
Unlike the desert, it is raw material waiting to
be given a shape. Who fashions these shapes? Not
the wind, which carves unwittingly, forming
shadows in the dark. To shape is to make visible.
The prime fashioner of shapes is the sun.
The eye of the sun is the first to look upon
the dark mountain. As the sunlight describes con¬
tours, it affords a host of viewpoints and of
unchanging images. As it lights up the mountain,
the sun gives a shape to the dark polymorphous
mass, and this first fashioning is indeed a "birth",
a "coming to light" which is akin to the process
whereby a notion comes to the mind of an artist.
Mimicking the sun, the eye creates the world
in all its beauty. The solar eye etches the dark
mountain with its rays and carves out its own
temple. Dayr al-Bahri, the funerary temple of
Queen Hatshepsut at Thebes, is carved out of the
western mountain just as the mountain itself was
carved out of darkness. A pastiche of the natural
art of the architect-sun, it reveals the laws
governing its own creation and the process by
which the eye brings a whole world to light. The
temple hallows the solar metaphor of the eye as
the sculptor of the world. We are at the begin¬
ning, the moment when time becomes time; the
creative act is not a part of the historical1 process;
it marks a new beginning. The temple of Dayr
al-Bahri is a temple fashioned by the creator's eye.
Its beauty, breaking away from the eternity of
the desert, makes history possible. What we refer
to as the "dark mists of time" precede the enlight¬
ening, creative irruption of the eye's vision. This
is what the temple of Dayr al-Bahri has captured
for ever in stonethe beauty of the world at its
birth.
The bas-reliefs of memory
Although the creative act inaugurates time, it also
inscribes its own history therein. The walls,
ceilings and columns of Egyptian temples are
covered with carvings portraying rituals, liturgies
and scenes of war. On the porticoes of Hat-
shepsut's funerary temple, bas-relief carvings
depict the divine birth of the Queen, the naval
expedition to the land of Punt (the Somali coast),
Above, dancers at a banquet.
Detail from an Egyptian tomb
painting (c. 1400 BC).
Opposite page left: Marlene
Dietrich, the German-born
American actress, In
Dishonored (1931), a film
directed by Josef von
Sternberg; at right, a painted
limestone bust of Nefertiti,
queen of Egypt (14th century
BC), preserved in the Egyptian
Museum, Berlin.
AYYAM WASSEF,
Egyptian essayist, is preparing
a doctoral thesis at the
University of Paris I on the
theme of the individual in
contemporary philosophy. Her
publications include a study of
the German-Jewish philosopher
Martin Buber. She is currently
writing an account of her
experiences as an Egyptian
living in Paris. 15

16
and record for eternity the glory of the sovereign.
So subtle is the delineation that it seems more
like drawing than sculpture. The sculptors fol¬
lowed the pattern set by the wind, the outer walls
of monuments are hollowed out while those
inside are raised. They carved out the background
of the scene so that the details of each figure
are revealed by the slightest of surface variations.
The sculptor's hand informs the stone, engraving
in it a memory destined to last throughout
eternity.
This is why each artist respected the famous
"conventions", or rituals of his craft, the first of
which was the law of ideal proportion. Any per¬
sonal innovation would destroy the permanence
sought. Whereas the carvings made by the wind
on the mountainside can be modified by other
winds, the artist tames erosion, takes command of
the wind and imposes his law upon it. By per¬
petuating the sculptor's act, technique confers
stability.
Thus the exploits of a specific monarch,
recounted in accordance with superhuman rules,
escape the realm of history and are inscribed in
eternity. Everything is portrayed in accordance
with conventions whose disdain for perspective
demonstrates that beauty is not a personal reve¬
lation. The viewpoint is that of the sun, the vision
of the ultimate eye, beside which any subjective
vision is an illusion, if not a misconception. In
the incorruptibility of matter, in the unity of a
form, "man has become Man" and has joined the
immortal gods.
The art of the fresco-
eternity in rhythm
"Nothing in art, not even movement, should
appear accidental". This remark by Degas, which
he used to describe his own technique for con¬
veying the ethereal grace of a dancer in the immo
bility of a drawing, applies with uncanny
accuracy to the frescoes of ancient Egypt. Degas
also portrayed figures in profile yet looking out
of the picture, sometimes in scenes painted from
the wings and sometimes when he brilliantly jux¬
taposed figures in movement and repose.
Critics have long commented on the static
quality of Egyptian art and denounced its
"strange blindness". But it is precisely through
tireless repetition of the same outline that purity
of line can be achieved. Symbolic painting cap¬
tures the essence of the dancer's movement, the
epitome of all movement. Think of the rigorous
training of dancers, their obstinate repetition of
each movement until it becomes exaggerated. In
performing her dance, a dancer must free herself
from her body and reach abstraction, the very
The temple of Queen
Hatshepsut at Dayr al-Bahri,
15th century BC.

i -J***"
****>
rt ft
. '¥
'
'S .-M^si .i, I!	-J^1I111, '"
.«-^ ,| ^-' -
¿Ts
v
:i¡üífi .-¿
heart of the dance, its truth. The dancer can thus
be seen as an incarnation of drawing. Egyptian
painting is full of dancers and dances, from the
sacred, ritual dances performed in homage to the
goddess Hathor to the secular dances that are por¬
trayed in banqueting scenes. We see the dancers,
agile magicians, moving in eternity.
Three dancers are shown cunningly inter¬
laced, as though snapped by a camera at different
stages of a single movement. They perform
pirouettes, leg lifts, and the acrobatic "wheel"
the feathery lightness of the outline indicating
that the movement is incomplete. The same
method is used to portray processions, with
individual members of the crowd depicted in suc¬
cessive poses indicating forward movement. We
hear the rhythm of their step, just as we hear the
unceasing lament of the mourners in the slow
motion expression of their collective grief.
Beauty is present, then, in a living eternity.
Far from being motionless in time, it oscillates
between what has been and what is to come. This
is the rhythmic beat of a masterpiece, looking
towards its future interpretations, for beauty car¬
ries on an "invincible dialogue" with time.
Beauty and time
Breaking with the primeval desert, the temple of
Hatshepsut set history in motion and on it
inscribed its memory, but it too was exposed to
the vagaries of timethe winds of historyas
dynastic rivalries inflicted upon the temple
another form of erosion. After the death of 17

18
Hatshepsut, Thutmose III defiled her memory,
breaking statues and hammering out her name.
Yet for us these mutilated faces are still works
of art. The mutilations of some of them have
proved fortunate in the sense that they struck a
chord among admirers of a later age. Time revives
beauty, and beauty senses this and glows at this
hoped-for encounter. A work of art originates a
dream which it is our business to perpetuate; its
endless journey in time is helped along by a
procession of constantly changing onlookers.
The glorious destiny of the unfinished head
of Nefertiti in the Cairo Museum is perhaps an
illustration of this regenerating dialogue. With its
barely outlined features and painted lips, it calls
for an unending process of interpretation. Beauty
is already there, but the unfinished state informs
us that there is yet more to come.
However, the fascination that this sublime
sketch, perhaps no more than a sculptor's trial
run, holds for us today probably owes even more
to its unfinished state than to the fame of Queen
Nefertiti. She is "sublime" since we see in her
our own modernity. It is tempting to reply,
paraphrasing Schoenberg, that she is not modern,
she is simply unfinished. But incompleteness is
the order of the day. The proof of this is that the
unfinished head has finally eclipsed the com¬
pleted, fully-painted portrait bust of Nefertiti in
the Berlin Museum. Is it over-done? In this per¬
fectly finished head, the unexpected angle formed
by the dip of the vast head-dress and the queen's
graceful neck bears witness to an artistic mastery
which is itself divine. But let the divine hold its
peace; silence can be more eloquent than words.
There are negative forms of aesthetics in which
beauty is remarkable by its absence. It is not sur¬
prising that the unfinished head of Nefertiti
should become the idol of moderns who prefer
writing to what is written and fragments to
poems.
When the enigma of the beginning, of the
primordial birth, has been solved, it would seem
that to live again in a new era is simply to repeat
in new deserts the rite of commencement. The
faces of Egyptian statuary smile at this children's
game of making, unmaking, remaking time,
which, after all, simply means coming to terms
with time itself.
There is nothing particularly Egyptian in
wanting to overcome the harsh transitoriness of
existence and to pursue in the permanence of cre¬
ation the impossible dream of immortality. This
may be an heroic struggle, but it is no less banal
for that. What is less banal is, in the desperate
search for the most suitable means of greeting the
eternal, to have penetrated to the essential nature
of things. The greatest achievement of all, in
seeking the guidelines that deliver one from death,
is to have found the secret of perpetual life to
have known how to create forms that will be
capable, thousands of years later, of engendering
new meaning. 1
1
I
$
Above, unfinished head in
rose quartzite of Queen
Nefertiti (14th century BC),
preserved in the Cairo
Museum.
Right, Greta Garbo
(1905-1990) in Rouben
Mamoulian's film Queen
Christina (1933).
