Herodotus
Roving reporter
of the Ancient World
'E
16
Lerodotus of Halicarnassus, his Researches
are here set down to preserve the memory of the
past by putting on record the astonishing achieve¬
ments both of our own and of other peoples...
that the great deeds of men may not be forgotten...
whether Greeks or foreigners: and especially, the
causes of the war between them."*
In this introduction to his Histories, Herodo¬
tus (c. 490-425 BC) provides us with perhaps the
earliest definition of the historian's aims and con¬
cerns. Some sixty years earlier, his precursor
Hecataeus of Miletus, who had sought to inquire
rationally into the mythical legends of the
Greeks, explained his intentions in the follow¬
ing terms: "Thus speaks Hecataeus of Miletus:
I write these things inasmuch as I consider them
to be truthful; in fact, the legends of the Greeks
are numerous and, to my mind, ridiculous." In
this tetchy assertion of the author's role we can
already see the two requirements of historiogra¬
phy in the Hellenic world: it must be written and
it must be truthful.
With Herodotus the tone changes. He does
not seek to give his own personal interpretation
of what he relates, and usually he compares the
different versions of stories he has collected. He
* Quotations from Herodotus: The Histories, translated by
Aubrey de Sélincourt, Penguin Classics, 1954.
BY CARMINE
AMPOLO
wants to talk about his researches, tell of his
inquiries. History as he understands it is at once
the gathering of information and the recounting
of a story. He thus inaugurated the two main
trends in Greek historiography for centuries
to come. Sometimes one would be given
prominence, sometimes the other, but the prime
imperative was always truthfulness, even in the
case of historians who attached very great impor¬
tance to narrative.
The art of storytelling
When Herodotus describes his work as an "ex¬
position of his researches, the narration of an in¬
quiry", these ambivalent terms must be taken to
mean both the oral transmission of a story and
its written formulation. The blending of oral and
written styles in the Histories can be explained
by the fact that Herodotus would give public
readings of the various stories (logoi) making up
his work. This is confirmed by the allusions in
the text to audience reaction, and by the circular
structure of the writing.
Above left, bust of
Herodotus.
Above, "The pomp and
ceremony of King Cyrus in
Babylon" (Anonymous
engraving, 1820).
CARMINE AMPOLO,
of Italy, teaches Greek history
at the University of Pisa. He
has carried out research on
the origins of ancient Rome,
on Greek politics and society,
and on the relationship
between myth and history.
Among his published works
are La citta antica (1983; "The
Ancient City") and, with M.
Manfredini, Le vite di Teseo
et di Romolo (1988; "The
Lives of Theseus and
Romulus").

This practice had a marked effect on the com¬
position of the work, which may seem to be
something of a patchwork, with its countless
digressions that sometimes fit into one another
like Chinese boxes or Russian dolls. More a
painter than a sculptor, Herodotus excels in the
art of storytelling and possesses the gift of en¬
thralling his audience, whether listener or reader,
by his descriptions of a detail, an episode or an
individual.
He often tells a story which he has heard at
second or third hand. For example, after describ¬
ing the victory of the Athenians over the Persi¬
ans at Marathon, he tells what happened to the
Athenian soldier Epizelos, who lost his sight
while fighting in the battle, though nothing had
hit him: "I am told that in speaking about what
happened to him he used to say that he fancied
he was opposed by a man of great stature in heavy
armour, whose beard overshadowed his shield;
but the phantom passed him by, and killed the
man at his side." It would be a mistake to see this
as Herodotus directly reporting what he has
heard, but rather as an example of the mirror play
that is a common feature of the Histories: Epizelos
tells his story, others repeat it, Herodotus hears
it and tells it in his turn.
This is not simply a taste for the fantastic or
the marvellous, for which Herodotus is so often
criticized, but a delight in intriguing and surpris¬
ing his audience. He is able to arouse people's
curiosity because his own is so great. He is in¬
terested in all kinds of out-of-the-way details, the
customs of each people and all the wonders of
the world, whether events, inventions or monu¬
ments like the pyramids of Egypt, the labyrinth
above Lake Moeris and the walls of Babylon. In
his quest for knowledge, Herodotus would travel
and make inquiries of those who might have in¬
formation about the countries visitedscholars,
priests or people whose names are not recorded:
"I learn by inquiry."
The reason for this passion for research
emerges clearly in the introduction to the Histo¬
ries: it is the historian's task to combat time, to
preserve what he considers to be memorable. In
the Greek cities and sanctuaries there were al¬
ready "memorizers" (mnemones) responsible for 17

18
recollecting and recording divine and human oc¬
currences. But the historian's concerns are much
loftier than the purely administrative, legal and
religious functions of the mnemones. All the
illustrious deeds and labours (ergo) that he relates
must retain their kleos, their aura of glory, their
renown. In some ways Herodotus seems to carry
on where the epic poets left off. They recounted
the deeds of heroes, the historian recounts the
deeds of men.
The insatiable curiosity shown by Herodotus
in his investigations and travels considerably
broadened the scope of written history, which
ceased to consist solely of myths, genealogical lists
and ethno-historical material relating to particular
peoples or communities. Although he wanted to
preserve as much as possible, he had to select
which of the facts to save. For the historian who
takes as his subject "great and marvellous
actions", not everything is memorable.
Herodotus was aware of the amount of space
given in his Histories to the long parentheses of
the storyteller. On one occasion he even confess¬
es: "I need not apologize for the digressionit
has been my plan throughout this work." To un¬
derstand this attitude, we should not use modern
criteria nor even refer to later Greek authors
whose works, which were designed exclusively
to be read, seem to be better constructed. In a
work addressed primarily to listeners and only
subsequently to readers, not only the form but
the choice of material were determined by the
exigencies of spoken communication. It is not
enough for details to be historically revealing or
admirable; they must also be entertaining and,
whether glorious or despicable, arouse the curi¬
osity of the narrator and strike a chord in the
minds of his audience.
An investigator at work
What was Herodotus' raw material? Much of the
Histories records the history and customs of peo¬
ples incorporated in the Persian empire (or those
of peoples like the Scythians which were unsuc¬
cessfully fought by the empire) as well as facts
about the Greek cities in the sixth and fifth cen¬
turies BC. The culmination is confrontation be¬
tween the Greeks and the Persians, which
accounts for less than half the work.
Herodotus does not speak of a single people,
nor even of a single Greek city, nor of Greece
in its entirety. He erects no barriers, shows no
scorn. He does not really differentiate between
the Greeks and other peoples, the "Barbarians".
Born at a time which, under the influence of the
Sophists, saw the development of cultural relati¬
vism, and originating from a region at the
meeting-point of East and West, he showed curi¬
osity, consideration and even respect for other
cultures.
He nevertheless viewed them through Greek
eyes. In keeping with a typically Hellenic way
of seeing the foreigner as a reversed image of
Above, combat between
Greeks and Barbarians.
Detail of a marble frieze
from the "Nereid monument
(c. 400 BC) of Xanthus,
Asia Minor, now in the
British Museum, London.

Scenes from the siege of
Troy are shown below on
two parts of a white
limestone bas-relief from the
ancient site of Trysa in
Turkey. (4th century BC.
Kunsthistorisches Museum,
Vienna.)
oneself, he depicted the behaviour of other peoples
as the antithesis of that of the Greeks. Among
the "strange practices" of the Egyptians, for ex¬
ample, he mentions that "women attend market
and are employed in trade, while men stay at
home and do the weaving.... Men in Egypt carry
loads on their heads, women on their shoul¬
ders...." His enumeration of their differences ends
as follows: "In writing or calculating, instead of
going, like the Greeks, from left to right, the
Egyptians go from right to leftand obstinately
maintain that theirs is the dexterous method, ours
being left-handed and awkward."
This comparative method can be seen as a
way of classifying and hence of understanding.
But Herodotus also observes similarities, which
he scrupulously notes, as in the case of the
Spartans. Customs on the death of a king, he
reports, "are the same in Sparta as in Asia", and
"the Spartans resemble the Egyptians in that they
make certain callings hereditary: town-criers (her¬
alds), flute-players and cooks are all, respectively,
sons of fathers who followed the same
profession."
Although he does not go as far as Thucydides
in saying that the Greeks lived formerly in the
same way as the Barbarians today, and although
he maintains a distance between the two worlds,
he does not regard them as two monolithic
blocks, one of which is in certain respects inferior
to the other or culturally backward. Different
though they may be, he acknowledges the many
qualities of the Barbarians, considering, for ex¬
ample, that the Greek gods have Egyptian ori¬
gins, that Egyptian civilization is older than that
of the Greeks, and that the Persians have numer¬
ous virtues.
The Histories end with a revealing anecdote.
To convince his people not to attempt to settle
in more fertile lands, the Persian King Cyrus the
Great declares to his troops that "soft countries
breed soft men", pointing out that the Greeks
have preferred to keep their freedom on a harsh
land rather than to be slaves cultivating fertile
plains for others. It is thus a Persian sovereign
who enunciates a truth applying chiefly to the
Greeks. Herodotus also sets among the Persians
a discussion on the best form of government-
democracy, oligarchy or monarchy. They are
foreigners, enemies, but not completely different.
They could even, in theory at least, be like the
Greeks, in the same way that the Greeks in some
respects resemble them.
Herodotus does not try to describe a series
of mythical or historical events since their ori¬
gins or even from one of the traditional mile¬
stones in Greek history, as other historians were
to do after him. His field of studythe Median
wars and the events that led up to themcovers
a fairly recent period. That which is remote in
time is left to poets and genealogists. He displays
the same attitude towards Egypt, distinguishing
what he has witnessed personally from the infor¬
mation he has collected from the Egyptians. If
he consults Persian, Phoenician or Egyptian scho¬
lars about mythical episodes, such as the abduc¬
tion of Helen and the Trojan War, it is mainly
in order to retrace and understand the causes of
the Median wars.
In choosing as his area of investigation recent
history of which he could have direct knowledge,
Herodotus had a decisive influence on the
development of historiography. Thucydides, half
a generation younger, would go even further
than his great predecessor, directing his gaze to
current events.
19
