In Panama,
Haiti and
Colombia,
traditions of
popular art and
culture are
reflected in
colourfully
decorated trucks
and buses
MOIRA F. HARRIS
is an American art historian
who specializes in forms of
popular culture such as
outdoor murals and painted
vehicles. She is the author of
Art on the Road: The Painted
Vehicles of the Americas,
Pogo Press, Minnesota. 1988.



Art on the road
AlCK a street, any street, in Panama City or
Port-au-Prince and you'll probably see them.
You'll find them in Medellin, Colombia, as well,
but there you must visit the outskirts of town
or the market area. "They" are the wonderfully
decorated buses and trucks which are the
privately-owned public transportation of these
cities. Ride a tap-tap, chiva or bus and you're in
for an aesthetic treat. You'll travel down the
street in a marvellous mix of art and words,
accompanied by flashing lights and pulsating
music.
Each of these vehicles began life as a solid
colour truck or bus accented with chrome. Each
has now been rebuilt for its new role in life and
decorated to suit the current fashion. Students of
popular culture agree that the paintings and
words decorating these vehicles offer an insight
into widely shared attitudes and beliefs, into the
"soul", perhaps, of Panama, Haiti and Colombia.
BY MOIRA F. HARRIS
The art of decorating these painted trucks and
buses basically started after the Second World
War, although there may be older examples of
it. Chivas, tap-taps and buses quickly won an
important place in the local economies and affec¬
tions. Every so often other types of buses or
trucks are brought in to replace the painted
vehicles, but these interlopers will never obscure
the place which chivas, tap-taps and buses have
already earned in the literature and art of their
respective countries.
In Panama, yellow school buses built in the
United States are the raw material. The original
colour is quickly hidden under layers of sprayed or
airbrushed paint. Along the sides of the bus,
beneath the windows, very long images are
The canine characters painted on this Colombian truck are
Inspired by advertising calendars produced by the Brown
and Blgelow Company In the 1930s and Illustrated by a
New York artist, Cassius M. Coolldge.
31

A writhing dragon adorns
this Panamanian bus.
Kustom car In Pennsylvania,
USA.

shown. A speeding semi-trailer truck, a mermaid
in her undersea home, a view of mountains with a
distant castle, or even the turning, writhing form
of a dragon are among the images painted here.
Bus art
The rear emergency door is regarded as the most
important spot for bus art, a focal point where
an artist concentrates his best work, probably
because the rear door is seen the most easily and
for the longest time as the bus passes. Artists sign
these back door paintings with name or nick¬
name, sometimes with "Painted by..." and, occa¬
sionally, with a telephone number so that other
customers may locate them.
The subject for a back door bus painting can
be religious or secular, but it is almost never polit¬
ical. Artists become adept in certain categories.
Those bus owners who want Christ, the Virgin
Mary, or various saints painted know which
artists to choose, as do those who prefer comic
strip superheroes like Mexico's Kaliman, com¬
mercial cartoon characters like the Playboy
Bunny, or television actors. A star's popularity
could well be rated by his appearance or disap¬



pearance from bus art. Hollywood's "Mr. T" in
his gold chains and Don Johnson, the Miami Vice
cop, may well be painted over now that their
programmes no longer appear on prime time
television.
Jesus Teodoro de Villarue, or "Yo Yo" as he
is affectionately known, is regarded as one of the
old masters of Panamanian bus art. Yo Yo taught
his sons and other apprentices how to paint, but
he felt that there were other bus artists who
needed his guidance as well. So Yo Yo created
for posterity a series of lessons in rear door
painting. Carefully numbered and titled "Arte
Popular", Yo Yo's lessons can be seen on the rear
doors and windows of twenty Panamanian buses.
Ferocious lions, fierce eagles and even cigar-
smoking dogs are portrayed on the back doors
of buses and trucks. Two painters, one in Panama
and the other in Colombia, were inspired by the
same advertising calendar printed by the Brown
and Bigelow Company, a North American adver¬
tising specialities firm. For many years Brown
and Bigelow calendars have featured a series of
dog paintings originally created by a New York
artist named Cassius Marcellus Coolidge who
died in 1934. Often shown smoking fat cigars
(Coolidge had earlier painted cigar box lids), these
bulldogs, collies and Great Danes played cards,
billiards and baseball, and went to the races.
While Panamanian bus art reflects the changing
urban popular culture of television, movies and
music, the subjects for Colombian chiva painters 33

focus more often on rural life. Chivas are rebuilt
trucks, converted to carry both passengers and
agricultural products from Colombian villages to
markets in larger cities such as Medellin, Cali or
Cartagena. Both the names for these trucks and
the styles of decoration vary from one Colom¬
bian province to another. Many observers feel
that the camion de escalera or ladder truck of
Antioquia province is the most beautiful of all.
Cows and coffee
To rebuild a large Ford or General Motors truck,
workers remove the entire cargo area, replacing it
Religious and secular themes
Intermingle In tap-tap
decoration, Haiti.
34
with a partially enclosed structure. The interior
is arranged with rows of removable seats which
can be entered from the outside at every row.
This arrangement was copied from old trolley
cars which also had numerous side entrances. If
the chiva's load is large, two cows, for example,
or multiple sacks of coffee, it is easy to remove
most, if not all, of the seats.
The design along both exterior sides of the
chiva is, by longtime convention, geometric.
Carefully measured triangles, circles and lines are
painted in the area below the windows and
between the rows of seats. The rear door is
reserved for the chiva painter's major effort.
The clients of chiva painters bring postcards
to suggest the subjects that they want to see
painted on the rear door. Perhaps San Francisco's
Golden Gate Bridge, a cottage in a mountain
valley, or a jumbo jet in flight, will remind the
chiva owner of places he might like to visit
someday. Religious scenes are often based on
chromolithographs, as they are in Panama and
Haiti. The Virgin and Child, St. Peter against a
fluffy background of clouds, or scenes from the
Life of Christ, all can be traced to readily avail¬
able printed sources. A particular scene showing
Christ carrying the Cross is intended to refer to
a pilgrimage site in the nearby town of Girardota.
What is completely missing in the range of
Colombian chiva painting is any reference to the
worlds of television, movies and popular music.
Tina Turner, Rambo and Janet Jackson have not
made it to Colombia. When the chiva heads



down the road to the market in the nearest big
city, the passengers may well have glimpsed a
copy of Millet's The Gleaners on the back door,
but not a whiff of Miami Vice.
Medellin does not allow chiva drivers to
follow routes within the city as they once did
since it is felt that overloaded chivas are dan¬
gerous. In Haiti, overloaded or not, tap-taps are
everywhere. For short trips within the cities or
for long hauls between towns, tap-taps and their
larger cousins, the bois fouille trucks, rule the
routes.
In Haiti a tap-tap begins life as a pickup truck.
Once tap-taps were built on the bodies of Fords
and Chevrolets, but now the names of Isuzu,
Mazda and Toyota are more often seen on the
tailgates. The cargo area of a pickup may be small,
but it can be arranged to provide seats and easy
access. First the tailgate is removed. It is divided
with the sections placed on either side of what
is now the entrance to the tap-tap. Sides and a
roof are built of wood making the "habitat" in
which the passengers will ride, seated on benches
paralleling the walls. Even though this size tap-
tap does not have a great deal of space to decorate,
whatever room there is on the exterior walls and
doors is painted with fruits, flowers, birds and
animals. The habitat of the large boisfouille truck
is built with an open side entrance, the opening
often having a carved and brightly painted frame.
Tap-taps have names painted over the wind¬
shields and along the roof of the habitat. Bumpers
and fenders provide space for a constantly
expanding literature of slogans, mottoes and refer¬
ences to biblical verses. There is not always
enough space to transcribe an entire passage from
the Scriptures, so tap-tap painters abbreviate by
writing Psaumes 1, Exode 14:14, or Romains 15:7
in available places. Names include those of family
members and friends, names of saints, places, or
those of well-known people such as Jean-Paul
Belmondo, Al Capone, or Diego Maradona the
soccer player. Tap-tap writing is a multi-lingual
world of Creole, French, Spanish and English
which freely mingles the topical and the religious,
but seldom includes any political comment.
Erzulie Freda's flamingoes
At first the portraits of the saints and of the Holy
Family on Haitian tap-taps seem very familiar
since they are often based on the same stock
images used by artists in Colombia and Panama.
However, the viewer's interpretation may not be
the same at all. Believers in vodun, the syncretic
religion of Haiti, look at St. James the Major (or
Santiago) and see Ogun the "loa" or god of war.
The Virgin Mary in crown and robes as the
Queen of Heaven is understood to be really

Ê9fP5Bl
I vAV^i
ri^fMiA
s<
A Haitian bofs fouille truck. Erzulie Freda, the loa of love in Haiti. Colours,
birds, animals and flowers are linked to certain
loas so the tap-tap artist will often incorporate
Agoue's boat, Ogun's sword, or Erzulie's
flamingoes in his overall design. Paintings and
slogans showing Christ as the Good Shepherd
may be interpreted both as Christian imagery and
as the tap-tap owner's wish for divine protection
in his often risky business.
Haiti's tap-tap painters are said to have been
inspired by the example of one car painted by
many artists in the 1940s. It was a jeep owned
by DeWitt Peters who had come to Port-au-
Prince to teach English, but stayed to become the
founding father of the contemporary art move¬
ment in the country. Peters' students painted and
repainted that historic jeep which then served as
a prototype for tap-tap painters who wanted to
expand their repertoire beyond the lettering of
routes, fares and owner's names.
Both the words "tap-tap" or "quickly" in
Creole and "chiva" or "little goat" in Spanish
suggest the speed with which these trucks travel
in search of passengers. Music from radios and
tapedecks heralds their passage through crowded
streets. Tap-tap drivers string Christmas tree
lights around the habitats' roofs while the engines
of Panamanian buses are draped with blinking
lights so the buses seem like enormous pinball
machines when they are driven after dark. Plastic
streamers fastened to rear view mirrors flutter in
the wind to accent the speed of buses and trucks.
With each of these vehicles there is a sense
that a rider is entering a driver's private domain.
Lured by the music, the fluttering ribbons and
the flashing lights, the rider climbs aboard to find
more paintings and words within. On the dash¬
board may be a small shrine where a protective
figure stands surrounded by flowers, charms and
medallions. Painted on the back windows are
swags of curtains with fringes and tassels, a per¬
fect touch to complete the decor of a travelling
home. While outside the slogans hint at the
driver's bold, macho persona, inside the dash¬
board shrine suggests his awareness of the daily
risks and gambles he takes as a driver. Driving
isn't an easy way to earn a living. Traffic is fast
and the competition for riders constant. Riders
won't choose a poorly painted vehicle and
perhaps may bypass one with the wrong religious
message or outmoded decor. So the paintings are
renewed and replaced, the slogans are reworded
and repainted. With new music and new lights
on their vehicles, drivers seek new business in the
constantly developing world of art on the road.
35
