The new Ford BY JOHN STEINBECK
Extract from East of Eden (1952) © William Heinemann Ltd.
ni noon one day Will Hamilton came roaring
and bumping up the road in a new Ford. The
engine raced in Its low gear, and the high top
swayed like a storm-driven ship. The brass radi¬
ator and the Prestolite tank on the running-
board were blinding with brass polish.
Will pulled up the brake lever, turned the
switch straight down, and sat back in the leather
seat. The car backfired several times without
Ignition because it was overheated.
"Here she Is!" Will called with a false en¬
thusiasm. He hated Fords with a deadly hatred,
but they were daily building his fortune.
Adam and Lee hung over the exposed sides
of the car while Will Hamilton, puffing under the
burden of his new fat, explained the workings
of a mechanism he did not understand himself.
It Is hard now to imagine the difficulty of
learning to start, drive and maintain an automo¬
bile. Not only was the whole process complicat¬
ed, but one had to start from scratch. Today's
children breathe In the theory, habits and idio¬
syncrasies of the internal combustion engine
in their cradles, but then you started with the
blank belief that it would not run at all, and
sometimes you were right. Also, to start the
engine of a modern car you do just two things,
turn a key and touch the starter. Everything else
is automatic. The process used to be more com¬
plicated. It required not only a good memory,
a strong arm, an angelic temper, and a blind
hope, but also a certain amount of practice of
magic, so that a man about to turn the crank
of a Model T might be seen to spit on the
ground and whisper a spell.
Will Hamilton explained the car and went
Scene from Ella Kazan's 1955 film version of
East of fden.
back and explained it again. His customers were
wide-eyed, interested as terriers, co-operative,
and did not interrupt, but as he began for the
third time Will saw that he was getting no place.
"Tell you what!" he said brightly. "You see
this isn't my line. I wanted you to see her and
listen to her before I made delivery. Now, I'll go
back to town and tomorrow I'll send back this
car with an expert, and he'll tell you more in a
few minutes than I could in a week. But I just
wanted you to see her."
Will had forgotten some of his own Instruc¬
tions. He cranked for a while and then borrowed
a buggy and a horse from Adam and drove to
town, but he promised to have a mechanic out
the next day.
There was no question of sending the twins
to school the next day. They wouldn't have
gone. The Ford stood tall and aloof and dour
under the oak tree where Will had stopped it.
Its new owners circled it and touched It now and
then, the way you touch a dangerous horse to
soothe him.
Lee said, "I wonder whether I'll ever get
used to it."
"Of course you will," Adam said without
conviction. "Why, you'll be driving all over the
county first thing you know."
"I will try to understand it," Lee said. "But
drive it I will not."
The boys made little dives in and out, to
touch something and leap away. "What's this
do-hickey, Father?"
"Get your hands off that."
"But what's it for?"
"I don't know, but don't touch It. You don't
know what might happen."
"Didn't the man tell you?"
"I don't remember what he said. Now you
boys get away from it or I'll have to send you to
school. Do you hear me, Cal? Don't open that."
They had got up and were ready very ear¬
ly in the morning. By eleven o'clock hysterical
nervousness had set in. The mechanic drove
up in the buggy in time for the midday meal.
He wore box-toed shoes and Duchess trousers
and his wide square coat came almost to his
knees. Beside him in the buggy was a satchel
In which were his working clothes and tools. He
was nineteen and chewed tobacco, and from
his three months in automobile school he had
gained a great though weary contempt for hu¬
man beings.
JOHN STEINBECK, American novelist (1902-1968), Nobel Prize
for Literature 1962. His works include Tort/Ha Flat (1935), Of
Mice and Men (1937), The Grapes of Wrath (1939) and The
Winter of Our Discontent (1961).

