The house as a total work
of art BY CECILE DULIERE
Y STUDTHE- IO
An Hla/trMed AA^^inc
of Fine ¿Applied An
4tLo<c/TCT$giiMT
LOSDON WC
MootHy
Top, cover of the English
magazine The Studio.
Above, vignette by Henry
van de Velde, 1905.
Opposite page, main staircase
of the Hôtel Solvay, Brussels,
by Victor Horta, 1894-1898.
Oil painting by Théo van
Rysselberghe, 1902.
22
JL HE birth of Art Nouveau can be dated to
1893, the year when the first issue of The Studio,
a magazine devoted to the propagation of ideas
about art in interior decoration, was published
in London. It was also the year in which the Bel¬
gian architect Victor Horta built the Hôtel
Tasselthe first private residence to be con¬
structed in a radically new technical and plastic
style and to be conceived as a "total work of art".
"Art Nouveau", a term which symbolized
a feeling that a new age was breaking away from
the past, was an artistic phenomenon closely
linked to the Industrial Revolution. In the
nineteenth century new forms of energy (elec¬
tricity), new mass-produced materials (iron and
glass) and new inventions (the railway, teleg¬
raphy, the telephone, photography) 'transformed
both landscapes and ways of living.
Confidence in human progress and faith in
the future were reflected in a series of great inter¬
national exhibitions. The first of these was held
in 1851 in London, the capital of the world's then
most powerful and most highly industrialized
country, in a vast construction of iron and glass,
the Crystal Palace. The 1851 Exhibition attracted
over six million visitors and was a huge popular
success. English artists were, however, revolted
by the ugliness of mass-produced articles for
everyday use. They mobilized in protest.
Arts and Crafts
The English artist William Morris (1834-1896)
launched a crusade against the "virus of ugliness".
He maintained that rather than enclosing them¬
selves in an ivory tower and serving only the
privileged few, artists should work for the greatest
number and play a part in the creation of
everyday objects. The distinction between artist
and artisan should be abolished, together with the
traditional differentiation between the "major"
arts (painting, sculpture, architecture) and
"minor" arts such as cabinet-making, ceramics,
and tapestry. Despite its rejection of the machine,
Morris's Arts and Crafts Movement was impor¬
tant for making the first attempt to apply artistic
principles to the fabrication of everyday
objectswhat later came to be known as design.
True to his principle of "decorative honesty",
Morris did not conceal the natural colour of the
bricks of the "Red House", the home he had
built at Upton in Kent, beneath the usual
covering of stucco, and he commissioned his
painter, architect and sculptor friends to decorate
and furnish its interior. In 1861, he established
his own firm, Morris and Company, in London,
to market the new artistic style of furnishing and
interior decoration which had become his major
preoccupation. Several English painters, sculptors
and architects followed his example and became
"artist designers".
Walter Crane (1845-1915), the "philosopher of
the nursery" as he was jokingly called, took
Morris's ideas even further. He set out to instil a
sense of beauty in children at the earliest possible
age and the success of his children's books did
much to publicize the ideas of the Arts and Crafts
Movement elsewhere in Europe. The propagation
of these ideas owed more, however, to a number
of specialized magazines, the most famous of which
was The Studio. An Illustrated Magazine ofFine and
Applied Art. Resolutely modern in tone and with
"Use and Beauty" as its motto, it carried inter¬
views with artists and reviews of exhibitions
organized prize competitions and was lavishlj
illustrated, mainly with photographs.
Morris brought a new style of floral decora¬
tion to his wallpapers and printed cotton and
velvet fabrics. Abandoning the stylized flowers
of the past, he established a much closer link with
Nature, selecting for his designs humble meadow
or garden plants such as pimpernels, daffodils,
violets and daisies or, more often, such climbing
plants as blackthorn and honeysuckle. His experi¬
ments with the decorative effect of sinuous plant
stems and silhouettes against a monochrome
background were continued by others including
Charles Annesley Voysey (1857-1941) and Arthur
Mackmurdo (1851-1942), who, in the early 1880s,
designed a number of flame-like abstract floral
motifs.
The sinuous lines of this floral decoration, the
dynamic play of interlaced curves, became the
hallmark of Art Nouveau whose influence was
transmitted through fabrics designed for soft fur¬
nishings and through the illustration and design
of books and magazines. The terms Modern Style
used in France, and Stile Liberty and Stile Inglese,
used in Italy, reflect the great debt Europe owed
to English proto-Art Nouveau.

Below right and below, the
Villa Bloemenwerf, near
Brussels, by Henry van de
Velde, 1895. He also designed
the lady's gown.
It was in Belgium, however, that these new
ideas from England really blossomed and were
given an architectural dimension they had pre¬
viously lacked. It was from there that Art Nou¬
veau spread through Europe. In the 1880s Brussels
was a leading centre of avant-garde art. Formed
in 1883, the Brussels group known as "Les XX"
(the Twenty)which ten years later became "La
Libre Esthétique"invited the most original and
controversial foreign artists to its annual exhibi¬
tion (it was there that Van Gogh made his only
sale). From 1891, the exhibition was opened to the
applied arts and included items such as illustrated
books by Walter Crane, tapestries, ceramics and
even complete room furnishings, such as the
"craftsman's room", exhibited in 1895, created
by the architect and decorator Gustave Serrurier-
Bovy (1858-1910), who was the first to import
into Belgium textiles and objects made in
England.
William Morris's social and artistic ideas were
most fully adopted by the Belgian painter Henry
van de Velde (1863-1957), who gave up painting
in 1893 and devoted himself to the decorative arts
with the avowed intention of "destroying the
virus of ugliness". When he married, he decided
to create single-handed the entire décor of his new
homethe Villa Bloemenwerf in Uccle near
Brussels (1895). Going even further than William
Morris, he drew the plans for the house, designed
the furniture, the wallpaper, the cutlery and even
the clothes his young wife would wear. He
seemed to be a universal man, the "complete
artist". As a writer, he propagated his theory of
"ornamentation as a living necessity" engendered
by the dynamics of line, which "reflects primarily
the movement induced by the inner life"
In 1898, he established in Brussels his "arts
of industry, construction and ornamentation
workshops". His work was well received abroad,
particularly in Germany where he settled in 1901
and where his ideas about the decorative arts were
widely propagated.
A revolutionary architect
Art Nouveau was given full all-round expression
for the first time by the architect Victor Horta
(1861-1947) in the house he designed in 1893 for
Emile Tassel, a professor at the University of
Brussels. Conceived as a "total work of art", from
the foundations to the minutest detail of its
interior decoration, the Hôtel Tassel represented
a radical break with the architectural and decora¬
tive language of the past.
Horta revolutionized domestic architecture
by making full use of the qualities of iron as a
building materialit had hitherto been reserved
for constructions built by engineers, such as exhi¬
bition halls, railway stations, warehouses, green-
24

Left, settee upholstered in
"Tulip" chintz, by Arthur
Mackmurdo, 1886.
Right, heating appliance,
Hôtel Solvay, Brussels, by
Victor Horta.
houses and the like. In 1889, as a young man,
Horta had seen the famous iron tower erected by
the French engineer Gustave Eiffel, but to use this
industrial material, thought of as vulgar, in the
construction of a house in a conformist bourgeois
setting was a huge challenge.
Far from concealing this bold initiative,
Horta gave prominence to bolts and rivets and
in so doing developed an entirely new architec¬
tural and decorative language. He radically altered
the disposition of the interior, which he opened
up by using delicately fashioned metal load-
bearing structures in place of partition walls. His
combined iron and glass partitioning enabled light
to penetrate to every corner and made the stair
well the glowing centre-piece of the residence.
This was an architectural plan of outstanding
originality.
The architect draws a plan and the façade of
a building is merely the reflection of this plan.
The layout of the interior, dictated by the tastes
and life style of the future occupants, is pre¬
eminent. As Horta wrote concerning the Hôtel


Winssingers (1894), a house is the "portrait" of
those who are going to live in it. In this case, the
layout of the main floor, its variation in levels
and the choice of furniture were all explained by
the fact that the wife of the man who had com¬
missioned the house could only move around
with difficulty.
In this kind of highly personalized architec¬
ture, everything is the architect's business. For
the Hôtel Tassel Horta designed the complete
interiorthe panelling, the windows, the mosaics,
the wall paintings, the carpets, the ironwork and
even the door handles. He also ensured the per¬
fect harmonization of the lighting and heating
equipment.
The architecture and decoration cannot be
separated. The line of the load-bearing structures
is prolonged and softened by the decoration,
which seems to originate from the supporting
pillars and to extend to the ceilings, the walls, the
floor, accentuating the continuity of the interior
space. Serpentine curves and counter-curves ter¬
minate in a whiplash. In them can be seen the
vital thrust of a growing plant, but a plant with
neither flower nor leaf. "What I like in a plant,"
said Horta, "is its stem." Making use of the widest
possible variety of materials, Horta exploited the
contrasts of texture and colourthe cold smooth¬
ness of marble, the ribbing of dull riveted metal,
CECILE DULIERE, Belgian
archaeologist and an official at
her country's cultural heritage
ministry, teaches at the Royal
Academy of Fine Arts, Brussels.
She was curator of the Horta
Museum from 1975-1980 and
has edited the memoirs of
Victor Horta, published in
1985. 25

the softness of light-coloured wood fashioned like
sculpture.
The success of the Hôtel Tassel earned Horta
commissions for two more prestigious houses,
one for the industrial magnate Armand Solvay,
the other for Edmond van Eetvelde. In both cases
provision had to be made for vast reception areas,
but, faithful to his principles, Horta adapted the
plans for the two buildings to match the per¬
sonalities of his clients. For the Hôtel Solvay he
designed a quadrangular double staircase as the
setting for a magnificent pointilliste painting; for
the Hôtel van Eetvelde, an octagonal area with
an oblique staircase of the utmost refinement.
Horta not only designed everything, he also
personally supervised the execution of every
detail of the work which he entrusted to the finest
craftsmen. The cost in work, time and money
was considerable.
The rich clients who commissioned Horta to
build these fine residences belonged to the class
of businessmen and industrialists that had
emerged from the Industrial Revolution. In this
new architecture, which was freed from the
burden of mixed styles and made extensive use
of new techniques and materials, they saw the
expression of their time "à temps nouveaux, art
nouveau" ("a new art for new times").
In 1896, Horta was asked to build the new
Maison du Peuple in Brussels. Behind its cur¬
vilinear façade of glass and iron, it housed co¬
operative shops, a café and offices. On the first
floor was a vast room for meetings of Belgium's
young Socialist Party, fêtes and conferences. The
site, in the centre of the city, was expensive and
some of the funds for it were donated to the
Socialist Party by Armand Solvay, man of
progress, founder of scientific institutions and one
of Horta's clients.
The inauguration, in 1899, of this "house
whose luxury was in the air and light so long
excluded from the workers' hovels", was the
occasion of enthusiastic celebrations that marked
the high point of the period of grace during which
the progressive bourgeoisie and the Belgian
Socialist Party combined their efforts in a
common faith in the universality of progress and
culture.
Dissension began to appear at the beginning
of the new century. Art Nouveau became
fashionable and many brilliant architects busily
emulated Horta. In new districts of Brussels Art
Nouveau façades mushroomedmore than 500
of outstanding interest have been counted,



earning the city the title of "the capital of Art
Nouveau". But these are mainly personalized
façades of buildings whose layouts are extremely
banal. The house as "a total work of art", as con¬
ceived and built by Victor Horta, was, alas,
beyond the means of most people.
26
