The mind transformed
By Raja Roy-Singh
A,DULT illiterates were long regarded as people
who were suffering from a kind of disease from
which they could be cured by learning to read
and write. They were thought to be devoid of
higher order cognitive characteristics and to lack
the capacity for abstraction, reasoning and sym-
bolization. Shackled to their immediate ex¬
perience, they had no conception of past or
future. They were mentally tabula rasa and some¬
what childish. The acquisition of literacy was a
leap across the great divide from the "illiterate
mentality" to the "literate mentality".
These myths have been extremely potent.
They helped to create a psychological climate in
which society is seen as divided into a dominant
class and a subservient mass. This attitude,
whether implicit or openly held, gave rise to
methods of teaching literacy in which adult il¬
literates are seen as passive objects to be salvaged
by the literacy process, in which they need not
intervene until they have mastered the salvation-
ary words in the right way and at the right time.
This "salvationary" literacy practice is almost ex¬
clusively based on the technical drills of reading
Once regarded
as the
inculcation
of mechanical
skills, literacy
work with
adults is
increasingly
seen as an
educational
process based
on dialogue
Above, a Tibetan storyteller
at Bodh Gaya, India.
Many adult illiterates have
a rich oral cultural heritage
which shapes their
perception of the world.
and writing and often uses the same methods and
texts which are used for children in their early
grades at school.
It is often forgotten that many illiterate adults
have an oral cultural heritage which is profoundly
important to them and that the ways in which
their oral traditions are stored, renewed and trans¬
mitted have shaped their perceptions and the lan¬
guages in which they think. Furthermore, in
most of the societies to which they belong, liter¬
acy is not new. In some cases it has formed part
of creative and religious life for centuries.
These adults have acquired an array of educa¬
tional experiences, competences and values in
their families, in social groups, in places of work
and entertainment, and in acts of worship. They
have had to learn lessons relating to community
life and understand the values and rules associat¬
ed with their occupations. All these experiences
give meaning to their lives and all of them involve
uninterrupted language learning. Literacy work
that does not recognize these facts and sets out
to teach adults to read and write by rendering
them meaningless to themselves is an exercise in 21

sterility and serves the economic and social forces
that marginalize people and deprive them of their
voice.
Literacy is only authentic if it adds meaning
to people's lives and helps them to understand
real-life problems. If there is no link between liter¬
acy practice and the situation of the learners,
there will be indifference, resistance and rejection.
Literacy as a dynamic
process
Radically new ideas and perspectives on literacy
have been developed in recent decades. Literacy
is no longer viewed as a simple concept bound
up with the coding and decoding of signs in
which the main problems are technical. The liter¬
acy process is no longer conceived of as a train¬
ing process which concentrates exclusively on
"implanting" specific mechanical skills; it is now
recognized as an educational process, as an un¬
folding of human potential.
The exponents of these new approaches do
not use the same terminology and emphasize
different aspects of the literacy process but they
have certain points in common. Firstly, they
recognize that adult learners have a central role
in the process and should be active in defining
their learning needs and the goals which they
serve. Secondly, they regard learning as a continu¬
ous, integral and deepening process of critical
awareness of the self within and the world
without. Thirdly, they see diversity and not
uniformity or homogeneity as the true charac¬
teristic of literacy action. Fourthly, this "dynamic
literacy process" finds its full expression in en¬
gaging and participating in authentic social change
and developments. As the Brazilian sociologist
and educator Paulo Freiré has said, "The literacy
process must relate speaking the word to trans¬
forming reality and to man's role in the
transformation."
The common schema which breaks down the
literacy process into stagespre-literacy, learning
to read and write, post-literacydistorts under¬
standing of the process.
mamé-*
\ t¿5 txBuenc* c**P&
Below, members of the
Unidad de Bibliotecas
Rurales, a network of
libraries serving 465 rural
communities in the
Cajamarca region of
northern Peru. Using
information provided by the
communities, the librarians
are producing a Cajamarcan
encyclopaedia in 20
volumes. Right, covers from
5 of the 6 books already
published. Support for the
project is provided by
Traditions for Tomorrow, a
non-governmental
organization founded in
1986 to help Third World
communities trying to
safeguard their cultural
identity.
muestras
tttSffS"
22
RAJA ROY-SINGH,
of India, is a former
educational adviser in the
Indian Federal Ministry of
Education. He Joined Unesco
in 1964 and was based in
Bangkok where until his
retirement he was closely
involved in international co¬
operation for the promotion
of education in Asia and the
Pacific. This article has been
adapted from a booklet
which forms part of a series
entitled Literacy Lessons,
produced by the
International Bureau of
Education on the occasion of
International Literacy Year
(see page 50).

Literacy proceeds from the learner, and the
impetus for it has its origin in a diversity of
sources in which the situations of the learners
have a profound influence. In the ultimate anal¬
ysis, the "literacy need" arises m the individual
or social group with a realization, however inar¬
ticulate, of a sense of disharmony or incomplete¬
ness in its particular social "universe" of relations,
meanings and interpretations. As the individual
or group becomes consciously aware of the dis¬
harmony of its own closed "universe", the liter¬
acy process as a reaching out to new meanings
and interpretations begins, transforming the in¬
dividual/group into learners.
The role of dialogue
Learning to read and write is not an isolated act,
nor is its goal only the acquisition of certain cod¬
ing and decoding skills. Indeed, it is a relatively
easy task for an adult to "alphabetize" himself
if he sees a worthwhile purpose to it. It is part
of a larger human process in which perceiving,
knowing, reflection and action are interwoven.
Not least, it is an act that transforms the learner
in the very process by which the learner becomes
aware of the need and possibilities of change.
Along the path from the first stirring of a sense
of disharmony to a state of self-appraising com¬
prehension, the learner becomes aware of the
"necessity" to learn to read and write and thus
to enter a wider field of participation and sharing.
The prime method in the dynamic literacy
process is that of dialogue. Whether it is used in
identifying the generative themes or in heighten¬
ing awareness or in developing instructional texts
and methods, dialogue defines the relationship be¬
tween the learners and the teachers, between
them both and the realm of knowledge, and be¬
tween the oral and written means of communi¬
cation. One of the creative insights of profound
significance that dynamic literacy practice has
contributed to the general education process is the
restoration of dialogue to a central role in educa¬
tion. The mediation of the dialogue process
establishes between learners and educators a rela¬
tionship of equality. It encourages the learners to
raise questions and unmask problems relating to
significant aspects of their lives.
Literacy action proceeds from, builds on and
comes to fruition in a deepening human aware¬
ness, what in Freirían terms is known as conscien-
tization. Its best expression is an accompanying
sense of growing autonomy and freedom.
Literacy action which proceeds from the
learner is inconceivable in any but a decentral¬
ized way. This means a decentralized develop¬
ment structure capable of responding to the
diversity of needs at the local level and, most im¬
portant, capable of creating the mechanisms at
the local level through which the literacy process
is sustained. 23
