THE EYE OF THE BEHOLDER
Women from Myanmar
(formerly Burma).
VJOOD morning, may I ask you a
question?
Please do.
What exactly are the "canons of beauty"?
A canon is a criterion, a model or an ideal.
I believe the word comes from the name of
a statue by the ancient Greek sculptor Poly-
clitus, which Herodotus called the Canon
because of its ideal form.
So I'd be right in thinking that there are
such things as canons of beauty.
Yes, of course. But they vary.
How do you mean?
What the Greeks considered beautiful, the
Indians did not, and vice versa. In ancient
India, the finest compliment you could pay
a woman was to say that her thighs were like
those ofan elephant. That wouldn't be a very
flattering thing to say today.
Certainly not.
In classicalJapan, at the peak ofthe Heian
civilization in the eleventh century, elegant
aristocratic ladies painted their teeth black.
And what about those African women
who lengthen their necks?
And the Amazon Indians who stretch their
lower lips?
What beauty can they see in that, I
wonder.
To us, it's neither beautiful nor pleasant.
But it's one of their customs.
Yet it seems to me that we all know a
pretty woman when we see onetake film
stars, for instance.
JEAN-CLAUDE CARRIERE,
French author, dramatist and
scriptwriter, is director of
FEMIS, a cinema and
audiovisual school in Paris. He
has adapted the great Indian
epic the Mahabharata for the
stage and, for the screen,
Edmond Rostand's play Cyrano
de Bergerac. His publications
include "Conversation on the
Invisible" (1988), written in
collaboration with Jean
Audouze and Michel Cassé,
and "The Mahabharata"
(1989), both published by
Belfond, Paris.
You said pretty, not beautiful.
That's true.
Beauty, beauty, nobody really knows what
it means. Sorry to keep going on about India,
but in India a woman's beauty is thought of
primarily as an inner quality, the profound
andpersonal sign ofsomeone who has fulfilled
her life, her dharma. That's why people
hardly ever say that a woman is beautiful
until she's over fifty. When she's young, she
may be pretty or nice-looking or attractive,
but beauty comes later.
How complicated it all is!
Everything human is complicated. Ifyou
asked me to talk about simplicity, for
example, I wouldn't know how to begin.
Nothing could be less simple than simplicity.
Yet you often see a man or a woman or
a child and everybody says how beautiful
they are.
...or a cat, or a car...
But the fact is, everyone agrees.
In our society, perhaps, almost everyone
agrees. Beauty is a matter of consensus, you
see, a cultural phenomenon, an arbitrary and
mysterious convention in each society.
Nonsense! You can't be right! There must
be a universal concept of beauty! And ugli¬
ness! Some colours clash, some horses are

BY JEAN-CLAUDE CARRIERE
too thin, some dogs are too fat, some trees
are gnarled and bent, and...
Take it easy, of course you're right. Of
course there are people, of both sexes, who
seem to move around in an aura ofbeauty...
what Salvador Dalí would have called
Pythagorean beauty. But even here not
everyone might agree. ..not to mention dogs
and trees. Take the case of my father. He
couldn't stand fashion models. He thought
they had legs like rabbitsnot very attrac¬
tive animals in his opinion. But I don 't agree
with him at all.
You like rabbits?
/ like models. I love it when I see them
turning and pirouetting on the catwalk. It
makes me feel dizzy. I never look at the
dresses. How about you?
I don't often go to fashion shows.
Nor do I. But I watch them on television.
What about body-building, do you find
that beautiful?
Goodness, no!
My son thinks he's too skinny so he's
taken up weight lifting. It worries me.
It makes the veins stand out. It's horrible.
You've said it yourself: it's horrible.
I'd be the first to admit that we let our¬
selves be trapped by words. Ah, beauty! What
a complicated business it all is, especially
when we're not talking about people. You
mentioned horses and trees. What about
houses, landscapes, the thousand-and-one
utensils and objects we use each day? What
about the feelings works ofart inspire in us?
You might say that a cathedral is beautiful,
or a play by Beckett, or a Mozart symphony.
Or the sea, the sky, a meadow, or a soul. We
may find a sunset enchanting, but who knows
whether a Martian would? Who knows
whether a Martian would have the foggiest
idea about what we call beauty?
You look sad all of a sudden.
No wonder. It's quite impossible to define
what moves us. However hard we try we
never get to the bottom of it.
Maybe that's precisely why we are moved
by beautiful thingsbecause they can't be
defined, labelled and put into little boxes.
Remember what the witches say in Mac¬
beth: "Fair is foul, andfoul is fair..." Where
is all this getting us? It's enough to drive one
to despair!
Come on, pull yourself together. It's not
as bad as all that.
But it is!
I should never have asked you that ques¬
tion in the first place.
But it's a question I ask myself every day!
Harmony, beauty ... it's all too complicated
for us. It's an unfathomable mystery.
Everyone who's tried to establish criteria for
beauty has failed. It reminds me ofa stupid
remark made by a critic called Emile Bayard
around the turn of the century. This is what
he wrote: "Ifever we saw giraffes, elephants,
tigers and lions running around in our dear
old countryside, we should have to admit that
nature had no taste."
Incredible.
But true. It's always the same. We think
the world is imperfect, we want to improve
it at all costs, but we just can 't. That's what
gets me down. You're quite right.
Look at that woman walking past. That
one over there.... Do you think she's
beautiful?
Where?
Over there. That tall brunette, the one
wearing blue stockings.
Oh yes. Magnificent!
I think so too. So there we are. We agree.
Delighted to hear it! But I'm afraid I must
ask you to excuse me. I have to rush off. I've
got an appointment...
Of course. Don't let me keep you. Well
well ... are you going in the same direction
as she is?
Yes, I am.
Fancy that! So am I! What a coincidence!
Do you mind if we stroll along together?
Why not?
Beautiful day, isn't it?
Beautiful.
