Industrialized
countries
discover the
extent of
widespread
illiteracy in their
midst



Waste
By Jean-Pierre Vélis
W.
30
' HEN you read the first line of this article you
have no difficulty at all in deciphering the graphic
signs of which it is composed, grasping the
arrangement of the different terms and under¬
standing their meaning. Without your giving the
matter any thought, your eyes have scanned the
text and your brain has unconsciously mobilized
all kinds of highly complex physiological and
intellectual mechanisms. For you reading is second
nature, so self-evident that you may have forgot¬
ten the effort its acquisition cost you. You can
scarcely imagine life without reading.
As the twentieth century draws to a close,
in the so-called industrialized countries, reading,
writing and arithmetic, the three universally-
accepted components of literacy, are considered
normal skills that everyone must master. Espe¬
cially since in these countries schooling is gener¬
ally compulsory and free, and sometimes has been
so for more than a century, and it is the duty of
the school to teach these skills. It would seem in¬
conceivable that a person who has attended
school for many years should be unable to read
on reaching adulthood, especially in societies
where the written word is practically indispens¬
able to everyday survival. The general reaction
to the existence of illiteracy is one of amazement
and incredulity.
A recent revelation
To be illiterate in a country where for several
decades there has been a struggle against illiteracy
is a far worse handicap than it is in a country
where illiteracy is the general rule. In industrial¬
ized societies the illiterate are the victims of an
unusual form of segregation which often causes
them to feel ashamed. And since they tend to
conceal their existence, it was a long time before
they were noticed. Was this oversight deliberate
or unconscious?
It was in the early 1970s that illiteracy sud¬
denly reappeared as a public issue in the indus¬
trialized countries. In 1972 the British people
were astonished to discover, from the findings of
a small charitable organization, the British
Association of Settlements, that between 7 and 10
per cent of adolescents aged sixteen or more were
barely able to stumble through a simple text
when they left school, and that there were some
two million illiterate people in the United King¬
dom, not counting immigrants.
This revelation was important for several rea¬
sons. It was the first time people realized the full
extent of a phenomenon that was far from mar¬
ginal. (Over the next fifteen years, many indus¬
trialized countries produced official or unofficial
estimates of a comparable order of grandeur1).
Secondly, a campaign to make public opinion
aware of the problem launched by the BBC
Automation tends to reduce
the numbers of unskilled
jobs and has revealed the
existence of "functional"
illiteracy.
Below, Jane Fonda in
Stanley & Iris (1990),
a film by the American
director Martin Ritt which
deals with illiteracy in the
United States.

programme On the Move and the government
measures to which it gave rise (such as the creation
of an agency for adult literacy), have often been
taken as models. Finally, this revelation en¬
couraged reflection on the concept of illiteracy
and its persistence in wealthy societies that are
proud of their culture and their record of school
attendance.
Another form of illiteracy
There have always been illiterates in the indus¬
trialized countries, but the public has not always
been aware of their existence, and their numbers
gradually declined to the point where they were
statistically negligible. As schooling has become
more widespread and education has become more
democratic, their numbers have constantly
decreased in recent decades while the general level
of education has risen. So is this a question of
much ado about nothing?
These illiterate people are adults who have
attended school and have had some contact with
reading and writing. They may know the alphabet
and even be just about capable of deciphering a
few words. They may be able to write a little.
They may recognize figures and be able to do a
few sums, but their knowledge in these fields is
rudimentary and insufficient for them to cope
easily with everyday life. They are not totally
illiterate, but they are illiterate in the context of
the society in which they live. For this reason
the term most frequently used to describe their
situation is "functional illiteracy", a relative
notion the content of which may vary widely at
different" times, in different countries and even
in different regions.
These functional illiterates are not a recent
phenomenon. A specific form of illiteracy has
arisen in contemporary Western societies in
which structural developments in employment
have resulted in requirements for higher levels of
training and qualification.
In rural societies where there are large num¬
bers of manual and unskilled jobs, the illiterate
managed to achieve social and professional in¬
tegration. This is no longer possible in industri¬
alized societies whose economies in the final
decade of the twentieth century are increasingly
dependent on the services sector. The large-scale
disappearance of unskilled jobs, together with the
constant rise in the qualifications required, is
leaving functional illiterates behind. Whenever a
firm reduces its staff, closes down or introduces
new technologies, workers hitherto considered
competent and efficient are devalued, incapable
of being retrained because their reading, writing
and calculating skills are inadequate. Labelled as
"functional illiterates", they find themselves
queuing up in employment agencies or receiving
some form of public assistance. 31

32
It is not surprising that functional illiteracy
should have been rediscovered in the early
1970sthe time of the first oil crisis, the begin¬
ning of the world economic crisis and the spec¬
tacular rise in unemployment, especially among
young people.
It soon became clear that there was a close
correlation between poverty and illiteracy, though
it was not possible to unravel cause and effect.
Hence the battle against illiteracy from the
beginning has been seen as an activity with social
and humanitarian connotations.
A number of countries have sought the help
of voluntary workersmothers willing to give
their free time or retired peopleon the principle
that people who know how to read, write and
count should be able to pass on their knowledge,
if only for a few hours a week, to those who do
not. Unfortunately there have been many disap¬
pointments and setbacks. Lack of method, teach¬
ing materials suitable only for immigrants, the
absence of training facilities for voluntary
teachers, have led even the most enthusiastic to
despair. In addition, even today, financial
resources are often insufficient, and support from
the authorities is often half-hearted. Where adult
illiterates are concerned, help has almost always
come from voluntary associations supported by
social workers. Some twenty years on, apart from
a few notable exceptions such as the Netherlands
and Portugal, the situation is still unchanged.
More than an economic
challenge
Initially viewed as an educational problem closely
linked to mechanisms of social discrimination,
functional illiteracy in the late 1980s became the
centre of an alarmist economic scenario. In North
America it has been the subject of a number of
reports and studies whose conclusions have been
voiced by political leaders and industrialists
swayed by the simple argument that illiteracy is
expensive both for companies and for the nation
as a whole. "The estimated direct cost of illiteracy
Above, two booklets from a
set produced for adult
literacy students in 1977 by
a British publisher. Each is
based on the vocabulary and
skills needed in an everyday
situation.
Above left, a retired man
from Troyes (France) acts as
volunteer adult literacy
tutor in his spare time.
JEAN-PIERRE VELIS,
a French journalist
specializing in education, is
the author of Through a
Glass, DarklyFunctional
Illiteracy in Industrialized
Countries, published by
Unesco, Paris, 1990. He was
formerly assistant editor-in-
chief of the French journal
L'Education.
to the business world in Canada is some C$4 bil¬
lion. It could actually be higher, since the total
loss to Canadian society is estimated, at the very
least, to amount to C$10 billion a year."2 Func¬
tional illiteracy is expensive today and tomorrow
will be even more so since in the long term it
weakens a country's competitivity on the world
economic market. A US Congressman has
declared that "Members of Congress are begin¬
ning to understand that, as a matter of fact, il¬
literacy is going to determine whether we are
competitive or not competitive in the years to
come."
And so measures to solve the problem cannot
be left exclusively to voluntary workers. A firm
commitment from governments is required. "The
time is clearly past when the government could
look on while the voluntary organizations took
charge of the problem of illiteracy," the Canadian
Prime Minister stated in 1987 when he announced
that his government would be investing C$110
million over a five-year period in an attempt to
solve the problem. In the same vein, the French
Secretary of State for Professional Training,
speaking in 1989, stressed that "The scale of the
task calls for a veritable national crusade. I intend
to ensure that training activities designed to
combat functional illiteracy are rid of the secre¬
tive atmosphere in which they are all too often
shrouded and become one of the main concerns
of the training schemes introduced for people
whose low standards of knowledge currently
exclude them from the labour market.... This
campaign is all the more pressing since such
exclusion is a threat to progress and spells the ruin
of development in the long run. It is economi¬
cally necessary for us to win the battle and it
would be socially unjust not to fight it."
Such is the situation as the 1990s begin
beneath the emblem of International Literacy
Year. This is more than an educational, social or
economic challenge; it is a human challenge. By
the time the industrialized countries enter the
twenty-first century, will they be able to halt the
development within themalas well underway
of a two-tier society, a large majority of whose
members will enjoy the benefits of progress from
which an important dependent minority will con¬
tinue to be excluded, because they are unable, or
not sufficiently able, to read, write and count?
1. The overall total (illiterates, those without schooling and
those who have not completed basic primary and secondary
education) of non-literates over the age of 10 is 36.4% in Spain;
23% in Italy; 23.2% in Greece; one adult in five in France;
24% of adults over 18 in Canada; 13% of those over 17 in
the USA. There are between 300,000 and 500,000 non-literates
in Wallonia and in Brussels (Belgium). According to a survey
carried out in Hungary among a sample of adults, 30% had
never used writing in their lives and 16% had never held a
printed sheet in their hands.
2. The Cost of Illiteracy in Canada, Canadian Business Task
Force on Literacy, Toronto, 1988.
