\
.-**Vr..-1 \
'Cars lit for
us all the fires
of the modern
world: the
desire for
escape and
self-assertion,
a love of
technical
efficiency, the
emancipation
of women,
freedom...'
16
MAHMOUD HUSSEIN
is the pen name of two
Egyptian writers who have
published several books of
political sociology, most
recently Versant sud de la
liberté, Essai sur l'émergence
de l'individu dans le tiers
monde ("The Southern Face
of Liberty, an essay on the
emergence of the individua!
in the Third World",
La Découverte, Paris, 1989).



Memory lane
BY MAHMOUD HUSSEIN
IT was the early 1940s. It was wartime, but our
village, in the northernmost part of Egypt, east
of the Nile delta, was far from the scene of action.
Little did we know that over there, deep in the
Libyan desert, a battle was being fought between
the Allied armies and the Axis powers that was
to mark a decisive turning point in the war.
We were between six and ten years old. We
were allowed to play in freedom at the end of
the long schoolday. We had to stay within the
area of the village or its immediate surroundings.
But sometimes we would venture as far as the
highway between Damietta and Izbet El Borg....
Barely a few hundred metres away from the
crossroads where the highway intersected with
the little road that led to our village was a British
army base with a radar station. Soldiers of var¬
ious nationalities bustled all around.
To rid us of any desire to take a closer look,
we were told that the soldiers would seize the
slightest opportunity to kidnap lone children.
Sometimes they ate them. Sometimes they raped
them. Had they not been living for months,
perhaps years, far away from women? The terror
inspired in us by these threats assumed
apocalyptic proportions when the nocturnal
silence was suddenly shattered by the sound of
muffled explosions which startled us from our
sleep. We were told that these were German
torpedoes smashing into Allied ships out at sea.
Our earliest memories of motor vehicles date
from that time. Convoys of sand-coloured army
trucks and jeeps wending their way to and from
the base. Outlandish machines bristling with
weapons and swarming with otherworldly
figures, each of which represented a danger for
every one of us.
From time to time, however, a different kind
of vehicle would appear. It would pass fleetingly
along the road, sometimes even stopping for a
moment or two at the crossroads to drop off a
grown-up returning from Damietta. These were
private cars containing Egyptians.
:'. HV
UT

Bahrlya oasis, Egypt.
We had no reason to be frightened of them.
We could give free rein to our sense of wonder.
All of our senses responded to the utter newness
of these contraptions which were so different
from the familiar landmarks of our lives by virtue
of their flawless lines, the smooth finish of their
bodywork, their even, gleaming colours, the purr
of their powerful invisible engines, and the smell
of petrol and exhaust fumeswhich we would
greedily fill our lungs with, racing for the
privilege, and which was as intoxicating to us as
the headiest of perfumes.
Then the marvellous machine would set off
towards the town, whose unknown charms it
epitomized, all those charms that then seemed to
us for ever out of reach.
We did not know that shortly those of us
who had successfully completed the course of
compulsory education would have the
opportunity to continue our studies in Damietta
itself. At least the well-to-do or educated families
would seize this opportunity for their children.
The first journey
Damietta was too far away for us to go there on
foot or even by donkey. So one fine day, without
any warning, we were taken to the famous
crossroads and told to wait. We didn't know what
we were waiting for but we were very excited.
It was the first time that, instead of going there
by ourselves, without any grown-ups knowing,
we had been taken to the crossroads by one of
them, acting on behalf of all our parents. A car
approached, slowed down and stopped. The
driver looked at us with an encouraging smile.
Then our hearts missed a beat. He asked us to
get in.
During that first car ride we were just as
frightened as we were thrilled. But fright soon
disappeared. On days when it wasn't too hot
some of us would stand on the running-board,
clinging to a window ledge, leaving the seats for
grown-up passengers. What words can express the 17

elation induced by speeding headlong into the
wind, at that moment when we cast off for ever
the weight of our childhood? In the fields, the
peasants would often stop work to watch us
whizz by, so quickly that we had no time to give
them the customary sign of greeting.
Two or three years later, when the war was
over, some families decided to go and settle in
Damietta, or to send their eldest children there
to live with other families who had already made
the move. This gave us an opportunity to explore
a town that we had until then only glimpsed as
we hurtled through it in the collective taxi that
took us from the village to school and back.
Explore was the word. Damietta seemed immense
to us, with empty squares so huge that each one
could have held an entire village, with tarred
roads along which plied buses, trucks, private cars
and taxis, and across which nonchalant donkeys
ambled at random. The small crossroads at the
entrance to our village that had for years seemed
to us to be a rendezvous for all the traffic in the
world, was no more than a pathetic memory.
Disturbing images
But our discoveries were only just beginning.
Another enchantment lay in store for us in
Damiettathe cinema. The magic of light-borne
images. And stories that unfolded, with a begin¬
ning and an end, with heroes whose love, courage
and kindness enabled them to triumph over fate.
And for whom the present ceased to be a mere
repetition of the past.
Most of the films were Egyptian. But some
of them were foreignEnglish or American and
they were even more disturbing. These men and
women were indefinably different from us. We
were affected by their sufferings and their joys,
but why did we feel that they nevertheless
belonged to a different planet from ours? Because
of their uninhibited way of talking about them¬
selves? Because of their way of tackling life head
on, of seeing an adventure through to its conclu¬
sion, of deciding and acting according to their
own desire and judgement, without bothering
about what the family thought or what the neigh¬
bours would say?
These men and women...but particularly the
women, so incredibly free in their speech and in
their movements. Their image remains engraved
on our memories. Young, beautiful, blonde, ele¬
gant, they drove convertibles. Why did this image
disturb us so? Around us were other pretty girls
and women whom we sometimes saw in the
streets bareheaded, with their hair loose. They
might be stylishly dressed, in frocks or skirts that
discreetly emphasized the'curves of their bodies.
But they had to be accompanied by father,
brother, uncle or husband. Even for a quick
errand, on a donkey, a woman had to be escorted
by a man. And now here was this fabulous
American actress who went out alone and drove
all by herself, controlling unaided a piece of
machinery so mysterious, so complicated, that it
seemed to be pre-eminently the preserve of men.
On the brink of adolescence cars and women
were to be a source of other mixed emotions. A
few of the older boys took us out of the town
at nightfall, to an isolated spot where, between
the trees or by a fence, parked cars could be made
out. The older boys encouraged us to go nearer,
18
American actress Grace Kelly
at the wheel of a convertible
In Alfred Hitchcock's film To
Catch a Thief. 1955.
Room at the top on a
crowded Egyptian bus.

**>
w^
I
using all our stealth and guile, to look through
the window and see what was going on inside.
A man and a woman were kissing passionately,
impetuously. Once or twice it seemed to us, in
the darkness, that they were going even further.
We watched them, torn between a sense of shame
at intruding on their privacy and fear that we
would be caught spying on them. We would
make a bolt for it when the man's gaze met ours
or when the woman suddenly stared at us with
terrified eyes.
The privileged few
Cars thus lit for us, one by one, all the fires of
the modern world, so alien to our ways, which
were however already directly exposed to them:
the desire for escape and self-assertion, a love of
technical efficiency, the emancipation of women,
freedom....
But for most of us the ownership of a car
would long remain an unattainable dream. We
had left Damietta and were continuing our studies
in Cairo. At university, some students occasionally
turned up in their parents' cars. A few others,
even less numerous, drove their own. They were
the most privileged of all.
The rest, if they came from far away, had to
take the bus. This was the 1950s when public
transport was a disaster. Buses were old wheezy
vehicles sagging beneath the weight of too many
passengers. It was impossible to get in through
the jam-packed doorways unless you were ready
for a fight. Being young, we were lucky enough
to be able to get in through the windows. Envious
looks and sometimes insults were cast our way
by those whose girth or social standing prevented
them from doing likewise....
Imported luxury goods were subject to
increasingly restrictive measures. And these
measures applied especially to private cars. Yet
mysteriously these steadily increased in number.
City streets, which had not been designed to
accommodate such a concentration of traffic,
became each year slightly more congested than
before. 19

The capital, far bigger though it was than
Damietta, suffered an even more massive inva¬
sion. Whole districts, suburbs and satellite towns
sprang up around it. And as the distances grew,
so new highways were built, and were immedi¬
ately submerged by more and more cars. Except
for a small minority of people who worked and
lived in the same neighbourhood, it became
increasingly difficult to do without a means of
mechanical transport. How could one walk to an
office, factory, faculty, or cinema miles from
home, or to the homes of friends and relatives
who were now scattered far and wide?
In the buses, the number of which never kept
up with the increase in the working population,
travelling became a mental and physical ordeal.
Taxis, which were too expensive, could be taken
only from time to time. The private car became
a necessity as well as a status symbol. People paid
for them by instalments, or purchased imported
second-hand models which could be tinkered
with all day long. But those who had succeeded
in business or saved some money while working
for a few years in an oil-producing country made
it a point of honour to buy, cash down, ¿"brand-
new German sedan.
..%
Driving into an impasse
Cars were no longer a pipe-dream. Either you had
one or, if you didn't, you wanted one. But for
everyone they had lost their mystery. They were
everywhere, they could be seen, they could be
touched. All the streets were lined with them,
bumper to bumper, the latest models and ancient
jalopies. Cars no longer partook of the eternal
springtime of dreams. Every day we saw
specimens in every stage of physical deterioration.
There were traffic jams, accidents, breakdowns,
causing endless problems both for drivers and for
the millions of passers-by. Everywhere people
cursed the fact that they needed cars and
bemoaned the frustration they caused....
Strangely, the car seems to have created as
many problems as it has solved. A gigantic game
which ends in a draw, in which everyone may
be said to feel a little freer and slightly more
trapped. We produce more, we consume more,
we drive more. At the cost of gutted cities,
expressways strung between apartment blocks,
blocking off the sky in whole districts, parks
sacrificed for the sake of parking lots and pollu¬
tion that sets a screen between us and the light
of day....
Perhaps, despite everything, the car remains
a pipe-dream. Or a marvellous machine that
meekly obeys us, on roads that do not disturb
the beauty of the landscape or the cows' slumber.
But the dream is no longer one of the future. It
is nostalgia for a lost childhood, near the end of
the war, at a deserted crossroads.
Traffic congestion In a Cairo thoroughfare.
mm a*
<i/r
-M
r-jr^r
-* I
» * r
.v. L
«*V
i
~. 3
f
