BY FRIEDRICH WILHELM GRAF



Christianity
and
history
30
Ahe relationship between the Christian faith
and history is the central problem of modern the¬
ology. Ever since the Enlightenment theologians
have tried to reconcile Christianity's long¬
standing claim to be the truth with modern
knowledge about the historical relativity of all
human experience and thought.
This enterprise has proved increasingly
difficult. In the eighteenth century, Gotthold
Lessing, a leading figure of the German Auf¬
klärung (Enlightenment), spoke of the "wide and
horrendous gulf" that lies between modern man
and Christianity in its original form. In the fol¬
lowing century this gulf became even wider.
Philosophers, theologians and historians under¬
stood that all historical reality is specific and rela¬
tive and that in history there are no absolute
norms valid for all individuals and for all periods.
But does not Christianity say that Jesus Christ
occupies an absolute position in history? Should
it not claim to be absolutely true and necessary
for everyone, irrespective of place and time? The
more thinking that has been done about the
essence of the Christian faith and the specific
nature of historical reality, the wider the gap
between faith and history has become.
Central to the Christian faith, as to all
religions, is the worship of God. In the traditional

language of Western philosophy and theology,
strongly marked by the world view of the ancient
Greeks and particularly by Aristotelian
metaphysics, God is also referred to as "the
Absolute". He is thought of as a boundless crea¬
tive power, conditioned by nothing and eternal,
the Creator of the cosmos and then of man, who
is a creature of a higher order. God the Creator
is seen as the possessor of unlimited sovereignty;
He is infinitely superior to His creatures. In
Western metaphysics the opposition between
God and the world, between transcendence and
immanence, between eternity and time, is fun¬
damental. The Absolute is absolute precisely
because the finite, the world and humanity do
not impinge upon it. Conversely, this created
world, the historical world of the finite and the
relative, is envisioned as permanently dependent
on the Absolute and as deriving its consistency
from God alone.
The more God is portrayed as transcendent,
as superior to the world, the more faith is regard¬
ed as a withdrawal from the relative, as a draw¬
ing away from history. For mankind, faith thus
consists in placing one's trust in the Absolute. But
as the Absolute is timeless, eternal, turning to
God is tantamount to turning away from the
world and setting oneself at a distance from the
finite realm.
The Christian mystics in particular believed



that when people pray they are immersed in eter¬
nity and withdraw from history, thereby becom¬
ing aware of their true, eternal purpose. Viewed
in this light, Christian piety always implies a
devaluation of history, of the world of relative
values.
The concept of history
in the early Church
It was from this standpoint that the theologians
of the early Church considered the history of hu¬
manity and Church history. They reformulated
various conceptions of God's sovereignty over
world history as found in the Jewish tradition
(the Old Testament of the Christians) and in the
Gospels and Epistles of the New Testament.
The apostle Paul thus gave a theological in¬
terpretation to history according to which there
is a close link between the creation of the world
and the redemption of humanity. In this scheme
of things Jesus Christ has a central position: He
is the absolute centre of the history of the world,
giving meaning and purpose to all human action.
Universal history began with the creative act of
God. But sin upset the divine order and the world
slid into chaos, as demonstrated in particular by
the historical disasters visited upon the people of
Israel and described in the Old Testament. In
The mosaic in the dome of
Genesis in St. Mark's Basilica,
Venice (early 13th century). 31

32
Jesus Christ, a new age of salvation began. Paul
describes this salvation in historical images: it
means the abolition of natural conflict between
man and woman, the end of enmity between peo¬
ples, the liberation of slaves from servitude to
their masters and the rebirth of all human beings,
truly freed at last.
Paul's interpretation can thus be defined as
a history of salvation: all human history is
directed towards the return of Jesus Christ or the
attainment of salvation in Him. Paul has a teleo-
logical view of history: its goal is the attainment
by all human beings of the salvation already
offered by God to humanity through Christ.
For this reason, the Church in his view is at
the centre of history. It is the institution that
brings us the news of salvation in Christ.
Through its action we draw nearer to the end-
purpose of history according to God, the return
of Christ and the establishment of His universal
kingdom of peace. Seen from this standpoint, the
history of the world and the political history of
states are without importance. Only the action
of the Church is decisive for true progress
towards the kingdom of God.
The early Christians lived in the faith that
Christ would soon return and accomplish the
final salvation of history. Accordingly, the
theologians of the early Church did not at first
pay much attention to the details of Church his¬
tory. It was only through the persecution of the
Christians by the Roman empire and the subse¬
quent triumph of Christianity over the empire,
expressed symbolically by the baptism of Con-
stantine in 337 AD, that the history of the
Church became an important subject of theolog¬
ical reflection.
A first synthesis of the history of the expan¬
sion of Christianity is provided by the early
fourth-century historian and theologian Eusebius
of Caesarea, whose Ecclesiastical History is still a
document of capital importance. The way in
which Eusebius links specific events in Church
history to an all-embracing theological interpre¬
tation of universal history served for centuries as
an example for the Catholic historians of the
Church.
His interpretation was particularly decisive
in two respects. First, the history of the Church
begins with the birth and works of Jesus of
Nazareth. The whole of Jewish and non-
Christian history until then were but God's
preparation for this event essential to the salva¬
tion of humankind. The pre-Christian religions
are seen as preparing the way for the reception
of Christ's message. In fact, Christianity was not
a new religion but eternal religion, which, before
Christ, had not been wholly revealed. Judaism
and Greek religion are not considered as "foreign
religions" but as forms of an unrealized Chris¬
tianity. History before the coming of Christ is
also in this account integrated into the history
of the Church.
Secondly, Eusebius sees the history of the
world and the Church as a constant struggle be¬
tween Good and Evil, God and the Devil. The
function of history is to record the continual
struggle between the good, who remain faithful
to God and His Church, and the bad, who follow
Satan and oppose the Church. He is profoundly
convinced that God will come to the assistance
of His Church in all its struggles against external
enemies, but also and especially against heretics,
and that divine truth will prevail. The history of
the Church is seen by Eusebius as that of an ever¬
growing power, which he attributes to the greater
proximity of the kingdom of God. Church his¬
tory thus becomes the axis of universal history.
The sixteenth-century leaders of the Refor¬
mation, especially Martin Luther and John Calvin,
radically challenged the Catholic vision of the
Church as an increasingly powerful, triumphant
institution. The Reformation grew out of a move¬
ment of protest against the established Church.
Against the authority of the Pope and the priests'
dominion over souls, it invoked "a Christian's
freedom" (Luther). Human salvation lay not in
the Church but in the word of God alone, which
was accessible to everyone through the Holy
Scriptures. For the reformers, "a Christian's
freedom" meant that less value was attached to
the Church. The institution of the Church took
second place to the pious individual.
This theological restriction placed on the
Church meant at the same time that greater recog¬
nition was accorded to the intrinsic value of the
world. True Christian faith was exemplified not
in a separate pious existence, sealed off from
worldly concerns, but in the actual circumstances
of life, where human beings had been set by God.
In the eyes of the reformers, living according to
one's faith meant above all saying "yes" to the
The Preaching of St. Paul,
by Luca di Tomme, an
artist of the Siena school
(Italy, 14th century).

world; it meant being actively and enthusiastically
involved in the world.
The reformers also profoundly changed
prevailing attitudes to the history of the Church.
The institution was criticized. Its history, as writ¬
ten in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries by
Protestant historians, was intended to legitimize
and bolster the rights of Protestantism against the
authoritarian nature of the Church of Rome.
Eusebius' history of triumph was replaced by an
account of the internal decomposition of the
Church. The more powerful it had grown, the
more it had become detached from the true faith.
The distinction made by Eusebius between bear¬
ers of authority and heretics, between good Chris¬
tians and enemies of God, was overturned: in
many cases it was the ecclesiastical authorities that
were the enemies of Christ. In the history of the
Church a central role was now assigned to the
pious who had transmitted the fundamental
truths of Christianity.
Under the influence of the Reformation, the
history of the Church became a medium for a
scientific and critical appraisal of the received tra¬
dition of the Church. Not only were historians
critical of its attempted domination, but they
were also increasingly sceptical about the sources
invoked by the Church in an effort to legitimize
its power and to base the supremacy of the Pope's
authority upon that of the emperor. This criti¬
cism had an ideological colouring. The concern
was to release the ordinary Christian from a state
of false servitude vis-à-vis the Church. Through
such criticism and through intensive exegesis of
the Holy Gospels, the Protestant history of the
Church paved the way for modern historical and
critical investigation, which took root during the
Enlightenment and continued to develop in the
nineteenth century.
between Christianity and other religions. From
then on they had to interpret the history of
Christianity with reference to the universal his¬
tory of religions. What consequences does this
attitude have for Christianity's long-established
claim to possess the truth? Should not a modern
historian refute the idea that the Christian mes¬
sage is valid for all human beings?
This question was a particular source of con¬
flict in German Protestantism, starting in the
eighteenth century. Philosophers and theologians
associated with what was known as German
idealismSchleiermacher, Schelling and Hegel for
instanceattempted to meet the challenge of the
Bust of Christ, detail from
the ceiling of the
Commodilla catacomb,
Rome (mid-4th century).
Below left, Heaven and
Hell, painting of the
Bolognese school, 15th
century.



The absolute nature
of Christianity and
the history of religions
The Enlightenment marked a radical break in the
interpretation of Christianity and of its history.
During the period of European expansion, when
the pull of other countries and cultures was be¬
ing felt, Western intellectuals discovered a mul¬
tiplicity of religions and religious traditions of
which they had previously been unaware. They
had to recognize that, from the point of view of
history, Christianity was but one religion among
others. At first they continued to claim, dogmat¬
ically, that Christianity alone was the true
religion, all the others being false forms of reli¬
gious consciousness or at least incomplete
representations of the truth as compared to that
of Christianity.
However as European intellectuals became
more interested in the history of the non-
Christian religions, the more clearly they per¬
ceived numerous affinities and mutual influences
FRIEDRICH 'WILHELM
GRAF,
German theologian and
historian, is professor of
systematic theology and of
the contemporary history of
theology at the University
of Augsburg (Fed. Rep. of
Germany). Among his main
fields of interest are:
protestantism and
democracy in Germany, and
the foundations of religious
theory and ethics. He is the
author of many articles and
books on theology and the
philosophy of religions. 33

Below, portrait of Martin
Luther by the German
painter and engraver Lucas
Cranach the Elder
(1472-1553).
Below right, a portrait of
John Calvin made by a
student during a lecture.
new critical approach to history by interpreting
Christianity as "the absolute religion". Chris¬
tianity was thus reincorporated into a universal
history of religions without the abandonment of
its traditional claim to hold the truth. On the one
hand, Christianity was but one religion among
others and had to be understood as a specific
historical instance of a universal phenomenon-
religion. On the other, it stood out from all the
others insofar as it was only in Christianity that the
universal goal of all religionthe reconciliation of
God and mankindhad been fully achieved.
Once a universal concept of religion had been
established, supposedly embracing all the forms
of religion that had so far emerged in the history
of humanity, these were shown to be linked to
one another in accordance with a historical
process based on the principles of evolution. The
history of religions, ranging back from primitive
religions, through natural religions all- the way
to culture-religions, was thus seen as a process
whose ultimate aim was the effective realization
of the universal essence of religion.
This evolutionist way of thinking was
widespread throughout nineteenth-century
Europe, where Christianity was regarded as the
highest form of culture-religion, like the religion
of freedom or of the personality. It was identi¬
fied, more or less directly, with the universal con¬
cept of religion. The success öf this interpretation
was due to the fact that it enabled historical and
critical account to be taken of the multiplicity
of religions without in any way renouncing
Christianity's claim to superiority. This model
could thus serve to justify Western imperialism.
Since the nineteenth century, however, the
rapid advance of knowledge in the history of
religions has put paid to the idealistic presuppo¬
sition that the course of history is determined by
an unchanging transcendental reason. The more
that historians have recognized the specificity of
individual religions, the more they have aban¬
doned attempts to understand the history of
religions as a single evolutionary process and to
encompass all religions in the same concept. The
idealistic belief in the basic oneness of the many
religions gave way to a pluralistic vision of
history in which the main focus of attention was
no longer their alleged sameness but their
individuality.
A truly critical approach to the science of his¬
tory meant then that the concept of "absolute
religion" had to be discarded as a dogmatic or,
in other words, ahistorical notion. The implica¬
tions for the Christian religion were keenly de¬
bated in the early years of this century, in Europe
and the United States.
The German theologian Ernst Troeltsch, a
liberal Protestant, played an important role in this
debate. In a famous lecture published in 1902, en¬
titled The Absoluteness of Christianity, Troeltsch
abandoned the concept of "absolute religion". He
assigned a "relative supreme value" to Christian¬
ity while recognizing that this could not be
demonstrated by a strictly historical method. He
did not dispute that Christianity claimed to
represent the truth, but for him there was only
one truth, which found expression in countless
forms of religion.
34
Facing page, illustration of
a Persian town from a 16th-
century manuscript of the
Itinerary, a description of
the campaigns of the
Ottoman sultan Süleyman
the Magnificent (1494-1566).
