Fafner the Dragon BY JULIO CORTÁZAR
Extract from Los autonaulas de la cosmopista, viaje attemporel París-Marsella
© Carol Dunlop and Julio Cortázar, 1983.
20
I his short but essential chapter is an auto-
quotation (a perfectly appropriate word in this
case) from a text written long ago whose title
is: Correction of Proofs in Haute-Provence.
So from time to time I stop working, I
wander around In the streets, I go into a bar,
I observe what's happening in town and I gossip
with the old man who sells me my lunch-time
sausage because the Dragonit's high time I
introduced you to himis a kind of moving
house or seashell on wheels that my obsessive
love for Wagner impelled me to call Fafner. A
red Volkswagen with a water-tank, and a seat
that lets down into a bed. I have added a radio,
a typewriter, books, bottles of red wine, pack¬
ets of soup and cardboard mugs. Plus swim¬
ming trunks for whenever the opportunity
arises, a lamp and a gas-ring that turns tinned
food into a meal while I listen to Vivaldi or pen
these words.
This stuff about the Dragon stems from a
long-felt need. I have rarely accepted the names
that are stuck onto things like labels, and I think
this is reflected in my books. I do not see why
we should always have to put up with what
comes to us from the past and from elsewhere.
So I have given to the beings I love and have
loved names derived from an encounter, a coin¬
cidence between secret codes. So women be¬
came flowers, birds or woodland animals. There
were friends whose names changed once a
cycle had run its course: a bear became a mon¬
key, a pale-eyed woman was first a cloud, then
a gazelle and finally a mandrake. Anyway, let's
get back to the Dragon. When two years ago
I saw him arrive in the Rue Cambronne, fresh
from the factory, with his wide red face, low-
set sparkling eyes, and laid-back air of bravado,
something in me went click and he became the
Dragon, and not just any old dragon but Fafner
who guarded the treasure of the Niebelungen
and who, according to legend and Wagner, is
brutal and stupid but has always aroused a
sneaking sympathy in me, perhaps because he
is doomed to die at the hand of Siegfried. I can't
forgive heroes that kind of thing: thirty years
ago I could never forgive Theseus for having
killed the Minotaur (I have only made the con¬
nection between these two things today). On
that particular afternoon I was much too busy
with the problems I was going to have with the
Dragon when it came to changing gear and
manoeuvringhe was much higher and wider
than my little old Renault. Now It seems obvi¬
ous to me that I only obeyed the instinct that
always leads me to defend those the estab¬
lished order regards as monsters and exter¬
minates as soon as it can. In two or three days
I became the Dragon's friend. I told him that
as far as I was concerned his name was no
longer Volkswagen. Poetry was, as so often,
right on target, for when I went to the garage
to have his number plate fastened on and saw
the mechanic screw a large F on his backside,
I was sure my hunch was correct. And even if
the mechanic would have insisted that the F
stood for France, the Dragon understood per¬
fectly. On our way home he showed me how
delighted he was by enthusiastically mounting
the pavement and scaring the wits out of a
housewife laden with shopping baskets.
JULIO CORTÁZAR, major Argentine writer (1914-1984). His
works translated into English include End of the Game, and
Other Stories (1967), and the novels Hopscotch (1963), A
Manual for Manuel (1973) and We Love Glenda So Much (1980).
