The once and future
i
30
N the history of Judaism, the Temple of
Jerusalem is constantly referred to, not so much
as a holy place that marks the site of a bygone
event or ritual, but as a symbol of messianic hope.
The Jerusalem towards which Jews turn three
times a day, at the time of prayer, is not the
Jerusalem of their roots, but a city to come.
In Judaism, the link between people and God
finds consecration in the Tabernacle, the Temple
and the synagogue. Although omnipresent and
thus able to manifest Himself anywhere, regard¬
less of the physical surroundings, God neverthe¬
less instituted the notion of a privileged sanctuary
when He commanded the Hebrews in the wilder¬
ness to build a Tabernacle to house the Ark of
the Covenant in which the Tablets of the Law
were to be kept.
The Tabernacle, the first holy dwelling-place
in Jewish history, is described in detail in the
Bible. The Tabernacle is primarily the dwelling-
place of God ("And let them make me a sanc¬
tuary, that I may dwell among them"). It was to
be in the form of a tent, a mobile sanctuary, thus
clearly showing that its sacred nature was due to
the presence of God and was not associated with
any particular place. God's presence was symbo¬
lized by the Ark of the Covenant, with its
Cherubim, whose outspread wings formed the
divine king's throne.
The arrangement of the 'interior space and

1
From Temple
to synagogue
The link between
man and God
% consecrated in the
g synagogue and two
t
J earlier sanctuaries
i,


Solomon's Temple
i and the Tabernacle
described in
; the Bible
city
BY LAURENCE SIGAL.
furnishings of the Tabernacle were in conformity
with the divine decrees. These concerned, in par¬
ticular, the Ark of the Covenant, the menorah
or multi-branched candelabrum, the table for the
shewbread and the altar. Above all, they ordained
the division of the Tabernacle into two distinct
areasthe main hall and the Holy of Holies,
whose proportions, functions and contents were
to be repeated in the Temple of Solomon, thus
ensuring continuity of conception from one sanc¬
tuary to another.
The building of the Temple of Solomon,
around 950 BC, was a response to the sedentari-
zation of the people of Israel, as well as a peak
of grandeur attained by the kingdom of David.
The Temple of Jerusalem became the religious
centre of the nation. At times of pilgrimage, the
faithful flooded in from all Judaea and even from
more distant regions to bring their offerings and
to make their sacrifices. The ritual instituted in
the Bible took on its ultimate form and the
Temple both embodied the notion of a holy place
and offered a pattern for ecclesiastical
architecture.
It can be assumed that, very early on, along¬
side the sacrificial rites performed in the Temple
and earlier sanctuaries, the Jews offered up
prayers. There are, however, few textual refer¬
ences and no archaeological evidence to support
this hypothesis. The institution of the synagogue
Opposite page,
the Temple of Jerusalem
illustrated in a Haggadah
(book of explanatory matter in
rabbinical literature). Hungary,
early 20th century.
Above,
miniature from a Spanish
Haggadah of the 14th
century, showing the
Haggadic narrative being read
to Illiterate members of the
Jewish community in the
synagogue.
31

m
as the place of prayer, therefore, probably dates
from the Babylonian exile (587 BC).
It was on their return to Israel in 538 BC that
the captives from Babylon brought back with
them the custom of gathering to pray and listen
to the reading of the Law (the Torah). This prac¬
tice coexisted with the ritual of the Temple for
many centuries, and continued alone after the des¬
truction of the Second Temple in 70 AD.
The building of synagogues
As the synagogue was a post-Biblical institution,
there were no precise instructions for the manner
of its construction. A single reference in the
Talmud* lays down that a synagogue should be
built on high ground and should be higher than
the buildings around it. From the Old Testament
Book ofDaniel we can deduce that windows were
considered indispensable for prayer, since they
enabled those praying to contemplate the
heavens, which inspired them with reverence and
devotion. Daniel also turned towards Jerusalem
when he prayed, and this was to have consider¬
able influence on the layout of synagogues.
Although synagogues had to be oriented
towards Jerusalem, the architectural responses to
this imperative varied considerably during the
32
early centuries of the Christian era. At the begin¬
ning, the main façade of the building faced
Jerusalem. In buildings constructed on this plan
no indication has been found of the siting of the
Holy Ark containing the Torah, which was sup¬
posed to be kept either in an adjoining room, or
outside the synagogue to which it was brought
for the reading of the Law. From the third cen¬
tury onwards, there was a definite change in the
layout of synagogues and the orientation of the
building was determined by the position within
it of the Ark.
In The Antiquities of the Jews, the historian
Flavius Josephus (37-100 AD) mentions the prac¬
tice of building synagogues near rivers or the sea
so that a room for ritual ablutions could be added
to the place of prayer.
The emergence of the synagogue represented
a fundamental break with the Temple cult. It
marked the transition from rituals performed
exclusively by the High Priest and his assistants,
Right, the German Synagogue
at Venice, Italy
(16th century).
Below left, model of the
Synagogue of Gush Alav
(Galilee, 3rd-4th century), in
the Israel Museum, Jerusalem.
Below, brick-built synagogue,
New South district of
Amsterdam, the Netherlands
(c. 1930).

the Lévites, to a form of collective service. This
movement from sacrificial ritual to prayer had
certain social effects, since the various parts of the
cult officesthe reading of the Law and prayer
could, from then on, be conducted by any adult
male believer and required no priesthood.
The synagogue became a centre of social life.
Flavius Josephus noted that the faithful gathered
not only to hear the reading of the Law and to
pray, but also to discuss problems concerning the
life of the community. In the great synagogue at
Alexandria, the men were seated according to
their trade. The spinners, silversmiths, and smiths
had their assigned places and any man entering
the synagogue knew immediately where to find
his colleagues. The synagogue was also a centre
of intellectual life and became known as the bet
ha-midrash, or house of study.
Generally speaking, the essential nature of
worship at the synagogue meant that the elements
of architectural style were of only secondary
importance, and these were often borrowed from
the surrounding buildings. Leaving aside these
local influences, however, there can be said to be
a truly synagogical style with its own internal
organization and iconography.
The Temple of Solomon, which was based
on the traditional layout of the sanctuaries of
Canaan and on the model of the Tabernacle, con¬
sisted of three successive areasthe vestibule, or
ulam, the main room, or hekhal, and the Holy
of Holies, or devir, which only the High Priest
could enter. In addition, there was a gradation
between the areas allocated to women, to men
and to the priests.
LAURENCE SIGAL,
of France, is curator at the
Museum of the Art and History
of Judaism in Paris. Her main
interests are philosophy and
the history of art and religion.
In the synagogues, however, where the whole
assembly of the faithful participated in the liturgy,
the architecture of the interior was organized
around two key pointsthe Holy Ark and the
bima, or pulpit, at which the scrolls of the Law
are opened and read.
The Holy Ark is in full view of all, indeed it
cannot but be seen, since it is placed in the direc¬
tion to which the faithful turn in prayer. It is set
in a recess or in a dominant position on a dais, and
forms both a real and a symbolic link between



the faithful and their prayersthe earthly
Jerusalem and, through it, the heavenly city.
Ever since the Middle Ages the bima has
occupied a central position, which it retains
whatever may be the constraints of space, with
the Holy Ark being always placed against the east
wall. Its position is the physical expression of the
change in form of the servicethe faithful form
a circle around the centre of the synagogue and
take turns to approach the bima.
Ornamentation
The early centuries of the Christian era saw a
transition from ornamented exteriors to
ornamented interiors. This was a response to
legislation hostile to the spread ofJudaism. About
a hundred years after the death of the Roman
emperor Constantine the Great (288-337 AD),
Jews were forbidden to build new synagogues or
even to restore existing ones, unless they were
liable to collapse. The profuse sculpted exterior
ornamentation of the early synagogues gradually
came to be abandoned, while interior floor
mosaics started to appear, the richest of these
dating from the fifth and sixth centuries.
The rabbis were far from being systematically
opposed to the pictorial expression of the
teachings of the Bible. In this respect, at least in
ancient Palestine, synagogues opened the way
towards the decoration of churches. Specific reli¬
gious themes began to appear alongside
naturalistic and pagan subjects and geometric
motifs borrowed from Hellenistic mosaics.
The spiritual links between the Temple and
the synagogue and between the Ark of the
Covenant and the Holy Ark are to be seen in the
ornamentation of the cult objects associated with
the Torahthe cloth coverings, the silver orna¬
ments and plates recall the robes and ornamental
breastplate of the High Priest; the decoration of
the Holy Arkwhich often consists of pillars and
a curtain, deriving from the veil that partitioned
off the Holy of Holiesrecalls the furnishings of
the Temple. In general terms, the recurrent
presence of architectural motifs in Jewish cult
objects (Hanukka lamps, incense boxes) leads one
to believe that they too have a symbolic meaning,
referring back once more to the building of
buildingsthe Temple.
* The Talmud is the most important work of Jewish post-Biblical liter¬
ature. It is held to be the authentic interpretation of the Law of Moses,
the Torah. 33
