A BEHIND-THE-SCENES STRUGGLE
FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
BY GEORGES-HENRI DUMONT
Unesco often intervenes when human rights
are violated. For the first time,
we publish an account of this little-known
aspect of Unesco's work.
M
«* **
LANY people know that Unesco's action
in favour of human rights serves the fun¬
damental purpose, set forth in its Constitu¬
tion, of furthering "universal respect for
justice, for the rule of law and for the human
rights and fundamental freedoms which are
affirmed for the peoples of the world, without
distinction of race, sex, language or religion,
by the Charter of the United Nations".
It is also widely known that since its foun¬
dation Unesco has been concerned with the
teaching of human rights. Through numerous
publications and in consultation with many
specialists, it has done much valuable work in
this field over the years.
Equally well-known is Unesco's standard-
setting action relating to human rights, en¬
shrined in nine conventions, twenty-one
recommendations and two declarations
concerning rights to education, culture and
information.
However, few people know that Unesco
takes action on specific human rights problems
through an organ of its Executive Board, the
Committee on Conventions and Recommen¬
dations. If the existence of the Committee is
virtually unknown to the general public, this
is perhaps because much of its work is done
in private session.
The Committee was originally set up to
examine "communications from individuals
or associations invoking the violation of cer¬
tain human rights, particularly educational and
cultural rights, by states which are or are not
members of Unesco".
In its early years, from 1965 to 1977, the
Committee dealt only with questions relating
to discrimination in education, but in 1978 its
responsibilities were broadened, along with
those of Unesco's Executive Board. Since then,
all Unesco's fields of competence have been
covered by the Committee, and general ques¬
tions relating to human rights violations have
been examined as well as individual cases.
The Committee had to find a way of
reconciling two contradictory demandshow
to operate with maximum effectiveness while
at the same time Unesco is prohibited as an
institution from intervening in matters which
are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction
of its member states.

The Executive Board resolved this dilem¬
ma by deciding that Unesco should "act in a
spirit of international co-operation, concilia¬
tion and mutual understanding"; and that it
should not "play the role of an international
judicial body". Thus any idea of sanctions was
implicitly rejected.
How the Committee works
The Committee on Conventions and Recom¬
mendations meets in private session twice a
year. One disadvantage of working in this way
is that the Committee's decisions may be
deprived of support they might otherwise
receive from public opinion. Another is that
the public may get the impression that Unesco
simply makes solemn and noble declarations
whereas in reality it is engaged in practical,
continuous and effective action.
Yet some of the benefits of working in
private session outweigh the disadvantages.
Discussion focuses on the humanitarian rather
than the political aspects of the problem. Since
governments are not publicly accused, they do
not feel that they are losing face when they
yield to a decision by the Committee.
To understand how the Committee
works, let us take the example of a person
perhaps a writer, a teacher, an artist or a
journalistwho is in prison. A dossier com¬
piled by Unesco's Office of International Stan¬
dards and Legal Affairs is given to each
member of the Committee. It contains infor¬
mation on behalf of the alleged victim and,
if possible, the initial reactions of the govern¬
ment concerned, together with a summary
provided by the representative of the Director-
General of Unesco. A representative of the
government concerned is invited to attend the
meeting of the Committee in order to provide
additional information or to justify his govern¬
ment's acts. He or she may be asked a variety
of questions after making a statement. Some
of the most common questions include:
If the alleged victim has been imprisoned
without having been convicted, why is this so?
When will the trial take place?
If the prisoner has been tried, on what
grounds has he or she been convicted?
Has the prisoner's family been authorized
to visit him or her? If so, how often?
What is the prisoner's state of health? Is he
or she receiving the necessary treatment?
In the case of an elderly person, is there a
chance of a speedy release?
It is rare that all these questions are an¬
swered immediately, but the representative of
the government concerned may undertake to
deal with them as quickly as possible, thus
setting in motion a process beneficial to the
prisoner. Even if the case is not settled, sub¬
sequent to this session of the Committee many
prisoners receive a medical or family visit for
the first time.
Many cases are settled during this initial
period of dialogue with government represen¬
tatives. If a communication is declared to be
admissible, and dialogue with the government
concerned breaks down or the government in
question remains silent, then the Committee's
task becomes much more difficult. The
government will tend to dig in its heels. In
such cases it may be necessary to await a po¬
litical change before dialogue can be resumed.
This page and preceding page, examples of
calligraphy in various alphabets, from a 1989
calendar illustrating the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights published by the French
magazine Non-Violence Actualité. Preceding page,
Chinese (Ung No Lee) and Cyrillic (Jovica
Veljovic). This page above, Arabic (Hassan
Massoudy); below, Roman (Jean Larcher).
44
Some 200 cases have been submitted to the
Committee since 1978. The results of its ef¬
forts may be considered to be encouraging,
especially in recent years: 30 cases were set-
tied between 1978 and 1981; 85 between 1982
and 1985; 86 between 1986 and 1989.
Unesco has played a decisive role in the
case of three well-known figures: the Argen¬
tine pianist Miguel Angel Estrella, who was
freed from prison in 1980; Professor Andrey
Sakharov, Nobel Peace Prize winner (1975);
and Vaclav Havel, now President of the
Republic of Czechoslovakia.
In ten years, around a hundred persons,
often imprisoned in very unpleasant condi¬
tions, have been freed or acquitted.
Many communications submitted to the
Committee concern intellectuals forbidden to
return to their countries, students refused per¬
mission to go abroad or denied the award of
a degree or study grant, persons arbitrarily
deprived of their employment, or publications
banned by the authorities. The list of viola¬
tions of human rights is too long to list here.
In all cases, the Committee has learned to act
with obstinacy and perseverance.
This action in favour of human rights is
carried out in the name of the Executive Board
and the Director-General of Unesco. In order
to help reach a solution in certain cases, the
Director-General may intervene personally,
either confidentially or publically, if for ex¬
ample he learns that an international civil ser¬
vant working for Unesco has been detained
or arrested in the country of which he or she
is a national. This is what happened to Sorin
Dumitrescu, as he describes in the following
article.
GEORGES-HENRI DUMONT,
Belgian historian and member of the Royal
Academy of Belgium, is the author of numerous
historical works including Marie de Bourgogne
(Fayard, Paris, 1982) and La vie quotidienne en
Belgique au temps de Leopold II (Marabout
Université, Brussels, 1986). He is chairman of
Unesco's International Commission which is
responsible for the preparation of a new edition
of the History of the Scientific and Cultural
Development of Mankind. A member of Unesco's
Executive Board from 1981 to 1989, he was
chairman of its Committee on Conventions and
Recommendations from 1987 to 1989.
