A West African people
learns to respect
the cosmic order
Out of the land

of shadows BY AMADOU HAMPATE BA
Colourfully dressed members of a Fulani family,
Burkina Faso.

IN the pantheon of the Fulani people of West
Africa, the Supreme Being is Gueno, the Eternal,
the Omnipotent, the Creator, Preserver and
Destroyer He who bestows life and takes it
away. Both good and evil stem from Gueno, as
is made clear in the prayer: "Give me Thy good,
not Thy evil, but if Thou givest me Thy evil, give
me the strength to endure it." Idleness, vice and
war all stem from Gueno. This is regarded as nor¬
mal, for His authority is unquestionable and He
owes no explanations to humankind, any more
than the head of a family owes any to his
children.
Obedient to the traditions which govern their
upbringing, the Fulani never rebel against their
parents or consider them unjust, even when they
are harshly treated. Parents, chiefs and elders all
have rights. If one of them distributes property
unequally and a young man complains, he is
asked: "Are Gueno's shares equal?" And he is
told: "No, they are not. Take then what you have
been given and when your time comes to appor¬
tion shares, do as you see fit."
In the Fulani tradition, unlike Islam and
Christianity, there is no Satan on whom evil
intent is polarized. When the devil is referred to
in the initiatory narrative known as Kaïdara,
which forms part of the tradition, a substitute
word is used. In reality, the devil is a spirit or
"genie", since Gueno is not in direct contact with
human beings. First of all there are his "emana¬
tions", supernatural spirits who act as "channels"
for him. They include Kaïdara the Initiator,
Jeddo-Dewal the Evil One, and the primal gods
such as Ham, Dem, and Yer, to whom sacrifices
are offered. Next there are an infinite number of
génies specific to the elements (the spirits of air,
water and fire), génies (such as the génies of
Kaïdara) who serve supernatural spirits, and
génies who roam free in nature and contrive to
help or torment human beings. A beautiful dream
is sent by a good genie, whereas an ugly suspi¬
cion is the work of an evil genie. Lastly, there
are génies who perform special functions in food
preparation, hunting, crop growing, animal hus¬
bandry, and other activities. This means that
there is a teeming "occult" population which
The terra-cotta bottle
stopper in the form of the
head of a Fulani woman,
above, was crafted in the
16th century.
Man, animal, the elements...
the rainy season in Niger.
lives in the "land of shadows" inhabited by the
suudiibe or hidden beings, invisible spirits that can
assume all kinds of physical forms.
This is a land lying midway between the
"land of clarity" inhabited by visible beings and
the "land of darkest night", the abode of the souls
of the dead and the unborn not only the souls
of humans but those of animals and plants. These
are the three lands of the Fulani.
Kaïdara is therefore "a beam radiating out
from the burning centre formed by Gueno". He
may assume a multitude of visible forms, but he
usually prefers to adopt the features of deformed
old men or beggars, to help him lead astray
would-be opportunists or shallow individuals.
It has not been possible to attach a precise
meaning to the word Kaïdara, but it could be
said to denote "aim", "limit", "boundary" or
"finality".
Why should the word mean "aim" and why
do people strive at all costs and endure many or¬
deals to grasp the mystery of Kaïdara?
The reason is that Kaïdara is the god of gold
and of knowledge.
Gold is a royal metal around which basic
myths throughout West Africa have been con¬
structed. But why was gold an esoteric substance
long before it had a monetary value? Because, it
is said, gold "never rusts and never tarnishes".
It ¡s the only metal which can become "cotton
while remaining iron", and "with one gram of
gold, it is possible to spin a thread as thin as a
strand of hair and circumscribe an entire village
within it". Gold is also "the pedestal of
knowledge, but if you confuse knowledge and
its pedestal, then the pedestal will fall and
crush you".
Yet while adventurers are attracted more by
gold than by knowledge, Kaïdara typifies
knowledge, which even dictates the form he
assumes. An extraordinary being with seven
heads, twelve arms and thirty feet, perched on
an endlessly rotating four-footed throne, Kaïdara
represents the structure of the world and time:
the seven days of the week, the twelve months,
and the thirty days of the month. He represents
the perpetual movement of the earth, the four
24

AMADOU HAMPATE BA,
of Mali, is a specialist in
African history, cosmogony
and literature. He is the
author of many books and
articles about Africa,
including a novel L'Etrange
destin de Wangrin
("Wangrin's Strange
Destiny"), which won the
Grand Prix Littéraire de
l'Afrique Noire in 1974. His
work in collecting and
relating traditional stories,
such as the Kaïdara initiatory
narrative presented in the text
published here, has
made a major contribution
to the preservation
of the oral traditions of the
Fulani people.
basic elements and the four cataclysms which,
according to the prophesies, will destroy the
world of humankind.


Kaïdara epitomizes knowledge of cosmic
order and disorder alike: pervasive dualism and
the annihilation of some beings by others. He
represents knowledge of the laws of society, but
also of the laws of psychology. Every symbol
encountered on the path taken by Kaïdara
corresponds to a human type, with its positive
and negative aspects. The three pieces of advice
given by Kaïdara himself are aimed at ensuring
that the laws of nature and of the ancestors are
absolute, yet without divulging their secrets. Woe
betide anybody who does not respect them!
But the knowledge of the god of knowledge is
unfathomable and that is probably why his name
means "limit", since he personifies the limit
placed on human knowledge. He is "remote yet
very close", since we think that we can easily
understand him, whereas in fact he is inexhaust¬
ible. It is significant that, at the end of the initia¬
tory narrative, Kaïdara takes three steps back
when the man he has just initiated wishes to
embrace him in a gesture of joy, for there must
always be a distance and a veil between master
and pupil, between god and man, and between
knowledge and its imperfect approximations.!
Fulani women often wear
jewellery of gold, the
precious metal which
features in many West
African myths.
25
