'Remember...' The Jews
and their past
¡UfcfetiCi
f( oY Y
m YIY^
BY LIONEL KOCHAN
SHORTLY before his death Moses besought his
people not to neglect their past: "Remember the
days of old, consider the years of many generations:
ask thy father, and he will show thee, thy elders,
and they will tell thee" (Deuteronomy, 32:7).
Despite this exhortation, the study of the past
and the practice of historiography did not flourish
among the Jews. In the late 70s of the Common Era
(AD), the Jewish priest and historian Flavius
Josephus published his narrative of the Jewish war
against Rome and, twenty years later, his general
history The Antiquities of the Jews. But it was not
until a millennium and a half later, towards the end
of the sixteenth century, that genuine historiography
emerged among the Jews with the "History of the
Kings of France and the Kings of the Ottoman
Empire" by Rabbi Joseph Ha-Cohen (1496-1578),
who hailed his new departure in these terms: "Within
the whole gate of my people there has not yet arisen
an historian in Israel like Josephus.. .they ceased, the
The first word of the prayer beginning "Remember us
unto Life..." is depicted in this detail of a Hebrew
illuminated manuscript from northern Italy
(c. 1450-1470).
writers of memorials, they ceased, until I arose, even
I, Joseph."
How can the fifteen-century interval between
the time of Josephus and Joseph Ha-Cohen be
explained? The question is all the more pertinent
because the Jews, after all, are popularly regarded as
the people of history par excellence. Their foundation
document, the Hebrew Bible, takes the form of a
national history; and their conception of God is that
of a being whose prime concern is on two levels,
the personal and the historical.
The presence of the past
But this is precisely where the difficulty lies. We
are dealing here with a conception of the past not
as a movement away from a fixed point but as some¬
thing enduring, an ever-present reality which is
nourished by the rhythmic lunar calendar of the
Jews and the regular cycle of their festivals, most 25

.
of which commemorate the events of the past and
maintain them in the present. The Haggadah text,
for example, read each year at the Passover festival
to commemorate the Exodus from Egypt, contains
the injunction "in each and every generation let each
person regard himself as though he had come forth
out of Egypt".
The importance attached to the past and the
continued presence ofthat past explain Jews' relative
lack of interest in their post-biblical history. All
possible historical interest is already exhausted by
the Scriptures, which explain where the Jews origi¬
nated, where they stand in the present and where
they are going. The historical framework of the Jews
' is predetermined by the fact that, in a certain sense,
their history is already writtenthe divine revela¬
tion to Moses on Mount Sinai has promised them
a part of central importance in the future of the
world in that, through Israel, "shall all families of
the earth be blessed" (Genesis, 12:3). Israel already
knows its end. No matter what suffering and trials
may be experienced, it is part of the very order of
the world that Israel will enjoy its messianic reward.
Furthermore, if these historical models are as
dominant as Scripture and the Talmud (the Jewish
compendium of law, lore and commentary) sought
to make them, then it is difficult to see how subse¬
quent history could seem meaningful and worthy
of record. It could add nothing of substance to what
has already been made manifest. Origins, future and
finality have already been disposed of.
Broadly speaking, except for chronicles and
martyrologies, this outlook was dominant until the
T I..1 «Mm i. ft' It UffCitl COfttfl flk.rn.ftti' Üt {cYlIlf
26
U aVutltll utl.U l'avili' f ,a < . a". Utfl' A" . 1 1 aalt/ «': iVf fV «ill
loue- qutauftx fffutudr Ffolft.*öfiin»arttii
^ rtraftiL'fúuicrtMff. u uu-fri. inltiuficnj
[ riaiiHuxuniqct ^f^ruomftitaonuu2>miii
. ' i
L^ CofftCtH ptiecefmtacifii
:..-.a, .::>'.... fdi I lu'tfuiiuaiut. -v.*
^-U^ f?hutii(.>iiif y.^fittiAi-i auniaafft. t»pt«i
" ' -ï-w ' I ! ^ . ,
^1 ">t'i^CT.'í illiitiriVi". tV.A^UVUf ai>tt<.Hlfcl'
Above, illustration from a
10th-century Mozarabic
Bible depicting one of the
10 plagues of Egypt. The
waters of the Nile are
shown transformed into
blood.
Left, carved ivory head
of a Jewish woman,
(9th-8th century BC).
late sixteenth century. Examples of Jewish historical
writing roughly contemporary with the pioneering
work of Joseph Ha-Cohen include Rabbi Solomon
ibn Verga's Shevet Yehuda ("Sceptre of Judah"), first
published in Turkey around 1554; Abraham Zacuto's
Sefer Yuhasin ("Book of Genealogies", 1504);
Gedaliah ibn Yahya's Shalshelet Ha-Kabbalah
("Chain of Tradition", Venice, 1587); and David
Gans' Zemach David ("Sprig of David", Prague,
1592). Belonging to a different category but histor¬
ically of the first importance is Azariah dei Rossi's
Me'orEnayim ("Light of the Eyes", Mantua, 1573).
Whereas Zacuto and ibn Yahya were concerned
with producing a more or less coherent account
of Jewish history mainly in terms of rabbinical

f AmiIUIalir.'lHirt'in.aLCÏU*. CT. 1lta> I I :i fUl. Oll
I
futf rt'J.idtiiTumttictl iofl<hu(UO«ifn< '
uiiis a«f- ftcu<rt>«cepifua do* ^urtncrâ íé n'.ti^w^
dl doii.i.m ilium lnVurfv^flalUírr.cVi.'.'n.-IJICi'
p dbtruna utmt .Mnf <vV)fJ>aj.*ctT*ii.cai»*i
f-lumt «if tujiuti iJiTttnciVna :»ondi:tn«oíerutí
LtLflfrafltqua. flumtnif i.iU'LcUiii funa
fi auiu Jto'I^'U tltt^cuffla rilVf fun...'.
Bt^iaraoâJA tct>ino]fán IhCa.Vf'cft ».Mi'lu1í
¿¿ai¿<f(tbAiní IicvaKMtr Ji
P itntcraf' pplni tmn tld futiflftvâa mi*."!
C ï«ituîn.noluiiflfaimicnrfft çèct'çt.yoveu
onmíf Etftmnofttuoffami frcttfbttUtdi
flutmiffUatw.4 rvíafa-úi^Jiú rflin->ffc¿idíro'
I fifi
ClOlnUmUWU.1.1 rttfUblCtjUltH at.Vi.tlI ti Ulli
uffupftfuatftnauuin <j?l«ii4ïtn«ïfCdfa<-*H
. Nt 5*
a. «»tw
HISTOIRE
[> I L A
G VERRE DES I VI FS
CONTRI. LES ROMAINS.
RESPONSE A AI'I'ION
MARTYRE MES MACHABEES
TAH
FLAVIVS IOSEPH
IT la VU ICKITI t AftlVT-MlML
Ci ayar PHriolf A t SC WIT
*M***>*"»* Ib+mr&mCiàgti.
PAR MUNSlfVv.
A ^
.i..i^.»,-aiâ>^fca i t i a.
a . . t la^», . '.c. an.
afir aííioaaT/9M a-r rttrtLwat.
tradition, dei Rossi wrote on specific themes such as
the Judeo-Hellenistic writings of Philo of Alexandria
(which had been consistently neglected by the rab¬
bis), the source of the Septuagint,1 the relatively
late origin of the Hebrew calendar, the historical
value of folklore and allegory. Rossi also stood
out from his Jewish contemporaries by virtue of
his much greater degree of familiarity with non-
Jewish sourcesclassical, medieval and
Renaissance.
As far as a "modern" approach to history is
concerned, ibn Verga's "Sceptre of Judah" is
notable for its naturalistic interpretation. The



principal theme is the suffering and persecution
undergone by the Jews, which ibn Verga had
himself experienced as one of those expelled from
Spain. Characteristic of his work is the effort to
understand this and similar sufferings not solely
in terms of divine providence and punishment
but in terms of the interaction of historical forces
and the conduct of the Jews themselves. "The
exile persists for natural reasons," he wrote,
"because of religious hatred and the desire of the
[Spanish] ruler to subject everyone to his faith
and belief." But he felt that the Jews had also to
some extent brought their suffering on themselves
through their arrogance, their segregation, and
their false oaths.
The Jewish historians of the sixteenth century
had no immediate successors. The atmosphere of
Above, title page of a 1668
French edition of "History
of the Jewish War against
the Romans" by Flavius
Josephus.
27

=rs
r11V). ;
M"w w-vn: tm-a-pq
¿¡S . gg a-,-, -,,-,. -a^-t-j aaj.j J. .¿-a; J,
BW TO a-::; aP'SP^tf
~ ¿n or r^ . <.-j "yr "í ¡» iw* í ry mooro-VW WdTp
^Hjai^oi .17 -f njvur w wprSîin-' nun wye^m» oar
.-,,,x..- -kJKarj . .-'- N;,^.lS. 1.3'^..3
~<i'0 pp^a3|f.*5tOi :jf»p a ysw in r.V.»3 pi MP -."
fTtt <^X 'j roniVi^ : 'j.*V '^ ^,-£j «¿n iwi'3 d^ a^o is*»
fc pni»J tanyap i« 7' -a »fsn ¡mwu ppe row ** «Su
. Kf*C* ¡W3J m;v"i"3 TI tUffiWMIBp
;;,v£- rwj'lW^*w*»p.uiO.*W3tt>»tUri)
a [Tn.S&'ifaw3»s.my 'Wfff *ia.T
""y* '^Nn »Wj 'noun
¡tan ixfmf^nsi
[?-*fijo Mfet
11 W3.
:M
rmg.
Page of a Hebrew Bible
illuminated by Joseph
Sarfati at Cervera,
Spain, 1299.
28
LIONEL KOCHAN
is a British historian
specializing in Jewish and
European history. Now
retired, he was formerly
Bearsted Reader in Jewish
History at the University of
Warwick (UK) and before
that taught European
history at the Universities
of Edinburgh and East
Anglia. He is the author of
many books and articles on
Jewish and European
history.
the Enlightenment, with its quest for universal
values and development, was in any case averse to
concentration on the particular. In the late eight¬
eenth century the German-Jewish philosopher
Moses Mendelssohn, the foremost representative of
the Jewish Enlightenment (Haskala) confessed that
"I always yawn when I must read something histor¬
ical". On the other hand, it was precisely at this
period that a knowledge of Jewish history and of
the Jewish past came to be regarded as indispens¬
able to the "new Jew" that the Haskala sought to
produce. At this time the only suitable work avail¬
able was the French Huguenot Jacques Basnage's
five-volume L'histoire et la religion des Juifs ("History
and Religion of the Jews", 1706-1711). But a
proposal to translate it into German came to
nothing.
The science
of Judaism
The whole context of Jewish intellectual life in
western Europe was transformed at the beginning
of the nineteenth century. The study of the
Jewish past for its own sake now came to the fore.
A precursor of the new movement was Isaac
Markus Jost, whose "History of the Jews" was based
on the need "to mediate between synagogue and
world culture", that is to bring Jewish culture and
general history into harmony with one another. But
Jost's work, important though it was, fell into
eclipse compared with the achievement of the move¬
ment known as Wissenschaft des Judentums (the
Science of Judaism), founded by a group of young
German-Jewish intellectuals centred on Berlin and
its university. Their manifesto, set forth in 1822,
proclaimed the need for the "scientific" treatment
of Judaism aimed at "the systematic unfolding and
re-presentation of its object in its whole sweep, for
its own sake and not for any ulterior purpose...
unfolding Judaism in accordance with its essence...
without any preconceived opinion and not con¬
cerned in the final result".
The work of the German-Jewish historian
Leopold Zunz (1794-1886) perhaps best embodies
this ideal. A graduate of the universities of Berlin
and Halle, he saw the Jewish past in terms of a liter¬
ature that best expressed the spirit of Judaism.
Thus he devoted his researches mainly to the history
of the sermons and liturgies of Judaism, synagogal
poetry, and to important biographical studies,
notably of Azariah dei Rossi.
Although Zunz had no immediate disciples, his
work had a great deal to do with the expansion of
Jewish historical learning that marked the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Different view¬
points certainly emerged from this research but the
ideal of the objective scholar, as determined by the
Science of Judaism, remained paramount.
This development did not take place without
much adverse criticism, however. The Italian-Jewish
scholar Samuel David Luzzatto (1800-1865) argued
that, in pursuit of objectivity, the practitioners of
the science had forsaken their Jewish commitment
that they investigated Israel's past as others inves¬
tigated the past of Assyria, Egypt, Babylon or Per¬
sia and that the Jewish ideal of the unity of idea and
act would thereby be undermined.
This argument was further articulated in the
work of Nachman Krochmal of Galicia (1785-1840).
He saw in historicism the most serious challenge
to Judaism. How could the unchanging and eternal
word of God be reconciled with the evidence
provided by history of human intervention in the
transmission of the divine teaching? But to deny this
reality, Krochmal also argued, would be to reveal
the backwardness of Jewish scholarship in the eyes
of the younger generation and thus disillusion them
with Judaism altogether.
These controversies notwithstanding, Jewish
I fî
. , r
ml , a. . 1
t 11
S ''¡al
¿fj Raj . 1 1 ,
^% a
.
! : I :
y 1

historiography seems to have contributed greatly to
the assertion of Jewish self-confidence and awareness.
Once the historical revolution had been fully
assimilated, works of outstanding importance were
produced in Germany by Heinrich Graetz (1817-
1891), in Russia by Simon Dubnow (1860-1941), and
in the United States by Salo Baron (1895-1989). Each
of them attempted a "universal" history of the Jewish
people, which each conceived within a different
framework of understanding.
Graetz, a graduate of the universities of Breslau
and Jena, saw Judaism as having both a spiritual and
a political dimension. He divided Jewish history into
a political era which ended with the destruction of
the Temple in Jerusalem in 587 BC; a second period,
mainly religious in character, which lasted until the
destruction of the Second Temple in 70 AD; and the
third epoch of dispersion which was one of deepening
self-consciousness leading to a "religious state-
constitution". The multi-volumed "History of the
Jews from Oldest Times to the Present"2 that
Graetz published between 1853 and 1876 did not
entirely match this pattern but it remains a
magisterial accomplishment for its period.
Dubnow's major work, a ten-volume "World
History of the Jewish People" (first published in
German, 1925-1929, and since translated into
several languages3), rejected what he saw as the
spiritual interpretation of Jewish history of Zunz
or Graetz in favour of a sociological emphasis that
concentrated on the structure ofJewish autonomy
in the various centres of the Diaspora. He saw the
dynamic centres of Jewish life moving from Pales¬
tine to Babylon and then to Spain, medieval
France and Germany, Poland and Lithuania.
These were all "substitutes for state forms",



Dubnow argued, which had however enabled the
Jews to preserve their uniqueness and their
nationhood without succumbing to the demands
of land and territory.
Baron's monumental Social and Religious
History oftheJews (3 volumes, 1937; 2nd edition, 18
volumes, 1952-1983) lacks the overall pattern that'
Graetz and Dubnow sought to give to their work
but is far better documented and has benefited
from the flowering of a century's research. Baron
dismisses what he terms "the lachrymose concep¬
tion of Jewish history" with its emphasis on perse¬
cution and suffering in favour of a view that asserts
Jewish national self-definition, both in the disper¬
sion and in the Land of Israel. Baron's forte was
his analytic gift and ability to marshal a quantity
of secondary material.
Apart from these comprehensive works,
knowledge of the Jewish past has been enriched
and transformed by a multiplicity of more special¬
ized works. Many of these have been written in
Hebrew by historians from the universities of
Israel; others, written in a variety of languages, have
emanated from the United States and Europe.
1. The earliest (3rd-2nd century BC) extant Greek translation
of the Old Testament from the original Hebrew.
2. A condensed English version was published as History of
the Jews, 6 vols., 1891-1898.
3. Published in English as History ofthe Jews, 5 vols., 1967-1973.
Editor
Illustrations on this page
evoke the 3 main periods of
Jewish history as seen by
the German scholar
Heinrich Graetz.
Below, the story of Daniel
and Nebuchadnezzar.
(Detail from an early 16th
century tapestry).
Below left, model of
Jerusalem as it was before
the destruction of the
Second Temple.
Left, Calleja de las Flores
("Alley of Flowers") in the
Jewish quarter of Córdoba,
Spain.
VTSTt
29
.,
