mméámm
USSR: filling in the blank spaces
iN the USSR, whole periods of Soviet and
world history alike have been entirely ignored.
The events that took place during them have not
even been falsified; they have simply been left out
of the history books. Old Bolsheviks such as
Bukharin, Zinoviev, Trotsky and many others
who were executed have been erased from the
historical record. This is why floods of biogra¬
phies are being published today. The Stalinist ver¬
sion of industrialization and the collectivization
of agriculture has been thrown into the
wastepaper basket. As a result, we have had to
do away with history examinations for want of
new textbooks. Instead of the history of the Com¬
munist Party, scientific communism and the po¬
litical economy of socialism, we are teaching the
social and political history of the twentieth
century.
New textbooks are being written. One team
is preparing a textbook entitled "Essays on the
History of the Party", while another is working
on a history of the Soviet Union. I am myself
contributing material on France, Italy, Spain,
Switzerland and Belgium to a new universal
history.
The world of historians is changing rapidly.
At one end of the spectrum you have long-
established teachers who are resisting, at least at
the intellectual level. At the other you have
young researchers, university teachers and leftists
who tend to be outside the mainstream. Then
there are those of us in the forty-five to fifty age-
group. We are trying to get things moving.
Take the French Revolution, for example.
Until five years ago, the period of the Terror was
the main focus of study. Revolution without
terror was not revolutionthat was how ter¬
rorism was justified. With the exception of
Robespierre, the leaders of the Revolution were
not studied. Last year, on the occasion of the bi-
BY VLADLEN SIROTKIN
öCa^^sst*"^ Anís *- -.
J&#tè^ Y
IIISSIíIa' " sil*r
centenary, we managed to improve matters. Some
of the gaps were filled in with the publication of
books which examine objectively all aspects of
the Revolution, and of the English and American
Revolutions. I wrote several articles in which I
made comparisons between these three revolu¬
tions and the October Revolution.
In the past many words and names, such
as "convergence", "gulag", "Academician
Sakharov" and so on, were regarded as taboo for
political rather than historical reasons. We now
talk of them freely and differing views are
expressed. The façade of uniformity has disap¬
peared and given way to diversity of opinion and
democracy. Everything has changed in the last
five years.
Naturally, there are still conservative forces
that are trying to slow down the momentum of
change but in the universityI am a university
Top, members of the Soviet
government saluting the
May Day parade in Red
Square, Moscow, 1929.
Nikolai Bukharin is at far
left.
Above, some recent articles
about Trotsky that have
appeared in the Soviet press.
43

44
teacherthings are changing at a tremendous
pace. We are engaged in the twofold task of
teaching and research, and university students
are pushing for change. This is a widespread
movement.
'You are historians.
It is up to you to decide.'
We are now free to publish, but this has only
been the case for the last two years, which ex¬
plains why there are no new textbooks yet. On
the other hand, floods of articles are appearing
in the daily newspapers and weeklies and in
somebut not allof the historical journals.
Some of these journals are still waiting for orders
or instructions from the Central Committee.
But the Central Committee is silent. President
Mikhail Gorbachev has said: "No orders. You
are historians. It is up to you to decide."
In order to fill the gaps in the archives, books
that were once banned must be used. In our
country, these are what are known as "special
archives", "special libraries" or "special
documentation". We are now publishing every¬
thing, absolutely everything. For instance, I have
published a major document on Trotsky and
Trotskyism in the weekly paper Smen ("Change"),
and, in a daily newspaper for secondary-school
teachers, a long illustrated article on Stolypin, the
leading reformer in the early years of the century,
who wanted to reform agriculture and was assas¬
sinated by the conservative faction. Thanks to the
photos illustrating the article, people "saw"
Stolypin for the first time.
If we are to give a true and comprehensive
historical picture, we must use all the archival and
other sources. The problem is how to overcome
the resistance of old-fashioned archivists and
hardened bureaucrats who are trying to slow the
movement down. But contrary to what is often
thought, the archives are not closed and you can
go and ask for what you need. Officially, every-
Members of the praesidium
of the first Congress of
Soviets in 1922.
Top left, Grigori Zinoviev.
Pyotr Arkadyevich Stolypin
(1862-1911).
VLADLEN S1ROTKIN.
Soviet historian, teaches at
the Diplomatic Academy in
Moscow. A specialist in the
history of France and
Franco-Soviet relations, he
is the author of many
published works, including
studies on the Napoleonic
wars and on relations
between France and Russia
in the 19th century.
thing is accessible, even the Party archives. In fact,
our archives are now full of Americans and
Japanese. There is a major film archive near
Moscow and I can view films there all day long
without any hindrance. I have travelled abroad
freely. I have worked in archives in Italy, France
and Belgium, and this year I shall be going to the
United States.
I am not in favour of immediately writing
history that would be valid for everybody. We
need time and we have to proceed a step at a time.
To return to the French Revolution, on the
occasion of the bicentenary we published a book
in which one-third of the authors were French.
We followed the principle already adopted in the
recently published "Dictionary of Glasnost",* in
which there were two authors one Soviet and
one Frenchfor each chapter. Scientific criteria
are being applied and ideology is taking a back
seat. But how should a scientific history be writ¬
ten? Some issues have ideological implications or
political consequences.
I certainly do not regard the historian's task
as that of providing explanations but rather of
revealing everything that really happened. For the
moment it cannot be said that we have a really
scientific history. But we are moving in that direc¬
tion. When I was a student in Moscow, I did not
boast that I was in the Faculty of Arts. I even
claimed to be a future engineer or physicist. But
now the time for historians has come. We are
interviewed by Soviet and foreign television,
newspapers and radio. I must have given at least
a hundred interviews to newspapers all over the
world.
For a long time the communists elsewhere
in the world, and especially in the Third World,
were satisfied with the official version of Soviet
history. That is why they are bewildered by the
current changes. We were a model for them, the
image of the earthly paradise. That image is
false. In fact, it began to be questioned over
thirty years ago at the time of the Twentieth
Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union and Nikita S. Khrushchev's report on
Stalin. We are now open-minded, we can discuss
and we are endeavouring to present the facts.
These comrades are not used to it.
People in the communist movement are not
familiar with the plurality of ideas which in my
opinion prevailed in Lenin's time. The habit of
discussion was lost from Stalin's time onwards.
As a result, whole sectors of the population in
the Soviet Union are extremely bewildered by
the present situation. On a trip to the Soviet Far
East I found that people did not understand what
was going on in Moscow or Leningrad. Make no
mistake. It will take a long time for these things
to be understood.
* SO idées qui ébranlent le monde. Dictionnaire de la glasnost
("50 Ideas That are Shaking the World. A Dictionary of
Glasnost"). Edited and with a preface by Yuri Afanassiev and
Marc Ferro. Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1989.
