-'
j
Ï&&&**".
**r¿¿t.í- ~ ^aH.
26

Heavenward steps
BY JACQUES GIES
Above, Buddhist temple-
monastery complex at
Popchusa, Republic of Korea
(1624).
Inset, from top to bottom:
Pagoda of the Tianningsi
("heavenly peace") Temple at
Beijing, China. Thought to
have been built under the Llao
dynasty (907-1125), it has
13 storeys rising to a height
of 58 m.
The "Big Wild Goose Pagoda"
at Xian, China (652 AD).
Pagoda of the Kosanji Temple
at Setoda, Ikuchl Island,
Japan (1946).
The great golden stupa of the
15th-century Shwe Dagon
Pagoda at Rangoon, Myanmar
(formerly Burma).
The eyes of Buddha on a
small stupa near Kathmandu,
Nepal.
JL OR most people, the architecture of Buddhism
in the Far East is synonymous with its most
typical feature, the pagoda, a lofty tiered structure
with a projecting curved roof at each level. In
popular imagery pagodas appear as ubiquitous fea¬
tures of the town and country landscape, but they
are most typically shown in remote mountain
sites which seem particularly appropriate to the
silent inner quest, the meditation and renuncia¬
tion which are characteristic of Buddhist practice.
In China, Korea and Japan the pagoda
dominates a cluster of buildings which stand
inside an enclosure whose wide gates give it the
appearance of a walled city. This complex of
buildings consists of temples and a monastery, for
Buddhist temples are usually shared by monks
who live there permanently and members of the
lay community, in contrast to the Christian West
where there is a distinction between cathedrals
and churches which are built in the midst of the
community and monasteries which are secluded
from it.
The temple-monastery complex is the
product of a long period of development. In early
Buddhism, the religious ideal was pursued exclu¬
sively by communities of monks. And although
it was in India, the cradle of Buddhism, that
monks and laymen first began to share the hospi¬
tality of sacred monastic precincts, the temple-
monastery would find its most complete expres¬
sion in the most distant corners of the Buddhist
world, especially in the imperial foundations of
the Tang dynasty in China during the seventh
and eighth centuries AD.
The first Buddhist monument was the burial
mound housing the relics of the spiritual master,
Gautama Buddha (the "Enlightened One") who
lived in the fifth century BC in northern India.
A cosmic symbol, this tumulus or stupa was a
hemispherical mound surmounted by a mast and
surrounded by a circular balustrade with a
gateway at each of the four cardinal points.
Crowning the central axis were a number of discs
corresponding to the celestial domains of other
worlds. Later stupas were conical or shaped like
a four-sided pyramid. Later still tower-like stupas
were built in China, and from them the pagoda
eventually developed.
The first Buddhist communities had neither
meditation halls nor fixed abode. The monks
lived as wandering preachers who renounced
worldly possessions and begged for their food like
the Master and the traditional holy men of India.
The first Buddhist places of communal devo¬
tion date from the second and first centuries BC
when monks in western India began to convert
caves for this purpose, probably because it was
their practice to use caves as places for medita¬
tion when travel was impossible during the rainy
season.
This type of semi-natural "architecture" was
so influential that cave-sanctuaries continued to
be used in the Buddhist world as well as free¬
standing temples, especially in central Asia and
China. In some cases, as at Dunhuang in China's
Gansu province, a wooden façade was placed in
front of the entrance to the caves or the rock was
carved in imitation of a wooden construction.
In Buddhist religious architecture there were
thus two types of building, the meditation hall,
which was a development of the monk's cell, and
the stupa or reliquary monument. At first these
two types were distinct, but when the temples
at Karli and Bhaja in western India were built
some three or four centuries after the death of
the Buddha, they merged into a single edifice. 27

Right, the vast hemispherical
dome of the Great Stupa at
Sanchi In northern India,
founded by the emperor
Asoka (268-233 BC).
Far right, the cave-sanctuary
at Karli, near Pune, India (c.
50 BC). Two rows of pillars
surmounted by carved figures
lead to a semi-circular apst.
which houses the stupa.
Below, statue of the Buddha,
flanked by two attendants,
In a niche of the stupa
in one of 486 cave-
sanctuaries at Dunhuang,
Gansu province, western
China (4th-10th century).
28
Influences on sacred architecture
Buddhism is rooted in history through the person
of its founder and this is the core of its doctrine.
The life and work of the sage Gautama were at
first the sole object of devotion and the way
shown by him was the spiritual path to be
trodden. It is fitting therefore that the first Budd¬
hist monument should have been the stupa, a
burial mound and shrine. Better than any other
symbol, it represents his passage through history.
A more ambitious architectural approach
developed later to accommodate a growing com¬
munity united by the rules of a single liturgy. The
schism which occurred in the first century AD,
between those who were faithful to monastic
orthodoxy (Hinayana or "Little Vehicle" Budd¬
hism) and the reformers, who favoured a more
just distribution of spiritual vocations between
men (Mahayana or "Great Vehicle"), influenced
sacred architecture. The capacity of the holy
places was increased to accommodate the students
and followers of Buddha and, more importantly,
a pantheon of deities (Bodhisattvas) appeared
around the image of the Buddha as objects of
popular veneration.

JACQUES GIES,
of France, is curator of the
Chinese section of the Musée
Guimet in Pans and professor
of Chinese art and aesthetics
at the University of Paris IV
(Sorbonne). He has published a
number of articles on Buddhist
art in China and central Asia.
The rock-cut shrines
of central Asia
Two types of sacred architecturecave-sanctuaries
hewn out of the living rock and precincts con¬
taining temples, a monastery and a stupa
developed in the oases on the Silk Road in
Chinese Turkestan which became focal points of
Buddhist culture after the eclipse of Buddhism in
India.
Rock-cut shrines such as those at Yunkang
in China's Shanxi province are often called "caves
of a thousand Buddhas" (a term which distin¬
guishes them from temples in the strict sense)
owing to their rows of stone Buddhas carved
from the cliff face. Their design showed a progres¬
sive change of style during a period of intense reli¬
gious activity which lasted from the fifth to the
eighth or ninth centuries. The oldest sites, in
which there is a pradaksina (circumambulatory)
path around the revered stupa, reveal the
influence of early Buddhist foundations in India.
In central Asia the stupa is a quadrangular
pillar, each face of which may be adorned with
a statue of the Buddha, who is often flanked by
attendants. Stupas of this kind express the ancient
link, which originated in India, between the sym¬
bolic monument and the sacred image. At the
same time, the cave walls were gradually covered
with paintings illustrating scenes from the lives
of the Buddha.
The pillar stupa and the circumambulatory
path disappeared from central Asian cave-
sanctuaries constructed in the seventh and eighth
centuries, thus indicating a change in ritual prac¬
tice. An altar consisting of statues was carved in
a niche hewn from the wall at the end of the cave,
facing the entrance. The new design encouraged
the creation of monumental imagery in which the
Buddha, usually shown preaching, is surrounded
by an assembly of revered beings (great monks,
Bodhisattvas, god-kings and guards), in large
groups of painted sculptures.
The disappearance of the circumambulatory
path brought a decline in the illustrations of the
lives of the Buddha which the faithful saw during
their ritual encirclement of the stupa. The pious
tended to ascribe divine and universal stature to
the Buddha. His benevolent image was depicted
in many transcendent figures which triumphantly
cover wide expanses of space. Much detail was
devoted to visions of the worlds in which the
devout hoped to be reborn, and each wall of the
cave was decorated with vast mystic composi¬
tions, designed as self-contained panels.
Although the design of the cave-shrines was
inspired by pillars, beams, consoles and other
features of wooden edifices, it did not reproduce
the fine architecture of the free-standing temple,
that harmonious complex of sanctuaries and
other monuments. Such free-standing temples are
known to have existed in the oasis towns of
Kucha, Khotan and Tumchuq in central Asia,
but it was in China that temple design attained
such a measure of stylistic coherence and such
power as the expression of a religious ideal that
it was adopted as a classical model by Korea and
Japan.
The ancient Chinese rules which governed
the symbolic use of space came to dominate the
architecture of the Buddhist temple. The notion
of a centre and the four cardinal points gave rise
to the alignment of the main chapels along the
north-south axis and the four doors of the temple
precinct. This symbolic layout is endlessly
repeated in an interplay of corresponding features
and is duplicated by the vertical superstructure
symbolizing the earth at the base and the celes¬
tial dome above. As Rolf A. Stein has written,
"Whether it was already vested with this meaning
or not, the stupa had become an orientated tower
with a square or octagonal base which can be
ascended in a spiral, in imitation of the graded
heavens of Buddhism". 1 29
