PAULO FREIRÉ TALKS TO MARCIO D'OLNE CAMPOS
Reading
the world
fe*«
Y.~ -
-'
. - '
- ' . ..
vi
' 1
ZZ3**-^~ t
PAULO FREIRÉ. We have often compared our
experiences of literacy work. The lessons you have learned
from your research in ethnoscience coincide in many
respects with what I have called "reading the world".
I have always insisted that literacy, thought of in terms
of reading words, must necessarily,' be preceded by the
"reading" or "deciphering" of the world around us.
Learning to read and write is tantamount to "re-reading"
the world of our experience.
It must never be forgotten that, long before they begin
to learn to form letters, the very young have learned to
speak, to manipulate oral language. Through their family
experience, they "read" the reality of the world around them
long before they can write about it. Later they simply write
what they have learned to say.
Any literacy training process must take this historical
and social fact into account and use it systematically so as
to encourage pupils to practise oral expression, which is
inseparably linked to what I call "reading the world".
Indeed, it is this first reading of the world that incites chil¬
dren to express, by means of signs and sounds, what they
have learned from the universe around them.
Literacy work must take this reality as its point of depar¬
ture and refer to it constantly so as to make possible, thanks
to the greater breadth of knowledge that reading and writing
confer, a more profound decipherment, a "re-reading" of
the world once it has ¡been discovered.
Depending upon the culture involved, this learning
process centres on two poles. On the one hand there is what
might be termed "spontaneous" knowledge; on the other
there is "rigorous" or "scientific" knowledge. In each of
us, there is a conflict between the two. The demands of
rigour are never totally clear and unequivocal and never free
from ideological influences; traces of ideological tendencies
always remain, in the very rigour with which we disclaim
our own ideological background.
MARCIO D'OLNE CAMPOS. I have long been
interested in the differences between the various types of
knowledgepopular, tribal and scientific. With regard to
what you call the "re-reading of the world", the example
of various Indian peoples has led me to a radical revision
of my conception of the role of the educator.
Lack of a system of writing has not prevented these
peoples from devising other methods of recording their
vision of the world and of expressing their relationship with
their immediate environment and the universe at large. This
they convey through personal ornamentation, rites, myths,
and intensive use of the spoken word. Their close involve¬
ment with their environment induces the first, original

Brazilian educator Paulo Freiré
his friend Marcio D'Olne Campos, ethnoscientist
and teacher, exchange reflections on literacy teaching
and discuss the purpose and conditions of a truly
popular form of education
Paulo Freiré
"reading of the world", which precedesindeed, makes
possiblethe creation of signs and symbols. The "re-reading*
of the world" is thus made manifest through a whole system
of expression that antecedes the symbolism of the alphabet
proper.
This point is a vital one and is almost universally
applicable. In our own Brazilian society, for instance, appar¬
ently arbitrarily selected characters are often imposed on
children, sometimes in an intimidating manner, although
they bear no relation to their experience or the symbolism
they use to express it. Educators do not always seem to be
aware that there may be other symbols than those which
they want to teach their pupils. The gap between teacher
and pupil is even greater in the case of children from Indian
societies, in which the original symbolism is linked to myths
and rites.
I see this standpoint in the world which is specific to
each one of us as the necessary starting point and the raison
d'être of literacy work. We cannot ask children to remain
isolated, as though in a glass capsule, while learning to read
and write, and only later require them to begin to "read"
the world around them.
P.F. I want to stress that teaching should always take
into account the differing levels of knowledge that children
bring with them when they come to school. This intellec¬
tual baggage is an expression of what might be called their
cultural identity and this, of course, is linked to the socio¬
logical concept of class. The teacher must take into account
this initial "reading of the world" that children bring with,
or, rather, within them. For each child, this has been
fashioned within the setting of his or her own home, locality,
and town, and is strongly influenced by social origins.
Schools tend, almost invariably, to discount this prior
knowledge. I am always astonished by the disdain with
which schools, with a few happy exceptions, treat the per¬
ceptual, existential, "lived" experience acquired by the child
outside the school confines. It is as though they want to erase
this other form of language, which constitutes the child's
way of being, sensibility and initial vision of the world, from
his or her mental and physical memory.
This lack of respect for the child's experience has con¬
sequences that are far more deleterious than is generally re¬
alized. It implies a failure to recognize all the inventiveness,
the hundred-and-one artful tricks that children from less
Opposite page, child
drawing on a Cape
Verde beach. Right,
painting by Zhou
Han, age 6. This
painting and those
on pages 6 to 9 are
by Chinese children.
They have been
kindly sent to us by
their art teacher.

favoured backgrounds employ to defend themselves against
a world that tends to oppress them.
I am not against the assessment of levels of knowledge
in schools. What I object to is the fact that such assessments
should only cover knowledge acquired at school, as if it had
been laid down that nothing important happens outside
school or school hours. No attempt is ever made to forge a
sufficiently strong link between what children learn in
school and what they learn in the world outside.
M.C. The world the child is already deciphering.
P.F. And which he or she never ceases to decipher.
This lack of consideration towards knowledge derived from
experience seems to me to be not only an ideologico-political
choice, but also to indicate a certain scientific incompetence.
Schools are authoritarian and elitist because they furnish
ready-made knowledge, a package that is supposedly com¬
plete. Such a conception of knowledge is scientific nonsense,
an epistemological falsification. There is no such thing as
a closed system of knowledge. All knowledge is constituted
within the setting of history, never outside it. All new
knowledge springs from the decay of previous knowledge
which was itself once innovative. Knowledge is born when
one has the humility to accept that such knowledge will,
in its turn, decay. Sometimes certain scientists seem to
forget this.
Having said this, neither you nor I would want to con¬
fine children to the knowledge they had before they went
to school. On the contrary, we want pupils to learn to under¬
stand better what they already know, so that, in their turn,
they will become the creators of new knowledge.
M.C. Here we touch on a theme we are both familiar
withthat of the role of error in the pedagogical process.
The French epistemologist Gaston Bachelard suggested a
pedagogical system based on error, which involved seeing
mistakes not as the aberrations of a tired mind, but as an

"epistemological obstacle", a barrier to the act of knowing
and a challenge to reality from the person faced with it.
Errors can thus be seen as "ideological obstacles" which deny
the existence of or block the way to the birth of new
knowledge.
P.F. Bachelard's concept of error should be democra¬
tized. If all educators regarded error not as in itself a bar¬
rier to understanding but as an obstacle of an ideological
nature, then error itself would become a necessary step in
the progress of knowledge.
Teachers should, by word and deed, show their pupils
that error is not the sign of a serious gap in their knowledge
or a proof of their incompetence, but, on the contrary, a
legitimate step in the learning process. Rather like someone
who looks first to his right for something that he will even¬
tually find on his left.
Once this inflection is given to the notion of error, the
whole pedagogical relationship is profoundly changed. Not
only does it ease the concept of learning for the child, it
also encourages the teacher to adopt a more modest approach
and relieves him of some of the burden of authority. Under
the authoritarian conception of error, error enables the
teacher to assert his power and to punish.
M.C. To punish in the classic meaning of the word.
P.F. In the strictly classic sensewrite out a hundred
times "I shall not make a mistake again"; to be kept in; to
be sent out of the room. This kind of thinking goes beyond
the intellectual plane. There is a danger that the pupil will
see error as a moral and cultural stain, as some kind of unfor¬
givable sin in some way linked to his or her social origins.
Far from being static, curiosity is perpetual, symbolic
movement. The curious mind cannot approach, grasp or
assimilate the object of its attention without feeling its way
or without making mistakes. When error is regarded as the
logical outcome of curiosity, it should never be punished.
Once this "error complex", this feeling of culpability,
has been eliminated, the knowledge that pupils bring with
them must be made an integral part of the dialogue that is
established between the class and the teacher. By its nature,
scientific rigour involves moments of complete spontaneity.
I would even go so far as to say that absolute rigour does
not exist, but co-exists with spontaneity and even arises from
it. Neither scientists nor teachers have the right to scorn
what is known as "popular wisdom" and even less to exclude
it so as to impose a supposedly rigorous explanation of the
world.
What we want is a pedagogical method, which, while
not rejecting the demands of rigour, gives scope to spon¬
taneity and emotion and adopts as its point of departure
what I might call the pupils' perceptual, historical and social
"here and now".
M.C. I would like here to refer to my experience of
"ethnoscience", which is the ethnography of knowledge as
seen through local group practices in the formulation of
knowledge and techniques. By definition, therefore, it is a
discipline devoid of any trace of ethnocentricity.
In order to understand the body of knowledge accumu¬
lated by a minority culture, it must be learned from the
inside. First one has to explore the vast network of words,
the world of basic notions that makes a link between man
and nature that is specific to that culture. How can this be
done? By adopting, from the start, the position of an appren¬
tice compiler of knowledge and playing the card of spon¬
taneity. As an educator I might also add, by accepting the
spontaneity of others, just as we accept our own. This means
sharing the child's culture within the classroom.
Opposite page
above: painting by
Ean Ya-Feng, age 7.
Opposite page
below: a village in
the Brazilian forest.
This page, paintings
by Ye Peng, age 6.

P.F. Yes, the ideal standpoint is acceptance of the spon¬
taneity of others.
M.C. In this way, I prepare myself for a real dialogue.
Coming to grips, without preconceptions, with a different
cultural context is the fundamental precondition of my work
as an ethnoscientist. I have to call upon all my ingenuity,
all my freshness of mind, if I am to understand the tools
of thought and action and the categories of thought that are
inherent in tribal societies. Only later, and very gradually,
is it possible to systematize.
This experience, and especially my work on the
knowledge of astronomy of the Indians of the island of
Búzios, in the Brazilian state of Sào Paulo, has had a great
influence on my work as an educator. I learned that what
you, Paulo, call the "minimal vocabulary" is much vaster
than the actual words that are used. The word is much more
than a sign; it is a symbolic, all-encompassing discourse. The
symbolical signification which impregnates the communi¬
cation of these groups of people with their world is as struc¬
tured as their language. Both come together in the
deciphering of the universe and the constitution of
knowledge into themes for reflection.
It is this vital relationship between nature and society,
a relationship which is the fount of culture, that we are
trying to comprehend in depth. Like the teacher, the scien¬
tific researcher must work in what might be called the
"laboratory of life". This is not to denigrate the scientific
facilities available to usbooks, laboratory research,
programme content, in short, all official knowledge. It is,
however, essential to put this official knowledge into per¬
spective, on the spot, to ensure that we do not inflict on
children abstract exercises dreamed up by people who are
insufficiently competent.
In our research, therefore, we have been obliged to give
pride of place, as our starting point, to notions of space and,
time which, in each case, provide a different framework and
colouring to our natural and cultural environment and thus
form the whole basis of our presence in the world. The ques¬
tions we put to the various disciplines,to the various reposi¬
tories of knowledge, are formulated in terms of the questions
this presence in the world asks of us. Both in the school
and in the field, this has led to a trans-disciplinary approach.
We move freely from one method of exploring knowledge
to another.
Thanks to this listening in to the world, we are able to
rediscover and verify our knowledge in another cultural
contextthe world of the pupil. We are making progress
not in our own knowledge, but in the knowledge of others.
P.F. Once again one must deplore the dirigiste
approach adopted by many educators. It is impossible to
comprehend intuitively the knowledge of the Indians you
have been talking about. First of all you must immerse your¬
self in the setting and conditions that have given rise to that
knowledge. This is what many intellectuals refuse to do.
Even when they expound progressive ideas, their practices
remain deeply authoritarian and their ideology remains
elitist. Although, perhaps, they would not admit it to them¬
selves, for them only institutionalized knowledge is true
knowledge. In fact, they see no value in popular wisdom,
which they consider to be imperfect, insignificant and not
worth talking about.
This reminds me of a rather revealing anecdote. It was
during a meeting at which the working methods of peasants
had been discussed. A group of intellectuals had just finished
a lengthy discussion, when a peasant got up to speak. "The
way things are going," he said, "I don't see any point in
continuing. We shall never reach agreement. You over
there"and with a humorous gesture he emphasized the
class distance that separated the two groups despite the fact
that they were in the same room"you over there are preoc¬
cupied with the salt, whereas for us what counts is the
sauce." The room fell silent. The intellectuals asked them¬
selves perplexedly what the peasant was getting at. His com¬
panions, on the other hand, knew exactly what he meant
and were waiting for a reply.
In his terse, simple language, the peasant was saying "The
discussion is going round in circles because you are looking
only at a fragment of reality whereas we see it as a whole.
We are thinking about things as a whole without stopping
to examine details, whereas you, who are always talking
about the overall picture, are getting bogged down in
details." Salt is only one ingredient in the sauce, but the sauce
symbolizes the sum of all the ingredients. This was a
metaphor that revealed an analytical capacity that certain
intellectuals did not expect to find in a peasant.
In my view, knowledge and competence are only of
valuealways relative, but nevertheless considerableif one
is aware that they are, like human beings, necessarily par¬
tial and imperfect.

Top, woman spinning in a
Brazilian village.
Above and opposite page,
paintings by Zhao Cheng,
age 6.
PAULO FREIRÉ, of Brazil, is an internationally known educator. His
many works translated into English include Pedagogy of the Oppressed
(Herder & Herder, New York, 1970), Pedagogy in Progress: the Letters
to Guinea-Bissau (Seabury Press, New York, 1978), and 7fie Politics of
Education: Culture, Power and Liberation (Macmillan, Basingstoke, UK,
1985).
MARCIO D'OLNE CAMPOS is a Brazilian physicist with an interest in
ethnoscience, ethnoastronomy and education. He is the founder-
director of the Aldebaran observatory at the University of Campinas,
Säo Paulo state, Brazil.
M.C. The fact is that, from the moment when we think
of them in terms of movement and not as a definitive
achievement, all forms of knowledge and competence are,
as Piaget said, constantly brought into question. Everything
seems to indicate that the equilibrium we seek as we attempt
to construct our knowledge is doomed to be destroyed as
soon as it is achieved. If we accept the idea that knowledge
is an ongoing process, then we must always be ready to
retrace our steps. We accept this disequilibrium because we
know that it is the prerequisite of a new equilibrium.
This position is just as valid for the teacher as for his
relationship with others. This other being who speaks to
you from a marginal, minority culture that is quite different
from your own, is capable of introducing you to his or her
cultural context if only you are prepared to accept the dise¬
quilibrium. Return to a state of equilibrium is dependent
upon contact and dialogue and not upon a way of thinking
that will leave you isolated in your so-called competence.
For me, the key to literacy training lies in this kind of inten¬
sive, dynamic interaction.
P.F. What conclusion can we draw from all this? It
is the same for us all, whether we are Latin American school¬
children, students in Asia or university teachers in Europe
or America: friend, please never lose your capacity for
wonder and astonishment in the world which you regard
and in which you live.
