The Greek ideal
BY GEORGES DONTAS
30
This page, detail of a bronze
statue of Athena (4th century
BC) found at Piraeus In 1959.
Opposite page, marble fröre of
the archaic period (late 6th
century BC).
Xhe human figure occupies a central place in
Greek art and particularly in Greek sculpture. In
the earliest works a diversity of beasts and mon¬
sters are depicted, but the range soon narrows to
a few domestic animals such as dogs and horsesa
trend reflecting the anthropocentrism of Greek
thought, history and character.
The Greeks believed profoundly in the value
of man. This conviction underlies Aristotle's
statement that the city-state is the ideal political
institution. For Plato "Man participates in the
divine" and is "related to the gods". The great
lyric poet Pindar wrote that "Gods and men have
a single mother, only our strengths are different".
At the dawn of Greek civilization Homer sang
of a world where the gods not only mingled with
men butexcept that they were immortal and all-
powerfulfelt and behaved like them.
The gods are thus almost always represented
in human form. The human body is a constantly
recurring motif in Greek art. Soaring temple
columns with their finely-chiselled lines recall the
slender bodies of Greek youths, and the name for
the capital of a column (kionokranon) means head.
In paintings and sculptured reliefs the beauty of
the human form in repose or in action stands out
against a neutral background. Only later, during
the Hellenistic period, do we find some rather
clumsy attempts to represent man in a natural
setting.
Human and divine
This anthropomorphism explains the pre¬
eminence of sculpture, which can render the
beauty of the human body more successfully than
any other art form. In Plato's Republic, when the
philosopher Glaucon refers to Socrates' descrip¬
tion of the magistrates in his ideal city, he utters
this revealing phrase: "My dear Socrates, you
have made your magistrates too beautiful, just as
if you were a sculptor."
Only by representing in a purely human
form the men they honoured, the gods they wor
shipped and the heroes of their legends could the
ancient Greeks understand them and communi¬
cate with them, almost as equals.
When, around the middle of the seventh cen¬
tury BC, sculptors first dared to carve stone
statues that were life-size or larger, they initially
restricted themselves to a small number of human
types, always viewed from the front. These types
are the kouros or young man, naked and standing
upright, his arms held close to his sides and his
left leg slightly forward; the kore, a young woman
who is always depicted clothed, her feet together;
and the male or female figure seated in a hieratic
posture.
All of these types, particularly the kouroi,
have points in common with Egyptian statues of
gods and pharaohs, but there are some notable
differences. The kouros, unlike his Egyptian pro¬
totypes, is never portrayed wearing a garment
around his waist or leaning against a pillar, and
his legs are not attached by a support. The figure
is usually naked, like the Greek athlete on which
it is modelled. It seems to be on the verge of
movement or action, unlike Egyptian figures
which seem fixed for all eternity.
Despite their reserved attitude and their
modest demeanour, the faces of the korai express
great vitality. Many of them are shown smiling

31

sensually. Their clothing is beautifully draped and
painted. They exude the joy of life and the radiant
charm of youth. Other human figures carved on
votive and even funerary monuments have the
same vitality.
The canon of beauty
How did Greek sculptors succeed in rendering
this ideal, these figures in the full bloom of youth?
Above all through the science of proportions
which, until the beginning of the Middle Ages,
was considered to be the key to beauty. A detailed
description of its principles was given in the fifth
Right, Attic amphora in the
red-figure style (second half
of 5th century BC), from Nola,
Italy.
Opposite page left: Roman
copy of the "Apollo
Sauroctonus" by the Attic
sculptor Praxiteles
(c. 390-335 BC), in which the
god is shown as a boy leaning
against a tree trunk.
Opposite page right: detail of
a Greek warrior (5th century
BC), one of a pair of bronze
statues found in the
Mediterranean off Riace, Italy,
in 1972.
32
century BC by the sculptor Polyclitus in a trea¬
tise on his statue the "Doryphorus" (Spearbearer)
which was known as the "Canon" because it


embodied the ideal proportions of the male form.
Although what he says is not always clear, Poly¬
clitus created a system of fixed ratios between the
different parts of the body which was taken as
a model for several centuries.
But the use of mathematical proportions in
Greek sculpture must date back to much earlier
times, probably even earlier than Pythagoras
(second half of the sixth century BC) whose doc¬
trines had a great influence on architecture and
sculpture as well as on philosophy and political
thought. How could monumental sculpture have
come into being without the use of an elaborate
system of measurement?
The Greeks used Egyptian parameters to
create their large stone statues but, always eager
to break new ground, they soon began to make
their own rules and their own, more realistic,
types of figure. Does this mean that naturalism
was always a feature of Greek sculpture? Most
later theorists, notably Aristotle, have insisted
that art imitates nature. But did the word "imi-
GEORGES DONTAS
is a Greek archaeologist who
was formerly director of the
Acropolis and the Acropolis
Museum and chief curator of
Greek antiquities in Athens. A
member of several European
archaeological institutes, he
has published many studies
and articles in specialized
journals, notably on Greek
sculpture and portraiture.
tation" mean to the Greeks "a copy from nature"
as it does to us? And if it did, when did their con¬
cern for naturalism begin and how important
is it?
The aim of Greek sculptors, especially during
the archaic or pre-classical period, was not to
recreate the appearance of nature, but to bring
to the surface the very essence of the model and
above all to render it dynamically, so that it seems
to live. It might be said that the Greek sculptor
worked from the inside out. He brought to light
the masses of the body as though he himself were
creating life, rendering in every detail the har¬
mony of forms. Even during the most naturalistic
periods sculptors never attempted to produce
photographic likenesses, as in academic art, or
cold reflections of abstract forms, as in neo-
classicism. Their works vibrate with life which
is tempered only by a profound sense of balance
and moderation.
This passion for truth led to a constant
renewal of means of expression. At the beginning
of the fifth century BC there were two major
developments. A new pose, the contrapposto,
appeared. There was also a change in expressivity.
The indistinctly human and divine creatures that
had been depicted until then now seemed to
acquire a specifically human soul.
In contrapposto the weight of the figure is
shifted onto one leg, and the other is bent at the
knee. The figure stands at ease, with new supple¬
ness and freedom. The head is turned, the axes
change position, and the rhythms vary. Breaking
out of its solitude, the statue begins to relate to
the space around it.
The smile of the archaic period, with its
promise of eternal youth, gives way to a more
thoughtful expression. The statue looks inward,
addressing its own self and its creator. What it
loses in divine perfection, it gains in depth of
spiritual meaning and humanity. It is no coinci¬
dence that this new departure, which marks the
beginning of the classical style, took place in the
years when the art of Greek tragedy reached its
zenith. In the fourth century BC, this develop¬
ment culminated in the individualized portrayal
of the human figure.
The Apollonian and the Dionysian
This increasing concentration on appearance, this
fragmentation of truth, was ill received by some
artists and philosophers. Though Plato was
doubtless less hostile to the plastic arts than some
writers have claimed, it is true that he severely
criticized the aesthetics of his time. He believed
that beauty lies not in the deceptive and illusory
appearance that gives pleasure to the eye but in
a higher reality, which he called the Idea. He
approved only of geometrical forms, pure
volumes, and mathematical proportions. He
seems to have accepted only works of very
ancient Greek and Egyptian art, which he valued
for their purity of form and their immutability.

Closer to reality and to the Greek tradition,
Aristotle in the fourth century BC found beauty
in ideal proportions, symmetry and order. Art
for him was merely an imitation of nature; the
instinct for imitation being inherent in man.
Faithful to the naturalistic ideas of his time,
Aristotle remarked that a work of art is a source
of pleasure when we recognize in it a familiar
object, even if the object is not beautiful in reality.
In this he prefigured the modern notion that
there is a distinction between artistic beauty and
physical beauty.
What then did the Greeks understand by
artistic beauty? Was it the mathematical rules and
relations of number which for centuries imposed
simple, clear and symmetrical forms and har¬
monious proportions, as demanded by Polyclitus,
the most normative of sculptors, and Plato, the
most brilliant of philosophers? Or what
Nietzsche called the Apollonian? Or the power
of life, the Dionysian force which brings life
to the smallest surface, the tiniest detail of a
Greek sculpture and makes it a joy to see and
touch?
The Greek idea of beauty may well have
sprung from the struggle of these two elements
clasped in an inextricable embrace. With time,
the Apollonian lost ground and the Dionysian
gradually triumphed and led to excesses of
realism. However, even at the end of its long
development, the art of ancient Greece, in spite
of its capacity for penetrating the secrets of the
human soul and its plastic virtuosity, never went
so far as to create a gallery of portraits, a chronicle
peopled with figures, as the Romans did. Until
the end Greek art was illuminated, however
dimly, by the tender and beautiful light which
emanated from the Greek idea of the perfect man.
33
