An aesthetic revolution
BY JORGE O. GAZANEO
A.ROUND the turn of the century, the new visual
and structural language of Art Nouveau won a following
among many young Latin American intellectuals who
had studied in Paris, Brussels, Berlin and Barcelona, and
among a prosperous middle class whose members were
frequent visitors to these and other European cities.
One South American country in which it found
a particularly receptive terrain was Argentina, where
its products found favour with an élite of rural and city
landowners, bankers, merchants and investors. Some
members of this élite were descended from families
established in Argentina since the late eighteenth cen¬
tury, but most came of more recent immigrant stock
and belonged to an expanding well-to-do middle class
of first-generation Argentines. Many of them would
become key reformist and modernizing figures in
politics, the economy and the arts.
Argentina at the beginning of this century was a
democratic, progressive society in the throes of change. 39

40
In the late nineteenth century the country had been
host to large'-scale immigration from Europe and a
massive infusion of foreign investment. There had been
a railway boom, major irrigation projects had been
undertaken, and residential areas had been constructed
for a burgeoning middle class employed in government,
commerce, industry and banking. A new generation was
coming to the fore with political ideas that were more
outward-looking than those of the old Creole Spanish-
colonial families which had painfully constructed the
republics-
Settlers and investors were welcomed by the host
society, especially in the port areas of Buenos Aires,
Rosario and Bahia Blanca, and by the end of the cen¬
tury the original identity of these cities had been modi¬
fied to the point where their colonial roots had almost
vanished. Buenos Aires in particular was an emporium
of banking and finance, the hub of government and
state employment. It was in these urban areas that Art
Nouveau flourished.
Recent studies suggest thai the coming of Art
Nouveau was part of a wider intellectual trend in
Argentine society in the late nineteenth century. As
one historian has written, "when in 1885 or there¬
abouts some of the more thoughtful young intellectuals
directed their interests to socialism and politics, others
chose to engage in the fight for the renewal of the arts".
Just as there were political links between the Partido
Socialista Argentino and the Belgian Workers Party,
there were also aesthetic links between Argentina and
the Brussels group La Libre Esthétique and the period¬
ical L'Art Moderne, both of which played an impor¬
tant role in the genesis and diffusion of Art Nouveau.
Preserved in the library of the Faculty of Architecture
at the University of Buenos Aires are collections of
European periodicals which popularized new trends
in the arts, such as The Studio, Art et Décoration and
La Revue des Arts Décoratifs, also suggesting that the
adepts of the new style were well informed and con¬
nected with their European colleagues.
Argentine architects and decorators imported
building materials in bulk from Europe, mainly from
France and Belgium. Complete sets of furniture came
from the Belgian architect Gustave Serrurier-Bovy; mir¬
rors, stained glass, bronze and ivory from Lauque and
Gallé; iron structures from Usines Eiffel. Space was
handled in accordance with what European masters had
accomplished using the new technical resources that
had emerged from the Industrial Revolution. Buildings
were more open to the air and sun since the use of iron
made it possible to design wide openings in what had
formerly been exclusively load-bearing walls. The
colours of new materials such as majolica and irides¬
cent glass offered local craftsmen a range of decorative
possibilities never seen before. The results were exciting
and eye-catching when compared to the prevalent drab
Victorian or French Empire styles, and rich in pastel
colours. Today most of these interiors have disappeared
or look diminished as parts of the furnishings have been
dispersed or replaced with unsuitable intrusions.
The aesthetic impact of Art Nouveau was destined
to be short-lived in Latin America where, a late
response to the Belle Epoque way of life, it faded away
after the First World War.
Above, the corner of this
Buenos Aires building, by J.J.
Garcia Nunez, is reminiscent
of the Hôtel Tassel in
Brussels (detail, right),
designed by Victor Horta in
1893.
il
tasa
JORGE O. GAZANEO,
Argentine architect and member
of the International Council of
Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS),
teaches at the Belgrano
University and at the University
of Buenos Aires.
