N T E R V I E W
Ernesto Sábato
A sense
of wonder
One of
the greatest
living writers
in Spanish,
the Argentine
novelist
and essayist
Ernesto Sábato
analyses what
he sees as
the spiritual
crisis of
our time
You have written many essays, notably a collection and above all since the advent of positivism, science has with-
entitled Hombres y Engranajes (1951; "Men and Gears"), drawn to a kind of Olympian retreat, cut off from humanity.
on the dehumanizing effects of science and technology. The absolute sovereignty of Science and Progress over the
How did a scientist like yourself come to see things in greater part of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries has
this lightí reduced the individual to the status of a cog in a gigantic
Although I studied physics and mathematics, disciplines machine. Capitalist and Marxist theorists alike have con-
which offered me a kind of abstract and ideal refuge in a tributed to the propagation of this sadly distorted vision in
"platonic paradise" far from the chaos of the world, I soon which the individual is melted into the mass and the mystery
realized that the blind faith that some scientists have in of the soul is reduced to physically quantifiable emissions
"pure" thought, in reason and in Progress (usually with a of radiation.
capital "P") made them overlook and even despise such
essential aspects of human life as the unconscious and the Yet, even in the nineteenth century, there was a strong
myths which lie at the origin of artistic expression, in short, philosophical current that questioned the monumental
the "hidden" side of human nature. All that was missing rational edifice constructed by Hegel, the weight ofwhich
in my purely scientific workthe Mr. Hyde that every Dr. crushed the individual. We are thinking ofKierkegaard,
Jekyll needs if he is to be a complete individualI found about whom you have written extensively.
in German romanticism and, above all, in existentialism and Kierkegaard was the first thinker to question whether
surrealism. Lifting my eyes from my logarithms and sinu- science should take precedence over life and to answer firmly
soids, I looked on the human face, from which I have never that life comes first. Since then, the object deified by science
since looked away. has been dislodged as the centre of the universe and been
replaced by the subject, the man of flesh and blood. This
Some great contemporary writers have managed to recon- led on to Karl Jaspers and Martin Heidegger, to twentieth-
cile science and creativity... century existentialist philosophy in which man is no longer
That may be so, but it does not lessen my belief that an "impartial" scientific observer but a "self" clothed in
our era is strongly marked by the opposition between science flesh, the "being destined to die" of whom I have written
and the humanities, which today has become irreconcilable, and who is the source of tragedy and metaphysics, the
Since the Enlightenment and the days of the Encyclopaedists, ' highest forms of literary expression.

The novel answers all these questions, not simply by
expressing ideas, but through myth and symbol, by drawing
on the magical properties of thought. All the same, many
of the characters in novels are just as real as reality itself.
Is Don Quixote "unreal"? If reality bears any relationship
to durability, then this character born of Cervantes' imagi¬
nation is much more real than the objects that surround us,
for he is immortal.
So literature interprets reality?
Fortunately, art and poetry have never claimed to
dissociate the rational from the irrational, the sensibility
from the intellect, dream from reality. Dream, mythology
and art have a common source in the unconsciousthey
/ believe in art, dialogue,
liberty and the dignity of
the individual human being
But not the only ones...
Of course not, but to my mind they are the most
important because of their tragic, transcendental dimension.
One has only to think of Dostoyevsky's Notes from the
Underground, that bloody diatribe in which, with almost
demented hatred, he denounced the modern age and its cult
of progress.
We are right into literature now...
Yes, because the novel can express things that are beyond
the scope of philosophy or the essaysuch as our darkest
uncertainties about God, destiny, the meaning of life, hope.
reveal a world which could have no other form of expres¬
sion. It is absurd to ask artists to explain their work. Can
you imagine Beethoven analysing his symphonies or Kafka
explaining what he really meant in The Trial? The notion
that everything can be "rationally" explained is the hall¬
mark of the Western positivist mentality typical of the
modern age, an age which overestimates the value of science,
reason and logic. Yet this form of culture represents only
a brief moment in human history.
You seem to consider our age to be thefinalphase in a line
ofmodern thought beginning in the middle ofthe nineteenth
century and ending in our own times.
Literary fashions should not be confused with the major
trends of thought. In the vast and tragic movement of ideas
there are advances and retreats, sideways excursions and
counter-currents. It is clear, however, that we are witnessing
the end of an era. We are living through a crisis of civiliza¬
tion in which there is a kind of confrontation between the
eternal forces of passion and order, of pathos and ethos, of
the Dionysian and the Apollonian.
Can this crisis be resolved?
The only way we can escape from this harrowing crisis
is by snatching living, suffering man from the gigantic
machine in which he is enmeshed and which is crushing him.
But it must not be forgotten, at the dawn of a new millen¬
nium, that an age does not end at the same moment for

everyone. In the nineteenth century, when Progress was
triumphant, writers and thinkers such as Dostoyevsky,
Nietzsche and Kierkegaard were not "of their time", for
already, despite the optimism of scientists, they had a presen¬
timent of the catastrophe that was in store for us and which
Kafka, Sartre and Camus were to portray.
7s that why you reject the concept of "progress" in art?
Art can no more progress than a dream can, and for the
same reasons. Are the nightmares of our contemporaries any
more advanced than those of the prophets of the Bible? We
can say that Einstein's mathematics are superior to those
of Archimedes, but not that Joyce's Ulysses is superior to
Homer's Odyssey. One of Proust's characters is convinced
that Debussy is a better composer than Beethoven for the
simple reason that he was born after him. There's no need
to be a musicologist to appreciate Proust's satirical irony
in this passage. Every artist aspires towards what may be
Design for
stained-glass
window, oil on
cardboard, by
the Uruguayan
artist Joaquin
Torres Garcia.

For a human being
learning means taking
part, discovering
and inventing
form their own opinions, even if, at times, this means
making mistakes and having to go back to the beginning
again. They need to explore new paths and experiment with
new methods. Otherwise we shall, at best, merely produce
a race of scholars or, at worst, of bookworms or of parrots
regurgitating ready-made phrases from books. The book is
a wonderful tool, provided that it does not become an
obstacle that prevents us from pursuing our own research.
called an absolute, or towards a fragment of the Absolute, How do you see the educator's role?
with a capital "A", whether he be an Egyptian sculptor in Etymologically speaking, to educate means to develop,
the time of Ramses II, a Greek artist of the classical age, or to bring out what exists in embryonic form, to realize poten-
Donatello. This is why there is no progress in art, only rial. This "labour", this delivery by the teacher is rarely fully
change and new departures that are due not only to the sen- accomplished, and this perhaps is the origin of all the faults
sibilities of each artist but also to the tacit or explicit vision of our education systems. Students must be made to ask
of an epoch or a culture. One thing at least is certain; no themselves questions, and be convinced of their own ignor-
artist is better placed than another to attain these absolute anee and of ours, so that they are prepared not only to ask
values simply because he was born later. questions but to think for themselves, even if they disagree
with us. It is also very important for them to be able to make
So you do not believe that there can be a universal aesthetic? mistakes and for us to accept questions and approaches that
The relativity of history is reflected in aesthetics, may seem odd. Given this state of mind, students will
Each period has a dominant valuereligious, economic or understand that reality is infinitely more complex and
metaphysical colours all the others. In the eyes of mysterious than the small area encompassed by our
the people of a religious culture preoccupied with the eternal, knowledge. Everything else will follow automatically. This
Ramses IPs hieratic and geometric colossus would encapsu- is what gives rise to questionings and to certainties, the
late more "truth" than a totally realistic statue. History mixture of tradition and innovation that constitutes the cul-
shows us that beauty and truth change from one period to tural dynamic. As Kant said, people should not be taught
the next, that black culture and white culture are based on philosophy, they should be taught to philosophize. This is
different criteria. The reputations of writers, artists and the method of Plato's "Dialogues", based on direct, spon-
musicians are subject to swings of the pendulum. taneous exchange, in the course of which questions emerge
from our awareness of our fundamental ignorance.
There is no justification, therefore, for speaking of the
superiority of one culture over another? Can you give us a specific example?
Today we have come a long way from conceited A long time ago, I travelled through Patagonia in a jeep
positivist certainties and from "enlightened thought" in with a forester who told me how much the forest was
general. Following the work of Levy-Bruhl, who after forty receding with each successive forest fire. He told me of the
years of research admitted in all honesty that he could see defensive role played by cypress trees, which he compared
no "progression" in the move from magical to logical to the stoical heroes of an army rearguard since they sacrifice
thought and that the two had inevitably to coexist in man, themselves to delay the spread of a fire and to protect the
all cultures must be seen as deserving equal respect. We have other trees. This made me wonder what the teaching of
finally come round to rendering justice to what were once geography could be like if it were linked to the struggle
condescendingly called "primitive cultures". between species, the conquest of the oceans and of the con¬
tinents, and to the history of mankind, which is pathetically
You are, nevenheless, dissatisfied with the education dependent upon the terrestrial environment. In this way the
currently available in schools and universities. What do pupil would get the idea of a true adventure, of a thrilling
you think it lacks? battle against the hostile forces of Nature and of history.
When I was young, I was made to swallow a mountain Far from the dead weight of encyclopaedic knowledge, from
of facts that I forgot as quickly as I could. In geography, dusty volumes and ready-made ideas, knowledge thus
for example, I barely remember the Cape of Good Hope perpetually renewed would give each pupil the feeling of
and Cape Horn, and perhaps that's only because they are discovering and participating in an age-old story. For
often mentioned in the newspapers. Someone once said that example, to engrave indelibly on students' minds the corn-
culture is what is left when you have forgotten everything plicated geography of the American continent, as a lived-
else. For a human being, learning means taking part, dis- through rather than a book-learned experience, would not
covering and inventing. If people are to advance, they must the best way be to teach it through the adventures of great

We have to kindle
astonishment at the profound
mysteries of the universe
explorers such as Magellan or conquistadores such as Cortés?
We should be formed, not informed. As Montaigne said,
"Learning by heart is not learning". What an exciting
manual of geography and ethnology for teenagers Jules
Verne's Around the World in Eighty Days would make! We
have to kindle astonishment at the profound mysteries
of the universe. Everything in the universe is astonishing
if you think about it. But familiarity has made us blasé and
nothing astonishes us any more. We have to rediscover a
sense of wonder.
You even recommend "back to front" teaching, starting
with the present and reaching back into the past.
I believe that the best way to interest young people in
literature is to start with contemporary authors, whose lan¬
guage and concerns are closer to the students' own hopes
and fears. Only later can they really become interested in
what Homer or Cervantes wrote about love and death, hope
and despair, solitude and heroism. The same could be done
with history by tracing back to the roots of current
problems.
It is also a mistake to try to teach everything. Only a
few key episodes and problems, enough to provide a struc¬
ture, should be taught. Few books should be used, but they
should be read with passion. This is the only way to avoid
making reading seem like a walk through a cemetery of dead
words. Reading is only valid if it strikes a chord in the
reader's mind. There is a kind of pseudo-encyclopaedic
teaching, invariably associated with book-learning, which
is a form of death. As if there were no culture before
Gutenberg!
For years you have been pointing out the risks inherent in
nuclear weapons, in the arms race and in ideological con¬
frontation throughout the world. Aren't the upheavals of
recent years, and in particular ofrecent months, taking some
of the force out of this message?
I'm not so sure about that. First of all, the proliferation
Wood engraving, anonymous, 16th century.
»*«®SfcA¿ff

The Temple, 1949, oil on canvas by the Belgian artist Paul Delvaux.
of nuclear weapons is a fact. Many countries already have
their own atomic "mini-bombs" and a chain reaction
starting with some irresponsible terrorist action cannot be
discounted. But this is only the purely "physical" aspect
of the question, monstrous though it is. What really worries
me is the spiritual catastrophe facing our era, which is the
sad outcome of the repression of the forces of the uncons¬
cious in contemporary society. I see evidence of this in the
proliferation of all kinds of protesting minorities, as well
as in our collective history. We live in an anguished, neu¬
rotic, unstable age, hence the frequency of psychosomatic
disorders, the upsurge in violence and in the use of drugs.
This is a philosophical rather than a police matter. Until
quite recently the "peripheral" regions of the world were
unaffected by this phenomenon. In the East for example,
as well as in Africa and in Oceania, mythological and
philosophical traditions maintained a certain harmony
between man and the world. The abrupt, unchecked irrup¬
tion of Western values and technology has wreaked havoc,
just as, during the Industrial Revolution, the mill-owners
of Manchester swamped with their cheap cotton goods
peoples who knew how to produce exquisite textiles. This
mental catastrophe is leading us towards a terrifying psy¬
chological and spiritual explosion which will give rise to a
wave of suicides and scenes of hysteria and collective mad¬
ness. Ancient traditions cannot be replaced by the transistor
industry.
Do you see nothing positive in the balance-sheet?
Yes, perhaps, but frankly I suspect that I belong to a
race that is on the road to extinction. I believe in art,
dialogue, liberty and the dignity of the individual human
being. But who is interested in such nonsense today?
Dialogue has given way to insult and liberty to political
prisons. What difference is there between a left-wing and
a right-wing police state? As if there could be good or bad
torturers! I must be a reactionary because I still believe in
dull, mediocre democracy, the only regime which, after all,
allows one to think freely and to prepare the way for a better
reality.
