BY ENRIQUE CAPABLANCA



A Cuban mythology
MCA C^
Entrance hall of the Museum
of Pharmacy, old city of
Havana, early 20th century.
M<LOST of the masons, stonecutters, blacksmiths, car¬
penters and other craftsmen who came from overseas
and settled in Cuba between 1902 and 1930 were of
Spanish, mainly Catalan, origin. They brought with
them their traditions, styles and techniques, and it
would be hard to overemphasize their role in the
development of Cuban Art Nouveau. At first the new
trend was even known by its Catalan name, Moder
nismo, and only several decades after its introduction
did the expression "Art Nouveau" come into use.
Although the direct Catalan influence was
undeniable, young local architects and craftsmen were
avid readers of foreign periodicals which made them
familiar with the main currents of Art Nouveau and
its variants. However, distance tended to blur percep¬
tions of the new style, which was often modified
ENRIQUE CAPABLANCA,
Cuban architect and sculptor, is a
staff member of the National
Centre of Conservation,
Restoration and Museology,
Cuba, and teaches at the
University of Havana.
37

Above, headquarters of the
"Golden Sceptre" company in
central Havana.
Below, an example of colonial
architecture, one of the
sources of inspiration for
Cuban Art Nouveau.
through contact with another world and a different
architectural tradition.
Because of a failure to clearly understand the
nature of the movement, any building heavily deco¬
rated with flowers and garlands was initially described
as Art Nouveau. Most of these buildings were actually
a compromise between the new aesthetic and fin-
de-siècle eclecticism, which sometimes worked surpris¬
ingly well. But the features and forms characteristic of
the new style were soon recognized and began to
appear in the streets of Havana and the other major
towns, especially in private residences. Art Nouveau
motifs were rarely seen in public buildings, perhaps
because the style was considered too frivolous to
represent the young republic in an appropriate
fashion.
Cuban Art Nouveau is heavily indebted to French,
Belgian, Italian and Catalan models. But it also has
its own originality. European influences were rapidly
assimilated because they had certain affinities with
Cuban culture. Composite arches, dynamic curves,
a taste for coloured ceramics and glass, and elaborately-
wrought ironwork, were long-established features of
the Cuban architectural heritage.
Like many of its European models, the Cuban
variant of Art Nouveau is a blend of styles, and
it is not unusual to see neo-Gothic, neo-Mudejar and
other historicist elements amicably rubbing shoulders
in many Cuban Art Nouveau buildings. Another
characteristic is the use of sculpted animal and human
forms, as well as plant motifs, to depict a kind of
mythology unique to Havana.
The popularity of Art Nouveau in Cuba was not
due to a small number of architects, but to a multi¬
tude of craftsmen who worked in the building trade
and created architectural features which were then mass
produced and used on hundreds of façades all over the
island.
Some of these building contractors were so suc¬
cessful that Art Nouveau was soon regarded as a
speciality of master masons and consequently as a
minor form of architecture. The next step was to
disparage the movement, and it was taken in the
1920s when art historians and critics dismissed it as
exaggerated and decadent. Architects concerned about
their reputation began to turn their backs on Art
Nouveau, and some of those who had contributed
to its rise turned towards more classical and conven¬
tional styles.
38
