.&7.i
THE VIEW
FROM THE
MERRY-GO-ROUND
LiC
e-aiv
fill BY JOSEPH BRODSKY
im
h S
^4
N*
k --A
^5, :
-^a ^
r\Y
-,
JhvSN
K*
^P'
i-C-'T
>
ö\\j;
\
1
V^onversation about the weather only really
becomes interesting, the Polish humorist
Stanislaw J. Lee once said, when the first signs
of the end of the world start to appear. The same
might well be said of the futurethere is little
point in talking about it except when important
chronological events are looming, for chronology
is the daughter of eschatology.
Both chronology and eschatology are born
of the inability of homo sapiens to master intellec¬
tually the phenomenon of time. Man does his best
to domesticate this phenomenon and make it
comply with his rational faculties, which are
themselves its offspring. Hence all our devices for
measuring timeour speedometers, calendars,
months, years, decades, centuries and millennia.
Hence too our linear concept of time and its
division into past, present and future.
The paradox of such a division, especially in
relation to the future, is that it is based on the
alternation of day and night, which results from
the rotation of the planet around its own axis and
around the sun in a never-ending cycle. An earth-
dweller might be compared with a child on a
merry-go-round who is absolutely certain that he
and his horse are not trotting where he mounted
it but in some vast beyond. The only difference
is that our merry-go-round is in perpetual motion
and never stops.
It is to movement, cyclical though it may be,
that the earth-dweller tends to relate all kinds of
change change of place, of flora and fauna, of
circumstances, of state of mind. This is because
man operates on a very small scale, travelling not
from one star to another, but from doorway to
Illustration by Philippe Druillet for a French edition
of Demons and Marvels by the American author H. P.
Lovecraft (1890-1937), a master of fantasy literature.
doorway. It is the different appearance of the
doors, the diversity of the occupants of a building
or of the passers-by, that create a feeling of
progression and lead him to see movement itself
as the source of a new quality.
That, in reality, is what the future isthe
notion of something qualitatively new. And chro¬
nology is like the numbers of the houses in a long
street leading towards this qualitatively new
something. The vanishing point of this street, this
avenue, this perspective, is lost in the mists of
grammar, since in most languages, at least in most
Indo-European languages, the relationship be¬
tween future time and the verbal expression of
it has always been somewhat strained. This
reflects the contradiction between man's aware¬
ness of his biologically imposed limitations and
the relatively boundless nature of his speculative
capacities.
Man's way of thinking, in short, has a
marked tendency towards the undefined, or the
Utopian, as it is more usually termed. This quality
finds full expression both in the workings of the
memory and in those of the imagination. Specu¬
lation about the future provides an opportunity
for the expression and satisfaction of imaginative
thought. The future is always, at the very least,
the utopia of a specific person. When attempts
to give it a reality come up against the grammat¬
ical difficulties mentioned above, chronology
comes to the rescue.
Like any transposition of ordinary speech
into the language of figures, chronology tends to
simplify the problem. In this context the future
takes on the aspect of the infinite in mathemat¬
ics; the figures merely get larger, forming a link
between a biologically limited body and a vanish¬
ing point that is physically inaccessible but which
the mind can envisage. Whenever we come to a
round figure (a date), whether it be the end of
a decade, a century or a millennium, society, 31
a.

JOSEPH BRODSKY,
Russian-born poet and
essayist, was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Literature in
1987. In 1964 he was charged
in the Soviet Union with
being a social parasite and
sentenced to five years*
internal exile and compulsory
labour. He was released in
1966, and since 1972 has lived
in the United States, where
he is currently professor of
literature at Mount Holyoke
College. His publications in
English include Less Than
One: Selected Essays
(Penguin, London, 1987), A
Part of Speech: Verse 1972-76
(Oxford University
Press/Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, New York, 1980),
and To Urania: Selected
Poems, 1965-85 (Penguin,
London, 1988).
32
without really knowing why, enters a period of
effervescence and, myopic though it is by nature,
indulges in an orgy of peering into the distance
and speculation about world change. This
phenomenon is known as millenarianism.
Since chronology itself is non-semantic, a
chronological event is, in fact, a non- or an anti-
event. The future, that is to say the qualitatively
new, bursts upon the life of an individual or
nation without warning, although it seems to
have a predilection for odd numbers (1939, for
example). In most cases it comes in the guise of
a scientific discovery, a technological innovation,
war, or an impoverishment of the language. Only
very rarely does it take the form of social change,
perhaps because the possibilities in that field are
extremely limited; after all, the only choice is
between various shades of autocracy or
democracy.
The most common guise in which the future
makes its appearance is that of accelerationin
the speed of locomotion, in musical rhythms or
in new weapons systems. The latter presuppose
a larger number of objects to be destroyed, while
the former usually herald a way of looking at the
world which is compatible with the act of pull¬
ing a trigger or, rather, of pressing a button. In
this century, the future may be said to have begun
with the first rhythms of boogie-woogie, which
abolished forever the notion of quiet little solos,
thus paralleling the fate of the notion of personal
tragedy in the perspective of a nuclear catas¬
trophe. The twenty-first century can be said to
have burst upon our time with the appearance
of remote-control devices for changing from one
television channel to another. Flickering scenes
of angry crowds alternating on the screen with
advertisements for orange juice or new cars seem
like a prophetic reflection of our psychological
landscape. The rapidity with which new objects
are brought to our attention prepares the mind
for the demographic reality of the chronological
perspective we call the future.
In fact, it is the chronological perspective
itself that intrudes on the contemporary outlook.
Born of our thought faculties, the future makes
every effort to arrive at the earliest possible mo¬
ment so as to make a better match between our
powers of imagination and reality, and to recon¬
cile the infinite with the finite and utopias with
their creators. As a general rule, the irruption of
the future into the present is felt as being a source
of discomfort, if not of downright discourage¬
ment. It might be said that the voice of the fu¬
ture can be heard in almost everything that we
regard as aggressive or unpleasant, since it is try¬
ing to carve a place for itself in the present. All
the betrayals of which we are the victims, or
which we ourselves commit, are also the voice
of the future in the present. This is not only be¬
cause betrayals are always committed in the name
of the future, never of the past or the present,
but also because they bring into our lives some¬
thing newa word which is, after all, synony¬
mous with the future.
Talking about the future, therefore, is psy¬
chologically unbearable and philosophically both
intolerable and inconceivable. If the future means
anything, it means our own absence. The first
thing we shall discover when we look closely at

the future is our non-existence there. The notion
of non-existence impels us either to adopt a reli¬
gious attitude or turns us back to our own reali¬
ties, making us retreat from the language of
figures into that of semantics and from the
chronological vanishing point to our own door¬
step. With those who dwell in this house we can
at least speak of the future in purely political
terms and without looking too far ahead. What
follows, therefore, are a few words on the decade
ahead from a man who still lives in this house
the monologue of an inhabitant of the present.
A world in the throes
of change
The ten years that remain before the beginning
of the third millennium will undoubtedly give
rise to a millenarian view of the world which,
encouraged by its inevitable promotion by the
media, will quickly become epidemic. It will
probably take the form of ecological radicalism
with a strong tinge of common-or-garden escha¬
tology. The feeling that the endof the century,
of the millennium, of the established order of
thingsis nigh, coupled with increasingly fre¬
quent ecological catastrophes, may well take
lethal or suicidal forms. The horror of our own
mortality is never more effectively stifled than
when the clamour of lamentations about univer¬
sal destruction rings in our ears.
Opposite page, Winds
(1985), acrylic on paper
by the Russian artist
Yury Mirakov.
Below, Danton (1989),
a "robot-sculpture"
constructed from old
television sets
by the Korean artist
Nam June Paik.
To this must be added the problems associated
with a gigantic demographic explosion, as a result
of which a high proportion of those now ex¬
periencing a period of relative well-being will find
themselves among the world's excluded. The
overriding need for a common denominator, the
absence of any even slightly convincing or acces¬
sible ideology and, above all, the anti-individualist
sentiment of an overpopulated world may well
bring together under the banner of ecology the
most diverse groups and types of discontent. The
end of a century, and even more the end of a
millennium, is always marked by the notion of
a forthcoming change in the world order. The
more unintelligible the notion, the more attrac¬
tive it is. We can always take consolation from
the thought that a new Thomas Miintzer* will
speak but one language, probably European, and
that this, coupled with geographical constraints,
will somewhat limit the scope of national or
international psychosis and prevent it from
becoming universal.
Leaving aside this desire to reorganize the
world, the catastrophism inherent in millenarian
thought could find expression in religious or
ethnic wars. By about the year 2000, what is
referred to as the white race will account for only
11 per cent of the world's population. It is not
unimaginable that the radical wing of the Muslim
world will come into confrontation with what
remains of Christian civilization. Conflicts of this
kind seem inevitable if only because the more
complex the picture presented by reality, the
greater the temptation to simplify it.
Such conflicts will inevitably be bloody, but
temporary. However, the equivalent of a third
world war looms in the prospect of an economic
war probably situated in western Eurasia and,
perhaps, the United States of America. The
absence of international anti-trust regulations,
particularly in banking, makes it possible to
foresee a level of competition that nothing,
absolutely nothing, will be able to curb, a situa¬
tion in which no holds will be barred and the goal
will be dominance. The battles in such a war will
be supra-national in character, but the victory
will always be nationalit will go to the nation
to which the victor belongs.
Germany and Japan will doubtless be in¬
volved. The reunification of Germany, if it comes
abouton the same principle of simplifying
complexitieswill establish in the heart of Europe
a financial and industrial monster without equal.
Financial power usually takes various forms of
expansioneconomic, political and cultural.
Unlike its predecessors, the new Reich will, for
purely hedonistic reasons, embark upon a Drang
nach Süden, a "Drive to the South". Already, 90
per cent of the inhabitants of the island of Ischia
speak German fluently. Buying is simpler than
* Thomas Miintzer (d. 1525). German priest and radical
reformer. JJ

34
killing. As the descendants of Wotan have at last
come to understand, indebtedness is a much surer
method of occupation than an army garrison.
The only means whereby Europe can defend
itself against this kind of expansion could be to
form alliances or financial and political blocs. No
country alone will be able to stand up to the com¬
petition of the German giant. The most reason¬
able thing to do would be to establish such blocs
on cultural or historical bases. There might, for
example, be a financial and political alliance be¬
tween Italy, Spain and France, or between the
present Comecon countries. One might also
envisage groupings such as that of the Scandina¬
vian countries and the United Kingdom with the
Benelux countries. The project for a united
Europe is not just a variation of such alliances.
On the contrary, it is the autobahn, the highway
that will enable Germany, whether reunited or
not, to pursue the objective, whether consciously
or not, towards which its rising financial power
is impelling it.
There is little hope that such alliances will
materialize. If they are to be made, it will have
to be before 1995, since, if the forecasters are to
be believed, Germany, whether reunited or not,
will by then have achieved so great an economic
superiority over its European partners that the
expansion mentioned above will have become
both inevitable and irreversible.
A similar situation is likely to develop in the
East for Japan. However, the formation of op¬
posing blocs is even more hypothetical than in
Europe, especially since the Japanese expansionist
drive is directed towards the east and west rather
the south. It is even conceivable that a Berlin-
Tokyo financial and political axis might be es¬
tablished. Today, the Land of the Rising Sun is
acting in a manner increasingly reminiscent of
that adopted by another island empire on which,
fifty years ago, the sun never set.
The outlook for 1995
As far as one can judge, around 1995, the world,
with or without blocs, will be in much the same
situation as it was in 1905. Geography, or at least
the geography of Europe, offers history only a
limited number of possible variants, and this
number is inversely proportional to the rate of
population growth. It is very likely that, once
liberated from the encumbrance of communism,
the countries of Eastern Europe (territorially
equivalent to the former Austro-Hungarian
Empire) will find themselves as debtor nations.
France, Italy, Spain and Portugal will, of course,
retain their administrative and territorial integrity,
but in political terms they may well be subject
to a certain "Finlandization" in relation to Ger¬
many. The same will be true in northern Europe,
although for ethnic reasons the situation will be
less evident. The United Kingdom and the Balkan
countries, involved as they are in ethnic conflicts
and contradictions, will doubtless be less affected
by these changes. The United States will doubt¬
less experience a similar situation which, coupled
with economic problems, might well lead it back
to a policy of relative isolationism.
In Russia too the year 1995, like the year
1990, will be reminiscent of the year 1905. It will
be a period devoted to the elaboration of new
constitutional norms and the struggle to main¬
tain the country intact. It will not matter much
who is head of state. It will probably be the same
man as today, unless he loses his grip or succumbs
to the task in some other manner. He is more
likely to end up in this fashion than to be the
victim of a power struggle, since it is difficult to
imagine that anyone would lay claim to power
over the chaos and contradictions to which the
country will be subject during the coming decade.
This chaos and these contradictions are, in
fact, a guarantee of the stability of a power that
is attempting to create order out of chaos and
to find solutions to problems. The range of
problems facing the Soviet head of state is enor¬
mous, since it is directly proportionate to the
seventy-year period which gave birth to them.
Today they have become organic and any
attempt to find a radical solution to them can
only be tautological, plunging the country back
into the seventy-year period that engendered the
problems in the first place. Their solution re¬
quires a qualitatively different approach, the
elaboration of which will be enough to keep the
country occupied over the years to come.
It is very likely that problems created over
several decades will in turn take several decades
to resolve. This is the case, however much we
would like things to be otherwise. Despite all
Above, detail of Hell, from
the right-hand wing of a
triptych by Hiëronymus
Bosch (c. 1450s-1516).
Below, enamel on wood
totem (1983)
by the American artist
Keith Haring.
Opposite page, cooling
tower at a nuclear power
plant.

imaginable democratic reforms, the Russia of 1995
is likely to be in a state of chronic crisis, the sole
argument in its defence being its organic nature.
Paradoxical though it may seem, what is happen¬
ing in the Soviet Union today fascinates us by
the extraordinary impression it gives of existen¬
tial truthnobody knows how to live. Any po¬
litical system, including democracy, provides a
means of escape from this truth. It is to the credit
of the present Soviet government that it is not
attempting or is not in a position to simplify,
either for itself or for its citizens, the complex
existential pattern with which it is faced.
However this may be, the role of Russia in
international relations, especially within Europe,
will bear much the same weight as it did in 1905.
Whoever comes to power in the Soviet Union
in the near future will inherit problems rather
than solutions. The fact that the present head of
state may not be universally approved of by the
people is to his credit. This disaffection is that
felt by a patient towards his doctor and is evi¬
dence that the country is convalescing, at least
morally. Only a demagogue could hope to retain
the affection of a people consisting of almost 300
million individuals.
A tropical fever
As far as one can judge, this state of chronic crisis
is likely to become the norm of political and eco¬
nomic life more or less everywhere. The days of
clear, radical solutions to national and interna¬
tional problems, including the use of armed force,
and the era of consensus and unanimity on all
political and economic questions, are over. And
with current population growth, democratic
processes themselves are being modified. The
weight of the masses involved in politics is
modifying the very concept of a minority, since
a minority can consist of a few dozen or, in the
case of a democratized China, hundreds of mil¬
lions of individuals.
This is why no revolution, even in a relatively
small country, will be decisive and, more impor¬
tant still, no ideology will be dominant. Revolu¬
tions, should there be any, will not be linked to
this or that philosophical doctrine, since none of
them will enjoy absolute authority, but will erupt
in a spontaneous, almost hysterical fashion. Those
who take over the reins of power will not be able
to hold them for long, despite the new means that
will be at their disposal to control peoples. What
will be called revolutions or revolutionary
changes will be no more than stages in the
chronic crisis already mentioned.
The countries of Latin America and Africa
will be the first to be affected. In the coming
decade it is likely that, in the eyes of the so-called
civilized West, these geographical areas will not
have the same political importance. In a sense,
these countries will be the victims of the changes
that have occurred in Eastern Europe, which
promise to offer the West a source of cheap,
qualified labour. The industrially advanced coun¬
tries of the West will concentrate their political
and financial attention on Eastern Europe to the
detriment of Third World countries. Having
ceased to be the arena for superpower rivalries,
Africa in particular will, more than today, be
exposed to hunger and epidemics, as well,
perhaps, as to more deliberate attempts to adapt
political forms copied from abroad to its own
traditions. Monstrous as such transformations
may turn out to be, they seem to signal the end
of the period of decolonization. At the same time,
the West will be able to justify its actions by
pointing out that it has transferred its interest
from Third World countries to other parts of
Eurasia.
This change of direction will not, of course,
be definitive. Poverty and more especially over¬
population in the Third World will continue to
offer a tempting source of cheap labour and com¬
mercial opportunities. During the coming decade,
however, the industrially developed countries,
subject to waves of immigration and a consider¬
able increase in their own populations, will find
themselves in their turn facing conditions similar
to those faced by their former proteges. In a sense,
this phenomenon of chronic crisis with its alter¬
nations between severity and remission resembles
a tropical fever which the northern hemisphere
has caught and which it must suffer in retribu¬
tion for what it has done in the southern
hemisphere.
If only half the propositions expounded here
prove to be true, the coming decade will be that
of a new egalitarianism. Traditional ideas about
the unique nature of national, ethnic and cultural 35

characteristics will give way to recognition of a
common denominatorthe state of crisis facing
most national economies. This new egalitarianism
will find expression first in the erosion of purely
cultural specificities. Already, the education
system of more than one developed country is
being modified considerably towards acceptance
of a new ecumenicism. Already, voices can be
heard expounding metaphysical relativism and
the notion that all religions are of equal validity,
which amounts to giving intolerance and toler¬
ance the same standing. Already, the concept of
an "international style" exists, especially in the
plastic arts.
There seems little prospect that society will
become more just in the coming decade. The best
we can hope for is that it will be no more unjust
than the one we know today. The sole guaran¬
tee of a relatively just society is the moral sense
of its members, but it is difficult to see how eco¬
nomic necessity could become a driving force for
moral education. At best the society of the future
will be an egoistic, indifferent society devoid of
any moral standard at all. The only hope for such
a society lies in the demographic extension of this
egoism and indifference which will force it to
organize itself on a technological rather than an
ideological basis and incite man to put his trust
in a computer rather than in his neighbours. In
this way, at least for a time, we will be able to
avoid bloodshed, since no one is going to throw
himself, knife in hand, onto a machine.
This is why the best thing we can do is to
leave the future in peace and make an effort to
organize the present as intelligently as possible,
paying more attention to those who are close to
or distant from us in space rather than in time.
Those who come after us, who will live in our
towns and our apartments and sleep in our
bedrooms, will neither thank us nor curse us for
the state in which we have left the world to them,
just as we neither thank nor curse our predeces¬
sors, occupied as we are with more current
problems and feelings.
What we see as the future will be the present
of those who come after us. This is why the best
thing to do is to build houses and hospitals for
those who need them now, making them solid
and not too ugly. It is better to act with justice
now than to count on the future triumph of
justice and common sense. Our actions today will
affect the flora and fauna, the natural surround¬
ings of our successors just as the environment of
those who are now twenty or thirty years old
is the result of the combined efforts of Le Cor¬
busier and the Luftwaffe. If only for this reason,
we should not credit the future with an enviable
superiority or with special qualities. It would be
equally dangerous to envy our successors and to
weave all kinds of dreams around the society of
the future. It is quite possible that we are in an
enviable position since, when we do good, or
harm too for that matter, at least we know who
is affected.
A New Planet,
by the Russian artist
Constantin Yvon
(1875-1958).
36
