I N I W
Some forty years after the guns of the Second World War fell silent, Ernst Nolte, of the Federal
Republic of Germany, fired the first shot in "the battle of the historians". This polemic concerned
the German people's relationship with their past and in particular with their darker memories
of the nazi period. With the reunification of the two Germanys now seemingly inevitable,
historian Hinnerk Bruhns points the way towards the rediscovery of an authentic German identity.
'A past that won't go away'
Hinnerk Bruhns
In 1986, the German historian andphilosopher Ernst Nolte
published an article entitled "A past that won't go away".
The article sparked offa long and impassioned debate that
came to be known as "the battle of the historians". It con¬
cerned the unique nature of the extermination of the Jews
by the nazis, which Nolte contested. The sociologist and
philosopher Jürgen Habermas accused Nolte and other
historians ofbecoming to some extent apologists ofthe Third
Reich. What importance do you attach to this controversy?
The real issue involved was the attitude of present-day
Germans to that specific period of their history. It concerned
the link between the collective memory and the notion of
national identity in the Federal Republic of Germany forty
years after the end of the Second World War.
This quarrel, which is in no sense an academic one, must
be put in context. It is a response to the repeated efforts
by certain leaders to use German history as a political
weapon and to distort the image of history as seen through
German eyes. The objective is to smooth the German
people's tormented relationship with their recent past and
with their history in general. A disturbed German identity
constitutes a destabilizing factor both within and outside
the country.
What are the historical roots ofthat identity?
Therein lies the problem. On this matter there are two
opposing viewpoints. Some hold that in searching for these
roots we have to bypass the period of the Third Reich and
make a direct link with the period that preceded it. Others
maintain that the period 1933 to 1945 was a unique episode
in world history, but that it cannot simply be erased. It
marks a discontinuity, an anomaly which makes it impos¬
sible for Germans ever to have a straightforward relation¬
ship with their history.
To understand this break with the past, we have to go
back to the position in which the Germans found themselves
in 1945. After its unconditional surrender, the German state
had ceased politically, militarily and morally to exist. In
1949, two German states, with diametrically opposed
political and social systems, were soon incorporated into two
equally opposed alliances: The front line of the Cold War
passed through the heart of Germany and its former capital.
The only way that the Federal Republic of Germany could
build itself anew was by making a total break with the past
and adopting Western democratic traditions that hitherto
had been rejected in Germany.
How did historians react to this dramatic chapter ofhistory?
At first they were at a loss. Ever since the nineteenth
century most of them had been convinced that their role
was to work for the construction of a national German state.
German national unity had been proclaimed the historic
German objective and the task of achieving it had been
entrusted to Prussia. This explains why, before the First
World War, history in Germany was not open to the
social and human sciences as it was in other countries. It
sought to be the political history of the national state and
nothing more, and this trend was strengthened after the
signing of the Treaty of Versailles after the war. Thus most
German historians were in a situation in which they were
ready to adopt the perverted nazi concepts of race, of peoples
and of the state and political power.

After 1945, most historians became interested in ques¬
tions of universal history rather than contemporary topics.
Nevertheless, there were some, like Friedrich Meinecke, who
were critical of the German historiographical tradition. More
often, however, the German drama was seen as an act of
fate. Explanations of it were sought in the inexplicable, in
demoniac possession or in mob psychology. Apart from a
few scholars who had emigrated, such as Sigmund Neumann,
the main body of German historians were totally bereft of
appropriate instruments for studying nazism. The first step,
therefore, was to invent such instruments.
What was the extent of this break with the German
historical past?
Both the Federal Republic of Germany and the German
Democratic Republic were built up under the control of the
victorious Allied Powers and were intent on distancing
themselves from their past and their political traditions. Thus
it was impossible, for them to refer back to the Weimar
Republic, which was then seen as a negative experiment
whose institutions, it was suspected, had facilitated Hitler's
seizure of power. Only the old German federalist tradition
was taken up as a positive element.
The collapse had been so complete that there was no
opposition to this new start. Constitutionally, the young
Federal Republic wanted to be cleansed of all trace of nazism,
yet the higher civil service was impregnated with nazism.
It became officially taboo to mention the past nazi links of
many individuals and institutions. In this way it was hoped
to integrate into the new democratic state, not the past of
individuals, but individuals whose past had been surgically
removed.
Furthermore, the policy of the political and military
integration of the Federal Republic of Germany into the
Western camp implied that the "German question"the
demand for reunificationwould remain unanswered. This
made for a very ambiguous situation. To safeguard this
integration the Federal Republic of Germany was obliged
to refrain from insisting on its status as a fully sovereign
state whilst at the same time declaring itself to be the legal
successor to the Third Reich.
The fiction of the frontiers of 1937 was maintained
and thus of a hypothetical return to those frontiers; on the
other hand, the Federal Republic of Germany had to face
up to the moral and juridical obligation of indemnifying the
victims of German crimes during the Second World War.
In so doing the Federal Republic assumed responsibility for
crimes committed by Germans in the name of Germany.
At the same time, the Federal Republic was obliged to un¬
dertake a permanent effort, unique in history, of keeping
alive the memory of the nazi period so as to be able to in¬
scribe, in the very foundations of its policies, its total rejec¬
tion of this period and its abominations.
How, then, do you explain the all-pervading German
concern with the recent past?
The first decade of the existence of the Federal Republic
of Germany was marked by almost total silence on the
subject of nazi crimes. The wretchedness of post-war con¬
ditions and the demands and the successes of political and
economic reconstruction encouraged a thoroughly pragmatic
approach. Historical memory, at least to outward appear¬
ance, seemed to have lost all importance. In terms of foreign
Monument to the German emperor
William I (1797-1888) at Koblenz
(Fed. Rep. of Germany), former capital
of the Prussian Rhine Province.
¿C&J

policy, the Germans made the transition from being the
guilty defeated to the status of partners within the Western
alliance. Citizens and interest groups gave their wholehearted
support to the new state. The Federal Republic was seen
as a provisional solution, the German Democratic Republic
was not recognized and reunification became an objective
to be achieved within the framework of integration in the
Western camp. In the context of the Cold War, the divi¬
sion of Germany made anti-communism and firm attach¬
ment to the West the hallmarks of the identity of the Federal
Republic.
Forty years later, it can be affirmed that the democratic
experiment of the Federal Republic has been a success. The
Germans identify with their institutions, their economic
system and Western democratic values. The Constitution
has become an object of patriotic pride. The prospect of a
united Europe has also strengthened the desire to make a
break with the past. All this has cushioned the shock of the
"loss" of a page of recent history, which was such a heavy
burden to bear.
During the 1950s and 1960s, explanations of the failure
of the Weimar Republic tended to point to its excessive
democratic formalism rather than to the anti-democratic
mentality of the traditional governing elite. In addition, the
theory of totalitarianism, which historically and ideologi¬
cally assimilated nazism and Stalinist communism, helped
to justify the exclusion from German history of the period
\
II *
MUF
" -*

Top, Hitler, the Führer
(leader), addressing a nazi
rally at Nuremberg.
Above, Nuremberg war
crime trials (1945-1946). The
wall-map shows territory
annexed or occupied by nazi
Germany.
Above left, Hitlerian
propaganda poster from the
early 1930s, bearing the
slogan "No more war!"
Left, Auschwitz, the largest
of the nazi extermination
camps (south of Cracow,
Poland).
of the Third Reich. This was classified as "a régime arbitrar¬
ily imposed on the German people and which could be
explained by Hitler's devilish powers of seduction and the
success with which he manipulated the divided masses", a
thesis denounced by the contemporary historian Hans
Mommsen.
It was not until the end of the 1950s that historians began
to undertake a painful revision of the image Germans had
of their history. The first step was to highlight the authoritar¬
ian elements inherent in the German political system, the
anti-democratic mentality of traditional political elites, the
political inertia of the workers' movement, excessive nation¬
alism and a desire for a powerful state and the specific form
taken by industrial development in Germany.
For the first time the deep underlying causes of the
process which led German politics to the crises of the twen¬
tieth century were brought out into the open. It was no
longer possible to ascribe the rise of nazism solely to the
economic crisis of 1929, to define it as a system of totalitar¬
ian domination imposed on the German people and to treat
it as a parenthesis in the continuity of German history.
What effect did this new awareness among German
historians have upon the great mass of their compatriots?
Did it transform popular comprehension ofGerman history?
During the 1960s, the way in which nazism was
presented in the media and in public debate was radically
transformed. The Eichmann trial and the resumption of
trials of war criminals broke the mantle of silence that had
hung over the question of the extermination of the Jews.
The Germans had been caught up by their own history.
The more public opinion became aware of the full
dimensions and monstrosity of the Holocaust, the more evi¬
dent became its uniqueness and the stronger became the
rejection of this period of history and the refusal of individu¬
als to identify themselves with it. This is how the historian
Eberhard Jäckel underlined the unique nature of the assas¬
sination of the Jews by the nazis: "Never before had a state
decided and announced, on the authority of its supreme
leader, that, as far as this was possible, a certain group of
human beingsincluding old people, women, children and
babes in armswere to be exterminated, and then attempted,
by all the means within its power, to carry through this
decision."



From the 1960s, the memory of Auschwitz became an
"objective reality" in Germany. But such was the strength
of their desire to escape acceptance of this period of their
past that the Germans were not immediately overwhelmed
by the moral shadow that it cast over their history. Ausch¬
witz figured strongly in theatre and literature, but it was
not until 1979, when the "Holocaust" series was shown on
television, that the general public felt its full impact. Fur¬
thermore, with the rise of protest movements and their
global rejection of bourgeois society, suspicion of nazism
began to appear like a gangrene affecting the whole history
of the Federal Republic. But by making an ideological
assimilation between capitalism and fascism, these move¬
ments ended up by taking the sting out of nazism.
At the end of the 1970s, the general public was showing
a renewed interest in history, as witness the success of the
1981 exhibition on Prussia, held in Berlin (West). Even if this

did not at first indicate an interest in the nazi past, curiosity
about the history of daily life led on to curiosity about
nazism in daily life. The shadow of the past seemed to be
stretching out even further.
The thinking of historians about the way in which nazi
power succeeded in imposing itself and about its structure
finally came to have political implications. Many stressed
the responsibility of the conservative elites and minimized
the relative importance of the role played by Hitler. They
maintained that Hitler would not have been able to impose
himself had there not been, in the background, an enormous
current of anti-liberal and anti-socialist feeling. This debate
continues today. Those who criticize this analysis because
it takes responsibility away from Hitler are criticized in their
turn for holding that he alone was to blame and thus
absolving the conservative ruling groups.
But as the social ramifications of the Hitler death
machine and the extent of the responsibility of those in¬
volved in its functioning become clearer, the more evident
becomes the extent to which the German bureaucracy and
armed forces were compromised with Hitler. It becomes
more and more difficult to exclude nazism from the general
sweep of German national history.
In spite ofthis, more and more voices can be heard demand¬
ing a "positive identification with the German past". What
is your interpretation of this attitude?
Many conservative historians consider that, in the
interest of political stability, national identity must be
anchored in the past, but that this attachment must be so
oriented as to give rise to a consensus. To achieve this some
are ready to resort to tricks and ruses about the past. But
there is another way of identifying with historyby
choosing the path of lucidity and courage. This is the path
chosen by President Richard von Weizsäcker when he
declared: "guilty or not, we must all accept the past. We
are all involved in its consequences and we are all obliged
to bear witness to it." It is also the approach adopted by
the historian C. Meier, who goes even further and considers
Auschwitz to be an important element in our social identity.
The demand for a selective "healthy" patriotism, which
would efface Auschwitz from German history, disguises
attempts, both deliberate and unwitting, to bring into ques¬
tion the very foundations of the historical identity of the
Federal Republic of Germany. It is perfectly legitimate to
retain the memory of democratic traditions that predate the
Third Reich, or even to emphasize this or that unfulfilled
potentiality of that past. These elements, however, weigh
less heavily in the makeup of the German identity than those
that marked the coming and the horrors of nazism. A lucid
view of history must incorporate the totality of the German
past, including all epochs whether they be positive or nega¬
tive. By the very fact of its birth, the political conscience
of the Federal Republic cannot have an unambiguous, aseptic
relationship with German history.
It is not the task of history to manufacture a tradition
that will receive general approval, but to throw light on
events and to study their causes. This involves continuously
reviewing and providing a historical basis for the ¡mage that
we have of our history, not interpreting it to suit political
necessities. Identity must be understood not as a given fact,
but as an open, pluralist process of reconciling different in¬
terests and points of view. This is one of the advances made
in the German approach to recent historyrecognition that
identity cannot be controlled on the sole basis of the logic
of the national state. Basically, identity can only be an amal¬
gam of a series of identities.
The specific nature of the German identity is the out¬
come of German history, which, in its turn, has always con¬
cerned the history of neighbouring peoples. But this is not
the only reason for their concern. The terrifying path fol¬
lowed by German history after 1933 has also to be seen as
one possible destiny for twentieth-century man and, there¬
fore, as a factor in the general history of European peoples.
Today, the new relationship which has been created between
history and identity in Germany can no longer be seen as
being solely a problem for Germans and their historians.
It must be an integral part of any reflection on the way a
united Europe will portray its history.
Do the events that have taken place in the German
Democratic Republic since November 1989 bring up again,
in a different way, the problem ofthe German identity and
its relationship with the past? What, for example, is the
position of the German Democratic Republic with regard
to nazism?
From the beginning, the German Democratic Republic
defined itself as an anti-fascist state which was intended to
represent a radical departure in terms of its relationship to
German history. The break with the historical past was
erected into state dogma and, as a result, as J. Rovan has
pointed out, the German Democratic Republic refused to
participate with the Federal Republic of Germany in indem¬
nifying victims of the former Reich, to undertake an

The Berlin Wall, before (left) and after its downfall in November 1989.



equivalent effort to keep alive the memory of the crimes
committed, or to seek out war criminals and bring them
to trial. After the failure of the political system established
in that part of Germany, however, society can no longer
concern itself simply with a critique of Stalinism: it will have
to examine the question of the inheritance of the period from
1933 to 1945. The German Democratic Republic could no
longer pick and choose from German history, nor claim
descent solely from the "good" periods of "progressive"
action. As it draws closer to the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many, it will have to share with it the German past.
How can two such divergent historical approaches be recon¬
ciled in view ofa possible confederation or even union of
the two states?
On 9 November 1989, the Germans living in two states
and under two radically different systems can be said to have
found themselves once again members of a single nation.
But for all that, it must not be forgotten that these two popu¬
lation groups have behind them forty years of differing his¬
tories, education and ways of life. Clearly this poses and will
long continue to pose a number of problems. West Germans
obviously see no reason to change their point of view, but,
on the other hand, the collapse of the communist regime
in the Democratic Republic does not imply that the East
German identity will disappear overnight. There remains
a sense of community, strengthened by the common
experience of sufferings and daily difficulties, as well as,
today, a sense of pride in having carried through a successful
revolution. Although the Federal Republic exercises a great
fascination and attraction for them, many East Germans are
still critical of it. They still dream of another kind of "good"
society, of a "true" form of socialism, and believe that they
will be able to bring their own values and ideals to the con¬
struction of a new Germany.
What is the major task facing the historian today?
In the German Democratic Republic, political libera¬
tion will enableindeed, will obligehistorians to make a
critical examination of the history of their country and, as
a result, to ask new questions, to open hitherto inaccessible
archives and to establish others. Now that official history
has vanished, a true history will have to be written. It will
be especially important that East German historians, in par¬
ticular the younger ones, have the opportunity of working
in collaboration with colleagues abroad.
The historian's raw material consists not only of events
and "material" facts, but also of visions based on the imagi¬
nation and memory of peoples. Today we have the impres¬
sion of a quickening pace of history, of living at a point of
new departure or at the end of the post-war period. At such
moments it is up to the historian to recall the weight of the
pastthe Second World War, genocideand to make people
aware of all the changes that have occurred since then. The
historian must act on the collective memory so as to put
people on their guard against the use for political purposes,
whether deliberate or not, of ingrained images and represen¬
tations. In this sense, the historian, in looking towards the
past, is working for the future.
In conclusion, I would like to recall something that Max
Weber said in 1917 about the German nation, quoting a
remark about Russia made by Aleksandr Herzen: "It is not,
and must not be, the land of its fathers, but the land of its
children."
