N W
Leopoldo
Zea
In a rapidly changing world, is there still room for
philosophical reflection?
The historic pattern which came into being at the end
of the Second World War was broken in 1989. The extraor¬
dinary changes which have taken place in Europe in recent
months mark the end of the post-war era. We are now
entering a period of intensive reflection, one in which
Europe is being rebuilt and is seeking new structures, while
other regions such as Latin America, Asia and Africa are
having to envisage new relationships and new forms of
integration with the rest of the world. More than ever
philosophy must help shape our thinking about this uni¬
fied world which is emerging from a divided world.
Many people think philosophy is useless and superfluous,
and would even eliminate itfrom the educational syllabus.
Philosophy has always tried to come to terms with reality.
From Plato who sought to solve the problems of the Greek
city-state, to St. Augustine who reflected on the relations
between Christians and pagans, Kant who meditated on the
situation of the individual in the modern world, and Hegel
who wrote history in the light of the French Revolution,
philosophy has always responded to the problems of a given
time and place. It provides a possible answer to the ques¬
tions people ask themselves. Without these questions it
would have no purpose.
Could there he such a thing as a universal philosophyf
The essence of philosophical thinking rests on the double
principle of the logos: reason and the word. To reason is to
apprehend the external world with a view to understanding
it, while the word makes it possible to communicate these
perceptions to others. It provides the capacity to understand
and to make oneself understood through communication
in order to expand and extend dialogue. This movement is

Leopoldo Zea, portrait In oils by Armen Chaltlklan,
Moscow (1984).
Opposite page, A Time to Remember (1989),
oil on canvas by the Mexican painter Diego Toledo.
the starting point for any talk of universality, for
philosophical truths are not immediately universal. They
only become so to the extent that they are accessible to
others. The universality of philosophy depends on the
capacity of some to communicate and of others to
understand.
In 1986, the World Congress of Philosophy held at
Montreal (Canada), reached the conclusion that the univer¬
sality of philosophy depended on the capacity of human
beings to make reason an instrument for communication,
dialogue and the exchange of experience. It was also said
that there was no universal philosophy but only specific
philosophies which become universal to the extent that they
are understood by others and make it possible to understand
others.



If there is talk nowadays of a truly universal philosophy,
The Mexican thinker Leopoldo Zea
has developed a philosophy of history rooted
in the Latin American experience but also
firmly linked to major movements in world
philosophy. Here he sets forth his ideas
on the role philosophy can play in the current
world situation.
this is not because the nature of philosophy has changed
but because for the first time in the history of humanity
problems have become universal. Since some problems affect
all human beings in the same way, transcending their differ¬
ences and the specificity of their experience, the responses
of philosophy acquire universal relevance. But this is always
a universality which takes reality as the starting point
of an attempt to solve the problems of people in given
situations.
What are the priorities of such universalist yet specific
thinking?
The first thing is to define modes of behaviour and of
participation in a changing world. The planetary range of
problems raises the question of the behaviour of peoples and
nations, as well as that of individuals. We do not accept that
othersblocs, governments, ideologiestake our decisions
for us. This presupposes that we assume a large share of
responsibility for what is done and that we choose new
forms of participation. Instead of vertical relationships of
domination and thus of dependence, there should be
horizontal links of solidarity. Individuals, minorities, a var¬
iety of cultural entities, increasingly wish for participation.
Everyone wants to participate in the redefinition of the
world that is emerging, one in which it will not be enough
to speak, as today, of a "common European home". We
know now that we live in one world, that our planet is for
the first time truly universal. It is the common home of
humanity that we should be thinking about.
In this universalist context, is philosophy as a discipline
taking new directions?
In many countries the tide is turning against the idea that
the instrument of philosophylogicshould actually be its
purpose. It is now accepted that logic is only a means of

Left, Atomic Explosion with
Green Rain (1960-1962),
mixed media on jute by the
Austrian artist Hundertwasser
(Friedrich Stowasser).
Right, Astronomer Observing
the Sky, illustration from the
Selenographia (atlas of the
Moon) compiled by the German
astronomer Johannes Hevelius
(1611-1687).
knowing with a view to acting. The more refined this
instrumental logic becomes, the better. But the essential
thing is to achieve knowledge of reality in order to change
it. This is the crux of the matter. Logic should never be con¬
sidered as in itself the goal of philosophy.
It is thus possible to talk of a return to the original preoc¬
cupations of philosophy: how to know reality and act on
it. The Greek philosophers never troubled to find out
whether their philosophy was universal. And yet it was
universal to the extent that it produced answers which
proved to be valid for others, in analogous circumstances.
This new philosophical "realism" clearly responds to ethical
preoccupations. How can ethics and pragmatism he
reconciled?
Many philosophers have abandoned the neutral analysis
of moral language and are dissatisfied with the abstract con¬
structions which a number of their contemporaries have
tried to make. What matters now, as I have said, are the
specific problems of human beings. Philosophers have a role
to play in criticizing the myths of contemporary society,
identifying ethical problems, defining fundamental prin¬
ciples, and reframing essential questions in the current
context.
Ethical reflection has a bearing on the problems of man
and society. Philosophers are concerned with medical ethics,
nuclear dissuasion, democracy and economic justice. In a
democratic society, moral thinking should be shared as
widely as possible. In view of the growing interdependence
of the world today, a kind of ethical consensus must be
established between all peoples who must share a common
planetary destiny.

Is it possible to speak of an ethico-philosophical concern
for the environment?
According to the historian Arnold Toynbee, the West
has always considered people, like plants and animals, as
objects for exploitation. This approach can be seen in the
attitude of the developed countries, which want to impose
their ecological rules on the Third World without regard
for the interests of those who live there. There is an attempt
to halt the destruction of nature by using the same authority
that once encouraged this destructionwithout showing
concern for the human beings who are thereby condemned
to underdevelopment in the name of the safeguarding of the
environment. Only an ethical consensus can permit a re¬
adjustment which will not condemn certain peoples to
irremediable poverty. Philosophy can contribute to this
universal readjustment and thereby help pave the way for
an agreement about the sharing of acquired wealth.
Is it possible to think of applied philosophy as we think
of applied science?
Philosophy is oriented towards actionMarx was not
alone in adumbrating this. Thinking is important, but so
is acting in conformity with what one thinks. Philosophy
is not an exercise in abstraction which stops at words, for
if I have a problem and think about it, it is in order to solve
that problem and that means taking action. Moreover, the
very fact of thinking presupposes that one has the capacity
to direct action.
In Latin America there is a long philosophical tradition
of concern for the problems of the region. As early as 1842,
in Montevideo (Uruguay), the Argentine thinker Juan Bau¬
tista Alberdi envisaged a specifically American enterprise
of philosophical reflection rooted in the "necessities" of the
continent. "What problems is America called upon to ask
itself and to solve at this moment?" he asked. The answer
was the problems of freedom, fundamental rights, and the
social and political order. Philosophy should thus be "syn¬
thetic and organic in its method, positive and realistic in
its action, republican in its spirit and purpose". This prac¬
tical knowledge presupposed a certain degree of participa¬
tion in social and political life on the part of the philosopher.
"It is the duty of every decent man," Alberdi concluded,
"who, through his condition or his capacity, can exercise
any influence whatsoever, to be involved in the affairs of
his country."
Does this mean that philosophy should be more "opera¬
tional" in developing countries?
Our peoples have enormous problems to solveproblems
of identity and dependence. Philosophy is a unique tool with
which to approach these problems and try to solve them.
But we should not only use our own criteria to define them.
We must be open to the rest of the world.
In this sense, the dialogue between North and South
must be kept going in order to define what we call "the
ethics of development". Treatment of the ethical questions
raised by development has become indispensable.
Did you have this in mind in the thoughts on universal
history set forth in your recent book Discurso desde la
marginación y la barbarie ("Discourse on Marginality and
Barbarity")?
Greater knowledge of other world regions can help us
to become aware of the state of dependence in which we
live, to understand what constitutes our "originality", and
our situation in relation to others. If we began by imitating
foreign models, it was to "instrumentalize" European
philosophy and to make it serve our needs. We did this
deliberately. It would have been absurd to deny that Western
culture has created conceptual tools that can be applied to
our situation. We have also assimilated the dialectical dimen¬
sion of the past, accepting the good and the bad in our his¬
tory, keeping what we considered to be valuable and
modifying what in our eyes was not. I think that one of
the responsibilities of Latin American philosophers is to
translate and adapt to our own situation what comes t- us
from elsewhere and can nevertheless be useful to us.
However, Latin America has obstinately closed its eyes
to the reality of its own situation, and has even rejected its
indigenous or Iberian past, which it has affected to ignore on

the grounds that it is inappropriate and alien. But to ignore
one's history is to deprive oneself of an experience without
which it is impossible to achieve maturity, responsibility.
Even so, Latin American thought has not restricted itself
to the problems of the region; it has contributed to a spe¬
cifically American philosophy, to a perception of reality and
world problems from an American standpoint. Discurso desde
la marginación y la barbarie is intended to be a book about
the philosophy of history written from a perspective which
is not European or "Eurocentrist".
Why should philosophy not give itself a "centre of
awareness" other than Europe? This is what I have done,
interpreting, not the history of America alone, but also that
of the non-American peoples. I deliberately chose European
peoples on the sidelines of history, "barbarians" according
to the classic notion, such as Spain and Portugal at the
western extremity of Europe, and Russia at the other end.
It is interesting to see how these historically marginal peoples
are today playing an important role in the recomposition
of the world.
In this unified and interdependent world we can also see
an awakening ofparticularism, a demandfor national iden¬
tities that have been repressed, and a growing number of
ethnic rivalries.
It is clear that the conquest of freedom carries risks and
should be subjected to methodical questioning. How far can
freedom go? The world must avoid atomization, the "tribali-
zation" to which nationalism or exacerbated regionalism
may lead. If we encourage forms of behaviour and modes
of participation based on respect for others to the extent
that others respect us, it is possible to imagine the coming
of a kind of world federation in which relations would be
horizontal, interdependent, in which there would be a
common effort to find a solution to common problems. If
I understand my neighbour and how he differs from me,
and if he does likewise, then we can discuss, collaborate, and
reach agreement without losing an identity which we could
never reject, and build this "common home of man" in
which we are condemned to live together.
Furthermore, in America we possess an experience
which we can offer to the world: an aptitude for ethnic and
cultural intermingling (mestizaje). The Spanish bequeathed
to us an extraordinary sense of the conviviality between
peoples, religions and cultures, but it is America itselfwhich
has been the great melting pot. This "cosmic race", on whose
behalf the Mexican writer José Vasconcelos (1882-1959)
spoke out, bears a message of integration and intermingling
which xénophobes and nationalists of all origins would do
well to ponder. Philosophy has a clear and precise task to
perform, to avoid the creation of impermeable blocs, self-
sufficient and self-satisfied, in the new spaces of freedom.
If one wall has fallenthe Berlin wall which prevented
some people from getting outlet's make sure that new walls
are not built to prevent others from getting in-the customs
barriers which developed countries raise in defence of their
well-being.
How does the resurgence ofreligious feelingsfit into a world
which should be striving towards the "ethical consensus"
you advocate?
Religion, to the extent that it helps me to understand
others, and others to understand me, can give an important
spiritual dimension to the philosopher's task. What should
be rejected is the religion that locks you in the closed world
of a given faith, without concession or tolerance towards
other beliefs, a faith which leads to religious conflicts, to
those "holy wars" from which the history of humanity
seemed to have found deliverance.
Just as philosophy sometimes turns to ideology and acts
as a brake on thought, we must avoid the obstacle that reli¬
gious intransigence may constitute. The key word is toler¬
ance. The differences of others must be respected so that
they will give respect in return.
In a world which is tending to become one, and in which

Right, Tonantzin-Guadalupe
(1988), mixed media on
paper by the Mexican artist
Dulce Maria Nunez.
Opposite page, Five Hundred
Years (1989), oil on canvas
by the Portuguese artist
Joaqulm Antunes.
problems are global, it is important to be able to reaffirm
our differences, what distinguishes us from one another,
while respecting difference, what is not "equal" to us. We
should not forget that equality, not to say egalitarianism,
can also become a means of domination. The important
thing today is to be able to be "different" in equality, for
everyone to be equal while being different.
How do you see freedom in this context?
Freedom is a value which can only exist in relation to
specific individuals. Otherwise it becomes an abstraction,
and it is worth recalling that freedom does not exist in the
abstract. It would be impossible to defend the idea of
freedom as an absolute, that is, ultimately, an irresponsible
freedom. We must fight for freedom, but a responsible
freedom, aware of its limits.
The free man must be responsible. Man does not have
a right to be free but the duty to be so; that is to be respon¬
sible. The exercise of freedom implies a responsibility which
is situated on the level of a moral obligation. Freedom is
a commitment. I am free but I also have a commitment to
the freedom of others.
This complex relationship between commitment, responsi¬
bility and freedom, which is a recurrent theme of your
philosophical work, is based on the reciprocal relationship
between man and society. Is there not a great temptation
to propose "models" offreedom to regulate these relations?
It would be impossible to talk of models in this context,
since there can be neither models nor archetypes of freedom.
Models eventually impose new subordinations. To accept
a model is to accept a constraint.
