THE ROLE OF THE PAST IN FRENCH LIFE



EDUCATING
THE NATION
BY CHRISTIAN AMALVI
H,
18
LlSTORY occupies such an important place in
French society todayin primary and secondary
schools, at universities, research institutions and
the mediathat it is difficult to imagine that this
has not always been the case. But the facts show
that the great respect for the historian's functions,
notably as a teacher, has not always existed but
is the offshoot of a stormy past. The story can be
divided into three main periods, corresponding to
radical changes in the French cultural landscape.
History on the sidelines:
1660-1814
In institutions of secondary education under the
ancien régime, history was a footnote to the Clas¬
sics. Inordinate importance was attached to Latin.
History was taught only indirectly by way of
historical commentaries on Latin texts, and was
learnt by translating the works of Livy, Sallust,
Caesar, Suetonius, Tacitus, Quintus Curtius and
other Latin authors. It had no independent exis¬
tence outside literature nor were any specialists
trained to teach it.
History was taught in certain colleges but did
not form part of the regular curriculum. It was
taught outside school hours on Sundays and feast
days and during the holidays.
History was considered to have only one
direct educational function, and that was a moral
one. The only real purpose of ancient history was
to provide a fund of moral examples. During the
Renaissance, the study of history was confined
to princes, who were supposed to derive specific
political rules from the past. In the late seven¬
teenth century history teaching was gradually ex¬
tended throughout the ruling classes, a restricted
group comprising the rich bourgeoisie, the no¬
bility and ecclesiastical dignitaries.
Clio, the Muse of history, instructs a young noble.
French allegorical engraving, 18th century.

Although many reform-minded teachers
wished to encourage the use of national history
as a basis for instruction, the bourgeoisie who
supported the Revolution in 1789 were more
familiar with the heroes of Livy and Tacitus than
with the great figures of French history.
The 19th century,
the golden age: 1814-1914
It is commonly said that in France the nineteenth
centurythe age of Augustin Thierry, Jules
Michelet, Hippolyte Taine, Ernest Renan among
otherswas an exceptional period for the writing
of history. This is true of history as an intellectual
and literary activity, but is less true if the place
of history is examined in primary, secondary and
higher education against the background of the
political vicissitudes of France between 1814 and
1914. The alternation of liberal and conservative
regimes had profound repercussions on the
teaching of history, which had mixed fortunes.
The early years, from 1814 to 1830, were not
easy. Scarcely had history been made a compul¬
sory subject in secondary schools, by a decree of
15 May 1818, than it fell out of favour. In 1820,
after the ultra-royalists had come to power,
several chairs of history were abolished in Paris
lycées, as was Guizot's course in modern history
at the Sorbonne.
The period of the July monarchy was, on the
contrary, a golden age. Historical studies were
given a boost by the establishment of the Com¬
mittee of Historical Works in 1834. In 1838
Michelet, who had been appointed head of the
historical section of the Public Record Office
in October 1830 by Guizot, was elected as a
professor at the Collège de France (see page 15).
Most important of all, the regime endeavoured
to give increasing prominence to history in the
lycées and colleges. Starting in 1830 between four
and six new history teachers were appointed
annually on the basis of a competitive examina¬
tion. Between 1830 and 1848 the number of his¬
tory textbooks rose sharply. By the eve of the
1848 Revolution, history was considered to be
a subject of the first importance in secondary edu¬
cation, although its impact had still not reached
the mass of the people.
There were several reasons why the situation
had improved. During this period two celebrated
historians, Guizot and Adolphe Thiers, held
office as premier. At a deeper level, the period
coincided with the Romantic movement which
rediscovered the past in general and the Middle
Ages in particular, just as the first humanists of
the Renaissance had rediscovered Antiquity: as
eras that were gone forever.



In the same way, the watershed of the Revo¬
lution conferred a mythical dimension on French
national history, and in the early nineteenth cen¬
tury learning about it was akin to engaging in a
sacred quest for the origins of the nation. Finally,
La République (1848),
by the French artist
Jules Claude Ziegler
(1804-1856).
at the political level, King Louis-Philippe sought
to steady his shaky throne by appealing to history
to support the claim that his regime was the
"happy medium", the necessary outcome of the
whole of French history and the only govern¬
ment capable of reconciling the ancien régime and
the Revolution.
This momentum was shattered during the
authoritarian years of the Second Empire which
complained that history was a subversive subject!
In 1852 the competitive examination for secon¬
dary-school history teachers was abolished and
Michelet was driven out of the Collège de France
and obliged to resign from his post at the Public
Record Office. For more than ten years order
prevailed in a discipline which had been forced
to toe the line, and it was not until the appoint¬
ment, during the liberal years of the Empire, of
an eminent historian of Rome, Victor Duruy, to
the post of minister of education (1863-1869), that
history recovered its place in the lycées and
colleges and began to be introduced officially into
primary-school curricula. However, Duruy's
liberal reforms were checked by the disasters of
the "terrible year" which saw France's military
defeat at the hands of Prussia in 1870 and the
proclamation of the Paris Commune in the spring
of 1871.
A consensus began to emerge regarding the 19

need to give the whole of society a solid basis of
knowledge about the national past in order to
revitalize the country after its collapse. But
political disagreements re-emerged when the time
came to define the content of history teaching.
The Catholics were bent on resuscitating an ideal¬
ized Middle Ages, a Christian model in which
inspiration for the "salvation of France" was to
be sought. On the left, the Republicans set store
by the study of the Revolution and its aftermath
as a training for enlightened citizens, aware of
their political duties, and as a means of sparing
France the infernal cycle of revolution followed
by monarchist or Bonapartist repression. This
programme of reform only began to be applied
by Jules Ferry and his friends in 1880.
The Third Republic ushered in a second
golden age for history which was to last far longer
than the first under the July monarchy. There
were two main reasons for this. Firstly, positi¬
vism provided historians with a method that had
been tried and tested and with a well-organized
stock of knowledge. Secondly, the Republic had
a far broader social base than the hesitant
Orleanist monarchy and was able as a result to
extend the influence of history to the whole of
French society.
Thanks to the evergreen history textbooks
of Ernest Lavisse (especially those published in
1884 and 1913), the portrayal of the nation's past
became, in primary schools, the natural means
of diffusing Republican ideology among the
broad mass of French people, and provided an
ideal opportunity for the consecration of the
Patrie, of the state as the custodian of national
unity, and of democracy, the daughter of the
French Revolution, in the villages.
At the same time, higher education institu¬
tions ceased to be regarded as places where
fashionable lectures were given and gradually
acquired a pre-eminent role in the training of
secondary-school teachers and as centres for scien¬
tific research modelled on the German universi¬
ties. A law passed in 1902 gave greater weight to
contemporary history in secondary education as
an instrument of civic instruction for the elite,
dedicated to the cult of scientific and social
progress. This edifice, symbolized by the new
Sorbonne rebuilt in the heart of the old Latin
Quarter between 1883 and 1901, was to last, in
spite of increasingly serious fissures, more or less
until the beginning of the 1960s.
20
From positivism to television: 1919-1989
The twentieth century has seen unprecedented
developments in the teaching of history. At
primary level, it was thanks to the patriotic spirit
instilled by the textbooks of Lavisse and his suc¬
cessors that the French poilu held out in the mud
of the trenches for four long years and that the
flame of the Resistance was not extinguished
beneath the nazi heel. The teaching of history in
secondary schools, associated with the teaching
of philosophy, also achieved the purpose set by
the reformers of 1902. It contributed to the emer¬
gence of an elite imbued with republican ideals,
able to withstand the temptation of fascism in
the 1930s and to rebuild a democratic France after
1945. Finally, the reform of higher education
lived up to the hopes placed in it. The French
doctoral thesis has become a masterpiece of
positivism which opens the door to professor¬
ships and is regarded in other countries as an
illustration of the vigour of the French school of

Still from La Chanson de
Roland (1977; "The Song of
Roland"), a film by Franck
Cassenti on the deeds of the
medieval French epic hero.
Detail from a mural by
François Flameng
(1856-1923) at the Sorbonne,
Paris, depicting 19th-
century French historians.
From left to right, Edgar
Quinet, Abel François
Villemain, François Guizot,
Jules Michelet, Victor
Cousin and Ernest Renan.
historiography. The continual increase in staff
since 1880 has probably been another factor
which has led to the healthy situation of history
in France in this century.
However, this constant progression masks
the serious difficulties experienced by teachers.
If a textbook helped France to win the 1914-1918
war, primary-school teachers between 1919 and
1939 were horrified by the spread of jingoism and
became ardent pacifists. Then again, the often
naive cult of the Revolution and the caricaturing
of the ancien régime have long provoked the anger
of the Catholics, particularly in western France.
Although secondary education experienced a
kind of golden age until 1945, the massive influx
of young people into the lycées and colleges called
into question the task assigned to history teachers
by the bourgeois Republicthe training of
elites and replaced it with responsibility for
educating the nation, which it is not always easy
to discharge.
Furthermore, in the late 1950s many teachers
became critical of an approach to history teaching
which they considered to be rigid and outmoded,
and endeavoured to introduce into the schools
the "new history", largely dominated by eco¬
nomic and social factors, which was being deve¬
loped within the university system by the
members of the editorial board of the journal
Annales. This journal, founded in 1929 by Lucien
Febvre and Marc Bloch, sought to take by storm
the positivist New Sorbonne, which gave pride
of place to political and military events, and to
replace the traditional "battle-oriented history"
by a "problem-oriented history" open to the
fertile methods of the new human and social
sciences: anthropology, sociology, ethnology,
economics and linguistics.
Thanks to the efforts of Fernand Braudel (see
page 16), in the early 1960s the university yielded
to the "Ecole des Annales". But for the profes¬
sion as a whole, this success soon looked like a
pyrrhic victory. After 1969 the teaching of his¬
tory, labelled a "general cultural subject" in
primary education, became virtually moribund.
Ten years later, the attempt to introduce into
secondary education a theme-oriented history
which had little concern for chronology plunged
teachers and parents into confusion. At univer¬
sity level history at the end of the 1960s seemed
in danger of becoming an appendage of the social
sciences, and particularly of sociology, dominated
at that time by Marxism and structuralism.
Twenty years on, history has made a spec¬
tacular recovery. A vigorous press campaign con¬
ducted by the gifted journalist and historian Alain
Decaux, who has become a kind of schoolteacher
to the nation through his presentation of histor¬
ical events on television, has enabled the teaching
of history at primary level to regain its soul. In
secondary education, the errors resulting from
certain reforms have been effaced. Last but not
least, the "history of mentalities" has taken over
from a jaded form of economic history and,
returning to the spirit of Michelet's pioneering



intuitions, has given a new lease of life to the
"Ecole des Annales". Whereas the social and
human sciences, after ruling supreme, are now
in a state of crisis, history, which has struck a deli¬
cate balance between tradition and modernity,
seems to be in sound condition. Historians, who
only yesterday were cooped up in libraries and
archives, have become media figures. In a society
that is stepping into the future while looking back
at the past, they cater to an interest in historical
roots and the archaeological heritage. They will
never be done with teaching, rewriting and
reinterpreting sometimes in the midst of sound
and furythe history of France and the French.
21
