BY ROBERT BRAUNSCHWEIG



A revolution
on wheels
Solutions must
be found to
environmental
and other
problems
surrounding
the automobile,
victim of its
own success
22
ROBERT BRAUNSCHWEIG
is a Swiss engineer who has
been writing about motoring
since 1932. From 1943 to
1980 he was on the staff of
Revue automobile/Automobil
Revue, latterly as
editor-in-chief. He is the author
of many articles and
technical studies on cars
and driving.
Or'NLY a century ago, cars were few and far
between. They coughed and spluttered along roads
intended for pedestrians, cyclists, and the horse-
drawn carriages which in shape they strongly
resembled. Regarded without enthusiasm by those
who happened to get in their way, these new¬
fangled machines were the realization of man's
ancient dream of personal mobility. A revolution
was about to begin.
Today, there are more than 500 million
motor vehicles in the worldabout 400 million
private cars and 100 million commercial vehicles.
It should not be thought, however, that the
automobile has become a means of transport
available to all. One-fifth of the world's popula¬
tion, living in North America, Western Europe,
Japan and Australia, runs 80 per cent of all the
motor vehicles on the planet. Cars are beyond
the reach of most of humanity. They symbolize
the gap that separates plenty from penury.
Before and after
It is hard for us today to imagine what life was
like around 1890, when there were no cars, tele¬
phones, televisions or electrical household appli¬
ances, when equal rights between men and
women did not exist, and there were no paid
holidays. In those days the only way for most
people to avoid a long daily trudge to and from
work was to live near their workplace. How
different is the situation today when millions of
office-workers drive to work each day from their
homes in the distant suburbs of the world's great
cities. Once upon a time people bought what they
needed each day at the local shops. Nowadays
they drive to distant shopping centres and return
home with enough provisions to keep them going
for weeks. Once fields were ploughed by teams
of plodding horses or oxen, and farm hands cut
hay with scythes and loaded it onto hay-carts
with pitchforks. Today machines have taken over
from human muscle and do the work much more
quickly.
In town and country alike people now have
cars. Once the prerogative of a small minority,
holidays far away from home are within reach
of the many. Holidaymakers drive to distant
countries, or fly there and hire a car at the airport.
The servants once employed by the wealthy have
almost entirely disappeared. Anyone still able to
afford domestic help must be ready to provide

Above, prototype design by
computer, 1989.
Left, a Ford production line,
1923.
them with parking space. Teenagers drive around
in cars or on motorcycles. People travel long dis¬
tances to go fishing, camp, or practise their
favourite sports.
But for today's car-owner this mobility is far
from being synonymous with total freedom of
movement. Where there are too many of them
concentrated in one place, cars defeat their own
object. Traffic grinds to a halt. At holiday time
there are interminable traffic jams, even on major
highways. In towns and cities the search for a
parking place is a daily chore. Roads and cars have
become safer and men and women more skilful
in using them, but United Nations statistics show
that the automobile takes a heavy toll of human
lives. More than 200,000 people are killed every
year and even more are injured, in many cases
seriously.
?A tool or a weapon?
Intrinsically, the automobile is neither good nor
bad. It all depends on the use to which it is put.
It can serve doctors and patients, bank robbers,
truck drivers and kidnappers. Is it not primarily,
to paraphrase the Swiss writer Friedrich Dürren¬
matt, a high-quality "artificial limb"? 23

Delivering fuel at Luxor,
Egypt.
Right, traffic congestion
In a Paris suburb, 1923.
But some people regard driving primarily as
a sport. Burning up the kilometres is their dream.
The car has not changed the character of men or
women, the latter often being more resistant to
its attractions than the former. There are all sorts
of driversthe timid and the adventurous, the
cautious and the quick-tempered, the discreet and
the flamboyant.
In those parts of the world where car-
ownership is particularly widespread, the car is
a major consumer of non-renewable energy and
one of the most significant causes of nuisance and
environmental pollution. A solution to these
problems will not be found by turning the clock
back but by making correct technological choices.
More respect must be shown for the interests of
the community at large and less for those of each
individual. This process is likely to take time.
The poorer countries
In the less motorized regions of the EarthAsia
(excluding Japan), Africa, Latin America and cer¬
tain parts of Oceaniathere are, for every thou¬
sand inhabitants, about forty times fewer cars
than in North America and Western Europe. In
some rapidly growing cities of the South, such
as Rio de Janeiro, Hong Kong, Mexico City, Tel
Aviv, Cairo and Singapore, the traffic concentra¬
tion is intense. But in most of these places car
ownership is the privilege of a chosen few-
wealthy private individuals and those who have
the use of an official vehicle. There were only
280,000 cars in China in 1980, for example, just
over twice as many as in Luxembourg! Commer¬
cial vehicles far outnumber private cars, which
are seen as a luxury, and the road network is often
inadequate. Heavy-duty vehicles are used to trans¬
port goods and buses to carry people.
Popular motoring
The idea of a "popular" car began to take shape
at the turn of the century in the form of simpli¬
fied versions of the classic models of the day, but
fifty years were to elapse before the idea came
to fruition. During this period there were three
major developments in production techniques:
the change from hand-crafted construction to
standardization, the introduction of the assembly
line, on which more than 10,000 vehicles could
be manufactured annually, and finally
automationthe introduction of robots capable
of carrying out most operations and the use of
computerized manufacturing programmes.
These revolutionary changes did not take
place everywhere at the same speed. The first
production line was installed in the United States
by the great pioneer Henry Ford, who wanted
to "put America on wheels" by producing an
automobile that was both robust and cheap. In
1909, his Model T, the famous "Tin Lizzie",
came on to the market and was an enormous
success. By 1927 more than fifteen million Model
T's had been produced. The rest of the American
automobile industry followed Ford's example,
and within a few years the United States had
become the only country in the world where car
ownership was the rule rather than the exception.
In Europe, its birthplace, the car remained
a rarity for much longer. Expansion of the
automobile industry was interrupted by two
world wars. Assembly-line production was most
notably successful in France, thanks to three
entrepreneurs, André Citroën, who was the first
to branch out into this activity, Louis Renault
and Robert Peugeot.
In Italy, Giovanni Agnelli, the founder of
Fiat and grandfather of the present head of the
company, built two factories whose prospects
were improved by the favourable attitude of the
fascist regime towards the automobile. Germany,
exhausted by its defeat in 1918, was unable to
follow the trend immediately, although Ford
relaunched the production of German cars at its
Cologne subsidiary, followed shortly afterwards
by General Motors, which took over Opel. The

Entrant In a rally of
vehicles powered by
solar energy,
Switzerland, 1986.
26
coming of the Nazi regime paved the way for the
expansion of the German car industry. By a cruel
irony of history, the world-famous Volkswagen
the "people's car"owes its existenceto Adolf
Hitler.
Improvements in quality
Within a few decades production methods in the
automobile industry have been revolutionized.
These changes, which are far from over, have led
to remarkable improvements in quality. While
the basic conception has not changed, many
aspects of the car have been transformed, above
all by automation. Electronics and microcom¬
puter technology are used not only to control
seats, windows and doors, but also the engine,
transmission and suspension.
The "popular car" now exists. The Japanese
car industry, a relatively late starter but today the
world's leading producer, has largely contributed
to its development. Far from being the uncom¬
fortable midget it once was, today's popular car
has all the latest equipment. Since it is small, it
can take chaotic urban traffic conditions in its
stride. Its main competitor is the second-hand car
which offers yesterday's comfort at cut price.
Today twenty American, European and
Asian companies produce 99 per cent of the
world's cars. Inheritors of the 6,000-odd compa¬
nies that feature in the history of the automobile,
they are established all over the world. Although
they are competitors, they work more and more
closely together. They are studying projects to
take over the stricken industries of Eastern
Europe. They are the nucleus of a huge sector
of diversified activity to which our age owes part
of its wealth.
What does the future hold for the automo¬
bile? More necessary than ever, it must solve the
environmental problems that its success has
spawned. Today much unpublicized work is
being devoted to efforts to transform the automo¬
bile, at a time when an alarmed public opinion
in one half of the globe feels pessimistic about
its future, whilst people in the other half feel
cruelly deprived of its benefits. The second
automobile revolution has begun.
