In the
realm
of the
senses
divine
BY
ROMAIN IY1AITRA
Left, monumental statue of
Buddha In a cave sanctuary at
Ajanta, India.
Opposite page left: one of the
many forms of the protective
divinity Mahakala is depicted
in this statue of repoussé
brass plaques, thought to
have been produced in
Mongolia around 1800.
Opposite right, female figure
carved on a wooden pillar,
Nepal, 17th century.

Araditional Indian art is primarily religious.
Everything in it has a divine meaning and no
aspect of life is treated for its own sake. People,
trees, flowers, birds and other features of the
natural world are all depicted in painting and
sculpture, but their beauty is not intrinsic, it lies in
the divine idea which is impressed on those human
minds which are in a suitably receptive state.
The earliest Indian treatise on the theory of
the beautiful is the Natya Shastra, which was
written around the sixth century BC. In it the
sage-priest Bharata set forth the important con¬
cept of aesthetic flavour or rasa. In a famous pas¬
sage, Bharata says that a rasa is a strong and lasting
emotion which may be kindled by transitory
feelings of pleasure and pain. He describes the
main rasas which are aroused by the arts as erotic,
comic, pathetic, furious, heroic, terrible, odious,
and marvellous.
To taste rasa the spectator must be in that
state of freedom which comes from detachment
from the self. His or her mind must be in a pure
and balanced state (satiric). Egoism and desire
must be forsaken before vision and delight are
possible. Through glimpsing a divine vision, the
real nature of the soul is set free. Unlike the
katharsis of Greek tragedy, rasa does not involve
the idea of emotional relief alone. The spectator
does not experience the unpleasant or agreeable
effects of his or her reactions but resolves them
into a blissful state of consciousness.
While the ultimate aesthetic consciousness is
purely contemplative, the steps prescribed to
achieve it through the artistic process are marked
by a high degree of concentration and purity of
mind. Aesthetic activity is like a yoga, a seeking
of truth, a spiritual exercise involving the culti
vation of a disinterested feeling. The emotions
aroused by a work of art do not belong to any
one person, neither to artist, actor or spectator.
They have no location in time and space. As
Ananda Coomaraswamy has pointed out, "all
knowledge and all truth are absolute and infinite,
waiting not to be created, but to be found".
When depicting the gods, Indian sculptors
and painters did not use the Hellenic models
whereby the gods are imagined in human form.
They sought to attain their goal through concep¬
tual insight or intuition rather than by observa¬
tion and analysis of physical features. A deity
symbolically represents a unified set of spiritual
ideas and his body, therefore, should be regarded
as merely a vehicle for the eternal expression of
that particular set of spiritual ideas. Thus the
many-headed gods and many-armed goddesses of
Hindu art represent eternal abstract ideas of
beauty and have no exact counterparts in nature.
One ideal of the divine form is based on the
ancient notion of the Indian hero, the superman.
The Mahabharata describes this ideal form as that
of a mighty hunter who became invincible after
vanquishing the king of beasts in many conflicts
and acquired a lion-like body with broad chest
and shoulders, long, massive arms, a thick neck,
and a very slim waist. In Indian art this leonine
body became the symbol of physical strength.
Nimbleness, another essential quality for success
in the chase, was symbolized by legs like those


of a deer or a gazelle, a feature which is promi¬
nent in the Buddhist cave-paintings at Ajanta in
northern India and in the Buddhist sculptures at
Amaravati.
In both Hindu and Buddhist art, gods who
had acquired divine powers by ascetic practices
are not represented like human ascetics with
bodies emaciated by hunger and thirst, with pro¬
truding bones and swollen veins. Instead they are
portrayed with smooth skin and rounded limbs.
Their veins and bones are always concealed, they
have strong necks, massive shoulders and narrow
waists. Whereas the divinities of the Far East
appear to dwell in a fair garden of peace filled
with delicate springtime blossoms, the Indian
ideal of beauty seems to be set among the celes¬
tial solitudes of a Himalayan skyscape hinting at
the infinite.
A special feature of the Indian concept of the
beautiful is based on the distinction between
pleasure and bliss (ananda), which is stated in the
Bhagavad Gita as being at the core of beauty.
Pleasure is selfish and individual, phenomenal and
relative, whereas bliss is absolute and infinite.
Pleasure is transitory, but bliss is unalloyed and
related to composure and peace. The Ramayana
and the Mahabharata do not end with the van¬
quishing of the unrighteous and the victory of
the righteous. They move on towards the fulfil¬
ment of a life after life. The goal is not the attain¬
ment of an earthly throne but the attainment of
perfection. Sensuality and spirituality seem to be
merely the inner and outer aspects of the same
life. The Ajanta paintings enchantingly depict a
civilization in which the conflict of matter and
spirit has been beautifully resolved.
ROMAIN MAITRA
is an Indian journalist, writer
and cultural anthropologist. He
is currently working at the
Maison des Sciences de
l'Homme, Paris, on a study of
the image of the Indian world
presented by French film¬
makers. 29
