Islands of welcome in
a sea of sand
BY JOSEPH CHELHOD
The master of a Qur'anic
school traces in the
sand the greeting "Salvation
be with you".
JL HERE are two sides to hospitality. In a general
sense, it is part and parcel of the ceremonial and
social activities of each people. More specifically,
it creates a special relationship between host and
guest. Among the Bedouin, who are a byword
for hospitality, guests are placed under the pro¬
tection of their hosts and thereby acquire con¬
siderable rights in accordance with the desert code
of honour. Starting as a simple act of generosity
that consists in looking after someone for a short
time, hospitality thus becomes an institution that
confers almost sacred privileges on the stranger
who is welcomed into one's home.
The Bedouin are not of course the only
people to accord a special status to guests. The
French historian Fustel de Coulanges noted in his
La cité antique (1864), a study of the part played
by religion in the history of Greece and Rome,
that food prepared on an altar and shared among
several persons established an indissoluble union
between themthe stranger who partook of the
meal became a member of the religious commu¬
nity. But the traditional hospitality of the desert
Arabs has wider implications, both in
theory and in practice. A mere glass of water in
which a stranger has simply moistened his lips
gives him the same privileges as a sumptuous
feast. The reason is that the difficulty of surviving
in the parched lands where the Bedouin live has
created a sense of solidarity and replaced anarchy
with a number of beneficent institutions, one of
which is hospitality. Through the gift of food a
stranger to the region can travel in the desert as
freely as the indigenous population.
The first rule of Arab hospitality is that it is
offered free, even if it is provided for several days.
The host would feel offended if he were offered 11

anything in return. But this is not the most im¬
portant feature of Arab hospitality. A set of rules
governs the behaviour of both host and guest.
The first sign of hospitality,
a good campfire
that burns all night long
The desert poets are unstinting in their praise of
those who lavish attention on their visitors and
make sure that they lack nothing. But what they
admire above all is not so much the abundance
or daintiness of the feast offered to the guest,
although these are fully appreciated, as the way
in which the guest is received. Excellent hospi¬
tality must have a tangible and visible form. Its
first sign is a good campfire, which the master
of the tent keeps going all night so that travellers
seeking shelter will know that a welcome awaits
them. The fire must blaze so that it can be seen
from afar. A generous host makes a second fire
on a hilltop which lights up the desert like a light¬
house in an ocean of sand.
Harsh words are reserved for those who,
through avarice, let their fire go out, deliberately
extinguish it or prevent it from being seen so as
to discourage visitors. If the servant responsible
for keeping the fire alight falls asleep and lets it
go out, the watchdog must take over and bark
so that travellers know where to find the tent.
Poets commend the qualities of such dogs whose
barking attracts visitors. Yet sometimes even the
silence of dogs can be favourably interpreted as
evidence of the extreme hospitality of masters
who receive guests so often that their dogs no
longer bark, "indifferent to the approaching
shadow" as one desert poet has put it.
But of course it falls primarily to the master
of the tent to prove himself a worthy host. As
soon as a visitor is announced, he rushes forward
to invite him before the other members of the
group. A smile on his lips, the host proffers greet¬
ings and words of welcome. He must not ask the
visitor his name nor try to find out the purpose
of his journey or how long he intends to stay.
The only questions he can ask concern his guest's
comfort. He must also make the visitor feel at
home and be attentive and thoughtful, anxious
to satisfy his every desire. The guest is invited to
partake of a meal. The host waits upon him,
without touching the food, encouraging his guest
to eat, selecting the tastiest morsels for him,
unwilling to leave him until such time as he
expresses a desire to sleep. Every effort must be
made to ensure that a guest leaves the clan fully
satisfied with the hospitality he has received.
When a host wishes to show his esteem for
a guest, he slaughters a camel in his honour. The
importance he attaches to the guest is reflected
in the size of the chosen animal, and much is
made of the size of the pots in which the food
is cooked. It would be most improper to kill a
chicken, although farming people often do so.
Only an animal of at least the size of a sheep is
considered satisfactory. If a second important
guest arrives, another animal is sacrificed. Blood
must be shed, since it will be used to mark the
12

Bedouin hospitality
*Fathallah Sayigh, "Memoirs",
an Arabic dialect manuscript
preserved in the Bibliothèque
Nationale, Paris. It was pur¬
chased by the French poet
Alphonse de Lamartine during
his travels in Syria in 1832. A
French translation was pub¬
lished in vol. IV of Lamartine's
Voyage en Orient (1832-1833).
traveller's horse or camel with the distinctive, sign
of the clan that has welcomed him.
Nevertheless, the amount of food provided
is not a criterion of hospitality, which is particu¬
larly appreciated when the person offering it is
not well-to-do. Giving what one has and depriv¬
ing oneself, and even one's family, is the golden
rule of Arab hospitality. Théodore Lascaris, an
emissary of Napoleon, and his Syrian dragoman
Fathallah Sayigh were given shelter by a poor old
widow of the Sardiyya Bedouin in Jordan, who
slaughtered her one and only sheep in their
honour. "Grandmother," they said to her, "why
such waste?" To which she replied: "If you en¬
tered the dwelling of a living person and did not
find hospitality there, it would be as though you
had paid a visit to the dead."*
A guest of the Bedouin is at once
a prince, a prisoner and a poet
The Arab poets who have so effusively sung the
praises of the perfect host say almost nothing
about the guest, considering him to have no more
than a passive, secondary role. In fact, the con¬
duct of the guest is also specifically governed by
the desert code of honour.
He who receives hospitality, say the Bedouin,
is at once an emir, a prisoner and a poet. He is
above all a prince, for he is entitled to every con¬
sideration; but in return he must behave as befits
one who is under an obligation. It is interesting
to note that the verb adàfa, to extend hospitality,
also means to add, to annex, to bind. He who is
received is a prisoner of him who receives as he
must comply in every respect with the instruc¬
tions of his host. In particular, he must occupy
the place assigned to him, be of pleasant disposi¬
tion, not raise his voice and gratefully accept
whatever is offered, even if it is no more than
a bowl of curds. To refuse a specially prepared
dish is to be suspected of harbouring hostile feel¬
ings towards one's host. It is incumbent on the
guest to respect the dwelling into which he is
received, to show deference towards the women
and to refrain from any misdeed. Once he has
taken his leave of the clan, his behaviour will be
that of a poet: wherever he goes he will sing the
praises of the house where he has been given
hospitality and will testify to the consideration
shown to him.
He who commits a culpable act such as theft,
attempted seduction, or lying, violates the rules
of hospitality and is dishonoured for ever. To em¬
phasize the seriousness of the deed, the master
of the tent seizes the dish in which the meal was 13

JOSEPH CHELHOD,
Syrian-born French
sociologist and
anthropologist, is honorary
director of research at
France's National Centre
for Scientific Research
(CNRS). He has published
over a hundred scientific
papers and a number of
books, including a three-
volume study of the history
and civilization of southern
Arabia (1984-1985,
Maisonneuve et Larose
publishers, Paris).
14
served, makes a hole in it and sends it to the clan
of the offending guest. By this symbolic act he
makes it known that the sacred laws of hospitality
have been violated. Henceforth the culprit is
treated with contempt. His testimony is refused,
his company forsaken and every door is closed
to him.
Arab hospitality makes for a special relation¬
ship between host and guest, entailing duties and
rights. It is these legal implications that are its
hallmark.
He who receives hospitality becomes an
inviolable, near-sacred being whom the host,
together with all the members of his family and
indeed of his tribe, is required to protect. The
guest must not be abandoned or delivered into
the hands of his enemies, and no one is allowed to
take revenge on him for a crime committed be¬
fore he was admitted into the tent. What is more,
the host still bears responsibility for his guest even
after he has left the camp. So long as the bread
and salt received in the tent are in the guest's
stomach, he is entitled to the protection of the
person who has given him shelter, unless in the
meantime he has received hospitality elsewhere.
This is what the Bedouin call "the right of salt".
It provides the traveller with a kind of safe-
conduct allowing him to travel freely and without
fear in the lands subject to the jurisdiction of the
host clan or of those who owe allegiance to that
clan or have friendly relations with it.
Hospitality thus begets three fundamental
rights, any infringement of which requires repa¬
ration: the right of the dwelling whose immunity

has been violated, the right of the host whose
honour has been outraged, and the right of salt
which has not been respected. Reparation, which
is always substantial, is out of proportion to the
offence, which may be insignificant: wounding
words, a disagreeable allusion, an invidious
gesture. Reparation lies wholly with the guest
who must proclaim in three different dwellings,
holding a white banner in his hand, that the
honour of the master of the tent is intact and that
"his face is white".
Of course city-dwellers and country folk also
welcome strangers, but where they are concerned
the duties of hospitality do not extend beyond
the rules of courtesy. In Arab towns and cities
no particular privilege or right accrues from the
fact of sitting together around the same table.
The delicate art
of pouring mint tea
Many are the occasions when an Arab invites his
friends and neighbours to honour his table: a mar¬
riage, a birth, a circumcision (or baptism in the
case of Christians), a pilgrim's return, the New
Year, religious celebrations or anniversaries. But
this kind of hospitality has little to do with
customary rules of behaviour. It is a matter of
social etiquette and neither rights nor duties are
involved.
The customary rules of desert hospitality
now seem to be dying out, even among the
Bedouin whose numbers are steadily shrinking.
With the possible exception of one indomitable
group living on the edge of the Rub'-al-Khâli,
the Bedouin world will soon be no more than
a memory.
The desert is being conquered by mechani¬
zation and the dromedary is being ousted by the
jeep. Arab hospitality, ever generous and courte¬
ous, is suffering the consequences. Hotels and
stopovers are replacing the black tent of
yesteryear, symbol of a time that regrettably is
no more. Something nevertheless lingers on.
Mindful still of pomp and ceremonial, which in
his mind are indissociable from hospitality, the
Arab will always be concerned about the "white¬
ness of his face", which he would be afraid of
losing if he did not extend the warmest possible
welcome to his guest.
