Krupa Sindhu and
BY PRAFULLA MOHANTI
the beggar
HeLoSPITALITY is natural in my village. Guests
arrive at any time of the day or night and they
are always welcome. Nobody asks them "Why
have you come?" or "How long are you going
to stay?". They become a part of the family.
Providing hospitality for strangers is a
religious act. A stranger should never leave the
village »displeased. Who knows, he may be
Vishnu, God the Preserver, in disguise.
Stories are told to children to teach them to
be kind and hospitable to strangers: "Once upon
a time there was a Brahmin. His name was Krupa
Sindhu. He was married, but had no children. He
was kind, religious, and so generous that he gave
all his wealth away to the poor. A time came
when he and his wife had nothing to eat.
"One day his wife said, 'We have no relatives.
You must ask a friend to help, otherwise how
can we manage? There's no food in the house.'
"Krupa Sindhu replied, 'I have a friend who
could help us but he lives in a distant place. If
I went to see him he might solve our problem.'
"It was decided that Krupa Sindhu would
visit his friend. His wife borrowed some rice from
a neighbour's house and she made ten pithas (rice
cakes). She divided them into two equal portions,
one for her husband to eat on his journey and
one for herself.
"Lord Vishnu knew this. To test the Brahmin
couple's devotion he came to their house
disguised as an old man. 'I haven't eaten anything
for many days,' he said in a trembling voice.
'Please give me something to eat.'
"When the Brahmin couple looked at him
their hearts were filled with compassion. They
felt it was their duty to look after the stranger.
They invited him into their house as their guest
and the Brahmin's wife gave her portion of the
pithas to the old man to eat.
"Lord Vishnu knew there were only ten
pithas in Krupa Sindhu's house and that his wife
had given him her portion. He wanted to test the
hospitality of the Brahmin couple further, so he
asked for more.
"The Brahmin's wife gave him Krupa
Sindhu's portion and Lord Vishnu ate one more
pitha. That left four which the Brahmin's wife
kept for her husband's journey, and they both
went without food.
"Lord Vishnu was pleased with their
devotion but wanted to test them even further.
'I'm so weak, I have no strength to walk. Can
I spend the night in your house?' he asked.
"Without hesitation they offered the old man
shelter for the night and gave him the remaining
iour pithas for his supper. They only drank water.
"During the night they discussed the
problems of the old man. 'He's so old and weak,
if we had enough money and food we could keep
him in our house and nurse him.'
"Lord Vishnu knew what the Brahmin
couple were saying and blessed them. In the
morning when Krupa Sindhu and his wife got up
they were amazed. Their mud house had changed
into a palace and the old man had disappeared.
They realized what had happened and knelt
down to pray to Lord Vishnu for his kindness."
Money is only the means to an end. Life ends
at Baikuntha, the Land of the Gods. Everybody
wants to go there but only those with punya
(piety) succeed. There is a saying in the state of
Orissa:
Dhana arjane dharma kari
Dharme prapata narahari.
"The aim of wealth is to follow dharma
And only through dharma can God be
reached."
People spend their lives following dharma
doing good works, helping others in every way.
Hospitality plays a major part. Planting trees to
provide shade and fruit for travellers, digging
wells for drinking water, giving food and shelter
to the poor, are typical good works. Many of the
dharmasalas (rest houses) in India have been built
by the wealthy as an act of hospitality.
The villagers are delighted to receive guests.
They are fed, clothed and given presents. When
guests arrive they are offered a pot of water to
wash their hands, face and feet. Then they are
given either a mat or a chair to sit on. Previously
sherbet was offered, but now it is the custom to
give a cup of tea, depending on the time of day.
Guests are never asked "Have you eaten?" or
"Would you like something to eat or drink?".
Food is placed before them and it is impolite for
the guests to refuse. Hospitality means giving
yourself completely to guests and strangers.
PRAFULLA MOHANTI
is an Indian writer and painter whose classic book My Village,
My Life (1973), an evocation of the Indian village in the state of
Orissa where he was born and brought up, has been translated
into Japanese, Norwegian and Danish. Among his other
published works are Through Brown Eyes (1985), a pen-portrait of
the English as he saw them after he went to England to work as
an architect in 1960. His latest book, Changing Village, Changing
Life, will be published later this year.
29
