BY ARBY OVANESSIAN 


Starlight
iHE opening sequence of a remarkable Korean
film, "Why has Bodhi Dharma gone East?",
shows a red light flashing on and off at regular
intervals in the corner of the screen. As it punc¬
tuates the moving images in a kind of visual coun¬
terpoint, it calls to mind the aesthetic canon that
governs the cinema, the art of moving light. In
the final images of the film, a liberated bird flies
up into the early morning sky like a star, while
on the earth below a man and his cow walk
together in harmony.
"Bodhi Dharma", with its flickering light of
water, fire and colour, with its sound and silence,
is a film that conjures up the beauty and wisdom
of the East, where emotion is a pure, immediate
response which is made spontaneously without
any prompting from the intellect. In this way
beauty blossoms in the universe. In skilful hands
the camera can capture and reveal the inner laws
of the invisible world. When it does so, there is
a moment of liberation at which we witness a
pure act. Such a moment occurs in "Bodhi
Dharma" in a scene when an orphan child enters
a temple and takes over the room of a newly
"departed" master.
The great Bengali director Satyajit Ray has
described how he and his fellow students at the
Visva-Bharata university founded by Rabin-
dranath Tagore at Santiniketan in India were
taught to draw a tree by making strokes from the
base upwards, in a movement which is in keeping
with the process of organic growth. At the same
time they were asked to "Consider Fujiyama...
fire within and calm without.. .the symbol of the
true Oriental artist". This Oriental canon of
beauty, which is so essential for the understanding
of the roots of creation and art, is also valid for
a medium such as Western cinema which uses
refined technology.
The soul of stardom
One of the great pioneers and masters of the art
of cinema, the American director D.W. Griffith,
believed that the sense of beauty is developed by
environment. "If I had children," he said, "I
should try to develop in them the sense of beauty.
To do this, I should provide them with rooms
of such simple beauty as that in which my father's
orotund voice poured forth the music of Keats 19

20
and Tennyson and Shakespeare." Griffith con¬
tinued his evocation of a setting in which beauty
could blossom thus: "we see the truth in silence.
Silence can be more eloquent than all the tongues
of men...." Describing the qualities he sought in
a film star, he wrote: "...Granted that the person
has a face for the movie camera, a face that pho¬
tographs wellthe first thing needed is soul."
Lillian Gish, one of Griffith's most famous
discoveries, possessed this quality to an out¬
standing degree. She had already become a legend
when she was in her early twenties and received
the accolade of stardoma portrait bust by the
fashionable sculptor Boris Loski. In Griffith's
film Broken Blossoms (1919) she made an unfor¬
gettably radiant appearance, her blonde hair sil¬
houetted against a halo of light. In all her screen
appearances she revealed a natural gift for radi¬
ating an inner light.
In the prologue to the silent epic Ben-Hur,
made in Hollywood in 1926, the Virgin Mary was
shown against a halo of backlight using the
biochrome process, while the main story was
filmed in black and white. This notion of colour
emanating from pure white light is a remarkable
example of cinematographic language and was
used much later in many memorable films to
depict beauty in glorious hues. However, despite
technological progress in the use of colour, eco¬
nomic pressures forced film-makers to continue
using black and white, but many directors used
this technique so brilliantly that it was as vibrant
as colour.
'The human face...
a land one can never tire
of exploring'
The play of light and shade on the human face
was exploited with great artistry in such films as
Carl Theodore Dreyer's The Passion ofJoan of
Arc, made in 1928 towards the end of the silent
era. The crystal clarity of Dreyer's stylization
made even silence vibrate. "Nothing in the
world," he said, "can be compared to the human
face. It is a land one can never tire of exploring.
There is no greater experience in a studio than
to witness the expression of a sensitive face under
the mysterious power of inspiration, to see it ani¬
mated from within and turning into poetry."
Hollywood was as sensitive as a celluloid
negative to light and its mysteries. One of the
great early directors, Josef von Sternberg, wrote
that "Light means fire and heat and life.... Every
subject has a moment when light can force its
beauty into full power, and that brings us to the
province of the artist.... Every light has a point
where it is brightest."
Marlene Dietrich is the star who was most
sensitive to Sternberg's use of light. She could feel
on her skin the exact temperature needed to cap¬
ture the luminosity of her beauty on film, and
always used her finger as a meter to test the inten¬
sity of the lighting.
Light flickering from a fireplace inspired
lighting director and cameraman William Daniels
in Rouben Mamoulian's film Queen Christina
(1933), which starred Greto Garbo and John Gil¬
bert. A special lens was developed which was used
to make a long tracking shot, culminating in an
enigmatic close-up of Garbo's face. The beauty
and composition of this sequence make it a land¬
mark in the history and mythology of the
cinema.
Fragile beauty
Hollywood jealously guarded from the public its
techniques for creating the illusion of beauty. For
the stars to retain their beauty and mystery was
a demanding responsibility, and as the years went
by and time left its marks very few of them
Right, the French actress
Renée Falconetti (1892-1946)
in the title role of Carl
Theodore Dreyer's film The
Passion of Joan of Arc (1928).
Below, the American actress
Katharine Hepburn in Spitfire
(1934), directed by John
Cromwell.

continued to face the cruel eye of the camera.
Only rarely did inner and outer beauty meet suc¬
cessfully on the screen after the bloom of youth
had faded.
One of the few celebrated exceptions was
Katharine Hepburn, who first appeared on the
scene as a young girl with freckles and wearing
tennis shoes. Rouben Mamoulian, who directed
her first professional performance as a maid in
Turgenev's A Month in the Country, remembered:
"She had only three replies in the play.... There
was something about herit's very difficult to
describe in words. You can't describe music.
There wasisa kind of luminosity. ..there are
some faces that project the light: hers does."
Hollywood immediately recognized in Hep¬
burn that mysterious aura which is the emana¬
tion of an inner light. Because she had this
quality, she was a natural choice to appear in
RKO Studio's historic Technicolor tests for St.
Joan in 1934. The only star who has been awarded
four Oscars for her performances on the silver
screen, Katharine Hepburn is one of those rare
photogenic actresses with a "soul".
In time the glory of these beautiful faces
which created the poetic canons of the cinema
began to disappear from the screen. Film-makers
began to use lighting that was harsh, crude and
direct. However, two Soviet directors have
revived the forgotten canons of traditional
Oriental art and opened up new ways of depicting
beauty.
The first of them, Andrei Tarkovsky,
introduced the aesthetics of icon painting in his
film about the life of the Russian painter Andrei
Rublev. After taking us on a long guided journey
through striking black and white images, the
vibrant notes of a bell sound as he reveals, in full
colour, fragments of Rublev's masterpiece, The
Old Testament Trinity.
The second director, Serguei Paradjanov,
returned to the techniques of silent cinema when
he used an almost static camera in his film about
the life of an eighteenth-century bard in the Cau¬
casian mountains, Sayat NovaColour of
Pomegranates, which is structured according to
the canons of Oriental music. Meticulously com¬
posed and edited soundtrack and images take us
back to a precise time and place, where from the
mouths of silver-haired children holding sacred
objects, we hear angelic, crystal-clear voices
singing Pity Us, Lord, one of the most ancient and
beautiful canticles.
ARBY OVANESSIAN,
Armenian-born Iranian stage
and screen director, has
directed over 30 plays which
have been performed in many
countries and notably at the
Théâtre des Nations. He has
also directed many short films
and three features: The Spring
(1970-1972), How my Mother's
Embroidered Apron Unfolds in
my Life (1983-1985), and
Rouben Mamoulian 88 (in
progress). 21
