r
The rise of
the greenback
BY JAN KREGEL
The US dollar brought order to domestic
monetary chaos and went on to become
the leading international currency
Left, "The United States
evoked through the
symbolism of their currency"
(1988-1989), three of a series
of acrylic canvases by Isia
Leviant (born Byelorussia,
1914). Each painting
measures 90 x 210 cm.
Above, silver coin
issued in the state of
Massachusetts in 1787.
I
LafJ .YMERIC,
*^m
N the last half of the nineteenth century, the
British pound sterling ruled supreme as an inter¬
national currency. Of all its possible rivals, the
United States dollar1 seemed the least likely
to take its place. The United States was an inter¬
national debtor of an uncertain quality without
a central bank and without a single unified cur¬
rency system. The dollar only rose to dominance
in the twentieth century as a result of a tortuous
sequence of events which led to the creation of
a central banking authority, the Federal Reserve
System, and to the adoption of the dollar as a lia¬
bility of the federal government.
The United States Constitution adopted in
1789 did not grant the federal government the
exclusive prerogative to issue coins and currency
which was enjoyed by the Crown in European
monetary systems. The absence of clear legisla¬
tion on currency matters created a myriad of
diverse means of payment virtually without any
central control or support. In these chaotic con¬
ditions, foreign coins circulated as legal tender
until 1857, and as late as 1901 an Oregon silver
mine was still issuing its own silver coins for
"commercial use".
In the aftermath of widespread default of cur¬
rencies issued by individual states of the Union,
they were prohibited from issuing paper money.
But nothing prevented them from creating banks, 37

38
which were free to issue bank notes. The state
of Kentucky, for example, created a private bank
of which it was sole owner and proceeded to
make payments with its notes. This individualist
tradition in money matters found expression
in "wildcat" banking and the prevalence in
this period of state "free banking" laws which
allowed any individual or association of individu¬
als to open a bank and issue bank notes without
licence or control.
The absence of a national bank meant that
even the federal government had to undertake its
financial transactions either through private
banks or in specie (coin or bullion). In 1840,
President Martin Van Buren instituted the
"Independent Treasury System" which handled
government transactions through nationwide sub-
offices. Since the Treasury was not a bank, and
could not issue notes, all government receipts and
expenditures had to be made in gold or silver.
Expenditures in excess of taxation could not be
financed except by issue of government debt sub¬
scribed in gold.
The Civil War
and the first greenbacks
Many currency arrangements of the late
nineteenth century can be traced back to the need
to finance the Civil War of 1861 to 1865. The
Treasury first issued "demand notes" which were
not legal tender, but were convertible into gold.
But the weak gold reserves of the Treasury soon
led to the suspension of convertibility of these
notes. Thereafter the war effort was financed by
an issue of "United States Notes", based on
nothing more substantial than the faith and credit
of the government. They were popularly called
"greenbacks", the name by which the United
States dollar is still known throughout the world.
The issue of greenbacks had been limited to
$433 million, so in the face of increasing difficulty
in borrowing and of rising expenditures Treasury
secretary Salmon P. Chase decided to apply "free
banking" on a national scale. The National Bank
Act of 1863 allowed any group of five persons
to form a "National Banking Association"
and issue "National Bank Notes" in an amount
equal to their holdings of federal government
bonds deposited with the Comptroller of the
Currency.2
To prevent competition from state bank
notes, a 10 per cent tax was placed on the latter
which soon drove them out of circulation. The
state banks countered by offering payment ser¬
vices by cheque against deposit accounts, which
proved to be an attractive substitute for National
Bank Notes.
By the end of the Civil War, the multiplicity
of means of payment representing the liabilities
of thousands of state banks had been largely
reduced to greenbacks and National Bank Notes,
neither of which were convertible into specie, but
the issue of which was strictly limited. The
money supply of the United States was thus
rigidly fixed, unable to respond to either fluctu¬
ations in trade, nor the frequent panics that
resulted from the failures of the unregulated state
banks (two years after the introduction of free
banking in Michigan, for example, all of its forty
banks had failed).
The dollar set firmly
on the gold standard
As the United States was basically an agricultural
country, the demands on currency were linked
to the harvest. As crops were sold, farmers' bank
deposits built up in the agricultural regions,
leading to a shortage of funds in the urban banks
of the east. The National Bank system of small
individual units had no mechanism to recycle
excess funds, such as was possible in a multi-
branch bank. Furthermore, without a central
bank to lend reserves, there was no way of
meeting these fluctuations apart from sharp
changes in interest rates, or declaring bank failure.
Together with the net drain of specie to the
Independent Treasury and the absence of strict
banking regulations, this led to extreme instabil¬
ity and frequent crises.
This instability was attributed by some to a
lack of specie, an argument exploited by those
interested in making silver the basis of the United

Clockwise from top left:
machine for printing
banknotes, USA, 1920;
unemployed Americans gather
to barter during the
depression, 1929; $100 note
issued by the Confederate
States of America in 1864,
during the Civil War, which
promises to pay the bearer
"two years after the
ratification of a treaty of
peace"; obverse and
reverse of a $20 gold coin
issued in 1899.
States monetary system. A "Free Silver Move¬
ment" launched by William Jennings Bryan



demanded the free coinage of silver as legal
tender. The 1878 Bland-Allison Act provided for
Treasury silver certificates which became legal
tender in 1886 and the Sherman Silver Act of
1890 made the Treasury virtually liable to
purchase the entire output of United States silver
mines. In 1882 a similar provision was made for
gold certificates, but neither measure gave the
hoped-for elasticity to the currency.
The system created serious international as
well as domestic problems, for fluctuations in the
internal demands for liquidity could only be met
by international gold movements, which in turn
created instability in the international monetary
system. This was particularly striking in 1893,
when the fear that the United States would not
honour its government debt in gold and would
instead pay in silver, whose price was collapsing
on world markets, led to a massive outflow of
gold and widespread bank failures.
Creation of
the Federal Reserve system
The outflow was reversed by the Gold Standard
Act of 1900, which set the dollar firmly on the
gold standard3 and required National Banks to
back their note issues with gold. Between 1899
and 1910 the gold holdings of the public trebled,
as did those of the Treasury. The proportion of
the world's monetary gold stock held in the
United States rose from around 15 to 30 per cent,
at a time when many other countries (Austro-
Hungary, Russia, Japan) were also adopting the
gold standard. As the expansion of gold supplies
was slowing, the accumulation of gold in the
United States caused more difficulties than had
the previous outflow, largely because once the
gold entered the Treasury it could not be drawn
out except to finance a balance of payments
deficit (the country was then in surplus). Given
the Independent Treasury System, gold could not
be used as the basis to create money or to serve
as lending of last resort.
Another banking- crisis in 1907 forcefully
reminded legislators of the need for a national
institution which could respond to fluctuations
in the demand for liquidity in some other way
than by attracting gold from abroad. Such an
institution was finally set up by the Federal
Reserve Act of 1913.
The Act divided the country into twelve dis¬
tricts, each with its own Federal Reserve Bank,
which began operations on 2 November 1914. The
existing National Banks were obliged to join the 39

40
system by purchasing stock in the Federal Reserve
Banks. The latter were authorized to issue a new
type of currency, the Federal Reserve Note, legal
tender for all debts and the liability of both the
banks and the United States government.
The new note was to replace National Bank
Notes. The issue was backed by gold to a mini¬
mum of 40 per cent, the remaining notes being
issued against commercial paper and other eligible
assets acquired by discount from the member
banks. This arrangement satisfied the need for an
elastic means of payment which could expand and
contract with fluctuations in trade and the situa¬
tion of the banking system. A member bank that
was short of liquidity could acquire it by dis¬
counting its assets in exchange for Federal Reserve
Notes at its District Reserve Bank.
The Federal Reserve Board of governors,
appointed by the President and based in
Washington, D.C., sat rather uneasily over the
Federal Reserve Banks which were owned and
run by private bankers. It was by no means clear
who was responsible for currency policy, but the
bankers clearly had the upper hand.
However, the two prerequisites for the sub¬
sequent international dominance of the dollar had
now been acquired: the massive accumulation of
world gold stock in the United States, which
obliged the international monetary system to
move onto a gold-exchange standard, and the
creation of a unified national currency issued
by a single authority with lender of last resort
capability.
Gold ingots at the Federal
Reserve Bank, New York.
JAN A. KREGEL,
of the United States, is
professor of economics at
the Bologna Center, Italy,
of Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, USA.
His published works include
The Reconstruction of
Political Economy (1983),
Inflation and Income Crisis
(1989), both published by
Macmillan, and a number
of articles in the American
Economic Review and The
Journal of Post-Keynesian
Economics.
The position of the United Kingdom was
weakened by the 1914-1918 war, and the dollar
entered the inter-war return to gold on a stronger
basis than sterling. Moreover the United States
economy, after a short recession, was to prosper
in the "roaring 20s" of radio and automobiles.
The massive movement of investment funds
to the United States, first caused by rapid growth
and the stock market boom, then by high interest
rates used to try to break the speculative rise on
Wall Street, severely disrupted international
finance and broke the stability of exchange rates.
The stock market crash of 1929 brought about
massive bank failures, which were far beyond the
ability of the Federal Reserve to offset, and the
consequent collapse of investment values was
responsible for a worldwide depression.
The evidence of widespread bank fraud
which emerged after the Wall Street crash
suggested deficiencies in the supervisory function



of the Federal Reserve Board and in its ability to
regulate monetary policy to prevent even well-
run banks from failing. A series of measures,
including the nationalization of gold, the devalu¬
ation of the dollar to $35 per ounce of gold, and
the 1935 Banking Act which gave the Federal
Reserve Board control over monetary policy,
finally created a system equivalent in its powers
and duties to a European central bank.
Thus the inter-war period strengthened both
the reserve position of the United States and the
domestic financial system. The country was ready
to take over London's role as banker to the world
when the outbreak of the Second World War
made the City unsafe and transformed the United
Kingdom from an international creditor to an
international debtor. The United States became
the world's major creditor. Any country which
wanted to buy goods for post-war reconstruction
had to acquire dollars, and the dollar thus became
the pre-eminent international currency.
1. The Spanish peso, or piece of eight, which circulated in
the Spanish and English colonies of America, was known as
a dollar by the English-speaking peoples. Familiarity with this
coin resulted in the designation of the United States mone¬
tary unit as the dollar in 1792. The word itself is a modified
form of the Germanic word thaler.
2. A Treasury official responsible for the design and issue of
National Bank Notes.
3. On thefull gold standard, gold coins are in circulation and
on demand bank notes can be exchanged for gold. This means
that a country on the gold standard must keep an adequate
reserve of gold to meet demand. On the gold-exchange standard
a country keeps its reserves in another currency that is itself
based on the gold standard. Editor.
