Disturbing
trends
In the early 1980s, sub-Saharan Africa had a
much higher rate of illiteracy and a much lower
rate of school enrolment than other regions,
increasing faster than their GNP fell from 20 in
1975-1980 to 12 in the years that followed.
According to Unesco figures, there may be
some 168 million illiterates aged 15 and over in
Africa in 1990, 1C5 million of them women. These
figures doubtless underestimate the true situation
insofar as they are based on rather unreliable
official statistics. In some cases, on the other hand,
they do not take into account those who are literate
in languages other than the official language of
the country.
It is true that in the long run only the provi¬
sion of primary education for all will make it pos¬
sible to attack the problem of illiteracy at its
source. But given the conditions of underdeve¬
lopment in many African countries, further
aggravated by the economic crisis, the implemen¬
tation of universal education is not feasible in the
immediate future, especially in those countries
where there are no places for at least half the chil¬
dren of school age. All these children, together
with the victims of inappropriate education
systems, are condemned to swell the ranks of the
illiterate. In addition to the demographic causes
of the problem there are otherssocial, economic
and political.
Illiteracy can only be vanquished if its global
nature is recognized and policies are adopted to
enrich the human capital of African countries.
Decision-makers must realize that investment in
education and public health brings a high eco¬
nomic return. BABA HAIDARA
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
lit i XÀ S
although for several decades African governments
had been making a big effort to eliminate illiteracy
among young people and adults. The illiteracy
rate of those over the age of 15 fell from around
75 per cent in 1970 to 64 per cent in 1980 and 57
per cent in 1985.
Unfortunately, this fall was accompanied by
an increase in the number of total illiterates
resulting from rampant demographic growth and
the ineffectiveness of education systemsdespite
the fact that a large part of the region's GNP was
being used to finance them. Since then, certain
negative trends have worsened. The number of
African countries whose education budget was
