by Charles Jeanneret
RirVanda; land of a thousand Ms
How a small country in the heart of Africa is safeguarding
the natural capital on which its survival depends
S ITUATED in the heart of Africa, Rwanda is a
relatively small country (26,338 square
kilometres), yet with nearly eight million inhabi¬
tants it has the highest population density of any
nation in Africa south of the Sahara.
The relief of the land is uneven. A chain of
volcanoes in the north gives way in the east and
south to wooded savannah and plateaux dotted
with innumerable hills. The west is dominated
by the Zaire-Nile watershed, a group of rugged
mountain ranges dissected by deep valleys. It is
hardly surprising that Rwanda is known as the
land of a thousand hills.
Demographic pressure, the smallness of the
country and the growing scarcity of land com¬
bine with a shortage of natural resources and a
land-locked position to make Rwanda a test-case
for all the knottiest problems of sustainable
development. The principal objectives of this
largely agricultural country have always been to
achieve self-sufficiency in food while also creating
jobs and wealth by encouraging the production
of goods to increase national purchasing power.
THE ENVIRONMENT:
A NATIONAL
PREOCCUPATION
Even though Rwanda lives under the constant
threat of food shortages, more than 10 per cent
of its territory is given over to nature reserves
of great importance. These include the Virunga
National Park in the north of the country, the
home of the last mountain gorillas, and in the
south the Nyungwe Forest, which besides
providing a habitat for certain rare species of
monkey is also the largest stretch of high primary
forest left in Africa and now one of the last.
Protecting these reserves is vital for Rwanda's
ecological and hydrological balance, as well as for
the biological diversity of its ecosystems. But a
policy of conservation can also be justified
economically in terms of the potential it creates
for an intelligently-run tourist industry that will
not harm the nation's extraordinary flora and
fauna. 19

20
As a result of the soaring population, the
borders of the reserves are being steadily
infiltrated by poachers and people seeking food.
Measures envisaged to protect the ecological
heritage include plans to create natural barriers
of vegetation as well as to increase research,
improve surveillance and launch publicity cam¬
paigns to make people aware of the need to
preserve areas vital to the nation's ecological
survival.
Big efforts are being made to improve and
restore the ecological heritage. A reforestation
campaign launched over twenty-five years ago
won widespread popular support and has been
an undeniable success. Since 1973 a National Tree
Day, marked by plantings across the country, has
also reflected the need for a reforestation strategy.
The planting of new forests has provided Rwanda
with an important renewable resource, supplying
the materials for a timber industry that, although
still small and decentralized, has great potential
for the future.
Other year-long campaigns have also been
launched in support of agriculture. There has
been a Soil Conservation Year, an Organic
Manure Year, a Year of the Struggle against
Erosionall of them aimed at boosting efforts to
achieve self-sufficiency in food.
THE THREAT
TO AGRICULTURE
The agricultural sector, which employs 93 per
cent of the working population, consists
primarily of highly productive smallholdings,
three-quarters of which are less than one and a
half hectares. Rwanda has neither large estates nor
the rural proletariat that goes with them, and
most agricultural products, even the so-called
industrially produced commodities such as coffee,
tea and pyrethrum, are grown on these small
family properties. One side-effect of this is that
income in the rural areas is relatively evenly dis¬
tributed.
Until quite recently, Rwanda produced
agricultural surpluses, thanks to a policy that
guaranteed minimum prices for foodstuffs, the
introduction of new plant varieties and species,
accelerated crop rotation, and a highly effective
saving and loans system.
Other factors also played a part. The climate
of Rwanda usually permits two and sometimes
even three harvests a year. The country is socially
and linguistically homogeneous, and has no
geopolitical commitments to distract it from the
problems of its own survival. There are no
natural resources to attract speculation. The
farming population firmly resists any threats to
its livelihood, while not being averse to innova¬
tion. Politically, the nation is enviably stable.
Unfortunately, however, in the last few years
things have taken a turn for the worse. Acceler¬
ating population growth is partly responsible, but
a growing number of external factors have also
been to blame.
Unusual weather conditions, including
drought and torrential rain, have exposed the fra¬
gility of Rwanda's overburdened agricultural
system, which now seemingly exploits every
square metre of available land. Disaster is never
far away. Overintensive farming and the lack of
new land are the principal constraints that, under
the pressure of an expanding population, have
pushed Rwandese agriculture towards breaking-
point. Several parts of the country suffered food
shortages in 1989.
One of Rwanda's advantages has actually
become a handicap. The widespread dispersal of
the population, which helped save the country
from rampant urbanization and the proliferation
of shanty-towns, is now synonymous with waste.
Sub-divided into ever tinier plots as a result of
the prevailing system of inheritance, the small¬
holdings have become too small to produce
reasonably large surpluses. Systematic over¬
cropping has reduced soil fertility, which had
previously remained high thanks to a carefully
supervised system of fallowing. Worse still, suc¬
cessive falls in the price of coffeethe nation's
principal export crop, providing the foreign cur¬
rency needed to pay for importshave reduced
^E?W V* i*\\V
Stacks of bricks made by
Rwandese craftsmen.
A soap statue made by a
Rwandese soap manufacturing
company to demonstrate its
support for the protection of
gorillas.

	' WÊ!&*
the country's purchasing power and deprived it
of the means to maintain its level of economic
activity and modernize its agriculture.
NEW ECOLOGICAL
IMPERATIVES
Without an effective demographic policy that
would combine family planning with a
programme to optimize land use, the existing
system may eventually break down. In any case,
will it be possible to increase agricultural produc¬
tion substantially and permanently without
harming the environment?
Various factors could help. New chemical fer¬
tilizers and other products must be introduced
to replace essential minerals the soil has lost.
Liming will be a priority, since Rwanda possesses
important lime deposits. The import of inorganic
fertilizers is a recent innovation, and remarkable
efforts are being made to optimize their use,
notably by applying them in conjunction with
organic manure.
Rwanda's only unused land consists of
marshes which play a fundamental role in
regulating the country's hydrological system.
Developing this marshland will pose complex
technological, social, economic and institutional
problems, but it offers the prospect of substan¬
tially increasing food supplies without harming
the environment.
The fact that half Rwanda's agricultural land
slopes at an angle of 25 degrees or more raises a
particularly serious problem. The most widely
used techniques of soil conservation, such as
planting hedges or digging ditches to counter ero¬
sion, do not work on terrain where the angle of
declivity exceeds 21 degrees. Consequently much
hope and enthusiasm have been invested in a new
system of "radical" terracing whereby the slopes
are transformed into horizontal platforms which
CHARLES JEANNERET,
Swiss-born Canadian
economist, has been a
professor and vice-dean of
research at the social sciences
faculty of the University of
Ottawa, and president of the
Canadian International
Development Agency. A
specialist in environmental
questions and development
strategies, he has been an
adviser to the Rwandese
government since 1981. 21

slope slightly against the hillside and thus inter¬
cept drainage water and encourage it to soak into
the soil. This reduces and in some cases even
eliminates land-loss and provides crops with max¬
imal nutrition.
Besides rehabilitating land that was previ¬
ously either badly eroded, under-exploited or
even regarded as unusable, the terraces also main¬
tain soil fertility. Consequently, agricultural
output rises almost immediately. A property at
Kisaro that formerly produced one ton of
potatoes yielded a bumper crop of 25 tons after
terracing. Plots where wheat would not grow
now yield two tons per hectare. These cases may
be exceptional, but there is general agreement that
terracing on average doubles the harvest without
diminishing the precious natural capital of the
soil.
ENVIRONMENTALLY
SOUND
INDUSTRIALIZATION
Bringing industry to Rwanda constitutes a real
challenge, in view of the fragility of the environ¬
ment, which could be disastrously affected by cer¬
tain kinds of pollution. Even so, industrialization
is a priority, not just to add value to the nation's
resources by turning them into finished products
but also to absorb the surplus labour of the rural
areas and to create additional purchasing power
to buy the foodstuffs and other commodities
produced there. Even so, it has taken consider¬
able inventiveness to identify genuinely
promising opportunities.
Because importing raw materials for manufac¬
ture is prohibitively expensive for this land¬
locked country, priority has been given to small
and medium-sized enterprises that are considered
ecologically safe, such as timber and agro¬
business.
Other industries are also concerned with the
need to safeguard the environment. The Ruliba
brickworks at Kigali uses dried papyrus reed and
coffee-bean casings as fuel. Rwanda will soon be
producing corrugated sheets of tarred papyrus to
serve as roofing. Not only will these last longer
than imported tiles, they also consume a locally
grown raw material that is indefinitely renewable,
and will thus save a considerable amount of for¬
eign currency. Rwanda's national brewery uses
methane gas from Lake Kivu as its energy source.
Other industries, notably cement manufacture,
are expected to follow suit.
Can Rwanda be described as a success-story
of sustainable development? It is still too early
to say. But the country is moving in the right
direction by seeking the tools of development in
its own environment and ensuring that its natural
££ capital remains entirely in its own hands.

