The legacy of
i ~
&
rtlMClENT China was a landlocked state and its
expansion to the coast opened a new chapter in
Chinese history. Rule of the sea was achieved
under the T'ang dynasty (618-906 AD) and mar¬
itime expansion continued under the Sung
(960-1279 AD). Sung seamanship became a
byword for excellence in the Asian maritime
world, but Chinese technological superiority
endured many challenges both on land and at sea,
and the Mongol conquest of the Southern Sung
ushered in the Yuan dynasty and brought the first
hint of a naval threat that eventually reduced
China to almost semi-colonial status.
During the early Ming dynasty (1368-1644
AD), the Chinese state sponsored epic maritime
expeditions which took hundreds of ships and
tens of thousands of men to countries as far away
as East Africa. Chinese emissaries played the role
of arbitrators in Ceylon and Sumatra, and in
return over sixty embassies visited China within
a short space of time, many bearing gifts of

Confucius tyKöw?
- -
strange animals, plants and jewels. This grand
design, which depended so heavily on state
patronage, leadership and finance, lost its staun-
chest and most energetic patron when the Yung-
lo emperor died in 1423, although voyages con¬
tinued under Hsiian-te. No royal patron, court
official or private adventurer ever emerged to
resume or indeed to finance such expeditions
again.
Instead of going on to develop the maritime
empire that had seemed to lie within its reach,
China now turned its back to the sea. The reasons
for this were historical, ideological and perhaps
even temperamental. One reason may have been
an intrinsic lack of interest in the sea on the part
of the Chinese, for never again in Chinese his¬
tory were such proclivities for maritime expan¬
sion to be revealed. Another may be found in the
Confucian ethos which held trade and mercan¬
tile concerns in low esteem. The Chinese never
considered trade to be a source of the state's
**?*«
domestic power, and merchants were never
thought worthy of a leading role in state-building.
A partnership between the state and the mer¬
chants in an overseas adventure for national glory
or profit would have meant turning the whole
Chinese social order and value system upside
down.
A COUNTRY WITH ITS BACK
TO THE SEA
As it turned away from the sea and concentrated
on the defence of its land frontiers and the reor¬
ganization of its finances, China lost the initia¬
tive in the East Asian maritime world. In the six¬
teenth and seventeenth centuries, a new maritime
order developed in the region. Led by the
Japanese and closely followed by the Europeans,
it was driven by the profit motive. The new Euro¬
pean masters of the Asian seas were soon
clamouring for concessions at the gates of China.
Above, Confucius
(C.552-C.479 BC) as depicted
on a stele in Xi'an, the capital
of Shaanxi.
Above left, junks in the bay of
Macao.
21

22
The Ming government, already predisposed
towards a defensive maritime policy, closed the
major ports and evacuated the coastal population
inland.
For the next 200 years, the coast of China



became a shady world, peopled by fidalgos (Por¬
tuguese noblemen), burghers, Wakoes (Japanese
pirates), marauders and conniving merchants and
officials, with in their midst perhaps a few honest
traders and people earning a living from the sea.
It was a world of romancé, terror, treachery and
illicit gain, dominated by the so-called "merchant
princes" who amassed fortunes from the inter-
Asian carrying trade, thereby building up polit¬
ical power and becoming virtually the paymasters
of local officials.
The new rulers of China after 1644, the
Manchus at the head of the Ch'ing dynasty, were
without experience of the sea and had inherited
a maritime world which the late Ming had aban¬
doned to private trade and local autonomy. They
took forty years to pacify the south, but when
this was done they returned the people to the
coast and repealed the prohibition against
overseas navigation. At the same time they
adopted an open-door policy by opening four
ports to foreign trade.
THE CHINA TRADE
By the late seventeenth century, the Dutch and
Spanish had been driven from the trading stations
they had established on the China coast and their
places taken by the English (from the 1670s) and
the French (after 1699). In the 1720s came the
Ostenders, who were later followed by Dutch,
Danes, Swedes and others, under the flags of their
East India Companies. As European trade with
China developed, it was brought under semi¬
official management by a system of controls and
regulations, the most intense period of legislation
being from 1740 to 1760.
European trade with China between 1684 and
the First Opium War in 1839 marked a revolu¬
tion in the maritime history of China. After a
break of 250 years the Chinese state was again
turning its attention to the sea. This was the great
era of trade in China tea, which displaced spices,
pepper and Chinese silk as Europe's leading
import from East Asia. A distinctive hybrid
between "official trade" and "private trade" was
devised by the Ch'ing to meet importunate
Western demands, to safeguard the livelihood of
Chinese coastal peoples and to maintain the secu¬
rity of the coast. The relationship between
Above, Europeans welcoming
a Chinese ship in a Dutch or
Portuguese settlement on the
Chinese coast. 18th-century
painting on paper.
Right, a "tower boat" of the
Sul dynasty (6th-7th century).
This article is based on
material contained in a longer
study by W.E. CHEONG,
Reader in history at the
University of Hong Kong. Dr.
Cheong is the author of
articles and two books on the
history of East-West trade in
Asia. One of the books, Opium
Agencies in China in the
1820s, won the Imperial
History prize of the Royal
Commonwealth Society. His
forthcoming The Hong
Merchants of Canton,
1684-1798, is a history of
official Chinese merchants in
the European trade.

Chinese merchants and the Europeans during this
long period was generally peaceful for, despite
their diametrically opposed views about the place
of trade and merchants in society, both European
mercantilism and Chinese Confucianism advo¬
cated active state intervention and a monopolistic
system as the means of attaining their ends.
From the beginning, the Ch'ing correctly
judged the maritime frontier to be the most likely
source of their major domestic and foreign policy
difficulties and acted accordingly. But as time
went by they found security in a conservative
orthodoxy, and when China was exposed by sea
to all that was new and changing in the late eight¬
eenth century, they failed to respond to the
stimulus and missed the chance to join the new
world order.
The traditional world order was challenged
by the new. After 1826 a rapid increase in imports
into China, first cotton and opium and later
..
industrial goods and equipment and, most damag-
ingly, consumer goods, served to highlight the
importance of merchants, industry and trade to
the national wealth of Western countries, whereas
industrial development was a concept that did not
exist in the Ch'ing official vocabulary. Finally,
China had not realized that it was necessary to
maintain her technologyshe was humiliated in
the nineteenth century by a few gunboats
despatched to her shores by "barbarians" from
outside.
The dockyard at Foochow that produced out¬
dated warships, some of which sank on going
down the slipway, the fleet that remained idle at
one port while another fleet was being destroyed
elsewhere on the coast, and several unsuccessful
major industrial enterprises symbolized the failure
of a country that had once been technologically



advanced to make up for more than five centuries
of neglect. Foreign warships, merchant ships, pas¬
senger and freight steamers frequented Chinese
ports and sailed upriver at will. Finally, the total
defeat of China at sea in the Sino-Japanese War of
1894-1895 raised the key question of whether eco¬
nomic and military reforms can be achieved
without political and institutional reforms.
