The Dogon, Mdft people of the cliffs
by Caroline Haardt
Above, Dogon village at the
foot of the Bandlagara cliffs.
Wn
42
ITHIN the loop of the Niger River in Mali,
between the town of Mopti and the Burkina Faso
border, there is a place where steep cliffs at the edge
of an arid plateau dominate a sandy plain. Over 500
metres high in places, the escarpment is fissured with
deep ravines, where rain caught in the cracks of the
grey rock supports the growth of dense and varied
vegetation. This is the Land of the Dogon, whose
natural features alone would justify exceptional
measures of protection.
Against the rock face and on the scree slope
below, the Dogon have built villages which are
remarkable for their architecture and for the pro
foundly original culture of those who live in them,
described by the French ethnologist Marcel Griaule
as a "relic of a lost Africa". In 1989, an area of some
350,000 to 400,000 hectares along the Bandiagara
cliffs, including almost 250 traditional villages, was
placed on UNESCO's World Heritage List as a site
of outstanding natural and cultural importance.
The Dogon, who today number about 300,000,
are of Malinke (Mandingo) stock. Their ancestors
are thought to have fled from the Keita empire in
the fifteenth century and found refuge at the Ban¬
diagara cliffs, where they displaced another people,
the Tellern, who left behind abundant evidence of

UNESCO
IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
their own cultural traditions in tombs set in caves
in the rock face.



Most of these caves can only be reached with
the aid of ropes and crampons. Some have been
explored in the past decade, and have revealed
interesting evidence of the highly developed tech¬
niques, especially for weaving, which had been
employed by the Tellern since the Iron Age.
On the cliffs themselves, aspects of Dogon ritual
and cosmogony are illustrated by cryptic signs and
paintings, the best-known of which adorn the
famous "Shelter of Masks", at the village of Songo
(fifteen kilometres from Bandiagara), which forms
part of the World Heritage site.
The Pale Fox, bringer of anarchy
According to Dogon cosmogony, from the union
of the supreme deity Amma and his creation, the
Earth, issued a being known as the Pale Fox. Unique
and imperfect, the Fox introduced the principle of
disorder into creation. It is associated with human
weakness and the anarchy inherent in the universe.
Amma also created Nommo, a hermaphroditic
creature who represents celestial harmony and is
linked symbolically to water and to fecundity. Then
Amma modelled a human couple from clay. They
gave birth to the eight ancestors of the Dogon,
whom Nommo taught to speak.
Every aspect of Dogon domestic, social and eco¬
nomic life is linked to this cosmogony. Villages are
designed in the image of the cosmos. Built on rock
in order to preserve scarce arable land, they are laid
out on a north-south axis in the form of a prone
human body, supposedly that of Nommo, the great
ancestor. The head is represented by the togu net
(literally, "big shelter"), a meeting-place reserved for
men. This open-sided structure is always the first
to be built in a new village. It consists of a platform
on which stand several rows of rough-hewn timber
pillars that support a roof of branches topped by
a thick mat of millet straw. The number of pillars
has symbolic significance. Decisions taken in the
togu m are solemn and irrevocable.
In each settlement there is also a large family
dwelling, or ginna, which is reserved for the spiritual
leader. Corresponding to Nommo's breast, this
43

44
building has a raised living area reached by a ladder
carved from a tree trunk. The windowless facade
is decorated with eighty niches, representing the
eight original ancestors and their descendants. The
two doors are often carved with rows of male and
female figures which, like the niches, symbolize
earlier generations.
Ordinary homes, which are smaller and are
generally made of mud-brick, are grouped around
the ginna. They are built to a rectangular- design,
with flat-roofed rooms opening onto an inner court¬
yard. They are flanked by granaries with distinc¬
tive conical thatched roofs. These structures are used
for storing millet, seeds, rice, dried onions and var¬
ious other foodstuffs. Their narrow entrances are
protected by wooden doors, which are often carved
and secured by ornate locks.
Many of the granaries are circular, like the
houses at the edge of the village where menstruating
women are sequestered. The forge, and the homes
of members of various artisan castesblacksmiths,
wood and leather workers and griotsare also on
the outskirts. Those who farm the land are the



aristocrats of this patriarchal, agrarian society.
Almost all the villages, and certainly the oldest
ones, possess one or more shrines, whose walls are
decorated with totems or chessboard patterns. The
most venerated of these shrines, which are square
chambers in the rock containing altars, are protected
by the hogon, a spiritual leader who serves several
villages and who formerly dispensed justice and
presided over the council of elders that directed
public affairs. Today he still conducts major religious
ceremonies and transmits to posterity the people's
myths and beliefs.
A century and a half ago the influence of Islam
began to reach the Land of the Dogon from the
neighbouring Tukulor and Fulani (Peul) peoples,
nomadic pastoralists of the plain, and many of the
villages now have mosques. Whether modest or
imposing, the mosque is often built next to the
togu na, which even among the Islamicized Dogon
has kept the role of men's house and council
chamber.
Statues and masks:
a rich artistic heritage
Among the many different arts mastered by the
Dogon, the most sacred is weaving, held to be the
first art bestowed on humanity, at the same time
as speech. In fact the Dogon have a single word for
the two concepts, both of which are considered to
have a question-and-answer structure. Griaule sees
the act of weaving as a metaphor for culture itself:
the warp represents uncultivated land; the weft, life-
giving human activity.
But the aesthetic talents of the Dogon are prob¬
ably best illustrated by their sculpture, whose
primary purpose is ritualistic. Roughly carved or
highly elaborate figures represent ancestors or
mythical heroes. They are usually made by the vil¬
lage blacksmith, who also carves the wooden doors
and shutters, while his wife is responsible for making
pottery for ceremonial use.
Masks, associated with the spirits of the dead,
are used only in funeral rites or to mark the end
of a period of mourning, which may be celebrated
either by public dances and ceremonies or by secret
gatherings for initiates. The masks form part of a
costume made of fabric or plant fibres, complete
with trimmings and accessories. They may be
fashioned from wood, bark or braided fibres deco¬
rated with cowrie shells and painted designs, or
topped with high crests like the kanaga mask, whose
upper portion is shaped like a cross of Lorraine. Its
two branches represent the demiurge Amma
gesturing towards his creations, Earth and sky.
CAROLINE HAARDT, French journalist, was a staff
member of UNESCO's Division of Cultural
Heritage from 1983 to 1987. She is currently
preparing an exhibition as part of the UNESCO Silk
Roads project on the CroisièreJaune, a motor rally
from Beirut to Tibet held in 1931-1932.

UNESCO
Above, sculptures
representing the ancestors
decorate the doorposts of
Dogon dwellings.
Middle photo this page,
typical Dogon rectangular
mud-brick houses and
granaries with conical roofs.
Top: a togu na, the men's
house where the elders meet
to take Important decisions.
The platform and the
supporting pillars are
decorated with symbols.
Top left, masked figures
enact a funeral rite. The
celebrant at right Is wearing a
kanaga mask topped with a
high crest In the shape of a
cross of Lorraine.
IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
A CULTURE IN DANGER
THE IMPACT
OF TOURISM
The greatest threat to the Dogon heritage
today is the gradual abandonment of the cliff
villages, a process accelerated by the drought
that has affected the Sahel region over the
past twenty years. Shortage of water, and the
hard labour involved in fetching it, have encou¬
raged many of the Dogon to settle on the plain.
Another threat is looming with the arrival
of large numbers of tourists. Some 5,000 visi¬
tors come to the Land of the Dogon every year.
Unless it is properly controlled, this influx may
lead to acculturation and social destabilization.
Art-dealers and souvenir-hunters are buying up
(often at ridiculously low prices) important
archaeological objects including ladders, locks
and carvings, thereby considerably impov¬
erishing the artistic heritage. Already a growing
number of masks are made for the tourist
trade. In addition, many cult objects and masks
are plundered. Once inaccessible, the cave
burial grounds are no longer safe from tomb-
robbers.
Every year the Land of the Dogon attracts
more and more tourists to Mali, one of the
world's poorest countries. In 1988 the govern¬
ment adopted a plan that took into account the
area's fragility as well as its spectacular beauty.
Measures have been taken to disperse tourist
facilities by installing small camp-sites and cul¬
tural information points on a marked itinerary
along the base of the cliffs. These facilities will
be able to receive some 10,000 visitors a year
while averting the problems that would arise
if they were sited too close to the villages. The
intention of the scheme is to minimize culture
shock while making known the villages of the
plain.
PRESERVING
THE ARCHITECTURE
Safeguarding the building techniques dis¬
played in the cliff villages, a living heritage
transmitted by word of mouth, must be pri¬
marily a task for the Dogon themselves. But this
will be pointless if the villages are uninhabited,
and living conditions in them will have to
improve if the exodus is to be staunched. New
amenities such as wells, schools and dispen¬
saries must be provided without delay.
The legal and constitutional measures
aimed at protecting the Land of the Dogon
should be reinforced. Laws protecting Mali's
national heritage are already proving useful in
this respect. At the international level, the
country has made its position clear by ratifying
the Convention Concerning the Protection of
the World Cultural and Natural Heritage in
1977, and, ten years later, the Convention on
the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the
Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership
of Cultural Property.
FURTHER READING
ON THE DOGON
M. Griaule. Conversations with Ogotemmeli:
Introduction to Dogon Religious Ideas, Galaxy
Books, Oxford University Press, 1976.
M. Griaule and G. Dieterlen. Le renard pâle
("The Pale Fox"), Le mythe cosmogonique, Vol.
1, Paris, 1965.
D. Roberts. Mali's Dogon People. National
Geographic, Vol. 178, No. 4, October 1990.
General History of Africa, Vols. I and II,
Heinemann/UNESCO, 1981.
Films
A number of films by Jean Rouch and Ger¬
maine Dieterlen.
