A Europe of travellers
by Brigitte Massin
Europe in Mozart's time was a patchwork of different cultures. The Enlightenment
provided it with a unifying principle and ushered in the modern age. Against this
background of cross-fertilization, Mozart's genius blossomed.
Wo
12
' OLFGANG Amadeus Mozart was born in Salz¬
burg on 27 January 1756 and died in Vienna on
5 December 1791. He was thus a European of the
second half of the eighteenth century.
The geopolitical landscape of eighteenth-
century Europe was very different from that we
know today. First of all, it would be a mistake,
historically speaking, to think of Mozart as an
Austrian, even if Austria can claim him as one
of her sons. When Mozart was born, Salzburg
was the capital of an independent principality
under the jurisdiction of a Prince-Archbishop. It
was an ecclesiastical principality, like the birth¬
place of another great composer, Beethoven, who
was born in 1770 in Bonn, the capital of the
ecclesiastical principality of Cologne.
Cologne and Salzburg were located on arteries
of communication that had been important since
very early times: in the case of Cologne the Rhine,
and in the case of Salzburg the north-south routes
leading from Germany to Italy via the Brenner
Pass. They were also close to the east-west routes
leading from Vienna towards France, England,
and the Austrian Netherlands (what is today
Belgium). These great axes of trade and commu¬
nication often follow the old Roman roads.
Mozart was not born an Austrian and never
claimed to be one. He always referred to himself
as a "German".
These ecclesiastical principalities, relatively
few in number, were part of the Germanic Holy
Roman Empire, which was founded in the tenth
century and survived, at least nominally, until the
upheavals due to the French Revolution and the
Napoleonic Wars eventually led to its disappear¬
ance in the nineteenth century. All the
ecclesiastical principalities were then secularized,
and after many vicissitudes the principality of
Salzburg was attached to Austria in 1816.
The Holy Roman Empire was an attempt
to perpetuate the thinking of Charlemagne. It
was to be a union of European states joined
politically and spiritually under the banner of
Roman Catholicism and ruled by an emperor.
By the eighteenth century it had long ceased
to consider itself Roman and was actually the
Holy Germanic Empire, an agglomeration of
some 400 states varying greatly in size and impor¬
tance (from the large kingdom of Bohemia to
the small princedom of Salzburg), with at its
head an emperor elected by a college of electors.
Since the fifteenth century Austrian Habsburg
princes (who were also kings of Bohemia) had
traditionally been elected emperors of Germany.
Map of Europe from an
18th-century atlas.

-
I
*f>
v A; S\ > 4
In the eighteenth century, the emperor was
elected by the first college of the imperial diet,
which consisted of nine electorssix lay princes
(representing the Palatinate, Bohemia, Branden¬
burg, Saxony, Hanover and Bavaria) and three
ecclesiastical princes (representing the Rhineland
principalities of Mainz, Trier and Cologne). The
archbishop of Salzburg was not an elector, but
he was a prince of the Empire and belonged to
the second college of the diet. He also bore the
title of primate of Germany, which placed him
above his national colleagues in relation to papal
authority.
While this German empire was the
geographical heart of Europe, it did not represent
the whole of Europe. Beyond its borders to the
east were the Russias, Poland with its shifting
frontiers, Hungary and above all Prussia. To the
south lay Italy which was also divided into many
states, some of which were under Austrian
administration. The great kingdoms of Spain,
France and Great Britain to the west and the
northern kingdoms of Sweden and Denmark-
Norway also lay outside the Empire.
The Austrian Netherlands (what is today Bel¬
gium) belonged to the Empire, but the United
Provinces (today Holland) did not.
Some imperial princes and electors ruled
simultaneously over states which were not
integrated into the Empire. Thus the Habsburgs
of Austria and Bohemia were kings of Hungary,
the Guelfs of Hanover became the kings of
England, and the Hohenzollerns of Brandenburg
became the kings of Prussia.
A march towards progress
The European balance of power was determined
by five states: Great Britain, France, Austria,
Prussia and Russia. The prosperous regions of
Europe (Great Britain, France, Holland, Ger¬
many and northern Italy) embarked on a period
of economic growth which led to a demographic
explosion. The population of Europe rose from
115 million at the beginning of the century to
187 million on the eve of the nineteenth century.
Between 1750 and 1800, the population of Russia
rose from 19 million to 29 million; that of the
Habsburg dominions from 20 to 27 million; that
of France from 22 to 26 million; that of Italy from
15.5 to 18 million; and that of Great Britain from
10.5 to 15.5 million. The population of Prussia
virtually doubled, rising from 3.5 million to 6
million.
Scientific progress called political and social
structures into question. Europe began a march
towards progress. There emerged a critical spirit
towards institutions and the past which called for
the participation of all human beings and implied
a democratic process. The first thing that had to
be done in order to create the spirit of tolerance
necessary for the establishment of a pluralist
society was to reform the educational system and
make it accessible to all.
A reading of Voltaire's tragedy
"L'orphelin de la Chine" in
Madame Geoffrin's drawing
room in 1755 (1812) by the
French painter Gabriel
Lemonnier. Madame Geoffrin's
salon was a centre for the
Encyclopaedists and an
international meeting-place of
artists and men of letters.
13

In its search for a new balance, Europe found
a unifying principle in a form of philosophical
reflection, a generalized attitude of thought,
which became known as the Enlightenment and
gave its name to the eighteenth century as a
wholethe age of the Enlightenment. It was a
century of receptiveness to modernity. Many of
the ideas which paved the way for this new mode
of thinking came from Great Britain, from the
Glorious Revolution of 1688 and the liberal con¬
stitution which ensued, from the experiments of
Isaac Newton and the philosophy of John Locke
(1632-1704), but it was in France that the new
philosophy was most fully and coherently
developed.
'Dare to reason!'
The spirit of the Enlightenment materialized on
the public stage around 1750. By that time the
Italian historian and philosopher Giambattista
Vico had already defended in his Scienza nuova
(1725 and 1744), the idea that all peoples pass
through three ages: the divine, the heroic, and the
human. In France Montesquieu published L'esprit
des lois (1748), and Voltaire his Essai sur les mlurs
et l'esprit des nations (1756), which familiarized
the public with the idea of the historical evolu¬
tion of human nature and with the possibility of
progress towards a greater maturity of conscience.
In 1750 the Encyclopédie was launched. Its publi¬
cation continued until 1772.
This Dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts ^

The "philosopher-king"
Frederick the Great of Prussia
(1712-1786) with his guests
at the palace of Sans Souci.
The king Is shown seated at
right. At his right is the
French writer Voltaire, with
whom he corresponded.
19th-century engraving.

et des métiers eventually comprised 60,000 articles
published in seventeen volumes, plus eleven
volumes of illustrations. Over 150 writers,
including d'Alembert, Voltaire and Rousseau,
contributed to the vast enterprise, which was
directed by Diderot. The Encyclopédie was based
on the idea that knowledge is the key to power.
This synthesis of knowledge took its place in the
vanguard of enlightened opinion, which insisted
on the primacy of reason in all research. The
Encyclopédie rejected all forms of prejudice and
embodied an attempt to develop a truly scientific
spirit which would lead to a better understanding
of the laws of nature and enable each individual
and humanity as a whole to attain a new state
of happiness.
In the Germanic world, the Enlightenment,
known as the Aufklärung, assumed a more con¬
structive significance in the work of Lessing
(1729-1781) and of Kant (1724-1804), both of
whom wished to make the individual fully adult
rather than to transform the world. Kant's
pamphlet "An answer to the question: what is
the Enlightenment?" (1784) is an achievement in
itseIf as well as a step towards the great German
philosophy of the nineteenth century. What is
the Aufklärung? The emergence of man from his
minority, for which he is himself responsible.
The word "minority" signifies an inability to use
his own understanding, since this state of mind
results not from a flaw in understanding but from
a lack of decision and courage to use it without
the guidance of others. Sapere audel (Dare to
reason!) is the motto of the Aufklärung.
European thinkers were united beneath the
banner of the Enlightenment. The Italian
economist and criminologist Cesare Bonesana,
Marquis of Beccaria (1738-1794), the author of a
famous treatise on Crimes and Punishments
(1764), was one of the most notable representa¬
tives of the spirit of reform which seized Enlight¬
enment Europe. Law reform, edicts of toleration,
the suppression of torture, the abolition of
slavery, the foundation of schools, universities,
national theatres and botanical gardens featured
in the government programmes of the most
enlightened rulers.
The new Europe became truly cosmopolitan.
There were exchanges between philosophers and
kings, and there were even philosopher-kings.
Frederick the Great of Prussia (1712-1788) invited
Voltaire to his court and corresponded with the
leading writers and philosophers of his time.
Catherine II of Russia (1728-1796) was a friend
of Diderot and the protector of French artists and
the philosophes. In Austria, Joseph II (1741-1790),
the son of Maria Theresa, was a strong advocate
of the new reforms and legislation, and almost
came to personify this principle of government.
"Josephism" was a word often used to describe
such policies.
Most Enlightenment sovereigns were not
swayed by these ideas so far as to relax their
authority, and hence came to be known as
"enlightened despots". "All for the people,
nothing through the people" [Allesfür das Volk,
Nichts durch das Volk), was the terse and eloquent
formula of Joseph II. The sovereign wished for
the happiness of all but he alone continued to be
in charge.
One characteristic figure of the century who
played a key role in the spread of knowledge was
the pedlar who, weighed down with books,
travelled from town to town, from town to
country, and in many cases from country to
country. Eighteenth-century Europe was a
Europe of travellers.
Ideas without frontiers
Sovereigns and princes dazzled by the glory of
Versailles commissioned their architects to create
palaces for them along similar lines. Architectural
Haydn (right), Gluck and the
young Mozart. Bas-relief
(detail) on a monument on
Maria Theresa Square, Vienna
(Austria).
15

Europe was a mirror of Versailles. From Lisbon
to Madrid, from Naples to Rome, from Vienna
to Warsaw, from Berlin to St. Petersburg,
fabulous mansions rose from the ground. One of
the most notable of these itinerant architects was
François de Cuvilliés of Hainaut (Belgium), who
created wonderful examples of ornamental art.
Among the buildings he designed were the
summer home and the delightful Munich resi¬
dence of the Prince Elector of Bavaria.
Musicians have always been travellers, and
they were notably itinerant in the eighteenth cen¬
tury. Mozart's European travels began in child¬
hood. His contemporary Paisiello journeyed
from Naples to St. Petersburg. Late in life, Haydn
made long visits to England. Italy has always
attracted operatic composers. It was there that the
Saxon Hasse achieved fame and became "Il caro
Sassone". Johann Christian Bach, the son of
Johann Sebastian Bach, was known successively
as "Bach of Milan" and "Bach of London", after
the cities in which he established himself profes¬
sionally.
Italy, homeland of the arts, held a strong
attraction for painters, writers and art-lovers. The
figures are amazing. According to the historian
Edward Gibbon, no fewer than 40,000 English
people visited the peninsula in 1785. Travelling
in Europe, in France but above all in Italy,
inspired much writing by Stendhal, Goethe and
others.
Bigger and bigger publishing houses were
founded in Berlin and Leipzig, Geneva, Rome and
Florence, Paris and London. Newspapers and
Pedlar selling newspapers and
prints. Copper engraving by
the German artist Johann
Christoph Seekatz
(1719-1768).
16
BRIGITTE MASSIN,
French musicologist, writer and
journalist, is the author, jointly
with Jean Massin, of a seminal
study devoted to Mozart (1958
and 1990, new edition, Fayard,
Paris) and the editor of a
history of Western music
(1985, Fayard, Paris). She has
also written a book on
Schubert (1977, Fayard, Paris)
and an essay on Olivier
Messiaen (1990, Alinéa, Paris).
Mme Massin is responsible for
the co-ordination of the Mozart
bicentenary year in France.

The Residenztheater, Munich,
a masterpiece of German
Rococo art designed by
François de Cuvilliés. It was
here that Mozart's opera
(domeneo, re di Creta was
first performed in 1781.
gazettes crossed frontiers. Baron Melchior
Grimm's Paris newsletter, Correspondance littér¬
aire, philosophique et critique, was read in all the
courts and made Mozart famous when he was still
a child.
The market for books was transformed, with
Frankfurt as its major centre. At Kehl, across the
Rhine from Strasbourg, the French writer Beau¬
marchais founded his own publishing house and
published the complete works of Voltaire for
German readers. He also took the opportunity
to print his own comedy Le manage de Figaro,
long banned in France, which caused a scandal
throughout Europe. Mozart was one of the pur¬
chasers of this first German translation and made
it the basis of his Italian opera The Marriage of
Figaro.
This great movement of cross-fertilization
which characterized the Enlightenment, deve¬
loped "understanding", encouraged individuals
to emerge from a Kantian "minority" which they
had hitherto accepted, and also led to the
awakening of German nationhood. The many
states, great and small, and writers such as Klop-
stock, Goethe, Schiller and Lessing, realized that
their union around a common language, German,
was legitimate, and claimed the right to make
German a cultural vehicle on a par with French
or Italian.
If life and thought in eighteenth-century
Europe had not been so open, dynamic and
optimistic, Mozart would probably never have
been able to write The Magic Flute, a work which
for him represented the fulfilment of a long
cherished dream, the flowering of German opera.
17
