PAST?
A new heart for old cities
by Stefano Bianca
I
22
N the pre-industrial era the development of
towns and cities was a slow process governed by
enduring cultural values and only slightly in¬
fluenced by the very limited technology then
available.
Some absolute rulers completely remodelled
their cities; others built entirely new ones. But
such cases were few. Cities were sometimes trans
formed for religious reasons, and as a result ac¬
quired a special significance which was recognized
by everyone. But in spite of apparently radical
changes in architecture and the use of space, there
was always a thread of cultural continuity.
The advent of the industrial era in the early
nineteenth century created an entirely new situ¬
ation. As a result of technological progress,

A highway under construction
(now completed), In central
Cairo.
human creativity and the innovatory spirit ac¬
quired new scope for expression in building and
urban planning. New means of communication
and production and new ways of living made an
indirect but powerful contribution to these
processes. Built-up areas expanded to an extent
that would once have been inconceivable. Tech¬
nology became a driving force and began to play
a role that had once belonged to culture and
religion. Change became explosive, coupled as it
was with new economic mechanisms which were
themselves at odds with traditional cultural values
and obeyed only the laws of profit or speculation.
European cities suddenly began to grow
under the impetus of new forces, the rise of new
social classes and hierarchies. With the expansion
of the suburbs, the levelling of old city walls and
fortifications and the construction of wide
boulevards, a new concept of the city began to
emerge. It differed sharply from the traditional
concept of the city, where development had often
been haphazard.
The old districts of towns and cities were then
regarded not as places of historic value but as the
insalubrious areas in which the poorest members
of society, the early industrial proletariat, found
refuge. The prosperous middle class lived in
buildings which lined the new boulevards and in
residential areas on the outskirts.
The ravages of war
and Utopian ideas
This polarization, and the class divisions that
went with it, existed all over Europe until the
mid-twentieth century. In the 1920s and 1930s
many modernist architects argued for the destruc¬
tion of the old districts. The most important of
them was probably Le Corbusier, whose "Radiant
City" plan for Paris would, if executed, have
sacrificed much of the existing city in favour of
a series of skyscrapers laid out in a geometrical
pattern.
These radical proposals came to nothing, but
the ideology behind them contributed largely to
the obliteration of many historic urban districts
in Europe. Then the Second World War came
along and flattened some central European cities
more effectively than the boldest Utopian projects
of modern architects could have done.
Following these losses, planned and un¬
planned, some new thinking began to emerge in
the late 1960s. On featureless housing estates
whose residents had no reason to identify them¬
selves with their man-made environment, the
standardized "machine for living" revealed all its
defects. Moreover, a growing awareness of eco¬
logical issues gradually led to a revision of the 23

dominant concepts in architecture and urban
planning. Meanwhile, the increasing scarcity of
"historic resources" in big cities obliged local
authorities and architects to treat the surviving
historic fabric with greater consideration.
As often happens in such cases, the pendulum
swung to the opposite extreme. Legitimate con¬
cern for conservation was accompanied by exces¬
sive zeal for the protection of ancient monuments,
Left, book sellers In the suq
at Damascus (Syrian Arab
Republic).
Below, a dangerous tangle of
electricity and telephone
cables In a corner of the old
city of Peshawar (Pakistan).
wake. Only a few cities, such as Bologna in Italy,
have managed to preserve and gradually rehabili¬
tate their old centres without the original inhabi¬
tants being driven out by property speculation.
The historic districts
of Third World cities
The problem of old towns and cities is even more
acute in developing countries, where the great
wave of modernization came not in the nineteenth
century but in the 1950s and 1960s, usually
around the time when political independence was
achieved. The colonial cities of the nineteenth
century were the points at which modern civili¬
zation gained access to these countries, but they
also formed a closed social system, which had vir¬
tually no contact with the indigenous communi¬
ties. This social dualism only collapsed with the
ending of colonial rule, when a rising indigenous
class began to settle in the abandoned colonial
cities.
. In societies eager for progress, the modern
"European" areas of these cities are regarded as
the most desirable urban environment. The old
urban districts, like those of nineteenth-century
European cities, decayed and turned into slums.
Population movements in recent decades, largely
the result of a massive rural exodus, have acceler¬
ated this process. The prosperous classes have
moved to the newer parts of the city, and a flood
of rural migrants has descended on the old dis¬
tricts, which (together with the shanty towns on.
24
and this hindered any creative approach to the
renovation of even the most ordinary buildings.
Strict rules were applied, especially to the resto¬
ration of façades. When the interiors of buildings
were completely restored, the old frontages
were meticulously preserved for the sake of
appearances.
A good example is the old city of Berne (Swit¬
zerland), where the façades of older buildings pro¬
vide the frontage of modern department stores.
Such changes of function are encouraged by the
rapidly growing trend for inner city renewal.
Pedestrian areas in historic districts, once shunned
by traders because of their inaccessibility to
motor traffic, have become gold-mines overnight.
Thus run-down urban areas began to be gen-
trified in a rehabilitation process that has some
positive features but, like the former process of
slum-formation, brings new social problems in i«--

y v
	 _ <^B
i
k i^^_ P*È>^
,
"^
^ P
H-
.¿Mf^^MI ¡M -
VI Wt
^
-^K
¡L!fr üfi
»CTir
} *5" ^>^i'Ti
JT^£ !
: 1
' 1* i^K
Bttài^ia H^^^^^^^^^H ï ' j 1 Wfe
i ;l' ^ = Mllf 1
i l^-'r^ r- -
* i
>
fi
>
y
Wooden scaffolding prevents
these buildings In Algiers from
collapsing.
STEFANO BIANCA,
Swiss architect and urban
planner, has directed many
restoration projects in the
historic districts of Arab cities
such as Aleppo, Fez, Baghdad
and Riyadh, and has worked
with Unesco at Fez, Cairo,
Damascus and Sana'a. He is
the author of a number of
books on Islamic architecture,
the most recent of which is
Hofhaus und Paradiesgarten
("Courtyard and Garden of
Paradise", Beck Verlag,
Munich, 1991).
the outskirts) were the only sources of cheap ac¬
commodation and job opportunities in the so-
called informal (i.e. pre-industrial) sector of the
economy.
The historic districts of Third World cities
have thus survived to a large extent as _ isolated
pockets of pre-industrial traditions and customs
in the midst of a rapidly modernizing world.
Rural migrants have found in them ways of life
resembling those they knew. The threat to these
districts is that the influx of people leads to over¬
crowding, with several families often living in one
house, and sometimes in a single room. Many old
houses, stables and even cellars, abandoned by
their owners, are used for unauthorized small bus¬
inesses and as craft workshops, supplying the
local market at a very low cost but in deplorably
unhygienic conditions.
Historic buildings used in this way soon fall
into ruin. In the maze of narrow streets of the
old districts, houses are often difficult to locate,
and from outside it is sometimes even impossible
to suspect their existence. This hinders any sur¬
veillance of undesirable or illegal activities. Sani¬
tary arrangements are also inadequate. The water
supply and sewerage networks generally no
longer meet current needs, and traditional
systems (where they still exist) are dilapidated or
obsolete.
This situation must be remedied if living stan¬
dards are to be improved and a responsible middle
class brought back into the old districts. For
whereas major monuments can be restored only
by the authorities, the upkeep of a city as a whole
needs support from private initiative. Here
another problem arises: material improvements
call for substantial investment, usually beyond the
available resources, which in any case tend to be
allocated to "modern" districts.
Projects for the renovation of historic urban
areas should not be governed by the same criteria
as those applied to modern citiesto do so would
be to deprive historic areas of the very quality
which justifies big investments. Renewal schemes
must scrupulously respect the morphology of the
old districts. Unfortunately there have been many
ill-considered redevelopment operations which
have defeated their own object. Major roads have,
for example, been driven into a number of old
city centres. Some of these schemes have been
well-intentioned, but they have ignored the vital
needs of the traditional city life and paid little
heed to the manifold social, economic and aes¬
thetic consequences of purely technical solutions.
Those responsible for the renovation of
historic neighbourhoods must ask themselves
whether imported methods of modern urban
planning are appropriate, and devise solutions
suited to local situations. Such solutions can only
be based on a thorough knowledge of traditional
urban structures and their interna] economy.
The conservation and revival of historic dis¬
tricts must likewise be considered in the overall
context of the city. While a single notable historic
building can be treated like a museum and
preserved, an old city that may be inhabited by
hundreds of thousands of people cannot. Human
dynamism must be mobilized to revitalize the ar¬
chitectural shell and save it from decay. A
planner's first task must therefore be to strike a
balance between meticulously restoring buildings
and gradually adapting them to current needs.
25
