The citizen and trie environment
by Claude Villeneuve
What the individual can do to help maintain
the planet's life-support systems
*c£T
16
Ahe scientific community today produces a
flow of reports, hypotheses and observations
which show that our constant assaults on the
environment are jeopardizing the world's poten¬
tial for development. It is even said that the sur¬
vival of the human race is threatened. Faced with
these planetary problems, it is hard for the ordi¬
nary citizen not to feel in the presence of the Four
Horsemen of the Apocalypse.
We are starting to feel the effects of the by¬
products of the very same technologies that have
enabled us to increase our lifespan and improve
our quality of life. Both the causes and the victims
of environmental degradation, we are learning
with amazement that we live in an increasingly
complex and fragile world.
The transformations we have imposed on the
biosphere are so far-reaching that immediate
action must be taken to prevent their catastrophic
effects from posing insoluble problems for the
next generation. What can ordinary people do in
the course of their daily lives to help solve these
problems instead of making matters worse?
WHAT IS SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT?
Many environmental problems are becoming
increasingly global in scale, transcending frontiers
and national jurisdictions and eluding the respon¬
sibility of individuals and nations.
Today's technologies are far more advanced
than those of a few decades ago, but we are get¬
ting dangerously close to the limits of technolog¬
ical efficiency. Greater and greater efforts are
required to make relatively insignificant progress,
both in the production of goods and in the fight
against pollution.
Furthermore, world population is rapidly
increasing, and under the influence of the mass
media consumer expectations are getting much
higher. Although the resources of the biosphere
still have considerable potential for development,
the limits of its productivity will be reached in
the foreseeable future.
Sustainable development is based on respon¬
sible management of resources so that the
interests of future generations are protected while
current needs are met. This is a stimulating
challenge both for individuals and communities
and it must be accepted immediately, for the
longer the necessary decisions are put off, the
harder they become.
BUILT-IN OBSOLESCENCE
The spectacular increase in industrial production
that followed the Second World War improved
living conditions around the world but also
whetted appetites for material goods of all kinds.
Industry provided a mass market with manufac¬
tured products at affordable prices. More and
more goods were turned out at lower and lower
prices, creating jobs and enabling people to buy
more. Supply encouraged demand.
This situation could not last for ever. To sus¬
tain demand, products had obsolescence built into
them. Advertising and marketing techniques that
associated such goods with an image of happiness
proved exceptionally successful. Unfortunately,
:>- v,
Below, precious metals
extracted from industrial
wastes at a refinery in
Shanghai (China).

however, accumulation of possessions does not
guarantee contentment, nor is it an end in itself.
On the other hand, the production of goods
that are not intended to last is a waste of energy
and natural resources, and creates volumes of
waste that are harmful to the environment. Every
American citizen, for example, throws away a ton
of domestic garbage each year. In highly deve¬
loped consumer societies, this refuse, which con¬
sists mainly of useless packaging, constitutes one
of today's most critical environmental problems.
It is perhaps in the handling of domestic
waste that the individual can be most effective
in the struggle against environmental degradation.
By choosing products that are either less pack¬
aged or less polluting, he or she can influence the
attitudes of industry.
Cars are among the most important of the
ephemeral products of the consumer society, and
many environmental problems are linked to their
excessive production and use. In North America,
for example, it is estimated that they account for
nearly 40 per cent of total energy consumption.
Using the car less is one of the first suggestions
^A-T
to make to the citizen to reduce pressure on the
environment.
World population is currently growing at the
rate of 170 persons a minute, the equivalent of
the population of Canada every three months.
Environmentalists are alarmed by the increase,
and with good reason.
First of all there is an ethical obligation to
feed, clothe and house all these new citizens of
the world. At present we do this rather badly,
because of inequalities in the distribution of
natural resources. Second, everyone in the plane¬
tary village wants to enjoy the benefits of the con¬
sumer societies of the industrialized world.



Unfortunately, in the present state of ecological
knowledge, high North American and European
levels of consumption of natural resources do not
seem accessible to everyone in the world.
Many writers, including the French
agronomist René Dumont, point out that for all
the planet to consume energy at North American
rates, we should have to increase oil production
threefold, natural gas production sevenfold, and
coal output tenfold, as well as multiplying the
This mass of used tyres at a
dump at Westley, California
(USA) will be used as fuel to
produce electricity. One tyre
can serve the energy needs of
the average Californian
household for a day.
17

Children at Honduras' National
School of Forestry Science at
Chagüite Grande learn about
tree planting and
conservation. The School was
founded in 1969 with aid
from the United Nations
Development Programme and
the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the UN.
18
CLAUDE VILLENEUVE,
of Canada, is a biologist at the
Centre Ecologique du Lac
Saint-Jean, in Quebec. He has
worked with several ecological
organizations and written a
number of works on animal life
and the environment,
environmental education,
sustainable development and
global warming.
current number of nuclear power plants by sixty.
This prospect, which would cause us to revise
estimates of how long reserves of fossil fuels will
last, is terrifying from an environmental point of
view. The pollution caused by the production and
use of the necessary energy resources would
increase amounts of acid rain, greenhouse gases
and nuclear wastes to intolerable levels.
Yet every human being ought to have the
right to live in comfort and security. Sustainable
development therefore involves reducing birth¬
rates, where these are high, both in rich and poor
countries.
Controlling the birth-rate is first and fore¬
most a matter for individuals, but it must also
be supported by society as a whole, and the com¬
munity should invest in the education and wel¬
fare of children who have already been born
before encouraging parents to bring others into
the world.
THE CHALLENGE
OF ENVIRONMENTAL
LITERACY
Finally, an unprecedented effort must be made
at local, regional and global levels to teach people
about the environment so that all the citizens of
the world can assume the responsibilities incum¬
bent on them in maintaining the planet's life-
support systems.
The fact is that we are all educated
ignoramuses. Instead of the well-formed mind
praised by the essayist Michel de Montaigne, most
educational systems, under the constraints of
competition, turn out well-stuffed brains. Our
knowledge is increasingly specialized and frag¬
mented among individuals who may be compe¬
tent in one field but are virtually ignorant in
others. Most of today's decision-makers are
produced by educational systems that leave little
space for extra-curricular discovery. Citizens too
know little of the processes that provide them
with the means to survive.
Yet informed action on environmental
matters demands at least some basic knowledge
of the way in which ecosystems work and an
awareness of man's place in the biosphere.
Environmental education is one of the keys to
sustainable development. A pathway to environ¬
mental literacy, it is also the vector of the new
ethic needed to redefine the relationship between
humankind and the biosphere.
Environmental education must therefore be
made generally available in schools and other
educational institutions, so that citizens and offi¬
cials can introduce an ecological dimension into
decision-making.
It must start with the fact that there are limits
to the capacity of the biosphere, and that human
actions can alter it both at the local and the global
levels in ways that are harmful to our health and
safety. Teachers must also point out that the
development of every human being depends on
the state of his or her environment, and that no
generation can arrogate to itself the right to des¬
troy elements necessary for the survival of the
next.
The challenge of sustainable development
may well be the most important we have ever
had to face. We now have extraordinary scien¬
tific instruments for predicting the evolution of
the environment. Will we be wise enough to
avoid catastrophe while continuing to improve
the quality of life for humankind as a whole? Or
will we be led to crisis by economic models that
encourage us to believe that the infinite exists in
a finite world?
These are questions science cannot answer.
It is up to each of us to take up the cause.
