INTERVIEW
with Professor
LÉON
SCHWARTZENBERG
A leading French cancer
specialist who is also a
member of the European
Parliament and of the French
national watchdog committee
for the life sciences, explains
how cancers are formed and
describes current methods of
treatment. In a field where
misunderstandings are still all
too common, Professor
Schwartzenberg sums up
some of the lessons he has
learned from a lifetime's
experience.
Lots ofpeople talk about cancer, but not
many of them know what it really is. Could
you tell us?
A cancer consists of a colony of cells which
have escaped from control by the laws which
govern the organization of a living being. Each
of the cells in our organism has a specific role.
For reasons that we are now beginning to
understand, some of them suddenly change
into different cells. They cease to co-operate
with the other cells and work as it were for
themselves. They behave anarchically.
X.
This can happen to all living things. Plants
and birds can have cancer. When cells estab¬
lish themselves within a living being in order
to take it over and destroy its life, we talk of
a malignant tumour. A tumour is a group of
cells. Etymologically speaking, malignant
means "diabolical". It is as if the devil has set
up house within a living thing and will, if not
eliminated, systematically destroy it.
What can modern medicine do to eliminate
this "devil"?

Culture of cancerous
cells of the breast.
Malignant or "diabolical" tumours must be
removed. But how? The simplest way has
always been the knife, or, to use a more high-
flown word, the scalpel. Early this century
radiation began to be used to prevent can¬
cerous cells from dividing. Then, around 1950,
chemical substances which poison cancerous
cells were discovered. But these substances can
also poison healthy cells, albeit to a lesser
degree, and so this form of treatment, known
as chemotherapy, is difficult.
Today a fourth and highly promising
form of therapy known as immunotherapy is
in its early stages. It may be described as
follows. Our immune system provides us with
natural defences against foreign agents such as
infectious bacteria or viruses, or transplanted
cells. In the case of organ transplants an
attempt is made to weaken the body's immune
defences so as to allow the recipient to accept
the transplanted organ, but where cancer is
concerned we try to stimulate these defences
so that the patient can reject the cancer. This
is a new attitude in medicine. Instead of acting
externally by means of surgery, radiation or
chemotherapy, we are trying to act from the
inside by helping patients to get rid of their
tumours by themselves.
Is genetic manipulation involved in this?
No that's something different. The manipu¬
lation of cells should not be confused with the
manipulation of genes. When a tumour
develops, the lymphocytes, the body's
infection-fighting white blood cells, try to
fight it. When the tumour becomes too big,
they lose the battle. Part of the tumour can
then be removed surgically and the lympho¬
cytes which are fighting it can be recovered
and cultivated in the laboratory so that their
number is multiplied a hundred-, a thousand-
'TO^bi
or ten thousand-fold. All these lymphocytes
are reinjected into the patient who then has
more cells with which to fight the tumour.
This is cell manipulation.
Genetic manipulation, as its name sug¬
gests, consists of modifying the hereditary
structure of certain cells, either by using a radi¬
oactive substance or by introducing a specific
gene. But cells manipulated in this way are not
reproductive cells.
Genetic manipulations of the human
ovum are not on the agenda, either scientifi¬
cally since they are still not feasible, or morally
since they are unacceptable to our society.
Could we replace the cells which are in
the body?
This is another possible approach to treat¬
ment. Each of the organism's normal cells has
a kind of organized brain. In the liver cell, for
example, there is a brain which tells it how
to stock sugar and how to secrete certain
enzymes. When the cell becomes cancerous,
its brain goes mad. This rogue cell has returned
to a wild state. A living creature, a human
being, is a being whose cells have become civi¬
lized in order to acquire maturity and phys¬
iological knowledge. The cancerous cells
which have returned to a wild state are totally
uncivilized. Is it possible to imagine
"recivilizing" these cells, making them
"normal" again? Some products give grounds
for hope.
Are some people more predisposed than
others to have sick cells?
Until 1975 we did not really understand
why some people develop cancers more easily
than others. Why, for instance, should some
heavy smokers develop cancer and not others?
Then a young scientist named Dominique
Stehelin, who was Working in the laboratory
of Doctors J. Michael Bishop and Harold E.
Varmus (who were later awarded the Nobel
Prize) discovered cancer-causing genes. Each
of us has tens of thousands of cells which are
"shadowed" by these genes, known as
oncogenes, from oncos the Greek word for
tumour. These cells can be "silent" or unex¬
pressed throughout our lives, in which case

we die of something else, or be activated and
trigger a sequence of events that leads to a
cancer. There are also cells known as "anti-
oncogenes", which afford protection against
cancer. When they weaken, they favour the
development of a tumour.
Do some people have a predisposition
towards cancer?
It is wrong to say that cancer is hereditary
except in very rare cases such as cancer of
the retina in children. What is usually called
heredity is a quasi-automatic induction
mechanism. Haemophilia, mucoviscidosis and
myopathia are hereditary. Cancer is not
hereditary because it is a multifactorial disease.
It requires the combined presence of external
causes, of oncogenes, a weakening of immune
defences, and perhaps too a specific kind of
psychological fragility.
Genetic fragility may constitute a
predisposition. A woman whose forebears,
sisters or aunts have had breast cancer is at
greater risk than someone else. In the same
way, there may be a family predisposition to
cancers of the colon or the rectum, the ovaries
or the prostate. In other words, people
belonging to such families, who are at risk,
should have systematic examinationsbreast
X-rays, endoscopy of the intestine
(colonoscopy)as well as systematic smear
tests for cancer of the womb.
Surely these ideas about genetic predispo¬
sition will cause alarm ifthey are notproperly
explained?
Let's take the example of cancers of the
colon or the rectum, which constitute a
quarter of all cancers. In 95 per cent of cases
these consist initially of a small benign
tumour, a polyp the removal of which will
prevent the appearance of a cancer.
Regular breast X-rays make it possible to
detect small breast tumours which are easier
to cure when detected in the early stages.
Some people believe that in fifteen years
cancer will be curable.
It is impossible to say. All we can do is
simply press on with research. Today, there
is less talk than there was ten years ago about
the curability of all cancers. But there is no
reason to give up hope. All the problems
facing humankind have eventually been
solved.
Do you tell yourpatients about the nature
of their illness?
Yes, provided that their general condition
is not too seriously affected. The essential
thing is to make patients understand that they
are not responsible for their illness. The ill¬
ness is not a punishment. As long as there is
no proof that a person's psychological make¬
up can bear any responsibility for the induc¬
tion of a cancer we have no right to use this
argument, for if we do we imply that patients
are responsible for their own cancers.
When you come into the world, you carry
within you the genes transmitted to you by
your parents who inherited them from the
long chain of life which preceded them. This
is the capital of risks and possibilities that is
available to us. This is how we are made. We
do not come from nowhere. We are not born
by immaculate conception. We are reposito¬
ries of all the adventures, possibilities and
defects of humanity.
Do you think that patients can do much
to cure themselves?
Yes. Studies carried out in the United
Kingdom on several hundred patients who had
been operated on for breast cancer showed
that those who were most highly motivated
lived longest. Unfortunately this should not
be considered a law. I have known admirable,
extremely courageous people, young mothers,
who have fought to be able to bring up their
children and havea terrible injusticebeen
unable to do so.
Some doctors do not tell theirpatients the
truth.
I think they are wrong. Human beings have
the right to know the truth about their ill¬
nesses, their destiny. Unless they expressly do
not wish to know. Whatever our convictions
or beliefs, we all feel that our earthly course
does not end on the day of our death. I am
not thinking about what lies beyond but about
what happens here on Earth. We are all
responsible for a human enterprise towards
which we feel certain responsibilities. Love,
family life, the arts, our profession	 Faced
with the possibility of death, we need to take
decisions about the the fate of those we love

or those for whom we feel responsible. If you
lie to a patient, he or she will die in ignorance.
Even more serious, lying falsifies human
relations. Perpetuating a lie has serious con¬
sequences. If you give dishonest answers to all
the questions asked by a patient, then you
create a kind of triangular relationship
between the patient who is going to die and
does not know, the person who shares the
patient's life and does know, and the cancer
itself, the third point of the triangle. Just think
of the bitterness the surviving member of such
a couple must feel. As long as his or her
partner was alive, that person agreed to live
a lie without measuring all its consequences.
Suddenly the loved one dies and the surviving
partner realizes that the moment when he or
she began to lie something in their intimate
relationship was broken.
I am not saying that I believe in truth at
all costs. Perhaps some things should be con¬
cealed. But if someone does have to keep a
secret then it should be the patient (since it
is the secret of his or her own body) rather
than the person who shares the patient's life.
We are all free to build our lives as we
think fit. That's why I ask patients who are
near to death whether they are believers, and
if so, whether they want to receive the sacra¬
ments. They all wish to do so, and contrary
to what is often thought, they are not over¬
whelmed by the experience.
Computer Image of a cancer
being treated by radiation therapy.
The green cone corresponds
to the path of the rays.

An electron microscope
at the Léon Bérard
Research Centre,
Lyons (France).
You say that you are a defender of
euthanasia, ofdeath in dignity. You believe
that people who tolerate the sufferings of
others are torturers.
Doctors and nurses are there to cure. When
you have succeeded you feel yourself justified
intellectually and morally. Intellectually
because the knowledge you have acquired has
brought about this result. Morally, because the
patient who has been for a time handicapped
or infirm, has returned to a normal life, to his
or her family and profession.
In the case of chronic illnesses, such as cer¬
tain cancers and neurological diseases, you
know that you will manage to prolong the
patient's life without being able to effect a
cure. Morally you are ill at ease. But you can
make sure that patients benefit from the latest
advances in science, improve their conditions
and prolong their lives. And this is for you
an intellectual justification.
A situation may arise in which all forms
of therapy have ceased to be effective. Every¬
thing has been tried: surgery, radiation,
chemotherapy. You have shot your bolt. All
you have learned in order to cure a patient
is now useless. Intellectually, you have failed.
At this juncture you must change your whole
intellectual approach and rediscover what has
been the glory of medicine since Greek Antiq¬
uity. The battle against the illness is lost, but
the struggle for the patient can still be waged.
There is a moral justification for this attitude.
To give a complete answer to your ques¬
tion, one also comes across patients who are
demoralized by their illness. They even feel
degraded and want to leave this world with
dignity, so that those around them do not see
them disfigured by a facial tumour, say, or
8

afflicted with a spinal tumour or creeping
paralysis.
In the course of a difficult illness, the
patient may ask for help by saying to you, "I
accept all the treatment you give me, doctor,
but don't let me go too far. When the moment
comes don't strive too hard. If I come to the
end of my tether and I ask you to help me,
will you agree?" One says yes, hoping that the
moment will never come. But when it does
one must keep one's word. You administer a
palliative which eases the disorder caused by
the illness without affecting the illness itself.
One can say that the doctor has realized that
the illness is irreversible. Then we may face
the problem of euthanasia, a word coined in
the seventeenth century by the English
philosopher Francis Bacon. Euthanasia is more
than a gentle death, it is a death worthy of a
human being. Of course it only concerns
patients who are conscious and lucidthey're
the only ones I'm talking aboutpatients who
wish to keep their dignity and their freedom
to be human until the last moment.
From palliative care you have moved on
to euthanasia. . . .
What actually happens? It is possible to
fight against pain, thirst, and fear. But it some¬
times happens that a patient's condition deteri¬
orates, that the tumour, paralysis, handicap,
infirmity or whatever get worse, and the
patient asks for help to preserve his or her dig¬
nity. Now this request for help is insistent,
profound, and repeated; it is not simply made
during a moment of depression. In fact the
first thing we do in this situation is to
administer anti-depressants, and then we dis¬
cover that the patient continues to make a
request which rests on a certain conception
of existence. Make no mistake. All these
patients who out of respect for their dignity
ask for the opportunity to go to sleep forever
are people who love life intensely. As an old
peasant woman said one day: "I'm not tired
of life. It's life that's tired of me."
But surely doctors who help theirpatients
in this way face enormous problems if the
word gets out.
This is because of a medical bureaucracy
of which we should be suspicious. In
medicineand this is the glory of the
professionyou are always confronted with
a person who is different from everyone else.
Even if that person is suffering from an illness
which affects others, he or she remains unique.
A doctor confronted with a patient is one
person confronted with another. You cannot
ask a bureaucracy to define the relationship
between two individuals.
You see death every day. Does it tell you
anything about your own death?
Even if contact with the death of another
person is terrible, I don't think it brings you
any closer to your own death. It only increases
your solitude on Earth.
Have you gained anything from patients
who are at death's door?
Of course. When I began to write about
them I did so because some of them seemed
to me to be more heroic than soldiers. They
displayed courage, dignity, and serenity. This
attitude transcends the difference between
believers and non-believers. I have known anx¬
ious atheists and serene believers and vice
versa. An eminent priest whom I had the
honour to treat was anxious because he was
not sure whether anything lay beyond. That
day I understood that faith could be a matter
of will, not of certainty.
I have seen the extraordinary power of
maternal love. I know that it is total, a love
without equal, and that if fathers have the
same feelings then they too feel maternal love.
Maternal love is protective, giving and trusting
whatever the circumstances. Think of those
unfortunate mothers whose children are
addicted to drugs and sometimes steal from
them. They go on living in order to be able
to bring up their children and perhaps to save
them.
It is hard to understand that death is part
of life. One hears of children who say that
they don't want to die. How can they have
such ideas?
Children start to ask themselves the big
metaphysical question around the age of seven
or eight. These are the most intense thoughts
of our lives. For some people they remain
intense. For others they eventually lose their
force.
Spinoza was right when he wrote: "The
wise man thinks of nothing less than he does
of death, for all wisdom is wisdom of life and
not wisdom of death."
