A many-sided concept
by Ahmad Hasnawi
The vision of time in Islamic culture has so many aspectsreligious, philosophical and scientific-
that it cannot be reduced to a simple formula
W
26
AHMAD HASNAWI,
Tunisian philosopher, is a
researcher at the French
National Centre for Scientific
Research (CNRS), Paris. The
author of studies on al-Farabi,
Avicenna and Averroës, he is
currently carrying out research
into the "natural philosophy"
of Muslim philosophers.
HEN seeking to describe the concept of time,
space or any other basic notion specific to a given
civilization, it would be useful if we could find
a distinctive form of words to sum up that civili¬
zation's character.
But this would be to fall victim to two sim¬
plistic assumptions. One is that civilizations are
discrete and unconnected. The other is that each
civilization has its own special insight into time,
which is reflected in various ways in the
"regions" of that civilization.
The following brief comments about the con¬
cept of time in Islamic culture are intended to sug¬
gest that these two assumptions cannot be
accepted at face value.
Qur'anic time
We cannot here consider the Qur'anic view of
time in all its richness, and shall therefore dwell
on three points only.
The first is that the Qur'an integrates time
as an essential aspect of revelation. The "divine
teaching" was adapted to the circumstances of the
Prophet's actions, and responded to his doubts,
his questionings, and the situation of the infant
Islamic community as regards both its organiza¬
tion and its relationships with other communities.
The second concerns "sacred history" as it
develops in the Qur'an in accordance with this
divine teaching. The early Meccan revelations
focused on the cycle of creation-cosmic break-up
and total destruction-recreation, in which every
soul is judged according to its actions. But in the
middle of the first Meccan period (from the begin¬
ning of the revelation until the years 615-616) reli¬
gious history acquired temporal substance. In the
first phase this history mainly took the form of
the manifestation of divine judgements on the
peoples who rejected the Word and on sinful
communities. But soon this aspect, while not dis¬
appearing altogether, gave way to a history of the
divine revelations, which established a genealog¬
ical and spiritual continuity between the bearers
of these revelations, each confirming his
predecessor's message.
The third point concerns a basic temporal
notion in the Qur'an, that of a "stated term" or
"fixed term" (ajal musamma), which is applied
in particular to the lives of people, human com¬
munities, and the world. Behind this and similar
expressions lies the idea of an "allocated span"

.e. ':
I LDI ,k.vl,
i
Î Hl v07S s
Copper sundial dating from
the reign of the Muslim ruler
Nur ad-Din (Nureddln), late
12th century.
"Worship timetable"
indicating the hours of prayer
at the Great Mosque of Xian,
capital of Shaanxi province,
northwest China.
whose duration is fixed by divine decreean idea
in keeping with the affirmation of God's pres¬
cience and omnipotence, but also containing
within it the notion that the life-span of beings
and things is in a sense subject to quasi-natural
laws, to a divinely-ordained legal system.
Astronomy and liturgical time
The Muslim calendar is lunar. Liturgical time,
especially the determination of the beginning and
end of the fasting month (Ramadan), is bound up
with observation of the New Moon. For secular
time and the timing of the daily prayers unequal
hours were used, their length varying according
to the season and the latitude. Equal hours were
mainly used in astronomy.
Muslim astronomers carried out intensive
research into ways of predicting the appearance
of the crescent Moon and of measuring time
(there was a science of the measurement of time,
Urn al-miqat). Particularly interested in liturgical
time, they drew up tables to determine the hour
of prayer for every day of the year, and developed
sundials and astrolabes marked with curves cor¬
responding to these times.
We feel tempted to suggest that these scien¬
tific developments were not actuated by liturgical
needs. Firstly, jurists tended to exclude arithmetic
when it came to forecasting the new Moon;
and secondly research into the visibility of the
new Moon was part of the natural development
of astronomy. Indeed, prayer curves were prob¬
ably only a sort of appendage to the theory and
art of sundials and astrolabes. Scholars who
claimed that their work was of value to the faith
probably only did so in order to please the
enlightened ruler who had encouraged them to
take it up.
On the other hand, however, scholars' preoc¬
cupation with religion can be interpreted as a sign
that they were fulfilling a social demand. This is
confirmed both by the frequent use of sundials
in mosques and also by the tendency of mosques
to employ the services of a muwaqqit, or specialist
in the measurement of time, who might, like the
fourteenth-century Damascene Ibn al-Shatir, be
a great astronomer. This social demand provided
astronomer-mathematicians with a testing-ground
for their theories.
Universal histories
Muslim historiography is characterized by its
richness and the scale of its output. It was also
extremely diverse, both in its subject-matter
(urban, regional, provincial and universal histo¬
ries; religious and secular histories) and in its
method of presentation (genealogical, dynastic,
annalistic or by generation), all these approaches
sometimes being combined.
With the beginning of a strictly Muslim era,
starting with the Prophet's Hegira or migration
from Mecca to Yathrib (Medina), the annalistic
form, in which events are recorded on an annual
basis, gained a valuable chronological framework.
The universal histories also contain attempts to
synchronize the histories of the different peoples
of the pre-Islamic period. The idea of a universal
history in fact implies a single temporal con¬
tinuum into which natural and cultural events are
fitted. 27

At the end of the eighth century and the
beginning of the ninth, most Muslim theologians
adopted an atomist doctrine, which dealt both
with matter (and the accidents that might attach
thereto) and with time. According to this doc¬
trine, bodies consist of indivisible homogeneous
particles, which are distinguished from each other
only by the presence in them of accidents which
endow them with a given characteristic. Some
theologians (the Mu'tazilites) held that bodies
comprising these atoms and certain accidents last
beyond the moment when they come into being.
Others (the Ash'arites) considered that every acci¬
dent is continually recreated by God, just as
atoms and bodies only last by virtue of an acci¬
dent which is continually recreated in them by
God.
The world: finite or eternal?
Muslim philosophers, whose philosophical ac¬
tivity followed in the wake of Aristotle and the
neo-Platonists, opposed the theologians not only
over the doctrine of atomism (for them, as for
Aristotle, time was continuous) but also as regards
the eternity of the world.
Al-Kindi (d. circa 866) held that the world
had a finite span; but from al-Farabi (d. 950)
onwards philosophers adopted the thesis that the
world is eternal. They did not deny the world's
causal dependence on first principles, and on
God, but they did not recognize a first moment
marking the beginning of the world. The debate
between supporters and opponents of the idea of
an eternal world involved problems relating to
infinity, causality, the logical difficulties inherent
in the idea of a beginning of the world, and the
relationship between knowledge and divine will
on the one hand and time on the other.
This brief account of Islamic thinking about
time shows that it is not a single body of thought
characteristic of Islamic culture as a whole; nor
can it be defined by a form of words that would
englobe all its variants. There have been sporadic
attempts to explain certain temporal behaviour
patterns in present-day Islamic societies by
presupposing a specifically Muslim view of time;
but this is merely to introduce (in addition to the
two assumptions mentioned at the beginning of
this article) a sort of "cultural fatalism" to the
effect that man's conduct and image are deter¬
mined by a vision laid down as a timeless
paradigm.
Water clock with automata as
described in al-Jazari's
13th-century Book of
Knowledge of Ingenious
Mechanical Devices.
