Between order and chaos
by Graciela Scheines
Like a game, society has rules. What happens when the players cheat?
'I
Left, the Queen's croquet
game: "the croquet balls were
live hedgehogs, and the
mallets live flamingoes, and
the soldiers had to double
themselves up and stand on
their hands and feet, to make
the arches". Illustration by
Gwynedd M. Hudson for a
1932 edition of Alice In
Wonderland.
don't think they play at all fairly, and they
all quarrel so dreadfully one can't hear oneself
speakand they don't seem to have any rules in
particular; at least, if there are, nobody attends
to them...."
The speaker is Alice, heroine of Lewis Car¬
roll's Alice in Wonderland, and she is describing
her confusion at a bizarre croquet game in which
all the normal rules have been abandoned. The
croquet ground is not the usual smooth lawn but
a wasteland of ridges and furrows. The hoops,
balls and mallets are all living creatures that liter¬
ally refuse to play the game. A bloodthirsty and
tyrannical Queen rules the proceedings by whim,
unilaterally deciding when play starts and finishes
and having the other players' heads cut off on the
slightest pretext. They too behave rather oddly,
fighting and insulting one another and playing
all at once without waiting their turn. Their fear

Les jeux et les hommes © Gallimard, Paris, 1967.
of the Queen makes them suspicious and cruel
and encourages cheating. But then they are not
playing because they want to, but because they
have been ordered to do so.
Carroll's parody brilliantly illustrates the
links that bind play, power and society. Alice's
experience in the croquet game effectively lays
bare the irrational and sometimes dangerous
mechanisms of social life. Reading her account
of it, it is hard not to think of the game of
democracy, when it is disturbed by the arbitrary
decisions of a few unfair players who prevent
their adversaries from playing, treating them as
enemies rather than as equals worthy of respect.
The crazy hoops, balls and mallets are simply a
metaphor for bureaucratic institutions when they
impede decisions and projects undertaken in the
public interest.
In contrast with the Queen's croquet game,
any kind of genuine play seems to be a model
of conviviality and sociability, even including
those violently competitive games that worry
some teachers so much, for they too have an
educational function. From time immemorial
children in every country have played at samurai,
soldiers or cowboys and Indians, using sticks in
place of spears or rifles. Even if such games give
vent to aggressive instincts, they do not encourage
children to murder or promote a cult of violence.
On the contrary, playing at war serves a useful
purpose, even at the cost of occasional cuts or
bruises, for it prepares children for democratic
co-existence by teaching them to defend their
own beliefs without despising those of other
people. Always granted, of course, that the
players respect the rules, which set limits on the
degree of aggressiveness allowed and ensure
respect for adversaries.
When any social group turns its back on this
model, however, whether by forgetting it or
breaking its rules, the gates are opened for every
conceivable abuse of power. As soon as the rules
cease to apply equally to all citizens without dis¬
tinction, or when rivalry degenerates to the point
at which one group terrorizes another, then the 19

whole concept of ordered and fair competition
disappears and the worst excesses become
possible.
There cannot be games without rules. The
act of playing involves creating order. The players
may make the rules up themselves or may choose
voluntarily and enjoyably to submit to existing
regulations, insofar as the order of the game both
hampers and encourages the freedom of the
player.
But the patterns of everyday life must be tem¬
porarily interrupted in order to create this order.
A kind of vacuum has to be created before play
can begin. That is why neither the Queen nor
her subjects can truly be said to be playing in
Alice's croquet game. Even in the game they are
still prisoners of the serious business of everyday
life, whose hierarchies, repressive order, punish¬
ments and fears they reproduce. The disorderli-
ness of life intrudes into the game and confuses
the players. The climate of terror that reigns in
Carroll's imaginary kingdom leaves no room for
the spirit of play because it leaves no place for
freedom.
It follows that there are two essential steps
in genuine play: a temporary relapse into chaos
followed by the creation of a new order. Chaos
and the void are not easy to accept, and this may
explain why old people and children are much Tug-of-war in Bangladesh.
20

readier to play games than adults who are too tied
up with everyday responsibilities to abandon
their familiar routine.
Some people, however, never get beyond the
first step. For them, creating chaos is not a
preparatory stage but an end in itself which they
seek to perpetuate by systematic and purposeless
destruction. Chaos can be a necessary step on the
path to the founding of a new social order, but
if it goes on too long, the law of the jungle pre¬
vails and individuals become subject to the
despotic caprice of an autocrat or a ruling group.
Play requires a balance between order and
chaos, destruction and creation. If the balance is
upset, play ceases to be possible. On one side of
the coin, there are the forces that turn citizens
into mere cogs in a machine: fear of the unknown
or of a break with established ways, attachment
to a daily routine that leaves no room for freedom
or for change. On the other, the exaltation of
chaos and permanent destruction turns man into
a beast of prey and can only lead to violence and
absolutism.
The past forty years have been marked by
a growing infatuation with games, particularly
those invented by and for adults. We now have
games weekends, games courses, games mara¬
thons. There is also a growing market for busi¬
ness games aimed at decision-makers and
executives.
In such exercises, the materialism of the
modern world generally perverts the true spirit
of play. The game is no longer a gratuitous
activity indulged in for its own sake, but a
utilitarian pursuit aimed either, in the case of
work simulation, at preparing young people for
adult life and a career, or, in the role-playing type
of business game, at envisaging work scenarios
and practising decision-making with the aim of
improving commercial, political or diplomatic
acumen.
In these instances play is gradually being



deprived of its fundamental significance, not by
disequilibrium between the forces of chaos and
order but through the erosion of the line that
separates play from real life. When the only
reason for playing is to win (time, experience, or
money) then play ceases to be a pastime or leisure
activity. It is no longer the art of enjoying spare
time.
GRACIELA SCHEINES
¡s an Argentine philosopher and
writer with a special interest in
play and games. She has
organized many seminars on play
and literature and is the author of
several books In this field.
Gambling at
Las Vegas (USA).
