A PLATONIC PARABLE
BY ALAIN FRONTIER
IXT the beginning of Plato's Republic,
Thrasymachus, one of Socrates' questioners, flies
into a towering rage. Socrates, he says, is making
fools of them all as usual. He is pretending to be
a simpleton, saying nothing clear, letting others
do the talking for him, taking pleasure in seeing
them get mixed up in their own contradictions.
The irony of Socrates, and through him the
irony of Plato whose mouthpiece he is, is not
gratuitous. He wants to destabilize certainties
before pursuing the only inquiry that matters:
what is justice? Thrasymachus's answer is clear.
It is the established sovereign power that decides
what is justice. Thrasymachus decides to stick to
the reality of things. What interests Socrates is
not the real but the true. And to explore the true
he proposes the path of utopia.
Let us observe, says Socrates, through the
word, the logoshe insists on this verbal
dimensiona city that is in the process of being
constituted. Why a city? Because a city is bigger

than an individual and thus easier to observe. By
seeing how men will live in it, we shall perhaps
have occasion to see justice and injustice consti¬
tute themselves there at the same time.
This city does not exist, it is a fiction. But
it is not entirely a lie since it is subjected to the
moral requirement that is love of truth. By
pushing it to its conclusion is there not a chance
of coming close to a reply?
Let's act as if it were a myth, says Socrates,
even though we know that it isn't one. There's
no pretence in this fiction. Nor any nostalgia: the
verbs are not in the past tense. With its future
indicative, utopia offers itself as a pure project,
we don't even need to dream about its execution.
It is not the exposition of an ideological
programme! Utopia does not present already
acquired ideas of which one can be sure. "I don't
know," Socrates says. "I don't know yet. We
must continue. We must go where the logos takes
us as the wind blows a boat." Utopia is like a
slow voyage which takes its time.
And yet what difficulties, what risks!
announces Socrates to those of his listeners who
wish to accompany him on this fictitious adven¬
ture. Utopia will meet with incredulity, it will be
taken for the ramblings of a dreamer. Even worse.
What I fear, says Socrates, is not so much making
people laugh as travestying the truth. I would
move forward more boldly if I were sure of
knowing. But I doubt and I seek. Perhaps it is
necessary, he adds, to bring a certain proportion
to our utopia, to impose certain limits on it.
No, replies Glaucon, another participant in the
discussion, we must go on, even if it takes the
whole of life.
Utopia. Has anyone ever noticed the strange
way in which Thomas More during the Renais¬
sance created his neologism from the Greek? At
first sight the word seems simple. Derived from
the Greek word topos meaning "place" and the
negative ou, "utopia" designates that which is
found in "no place". But logically More should
have used the privative form a which should be
used in this situation (as in apolitical, etc.). Why
did he not do so? Why did he not want to use
the word "atopia"?
I think there are two reasons. First of all, the
word atopia already existed in Greek to designate
something extraordinary, new, strange, extrava¬
gant or absurd. This is not a definition of the
utopia described by More (and after him Rabelais
and others). Then, by beginning the word with
a negative adverb ("not"), More deliberately
emphasized that the place he describes does not
exist anywhere, has never existed and will never
exist. That it should not exist. Woe betide anyone
who tried to apply to the real world what is only
a figment of thought, a method of understanding
and approaching the truth.
If Plato's city existed, it would be the worst
of all cities. Is this a reason for burning his
Republic} Banish the philosopher from our city?
The world's problems come not from utopias but
from those who were foolish enough to confuse
them with programmes of political action.
Panel from a series of
allegorical frescoes on "Good
and Bad Government"
(1337-1339), painted by the
Italian artist Ambroglo
Lorenzettl for the Palazzo
Pubbllco, Siena.
ALAIN FRONTIER,
French poet and grammarian,
teaches ancient Greek In Paris.
He is the author of textbooks
on the Greek language and of
several works of fiction,
including Portrait d'une dame
(TXT, Brussels, -1987) and
Comment j'ai connu Harry
Dickson (Muro-Torto, Berlin,
1988). 21
