TM MO   y MO ! M 
transmission 0 the 40-G cultural
legacy from alAndalus to Europe
i. T was not until the twelfth century that the
first college of translators from Arabic into Latin
was set up in Spain, in the city of Toledo. It was
founded by Don Raimundo, archbishop of
Toledo from 1126 to 1151. A Benedictine monk
who had been born at Agen in south-western
France, Raimundo was convinced of the impor-
tance of the Arab philosophers for an under-
standing of Aristotle, and he decided to make
their works available in Latin.
Domingo Gundisalvo, archdeacon of Segovia,
was one of the most eminent of the scholars
recruited by Raimundo. He translated much of
the encyclopaedic At al :/a' ("Book of
Healing ") by Ibn Sina (Avicenna) as well as al-
Ghazali's MM //M !/ ("The Aims of the
Philosophers ") and aI-Farabi's/M't !/- «/M
( " Catalogue of the Sciences ").
But Gundisalvo knew no Arabic. He used a
Jewish or Muslim intermediary to translate from
Arabic into Castilian, and then put the Castilian
into Latin. Among his Jewish collaborators two
names feature prominently : a certain Salomon
and, more importantly, one Johannes Avendeath
(who also appears as Avendear, Johannes ben
David, Johannes Hispanus, and also John of
Seville). The exact identity of these two has
aroused much discussion.
The most important of the Toledan trans-
lators was undoubtedly Gerard of Cremona
(1114-1187). Thanks to a brief notice left by his
pupils on his life and work, we know that Gerard
came to Toledo after finishing his studies in Italy,
in order to learn more about the 4/wMt. This
vast astronomical treatise by Claudius Ptolemaeus
ABDURRAHMAN BADAW).
of Egypt. is a philosopher and historian ofphilosophy. A
former head of the departments of philosophy at a number
of universities in Egypt, he Libyan Arab Jamah ! hya. and
Kuwait, and a visiting professor at the Sorbonne. Paris, he is
the author of over a hundred publications i  French and in
7t Arabic, mainly concerned with existentialism. Greek and
V Arab philosophy, and contemporary German philosophy.

(Ptolemy), the celebrated second-century-AD
Greek astronomer, mathematician and
geographer, was then only available in Arabic.
In fact Gerard discovered a multitude of scien-
tific works in Arabic in Toledo, and immediately
began to learn the language so as to read them
and, later, to render them into Latin. He eventu-
ally translated more than seventy of them,
including the 4/gc, which he completed in
1175.
His translations cover virtually the entire
field of science of his time. Among them are
several treatises by Aristotle (The Physics, 0
Heaven ! M EA, 0 GccrfzoM J Co ?'y-
tion, and 7% c  ? 0), as well as books by al-
Kindi, Ptolemy, Isaac Israeli, Ibn SIna, Galen and
others.
The other great translator was Michael Scot
(c. ll75-c. l235). Born in England, he studied at
Oxford University and then in Paris before
settling in Toledo. After learning Arabic and
Hebrew, he became a prolific translator of Arabic
into Latin. Near the end of his life he was invited
to the court of the Emperor Frederick II in Sicily,
the other great centre of translation from the
Arabic.
Scot's translations included many commen-
taries on Aristotle by Ibn Rushd (Averroes) as
well as al-Bitruji's work on the spheres, which
was to have a great influence on astronomical
knowledge.
The Toledan translations raise problems of
attribution. The French writer and historian
Ernest Renan wrote in a study of Averroes : " It
is certain that the Latins who journeyed to
Toledo had no scruples about appropriating the
work of their secretaries, and... the name of
the translator was often a fiction.
" Nearly always a Jew, often a converted
Muslim, did a rough translation, substituting
words in Latin or the vernacular for the Arabic
original. A clerk would supervise this process,
taking responsibility for the final Latin version
and putting his name to the work. This explains
why one translation is often attributed to
different individuals. "
Renan's view was shared by the great
American medievalist Charles Homer Haskins in
his book on the twelfth-century Renaissance. It
is also supported by some translations in the Bib-
liotheque Nationale in Paris, which were ren-
dered from Arabic into Latin by way of Spanish.
The extraordinary achievements of the
Toledan translators were in reality the joint work
of Muslim Arabs, Jews and Latin Christians. It
would be unjust to give the credit exclusively to
the latter, even though many of the manuscripts,
and many historians, mention only their names.
Gundisalvo, Gerard of Cremona, Michael Scot
and others all called on the help of Muslim Arabs
or more often of Jews in the course of their work.
Sometimes the task of the Latin Christian trans-
lators was limited to putting into good Latin what
their assistants had already translated into bad
Latin or Spanish.
The great enterprise of translation from
Arabic into Latin began in Spain in the twelfth
century, and Toledo was its most active centre.
But it also took place in other cities of the penin-
sula including Barcelona, Tarragona, Segovia,
Leon and Pamplona. The task was subsequently
taken up on the other side of the Pyrenees, in
Toulouse, Beziers, Narbonne, Montpellier and
Marseilles.
It was thanks to these translations that
Europe came to know both the works of the
Greek philosophers, mathematicians, doctors and
astronomers and those of their Arabic commen-
tators or emulators. As Haskins wrote, " The
reception of this knowledge by western Europe
marks a crucial turning-point in the history of
European thought."t
Of Arabic origin, the word
alcazar is used to designate a
type of medieval fortified
palace in Spain. Left, a view
of Toledo in which the alcazar
can be seen on the horizon.
Right, detail from a passage
describing the treatment of
goitre in an i)) uminated
Latin manuscript of
Avicenna's Canon of Medicine
(13th century).
41
