The four pilkrs of Neptune's
temple by ¡acques Ferrkr
His breast must have been protected all round with oak and
bronze, who first launched his frail boat on the rough sea. . . .
(Horace, Odes, I, III, 9)
Xhe ocean is the largest expanse on Earth and
the vastest resource available to humankind. It
contains in abundance, in a state of continual
regeneration, the source of life from which the
human race emerged. It inspires the industry of
Homofaber and whets the imagination of Homo
sapiens, stimulating his creative genius and
challenging his spirit of adventure and courage.
The scientific, technological, industrial, economic
and social responses to the ocean's hold on the
human imagination may be grouped under four
headings, each of which corresponds to a dream:
the achievements of the maritime genius (walking
on the sea); the conquest of the abyss (penetrating
the ocean depths); the exploitation of the oceans
(harvesting food from the sea); the new Atlantis
(inhabiting the sea). These are the four great
pillars of Neptune's temple.
The achievements of the
maritime genius
Free man, you will always cherish the sea
(Charles Baudelaire)
The sea has inspired human genius to invent a
host of navigational devices. The Greeks, the
Chinese, the Arabs, the Portuguese, the
Spaniards, the British, the Italians, and the
French, among other peoples, may claim to have
invented the astrolabe, the compass, portulans
and sea charts, the chronometer for calculating
longitudes, the anchor and rigging, the keel and
66 the rudder. The polders of Holland and the
embankments promised for Bangladesh, the artifi¬
cial harbour of Arromanches and the Channel
Tunnel rank with with the lighthouse of Alex¬
andria as Wonders of the World. The Statue of
Liberty in New York harbour and the Colossus
of Rhodes were born of the same spirit of inven¬
tion. Dictionaries in every language abound in
words that designate things and events
experienced, dreamed of and created under the
sway of the sea. However, the ship remains the
most beautiful of these creations.
Many peoples have left the mark of their
genius on the design of ships which have been
the witnesses and often the agents of their des¬
tiny. The history of science and technology,
which forms the infrastructure of the history of
civilizations, is a fresco in which naval pomp and
circumstance play as big a part as they do on the
Bayeux Tapestry. The English poet John Masefield
wrote of a "Quinquireme of Nineveh from dis¬
tant Ophir/Rowing home to haven in sunny
Palestine/With a cargo of ivory". Today, twenty-
seven centuries later, giant oil tankers ply in their
wake.
The strands of legend and history, dream and
reality, have been woven into a rich tapestry of
images by poets, novelists and historians: the
longship of the Argonauts; the barques of Ulysses
and Aeneas; the triremes of Salamis; Polynesian
rafts; the drakkars of Ragnar Lodbrok and Leif
Erikson; the ships of the crusaders; the Santa
Maria of Christopher Columbus; Chinese war
junks; the praus of Malayaancestors of today's
"Sfc

Cartoon, below, shows
Jules Verne, the author of
Twenty Thousand Leagues
Under the Sea, investigating
the seafloor (1883).
multi-hulled ocean racers; the storm-battered
invincible Spanish Armada; Mongol fleets dis¬
persed by the kamikaze wind; the galleys of
Lepanto; the dhows of Sindbad and Henri de
Monfried; tea clippers; the Victory of Hood and
Nelson; the Queen Elizabeth and the France, great
liners in the tradition of the Great Eastern immor¬
talized by Jules Verne in Une Ville Flottante, and
the Titanic, recently rediscovered on the ocean
bed.
~^£5:
The conquest of the deep
that ye . . . May be able to comprehend with
all saints what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height.
(St. Paul, Ephesians III, 17, 18)
In 1868, Jules Verne described for the enchant¬
ment of generations of "children in love with
maps and prints", how Professor Aronnax and
his two companions discovered beneath the
pounding waves Captain Nemo's electrically-
powered steel monster the Nautilus, as vainly pur¬
sued and harpooned by Ned Land as the white
whale Moby Dick had been in 1851 by Captain
Ahab in Melville's novel.
Less than a century after Jules Verne, the
American nuclear submarine Nautilus became the
first vessel to sail beneath the polar ice-cap and
took only a few years to cover more than ten
times "Twenty Thousand Leagues under the
Sea". Also in our own time, the divers of the
French vessel Calypso descended to the most
secret corners of the "World of Silence"; the
"Extraordinary Voyages" ofJules Verne's imagi¬
nation were emulated in real life by Comman¬
dant Jacques-Yves Cousteau; while the French
marine engineer Camille Rougeron amused him¬
self by designing a submarine supertanker which
could carry several million tonnes of crude from
one deepwater terminal to another. May God
preserve us!
All these feats, both mental and physical,
were performed a few cables beneath the surface,
in the blue sea that is penetrated, caressed and
brought to life by the not totally absorbed rays
of the Sun. However, no one ventured into the
ocean depths until the early 1930s when William
Beebe and Otis Barton made the first dives in the
bathysphere, a steel sphere suspended on a cable
attached to a boat. By 1934 these courageous men
had reached a depth of just under 1,000 metres.
It was not until 1954, twenty years after
Beebe and Barton's exploit, which was without
practical consequences but had a catalytic effect
on the collective imagination, that psychological
taboos and technological obstacles to deep-sea
exploration were finally overcome when Georges
Houot and Pierre Willm in the bathyscaphe
FNRS 3 reached a depth of more than 4,500
metres off Dakar. The spherical cabin of the
bathyscaphe, which was made of high-quality
steel, had to resist pressures of over 400 kg per
cm2. Its success was due to the scientific imagi¬
nation of professor Auguste Piccard, the
engineering skills of French submarine con¬
structors, and the courage of the two pioneer
divers.
The hidden depths of the ocean have been
visited and observed at close quarters on several 67

A 16th-century Korean
"turtle-boat".
occasionsto a depth of 9,050 metres in the
Kouriles trench by Houot and Willm in 1958
aboard the Archimede, and frequently in recent
years at the mid-Atlantic ridge, where the con¬
tinental plates supporting Europe and America
meet and fray. Although no sea monster has yet
appeared, this does not necessarily mean that such
monsters do not exist. Neither have the stocks
of living creatures which accumulate at certain
depths according to the hypothesis proposed by
the Danish oceanographer Hans Petterson1 ever
yet been seen beneath the arc lights (which
perhaps drive them away).
The exploitation of the oceans
The sea is the forest
(Victor Hugo, Les pauvres gens)
The most imaginative and universal poet of the
nineteenth century, exiled at the age of fifty on
a cliff overlooking the sea, regarded the sea as a
sterile and frightening immensity, a cemetery of
wrecks, a hostile power, a source of uncontroll¬
able energy ready to crush and bury the coastal
poor who were condemned to forage for their
meagre food supplies using ways and means that
had hardly changed since biblical times.
-fs } * Jk * À M
68
Within less than two generations, this night¬
mare situation had changed into a far more
hopeful one. Lone fishermen were replaced by
industrial fisheries. Then came the development
of aquaculture. Soon it will be possible to order
robots by remote control to shovel up the man¬
ganese nodules which carpet the seabed. If ther¬
monuclear fusion of hydrogen in confined con¬
ditions is successfully developed, the seawhich
contains inexhaustible supplies of hydrogenwill
become the reservoir of a virtually free and non-
polluting energy source, which could satisfy all
our energy needs in a new golden age. Perhaps
we shall see a happy ending to the wonderful Per¬
sian story of the poor fisherman who cast his net
after imploring Allah and invoking Moses and
caught a bottle which he was unwise enough to
uncork after breaking the seal of Solomon to do
so. A genie emerged from the bottle "in the form
of smoke which rose to the clouds, billowing over
the sea . . . before solidifying into a monstrous
giant". The genie would have wiped out the over-
curious fisherman if the latter had not persuaded
it to get back into the bottle. For us the genie
was the cataclysmic mushroom cloud which rose
above the Pacific Ocean off the island of Bikini
on 26 May 1956 after the testing of a ther¬
monuclear bomb. Today there are grounds for
hoping that scientists working on nuclear fusion
may return this particular genie to its bottle, pos¬
sibly in the form of a Tokamak2 or some other
form of apparatus serving this fourth and last
pillar of Neptune's temple.
The new Atlantis
The sea begins and ceases and then again begins
And when after thought I long rest my gaze
On the calm of the gods, I have here my reward. . . .
But the wind is rising! . . . I must try to live!
(Paul Valéry, Le Cimetière Marin)
The imagination and the sea have been closely
linked ever since the legend of Atlantis. But is
it really a legend?3 Whatever the case, it may be
converted (or restored) to reality. More and more
people dream of lotus-eating on tropical islands,
and holiday clubs and leisure centres of all kinds
are proliferating. Offshore oil platforms could
already serve as models or embryos for earthly
paradises.
We must aim higher and settle in ever more
remote locations. Today it is possible to build off¬
shore and even way out to sea, far from the dirt
and noise of cities, islands dedicated to the higher
pursuits of humanity. Habitations can be built
above the deep blue waters, looking out over a
vast expanse, the inviolate horizon and "the calm
of the gods", but above all in the freedom of the
open sea, subject only to international law. The

"serene temples of the sages" which Lucretius
imagined in the marine environment (Suave mare
magno), the ideal scientific city which Francis
Bacon called the "New Atlantis", could thus
emerge from the limbo of the mind.
Philippe Tailliez, another pioneer of under-


water exploration, has been cherishing this idea
ever since his first dives in 1937 with Jacques-Yves
Cousteau. He has worked out an outline
Archipelaego Project and in 1981 founded an
association whose aim is "the design, construc¬
tion, and experimentation of a floating inhabited
archipelago extending from the heights to the
depths, by means of spatial and underwater struc¬
tures. Such an archipelago, dynamically anchored
to the seabed, is being planned for the Pacific
Ocean, outside those areas which have already
been or are being appropriated by the nations of
the planet for economic exploitation."
Described as "a symbol and affirmation of
the common marine and spatial future of the
human race, in line with the concept of the
common heritage of humanity", the Archipelaego
Project was favourably received by leading divers
and astronauts who met at Miami in 1985, in
Tunis in 1986 and in Japan in 1990, under the
auspices of the World Confederation of Under¬
water Activities (CMAS). It is still no more than
a project, perhaps even a pipe-dream. But it is not
too late, nor perhaps too soon, to start to build
this "last shore".
Summer holidaymakers on the
Atlantic coast of France.
1. La croisière aux abîmes, cited by Georges Houot and Pierre
Willm in Le bathyscaphe, Les Editions de Paris, 1954.
2. Tokamak: an apparatus for the magnetic confinement of the
reacting matter (plasma) involved in nuclear fusion.
3. One recent study suggests that an Atlantis civilization may have
existed in the North Sea 10,000 years ago. Jean Dequelle, De la
préhistoire à l'Atlantide des mégalithes, France-Empire publishers,
Paris 1990.
JACQUES FERRIER,
Commissioner General in the
French Navy, is honorary
president of the Academy of
the Var département in France
and a member of the French
Academy of Commercial
Sciences. He is the author of
many scientific papers, and
recently published a study on
the French Revolution and the
Var (Académie du Var, Toulon
1990). 69
