The ghost ship
of the Arctic
4M n*
WNE of the world's strangest sea stories is still
unfinished, and looks like remaining so for a long
time, perhaps for ever. This is the story of the
Baychimo, the deserted ghost ship that refuses to
die and still haunts human memory and curiosity.
A fine, trim, solid steel 1,322-ton cargo
steamer owned by the Hudson's Bay Company,
the Baychimo was built in Sweden in 1914. She
was originally used to collect furs from Eskimo
trappers along the Victoria Island coast of
Canada's North-West Territory. With her single
tall funnel, curved bridge and long high prow,
the Baychimo was sturdily built to withstand the
floes and pack-ice of the dangerous northern
waters in which she operated.
She actually pioneered fur trading with the
Eskimo settlements around the Beaufort Sea,
forging her way many times on her 3,200-
David Gunston
kilometre round trip through some of the most
treacherous shipping lanes in the world. Each
year she set out on a regular voyage, always a
tough and difficult one, delivering food, fuel and
other supplies to, and loading pelts from, eight
of the Hudson Bay Company's lonely outposts.
On 6 July 193 1 she left Vancouver, British
Columbia, on such a journey, with skipper John
Cornwell and his crew of thirty-six men. They
On the morning of 22
September 1931 members of
the Baych/mo's crew make a
vain attempt to help their ship
break through ice floes to
open water.
63

expected a hard trip, for all their runs were hard,
but what they did not know was that this was
to be the Baychimo's last manned voyage.
PRISONERS
OF THE PACK-ICE
Day and night, under the misty glow of the never-
setting sun, the Baychimo steamed on eastward.
Eventually they reached the end of their normal
eastward run by the shores of Victoria Island.
With the hold crammed with cargo, the relieved
captain turned the Baychimo about for Van¬
couver.
Unfortunately winter came early that year
to this bleak northern wasteland. Ferocious winds


and deep-freezing conditions brought the dreaded
pack-ice south much quicker than usual. By 30
September only a narrow stretch of open water
remained for the ship to steam through, and on
1 October the ice closed in.
Her engines at stop, she could only move as
the creaking ice willed. She was not far from the
Alaskan village of Barrow, where the company
had permanent huts built ashore. Seeing that a
terrible blizzard was imminent, Cornwell ordered
his men to trudge across the kilometre or so of
ice to shelter in these huts, where they remained
for two days, half-frozen and unable to venture
out.
Then the first extraordinary thing in the Bay¬
chimo's strange story happened. Without warning
the pack-ice loosened and moved away from the
Baychimo's sides, leaving her free to move again.
The crew rushed aboard and for three solid hours
the ship steamed away to the west at full speed.
Disaster seemed to have been narrowly averted.
But once more the ice gripped the little cargo
steamer, and on 8 October a sickening crack her¬
alded the sudden appearance of a deadly black
fault-line in the ice. It actually cracked right across
the patch where some of the crew were playing
football.
Now the ice that had held the ship had
broken away, it began to move slowly but surely
towards the shore. To Cornwell it seemed only
a matter of hours before his rugged little vessel
would be crushed like an empty eggshell. Radio
SOS messages were sent out but these doughty
men hung on in the hope that they and their ship
might be saved. By 15 October their plight
seemed so desperate that the Hudson Bay Com¬
pany sent two aircraft from the base at Nome,
almost 700 kilometres away. Twenty-two of the
Baychimo's crew were rescued, and her skipper
and fourteen men were left behind to wait until
the melting ice released the ship and its precious
64 cargo. They knew they might have to wait as long
as a year, so they built a small shelter on the pack-
ice a short distance from the shore.
Their sojourn proved to be short and
startling, for on the pitch black night of 24
November a hellish blizzard descended, trapping
the men inside their wooden shelter. When at
last the storm abated, they emerged into the
wintry gloom to find that the Baychimo had com¬
pletely vanished beneath mountains of ice over
20 metres high. They searched around as much
as they could, but on failing to find their doomed
ship they came to the conclusion that she had
been broken to pieces in the blizzard and had
sunk.
A GHOST SHIP
They reached the safety of the mainland and pre¬
pared to return home. In a few days, however,
an Eskimo seal-hunter brought the astonishing
news that he had seen their ship some 70
kilometres away to the south-west. Already the
Baychimo had been turned into a ghost ship, a
polar puppet pushed this way and that by the
power of ice, wind and water. The fifteen men
trudged to where the Eskimo led them and, sure
enough, there was the ship.
It was obvious to the captain that the chances
of salvaging his vessel were nil. The ice was not
going to allow it. So the men rescued the more
valuable furs from the hold and reluctantly left
the Baychimo for ever. In due course they were
flown back home.
American planes rescue
the crew of the Ice-locked
Baychimo.
DAVID GUNSTON
is a British free-lance writer
and journalist whose work has
been published in over 40
countries. He has written
widely on the natural world and
is the author of biographies of
Marconi and Faraday.

Wfi. mt u
As the months went by, the Company's base
in Vancouver received strange reports from
Eskimo sources that their ship had again been
sighted, this time hundreds of kilometres to the
east. On 12 March 1932, a young trapper and
explorer named Leslie Melvin discovered her
while on a journey from Herschel Island to
Nome by dog-team. She was floating inshore
peacefully enough. He managed to board her and
found that many of the furs were still intact in
the hold. Unfortunately, as he was alone and
without much equipment, far from his base in
Alaska, he could do nothing.
Some months went by and a group of wan¬



dering prospectors saw the ship and also managed
to board her. They reported that everything was
in perfect order. In March 1933 the Baychimo
apparently drifted back to roughly the point
where her captain had abandoned her. A group
of some thirty Eskimos saw her floating idly in
the freezing waters and went out in their kayaks,
but no sooner had they clambered aboard than
a terrific storm blew up. They were trapped on
the ghost ship without food for ten days before
they could get away.
ADRIFT IN THE ARCTIC
By August 1933 the Hudson Bay Company knew
that the Baychimo was moving calmly in a north¬
erly direction, but she was still much too far from
civilization to make salvage operations a possi¬
bility. The next visitors were an exploring party
on a schooner. They came across her in July 1934,
and boarded her for a few hours.
By now the legend of the little grey tall-
funnelled ghost ship was well known among the
Arctic Eskimos, many of whom sighted her from
time to time on their travels. By September 1935
she had reached the Alaskan coast, always
managing to avoid the crushing grip of the pack-
ice, always surviving the worst polar storms.
Nature seemed unable to destroy her, but man
was unable to rescue her.
After 1939 the Baychimo was seen scores of
times, mostly by Eskimos but occasionally by
explorers, traders and pilots. Each time she eluded
whatever pursuit was possible, and over the inter¬
vening years she has sailed on crewless and alone.
In March 1962 a small party of Eskimos dis¬
covered the ship again while fishing from their
kayaks. This time she was floating serenely in the
Beaufort Sea near a desolate strip of coastline.
Once again there was no means of capturing her,
so they left the desolate, rusting, but still
uncrushed hulk to drift away into the unknown
once more. The last recorded sighting, again by
Eskimos, was in 1969thirty-eight years after she
was abandoned. But this time she was once more
fast in the pack-ice of the Beaufort Sea between
Icy Cape and Point Barrow.
A representative of the Hudson Bay Com¬
pany told me, at their headquarters in Winnipeg,
that even now they cannot say definitely whether
or not the Baychimo is still afloat.
