N
François Jacob
In one of your books, The Logic of Life (1970), you
show that the history ofscience and the history ofmankind
coincide, and that the results ofbiological research influence
our changing image of the world. How do things stand
today when mastery of the mechanisms of life, and espe¬
cially of the keys ofhuman heredity, is causing both hope
and anxiety?
In that book I was trying to understand the evolution
of our ideas about life, about the way in which living beings
are produced. Our understanding of the processes of life has
grown constantly. Until the sixteenth century each birth
was seen as a creation. Each new being was shaped by divine
intervention. At the origin of each life was an act by the
Creator. It was not until the late seventeenth and the early
eighteenth century that the idea of reproduction replaced
that of creation.
Until the eighteenth century, the study of living beings
was limited to their external appearance. Investigation went
no further than the visible structure. Natural history classi¬
fied and compared forms in this way and defined genera or
species. Around the end of that century, there came a rad¬
ical change in the way of analysing living beings, as the use

of the term "biology" suggests. It was discovered that there
was an "organization" within the bodies of man and animals.
Then, in the middle of the nineteenth century, it was realized
that the body consists of elementary units called cells. At
the end of the century investigation went even deeper and
chromosomes were discovered. Then, at the beginning of
this century, came the discovery of the genes, which, in the
nucleus of the cell, govern characteristics. Finally, in the
middle of this century, molecular biology penetrated even
more deeply into the secrets of life when it discovered the
chemical and molecular structure of the gene: DNA or
deoxyribonucleic acid.
Molecular biology seeks to explain the astonishing
properties of living creatures in terms of the structure and
the interactions of the molecules which comprise the var¬
ious cells of the organism. In particular, this new biology
has tried successfully to solve the age-old mystery of heredity.
What is the status of the notion of teleology, which has
haunted all modern thinking on reproduction? You wrote
in The Logic of Life that "For a long time, the biologist
treated teleology as he would a woman he could not do
without, but did not care to be seen with in public. The
concept of programme has made an honest woman of
teleology".
The problem is couched in these terms: as a general rule
nature does not follow a plan. But in the case of living beings,
there clearly are phenomena which take place according to
We are programmed,
but programmed
to learn..,
Opposite page, the Escherichia coli bacterium, which was used
by Professor Jacob in his research on cellular genetics.
Below, model of the molecular structure of DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid).

a plan in order to attain a goal. Reproduction is one example.
Its result is known in advance. We know that only a duck
can result from the coupling of two ducks. For a long period
people wanted to explain this finality in terms of a "life
force" which was not governed by the laws of physics and
chemistry. Molecular biology has shown that the chromo¬
somes of the fertilized egg, half received from the father and
half from the mother, contain in coded form all the instruc¬
tions required for the making of a new organism. They con¬
tain what has been called a genetic programme. This is how
we can explain the apparent finality which manifests itself
in the development of an embryo.
Does the genetic programme also have a bearing on
psychological characteristics? What is current thinking on
the old controversy about nature and culture, innate and
acquired characteristics?
I think it is absurd to postulate a complete antithesis
between the innate and the acquired. Modern biologists see
hereditary structures and learning as mingled and continu¬
ally interacting. If you blindfold a cat at birth and prevent
it from seeing, when the blindfold is removed two weeks
later the cat has become blind. But if you put the blindfold
on when the cat is two or three months old, the cat can
see normally when you remove it.
An individual is thus the result of a programme inscribed
in the genes received from its two parents. However, it is
different from them. Why? Evolution has found a clever
way of ensuring that all organisms of the same species are
different from each other. Each time the blend is different,
with half of the programme coming from the mother and
half from the father. Thus the genetic equipment of each
being contains the indelible traces of its individuality, of its
differences from all its past, present and future congeners,
except for identical twins.
These differences permit evolution to encourage some
rather than others. Each programme is not entirely rigid.
It defines structures which are potentialities, probabilities,
tendencies. Genes only determine the constitution of the
individual.
We are all different, and the way in which living beings
reproduce is arranged so that we shall be so. This is why
the day came when man needed to formulate the concept
of equality. If we were all identical, like a population of bac¬
teria, the idea of equality would be quite unnecessary.
Stages in the development of a mouse.
From left to right:
the fertilized egg divides;
the two cells divide into four;
the fully-formed embryo.
The whole system probably functions in this way.
Learning stabilizes certain circuits and the others degenerate.
It chooses from among pre-existing possibilities. The making
of an individual, physically, intellectually, morally and men¬
tally, corresponds to a permanent interaction between the
innate and the acquired.
Would it be correct to say that in every child who is
deprived ofopportunities forfulfilment, we kill a Mozart?
Let's not exaggerate. Each individual harbours possibili¬
ties of excelling in a certain field. It may be music, or high
jumping, or carpentry. We just have to find out which one.
That's the most difficult thing. I think that education does

not try hard enough to exploit the potential of each child.
But that doesn't mean that in each child the genius of a
Mozart is only waiting for an opportunity to express itself...
You have also written that "Each being contains in
its chromosomes all its own future, the stages ofits develop¬
ment". So what margin offreedom do we have?
considerable margin. We exploit to a greater or lesser
degree the possibilities inscribed in our chromosomes. And
each culture orientates these possibilities in its own way.
You learn to speak Bantu or Eskimo, depending on whether
you are born among the Bantu or the Eskimos. That is one
system of selection. The genetic programme fixes in the
individual a framework into which the culture introduces
a certain hierarchy of values, certain forms of incentive or
motivation. We are programmed, but programmed to learn...
To imagine?
Yes. We are rather special animals who never stop learning
and searching. Horses gallop, birds fly, fleas jump. In our
case, we function with our imagination. In this context I
should like to discuss a widely-held idea about the supposed
difference between scientific and artistic activities. It is often
said that the imagination, the creative capacity attributed
to the artist, whether he is making a picture, a symphony
or a novel, is absent from scientific work. The scientist is
supposed to lift the veil which hides a pre-established truth.
It's not as simple as that. In scientific work as in the work
of the artist, the element of imagination is, at least at the
outset, very similar. If you look at the process from the
beginning, the elucidation of the structure of the atom or
of DNA is as much a creation as a discovery.
There is room for astonishment, for the unexpected.
The whole system is so arranged that we don't know what
will happen tomorrow. And yet we can only live in rela¬
tion to the future. This accounts for the astonishing interest
in astrology! We spend our time looking ahead, trying to
make sense of things. Man finds it hard to accept that
the world is what it is and not otherwise. Why do bodies
fall, not rise? Why do we age? Why are there leaves on the
trees? That's the way it is! We want everything to have a
meaning.
Take the case of evolution: we find it hard to accept
that it is purely a matter of tinkering. However different
they may appear, organisms all consist of the same elements,
which are simply redistributed and rearranged differently
in different organisms. What distinguishes a lion from a but¬
terfly, a fly from a hen or a worm from a whale, is simply
the different organization, the different arrangement of the
same materials, the same cells, the same molecules. It's
amazing but that's the way it is.
What's more, there are lots of cases where this process

has been unsuccessful in nature, in the human body. Do you
know how many spontaneous miscarriages take place in
nature? Fifty per cent. The mechanism that governs the
entire system of life has a 50 per cent failure rate. And yet
the system works. Amazing isn't it?
Shall we not want to influence this molecidar tinkering
ourselves, ifit is technically possible? There is a frightening
possibility of genetic manipulation...
The great success of molecular biology has been to under¬
stand the functioning of the genetic mechanisms of heredity.
After finding out how genes function and reproduce them¬
selves, we have acquired the capacity to affect the genes
themselves through genetic engineering. It is, for example,
possible to isolate a gene, splice it to others, and even
insert it into another organism. Genetic engineering is
simply the imitation of nature's tinkering in laboratory
conditions.
This power, it is true, is causing anxiety. Modern biology
appears so formidable because it is concerned with what is at
the very heart, not only of every living system, but of every
social system, at the heart of the intellectual and emotional
structuring of every living being: reproduction and heredity,
fields which long remained sacrosanct.
Here we must make a distinction of crucial importance.
On the one hand between the input of new knowledge-
research which is by definition unpredictable, and whose
unpredictability and alarming aspects must be accepted
and on the other its potential applications. The day man
was able to use iron, he could make a knife and use it just
as easily to peel an apple as to murder one of his fellows.
The application of scientific knowledge must be under¬
taken by decision of society as a whole. A society must be
able to decide whether to encourage or to prevent a given
application of a scientific discovery.
But society should not restrict, still less prevent, the quest
for knowledge in the life sciences. This quest must be car¬
ried out in total freedom, since it makes a great contribu¬
tion to our knowledge of ourselves and to the struggle to
improve the human condition. At the same time, the appli¬
cations of this knowledge must kept under constant surveil¬
lance. We must be vigilant.
Genetic engineering has become the indispensable tool
for all research on living beings. It is necessary for studying
Diagrams showing how a virus reproduces.
From left to right: injection into a cell of genetic
material from the virus; reproduction of the virus
within the cell; appearance of the complete virus
within the cell; destruction (lyse) of the cell and
release of the virus.
The French biologist François Jacob who (with André Lwoff and Jacques Monod) was awarded the Nobel Prize
for Physiology or Medicine in 1965, is one of the great figures of contemporary science. He originally intended
to become a surgeon, and was a medical student when he joined the Free French Forces in 1940. After the war
he finished his medical studies but, unable to practise surgery because of wounds contracted during the Normandy
landings in 1944, he turned to biology. In 1950 he joined the Pasteur Institute (Paris) as a research assistant and
ten years later became head of the department of cellular genetics. He has also been president of the Institute's
board of governors. In 1964 he was appointed professor of cellular genetics at the Collège de France. His work
has been principally concerned with the genetic mechanisms of bacteria and bacterial viruses, the transmission
of genetic information and regulatory activities in bacteria. His publications translated into English include The
Logic ofLife and The Possible and the Actual (new edition, Penguin, London, 1989) and his autobiography, The
State Within (Unwin Hyman, London, 1988).
8

the development of the embryo, hereditary diseases, the
brain, and even evolution. It provides medicine with
weapons of matchless power of diagnosis, prevention and
treatment.
Genetic engineering, for example, makes it possible to
understand the mechanisms at the origin of cancers. Human
body cells form a society and obey precise regulations. In
the case of cancer, some cells start to multiply anarchically
because they have become deaf to the signals governing their
multiplication. But it is only in the last few years, as a result
of genetic engineering, that we have learned how to locate,
in different types of cancer, the mutant genes which allow
the cell not to heed these signals. For the first time, we thus
have the possibility of access to the very mechanism of the
illness. Only genetic engineering will enable us to analyse
the AIDS virus and thus to stop it.
a personwho would then transmit them to his or her off¬
spring. To touch the reproductive cells is to touch the human
genome, the genetic heritage of humanity. Biologists and
doctors are unanimous that this should be absolutely
forbidden.
What exactly is the genome?
It is the set of genes that constitutes the genetic material
of a given individual or species. These genes are carried by
chromosomes whose principal constituent is DNA, a very
long molecule formed by the sequence of four chemical
radicals. In man, the forty-six chromosomes contain some
3,000 million of these radicals and correspond roughly to
What can genetic engineering do in the case of heredi¬
tary diseases?
We must make a distinction between the cells in a person's
body, or somatic cells, on the one hand, and the reproductive
cells on the other. It is possible to treat a sick person's
somatic cells through genetic engineering. In the case of a
hereditary blood disease, for example, it is possible to modify
the genetic constitution of sick cells by replacing a damaged
gene with a healthy gene, then reinjecting into the patient
his own cells thus treated. This treatment follows the same
principle as that of artificial limbs, grafts, or organ trans¬
plants. Only the somatic cells of the patient are targeted;
the reproductive cells are not touched. There is no reason
why this kind of treatment should not be used when we
know how to do it properly.
But I believe that for a long time to come we should
totally forbid any kind of experiment on the injection of
genes into all the cells, including the reproductive cells of
the 100,000 genes which are necessary for a human being
to take shape and live.
It was long thought that the more complex an organism
is, the more DNA it would contain. But it has been found
that the salamander and the lily have about ten times more
DNA than a person. Even leaving anthropomorphism aside,
a human being seems more complicated to make than a
lily or a salamander. It would seem that the genome of
rather complex organisms contains only a small fraction
of DNA, from 5 to 10 per cent, corresponding to real
genes. We don't really know what the rest is for. It
contains many repeated sequences which are probably
useless. Some believe it is a kind of waste, a residue of
various genetic mishaps...
The human genome is being studied more and more sys¬
tematically. Efforts are being made to map it with preci¬
sion. One day we shall be able to fully decipher the
hereditary information contained in human chromosomes.
This will be an extraordinary tool, not only for medicine.
We shall have to take great care if we are to make good use
of it. In the name of freedom.
