The t survive
by Robert G. Myers
Twelve out of thirteen new-born babies now reach age one. What future lies
in store for them?
0,
My family,
by Bilgundi T.M. Tarkewada,
age 5 (India).
34
'ver the last three decades, extraordinary
progress has been made in reducing infant and
child mortality rates. Whereas five out of every
six children born in 1960 survived to age one,
twelve out of thirteen will reach their first
birthday in 1991. By the year 2000 the figure
could easily reach nineteen out of twenty. A great
deal of money and emotional energy will rightly
be spent during the coming decade in trying to
save the one child who is at risk of death. But
what will happen to the twelve out of thirteen
who survive? Who is concerned about their early
years? Who is looking beyond the mere fact of
survival to ask the question "Survival for what?"
Unfortunately, in their earliest months and
years most of these children will live in condi¬
tions that compromise their physical, mental,
social and emotional development. Through
neglect, millions of young survivors will be con¬
demned to lethargic, unrewarding, unproductive
and dependent lives.
And yet the Convention on the Rights of the
Child adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations in 1989 and ratified by 139 coun¬
tries, says that "States Parties shall ensure to the
maximum extent possible the survival and
development of the child" (article 6). It "recog¬
nizes the right of every child to a standard of
living adequate for the child's physical, mental,
spiritual, moral and social development" (article
27). Furthermore, the Convention urges signa¬
tories to "render appropriate assistance to parents
and legal guardians in the performance of their
child-rearing responsibilities", and to "ensure the
development of institutions, facilities and services
for the care of children" (article 18).
The Convention offers hope. It takes a com¬
prehensive view of development. It emphasizes
the role of parents (not just the mother), but also
recognizes the need for support for parents
through the creation of appropriate institutions.
It makes an explicit link between work and child
care. In brief, the rhetoric is good. But there is
a need to translate rhetoric into action. Where
do we stand in this process? Could we do better?
FLORINDA AND CARMEN
It is 7:00 AM and already the market in Huan-
cayo, Peru, is bustling. Florinda Quispe has set
out the baskets that she will try to sell. Tucked
in amongst them is her daughter, Carmen, aged
two. Now too big to be slung on the back,
Carmen must spend the day on the ground near
her mother, trying to keep out of troubleno
mean challenge. There is no child-care arrange¬
ment in the market. Other family members are
busy at other tasks. The skimpy sales will not
allow Florinda to pay for someone to watch her
daughter; she barely has enough to make ends
meet. So Carmen spends a great deal of the day
sitting unhappily, or being scolded for her inno¬
cent play.
Carmen's mother is coping in the best way
she knows how. But she needs support and that
is not forthcoming. Florinda does not know
about the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
If she did, she might be sceptical about its
meaning and intended effects. And yet that need
not be. Elsewhere in Peru, even in these difficult
times, there are promising initiatives providing
child care for families in need. Some of these are
associated with community kitchens in which
families group together to cook meals in
common, reducing costs, improving nutrition,
and providing opportunities for other joint activi¬
ties, such as child care.
Other programmes are linked to the forma¬
tion of women's groups. In Venezuela, Colombia,
and Ecuador, programmes of home day care have
been established, with local women who have
been trained in child care taking neighbourhood

children into their homes during the day. This
frees others to work and provides modest
earnings for the day-care mother.
In a village in northeast Thailand, Tisana
places her four-month-old son in a hammock
where he will spend a great part of the day. The
weight of the child brings the hammock together
at the top, making an almost closed cradle. This
practice leaves the baby with only the smallest
view of the home's thatched roof through the
narrow slit that remains open. Tisana knows that
she is protecting her child, bjut she is not aware
that she is depriving him of the stimulation he
needs to develop mental alertness.
Nor is Tisana aware of a programme in
another part of the Northeast in which home
visitors have been trained to support families in
their childrearing, encouraging those practices
that are favourable to development and helping
to change those that are unfavourable. A home
A happy childhood,
by Bianca Chiriloiu, age 11
(Romania).
visitor's simple suggestion of placing two sticks
between the cloth sides at the top of the ham¬
mock has provided other Thai babies with addi¬
tional visual stimulation and has helped to facili¬
tate development. The programme, in which
local mothers serve as home visitors, also includes
a nutritional component and attention to feeding
practices, both of which are helping to alleviate
undernutrition. But its benefits have not yet
reached Tisana and her baby.
THE PRE-SCHOOL
AT ABEOKUTA
At 10:00 AM, in an outlying area of Abeokuta,
Nigeria, a group of three- to five-year-olds are
barely visible to those who pass by on the main
road. Partially hidden behind an oil drum, a cot,
and an unusual collection of items for sale
(machetes, brooms, mattresses, cloths), twenty
children are squeezed on four small benches set
close together under a corrugated metal roof. In
the shadows in from of them, one child is
pointing to letters chalked on a disintegrating
blackboard. Just outside, a younger child, prob¬
ably aged two, with a distended belly suggesting
malnutrition, is idly dipping water out of a plastic
pail and pouring it on the dusty ground. No adult
is visible.
This "pre-school", with its makeshift locale
outside a combination store and home, is typical
of many such informal arrangements throughout
the world whereby people are trying desperately
to fill a void in the only way they know how.
Child care has been left to private devices for the
most part, but family members must work. Chil¬
dren do poorly in the first grades of schools, but
no institutions in the government or outside seem
concerned about their preparation, symbolized
in the above example by memorizing ABCs. The
young child with the distended belly, although
unattended, is much better off than many chil¬
dren throughout the world who are left alone for
long periods during the day, enclosed in small
rooms, sometimes tied to posts or pieces of fur¬
niture while mother goes off to work.
From one perspective, the Abeokuta model
provides a negative example of how to approach
pre-schooling. From another, it provides an
opportunity for governments and non¬
governmental organizations interested in the
improvement of early childhood development,
indicating a need and a willingness on the part
of families and communities to seek local
solutions.
LOOKING FURTHER
Intentionally, none of the above examples has
been taken from extreme conditions in which
young children are, for instance, suffering from
third-degree malnutrition in a famine such as that
which struck Ethiopia. Children in such special 35

circumstances require special treatment. Their
physical plight is more obvious and more likely
to be attended to. However, such emergency
treatment has tended to be short-sighted. Little
thought is given to what will happen to the chil¬
dren if they manage to survive. In many cases no
attention is paid to the social and psychological
stress and/or lack of nurturing and stimulation
that can permanently affect development. In these
more extreme cases, an extra effort is required to
look beyond the tragedy of the moment to longer-
term, more integrated and humane treatment.
Since the International Year of the Child
DROUGHT
ÍÍ ¿"(¿P*****
Drought,
by Zehra Zaidi,
(Pakistan).
age 9
36
ROBERT MYERS,
of the United States, is co¬
ordinator of the Consultative
Group on Early Childhood Care
and Development, which
gathers and disseminates
information about early
childhood programmes in the
developing world. He is the
author of Towards a Fair Start
for Children (UNESCO. 1990)
and the forthcoming The
Twelve Who Survive (Routledge
& Kegan Paul, London, 1991).
(IYC) in 1979, considerable progress has been
made towards improving the lot of young chil¬
dren at risk. Without doubt, the IYC generated
a new interest in this question. Many descriptive
and analytical exercises were undertaken at the
national level, intended to identify needs, to
create awareness and to mobilize people around
the idea of attention to "the whole child". Many
small-scale pilot or demonstration projects were
begun that marked a significant opening towards
nonformal programmes set within a context of
community development. Parental education
programmes were also begun, as were others
directed towards the care of younger children by
older brothers and sisters. At the same time, con¬
siderable energy was devoted to promoting and
expanding formal pre-schools. These efforts have
provided many cost-effective models that can be
drawn upon.
But the enthusiasm and the activities gener¬
ated by the International Year of the Child have
often withered for want of continued support.
Governments and international organizations
have been timid and tepid in their approaches
to early childhood. The economic recession of
the 1980s reinforced sceptical tendencies in
these organizations about the value of such
programmes. The emphasis on survival, narrowly
and medically defined, also distracted attention
from a broader and more integrated view focusing
on human development.
As a result, we can point to progress, but in
most countries:
coverage for identifiable, organized programmes
is still relatively low. This is particularly true for
sub-Saharan Africa.
Many projects and programmes continue to be
pilot or demonstration activities that are innova¬
tive, effective and capable of being replicated, but
have not been extended in a significant way.
The distribution of programmes, particularly
the more institutionalized ones, while improving,
often continues to favour the cities and to miss
children who are "at risk". (There are, of course,
exceptions.)
Reaching children before the age of three, and
particularly between the ages of one and three,
continues to be a challenge. Day care that takes
into account both the needs of children and their
working mothers remains at a very low level,
both in extension and in quality..
Programmes of support and education for
parents have grown dramatically in some coun¬
tries but are virtually nonexistent in others, par¬
ticularly with respect to the psychosocial com¬
ponents of early development. And there is a ten¬
dency in these programmes to impose, rather
than to reconstruct and expand knowledge.
Often the quality of the programmes is poor,
so that the effects on children are minimal. The
combining of elements of integrated attention to
the child remains a challenge, despite some suc¬
cesses and an increasing awareness of the
problems.
THE ALL-IMPORTANT
EARLY YEARS
The Convention on the Rights of the Child pro¬
vides us with an opportunity to pay greater atten¬
tion to the early years in programmes addressed
directly to children, in programmes of parental
education and support, and in community
development projects that have effects on the
child.
The arguments in favour of social investment
are compelling. The need and demand are
widespread and growing. Although some progress
has been made, we are at a very early stage and
much remains to be done, not only for children
in exceptional circumstances but for those who
endure the "normal" day-to-day effects of grinding
poverty. We have examples to draw upon. The
cost need not be high. There is little reason why
we cannot do a better job than we are doing to
improve early childhood development.
- Let us hope that the Convention will help
give the signatory nations, and perhaps others,
additional force to dedicate the resources and
energy needed for the sound development of the



twelve who survive. It is they who will be the
leaders and builders and creators of our world in
the twenty-first century.
