Yemanja, godàss of the sea

by Mario de AraUnha
Boats laden with offerings are
launched In Rio de Janeiro on
New Year's Eve during a
fiesta In honour of Yemanja,
goddess of the sea and of
fertility.
I HE musical tradition of the Brazilian littoral
began with the arrival of the first Portuguese navi¬
gators and developed during the 300 years or
more which saw the forced migration of slaves
from Africa. This century it has achieved nation¬
wide popularity and recognition through the
talents of Dorival Caymmi, a mulatto of Afro-
Italian origin who drew inspiration from the
songs of Portuguese sailors, mestizo fishermen
and worshippers of the three black divinities of
the sea.
THE AFRO TRADITION
The coastline of Brazil is almost 8,500 kilometres
longlonger than that of almost any other
country in the world. Along it the early sixteenth-
century colonists first settled. Only later did
colonization spread to the hinterland with the
gold rush to Minas Gerais in the eighteenth cen¬
tury, the rubber boom which attracted settlers
up the Amazon, and the development of coffee-
growing inland from Sào Paulo. The inaugura¬
tion of a new capital, Brasilia, in 1960 constituted
an official challenge to the Brazilian's passion for
the sea.
Maritime culture is important in the big
northeastern cities such as Recife and Fortaleza,
and throughout the region as a whole. But it is
primarily in Bahia that the ripple of waves turns
most easily to music. Early Portuguese influences
such as that of the majurada ("Sailor, it's the fish
in the sea/ that taught me to swim, that taught
me to swim. . . .") were followed by African Can-
domblé chants which established a tradition of
sea songs, whose musical form and religious
power attested doubly to their black origins. The
people of Salvador de Bahia, the most African of
Brazilian cities, sing for all the Orixás, the saints
of their syncretic religion, but they keep their
best offerings for Yemanja, the goddess of the
deep sea more beloved than her fellow-divinities,
Oxum god of the shore and Ayoka goddess of
the deep.
"On the second day of February, festival day
at sea,
I want to be the first to celebrate Yemanja.
J)
Thus sang young Dorival Caymmi, who left
Bahia in 1938 to seek fame and fortune in Rio
de Janeiro, where he was a fantastic success with
his big guitar and his serious way of singing about
gods, fish, fishermen, and the sea off Bahia.
"The raft set sail with Chico Ferreira and
Bento,
the raft returned alone. ..."
"How many have lost
husbands and sons in the waters of the sea."
While Caymmi sang of dramatic events from
the lives of the fishermen of northeastern Brazil
and their familiesdisconsolate widows, weeping 35

fiancées waiting for their men to return, offerings
begging Yemanja to provide fish Admiral Paulo
Moreiro da Silva, the architect of modern Brazil's
fishing policy, said jokingly that "The hunger
problem of the northeast would be solved if we
turned the map of Brazil upside down and sent
the great shoals of fish from the south to the
north". In rich, cold, southern Brazil, where the
economy is based largely on industry and agricul¬
ture and where the coast is sparsely populated,
sardines are plentiful and fishing is practised on
a large scale with modern vessels.
In the northeast, where fishing has always
been a source of subsistence, the fish are bigger
and finer, but they are caught individually on the
line, from rudimentary craft such as the saveiros
of Bahia or even from rafts. The recent industri¬
alization of fishing in the region has largely
brought profits to a handful of companies from
the south.
POETIC INSPIRATION
Solitary adventures like that immortalized by
Hemingway in The Old Man and the Sea are
common in the warm waters off Bahia, Ceará and
Pernambuco. They have inspired many poems,
including one written by Caymmi and his great
friend Jorge Amado, which contains the words:
"It is sweet to die at sea, in the green waves
of the sea. . . . The siren has seduced the hand¬
some sailor. . . ."
Caymmi's influence on Brazilian popular
music has been far-reaching. Many other com¬
posers inspired by folklore have followed his
example, and have brought the music of distant
regions to Rio, the cultural centre of the Brazilian
sub-continent. As a composer and guitarist
Caymmi has been a great innovator in the field
of harmony. Already a veteran, he wrote four of
the early songs of Joào Gilberto, the creator of
the bossa nova. His musical heirs are countless.
Caymmi was still very popular when the
bossa nova appeared on the scene. He shared its
glory on the record in which he and Gilberto,
accompanied by Cuarteto em Cy, sing a bossa
nova classic, "The fishermen's suite":
"My raft is off out to sea. . ./ when I come
home from the sea a fine fish I shall bring/ my
friends will come back too/and we shall give
thanks to God in heaven. . . ."
"Farewell, farewell fisherman, do not forget
me/I am praying for fair weather/that the
weather won't be foul. . . .
"With weather like that we stay in port/He
who goes to sea does not come back. . . ."
A NEW CULT
From the historic encounter between Caymmi
36 and the bossa nova a new cult was born on the
shores of a sea that had become symbolic, an
urban sea edged by the concrete buildings south
of Rio from which people can greet the summer
from their windows:
"Day of light, festival of the Sun, and the
little boat glides on the tender blue of the sea"
(O Barquinho by Mensecal and Boscoli, recorded
by Joào Gilberto in 1961).
This is the cult of health, beauty and passion.
From Tereza de Praia, in which Dick Farney and
Lucio Alvez sang "She belongs to nobody, she
can't be mine, she can't be his", to Tom Jobim
and Vinicius de Moraes's great hit The girl from
Ipanema, the shapely beauty of the girls (and
boys) of Rio who congregate on the beaches and
in the bars of Ipanema, Copacabana and Leblon
has become the great source of inspiration for the
poets of salt water and ice-cold beer.
Most of the movements that have changed
the life of the Carioca and of Brazilians in general
have come into being and found expression in
song on the beaches of Rio: cultural resistance
to the dictatorship, the liberalization of morals,
and now the prevention of AIDS.
As the urban population increases, the
problem of seawater pollution gets worse in spite
of all that has been done to extend sewage pipes
further from the shore. The ecological balance
is precarious. A great effort is being made to
restore beauty to the beaches and purity to the
water.
Perhaps this is a response to the dearest
wishes of Yemanja, whose cult is gaining ground
in Rio not only among the traditional practi¬
tioners of Candomblé, the country's second
religion after Roman Catholicism, but also
among the general public. New Year's Eve has
become a great festival in honour of the sea
goddess. That night, southern Rio comes to a halt
as hundreds of thousands of worshippers throw
flowers into the sea while cascading fireworks
illuminate the scene.
The moment symbolizes what is expected of
the sea throughout the year. When it is not a
receptacle for the city's wastes it is the recipient
of requests for good luck and happiness, money,
health and love. It is almost as if the sea can
absorb all the negative energies of humankind and
return them in the form of food and fortune.
Perhaps the Bahia song-writers Gerónimo
and Vevé Calasans were seeking to placate the sea
divinities of Brazil when they wrote:
"A dozen roses ... I wanted to give,
but without asking a thing, I threw them in
the sea,
embracing the sea, but without asking a thing
I just gave thanks. ..."
MARIO DE ARATANHA is a Brazilian journalist, record
producer, and organizer of cultural events.
