étions on the ocean
by Bisabeth Mam Borgese
50
SOME human attitudes towards the
ocean are universal and timeless
almost like the ocean itself. Whether
they originated in one place and spread
from there into all cultures, or whether
they were born identical, in different
places, settings, and times, we do not
know.
However this may be, human beings
have always regarded the sea as the origin
of all things. In virtually all mythologies
of the world, water is given primacy over
the other elements. It was the first thing,
after which came all others. To the
Greeks as to the Aztecs, even the gods
were "born of water". Myths of creation,
from Peru and Mexico to North
America, India and Scandinavia, depict
the Earth as being created from the sea,
and life as evolving from the sea.
A second univeral perception of the
sea is the perception of ambiguity. The sea
is seen as a giver of life and a taker of life:
an element of calm and beauty, of physical
and spiritual nourishment, a conveyor of
wealth and power, a road to new lands, to
new knowledge, a medium of communi¬
cation. At the same time, however, it
separates lands and their peoples. It
remains mysterious, unfathomable and

irrational. In its wrath, with its storms and
floods, it destroys wealth and power. It
drowns and kills life. It is horrible to
behold, generating fear, bereavement and
mourning. The Great Flood, exter¬
minating a humankind at odds with
nature and its laws, is a universally recur¬
rent myth of doom and damnation.
Other perceptions, though rooted in
these universal ones, are more closely
linked to specific cultures. In the
northern, terrestrial hemisphere, for
instance, we tend to think of the oceans,
and especially the seabed, as an extension
of the landmass. In the southern, aquatic
hemisphere, people living in island states
think of the land as a continuation of the
water mass, the most important part of
their environment. The Western image
of the oceans is as complex as the Western
self-image. The souls of Westerners are



mirrored in the ocean, in its very
ambiguity between creation and destruc¬
tion, good and evil.
'HE WHO RULES THE SEA,
RULES THE LAND'
The role the world ocean has played in
the evolution of Western culture is indeed
enormous.
Since the Stone Age fisheries have
constituted the basis of the economies of
coastal communities. For fisheries to be
successful, ships had to be built, and this
encouraged the development of science,
technology, exploration, trade and naval
power. The power and influence of the
Hanseatic League, the medieval federa¬
tion of north German cities, was based
on their maritime skills. With its variants
in many other languages, the expression
"He who rules the sea, rules the land"
has been conventional wisdom, and naval
battles have decided peoples' destinies
from Greek Antiquity to modern times.
Western culture thrived on its
overseas discoveries and conquests, based
on sea power. It has seen the ocean as a
great educator, nursing a love for freedom
in seafaring people. Republics are the cre¬
ation of maritime peoples; tyranny was
born inland. In his Philosophie des Rechts
(Philosophy of Law), the philosopher
Hegel compares the role of the seas in
industrial societies with the role of the
Opposite page above, Rooms by the sea
(1951), oil on canvas bv the American painter
Edward Hopper.
Right, Noah's Ark (1731), an engraving
by the German artist Johan Andreas Pfeffel
the Younger.
earth in agricultural, less developed,
societies.
Oceans, storms and waves; ships and
sailors; fishermen, mermaids and sea
monsters have filled the pages of our liter¬
ature, the canvasses of our painters, and
the scores of our music. Occidental music
is indeed the art form most suited to cap¬
ture the essence of the sea, the playing of
silvery ripples and the crashing of surf.
The swelling of storms and their exhaus¬
tion find expression in crescendo and
decrescendo. The rolling of waves and
their eternal cadences are readily trans¬
lated into the measures of musical time.
The multiple layers of ocean space, from
the mysterious seafloor through sub¬
merged waves and submarine rivers to the
bobbing, scintillating surface can be cap¬
tured in harmony and counterpoint, its
flux in time reflected in the duration of
horizontal, melodic development.
FARMING THE SEA
Today the ocean has become our "last
frontier". Penetrated ever deeper by the
industrial revolution, its immensity is
shrinking, yielding to ever more rapid
and efficient means of communication. Its
wilderness, where humans used to hunt
and gather at their own risk, is being
transformed into farms and mines, just as
terrestrial wilderness has been trans¬
formed over the past 10,000 years.
Fishing from the wild is being over-
I \i) I. M
< «I Mm,i|i\IIIy » -
Corvu» c\ ol.nis
I ";>tuIiT\Mn|i'>(.,.iiviii i...:
jpirr iinr-Mii-nniiV i*lrtBr!
51

52
taken by sea farming and aquaculture,
which introduce human intervention
and, potentially, genetic engineering, into
the life cycle of every commercially
fished species. Chemicals, pharmaceu¬
ticals, energy, metals and minerals are
extracted and produced from the seas,
while the marine sciences are trans¬
forming concepts of the genesis of our
planet. They have demonstrated that con¬
tinents are drifting, and oceans are born,
made and remade through volcanic
masses welling up from mid-ocean rifts,
expanding the seafloor and forcing con¬
tinents apart, while other oceans die, their
floors devoured by deep trenches, and
continents clash, their landmasses forced
up into mountains.
Strange creatures have been disco¬
vered in recent years, deep down on the
seafloor where all this activity takes place,
where volcanoes spew matter from the
core of the Earth and the water reaches
temperatures too high to support life as
we know it. There colonies of red-
crowned tubeworms, white crabs and
giant clams are thriving, not on the basis
of photosynthesis like all other known
forms of life on Earth, but through
chemosynthesis in a symbiotic relation¬
ship with bacteria capable of converting
volcanic sulphur into energy and body
mass. Life on other planets may sustain
itself in this way, and it may possibly
have been the first life system on our
planet, the one from which all other
systems evolved.
THE MIRROR OF THE OCEAN
What do contemporary Westerners
project onto the mirror of this new kind
of ocean? What do they discover about
themselves?
Perhaps: that science and mystery are
not zero-sum values, such that one
decreases as the other grows. Western
science may be the greatest of all sciences,
but while spaces are indeed shrinking, the
mystery of the sea remains as deep as it
ever was. The more we know, the more
we know how little we know. And some
of our science, at least, may make us
relive old myths in new clothes: universal
myths of genesis and Leviathans and
Great Floods.
Perhaps: that we still feel awe and
love and fear faced by the power and the
beauty of the sea, just as we always did;
that we yearn for its healing and dan¬
gerous elementariness, for its purity as an
escape from the sophistication and cor¬
ruption of industrial city life, just as we
yearn for the awesomeness and purity of
Leviathan (1908)
by the English artist
Arthur Rackham.
ELISABETH MANN BORGESE,
of Canada, is professor of
political science at Dalhousie
University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, and chairman of the
Planning Council of the
International Ocean Institute,
Malta. She has written many
articles on the law of the sea
and on ocean management
and several books, including
The Mines of Neptune (1983).
Her Ocean Frontiers (with a
preface by Federico Mayor)
and Chairworm and
Supershark, a book about the
oceans "for children aged 8 to
80", will be published in 1992.
the high mountains and their eternal
snowsfrozen waves; that we yearn to
encompass it in our art, our music; that
we long for its integrity, the unity of all
life in nature, in the cyclic rhythm of
becoming, being and passing.
And then, perhaps, a cloud moves
across the Sun and the water darkens,
reflecting a different image of ourselves:
harvesters of fish, of oil measured in
tonnes. We see wave and tide power
translated into dollars and cents; ports
and harbours and trading ships; satellite
guided fleets and navies; the scum and
foulness from outfall pipes and river
mouths continually streaming in.
We feel greed, but we feel shame and
fear: fear of our own destructive power
as much as the ocean's. Greed and love,
the irrationally rational, are clashing in

our minds. Do we want Development, or
do we want Environment?
Western culture has been programmed
with an Either-Or writ large. Good or
evil. Ego or other. Egotism or altruism.
Mine or yours. Nationalism or interna¬
tionalism. It is easy to say but hard to see
that these might be mutually dependent,
be considered as a whole.
In the case of the oceans we will have
to learn to see it. For there, beneath our
eyes, everything flows, everything
interacts with everything else; boundaries
are fictitious, and neither sovereignty nor
ownership holds solutions. What is mine
is dependent on you; what is yours is
dependent on me. If we want to get things
done, we have to do them together, across
sectoral uses, across fictitious geographic
boundaries, or we cannot do them at all.
Development depends on conservation.
Without conservation it simply cannot
happen. Economics becomes part of
ecology; culture, part of nature; the
human being, part of the animal family.
The flowing ocean environment reveals
these facts, while the apparently solid
state of terra firma could maintain in us
the illusion of separateness and indepen¬
dence, superiority and domination.
Other cultures have stayed closer to
a unitary world-view. In the West we had
to return to the sea to regain it, and thus
it is no accident that, in the evolution of
Western culture, the search for a new
world order starts from the Law of the
Sea, a term which in itself symbolizes the
unity between culture (Law) and Nature
(Sea) and all that flows from it.
