A bridge between cultures, al Andalus transmitted to Europe Arab science and philosophy as well
as the work of Aristotle and other elements of ancient Greek thought
Abuicasis, a distinguished
Arab surgeon who lived
in 10th century Cordoba,
is shown visiting the city's
hospital in this
iate-19th-century engraving.
i. T 
was only in al-Andalus that scholars of the
early Middle Ages had access to the entire corpus
of scientific knowledge of their time written In
Arabic, Hebrew, Greek or Latin.
To take one example of the transmission of
knowledge to Muslim Spain, Byzantine envoys
took there a copy of the Materia Medica, a well-
known treatise by the first-century-AD Greek
doctor DIoscorides. By comparing it with an
existing Arabic version, It was possible to fill in
many gaps, notably with regard to the precise
identification of plant species. This task was car-
ried out in collaboration with a monk named
Nicolas, who came from the East expressly for
the purpose.
In the same circle of scholars were the Jewish
minister and doctor Hasday ben Shaprut ; Ibn
Juljul, historian of medicine and pharmacology ;
and also perhaps the great surgeon Abu aI-Qasim
az-Zahrawi, known to Christians as Albucasis,
whose work was soon translated into Latin. He
wrote an outline of all the medical knowledge of
the day, providing descriptions of such diseases
as haemophilia and scabies, of various surgical
instruments, even of a way of using a particular
variety of ant to heal wounds.
Maslama al-Magriti's name also belongs on
the list. The works of this Madrid-based
astronomer and alchemist circulated In digest
form in Western Europe almost as soon as they
were written, thanks to Latin adaptations pre-
pared by the Mozarabic monks of the monastery
of Ripoll in Catalonia. From there they were dis-
patched to monasteries in the Rhine valley,
notably Saint Gall in Switzerland and Reichenau
in Germany.
In the tenth century the natural passage still
used by modern tourists travelling from central
Europe to Spain was the only means of commu-
nication beween the peninsula and the rest of the
continent. The route through the central and
western Pyrenees had been closed since the defeat
of Charlemagne at the battle of Roncevaux in
778.
The importance thus accorded to Catalonia
explains why the oldest surviving astrolabe, a
hybrid product of the Arab and Visigothic cul-
tures, is set to function at the latitude of Barcelona.38

It was to the Catalan marches that the young Ger-
bert of Aurillac, later to become Pope Sylvester
II, travelled to study science. By the time he
returned to France, he had learned so much that
at first he was taken for a necromancer or magus.
It was some time before the new knowledge that
he helped to introduce to Europe-of such subjects
as decimal numbers, the abacus, the construction
of astrolabes, sun-dials, armillary spheres and
other instruments-became widely available there.
When he quit the Iberian peninsula, Gerbert
knew that he was leaving behind him not just a
land whose scientific culture was vastly superior
to that of Christendom but also one whose
researchers (if one can use that word to describe
tenth-century scholars) were making continued
progress in their respective fields. In order to keep
abreast of their work, Gerbert corresponded with
an acquaintance in Barcelona-one Lupitus,
recently identified as the archdeacon Sunifred-
whom he requested to send him the latest
writings from al-Andalus.
A fruitful partnership
In the same way, Christian envoys to Cordoba
such as Gomar, the future Bishop of Gerona,
profited from their residence in al-Andalus to co-
operate with their Muslim counterparts. Gomar
wrote a chronicle of the Frankish kings at the
request of the future caliph al-Hakam II al-
Mustansir. An edited version of this work was
soon circulating In the Orient, and it has come
down to us In the great Arab traveller and ency-
clopaedist al-Masudi's Murudj al-Dhahab.
The same ruler was also responsible for the
enlargement of the palace library, which eventu-
ally contained some 400, 000 volumes, only one
of which has survived. His bibliomania drove him
to pay a fortune for any book that caught his
interest. That is why the first copy of Abu al-.
Faradj'Ali al-Isfahani's " Book of Songs ", a col-
lection of poems set to music that contains much
information on social and cultural life during the
first centuries of Islam, was known in Cordoba
before it was In the Orient.
It has been established from the dates at which
some surviving works were imported that It was
possible for books to make the journey from the
Orient to Cordoba and then on into the Chris-
tian world in less than two years. The speed with
which knowledge was transmitted can be
explained by the close collaboration that existed
between scholars of different religions and cul-
tures. For instance the monk Recemundo, author
of a celebrated liturgical calendar, was successively
Andalusian envoy to the Holy Roman Empire,
to Constantinople and to Jerusalem. His work,
which was amalgamated into the oo o/ ! 
of Arib ben Sa'd, a doctor and civil servant who
was his contemporary, contains popularized ele-
ments of Indian and Iraqi astronomy as well as
a mention of the great astronomer aI-Battani.
The Christian writer Orosius's Seven 600
of Histories against the Pagans (Historiarum
< : c/Mg<tM (M Z. ! r : 77 was translated into
Arabic by two men, Qasim ben Asbagh, a
Muslim cadi or judge, and his Christian counter-
part, Walid ben Khayzuran. The treatise known
as the Mathematica Alhandrea probably had a
similar genesis. A series of brief texts In Latin,
it contains In more or less accurate form the
Arabic names of many stars, among them Rigel,
Betelgeuse, Altair, Vega and Aldebaran-
appellations that are still familiar today.
Other, more technical knowledge was also
propagated abroad. Maslama of Madrid, an
astrologer at the Umayyad court, adapted the
tables of aI-Kharezmi, the great Baghdad
mathematician, for the Cordoba meridian. He
also wrote notes on the construction of astrolabes
and carried out astronomical observations. His
work soon became known In Europe, though not
under his own name. Latin translations and
digests also helped many Arabic words, such as
al-sumt, azimuth, to enter other languages.
The new knowledge was also transmitted to
Europe via Arab prisoners of war held on Chris-
tian territory. Ibn Hayyan, the greatest historian
of al-Andalus, specifically refers to their influence.
Some of these captives were men of great
learning, and their captors knew how to profit
from their knowledge, t
This copper astrolabe
made) n earty-llth century
Cordoba) Is one of the oldest
in the world.
JUAN VERNET,
Spanish Arabist, is professor
emeritus at the University of
Barcelona and a member of
the International Academy of
the History of Sciences. A
specialist inthe field of Arab
science and its transmission t<
medieval nd modern Europe.
he is the author of many
artiniM and RturttM
39
