The age oí genius
by Jean Starobinski
The concept of genius in the modern sense dates from the eighteenth century. Already at
that time, when Mozart was still alive, the word was being applied to him.
%
18
HEN the seven-year-old Mozart first per¬
formed in Paris, Friedrich Grimm, whose cultural
newsletters were sent to the European courts,
spoke of him with enthusiasm and, reporting on
the event in December 1763, did not hesitate to
use the word genius: "What is incredible is to see
him playing by heart for an hour without inter¬
ruption and then give himself up to the inspira¬
tion of his genius and to a host of ravishing ideas
which he then goes on to develop one after
another with taste and without confusion".
Three years later, after a concert in Lausanne,
one critic spoke in praise of "this forcefulness
which is the hallmark oí genius, this variety which
bespeaks the fire of imagination, this charm
which reveals an unfailing taste". Later, in 1788,
just after the triumphal success that had greeted
Don Giovanni in Prague, Joseph Haydn, con
cerned about Mozart's precarious financial situ¬
ation, wrote in a letter: "The lives of great geniuses
are all too often marred by the thoughtless
ingratitude of their admirers".
The fact is that Mozart's genius was not
recognized by enough people nor indeed to a
sufficient extent to preserve him from want or
to protect him from the rivalry of lesser talents.
In the opinion of many, whose ears could not
be trusted, the precociousness of Mozart's gifts,
which made him a "prodigy", a "wunderkind",
a "miracle", was not a guarantee of genius. Some
people, after being dazzled by him, were con¬
vinced that his performance had been just a flash
in the pan. For educated audiences of the eight¬
eenth century, being a "genius" was, to say the
least, not the same as being a "prodigy".
After Mozart's death, when there was no

longer any doubt about his greatness, Count
Waldstein wrote to Beethoven, at the time of the
latter's visit to Vienna: "The Genius of Mozart
is still in mourning and laments the death of its
disciple". Allegorized in this way, genius becomes
an independent being, a kind of graveside statue,
examples of which abound in neoclassical art,
fond as it is of combining conceptualization with
shows of sentiment.
The voice of nature
What was understood by genius in the eighteenth
century, and particularly musical genius?
The meaning of the word had changed since



the previous century. Genius was thought of
primarily in neutral terms as intellectual ability.
One might speak of a "narrow genius" or a "fine
genius" or an "original genius". Each and every
language in the world had its own "genius". An
individual's "moral personality" was determined
by his or her character (passions and propensities)
and genius (gifts or talents). The word genius
could be given a favourable or unfavourable con¬
notation.
If we retrace the use of the word in the abun¬
dant English, French, German, Italian and
Spanish literature of the eighteenth century we
see it gradually losing its original neutrality. Its
meaning became strictly circumscribed, coming
to designate the higher activity and power of the
mind as revealed in certain exceptional
individuals. Genius was a mysterious gift of
nature. Thanks to this gift, man became a cre¬
ator in nature's image. Genius was nature at work
within the human imagination.
Genius thus became, in Diderot's words, "A
secret, indefinable quality of the soul without
which one cannot accomplish anything very great
or very beautiful". Genius made its own rules,
which were not the same as those governing the
common run of humanity. In the article on genius
in the Encyclopédie (written by Saint-Lambert, but
largely inspired or revised by Diderot) we find
the following: "The rules and laws of good taste
would set shackles on genius; genius puts them
asunder in order to soar to the heights of the sub¬
lime, of pathos, of grandeur. Love of that eternal
beauty which characterizes nature and a passion
for depicting scenes in accordance with some self-
created model from which he derives his ideas and
feelings of beautythese are the inclinations of
the man of genius. . . . Power and abundance, an
indefinable roughness, unevenness, sublimity,
pathossuch, in the arts, are the qualities of
genius; it does not affect in mild degree, it does
not give pleasure without causing surprise, it is
surprising even when it errs".
To Diderot, genius was "a kind of prophetic
cast of mind". Goethe, taking Shakespeare as his
example, was to say the same thing: through the
agency of genius, which is its interpreter, nature
engages in prophecy. But Goethe, who celebrated
genius and the independence of genius, as did
Kant, was all the more scathing about the triviali-
zation of the concept and the frauds perpetrated
in its name during the period when the "cult of
genius" reigned. "On the pretext that they have
genius or that they are geniuses, large numbers
of young people have indulged in every kind of
extravagance, going beyond all bounds: they have
lost their way	" This reproach, it hardly needs
pointing out, was in no way directed at Mozart,
all of whose works were considered by Goethe
to possess a "fertilizing power which remains
active from generation to generation and which
will not soon be exhausted. . . ."
Diderot, in his writings on the arts, did not
forget music. In his Leçons de clavecin ("Harp¬
sichord lessons", 1771) he has the pupil ask: "And
do you think that eventually one day I'll be able
to compose? Composing is the finest skill!" To
which the master replies: "And unfortunately it
is the only one that cannot be taught: it is the
Opposite page, Voltaire and
Rousseau being led by their
Genius to the temple of glory
and Immortality (French
engraving).
Below, frontispiece from
L'Encyclopédie ou Dictionnaire
raisonné des Sciences, des
Arts et des Métiers (1751) by
Diderot and d'Alembert.
19

preserve of genius. ... If you have genius you
will find songs. . . . Any music which neither
paints nor speaks is bad, and you will produce
it without genius. . . : you will swell the ranks
of those I call the rag-and-bone men of music".
It will be remembered that Rameau's Nephew
opens with a debate on genius, turning around
Racine, Voltaire and Jean-Philippe Rameau. But,
concerning the latter, the Philosopher declares
that "it is not quite certain that he really is a man
of genius". Voltaire for his part was convinced
Lully and Rameau did have geniusand in this



his judgement was that of all his generation, for
which moreover genius was but the supreme
manifestation of talent and taste.
Diderot and especially Rousseau distanced
themselves from French tradition. To know the
views regarding genius of the men and women
who sided with the Italians on the occasion of
their dispute with the partisans of the French
theatrical style (the Guerre des Bouffons), one must
open Rousseau's Dictionnaire de Musique (1768)
and read in particular the article on prima inten-
zione: "A melody, a piece of music di prima
The library of the
Klementinum (1727), a Jesuit
college in Prague
(Czechoslovakia). Mozart
visited the library in 1787.
20
JEAN STAROBINSKI,
Swiss writer and essayist,
member of the Institut de
France, has written widely on
the eighteenth century. His
publications translated into
English include The Emblems of
Reason (1982, University of
Virginia Press), The Invention
of Liberty, 1 700 to 1 789
(1985, Rizzolo Intl.,), Jean-
Jacques Rousseau-
Transparency and Obstruction
(1988, University of Chicago
Press) and The Living Eye
(1989, Harvard University
Press).
intenzione, is one which has taken shape at a
single stroke and in its entirety in the composer's
mind, like Pallas emerging fully armed from
Jupiter's brain. Compositions diprima intenzione
are those rare strokes of genius in which all the
ideas are so closely linked as to form so to speak
one single idea. . . . This kind of operation of the
intellect, which can barely be explained, even ana¬
lytically, is a wonder to reason and can be con¬
ceived only by geniuses capable of producing it.
... In music, compositions di prima intenzione
are the only ones that can cause those ecstasies,
those raptures, those flights of the soul that trans¬
port listeners into another world".
Rousseau harks back here to a theory of
knowledge subscribed to by the neo-Platonic
philosophers of the Italian Renaissance who held
that ecstasy afforded a direct view of a supreme
reality, composed of pure ideas. This all-
embracing vision is offered only to the highest
faculty of the soulto its finest flowering. In the
eighteenth century, according to the accepted idea
of genius, the gaze ceased to be turned towards
the sky of existing truths and was directed
towards the future, instantaneously embracing
every aspect of an original composition, all the
parts and components of a work which the artist
then went on to construct.
Mozart, according to the account given of
him by his friend Rochlitz, claimed to hold the
whole of a work in his head before noting it on
paper. However, this totality did not present itself
to him at a single stroke: it gradually took shape
in his mind: "It grows; I develop it more and
more, ever more clearly. The work is then com¬
pleted in my head, or as good as, even if it is a
long piece, and I can view the whole at a single
glance like a painting or a statue. In my imagina¬
tion I do not hear the work as a flow or a succes¬
sion, but I hold it in its entirety so to speak, as
a single unit".
In the text quoted earlier, Rousseau attributes
to musical prima intenzione the privilege of that
systematic and organic unity which he claimed
to have experienced philosophically on the occa¬
sion of his famous "illumination" on the Vin-
cennes highway, when all the truths inherent in
his system became clear to him in one mind-
shattering moment. So numerous and so closely
interlinked were they that he was unable to seize
hold of each and every one. A piece of music is
of narrower compass, and that which has been
revealed "at a single stroke" to the composer's
mind can be preserved and transcribed. So it was
that Mozart proceeded, if we can believe
biographical tradition, during the night when he
noted down the overture to Don Giovanni.
An all-consuming fire
Rousseau was very proud of the article on genius
that he had included in his Dictionnaire de
Musique. Rightly so, for it is outstanding and
deserves to be more widely known. It should be
read in conjunction with the articles on prima
intenzione and composition. From it we learn that
genius is by essence indefinable; that it is recog¬
nizable by its extraordinary powers; that it draws
inspiration from contact with other geniuses, par¬
ticularly poetic genius; and that, even if it is a gift
of nature, it may be fully developed only by dint
of unremitting effort: "Young artist, seek not to
know what genius is. If you have it, you will find
it in yourself. If you do not have it, you will never
know it. The musician's genius subjects the entire
universe to his art; it paints every picture with
sounds; it makes the very silence speak; it renders
ideas by feelings, feelings by tone colours; and the
passions it expresses, it rouses them in the depths
of people's hearts: it gives fresh charms to sen¬
sual pleasure; the pain it portrays pierces each
breast; it burns steadily and is never consumed:
it evokes ice and frost by means of heat; even
when depicting the horrors of death, it is ani¬
mated by a feeling of life that never leaves it and
which it communicates to receptive hearts: but

Jean-Jacques Rousseau in
Rochecardon park, a painting
(1795) by the French artist
Alexandre-Hyacinthe Dunouy.
alas it cannot speak to those in whom its seed has
not been sown, and its wonders are not percept¬
ible to those who are incapable of imitating them.
Do you wish to know then whether some spark
of this all-consuming fire glows in your breast?
Hasten to Naples and listen to the masterpieces
of Leo, Durante, Jomelli and Pergolesi. If your



eyes brim with tears, if you feel your heart
pounding inside you, if you are seized with shud¬
dering, if in your raptures you are stifled by a
sense of oppression, take up the lyrics of
Metastasio and work: his genius will fire your
own, you will create through his example; this
is how genius proceeds, and other eyes will soon
pay you back for the tears that the masters have
caused you to shed. ..."
Rousseau (born in 1712) urged his readers to
model themselves on the Neapolitan geniuses.
But Rousseau was simplifying matters: he seemed
not to be aware that the Italian style had gained
a foothold nearly everywhere in Europe. Mozart
became acquainted with the Italian taste in 1764
through Johann Christian Bach in London. Then,
in 1770, during his visit to Italy, he acquired fur¬
ther knowledge of an art that Rousseau abhorred:
counterpoint. In this technical field, the lessons
of Martini, in Bologna, were invaluable to the
young composer.
He nevertheless seems to have heeded Rous¬
seau's advice. He journeyed to Naples! But not
with undue haste. He met Jomelli (born in 1714)
and went several times to listen to his latest opera,
Armida abbandonata. But this did not produce
the effect foretold by Rousseau. In his first letter
on the subject, Mozart found the opera to be
"well-written". A few days later he declared it
to be "beautiful, but . . . too reasonable and too
antiquated for the theatre". No longer were there
any tears or raptures. The fire announced by
Rousseau had lost its warmth. It burned brightest
not in the old Neapolitan master, but in Mozart,
who had nothing more to learn from him.
It is hazardous to say that one place offers
a more fertile ground to musical genius than any¬
where else. This again implies an undue desire to
define genius. But genius is recognized by what
it produces, regardless of locality, provided that
men and women are willing to listen. This
capacity for listening, it is true, is not equally
present at all times, in all places, in all societies.
Is it merely by chance that those who theorized
about genius in the eighteenth century, and first
and foremost Rousseau, were the very ones who
theorized about education?
