INTERVIEW



JORGE
LAVELLI
Jorge Lavelli is the director of the Théâtre National
de la Colline in Paris, founded in 1988. Born In
Argentina in 1931, he has staged more than eighty
major works in the classical and contemporary
European repertoire.
Since 1962 the hallmark of his productions has
been stringency, rituality and violence in its tragic
or absurd aspects. They have revealed the theatre
of Gombrowicz, Arrabal and Copi, but also that of
Seneca and Panizza. Attracted to opera, Lavelli has
since 1975 adopted a boldly innovative approach
to classics such as Idomeneo, Faust, La Traviata,
Madame Butterfly, Norma and to contemporary
works (Luigi Nono's In the Great Sun of Blossoming
love, Arrigo's The Return of Casanova, Sutermels-
ter's Berenger I, and Zygmunt Krauze's The Star).
Lavelli now works alternately as a theatre and
opera producer, being especially drawn to the operas
of Mozart (The Marriage of Figaro, La clemenza di
Tito) and the plays of Shakespeare {The Winter's
Tale, The Tempest, A Midsummer Night's Dream).
What, in your view, is theatre?
Whenever you have one or more people
performing in front of an audience, you have
theatre. Wherever this takes place, it consti¬
tutes a theatrical act in the strict sense. If, for
instance, at this precise moment, you were just
listening to my words and not engaging in a
dialogue with me, then we could talk about
the adumbration of a theatrical act. Theatre
is the primordial act of communication.
Will it cease to exist one day, like so many
other forms of artistic expression?
No. Theatre is an exceptional, unique acti
vity which brings together in the same place,
within the same unity of space and time, indi¬
viduals who are to transmit a message
whether in the form of physical expression or
wordsto a passive audience. Once these con¬
ditions have been met, you have theatre. But
the fact is that these conditions can be found
in any place and at any time. This is why
theatre cannot cease to exist. It cannot even
appear outdated.
It is, however, ephemeral. Hence it is des¬
tined to die, but only to be constantly reborn
in different forms, in any form whatsoever
that is rooted in the imagination, but always

Jorge Lavelli receives an
award for his production of
Steven Berkoff's Greek at the
Théâtre de la Colline, Paris.
observing the unity of these two basic ele¬
ments: space and time. Even though, in a
theatrical performance, time is artificialwe
know that between eight and half-past nine
this evening it will be theatre timethe
audience and the actors or singers, those who
are going to pass on the message, live in the
same space and time during the performance.
It is an ephemeral act, but it can be repeated
ad infinitum.
Considering that, even though it is
repeated, this ephemeral act is unique, can
it not be said to take on an absolute value?
Indeed it can. A performance lives only in
the memories of those who were there, who
witnessed the theatrical act, and this is some¬
thing which is very specific to it. The only
place where it can live again is in their minds.
There is no other artistic activity about which
this can be said.
What's more, the time of the performance
does not coincide with the artificial time
created on stage. The action may unfold at a
very remote time or in the immediate present,
but the time created on stage is not real time
as it is experienced in everyday life.
Does a man ofthe theatre like yourselfget
a specific pleasurefrom working in this essen¬
tially ephemeral medium?
Definitely, because each performance is at
the same time a form of expression in which,
as though to raise this ephemeral moment to
the highest pitch of intensity, a large number
of elements play a part: the actors, the per¬
formers; objects which take on a different sig¬
nificance according to how they are placed on
stage; the architecture, the lighting; all these
are factors that shape and determine the way
in which the performance is perceived.
You didn't mention words.
Of course, words play an essential part. But
you can have theatre without using words. A
gesture can be just as eloquent as a speech.
There's also dance, mime, the theatre of
silence. But words are part and parcel of the
dramatic art.
Do you try to put on a play that will be
the same every day or do you accept the fact
that no two performances can be identical?
Every evening there will be some change,
which may be perceptible only to me.
Unforeseen events are bound to occur, just as
I'm sure they do when you're preparing your
magazine. Doesn't a page sometimes turn out
to be badly printed or a photo to be of poor
quality? It's the same in the theatre. Accidents
may happen that are outside your control. A
power cut or a storm if you're performing in
the open air will alter the climate of the per¬
formance. The mood or state of health of the
actors will also have an effect. These are acci¬
dents in so far as human beings are not the
same every day, even though they are readying
themselves to enact a ritual that has long been
studied, worked at and rehearsed over and
over again. They will also be influenced by
the size and behaviour of the audience. As for
the members of the audience, they will have
their own individual interpretation of the
play, which will depend on their own partic¬
ular sensibility, on their intelligence, on how
concerned they feel about what they are being
shown, and even on where they are sitting in
the theatre.
Let's talk about yourpersonal sensibility,
your identity. Would you say that in Argen¬
tina theatre is based on European theatre or
does Argentine theatre exist in its own right?
Argentina is a country of immigration, a
patchwork of peoples, in which Europeans
have a special place. Needless to say, Argen¬
tines of Spanish, French or Italian origin
brought with them their culture and hence
their theatre. But since the mid-nineteenth cen¬
tury there has also existed a specifically Argen¬
tine theatre with its own characteristics. Why?
Because every society finds in theatre a means
of analysing, studying and expressing itself.
Argentine theatre is the reflection of a culture,
an attitude to life, a way of responding to the
things around us. In Argentina, the French,
English and German classics are well known,
Goethe, Shakespeare and Molière are regularly
staged, but plays by Argentine writers are also
performed. In its form, however, Argentine
theatre is similar to European theatre, just like
American theatre as a' whole. It would in any
case be rather surprising if, in Argentina, that
farflung corner of Europe, the prevailing
theatrical influence were Kabuki, No or
Chinese theatre.
Who are your favourite playwrights?
At the Theatre de la Colline I have deliber¬
ately chosen to give precedence to contem¬
porary playwrights, to reveal present-day
authors to the public. But before being made
director, I staged a large number of produc¬
tions, in Paris, in the rest of France and in var¬
ious other European countries. Where the
choice of authors is concerned, I have always
followed my own inclination, for there is a
very close relationship between a producer's
sensibility, temperament and intellectual out¬
look and the plays he chooses to put on. Those
that I have chosen represent so to speak the
successive chapters of a novel that will come
to an end when I myself leave the theatre. A
novel that can be said to exist only for me, that

A monument to the Spanish
playwright Jacinto Benavente
(1866-1954) In Madrid.
I alone can read from end to end. And one
that has a secret unity, a secret consistency.
For example, between the classical and
modern authors whose works I've put on
there are points of similarity. With hindsight
I would say that they share a freedom of
expression that enables them to go beyond
naturalism and to penetrate into the world of
the imagination, both in the patterns of lan¬
guage and in their musical organization. They
all show human beings in the round, in their
psychological and social dimensions, but also
with their inner lives and dreams. They tran¬
scend reality in the interests of lyricism,
expressing the inexpressible by virtue of a
different kind of stagecraft, a different idea of
the expressive value of gesture, a more effec¬
tive way of occupying space than would be
possible with a purely naturalistic approach.
This seems particularly relevant to your
production ofShakespeare's A Midsummer
Night's Dream...
Yes, a play dealing with love's taboos, with
the difficulty of being happy. I have, I think,
in my career in the theatre, remained faithful
to this theme of the aspiration to happiness.
I have put on other classical works, like
Life Is a Dream and The Wonder-Working
Magician by Calderón de la Barca, or The Tri¬
umph of Sensibility, a rarely performed play
by Goethe. Among modern authors, there is
Witold Gombrowicz, whom I introduced into
France with The Marriage, Yvonne, Princess of
Burgundy and Operetta, or Eugène Ionesco,
with whom I staged the first production of
Killing Game and put on The Picture and Exit
the King. There's also Fernando Arrabal,
Steven Berkoff, Carlos Fuentes, Thomas Bern-
hard, Mikhail Bulgakov, Copi of course, and
many others... This choice of contemporary
authors follows an inner logic, and of course
it's the same logic that's behind my work at
the Theatre National de la Collinewhere
there's no competition between classical and

modern, but an exclusive concern with the
theatre of today.
Contemporary theatre follows on directly
from classical theatre and can be just as
exciting, interesting and controversial. It can
also, by exploring new directions, applying
new approaches and providing a reflection of
the sensibility of our time, shed light on the
society in which we live and guide our polit¬
ical, cultural, spiritual and intellectual choices.
But don't you think that Shakespeare,
Corneille andMozart achieved such a degree
of perfection in their art that no one can
match them today?
No, this is the effect of distance, of all the
years that have come between. The contribu¬
tion of the twentieth-century playwrights is
considerable. Take someone like Eugene
O'Neill: the inventiveness of his theatre and
the vast range of his characters are staggering.
In his work, as in that of Shakespeare, the
mainsprings are ambition and the thirst for
power. But at the same time he creates, in
plays like Strange Interlude, a dreamlike
theatre, unconfined by realism, focusing on
extreme situations and emotional and phys¬
ical relationships of a rare violence. He opened
up vast possibilities for those who came after
him.
I'm also thinking of Pirandello, one of the
pillars of contemporary theatre. Without him
we wouldn't have had Ionesco, nor even
Beckett. This whole dialectic between form
and content, this duality of man at grips with
himself, of the individual face to face with his
own inwardness, these are extraordinary
insights granted to us by the contemporary
stage. Unsuspected horizons have thus been
revealed, bringing into the theatre the findings
of both science and psychoanalysiswhich
was unknown in Shakespeare's day. It is quite
possible that in three or four hundred years'
time these authors will have the same stature
as their Greek predecessors.
Take the case of Mozart, around whom
a cult has sprung up in our time and who
seems to be in the process of being redisco¬
vered. In the nineteenth century his music was
hardly ever performed. He was regarded as a
composer of genius but one who dealt in
trivialities. This point of view is no longer held
today. People have looked closely into what
he wrote, wondered why he chose particular
texts, and come to realize that there were the
same relations between certain of his
characters in many of his works and that this
recurrence of the same themes in different
guises was a way of developing a particular
world-view, of putting across a message; and
that this blend of seriousness and lightness
which runs through all his work had nothing
trivial about it. That on the contrary, there
was perhaps no view of life more profound.
So it happens that time corrects the impres¬
sion that a writer, a composer or an artist has
made upon his contemporaries.
How do you see the role of the producer?
His role is to recreate the play in his imagi
nation, to situate it in his own space and time
'in order to put it across more effectively and
to imprint upon it the colour of his own sen¬
sibility. When you are producing a play you
are not simply piecing it together, reducing
it to its bare bones or attempting a historical
reconstruction; you are taking a fresh look at
a piece of writing, reinterpreting it, mingling
your dreams with the author's.
You don't find this too restrictive?
No, certainly not. It's all part of the
ephemeral nature of the performance, of this
unique, fleeting moment which is theatre.
There is always an author and a text, and the
text is always open to new interpretations.
Actually, a theatre producer enjoys the same
freedom as a novelist: he can tamper with
time, set his own pace.
An act of theatre is an act of love, a work
of creation. If I put on a play, it is of course
because I like the play. So I bring something
to it, the feelings and emotions that it triggers
in me, my own way of seeing life, my own
response to words. When all is said and done,
it is an expression of absolute fidelity and, for
that very reason, demands the utmost
freedom.
