UNESCO FROM THE BEGINNING: A CHRONOLOGY OF KEY EVENTS
THE STORY OF A GRAND DESIGN
BY FEDERICO MAYOR
Director-General of UNESCO
T,HE memory of an institution is at once more reliable and
more precarious than that of an individual. More reliable,
because it is not subject to physical decay and also less subjective,
since its collective nature provides it with a permanent capacity
for checking and cross-checking.
But at the same time it is more precarious. Partly as a result
of compartmentalization, the members of an institution do not
always realize the importance of those fragments of the past
of which they are the sole repositories. All too often they rely
on others to transmit the heritage of history and information
which they share with their colleagues. The institutional
memory is also fallible because institutions live longer than
people. As soon as those who have served an institution since
its foundation start to leave it, the record of its history is exposed
to destruction, to oblivion.
However essential they may be, and however well-
organized, archives can never fully replace the living testimony
of eyewitnesses. The play of influences, the power and charisma
of certain personalities, the enthusiasm of great moments of
unanimity, the clash of controversyall these factors elude the
archival memory, along with the anecdotes which can bring
a situation back to life and which are often, perhaps wrongly,
disdained as trivia. The atmosphere in which events unfold and
decisions are taken cannot be captured and preserved in dossiers.
Something of this atmosphere seems to me, fortunately, to
have been preserved in the chronicle presented on the following
pages, which has been prepared not only from documentary
evidence but also with the aid of conversations with those who
took part in the events described. These individual contribu¬
tions are important today. Now that UNESCO is forty-five
years old, its existence outspans the careers of even those who
have served it longest.
The late 1980s were a milestone in UNESCO's history.
They were a time for taking stock and breaking new ground.
Today one generation is handing over to another. To the new
generation I would particularly recommend this chronology,
which will provide it with a humus of memory and tradition
in which its energy can take root. To the departing generation,
to those who at all levels of responsibility, through doubts and
certainties, failures and successes, have made the history of
UNESCO and are its living memory, this chronology is natur¬
ally dedicated.
In such a context it would be equally impossible not to
think of the promoters and precursors of UNESCO, the
pioneers whose role is recalled in these pages: the resolute men
and womeneducators, jurists, writers, philosophers, great
scientistswho believed, while war was still raging, that one
of the priorities of the postwar world would be the dedicated
search for alternatives to ignorance and philistinism, injustice
and violence.
I wonder whether the exemplary nature of this enterprise
has been sufficiently recognized and whether enough thought
has been given to the small group of founding fathers who in
war-torn London in 1942 pooled their abilities and their con¬
victions in order to give shape to their intuition, with a serenity
and farsightedness that enabled them to look beyond the grim
events around them. Have we paid due respect to the
disinterestednessso characteristic of devotion to great causes
that involved them in this enterprise whose credibility every¬
thing then seemed to deny?
The objectives they set forth are still far from being
achieved. "It is UNESCO's vocation to be a permanent ques¬
tion". This phrase, which featured in UNESCO's fortieth
anniversary exhibition in 1986, summed up the thinking of
some of the Organization's great figures. It seems to me to be
extremely apt. It is impossible to be certain of the outcome of
such a vast and ambitious mission as oursone which may
sometimes seem thankless to those who seek tangible and
immediate results, yet inspiring to those who are convinced of
its long-term necessity.
Finally let me express the pride I feel in exercising my
responsibilities at a time which is doubtless difficult but when
the opening of the last decade of the century and the millen¬
nium invites us to look back and to reflect. In this issue the
Courier begins publication of a chronological record of
UNESCO's history, a testimony to the accomplishments and
events which have marked its life since its inception. This record
of achievements that are already considerable will, I am sure,
serve as a reminder of our springs of action and inspire us with
the vigour of renewed commitment.
