History provides many
examples of people who
have attempted, with
varying degrees of
success, to realize the
dream of utopia. Over
3,000 years ago the
Pharaoh Akhenaton built
a "city of the sun" on
the banks of the Nile. In
India in the third century
BC the Emperor Asoka
took inspiration from
Buddhist egalitarian
ideals. In the nineteenth
century a crop of
Utopian communities
blossomed in the United
States. A prolific
futuristic literature
produced in Russian
since Tsarist times has
expressed the intuitions
and torments of society.
Some Utopian thinkers,
by imagining original
solutions to the
problems of the
industrial age, have
influenced, for better
or worse, the way we
live now.

AKHET-ATON, CITY OF THE SUN
BY AYYAM WASSEF
Left, Akhenaton, Nefertiti and
their daughter worship Aton,
the solar disc. Limestone bas-
relief from Tell el-Amarna
(Asyut province, Egypt).
Above right, Akhenaton
portrayed on a sandstone
pillar statue from the Temple
of Aton at Karnak (1370 BC).
wHEN Plato sought to visualize the ideal state,
the illusory hope of creating a republic founded
on reason led him prudently to propose banishing
poets. Utopia, it would seem, cannot tolerate in
its ideal world the subversive force of the
imagination which is, ironically, the very ele¬
ment that gives it birth. Things change, however,
when the Utopian dreamer has the power to put
his visions into effect through the fact that he is
kinga real king, who as it happened in this case
was also a poet.
Akhet-aton (literally, "city of the horizon")
was a real-life utopia that lasted only as long as
the heretical views of its creator, the Pharaoh
Akhenaton. What is left of its twelve-year exis¬
tence can be found in Middle Egypt, on the banks
of the Nile at Tell el-Amarna. There are some
palaces, a workers' residential quarter, a sculptors'
workshop, several temples. These vestiges bear
witness less to the town's existence than to the
fact of its demolition. They are stone fragments
of an interrupted poem, fixed forever in its
moment of inception.
Until 1842 even the name of the city was for¬
gotten, let alone its history. People had at best
an inkling that somewhere midway between
Egypt's ancient capital of Memphis and Thebes,
the town that supplanted it, a city of gold-
encrusted temples lay hidden, concealed both by
the sands of the desert and by the still more cor¬
rosive dust of neglect.
It was not until 1912 that German Egyptol¬
ogists discovered the painted bust of Nefertiti,
now in the Berlin Museum, that was to become
one of the most precious of Egyptian artworks
and was by its luminous beauty to cast light on
the strangest and least-known episode of the
country's Pharaonic history. It immediately
raised the question of who its subject might have
been, for her name had been carefully removed
from most of the records. It took fifty years'
research to establish that the splendid, high-
crowned queen had been the wife of Akhenaton,
whose name had also been proscribed, featuring
in none of the official lists of Egypt's rulers. In
effect, the historians of ancient Egypt had deliber¬
ately expunged thirty years of their own history.
The extent of the conspiracy suggests just
how significant the Amarna episode was for
ancient Egyptians. The radical programme that
Akhenaton introduced, inspired as much by
poetry as by politics, was so profoundly
unsettling that even now it appears an aberration
fitting uneasily into any straightforward chrono¬
logical account of Egyptian history, belonging
instead, it would seem, in some hidden corner of
the memory, on the threshold of a dream.
At this distance, Akhenaton's own person¬
ality is difficult to reconstruct. Some people see
him as a tragic préfiguration of Christ, a precursor
of monotheism, Moses before the letter. For
others he is the heretical Pharaoh, the great stain
on the history of his nationand by extension
on its geography, which through his creative
endeavours he permanently marked with a small,
enduring, sun-coloured spot.
For in an arid and burning place where the
sun might have come up on the very first day of
creation, Akhenaton decided to build a city that
was to be the centre and focal point of his own
new religion. In defiance of the powerful priest¬
hood, he banned the cult of Amon, king of the
gods, and established in its place the worship of
Aton, the sun. The break came abruptly at the
beginning of his reign, around the year 1362 BC.
The king changed his royal title from Amenophis
IV the name meant "Amon is satisfied" to
Akhenaton, "he whom Aton loves", and left the
royal city of Thebes to start work on the new
capital. A hundred thousand technicians, engineers
and workers were employed to build his
metropolis, which was planned to hold an even
larger number of inhabitants. Akhet-aton was to
be a city of the sun, of art and love and joy. It
was almost certainly the first urban centre to have
been designed from scratch.
Ingenious means were found to bring the
finest and most suitable materials to the site. To
lighten the architecture, and so increase the con¬
trast with the massive stone monuments of earlier
reigns, wooden beams were used to support walls
of mud-brick. A royal avenue bordered by the
most expensive houses ran through the middle
of the city. The houses of less privileged citizens
occupied the adjoining district, and beyond lived 23

I»
* ti ' .Ci. *
Któv
""
-a-~
^w
*
-
24
all the tribe of hopefuls who came to Akhet-aton
in search of a new life. The great temple in the
city's centre was formed of several courtyards
leading to a sanctuary; the whole building was
oriented to the rising sun and laid open to its
sacred rays, for it had no roof. Thus the Pharaoh
and his fellow-worshippers could commune
directly with their god, bathed in a light made the
more dazzling by the yellow colour omnipresent
throughout the town.
The most impressive building of all, however,
was the Northern Palace, built a short way out¬
side the town for Nefertiti. It was a world in
miniature. Set amid pools and gardens, a vast,
square lake bordered by colonnades was sur¬
rounded by enclosures containing rare birds and
beasts, a happy intrusion of nature into the daily
human round.
We now have a fairly clear idea of the daily
life of Akhet-aton: of its many banquets, its fes¬
tivals in honour of the sun-god. But we still know
little of its political activity. The world of affairs
apparently took second place to the Pharaoh's
aesthetic preoccupations.
Nevertheless, the fact that its god could be
seen suggests that there must have been some¬
thing of a revolution in people's perception of
secular power. For in a city whose god is open
to view, people live close to, and within the
compass of, the divine. This new relationship
between god and man lies at the heart of
Akhenaton's revolution, and its significance can
be summed up in a metaphor of looking. Aton
the all-seeing is, as it were, the eye of the sun;
and the sun itself is the eye of god, both seeing
The ruins of Akhet-aton, the
capital city of the Pharaoh
Akhenaton at Tell el-Amarna.
AYYAM WASSEF,
Egyptian essayist, is preparing
a doctoral thesis at the
University of Paris I on the
theme of the individual in
contemporary philosophy. Her
publications include a study of
the German-Jewish philosopher
Martin Buber. She is currently
writing an account of her
experiences as an Egyptian
living in Paris.
and seen. The old hidden god, Amon, saw every¬
thing without being observed, never revealing
himself except through a glass darkly in the form
of multifarious carved and graven images that
served as scattered symbols of the divine presence
among men. Maybe Akhenaton's heresy lay in
wanting to break through such substitutions, to
do away with this distance of symbols and instead
to bask permanently in the godhead's shining
light.
That is why his creation was Utopian in the
true sense of the word. From a poetic point of
view, utopia implies the promise of finally
achieving a true and exact apprehension of reality.
The Amarnan aesthetic lends itself to a kind of
exacerbated realism. Imitating the solar disc itself,
which radiates outwards in countless individual
rays, the artist's regard moves forth towards the
object of its attention, the objective other that
is also watching it. King Akhenaton is represented
as he was, formless; a king whose reality lay in
the regard of other people.
One glimpses here the germs of the incipient
democratic sense that some people have discerned
in Akhenaton's programme. Universally visible,
dispensing light and life to all with equal bounty,
the sun is the very emblem of a just monarch,
indeed of utopia itself. But a kingeven one who
was also a poetwould find it hard to maintain
such an exalted level in the day-to-day governance
of any human community. Akhenaton's courage
lay in not having presupposed failure, and
thereby having for a short time blurred the
boundary between what is desirable and what is
possible.
