A long journey from obscurity
by Hugo García Robles
LATIN AMERICA
Long ignored or considered to be a composer of the second rank,
Mozart has only recently been fully recognized as a genius. The pattern
of his fortunes in Latin America illustrates these whims ofposterity.
I
30
N 1791, the year of Mozart's death, a little-
known musician of Salamanca in Spain published
a pamphlet ranking the composers of his day in
order of merit. The hit parade he produced says
much about the tastes and prejudices of the time.
In it one can read: "If Apollo, noted among the
gods for the beautiful music of his lyre, was to
come down among us, what eulogies would he
not deliver for the celebrated Antonio Lolli,
Manuel Carreras, Melchor Ronci or Jaime
Roquillas? Let him hear the compositions and
concerti of the great Joseph Haydn and Ignaz
Pleyel, or of our own countryman Josef Castel
. . . not to mention the works of Paesiello and
Cimarosa for the theatre."
Antonio Lolli often toured Spain as a
standard-bearer for Italian violin music, which no
doubt explains his presence on the list. Josef
Castel was a Spaniard who belonged to the world
of the theatre, of the musical interludes known as
tonadillas and of the opera, where Paesiello and
Cimarosa were also noted figures. Haydn and
Pleyel, great names both, represented instrumental
music.
Mozart's name, however, is conspicuous by
its absence. And the same neglect is evident in
another contemporary source, Tomás de Iriarte's
poem La Música, in which Haydn is frequently
praised.
There are indications of the same attitude in
paintings of the time. When Goya portrayed the
Duke of Alba, he chose to exalt his patron's
musical talents by showing him leaning on a
piano on which rests a violin, an instrument the
Duke played with a virtuoso's skill. In his hand he
holds a composition bearing the name of Haydn.
The passion for Haydn was shared by those
well-informed music-lovers the Dukes of
Benavente, who were also at the time supporting
Luigi Boccherini, without doubt the most impor¬
tant composer resident in the country. In
October 1783 they signed a contract at the palace
of Esterhazy that entitled them to take to Madrid
all the works of the master that were not already
covered by copyright.
Yet it was not only in the Spanish capital that
Haydn was glorified and Mozart ignored. When
Haydn died in 1809, he was accorded the honour
of a state funeral, and Napoleon's army escorted
him to his final resting-place. The composer of
The Marriage ofFigaro, however, ended up in a
pauper's grave.
Yet tastes were already starting to change.
Notwithstanding the profound admiration felt by
the aristocracy for such masters as Haydn and
Boccherini, whose music graced many a stately
home, a new vogue was emerging. Romanticism
was about to explode on the world, and the
theatre was to be the place where the new sensi¬
bility would find its fullest expression.
At the time no one realized that the struggles
of Victor Hugo and Berlioz, the battle of Her-
nani and the scandal caused by the Symphonie
Fantastique, were signs of a revolution whose

roots could be traced back to such works of
Mozart as Don Giovanni, The Magic Flute, and
the last symphonies of 1788.
Rossinimania
In Latin America in the closing years of the eight¬
eenth century, just before the struggle for
independence began, theatrical fashion followed
that of Madrid. Tonadillas were still in vogue.
These Spanish equivalents of the operetta featured
overtures, duets, choruses, and ballets. Their
libretti had literary pretensions, but the inspira¬
tion was clearly popular, as indeed was the music.
It was the vogue for Italian opera that spelled
the end for the tonadillas. Initially, from around
1810 to 1820, the new form was introduced
piecemeal. Arias and duets, sometimes even
whole scenes, were played on the Latin American
stage, but rarely entire works. The situation
changed after 1825, the year when the great
Spanish singer and teacher Manuel Garcia arrived
with his company in New York. This was an
important date in the development of attitudes
to opera throughout the American continent.
Garcia's production of The Barber of Seville
sparked off a movement, best described as
Rossinimania, that would only subside a quarter
of a century later when the work of the young
Verdi came into fashion.
After two successful years in New York,
Garcia moved to Mexico City, where he per¬
formed the same repertoire. Meanwhile further
south two Italian singers, the Tanni brothers,
were staging the first Italian opera ever performed
in Buenos Aires, doubtless Rossini's Barber. In
The Austrian conductor
Erich Kleiber and his
orchestra in front of the
Colón theatre, Buenos Aires
(Argentina), in 1926.

32
1830, three years later, Teresa Schieroni and Mar¬
garita Caravaglia took the new mode to Chile.
Their only innovation was to substitute another
Rossini opera, L'inganno felice, for the ubiquitous
Barber.
In Lima, Caracas and Rio de Janeiro the same
tunes were being playedthe roles and trills of
the ever-popular Rossini. Mozart in no way
benefited from this growing enthusiasm for
Italian opera.
In spite of the omnipresence of Italian bel
canto Mozart's music was occasionally performed.
Jose Mauricio Nunes Garcia (1767-1830), a native
of Rio de Janeiro, performed Mozart's Requiem
there as early as 1819. Introduced to music by his
mother, Nunes Garcia had been ordained a priest
in 1792 and became choirmaster of Rio's
cathedral six years later. Given the overwhelming
preference for Italian works shown by both the
city and the court, the knowledge of German
music displayed in his work is truly surprising.
Above, portrait of the Duke of
Alba by the Spanish painter
Francisco de Goya y Lucientes
(1746-1828).
Right, portrait of Peter I, King
of Portugal and Emperor of
Brazil, by Henrique J. Da Silva
(1771-1834).
Another early champion of Mozart in Latin
America was the Milanese baritone Michèle Vac-
cani. Born in 1770, his American career was to
take him the length of the continent, following
the standard itinerary later taken by the young
Toscanini. He made his debut in Rio in 1822, at
a time when the presence of the Portuguese court
lent great cultural prestige to the city, still basking
in the glory of the Braganza dynasty's baroque
heritage. In 1827, he and his wife Maria Candida
played Leporello and Zerlina in Don Giovanni
in Buenos Aires. In February of that year,
Angelita Tanni sang the role of Donna Anna.
These isolated performances were too excep¬
tional to threaten Rossini's operatic primacy. But
tastes were to change. It was a sign of the times
that, when the San Felipe theatre opened in Mon¬
tevideo in 1880, there was a place on the façade
for Mozart's name.
Towards the end of the nineteenth century,
instrumental music began to play an increasingly
important part in Latin American cultural life,
on a par with opera and the theatre. As in
Europe, musical societies and enthusiastic
amateurs were active in taking instrumental
music out of the constricting world of the salons
and into the concert hall. At first the two genres
were juxtaposed, with instrumental works and
arias often featuring on the same programme.
One sign of this change in taste can be traced
as far back as 1850, when Camilo Sivori, a vir¬
tuoso trained by Paganini, gave a recital in Mon¬
tevideo which was interrupted to allow the
orchestra of the Casa de Comedias to play the
overture to The Magic Flute. And in Santiago de
Chile in 1869, the band of the local philharmonic
society played a Mozart symphony in C, perhaps
the Linz (K. 425) or the Jupiter (K. 551).

Design executed in Italy in
1830 for a production of Dido
(1794), an opera by the
Italian composer Giovanni
Paisiello.
HUGO GARCIA ROBLES,
Uruguayan musicologist, is a
music critic in his country and
also works with Italian Radio
and Television in the fields of
music and literature. His
publications include El cantar
opinando (1969), an essay on
songs with a social and
political message in Uruguay.
The half century from 1880 to 1930 saw an
increase in the number of concerts and the
appearance of the first philharmonic societies in
Latin America. The growing interest in classical
music was also served by new means of commu¬
nication, notably the radio and the gramophone.
Europe remained the great provider, both of
the musical compositions themselves and of the
means of appreciating them. Yet even Europe
took time to rediscover Mozart. Otto Jahn's great
biographythe first to really do justice to the
composer's geniusdid not appear until almost
a hundred years after his death, and it was not
until 1912 that the initial tomes were published
of the monumental five-volume critical and
biographical study by Theodore de Wyzewa and
Georges de Saint-Foix. Alfred Einstein's repub¬
lication of Köchel's thematic catalogue dates from
1937. All of which suggests that the belated appe¬
tite for Mozart in Latin America merely reflected
his gradual rediscovery in Europe.
Mozart in the twentieth century
In musical terms, the dark years of the 1930s and
the catastrophe of the Second World War were
beneficial for Latin America. Among the artists
who fled from racial and political persecution in
Europe to find a haven across the Atlantic were
many musicians seeking a place of exile where
they could exercise their profession. Such was the
case of the distinguished German conductors
Fritz Busch and Erich Kleiber, both eminent
Mozartians, and also of Bruno Walter, who chose
to settle in the United States for similar reasons.
Busch is particularly associated with the
Glyndebourne Festival in England, where he
made recordings of Don Giovanni, The Marriage
of Figaro and Cosi fan tutte which are sublime
examples of Mozart interpretation. But, like
Kleiber, he also directed brilliant performances
of the composer's works at the Colón Theatre
in Buenos Aires.
Both Busch (from 1935 to 1948) and Kleiber
(from 1938 to 1951) chose to pursue their careers
in Latin America. Chile, Brazil and Argentina all
benefited from their refined art, dedicated notably
to the service of Mozart. The two masters
bequeathed their passion to many Latin
American disciples, thereby doubly enriching the
cultural life of the continent.
At first Mozart's music encountered the same
indifference in Latin America as it had in late
eighteenth-century Europe. The wheel turned full
circle with the arrival of these illustrious represen¬
tatives of the culture of the old continent who
went on to put down new and vigorous roots for
Mozart's music in the New World. 33
