The perspective from space
by Jean-Philippe Grelot
.?#<
Advances in computer
science and the mass
of data transmitted
from remote-sensing
satellites are taking
cartography into a
new era
Aerial photography is used
systematically In map
production. Partly overlapping
photos are assembled in a
mosaic (above).
VMRTOGRAPHY is a very ancient art. As long
ago as the time of the Pharaohs, surveyors were
drawing up plans of plots of cultivated land in
order to re-establish property boundaries or
replace cornerstones buried under the silt brought
down by the floodwaters of the Nile.
The great voyages of discovery of the fifteenth
century led to the transformation of world maps.
Returning from their voyages, the great navi¬
gators of those days recounted their experiences,
which cartographers working quietly in their
homes incorporated into more accurate maps.
The emergence of modern cartography,
however, dates from the eighteenth century,
when scientific expeditions such as the French
expeditions to Lapland and Peru finally con¬
firmed Newton's hypothesis that the world was
shaped like a sphere slightly flattened at the poles.
It was through these expeditions that cartog¬
raphy acquired the mathematical basis it needed
to become the instrument for the accurate,
graphic, scale representation of our knowledge
of the Earth that it is today.
The starting-point of all cartography is the
science of geodesythe determination of the size
and shape of the Earth and the exact position of
a series of reference points on its surface. By
means of successive readings taken in turn from
each of these points, the co-ordinates of these
points on the surface of the Earth are determined
and then transposed to a flat surface.
Today, methods and instruments have com¬
pletely changed. Using a small calculator linked
to an aerial, geodesists "listen" to the specialized
satellites of the Global Positioning System, which
give them their precise position immediately.
During the previous three centuries, however,
they would have had to take readings with the¬
odolites of the various topographical features
around them. On the basis of these reference
points, topographers would have made a detailed
examination of the terrain so as to locate the
roads, houses, forests, rivers, etc., that they had
observed.
From about 1930, aerial photography, a tech¬
nique which had been perfected during World
War I, radically modified this painstaking work
and signalled the end of direct accumulation of
data by observation on the ground. Aeroplanes are
flown in a series of straight lines and photographs 35

are taken at fairly close intervals. Each section



of terrain flown over is photographed twice, from
different angles. In this way the aerial photo¬
graphs provide the binocular effect of human
vision, which makes possible the appreciation of
distance and relief.
The cartographer makes use of this
stereoscopic effect which, used in conjunction
with extremely precise measurement techniques,
gave rise to the science of photogrammetry (the
measurement of photographs applied to sur¬
veying and mapping, as well as for engineering
and other purposes). Through the twin eyepieces
of their photogrammetrical reconstitution equip¬
ment, each of which is focused on one of the two
successive aerial photographs, the stereo-operators
get a true picture of the terrain in relief, with its
heights, its valleys, houses and trees. All that then
has to be done is to trace the relief with a cursor,
whilst operating certain controls, for the co¬
ordinates of the various features to be recorded.
However, a certain amount of fieldwork
remains necessary to check the correct identifi¬
cation of detail, to fill in details not visible in areas
in shadow, or to add information such as place-
names or administrative boundaries that aerial
photographs cannot supply.
The documentation thus produced is cor¬
rected by the map editor and then printed. The
process calls for great care and precision and is
quite lengthy. About two years should be allowed
from the taking of the aerial photographs to the
publication of the map.
The computer invasion
Computers came upon the cartographical scene
in the late 1950s. They were first used in geodetic
calculations. Some ten years later experiments
were begun with computer-assisted design,
although this did not go beyond the laboratory
stage. Then, in the 1970s, the data on maps were
recorded in numerical form, which greatly eased
their use and updating.
Geodetic surveying afloat.
Below, members of a
scientific expedition climb
Mount Pelvoux, France's
highest geodetic point (1910).
In the 1980s computers invaded every sphere
of cartography, including photogrammetry. Like
the micro-computer, equipment for computer-
assisted design became smaller and smaller and
at the same time more and more powerful. Par¬
ticularly spectacular progress was made in the
development of conceptual models and data
banks and in numerical data-handling capacity.
Computerized cartography has developed into a
full-scale "Geographic Information System" with
its own data banks and its own equipment and
application programs.
With their powerful analytical capacity, com¬
puters have considerably reduced the time
required to produce a map; but the demand is still
for faster results. To meet it, cartography is
turning towards a new toolremote sensing by
means of Earth observation satellites.
Remote sensing satellites
What are the broad principles of this new and
revolutionary technique? Remote sensing satel¬
lites capture by means of scanning sensors the
varying electromagnetic radiations emitted by the
points the satellites observe on the Earth's surface.

Top, the site of the 1992
Winter Olympics at Albertville
(France) as viewed from the
SPOT satellite. Altlmetrlc data
are used to make a numeric
model of the site In which the
relief Is depicted In grid form
(middle photo). The model Is
then combined with the SPOT
Image to obtain a perspective
view (bottom).
The nature of the electromagnetic radiation
emitted by a given point on the Earth's surface
depends upon the characteristics of the Earth's
surface at that pointfactors such as temperature,
humidity, the presence or absence of vegetation,
and the nature of rock formations.
The satellite then transmits the data it has
obtained to a ground station, either in photo¬
graphic or numerical form. Analysis of this data
enables the characteristics of the points observed
to be deduced. Thus, like aerial photographs,
satellite images require interpretation by a
specialist, but with the aid of a computer.
Broadly speaking, satellites may be classified
into three groups according to the orbits they
follow:
Low-orbit satellites, like the American space
shuttle and like most military observation satel
lites, circle the Earth at an altitude of between
200 and 300 kilometres. Subject to the braking
drag of the atmosphere, they have an effective life
span which varies from a few days to a few weeks.
The photographs they take are of a scale of the
order of 1:100,000, which means that objects of
a metre or more can be distinguished. The pho¬
tographs are transmitted during the satellite's
return to Earth or when a capsule fitted with a
parachute is ejected.
Satellites in heliosynchronous orbit circle the
Earth at ,an altitude of 800 to 900 kilometres.
Those in the American Landsat (or ERTS) series
(five satellites since 1972) or the French SPOT
series (two satellites, one in 1986 and one in 1990)
have a life span of a few years and record numer¬
ical images each of which covers an area of from
3,500 to 35,000 square kilometres. Their resolu¬
tion varies from about fifty metres for Landsat
to about ten metres for SPOT, which, using
stereoscopic methods, is the first system of Earth
observation to "see" in relief. They pass over the
same point of the Earth at the same time in rela¬
tion to the Sun (hence the term heliosyn¬
chronous) approximately every twenty days. By
orienting the mirrors of its sensors, SPOT can
record details of a given zone every three days,
meteorological conditions permitting (SPOT
satellites cannot pierce cloud cover). The whole
of the Earth's surface is covered in a period of
two to three weeks.
Geostationary satellites, like Meteosat, are placed
in an equatorial orbit at an altitude of 36,000
kilometres. They record numerical images
covering a quarter of the globe with a resolution
of about five kilometres. Since their position in
relation to the Earth is fixed they are within cons¬
tant view of a ground reception station to which
they transmit images every half hour. They are,
however, unable to scan the polar ice caps.
Satellite images make possible the continuous
updating of maps, with a reduction in the margin
of error and in the time span. A satellite like
SPOT makes possible the updating of the car¬
tographical cover of a country in a matter of
months, as compared with ten years or so using
classic methods.
Today evolving computer technology has
combined remote sensing and cartography and
taken advantage of their complementarity. As a
result, now that we can handle both cartographic
data and the images on which they are based,
whether these be numerical or graphic, we talk
nowadays in terms of "integrated" geographical
information systems
Practical applications
The first field of application for geographical
information systems is resource management in
both urban and rural areas. Now that it can pro¬
vide the most accurate information about the con¬
dition of a given area and furnish a visual and
data-based synthesis of it, cartography is in a 37

38
position to optimize the efficiency and cost-
effectiveness of that area's management.
The supply and waste utility networks of an
urban area (water, electricity, telephone and tel¬
evision cables, waste water conduits, household
waste collection and road networks) are all inter¬
twined within a restricted space. As they become
older they have to be renovated and adapted to
meet new needs. Work of this kind has to be care¬
fully planned to cause the least possible distur¬
bance to users, to reduce the risk of accidents and
to keep costs to a minimum. Cartography also
has a part to play in other sectors, such as public
transport and the siting of medical and educa¬
tional facilities. In fact, all aspects of the life of
the community are involved. Three-quarters of
the data handled by urban authorities are local¬
ized data and thus come within the sphere of
geographical information systems.
In agriculture, the main application of car¬
tography is in the study of land-use and cultiva¬
tion methods, monitoring plant cover, harvest
forecasting and the assessment of the conse¬
quences of such climatic hazards as drought or
floods and of the incidence of such events as epi¬
demics or fires.
Coupled with management is development,
on which the whole aspect of an area depends.
This includes town planning, the construction of
the road infrastructure and agricultural improve¬
ment. Here, project mapping, which is limited
in both space and time according to the nature
and scope of the project envisaged, is used as well
as overall, basic cartography. This is a specific
type of cartography based on a specific range of
data. It is dependent upon precision, constant up¬
dating and a permanent observation system. In
this domain, aerial photography and satellite
imagery play a decisive role because of the speed
with which they can furnish information.
Lastly, understanding and control of the
environmenta more recent concern directly
connected with developmentcall for broad car¬
tographical involvement, for here too thinking
must be in terms of spatial analysis. The factors
that have to be borne in mind are multiple and
complex yet they require simple formulation.
The areas involved are becoming larger and larger
so that the interactions and spread of phenomena
can be taken into account. Satellites that roam
in space unhampered by national boundaries are
the ideal tool for the acquisition of the necessary
global information. This is even more true now
that computer science is beginning to provide the
means (vast storage capacity thanks to the new
optical disks, rapid data handling by means of
parallel processors, transmission by local net¬
works and integrated service networks) for rapid
and efficient handling of the vast mass of data
these satellites transmit.
Cartography still retains its essential didactic
function. A synthetic science that reveals the lines
of force of global phenomena by demonstrating
their spatial relationships, it also pioneers the way
to new horizons of knowledge. And, feeding back
to us as it does the image that we are giving to
our land, it has become a prime witness to our
cultural development.
A satellite Image forms the
basis of this map of Bamako
(Mali).
JEAN-PHILIPPE GRELOT,
French geographer, is sales
director of his country's
National Geographical Institute.
He teaches cartography at
France's School of
Geographical Sciences, and is
vice-president of the
International Cartographic
Association. He has published
many articles on cartography
in French and other journals.
