So//, mineral deposits, tectonic
structure, vegetation, climate...
many chapters in the story of the
planet recorded in scientific maps
and atlases produced by UNESCO
IN the earth sciences, the maps produced by
UNESCO are mainly geological, tectonic,
metallogenic or metamorphic. These maps
generally show a continent in its entirety,
hence their small scaleusually 1:5,000,000 or
1:2,500,000.
GEOLOGICAL MAPS
The first map in this series is of Europe. The
innovations it contains paved the way for a
new generation of geological maps. For
example, the Pleistocene cover (major part of
the Quaternary), which is relatively thin in
the area of the Baltic Shield and the British
Isles, is not shown. In areas where this cover
is thicker, however, it is shown either by trans¬
parent signs or by full colour, if strong tec¬
tonic activity played a decisive role in the
process of sedimentation.
In addition, intrusive magmatic rocks
(rocks produced by molten matter being
forced up from the Earth's interior into pre¬
existing formations) and volcanic magmatic
rocks have been subdivided according to age,
chemical composition and relation to orogeny
(process of mountain formation). Generally
speaking, age is shown by colour and the
nature of the rocks or lithology by over¬
printed signs.
The map of Africa was the first to show
LYDWINE D'ANDIGNE DE ASÍS
is a programme specialist with UNESCO's Division
of Earth Sciences.



The Earth from every angle
ty Lydáe iM$é de Asís
45


the geology of the continental shelf and the
seafloor. Along with depth measurements
(bathymetry), it shows the age of the crust,
magnetic lineation, fracture zones, isopachs
(sediment thickness), the siting' of drillings, the
limits of volcanism and thrust sheets and the
epicentres of earthquakes.
Besides the geological map of Africa on
a scale of 1:5,000,000, UNESCO has recently
published a map of South and East Asia on
a scale of 1:5,000,000 and a geological map of
the world on a scale of 1:25,000,000.
TECTONIC MAPS
The tectonic map of Africa which, as its name
suggests, shows distortions in the earth's crust,
also contains some decisive innovations. For
the first time in the history of cartography,
the signs and symbols of the Precambrian are
entirely based on geochronology, i.e. on
"absolute ages" (expressed in thousands or
millions of years) determined radiometrically
on the basis of certain properties of isotopes.
The various orogenies are shown by
specific colours while overprinted conven¬
tional signs represent the ancient structures.
The depth of the basins and the thickness of
the surface cover are indicated by gradual
shading rather than by isobathic curves.
Tectonic maps provide a considerable
^1 V
^3tj- - * ' _ '
« P.;%¿ HjT¡
's V^7¿TO? "í,7iff? ; ,
Eis- .-. ' ^mH'L
^1^%X, A «V
An I
fènèfiye i
Detall of »haet 9 of the International tectonic r
of Africa (ÍS.OOO 0001
amount of data not given by geological maps.
Dynamic geology serves as a means of
explaining structures and is a source of insights
into the laws governing the evolution of the
Earth's crust. This knowledge is useful in par¬
ticular for a more practical approach to
prospecting.
METAMORPHIC MAPS


These maps show the metamorphic belts,
which are rock masses altered by heat and
pressure, highlighting mineral associations and
faciès (sediment characteristics, considered
from the point of view of their development).
The spatial distribution of these faciès is a
source of significant information concerning
the thermal history of the Earth. In some
cases, on account of the scale used, various
types of faciès corresponding to a given tem¬
perature have had to be grouped together,
irrespective of the pressure undergone.
Pressure-induced facies are also considered
together, in terms of temperature and pressure
gradients.
METALLOGENIC MAPS
These maps represent a big step forward in
metallogenic studies and the methodology of
prospecting. They show the principal litho-
logical, tectonic, magmatic and palaeogeo-
Detatt of «heel 2 of th« Metallogenic map of Europe
I12.SOO.OOOI
of ah*el 9 of th* International Quaternary map
of Euro». 11 2.500,0001

V	j-
UNESCO IN ACTION
graphie features contributing to strata forma¬
tion and indicate the limits and specific charac¬
teristics of mineral provinces.
They also show other important features,
namely, age of orogeny and the various sur¬
face irregularities, age of contours and
lithology of platform cover, mineralizations
with the mineral content and its importance,
and age of the mineralization along with its
genetic type.
Work is in progress towards the publica¬
tion of a map of the mineralizations of Africa,
the first sheet of which is in press, and the
mineral atlas of the world, for which the signs
and symbols have been defined.
THE SOIL MAP
OF THE WORLD
This original map in eighteen sheets is accom¬
panied by a volume of explanatory text for
each continent: the legend covers no less than
5,000 physico-chemical soil types or pedolog-
ical units. It provides a means of arriving at
an initial estimate of world soil resources and
opens the way for more extensive studies.
Since its publication, other projects have been
launched, in particular a world desertification
map and a world map of soil degradation.
THE QUATERNARY MAP
In this series only the map of Europe has so
far been published. The information presented
is not limited to glacial phenomena but
includes fluvial, lacustrine, marine and aeolian
deposits, whether of detrital or chemical
origin, and volcanic rocks. Certain geomor-
phological features are also shown on these
maps, together with the limits of marine trans¬
gressions and ice movement.
Designed for specialists, but also for
teachers, to whom they should be of invalu¬
able assistance, UNESCO maps provide a
state-of-the-art overview of our knowledge of
the Earth while opening the way for ever
more precise local investigations on an increas¬
ingly large scale. One of their aims is to trans¬
late a maximum of scientific data into an inter¬
national language understandable to all earth
scientists.
The international
language of maps
Situated at the interface of art and science,
cartography offers an irreplaceable syn¬
thesis of information scattered through
numerous books, articles and documents.
It therefore calls for the co-operation of
specialists in a variety of fields from all over
the world. The unique position occupied by
UNESCO among scientific institutions
enables it to take an active part in this type
of activity.
UNESCO plays a major role in the publi¬
cation of continental maps and world maps
covering such scientific fields as the earth
sciences (see article page 45), the water and
environmental sciences and seafloor geology.
These maps are based on national docu¬
ments prepared by UNESCO member states
themselves and then compiled and assem¬
bled by international drafting committees.
In the water sciences, UNESCO is con¬
tinuing to prepare hydrogeological maps of
the European and African continents and of
Latin America and the Caribbean.
The maps published by UNESCO make
use of the most modern techniques of satel¬
lite imaging, data processing and scanning.
The trend as regards traditional maps
printed on paper is towards the preparation
of supplementary or derived maps, prepared
to order on the basis of computerized data.
UNESCO's vast cartographic programme
is being carried out in close co-operation
with such bodies as the Commission for the
Geological Map of the World (CGMW),
UNESCO's main partner for thematic earth
science maps, the FAO (the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations) and the International Association
for Quaternary Research (INQUA), which co-
publish soil and Quaternary maps with
UNESCO, the International Association of
Hydrologlcal Sciences and the International
Hydrographie Organization.
UNESCO maps can be ordered from
the Office of the UNESCO Press,
1 rue Miollis, 75015 Paris (France)
and the Organization's sales
agents worldwide.
A small brochure in English, Scientific Maps ":?:':-; '& ]^§
and Atlases, UNESCO Catalogue, contains j j j j ;"{
a detailed, illustrated inventory of UNESCO
maps and atlases. Copies may be obtained
from the UNESCO Press, Sales Division, Bjjjji*^*^
1 rue Miollis, 75015 Paris (France). .:.::..:..
Detail of sheet D2 of the International hydrologeological
map of Europe (1:1,500.000).
