An appetite for living
by
"Man is only truly man when he is playing"
FRIEDRICH VON SCHILLER
MARTINE MAURIRAS-BOUSQUET,
a staff member of UNESCO's
Education Sector, is a
psychosociologist who has
taught in the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, in Côte
d'Ivoire and at the University
of Paris. Co-author of The
Child and Play (UNESCO, 1979)
and author of Théorie et
pratique ludiques (Paris, 1984),
she has also written many
articles on the applications of
play to communication and
training.
W' HEN placed in a maze, a well-fed rat with no
particular caufe for anxiety will start to explore
its new surroundings out of curiosity and a desire
to play. By doing so, it seems to become familiar
with the layout of the maze. If food is then put
in the maze and the rat is returned to it unfed,
it will soon find its way to the foodfar more
quickly at any rate than another rat which has
not previously played in the maze and has thus
had no opportunity to find out its plan.
The impulse to play which can also be called
the curiosity or exploration impulse, since for
ethologists (students of animal behaviour) the three
expressions are pretty well interchangeablegives
species and individuals an obvious advantage in
the process of natural selection. The individual
who is in the habit of gratuitously exploring his or
her environment will have many more opportu¬
nities to acquire knowledge and will consequently
be better prepared to face unexpected situations.
The most playful species are
the most adaptable
To some extent all animals play, explore and
move around to no apparent purpose. But only
a few species retain in adult life their youthful
capacity for play. They include certain birds such
as crows, rodents, the higher carnivores and pri¬
mates and, of course, man. The species with the
greatest aptitude for play are also the most "cos¬
mopolitan", in the sense that they have proved
able to adapt to very different climates and have
thereby improved their chances of survival.
What is true in biology is also true in socie¬
ties and cultures. In order to subsist in a specific
territory a society needs a considerable capacity
for hard work, organizing power and determi
nation to pursue its own interests. But these
serious qualitiesor faultsare not enough to
guarantee progress. Myths, social rituals and even
science are not based on seriousness but on play,
curiosity and gratuitous explorationfactors that
stimulate creativity and invention.
Some of the greatest scientistsone might
mention at random such names as Kepler,
Ampère, Darwin, Gauss, Pasteur, Maxwell,
Planck, Poincaré and Einsteinhave described
how, at the moment of discovery, they felt the
same pleasure and the same excitement that a
child feels when playing.1 If the research to
which these men made such notable contribu¬
tions is the basis of modern technology then we
must admit the truth of an idea that at first may
seem paradoxicalthat progress, like culture, is
born in play.
We are not of course talking about games
such as bridge or football. The problem is largely
semantic. The English language uses two words,
game and play, to denote concepts that in French,
German, Spanish and many other languages are
designated by a single word. This leads to end¬
less confusion. So before embarking on any dis¬
cussion of play we must agree that these two
words denote two very different things. "Games"
are social institutions that are the sediment of
play. Play itself is an existential attitude, a way
of approaching life which can be applied to every¬
thing but is not exclusively attached to anything
in particular.
Bridge, football, hide-and-seek, dice and
dancing are games. But playing cards or dancing
do not automatically involve the specific
approach to life that is play, nor lead to the par¬
ticular pleasure which accompanies play.
Everyone knows that it is perfectly possible to 13

A Japanese kite enthusiast.
Kite-flying has long been
popular In Asia, especially In
Japan where It was
traditionally a sport for
adults.
take part in a bridge tournament or to go dancing
and be bored stiff. No institutionalized game is
ipso facto playful.
In contrast, a number of activities which are
not usually considered to be games may be
playful experiences. Travelling, conversation, the
creation or appreciation of a work of art, getting
to know another person, going for a stroll, even
work, can all be experienced from time to time
as play.
If we think back to childhood, we find that
our most vivid memories of the excitement of
play often have nothing to do with games as such,
but with intensely-felt moments linked to fortui¬
tous experiences such as exploring a house,
walking in a strange district, or discovering the
world of nature.
From Martin Heidegger to Georges Bataille,
from Johan Huizinga to Roger Caillois, from
14
Konrad Lorenz to Gregory Bateson, some of the
most eminent thinkers of our time have been
keenly interested in the phenomenon of play. A
fairly clear idea has gradually emerged in contem¬
porary thought as to the place of play in human
experience and in the overall world-picture.
Today most philosophers, anthropologists and
ethologists would agree on a definition of play
as an activity which is its own justification and
exists in its own right.
The more play is authenticas in the case of
an absorbing children's gamethe more the
player feels freed from contingencies of all kinds.
Play is totally gratuitous and, as the German
philosopher Eugen Fink has remarked, it is an
"oasis of happiness" in the desert of so-called
"serious" life.
Taking life as it comes
To play is, for a moment in time, not to ask life
to be anything but what it is, nor to have any
purpose other than itself.
Play is desire for that with which one plays,
not desire for something which one lacks and
feels one must obtain. It is desire for the here and
now, for the passing and the coming moment.
In other words, play is pure appetite for living,
not for this or that type of life made desirable
by fashion or habit, but for things as they are,
for life as it is.
Take the example of modern tourism. More
often than not tourists set themselves precise
targets. They want to visit outstanding sites and
monuments which, so they have been told, are
particularly beautiful. They are looking for curi¬
osities and a change of scene in the picturesque
and the exotic. What is supposed to be a pleasure
trip is actually subject to a number of imperatives.
It is an extremely serious unpaid activity, a kind
of holiday task.
Adventurous travellers do not plan every¬
thing. They go where their whim takes them.
They are not collecting souvenirs as lepidopterists
collect butterflies, but looking for an opportu¬
nity for self-renewal.
"Serious" desire is a desire for something that
one lacks. It is almost like an addict's desire for
a drug, a desire which is bound to lead to
suffering. It is a desire for something one does
not possess, a desire to consume. In our civiliza¬
tion it often focuses on a commodity (in the
widest sense of the term) and is therefore depen¬
dent on money. In contrast, desire linked to play
finds its satisfaction within itself and asks for
nothing from outside. It makes desirable
whatever it turns to. One might say that it creates
the desirability of its object.2

Play, the enemy of materialism
The essentially materialistic civilization in which
we live today is dominated by desire for what is
lacking. It is focused on progress, which means
in effect on the continual invention of new needs.
For our civilization play is the enemy. It is
defined in negative terms as something that is not
serious. Play is thus marginalized in theory and
in practice. To neutralize it even further, it must
be restricted to exceptional occasions (celebra¬
tions) and to clearly defined activities (games).
Many authors agree with the American
anthropologist Marshall David Sahlins3 in
thinking that play has been continuously mar¬
ginalized and diverted to other ends ever since
neolithic times. Today games have a new market
value. With cinema, television, books, magazines,
records, sports and tourism, games of all kinds
may constitute the most important industry in
the industrially developed countries. But play is
not necessarily involved in these commodity-
games which present play as something that can
be bought and thus tend to exclude it. The
amount of genuine play diminishes as the number
of manufactured games proliferates.
The current fashion for educational games

and toys is a good example of this. The very con¬
cept of an educational toy is in many ways ques¬
tionable. It is true that children, like adults, can
learn, create and discover a new universe in the
free-ranging mental activity that is play. But this
does not mean that the uses of play in education
are boundless. An educational game, like any
other kind of game, does not automatically lead
to play. It all depends on the inclinations of the
person who is being induced to play.
Can play be taught?
So we either teach children or let them play
freely. But we cannot simultaneously let them
play freely and teach them multiplication tables,
the alphabet or the principles of hygiene. All
attempts to instruct, indoctrinate or inform by
means of play are doomed to failure because they
are contrary to the very nature of play. However,
the fact that play cannot teach ideas or values does
not mean that it cannot be educational. As we
said at the beginning of this articleand as St.
Augustine noted in the opening pages of his
Confessionsplay is eminently educational in that
it whets our curiosity about the world and about
life itself, and is the principle governing all dis¬
covery and all creation.
While it is a mistake to claim, as Montaigne
and Froebel did, that play can be a means of

"Our most vivid memories of
the excitement of play have
nothing to do with games as
such, but with Intensely-felt
moments."
16

instruction, it is extremely tempting to conceive
of education for playthe invention of ways of
developing or reawakening the capacity for play,
in adults as well as children. If there is something
that people today urgently need to learn, surely
it is how to use their leisure time.
What type of education could this be? Obvi¬
ously it would not, strictly speaking, involve
teaching. It is possible to tell other people about
play, but it is difficult to see how a playful attitude
could be instilled into them because such an atti¬
tude is essentially self-taught. Collective activities
should be strictly voluntary. There must be no
punishment, examinations, diplomas or financial
reward.
How can spontaneity and education be
reconciled? The French philosopher Mikel Louis
Dufrenne4 has shown that this question, which
Herbert Marcuse5 had already examined, was
central to the "cultural revolution" which shook
the student world in the 1960s and might well
occur again. Why wait for another student revolt
Koreans playing Paduk,
a variant of Go, a
popular board game In
the Far East.
before trying to introduce play into such fields as
aesthetics and philosophy, that have been unneces¬
sarily dominated by instruction? Play cannot
teach us about the history of literature, art or
philosophy or theories of sociology. On the other
hand, it is the best and perhaps even the only way
of introducing us to aesthetic pleasure and medi¬
tation, and, at a more modest level, teaching us
to question accepted ideas and opinions.
Initiation into aesthetic pleasure by means of
play would not be an attempt to form people's
tastes, to suggest what should or should not be
liked. It would aim to awaken their capacity to
find pleasure in beauty and help them to become
aware of this pleasure. Most important of all, it
would help them to extend this feeling of pleasure
to other objects of their choice, leaving aside any
value judgements. The aim of such an initiation
is clearly not to transmit academic or social skills,
but to encourage an aesthetic appreciation of the
world around usand this is, most definitely, a
game.
1. Arthur Koestler, The Act of
Creation, 1964.
2. J. Lacroix, Le désir et les
désirs, Paris, 1975.
3. Marshall David Sahlins,
Stone Age Economies, Aldine
Atherton, Chicago, 1972.
4. Mikel Louis Dufrenne, Art
et politique, Paris, 1974.
5. Herbert Marcuse, Eros and
Civilization, and
Counterrevolution and Revolt,
(1972). 17
