DOCUMENT A PLANETARY UTOPIA
BY JULIAN HUXLEY
In 1946 the British
scientist and
humanist Julian
Huxley (d. 1975),
soon to be Unesco's
first Director-General,
wrote a long paper
entitled Unesco, its
purpose and its
philosophy, in
which he set forth
guidelines for the
new organization.
The document was
highly controversial.
it was regarded by
some as an attack
on religion, by others
as pro-communist.
Eventually Unesco's
General Conference
refused to sponsor
its publication. Over
forty years later,
Huxley's "planetary
utopia" has lost none
of its force or
topicality. Published
below are salient
extracts.
IN general, Unesco must constantly be testing
its policies against the touchstone of evolutionary
progress. A central conflict of our times is that
between nationalism and internationalism, be¬
tween the concept of many national sovereignties
and one world sovereignty. Here the evolutionary
touchstone gives an unequivocal answer. The key
to man's advance, the distinctive method which
has made evolutionary progress in the human sec¬
tor so much more rapid than in the biological and
has given it higher and more satisfying goals, is the
fact of cumulative tradition, the existence of a
common pool of ideas which is self-perpetuating
and itself capable of evolving. And this fact has
had the immediate consequence of making the
type of social organization the main factor in hu¬
man progress or at least its limiting framework.
Two obvious corollaries follow. First, that the
more united man's tradition becomes, the more
rapid will be the possibility of progress: several
separate or competing or even mutually hostile
pools of tradition cannot possibly be so efficient
as a single pool common to all mankind. And
secondly, that the best and only certain way of
securing this will be through political unification.
As history shows, unifying ideas can exert an
effect across national boundaries. But, as history
makes equally evident, that effect is a partial one
and never wholly offsets the opportunities for
conflict provided by the existence of separate
sovereign political units.
The moral for Unesco is clear. The task laid
upon it of promoting peace and security can never
be wholly realized through the means assigned
to iteducation, science and culture. It must en¬
visage some form of world political unity, whether
through a single world government or otherwise,
as the only certain means for avoiding war.
However, world political unity is, unfor¬
tunately, a remote ideal, and in any case does not
fall within the field of Unesco's competence. This
does not mean that Unesco cannot do a great deal
towards promoting peace and security. Specifi¬
cally, in its education programme it can stress the
ultimate need for world political unity and
familiarize all peoples with the implications of
the transfer of full sovereignty from separate
nations to a world organization.
But, more generally, it can do a great deal to
lay the foundations on which world political
unity can later be built. It can help the peoples
of the world to mutual understanding and to a
realization of the common humanity and
common tasks which they share, as opposed to
the nationalisms which too often tend to isolate
and separate them. (...)
Our evolutionary analysis shows clearly
enough that a well-developed human individual
is the highest product of evolution to date. This
provides external and scientific support for the
democratic principle of the dignity of men, to
which by its Constitution Unesco is committed.
It also constitutes a complete disproof of all
theses, like those of Hegelian philosophy, of fas¬
cism, or of nazism, which maintain that the state
is in some way higher than the individual, and
that the individual exists only or primarily for
the state.
On the other hand, we have been brought
to realize that the evolution of man, though a
natural continuation of that of the rest of life, is
quite a different process, operating by the essen¬
tially social method of cumulative tradition, and
manifesting itself primarily in the development
of societies, instead of in the genetic nature of the
individuals composing them. And this at once
makes it equally obvious that the opposed thesis
of unrestricted individualism is equally erroneous.
The human individual is, quite simply,
meaningless in isolation; he only acquires sig¬
nificance in relation to some form of society. His
development is conditioned by the society into 41

which he is born and the social traditions which
he inherits; and the value of the work he does
in life depends on the social framework which
benefits by it or transmits it to later time.
Thus Unesco's activities, while concerned
primarily with providing richer development and
fuller satisfactions for the individual, must always
be undertaken in a social context; and many of
its specific tasks will be concerned with the social
means towards this general end the improve¬
ment of social mechanisms or agencies, such as
educational systems, research organizations, art
centres, the press, and so forth.
In particular, Unesco must clearly pay special
attention to the social mechanism of cumulative
tradition in all its aspects, with the aim of ensur¬
ing that it is both efficient and rightly directed
in regard to its essential function of promoting
human evolution.
The unifying of traditions in a single com¬
mon pool of experience, awareness, and purpose
is the necessary prerequisite for further major
progress in human evolution. Accordingly,
although political unification in some sort of
world government will be required for the defini
tive attainment of this stage, unification in the
things of the mind is not only also necessary but
can pave the way for other types of unification.
Thus in the past the great religions unified
the thoughts and attitudes of large regions of the
Earth's surface; and in recent times science, both
directly through its ideas and indirectly through
its applications in shrinking the globe, has been
a powerful factor in directing men's thoughts to
the possibilities of, and the need for, full world
unity.
Special attention should consequently be
given by Unesco to the problem of constructing
a unified pool of tradition for the human species
as a whole. This, as indicated elsewhere, must in¬
clude the unity-in-variety of the world's art and
culture as well as the promotion of one single
pool of scientific knowledge.
But it must also eventually include a unified
common outlook and a common set of purposes.
This will be the latest part of the task of unify¬
ing the world mind; but Unesco must not neglect
it while engaged on the easier jobs, like that of
promoting a single pool of scientific knowledge
and effort.
