28
In Polynesian myth, the primal spiritual force
is Tangaroa, the atua, or god, of the ocean. The
sky, Raki, is his parent, and Hinemoana, the
woman of the sea, is his partner. Tangaroa
appears in different forms within the diverse but
connected cultures of Polynesia as a figure who
cannot be escaped and must always be accom¬
modated.
The Polynesians inhabit a world which con¬
sists almost entirely of ocean. Apart from New
Zealand, the land area they know consists of small
islands, some of them volcanic outcrops and
many others mere coral atolls. Habitable land
constitutes no more than 1.5 per cent of
Polynesia.
In Polynesian mythology the land comes
from the sea, from which it has been drawn by
the demi-god Maui. Islands are great fish dragged
from the depths, or waka (canoes) from which
Maui brought lesser islands to the surface.
The indigenous people of Polynesia share a
high level of linguistic, ethnic and cultural unity,
tempered by a diversity resulting largely from
adaptation to the specific island worlds where
they have made their homes. They live within
the vast area of the Pacific which is known as the
Polynesian Triangle and is divided into two
closely related yet culturally distinct areas,
Western Polynesia and Eastern Polynesia. The
former comprises Tonga, Samoa, Tuvalu and,
historically, part of Fiji. The latter consists of
Hawaii, the Tahiti group of islands, the Cook
Islands, the Marquesas, Rapanui (Easter Island)
and Aotearoa (New Zealand).
THE PEOPLING OF POLYNESIA
Who were these people and where did they come
from? Modern scholarship concludes that their
ancestors were Austronesian seafarers who
worked their way from a starting point some¬
where in Southeast Asia down the island chains
to what is now the western Polynesian Triangle.
Archaeological evidence based on the remains of
their distinctive pottery suggests that these people
were capable of sailing over vast areas of ocean
from one group of islands to another.
What was to become Polynesian culture
began to appear about 6,000 years ago in the
Tonga-Samoa triangle. Then, some 2,000 years

later, some of these proto-Polynesians broke out
into Eastern Polynesia. It is widely believed that
this great leap into oceanic space took them to
the Marquesas Islands, from which they then dis¬
persed to Hawaii, the Tahiti group and from
there to Aotearoa. This last major movement
seems to have occurred about a thousand years
ago. A glance at the Polynesian triangle on a map
of the Pacific is enough to give some idea of the
extraordinary distances involved.
Were these migrations purposeful or were
they accidental "drift" voyages? The scholarly
consensus, based on computer simulation of
ancient weather conditions and other evidence,
such as the distribution of plants and animals, sug¬
gests that although some accidental voyages may
have occurred there was intended and purposeful
migration.
One argument against the drift thesis is that
the known pattern of migration conflicts with
the prevailing easterly winds of the Triangle. In
fact the wind shifts to the west at more or less
regular times, and waiting for this west wind
became an important element in Polynesian reli¬
gious beliefs. Tawhiri-a-matea, the god of winds,



Padfic
pioneers
Tipene O'Regan
Tahitlan war canoes are
shown In painting, left,
executed by William
Hodges during Captain
Cook's second voyage to
the Pacific (1772-1775).
Right, a figurehead from
Rarotonga, Cook Islands,
carved In the form of a
fisherman's god known as
"Great Ears".
is almost as important in Polynesian traditions
as Tangaroa, and in the whakapapa (genealogy)
of creation, he is the elder brother with whom
Tangaroa most closely interacts. This relationship
was activé and constant, and when the Polyne¬
sians put out to sea it was into the hands of these
two atua that they entrusted themselves.
THE CANOE, SYMBOL OF PRESTIGE
The dominating cultural object in migration tra¬
dition was the waka or canoe, which was a
symbol of mana, tribal authority, chiefly pres¬
tige and, most of all, wealth. Building a great 29

canoe was a major exercise which required the
full commitment of the skilled members of the
tribe and called for resources that only a few of
the high island cultures of Polynesia could afford.
The decoration of the waka and the ritual
associated with it became a major focus of reli¬
gious life.
Far from being a frail and inadequate vessel,
the traditional Polynesian canoe was, for its time,
at the leading edge of maritime technology. We
know from historical evidence and more recent

simulated research that its double hulls, lashed
together with sennit, were capable of sailing at
great speed. The heavy stresses experienced in
modern twin-hulled catamarans were avoided by
keeping the canoe hulls quite close together so
that they did not create too much resistance to
the pressure of the sails on the hulls. The latter
were able to "give" to the pressure of wind and
to flex and "work" with the movement of the
waves.
The distinctive Polynesian sprit sail which
drove these canoes was woven from pandanus
fibre. Recent simulated studies suggest that it had
more driving force than even the fore and aft rig
of modern vessels. It was, however, more difficult
to control. A remarkable modern reconstruction
of a Polynesian voyaging canoe, the Hawaiian-
built Hokule'a, has made swift voyages between
Hawaii and Tahiti, Tahiti and Raratonga, and
Raratonga and New Zealand.
PRODIGIOUS FEATS OF MEMORY
But the waka by itself was not enough. The great
voyages would have been impossible without
mastery of a developed and sophisticated system
of navigation. Considerable astronomical
knowledge was required, and an intimate under¬
standing of oceanic wind patterns and other
natural and seasonal phenomena. A navigator
would, for example, need to know the rising and
setting positions of roughly 1,000 azimuth stars.
Right, carved post from a
Maori meeting house In
Rotorua (New Zealand).
Below, replicas of Hawaiian
canoes off the island of Maui.
30

1
As well as performing that prodigious feat of
memory, the priestly navigator would have to
make and master "memory maps" of island
groups and know much about wind patterns and
wave systems. The absorption and retention of
this huge volume of knowledge, transmitted
without notebooks or instruments, were a part
of religious practice. We know that these naviga¬
tional systems were workable because they have
been tested extensively in the Hokule'a
experience.
Why did these people undertake their
remarkable travels? There is much historical evi¬
dence of inter-island trading in canoes between
Samoa and Tonga, Tahiti and other islands of
eastern Polynesia. But what of the migration
voyages over hundreds of miles of ocean? Poly¬
nesian traditions speak of competition on over¬
crowded islands, defeat in war, and chiefly con¬
flicts of family and prestige. Much voyaging,
however, seems to have been driven by that most
human of all needsthe lure of the far horizon
and the desire to know and to explore. Whatever
the motive, it is clear that these remarkable
seafarers were supremely confident in their
ability, in the capacity of their craft and in the
goodwill of their atua.
The high and ornately carved stern posts and
low-slung prows of the Maori and Tahitian waka
are examples of a blending of art and belief. Art,
knowledge, and the pride of the community all
focused on the canoe. The smaller, more
IB
TIPENE O'REGAN,
a New Zealander of Ngai Tahu
Maori descent, is chairman of
the Ngai Tahu Maori Trust
Board and chairman of the
Maori Fisheries Commission. A
member of the New Zealand
Geographic Board and a
trustee of the National
Museum of New Zealand, he
has written widely on Maori
and Polynesian history and
cultural affairs in the Pacific.
utilitarian waka for fishing and coastal travel were
less adorned, but there was always some
decoration carving, inlaid shellwork or the geo¬
metric design of the lashings holding the craft
together.
There is art in both the structural design and
the decoration of these canoes. To the Polyne¬
sians, art is inseparable from function. The carved
prow of a Maori war canoe is a defiant figure
flying over Tangaroa towards the enemy. The
small carved figures carried aboard fishing and
voyaging canoes were not works of art taken
along as prized possessions, but symbols and
residing places of the protective atua of the Poly¬
nesians.
Everything to do with Tangaroa was
decoratedfish-hooks, sinkers, spears. Art was
necessary to evoke from the atua a good catch.
Even today the custom of returning the first fish
to Tangaroa remains an important one. Art and
custom decree that the god of the ocean must be
appeased.
