A world of music
8

by Isabelle Leymarie
Rock festival
¡n Rio de Janeiro.
Vjivilizations have always influenced and
enriched one another culturally through bor¬
rowing, osmosis and acculturation. With the
development of intercontinental communications
networks and the audiovisual media, the speed
at which these processes take place is accelerating
at a tremendous rate. Music, a source of enjoy¬
ment which transcends linguistic barriers, is one
of the more positive aspects of these exchanges.
As early as the eighth century, one of the
farthest-reaching currents of musical cross-
fertilization was making its way around the globe.
Indian music travelled to Central Asia, Iran and
Afghanistan, and also to the Middle East, where
it influenced Arab music. Arab music in turn
spread throughout North Africa to Spain, where
it gave rise to flamenco, then after the expulsion
of the Arabs from the Iberian peninsula, back
down to North Africa, where "Andalusian"
music was born.
Nevertheless, until colonial expansion and
the slave trade turned the world music order
upside down, musical traditions remained fairly
localized, centred on a village, a tribal group, or
a region, and varying from place to place in much
the same way as regional dialects, dress or
cooking.
Music has had clearly defined social and ritual
functions since very early times. In some cultures
it remained the exclusive domain of certain
individuals or groups. Among the Wolof and
Malinke peoples of West Africa, the griots were
the sole repositories of music, of genealogies, and
of the oral tradition, which they transmitted from
generation to generation. Griots were even
obliged to marry within their own group.
Many young griots today, however, perform
in modern settings and use such instruments as
saxophones and electric guitars. In Senegal this
mixture of traditional rhythms and pop music has
resulted in a new musical style called mbalax.
In Japan some musical instruments are still
associated exclusively with specific professions.
They include the geisha's shamisen and the biwa,
which is played only by blind bards. At the same
time, the Japanese are great consumers of Western
music, and in particular of French popular songs.
When, at the beginning of the sixteenth

century, the Portuguese and other European
colonists established themselves in Africa and
began exporting thousands of black slaves to the
Americas, an entirely new genre, "creóle" music,
was born. Portuguese-influenced music from
Cape Verde, Mozambique and Angola, and then
Afro-Cuban, Afro-Brazilian, Caribbean and Afro-
American music developed. Instruments of
African origin such as bongos, congas, timbáis,
claves (rhythmsticks) and maracas, began to be
used, notably in Cuba, and new musical forms
such as son, son montuno, bolero, guaracha and
rumba gradually emerged.
From tango to rock
In the 1920s, jazz, which had emerged as a hybrid
of Afro-American and European music and had
become associated with Art Nouveau and Moder¬
nism, blew a wind of freedom over America and
Europe. It imposed its black aesthetic on white
culture and became one of the most important
forms of popular music of the twentieth century.
It influenced and inspired composers such as
Gershwin and Debussy, and painters such as
Matisse and Mondrian. In the same way, the
tango, a blend of Bantu rhythms and Argentine
expressionism, then the rumba in the 1930s,
mambo in the 1940s, cha-cha-cha and rock 'n' roll
10
in the 1950s, all Afro-American creations, gained
world-wide popularity.
Black music is still the common denominator
(though not the only one) of most popular music
today. Funk, disco, soul, rap, rock, reggae, samba,
bossa nova, soca, Afro-beat, juju, highlife and
zouk all have African roots to some extent. In
France, Georges Moustaki, Claude Nougaro and
Bernard Lavilliers are enthusiastically exploring
Afro-Brazilian rhythms, and Nana Mouskouri is
branching out into gospel singing. In the United
States, Paul Simon has made a recent album with
Cameroonian and Brazilian musicians, and in
Japan Ryuiji Sakamoto has called on the Senegalese
The Indian-born musician
Najma plays a traditional
portable organ at a concert in
Paris (1990).
singer Youssou N'Dour to bring a little warmth
to his rather precise instrumentation.
After the Second World War, the LP record
and television contributed to the spread of pop
music, which American musicologist Peter
Manuel has described as the most significant event
in twentieth-century music: "Socio-economic and
technological development brought a bewildering
array of new styles, instruments and expressions
into being, and pop music reached a much larger
audience than any other art form ever has."
Rock music, created by Afro-American musi¬
cians like Chuck Berry and Bo Diddley and taken
up by Elvis Presley and other white singers,
became a symbol of revolt and protest for youth
the world over. It disrupted the American con-
formism of the 1950s, inspiring a new style of
dressingjeans, T-shirt and leather jacketand
revolutionizing standards of behaviour.
New forms of musical syncretism appeared
in the 1960s with the hippy-era craze for Asian,
and particularly Indian, music. Miles Davis and
John Coftrane introduced the use of Eastern-
inspired modes in jazz, and the Beatles brought
the Indian sitar to pop music. But this infatua¬
tion with exoticism made little impact on highly
structured musical forms which already possessed
a strong identity, just as attempts to mix jazz and
classical music have always failed.
During the next decade the record industry
contributed to the trend for musical blending.
The term "fusion" was coined to describe cer¬
tain types of hybrid music which were created
artificially, often from a basis in jazz, using

Synthesizers to produce a uniform sound which
was culturally neutral and could reach very large
audiences. The Crusaders (who, significantly,
changed their name from The Jazz Crusaders) and
the saxophonist Stanley Turrentine are represen¬
tative of this trend. Most jazzmen agreed,
however, that this "fusion" was really only "con¬
fusion", a juxtaposition of distinct musical styles
which lost all their originality in the mixing
process.
Musicians who find
inspiration in other cultures
Frontiers also opened in the once compartmen¬
talized world of classical music, where an exciting
process of exchange between East, West and
Africa began. Steve Reich has used Ghanaian
drumming rhythms in his compositions, Philip
Glass has written music inspired by Pygmy poly¬
phony and several Asian composers produce
music that combines both Asian and Western
elements.
Several historical and social factors are
responsible for the present intensification of
musical blending: urbanization, decolonization
and immigration all contribute to population
movements and cultural mixtures. In the world's
great cities composite ethnic groups have deve¬
loped such as the Hispanics in New York, the
Jamaicans in London, the Californian, Texan and
New Mexican Chícanos and the Africans and
second-generation Arab immigrants in Paris. All
these groups are exposed to the multiple musical
Above, the Senegalese
singer Youssou N'Dour
and Ryuiji Sakamoto of
Japan.
Right, the Malinke griot Mory
Kante (1986).
ISABELLE LEYMARIE,
French ethnomusicologist, is a
journalist, educator and
producer of music
programmes for radio and
television, notably in France
and the United States. Since
January 1989 she has been
responsible for programming
jazz at the Châtelet Theatre
and Auditorium, Paris. She has
published many articles on jazz
and Latin American rhythms in
specialist periodicals.
influences of their environment and are searching
for their own modes of expression.
The present trend towards "world music"
may well entail a certain amount of cultural
imperialism, but more significantly it is indica¬
tive of a genuine human desire to open up cul¬
turally and go beyond political ideologies and
national borders. It is also somewhat counter¬
balanced by a worldwide renewal of regional



popular music and the increasing interest of
Western musicologists in non-Western music.
This is particularly evident in the numerous
"multicultural" music festivals that take place
every year at Lille, Angoulême and La Rochelle
in France, in the seminars organized by the New
School in New York, in the enthusiasm of
Japanese teenagers for African and Latin rhythms
and in the ever-growing number of mixed-
repertoire groups (such as Xalam and Ultrama¬
rine in Paris) whose members are themselves of
different ethnic backgrounds.
Young people in towns and cities, torn
between conflicting values, often find an emo¬
tional outlet in rock, jazz, rap or pop music that
makes them feel that they belong to a larger inter¬
national community, that they have a global iden¬
tity where tensions subside and conflicts are
resolved.
Is there reason to hope that the increasingly
close contact between the world's different forms
of music, reflecting a deeply-felt need for com¬
munication and mutual understanding, will lead
to greater humanism and a general enrichment
whereby different cultures, in opening up to one
another, will strengthen their own originality?
11
