The squatter-builders
of Lima s
by Anna Wagner de Reyna
Aerial view of Villa Maria del
Triunfo, a working-class
suburb south of Lima (Peru).
QUATTER settlementsthe so-called "spon¬
taneous" districtsbegan to proliferate in Lima
shortly after the Second World War. They were
the result of an influx of population brought
about by internal migrations, a shortage of
dwellings for the poorer classes, and the lack of
any coherent social housing policy.
What distinguishes these settlements from
other residential districts of the Peruvian capital
m
37
&

is the fact that they were built by their own resi¬
dents, without any external financial support and
in contravention of existing property laws and
urban housing standards. The land on which they
are constructed was usually acquired illegally,
sometimes simply by occupation, and the normal
sequence of urban planning was reversed: people
moved onto the site before the buildings went
up, and only later were the dwellings provided
with services and legally acquired by their
occupants.
It is a very special kind of urban develop¬
ment. Whole neighbourhoods, built by the poor
themselves, spring up suddenly, sometimes
within hours, and then remain unfinished for
years on end. They are precariously built and
inadequately equippedcharacteristics that won
the name "spontaneous" for this new form of
urbanization.
According to the dictionary definition, the
term "spontaneous" implies something impulsive
and uncalculated, instinctive and unconstrained.
However, none of these epithets applies to the
squatter-built settlements of Lima, which have a
rigour and a coherence that sit uneasily with any
suggestion of unconscious or unconsidered
activity. Nor are the districts spontaneous in the
sense of following the dictates of nature rather
than culture, for they fit into a historical and cul¬
tural context. They are, in fact, a response by the
needy to the failings of public and private housing
policy.
The roots of popular urbanism
Even a hasty glance reveals that the districts
follow a methodical plan, usually a grid pattern.
Roads meet at right angles, and are often grouped
around a central square known as the plaza de
-the parade-ground.armas-
38
Left, most new
structures In Villa El
Salvador, on the
outskirts of Lima, are
built by community
volunteers.
On the level ground on the city's outskirts,
this chessboard model is systematically applied.
Wide, straight roads delineate squares and rec¬
tangles. A similar pattern is repeated on the hill¬
sides wherever the lie of the land permits. The
square at the centre of the grid is the site of the
principal public buildings such as the church, the
school, and the town hall. Land set aside at the
start of the project allows room for the settlement
to grow and provides some green spaces, although
in time these often disappear to make more room
for housing.
The urban grid pattern with a central square
has great symbolic significance in South America,
. since it was used by the Spaniards in the sixteenth
century as part of their efforts to organize and
pacify their newly-conquered territories. With
the exception of a few ports and mining centres,
the ground plans of almost all the towns and cities
founded by the Spaniards were as regular as
chessboards. There was nothing spontaneous
about this form of urbanism. It was the result of
careful calculation that found its clearest expres¬
sion in 1681, during the reign of the Spanish
King Charles II, in a widely-circulated compen¬
dium of laws relating to the Indies,1 in which
the chessboard model was prescribed as the only
conceivable form of urban layout. Earlier direc¬
tives, including one promulgated by Philip II

Newcomers to Villa El
Salvador often use straw as a
material when building their
first home.
ANNA WAGNER DE REYNA,
Peruvian architect, is currently
preparing a doctorate on land
use management at the
University of Paris I. She is the
author of a study entitled Lima,
quartiers spontanés: formes
urbaines et facteurs
d'évolutionLe cas de Villa
María del Triunfo, which was
published in 1986 as part of
Unesco's "Human Settlements
and Socio-Cultural
Environment" series
(in French only).
in 1573,2 had already recommended this arrange¬
ment as a model both for Spanish and Indian
communities.
At that time the grid pattern was a response
to important strategic imperatives. With its cen¬
tral plaza de armas, it seemed in the first place
almost a replica of the military camps to which
the Spaniards were accustomed to withdraw
when trouble threatened. Besides having purely
military uses, however, the grid was part of an
attempt to instil in the overseas territories a
rigorous social organization of which the under¬
lying assumptions were order, unity and cohe¬
sion. In spite of their vast numerical inferiority,
the Spaniards would succeed through this urban
model in imposing on the indigenous peoples the
image of a people strong in its discipline, organi¬
zation and efficiency.
Today the same simple ideas have re-emerged,
inspiring a similar solution to the problems of
development. The motives are, after all, analo¬
gous: the need to bring order to a piece of land.
Bending the rules
The communities of squatter-builders contravene
the law, not only because the land they build on
has not been legally acquired but also because
they flout the planning regulations by which a
district has to be equipped with basic services
before it can be settled. The would-be residents
have to organize themselves to circumvent the
rules.
A typical group of squatter-builders consists
of a nucleus of families which either come from
the same part of Lima or from the same part of
the country. The first problem is to choose a site.
To minimize the risks, they usually choose vacant
land in public ownership, since the state is more
likely to tolerate an occupation than private land¬
owners, who generally fight vigorously to defend
their property. The squatters normally need the
backing of a well-placed politician or civil servant,
who can suggest possible sites to them. The fami¬
lies then choose leaders to take charge of the oper¬
ation, for occupying the land involves
co-ordinated collective action. Moving in is not
an initiative for individuals but a communal task
demanding concerted action by all the members
of the group.
The next stage is to draw up a plan outlining
residential zones and public spaces, shared ameni¬
ties and land reserved for future extensions. The
families are given advance notice of the timing
of the occupation, and each has specific jobs
assigned to it. An advance guard, most of which
are men, moves in to take possession of the land,
with the women and children providing back-up. 39

The group must then stay put, both to prevent
other families coveting the same site from moving
in and to resist any reprisals by the forces of
order.
The blueprint for the district is immediately
traced out on the ground. Individual lots are
assigned, and temporary shelters made out of rush
matting are erected on each one. The whole oper¬
ation must be carried out quickly, simply and in
good order, for an immediate, visible occupation
of the district reduces the risks of subsequent
expulsion.
Life soon begins to get organized in the
precarious encampments. Those in charge arrange
for trucks to deliver water, and do their best to
see that public transport starts to serve the new
district. The residents set about constructing
housing units and public amenities. At best it
takes ten to fifteen years before the infrastruc¬
ture of a new residential district is completed. The
risk of eviction slows the process even more.
Districts where people lack security of tenure
develop two or three times more slowly than
those where they enjoy such tenure. Conse¬
quently, the organizers go to great lengths to win
recognition of their title to the annexed land.
Below, a Bangladeshi family
works together to make a
home.
Bottom, at Popotlán (Republic
of El Salvador) low-income
families are building their own
homes with the help of small
loans for materials and on
land provided by FUNDASAL,
the Salvadorian Development
and Low-Cost Housing
Foundation.
school are not allowed to send their children to
that school. Local tribunals deal with thefts, mug¬
gings and other crimes.
A new urban model?
Right from the start, the state passively
encouraged the growth of the squatter settle¬
ments, firstly by failing to provide any effective
alternative social housing policy and subsequently
by tolerating and eventually legalizing them.
The first legal attempt to deal with them dates
from 1961, fifteen years after the earliest commu¬
nities had sprung up. That law was inspired more
by political and electoral considerations than by
any considered policy of resolving the housing
problems of the poor. Its authors sought
primarily either to win votes or to bring some
order to the question of land ownership in the
capital. In 1984, however, the city authorities
made an attempt to adopt the squatters' methods
in developing its own social housing programme.
The mayor decided to make land available to a
group of families that was already organized to
take advantage of it. Realizing the impossibility
of handing over the land through accepted legal
channels, he simply allowed them to go ahead and
occupy it.
So perhaps the word "spontaneous" is no
longer really appropriate for these settlements.
Drawing on the traditions of the Spanish con¬
quest and with a social organization comparable
to that of conventional society, Lima's squatter
communities have proved efficient enough to
challenge traditional assumptions of urban
development, and finally have forced the powers-
that-be to accept their methods as a viable solu¬
tion to the problems of popular housing.
1. Recopilación de las leyes de los reinos de las Indias ("Compen¬
dium of Laws of the Kingdoms of the Indies"), published by
Cultura Hispánica, 1973.
2. Ordonanzas de descubrimiento, nueva población y pacifica¬
ción de las Indias ("Ordinances Concerning the Discovery,
Colonization and Pacification of the Indies"), Archives of the
Indies, Seville, Spain. Editor
40
Usually they form alliances with political parties
that promise them legal right to the land in return
for votes.
The social organization that enabled the land
to be occupied and divided up and allowed houses
to be built and services to be provided, evolves
to cope with the new problems facing the com¬
munity. The organizers' job is no longer just to
defend land illegally acquired; now they must also
handle the day-to-day administration of the dis¬
trict. Their goal is to raise the living standards
of the residents, for example by sorting out
problems caused by the division of the land, as
well as to maintain order and see that the rules
that guarantee the solidarity and cohesion of the
community are respected. Transgressors are
severely punished. Families that refuse to partic¬
ipate in a collective endeavour like building a
