/M COM&K-t  1 Ot, M 0 OMM MO tr K', Op/,
poetic xdCMtC OnZMM  0 CMnc M/MMM CKZMM
) UDAISM has never interrelated more closely or
more fruitfully with another culture than It did
with the Islamic civilization of al-Andalus. Even
though the status enjoyed there by Jews and
Christians as peoples of the Book was often
precarious and in some ways oppressive, the legal
position it guaranteed was, all things considered,
liberal in comparison with the conditions the
Jews encountered elsewhere in Europe, providing
as it did a high degree of legal, administrative,
fiscal and cultural autonomy.
The largely secularized character of the
Islamic civilization of al-AndaIus allowed the
peoples of the Book to consider themselves the
heirs of a great and respected cultural tradition.
The dominant language, Arabic, was less closely
wedded to the prevailing religion than Latin was
to the Roman Catholic and Eastern Churches,
and was widely used by Jews when commenting
on their own sacred texts.
The " bourgeois revolution " of the eighth and
ninth centuries in the Islamic world saw the
appearance of an entirely new Jewish society, one
very different from that of medieval Christian
Europe. While Jews in the pre-lslamic era had
mostly been farmers or small craftsmen, they
now rose to dominant positions in public life and
the upper ranks of the administration, as well as
in industry, finance and the professions.
With time and money to spare, these new
elites had wider intellectual horizons, more
refined tastes, and heightened expectations of a
more exalted spiritual life. Like their Muslim and
Christian counterparts, they devoted themselves
to science and poetry, to artistic activities and
fashionable occupations of all kinds, both serious
and frivolous. It was a time of travel, when Jewish
communities were spreading across the Islamic
lands and migrating between countries.
In linguistic terms, the symbiosis meant that
Arabic, the new international language of civili-
zation and culture, replaced the former vehicular
language, Aramaic, which henceforth was used
only for Talmudic texts. The Jews employed
Arabic In all their intellectual activities : sacred and
profane literature, science and religion, transla-
tions and commentaries on the Bible and the
Mishna. It was used for liturgical purposes, in
theological treatises, in grammars, dictionaries
and in correspondence.
Jewish and Muslim philologists alike became
aware of the kinship between Arabic, Hebrew
and Aramaic. But it was only the Jews who,
knowing all three, were in a position to lay the
foundations for a comparative study of these lan-
guages.
In literature, an examination of Jewish and
Arabic traditions, both written and oral, reveals
common elements and structures. There is a
striking similarity between, on the one hand,
A page of the polyglot Bible
published early in the
16th century by the
University ofAiacaia de
Henares. near Toledo, under
the auspices ofCardinal
Cisneros. The text, written in
Greek, Hebrew. Latin and
Chatdean. is printed in parallel
columns.
35

Astreet in the otd Jewish
district of Cordoba.
Jewish folklore, the Talmud and the Midrash (a
collection of homilies and legends), and on the
other their Arabic counterparts, the Hadith
(spoken traditions attributed to the Prophet
Muhammad) and the Islamic verse-chronicles.
There are also common subjects and heroes-
Abraham, Moses, Job and Joseph, for example-
in the stories, verse and proverbs of the two
peoples.
Hebrew poetry was transformed by contact
with Arabic verse. Indeed, it owes the greater part
of its prosody to the Andalusian inheritance. In
the tenth century, Dunash ben Labrat laid the
foundations of a new system of scansion that
replicated the quantitative metre of Arabic verse,
whose rules he adopted. The MMMM/M/M, a poetic
form originating in al-Andalus, also became a
familiar mode of expression in Hebrew poetry.
Alongside the renewal of Oriental Jewish
styles, a novel and prestigious form of poetry
gradually developed to express the new elite's love
of art, comparable both in its form and its inner
meaning to the Arabic model. It displays a
manifest desire to emulate the intellectual and
social elites of the Muslim world.
The Arab contribution to this literary
heritage was thoroughly digested and assimilated
until it finally became a naturalized part of the
Jewish tradition. Jewish writers achieved an
almost total blending of the cultural components
of the Judaeo-Arab world of their day. At the
same time that interconfessional tensions were
abating, an attempt was made in poetry to
remove the discrepancies and discordances that
the abrupt encounter of the Hebrew language and
orthodox Jewish thought with a foreign tongue
and culture could have occasioned. One can see
in the works of Ibn Khalfon and his successors
the attempt to adapt an essentially Jewish rhetoric
to the task of describing a secular world of which
Judaism had up to that time known nothing.
The lessons of Sufism
It would be impossible to understand or even con-
ceive of the existence of Jewish spirituality and
esotericism had it not been for the Islamic
environment and the knowledge Jewish authors
had of Sufi mysticism.
A comparison of the ancient Jewish mysti-
cism centred on the Merkava, the divine chariot
described by the prophet Ezekiel, with such
Islamic practices as dhikr (ritual repetition of the
name of God) and breathing exercises might sug-
gest that archaic Jewish gnosticism contributed
to the formation of Islamic esoteric traditions. In
fact, the influence went very much in the oppo-
site direction. The relatively incoherent utter-
ances of the Jewish Gnostics of the fifth and sixth
centuries gave way to the fervent eloquence of
the Islamic mystics, who possessed in the Arabic
language a first-class means of expression. From
that time on, Muslim pietism left its mark on the
mysticism, spirituality and ethics of Judaism as
it existed on Islamic soil.
It was via Sufism that many Jewish mystics
and ascetics received their apprenticeship in a new
form of spirituality that they subsequently passed
on to their own culture, first of all in its original
language, Arabic, then through translations into
Hebrew and other vernacular languages. This
work was accomplished by such scholars as Bahya
Ibn Paquda, Abraham Abulafya, and Abraham
and Obadya Maimonides, the son and grandson
respectively of the great Moses Maimonides.
Common ground between Jewish and Muslim
mysticism and esotericism can also be found in the
practices of the Andalusian Sufis and the teachings
of Ibn'Arabi (1165-1241), a prestigious figure in
the Sufi world who was born in Murcia in Spain.
The experiences and teachings of al-Ghazali
(1058-1111), one of the greatest Islamic
philosophers and theologians, exerted a consider-
able influence on the intellectual history of the
West and the East, and especially on Jewish
thinkers. The influence was felt at two levels and
at two distinct times.
During the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
it affected Jewish authors writing and thinking
in Arabic. One such was Judah Halevi, al-
Ghazali's most fervent disciple who, sharing his
master's view of the danger posed by philosophy
to revealed religion, took as his starting-point the36

A miniature from the Hebrew
Farhi Bible, copied and
illustrated by Elisha Crescas,
who lived and worked in
northern Spain and the south
of France during the second
half of the 14th century.
HA) M ZAFRAN)
is professor of Hebrew at the
University of Par ! sV ! !) and
director ofaresearchun ! t on
Judaism in Islamic lands. He is
the author of 11 books and
many articles on Jewish
thought. literature (written and
ora !) and languages ! n the
Muslim West His study of
Jewish poetry in the Muslim
West (Poesie juive en Occident
musutman. Paris. 1977) was
translated into Hebrew in
1984. and his Mille ans de vie
juive au Maroc ( " A thousand
years of Jewish life in
Morocco". Paris. 1983) was
translated into Hebrew in1986
and into Arabic in 1987.
charge of incoherence brought by al-Ghazali in
his masterwork Tahafut al falasifa (The Incoher-
ence of the Phiiosophers) against philosophers in
general and Aristotelian philosophy In particular.
It Is also accepted that Moses Maimonides knew
al-Ghazali's works, and especially his refutation
of philosophy.
From the thirteenth century onwards, the
works of aI-Ghazali were translated into Hebrew,
and were read, studied and commented on by
Jews in non-Arabic-speaking Provence and Spain,
where they achieved immense popularity. In fact
some of the writings of al-GhazaII and of
Averroes (Ibn Rushd), the great Cordoba-born
twelfth-century Islamic philosopher, have only
survived in Hebrew.
The communication of Greek learning
In philosophy, one of the most outstanding fea-
tures of the Judaeo-Arabic symbiosis was the
irruption of Greek science and culture into the
Jewish world through the medium of Arabic liter-
ature. The Hellenization of Jewish thought via
Islam is all the more surprising in view of the fact
that many Diaspora Jews had close and some-
times fruitful contacts with the Graeco-Latin
world.
However, the example of Philo of Alexan-
dria, a philosopher of the Diaspora who lived
sometime between the first century BC and the
second century AD and was familiar with Greek
philosophy, had no strong impact on Jewish cul-
ture, and the countless traces of the Greek lan-
guage and of Hellenic civilization that are to be
found in Talmudic or Midrashic literature sug-
gest only a superficial influence. Such a rejection
can perhaps be explained by the Jews'defensive
instinct to protect their religious identity, dictated
by an intransigent monotheism confronted with
the temptations of the paganism that Graeco-
Latin culture represented.
A more conciliatory attitude towards Greek
learning only became possible after the victory
of the monotheistic principle In the form first of
Christianity and then, more importantly, of
Islam, which was closer to Judaism in Its unitary
conception of divinity.
Judaism subsequently successfully passed the
test of Hellenization. Yet it always maintained
Its independence of Islam In the matter of reli-
gious fundamentals, even while travelling down
the paths of Muslim philosophy and accepting the
latest findings of the new sciences. This explains
why the masterworks of the Jewish theologians
and philosophers of the tenth, eleventh and
twelfth centuries, notably Ibn Gabirol and Moses
Maimonides, have remained classics of orthodox
Judaism, t
