UNESCO's Hist 45 years
Early preoccupations
Development of educational structures
Free circulation of sources of knowledge
Copyright, standard-setting action
The struggle against racial prejudice
mo
General policy
Meeting in Florence, the General Conference
defines a "basic programme" of 120 activities
grouped under 10 major tasks.
The first UNESCO expert is sent into the field
as part of the UN technical assistance programme
on a scientific mission to Iran.
The first conference of representatives of inter¬
national non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) co-operating with UNESCO is held in
Florence. Ever since its early days UNESCO has
sought to collaborate with the NGOs, which
constitute a precious link with specialists in
UNESCO's fields of competence and help the
Organization to accomplish its programme. In
1990, UNESCO was officially associated with
585 NGOs. In 1988-1989, from UNESCO's own
resources, contracts amounting to almost $2.6
million were concluded with NGOs. During the
same biennium subventions allocated by
UNESCO to NGOs approached $4 million.
The first regional conference of UNESCO
National Commissions is held at Havana. The
National Commissions are bodies established by
Member States, in accordance with UNESCO's
constitution, in order to associate their major
institutions in education, science, culture and
communication with UNESCO's work.
UNESCO is the only specialized agency of the
UN which has this system.
UNESCO's Co-Action Programme is created
to aid development projects in Member States.
Between 1950 and 1990 $14,546,291 collected
by national Co-Action partners, NGOs, schools,
etc. have been allocated to several hundred
projects.
Education
A joint UNRWA-UNESCO education
programme on behalf of Palestine refugee chil¬
dren in the Middle East is launched (UNRWA:
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East). In
1950-1951 there were 42,122 pupils in schools in
refugee camps; today the figure is 370,600. 5,200
vocational and teacher training centres are
involved in the programme.
Exact and natural sciences
The first issue of the quarterly Impact ofScience
on Society appears.
Impact, today published in English, French,
Chinese, Russian, Arabic and Portuguese,
presents to a wide audience the achievements of
modern science and describes their impact on
society, notably in the developing world.
Social sciences
The first studies on social tensions, stereotypes
and their connection with international under¬
standing are undertaken, and UNESCO produces
its first publications in this field (by Otto Kline-
berg, Margaret Mead, J. Stoetzel and others).
Culture
The History ofMankind: Cultural and Scien¬
tific Development is launched under the respon¬
sibility of an international commission headed
by P. de Berredo Carneiro. 6 volumes are pub¬
lished between 1963 and 1976 with the collabo¬
ration of a thousand specialists from over 60
countries. A new, updated edition is currently
being prepared to take account of political
changes and the latest historical research. The 48
quarterly issues of the Journal of World History,
published as part of the project between 1953 and
1972, are still a valued information source.
Communication
The "Florence Agreement" for the abolition
of customs duties on certain educational, scien¬
tific and cultural materials (including books), to
which over 79 countries are today contracting
parties, is signed. This agreement, which comes
into force in 1952, extends and strengthens the
Beirut agreement.
im
Education
The UNESCO Institute of Education (UIE)
is established in Hamburg. Today it is mainly
concerned with research and documentation
relating to lifelong education.
UNESCO sets up in Mexico a Regional
Centre for Fundamental Education in Latin
America (CREFAL).
The first regional centre of its kind, it is mainly
concerned with drawing up strategies and metho¬
dologies in the fields of fundamental education,
community development and literacy work, and
with the implementation of pilot experiments
and the production of teaching materials. It later
plays an important role in the major project for
education in Latin America and the Caribbean
launched by the General Conference at the
beginning of the 1980s.
Exact and natural sciences
The first session is held in Algiers of
UNESCO's Advisory Committee on Arid Zone
Research, which leads to the first development-
oriented international scientific research
programme. This is the first concerted attempt
to combat desertification, a crucial problem in
many Third World countries.

Clement Attlee,
Prime Minister of
the United Kingdom In 1945.
The French physicist Louis de
Broglle, first winner of the
Kallnga Prize (1952).
Luther H. Evans,
Director-General of UNESCO
In 1953.
Vlttorlno Veronese,
Director-General of UNESCO
in 1958.
Roger Caillois,
founder of the review Diogenes
(1952).
Social sciences
Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, a member of the US
delegation to the General Assembly of the
United Nations, takes part in an expert meeting
at UNESCO on human rights, with René Cassin,
Gianfranco Pompei, and Charles Malik.
Culture
Jawaharlal Nehru, Prime Minister of India,
opens the first public library in Delhi, the result
of a UNESCO pilot project.
im
General policy
The Director-General, Jaime Torres-Bodet
(Mexico), resigns because of disagreement over
the budget. John W. Taylor (U.S.A.) is appointed
Acting Director-General.
The Universal Copyright Convention is
adopted at Geneva (revised 1971). In 1991, 84
States are Parties to the 1952 Convention, and
50 to the revised Convention.
Poland and Hungary (followed by Czechos¬
lovakia in 1953) withdraw temporarily from
UNESCO. They renew co-operation with
UNESCO in 1954. Similar temporary decisions
mark the relations between East European
countries and other UN institutions in the early
1950s.
Education
The Arab States Fundamental Education
Centre (ASFEC) is founded and established in
Egypt.
The first regional conference on the develop¬
ment of compulsory free primary education is
held in Bombay.
UNESCO provides the UN with the first
statistics on women's education, covering 120
countries and territories.
The World Confederation of Organizations
of the Teaching Profession (WCOTP) is founded
in Copenhagen. The other leading federations of
teachers with which UNESCO works closely
are: the World Federation of Teachers' Unions,
the International Federation of Free Teachers'
Unions (IFFTU), and the World Confederation
of Teachers (WCT).
Exact and natural sciences
Louis de Broglie wins the first Kalinga Prize
for the Popularization of Science, created 2 years
earlier by an Indian industrialist, Mr. B. Patnaik,
and awarded each year by UNESCO.
Social sciences
The International Social Science Council
(ISSC) is established at UNESCO's instigation.
It currently groups 14 international social science
associations and a federation of national and
regional research bodies in the social sciences.
The first issue oí Diogenes appears. This inter¬
national review of the humanities, founded by
Roger Caillois, is published under the auspices
of the International Council for Philosophy and
Humanistic Studies with UNESCO aid.
Since 1952 Diogenes has been published quart¬
erly in English, French and Spanish, and, since
1986, in Arabic. Anthologies of Diogenes have
been published for many years in Hindi,
Japanese, Portuguese and, since 1985, in Chinese.
Culture
UNESCO convenes a conference in Venice
to consider the situation of the artist in the
modern world.
Communication
The first regional meeting of specialists on
needs for communication training in Africa is
held.
Ml
General policy
Luther Evans (U.S.A.) is elected Director-
General for a 6-year term.
A committee of U.S. delegates to the
UNESCO General Conference is requested to
appraise the Organization and its work ("the
Saloman Report") following criticism of
UNESCO in the American press.
Education
UNESCO sets up an associated schools
programme.
In 1991 this network comprises over 2,550
establishments (pre-school, primary, secondary,
colleges of education, technical and professional
schools) in 101 countries.

St. Joseph's school
in Ghana,
a member of
UNESCO's
network of
Associated
Schools.
m
General policy
At Montevideo, the 8th Session of the General
Conference decides that members of the Executive
Board, while they should necessarily be compe¬
tent in UNESCO's fields of activities, will hen¬
ceforth represent governments of the States of
which they are nationals. It adopts as the emblem
of UNESCO a temple in the image of the
Parthenon, in which Phidias saw "proportions
rather than dimensions"a symbol of the balance
between nations that inspires UNESCO's activi¬
ties and of its cultural mission.
The USSR becomes UNESCO's 70th Member
State, followed by the Ukrainian SSR and the
Byelorussian SSR.
A first step is taken towards programme con¬
centration. A distinction is made between general
programmes (UNESCO's permanent and
universal functions) and special activities
(designed to meet specific needs of Member
States).
The UNESCO Courier changes its format. The
number of language editions later rises to 35
(1991) plus 4 Braille editions. The first non- 1
headquarters edition is the Russian (Moscow,
1957). A German edition follows in 1960. Edi¬
tions in Swedish and Basque are launched in
1985.
The magazine's current format dates from
1989, when the contents were also modified to
concentrate on major themes designed to interest
a wide public and treated from an increasingly
cross-cultural viewpoint.
The European Centre for Nuclear Research
(CERN), created with the participation of
UNESCO, comes into operation.
Culture
The International Association of Plastic Arts
' (now the International Association of Art) is
created under UNESCO auspices. Its members
are painters, sculptors, engravers and other prac¬
titioners of the visual arts working in over 80
countries. Its activities include: contributing to
the development of art and of access to the arts
in all world regions; communication between
artists from different countries; documentation;
defence of the material interests and moral rights
of creators. Among its advisers (past and present)
are Sonia Delaunay, Miró, Calder, Moore, Louise
Nevelson, Matta, Schöffer, Vasarely.
Communication
The Director-General is authorized by the
General Conference to help Member States, at
their request, to develop their communication
and information media.
IM
General policy
A new programme, later known as the "par¬
ticipation programme", is launched. Financed
NouveaumanueldeVUnesco
fe
The Convention for the Protection of Cul- 1
tural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict
is adopted at The Hague. In 1991 76 States arel
Parties to this Convention.
from the UNESCO budget, it enables the
Organization to contribute to certain activities
carried out by Member States at the national or
international level, connected with UNESCO's
objectives.
Social sciences
Launch of the "associated youth enterprises
system" designed to associate UNESCO with
experimental initiatives serving the cause of inter¬
national understanding and seeking to develop
a sense of social responsibility among young
people.
m
General policy
At New Delhi, the General Conference
approves UNESCO's first 3 Major Projects: on
the extension of primary education in Latin
America (teacher training), for 1957-1966; on
scientific research on arid lands, for 1957-1962;
on mutual appreciation of Eastern and Western
cultural values, for 1957-1966.
South Africa withdraws from UNESCO.
UNESCO inaugurates a world anthology of
treaties and laws on copyright, since then annu¬
ally updated.
Education
A meeting of experts, then a working party
of the General Conference, proposes a new defi¬
nition of "fundamental education". The latter
"aims to help people who have not obtained such
help from established educational institutions to
understand the problems of their environment
and their rights and duties as citizens and
individuals, to acquire a body of knowledge and
skill for the progressive improvement of their
living conditions and to participate more effec¬
tively in the economic and social development
I of their community".
Exact and natural sciences
The UNESCO Source Bookfor Science Teaching
is published. A revised edition will be published
in 1973 under the title New UNESCO Source
Book for Science Teaching.
Many times reprinted and translated into some
30 languages, more than a million copies have
today been sold.
Communication
UNESCO and the Indian Government co¬
operate in the Radio Forum pilot project for
literacy and development in 150 villages around
Pune. Similar projects are later established in
Ghana, Senegal and Gambia.

An Indian school
supported by
UNESCO's
Co-Action
Programme.
The first Major Projects
M7
Exact and natural sciences
Launch of the major project on arid lands, an
extension of the Arid Zone programme launched
in 1951, with increased resources and action con¬
centrated on the region stretching from North
Africa to Southern Asia.
An international conference on radio-isotopes
in scientific research is held in Paris.
Social sciences
The Latin American Faculty of Social Sciences
and the Latin American Centre for Social Science
Research are established, initially for one country
(Brazil) but later for the whole region.
Culture
The Major Project on mutual appreciation of I
Eastern and Western cultural values is launched I
(1957-1966)
This interdisciplinary programme covers the I
improvement of school textbooks, diffusion of I
literature and the plastic arts, exchange of resear- 1
chers, awarding of scholarships, etc. A newsletter, I
Orient Occident, is published (52 issues).
Communication
UNESCO co-operates in the establishment at I
Strasbourg of the first International Centre for I
Higher Education in Journalism. A second ins- 1
titution of this kind is established at Quito in I
1959.
Events
The International Catholic Centre for
UNESCO launches its periodical The Month at
UNESCO, published in English, French, Spanish
and German. The Centre had been created 10
years before under the patronage of Mgr Ron-
calli, the future Pope John XXIII, then apostolic
nuncio in France.
im
General policy
UNESCO's new permanent headquarters
building, designed by Marcel Breuer (U.S.A.),
Pier-Luigi Nervi (Italy) and Bernard Zehrfuss
(France), is inaugurated at Place de Fontenoy,
Paris, in the presence of René Coty, President
SB
of the French Republic. Sarvepalli Radhak-
rishnan (India) is President of the General Con¬
ference.
Vittorino Veronese (Italy) is elected Director-
General.
Education
The 21st International Conference on Public
Instruction (later "Education") in Geneva exa¬
mines the problem of access to education in rural
areas.
Events
A Round Table of Nobel prizewinners is orga¬
nized on the theme of the impact of science and
technology on human life. Participants include
John Boyd Orr, UK, and Nikolai Semenov,
USSR.
1W
General policy
Technical assistance: UNESCO is assigned the
responsibility for carrying out a number of
United Nations Special Fund projects.
Culture
On the joint initiative of UNESCO and
ICOM, the International Centre for Conserva¬
tion (now ICCROM) is founded in Rome.
Communication
On the invitation of the Human Rights Com¬
mission, the United Nations and ECOSOC,
UNESCO studies a programme for the develop-
ment of the media in non-industrialized
countries.
The International Film and Television
Council (IFTC) is founded.
The IFTC groups 30 international organiza¬
tions and is represented in most countries of the
world. Its co-operation with UNESCO, espe¬
cially through meetings of professionals orga¬
nized at festivals, is mainly designed to encou¬
rage the circulation of audio-visual works and to
stimulate creativity in this field, notably through
co-productions. Special attention is given to the
diffusion of audio-visual works from developing
countries.
Michel Con/7 Lacoste
