M,
32
Lany people in the industrialized countries
would like Amazonia to be preserved exactly as it
is, and transform it. into a vast nature reserve.
Some of these advocates of the non-
development of Amazonia attach the highest pri¬
ority to safeguarding planet Earth and at the same
time contrive to regard human beings as parasites.
Others point out that the Amazonian forest plays
a major role in counteracting the greenhouse
effect, and wish to see it act as a gigantic filter
so that 500 million cars can continue to consume
fossil fuels.
THE CURRENT
CONTEXT
The non-development of Amazonia is totally
unacceptable both to the people who live in the
region and to Brazilians in general. The gratui¬
tous advice handed out to the people on the spot
may well be seen as a kind of ecological
colonialism as long as the industrialized countries
of the North refuse to change their ways of life
and patterns of consumption.
Let these countries prove their sincerity by
proposing to the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development a specific
programme for the reduction of energy consump¬
tion in industrial societies.
Let them also provide the countries of the
South with access to the scientific and technical
knowledge that is needed to develop the immense
biological heritage of the Amazonian forest
within a framework of sound ecological prin¬
ciples. For this long-term task, Brazil and the
other countries of Amazonia need the capacity
to carry out their own in situ research.
For tropical countries biotechnology opens
up considerable possibilities based on progress in
the production of biomass and the range of
products that can be derived from it. Eventually
we may see the emergence of a new "plant-based
industrial civilization", a particularly interesting
prospect for tropical countries. Mr. Monkombu

S. Swaminathan, a former President of the Inter¬
national Union for Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources, believes that a new form of
civilization based on the sustainable use of renew¬
able resources is not only possible but essential.
The vision of this Indian scientist coincides with
the intuitions of the Brazilian sociologist Gilberto
Freyre, who in the 1960s founded a seminar on
tropicology at Recife.
However, at present biotechnology seems to
be so effectively shielded by a wall of patents that
people in many developing countries are won¬
dering whether it will not become an instrument
for the recolonization of the South by the North.
The industrialized countries would provide
another token of their disinterestedness if they
were to relax their position on patents and
intellectual property rights, and establish more
open forms of access to science and technology.
In 1989 Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, then Prime
Minister of India, suggested that a 0.1 per cent
tax be levied on world revenue and its yield of
$18 billion used to establish a world fund to
finance research into environment-friendly tech¬
nologies, their purchase and their free distribu¬
tion to all interested countries. However, nothing
came of this proposal, which relaunched the
debate on the financing of environmental protec¬
tion and development.
Another possible course of action would be to
create a network linking Asian and African
researchers to Brazilians and other Latin
Americans who are seeking to harness the renew¬
able resources of humid tropical forest ecosystems
to development, a process that should harmonize
three objectives of what is known as
ecodevelopment:
the promotion of greater social justice in the
name of the ethical principle of synchronic
solidarity, with development being regarded as
a civilization based on the equitable sharing of
possessions;
self-development in harmony with nature
rather than through domination of nature, in the
name of the ethical principle of diachronic
solidarity with future generations;
the pursuit of these two goals through a search
for a kind of economic efficiency that is not res¬
tricted to a concept of business profitability
which often takes no account of ecological and
social costs.
In addition to such measures, however, inter¬
national co-operation must primarily be directed
at improving the general economic environment
of Latin American countries. In other words solu¬
tions must be found to the problems of debt,
terms of trade, and the reduction of protectionist
barriers in the industrialized countries.
A painting by pupils of the
Usko-Ayar School of Painting
and Nature at Pucallpa in
Peruvian Amazonia. The
school was founded in 1988
to encourage young artists to
observe the Amazonian
environment and portray its
plant and animal life.
33

34
The internal challenges posed by the develop¬
ment of Brazilian Amazonia are as vast as the size
of this immense area which has captured the
imagination of so many and inspired so many
exaggerations.
DREAMS
AND REALITIES
There is a golden legend which portrays
Amazonia as a region of fabulous wealth, a
mirage which has lured generations of adven¬
turers. A variant of this legend, inspired by the
philosophy of the Enlightenment and the expia¬
tory inclinations of our ethnologists, paints a pic¬
ture of noble savages living happily in perfect
harmony with nature.
There is also a black legend which describes
Amazonia as a green, impenetrable hell, protected
by tropical diseases which afflict all intruders.
These contradictory pictures are reflected in
opposing conceptions of the region's future.
Some see Amazonia as the world's last great eco¬
nomic frontier, a place of incalculable mineral,
hydraulic and plant wealth. Others believe that
the abundance of its vegetation is an illusion and
that its soils are poor and subject to erosion as
soon as the forest is felled. Haphazard exploita¬
tion of Amazonia's mineral wealth and the
growing number of big dams, combined with
chaotic colonization leading to massive deforesta¬
tion, will rapidly turn Amazonia into a desert.
What are the facts?
A precondition for successful development is
the abandonment of the dominant model of
predatory exploitation of the region's natural
resources, a model which takes no account of
social and environmental costs. The random pur¬
suit of growth is just as unacceptable as non-
development.
For twenty years or more, several factors
combined to accelerate deforestation. These
factors were:
geopolitical imperatives leading to the settling
of Amazonia along purpose-built roads;
the idea that Amazonia could absorb rural
refugees displaced by the modernization of
agriculture in southern Brazil and by the persis¬
tence of anachronistic land-ownership structures
in the northeast;
the decision to favour large-scale animal hus¬
bandry, which is quite unsuited to the natural
conditions of Amazonia and leads to frenetic
speculation in land, as well as hopes that the
region's mineral wealth could be used to alleviate
the burden of debt;
the establishment in the duty-free zone at
Manaus of a great industrial centre.
As a result of these policies, now revised,
Amazonia has lost between 300,000 and 400,000
square kilometres of forest.
There has also been rapid urbanization. Ten
million of Amazonia's 17 million population
today live in cities (Manaus and Belém each have
over 1 million inhabitants). There are many
shanty-towns which are so exposed to the risk
of epidemics that the living conditions of the
people who live in them and in the cities
undoubtedly constitute Amazonia's most acute
environmental problem today.
Outside the urban centres the population
A timber company plants
native trees in a heavily
logged area of Peruvian
Amazonia.

lives in widely scattered settlements along the
banks of streams and rivers and practises a sub¬
sistence and gathering economy. The creation of
"extractive reserves" has brought a measure of
relief to the caboclos and seringueiros (peasant
farmers who tap rubber), whose existence is
threatened by land speculators. These people live
in extremely precarious conditions which could
be improved by more rational exploitation of the
forest's natural products, but this can only be
envisaged as part of a long-term solution for the
whole region. The seringueiros want their share of
economic, social and cultural progress, which
implies a dynamic vision of the transformation
of the extractive reserves into poles of
ecodevelopment.
The indigenous populations, long the victims
of adventurers and colonists, enjoy considerable
rights under the Brazilian Constitution, and the
Government has promised to earmark 80 million
hectares of land for 250,000 of them throughout
Brazil between now and 1993.
A NEW STRATEGY
The aim of Brazil's current environmental policy
is to promote a strategy of ecodevelopment rather
than a strategy of development at all costs. This
is a laudable goal, but it will not be easy to
achieve, either in Brazil or in the other Amazo¬
nian countries.
It must be accepted that ecodevelopment in
Amazonia depends on policy changes outside the
region. Land reform and reform in agricultural
policy must be carried out in the rest of Brazil in
order to reduce the flow of migrants to Amazonia.
Likewise, forest resources must be protected by
an ambitious reforestation programme elsewhere
than Amazoniathe FLORAM Plan prepared by
the Institute of Advanced Studies of the Univer¬
sity of Sâo Paulo proposes that 20 million hec¬
tares of forest be planted outside Amazonia in
thirty years, at a cost of $20 billion.
Within Amazonia, the first step is to divide
this far from homogeneous region into some



twenty sub-regions, each with its own strategy.
The global problems of Amazonia call for solu¬
tions adapted to local ecological and cultural con¬
ditions. Social diversity is a counterpart to bio¬
logical diversity.
The main thrust of these efforts must be
directed towards the rehabilitation of already
deforested land and, as far as possible, to
increasing the density of the population in these
areas, so as to halt the advancing frontier of
colonization and prevent further deforestation.
Efforts must be made to create an archipelago of
connected "development reserves" so as to
guarantee the protection of virgin forest and the
habitat of the indigenous population. Such an
approach presents many difficulties, but it still
seems more realistic than creating a proliferation
of natural reserves.
Agroforestry which makes judicious use of
local plant species (especially the enormous poten¬
tial of fruit trees), aquaculture, high-yield agricul¬
ture and horticulture in the varzeas (highly fertile
floodland), and small-scale animal husbandry are
promising techniques. Knowledge of the environ¬
ment acquired in the course of the centuries by
local populations may provide a useful starting
point, whence the importance of ethno-ecological
studies.
Technical skills based on the know-how of
local populations and inputs from modern science
can meet the needs of small modern family farms.
The use of local energy sources exploited on a
limited scale would also make possible the gradual
development of small packaging and transforma¬
tion industries.
An efficient network of production and mar¬
keting co-operatives would provide an institu¬
tional framework for these ecodevelopment
strategies. In the medium term, such co-operatives
would make it possible to provide decent living
conditions for a much larger population, while
respecting the vulnerable ecosystems of
Amazonia. They would also slow down the
exodus to the shanty-towns and the proliferation
of uncontrolled gold mining.
The objective must be to make Amazonia
habitable, by abandoning the colonial vision of
an area producing resources which are then
drained away to the outside world. There remain
the far more difficult problems of reducing the
social and ecological costs of mining and
hydropower, improving the living conditions of
the urban masses, and controlling tropical dis¬
eases, starting with malaria.
Contrary to a widespread prejudice, enough
is already known about Amazonia for us to
advance along the road of ecodevelopment,
without neglecting the research which is anyway
necessary. Successful projects and promising local
initiatives can be found in the interstices of the
predatory development model. These solutions,
which for the time being lie outside the dominant
paradigm, may be seen as the precursors of a new
paradigm of development.
Harvesting nuts from an
andiroba tree in Brazil. The
nuts yield an oil with
medicinal properties.
IGNACY SACHS,
French economist, is director
of studies at the Ecole des
Hautes Etudes en Sciences
Sociales In Paris, where he
founded the International
Centre for Research on the
Environment and Development
in 1973 and currently heads
the Research Centre on
Contemporary Brazil. He has
served as a specialist with
many international
organizations, including
UNESCO, and ¡s a former
programme director at the
United Nations University. 35
