ä«i£
"-"Vi.-.;
-
i&S&r.
av: '
; '
v.v
. -Jt '«.fTS.
... -Î,Fi
The sea is a treasure-house which
belongs to all mankind. The marine
sciences have revealed the crucial role
played by the oceans in regulating
the Earth's climate and have unlocked
many secrets of the deep. A source of
wealth and perhaps potentially
habitable, the marine environment is
fragile and must be protected if it is
to continue to sustain human life
and inspire the imagination.
A sántist
Building a boat, Japanese
print of the late Kano school
(15th- 19th century).

has at the sea
MANKIND lives beside the sea.
Over 145 of the world's nations
are coastal or island states, and
the majority of the world's population
lives within 200 kilometres of a coastline.
Today the use of coastal space for living,
trade, resources development and recre¬
ation is increasingly intensive. In the
United States, for example, even though
there is abundant space inland, it is fore¬
cast that 80 per cent of the population
will be living within 80 kilometres of the
sea by the year 2000.
In addition to this migration to
coastal areas, many works of literature
and music testify to mankind's emotional
link to the sea. Intellectually, however,
the tie is much weaker. Although since
the beginning of recorded history the sea
has been used as a highway between
different lands, this vast region has never
been explored with the same urgency or
thoroughness as the land. The world
ocean is truly the last geographic frontier
on Earth.
Why should this be so? Perhaps one
reason is that until the twentieth century
there was little demand for scientific
studies on the sea, and in any case the
means did not exist for putting man into
the sea to make direct observations. Even
today, marine exploration does not arouse
as much public interest as the exploration
of space. The rhythm of events tends to
be slow, the events themselves are not of
great visual interest, and they do not
receive wide publicity. And yet the world
ocean has a major influence on our lives.
THE EARLY DAYS OF OCEANOGRAPHY
It is widely agreed that oceanography
began as an interdisciplinary science 115
years ago, when the British HMS
Challenger expedition (1872-1876) left 59

England on a round-the-world scientific
voyage. The team that wrote up the
results of the three-and-a-half-year expe¬
dition formed the first international net¬
work of marine scientists. The fifty-
volume set of reports and the extensive
sample collections taken by the expedi¬
tion are still being studied by marine
scientists today.
It was also during the 1870s that the
first marine laboratory was established,
at Naples, Italy. The Marine Biological
Laboratory was founded at Woods Hole,
Massachusetts, in 1893, and by the turn
of the century océanographie studies were
being conducted in many places
throughout the world. In 1902 the Inter¬
national Council for the Exploration of
the Seas, the first intergovernmental
organization concerned with marine
science, was founded in Denmark.
Most maritime research before the
beginning of World War I was in marine
biology relating to fisheries development.
Before then, few samples of marine
minerals were taken from the sea, and the
study of ocean currents and water depths
was mostly confined to improving the
safety of navigation in shallow coastal
waters. However, the tragic loss of the
steamship Titanic in 1912 set in motion

studies of icebergs, their formation and
drift trajectories. These studies still con¬
tinue, though Earth-orbiting satellites
make the tracking safer and more
accurate.
World War I stimulated the need for
more information about the oceans, espe¬
cially to aid the detection and destruction
of enemy submarines. Since the primary
means of submarine detection was sound
propagation through the water, this need
promoted the advancement of physical
oceanography and the field of marine
acoustics was born. During World War
II more research was carried out in this
field and by the end of the war effective
sonar (sound navigation and ranging)
systems were installed on both subma¬
rines and surface ships. The scene was set
for a major expansion in the field of
oceanography in the postwar years.
PREDICTIVE INFORMATION,
THE KEY TO EFFECTIVE USE
OF THE SEA
The primary product of marine scientific
research is predictive information that
will eventually enable the sea to be used
in ways that are beneficial to mankind.
Without the supporting foundations of
excellent science and technology, exploi¬
tation of the ocean's resources is wasteful,
economically inefficient and potentially
harmful to the marine environment. Lack
of scientific information is bound to con¬
tribute to misuse of the world ocean in
such areas as overfishing, waste disposal,
and coastal and open ocean pollution.
Many of the uses of the ocean are
commercial, but not all. Public safety is
also important. For example, accurate
advanced warning and movement predic¬
tion of marine weather systems such as
typhoons and hurricanes can save thou¬
sands of lives and billions of dollars.
Today the world community is con¬
cerned about the complex issue of global
warming and a consequent gradual rise of
sea level. We need to know more about
how the oceans interact with and
influence the Earth's atmosphere and its
quality. At present we may not be com¬
pletely certain that accelerated burning of
fossil fuels since the Industrial Revolution
has caused these problems. But we cannot
afford not to do the necessary science that
will enable us to know for sure. This
work will require an unprecedented inter¬
national pooling of scientists and research
assets. No one nation can do it alone.
THE TOOLS
OF THE MARINE SCIENTIST
In seeking the answers to these and other
questions, modern oceanographers use a
3-tier family of macroscale, mesoscale and
microscale "platforms" and techniques to
study the oceans. Macroscale platforms
are remote-sensing systems such as air¬
craft, balloons and Earth-orbiting
spacecraft which provide the "big pic¬
ture", permitting scientists to observe
large areas of the ocean surface. Satellites
in particular provide the only means of
measuring air-sea interaction processes in
real time.
The principal mesoscale platform is
the ship, which is the primary and gener-

ally the cheapest means of obtaining data
at sea by means of long-term research
programmes using relatively large teams
of scientists and large quantities of
instrumentation. In recent years, sophisti¬
cated ship designs, high-powered on¬
board computer capabilities and new
sensor technologies have made the
modern research ship several times more
productive than the vessels of only
twenty years ago. Ship platforms are also
remote sensing systems. They work at the
air-ocean interface and make observations
and take samples through the use of
lowered mechanical "eyes and hands".
The last, microscale category of plat¬
forms puts the trained mind and eye of
the scientist into the sea. For about $1,000
a scientist diver can be fully equipped
with the self-contained underwater
breathing apparatus (SCUBA) and ena¬
bled to operate at depths of about 40
metres. This research technique is today
used by marine scientists throughout the
world, including under ice in polar
regions. At depths greater than 40 metres,
the marine scientist will use a submer¬
sible. Using manned submersibles,
oceanographers can descend to depths of
up to 6,000 metres to make direct, in situ
observations and measurements.
Since they were first developed in the
1950s, over 150 manned submersibles
have been built. Today about twenty-
four are being used for marine science
support in eleven countries. Currently
discussions are going on in several coun¬
tries about building a new generation of
manned submersibles capable of diving
into the deepest parts of the oceans. A
Above, the submarine Caya, with Its
three-person crew, can dive as deep
as 300 m. It is used for Industrial or
scientific purposes.
Left, a Soviet océanographie vessel In
the port of Istanbul (Turkey).
Right, satellite Images enable
scientists to track the Gulf Stream
with precision.
DON WALSH,
of the United States, is a specialist in
oceanography, marine «ngineeiing and
underwater technology. He served in
the U.S. Navy for 24 years and is the
author of many articles and books on
marine subjects. 61

Harvesting salt from Lake Rose (Senegal).
Canadian company has also proposed
building a commercial, nuclear-powered
submarine which would be capable of
missions of up to eighty days at depths
up to 1,000 metres.
Unmanned submersibles have also
been developed for submerged scientific
operations. The most common type is the
remotely operated vehicle (ROV), which
is controlled from the surface through a
long tether cable. ROVs can be fitted
with television and still cameras, mechan¬
ical arms for work tasks, and a variety of
instrumentation sensors depending on the
scientific mission.
The vehicle is controlled from a sur
face vessel using television pictures from
the ROV as well as instrument readings
for depth and compass heading. Almost
a thousand ROVs have been built since
their introduction in the late 1960s, but
only a few have been used for marine
science. In the past five years, however,
several have been acquired by marine
research organizations.
FUTURE EXPECTATIONS
The distance between scientific investiga¬
tion of the ocean and commercial prac¬
tice is great. At every step of the way
there are major problems which need to
be addressed to ensure that the people of
our planet can enjoy maximum use of the
resources of the ocean. One of these
problems is lack of public interest and
thus investment in marine science and
technology. Because marine science
produces results over the long term, it is
difficult for short-term governments to be
concerned about it. Since modern marine
science calls for international co¬
operation, the political difficulties
become even more complex. Can ocean
science prevail in this context? Clearly,
the answer is that it must.
Some facts and figures
The ocean covers nearly two-thirds of the
Earth's surface, an area of 361,000,000 square
kilometres. The Pacific Ocean alone covers
more of the Earth's surface than all the land
masses put together.
Two-thirds of the Earth's land masses are
north of the equator. The southern hemisphere
is often called "the ocean hemisphere".
The average depth of the ocean is 3,730
metres. Its greatest depth is nearly 11,000
metres, but only 2 per cent of the sea floor is
deeper than 6,000 metres.
A specimen of Zooplankton. -
The total volume of the sea is over 1.5 bil¬
lion cubic kilometres. The oceans contain over
86 per cent of all the water on our planet.
The water in the oceans has been there for
about 3 billion years. It has been thoroughly
mixed more than a million times. As a result,
this well-mixed "chemical solution" contains
the same relative proportion of chemical ele¬
ments (salts) no matter where a sample is taken.
Only six elements make up 99 per cent of
the salts in seawater: sodium, calcium, chlorine,
magnesium, potassium and sulphur. The
amount of these elements in a given volume
of seawater may vary from place to place. This
is called "salinity". The average for the world
ocean is 35 grams per kilogram of seawater.
It is estimated that if all salts in the world ocean
were extracted and put on land, the layer would
be 150 metres thick.
Life in the sea begins with photosynthesis
when solar energy is captured by microscopic
plants in the sea, phytoplankton, which are the
first step in the marine food chain. Like terres¬
trial plants, phytoplankton absorb carbon diox¬
ide and release oxygen to the sea. A large por¬
tion of our planet's oxygen is produced from
the sea.
Because seawater rapidly filters out the
penetration of solar energy, most marine life
is found in relatively shallow, upper layers of the
sea. In fact, about 90 per cent of the life in the
sea can be found in the upper 30 metres. The
highest biological productivity exists near coast
lines, where river and other runoff from land
provides a steady supply of nutrients. Even
though these coastal areas represent only
about 15 per cent of the ocean's area, they are
the primary areas for marine life. Essentially,
the rest of the world ocean is thinly populated
and more of a biological desert.
The principal current system of the oceans
is called "wind-driven circulation". Its engine
is the wind that blows across the ocean surface
at a constant velocity and from the same direc¬
tion season after season and year after year.
The motion of the surface waters due to wind
forces is modified by the shape of the ocean
basins and the Earth's rotational motion. This
results in a generalized circulation pattern con¬
sisting of giant circular water movements in
each major ocean. These circulations are called
"gyres". Direction of circulation is clockwise in
the northern hemisphere and counterclockwise
in the southern hemisphere. Major surface cur¬
rents such as the Gulf Stream in the Atlantic
and the Kuroshio in the Pacific are examples
of wind-driven circulation and each is part of
a larger gyre in that ocean basin. These mas¬
sive movements of seawater act as part of our
planet's "air conditioning system". Excess heat
is transported from the tropical regions to the
higher latitudes where there is a heat deficit.
This process helps to keep the average regional
temperatures throughout the planet constant
from year to year.
D.W.
