íM$ for a sustainable world
)si José Gofdembeig
The search for new energy sources to replace
exhaustible and environmentally harmful fossil fuels
A HE concept of sustainability is a highly com¬
plex one, particularly where energy matters are
concerned. We can only hope to approach any¬
thing like absolute sustainability by the use of
renewable energy resources such as hydro-
electricity; but even hydro-electricity involves
problems such as the silting up of dams or the
secondary environmental damage dams can cause,
which makes it less than a hundred per cent sus¬
tainable.
On the other hand, some fossil fuels, such as
coal, are quite abundant and even at their present
rate of consumption will last for several centu¬
ries, when other sources of energy might become
available.
The Report of the World Commission on
Environment and Development (1987) defined
sustainable development as development that
"meets the needs of the present without com¬
promising the ability of future generations to
meet their own needs". And this, perhaps, con¬
tains the hint that we need to introduce the
notion of "depletion rates" into any discussion
of sustainability. This opens the way to the estab¬
lishment of compromises between what is
desirable in principle and what is practical in
terms of the realities of everyday life. Such com¬
promises are unavoidable when a choice has to
be made between preserving resources and the
needs of survival and development.
If energy use were to be considered in con¬
formity with the strict definition of sustainable
development, this would mean that man should
rely exclusively on renewable sources of energy.
This was the case before the industrial revolution,
when fuelwood, used in a renewable fashion, was
basically the only source of energy.
With population growth and increased
demand for energy, however, exhaustible fossil
fuels came into use and became the predominant
energy source. In the industrialized countries
today, fuelwood represents less than one per cent
of total energy consumption, the remaining
demand being met basically by fossil fuelscoal,
oil and gas.

«A*
This is clearly an unsustainable form of
development, since the depletion of existing
reserves of fossil fuels is proceeding at a fast pace
and will certainly "compromise the ability of
future generations to meet their own [energy]
needs."
Depletion, and eventual exhaustion, of stocks
of fossil fuels are not the only problems. Their
use entails other problems which affect the sus¬
tainability of the system in which we livethe
emission of carbon dioxide and other gases is the
major cause of atmospheric pollution and global
warming and thus poses a threat to the way of
life of future generations.
In the less developed countries, fuelwood still
represents an appreciable fraction of total energy
consumption. If this resource were properly
managed, by the systematic planting of trees to
replace those cut down, it could become an inex¬
haustible energy source. This is far from being
the case and we are witnessing intensive deforesta¬
tion which is consuming more than ten million
hectares of forestmainly tropical forestevery
year. The problem is most acute in Africa, but
is also very significant in south-east Asia and Latin
America.
On a worldwide scale, only hydro-electricity
can today be considered a sustainable energy
resourceit cannot be depleted and it does not
11 HM*
II
produce greenhouse gases. However, only ten per
cent of the total energy used in the world comes
from this source and, although the potential of
existing untapped sites is considerable, they are
unevenly distributed around the world.
Three approaches can be adopted to attain
energy sustainability:
extend the life of existing fossil fuels as much
as possible by wise use;
increase the use of other, little-used renewable
energy sources such as wind power, solar thermal
power, solar thermo-electric power, photovol-
taics and biomass;
increase the use of nuclear power.
Before the two oil crises of the 1970s, growth
in energy consumption, based on the use of fossil
fuels, seemed to be part of the way of life of deve¬
loped countries and an example to be copied and
a goal to be attained by all. The projection of
future energy consumption reflected those expec¬
tations and predicted a sustained growth of at least
three per cent a year, which meant that total
energy consumed would quadruple in less than
fifty years.
The two oil crises led to a re-examination of
the situation and to moves to reduce what was
seen as a dangerous over-reliance on oil. Two
major energy studies were conducted during the
1970sone by the Energy Research Group,
The dam at the Tucurui hydro¬
electric power station on
Brazil's Tocantins river.
JOSE GOLDEMBERG,
of Brazil, was formerly rector
of the University of Säo Paulo,
where he still holds a
professorial chair, and is
currently his country's Minister
of Education. The author of
many papers and books on
nuclear physics and energy In
general, in 1991 he was
co-winner of the Mitchell Prize
for Sustainable Development. 23

Cambridge, England, for the World Energy Con¬
ference, the other by the International Institute
for Applied Systems Analysis, Vienna. Both
studies had one long-term objective in
commonto shift from oil to more abundant
energy resources such as natural gas, coal and
nuclear energy while maintaining a significant
growth in energy consumption.
Their approach was to estimate future energy
demand on the basis of assumptions about future
demographic and economic trends, to make
historical correlations between such trends and
energy demand, and to match this demand to
a new mix of energy supplies. However, the
scenarios they produced had the defect of
projecting a perpetuation of the energy consump¬
tion imbalance between the developed and the
developing world and thus of implying contain¬
ment of the legitimate development expectations
of the less developed countries.
In 1988, in his book Energyfor a Sustainable



World, the author of this article explored the pos¬
sibilities of modern, energy-efficient technologies
for meeting the energy needs of the world popu¬
lation in the year 2020. This study concluded that
widespread use of new technologies could enable
people in the developing world to attain a level
of amenities comparable to that of the countries
of Western Europe in the middle of the 1970s and
the industrialized countries to reduce their per
capita energy consumption by almost half. Taken
all together he foresaw total energy consumption
in the year 2020 remaining approximately the
same as in 1980, but with a much higher level
of comfort for the great majority of the world
population.
Unfortunately, this projection did not really
correspond to a sustainable situation because
fossil fuels still represented the great majority of
the energy needed and carbon dioxide emissions
would continue to poison the atmosphere signifi¬
cantly. It did, however, demonstrate that it was
possible to stabilize energy consumption at
existing levels while extending considerably the
life of fossil fuel resources.
A more recent study by R.H. Williams, of
the Center for Energy and Environmental
Studies, Princeton University, published in 1989,
is more optimistic about the possibility of greater
use of renewable fuels which evolving technolo¬
gies seem to be making both feasible and econom¬
ically viable.
More efficient methods of using fuelwood
and of converting other biomass fuels (basically
vegetation and crop residues) into electricity
through gasification and the use of modern gas
turbine generators, are rapidly being introduced.
The conversion of sugar-cane into ethanol as an
energy source for electricity generation is gaining
ground and there are important new develop¬
ments in wind, solar thermo-power and pho-
tovoltaics.
Re-examination of all these possibilities in the
Williams study led to the conclusion that by the
year 2025 renewable energy sources could
account for more than half the energy used in
developing countries.
THE NUCLEAR
OPTION
Finally, we have to consider the possible contri¬
bution of nuclear energy to the establishment of
a sustainable world energy system. Nuclear
energy does not emit carbon dioxide and with
the development of breeder reactors sufficient
nuclear fuel for the operation of thousands of
nuclear power plants is guaranteed for centuries
to come. Here theoretically is an ideal sustainable
energy source.
The problem with nuclear energy lies else¬
where. Even with the use of the most advanced
technology, accidents do happen, as the Cher¬
nobyl disaster so tragically demonstrated. In addi¬
tion, there seems to be no solution to the problem
of disposing of radio-active waste in a manner
compatible with maintaining a "clean" environ¬
ment. These problems, coupled with the danger
of nuclear proliferation for military purposes,
. make the nuclear solution unacceptable to public
opinion in many countries.
Children planting tree
seedlings in Sri Lanka.
24
m
