50
1 he Universal Copyright Convention (UCC) is
an international instrument which was drawn up in
1952 under the auspices of UNESCO. If it were to
be as universal as its title claims, the Convention not
only had to recognize copyright as a human right
but also to act as a kind of bridge between the
world's different legal and social systems. As an
attempt to devise a legal common denominator
which would foster respect for the rights of creators
and also encourage the international circulation of
literary, scientific and artistic works, the UCC had
a dual thrust.
Before the Second World War, steps had already
been taken to remedy the paradoxical situation
whereby the United States was cut off, legally
speaking, from the countries of Europe and Asia
which since 1886 had become signatories to the
Berne Conventionthe International Convention
for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works.
Under United States law authors could only be
protected if they carried out certain administrative
formalities such as registering their work with the
US Copyright Office. This legislation had affinities
with that relating to industrial property, which only
recognized an inventor's rights if his or her inven¬
tion had been registered. This requirement stood in
the way of the United States' accession to the Berne
Convention, which enshrines the principle that a
work is protected purely by virtue of its creation.
There was thus no legal mechanism whereby a
work originating in the United States could be pro¬
tected in Japan or in the countries of Western
Europe, or whereby a work originating in the latter
countries could be protected in the United States
except when the requirements of American law were
observed.



The Universal Copyright Convention of 1952
provides a simple and ingenious solution to this
problem. It prescribes that the formalities required
by the national law of a contracting state shall be
considered to be satisfied if all the copies of a work
originating in another contracting state carry the
symbol ©, accompanied by the name of the
copyright owner and the year of first publication.
Ratified by the United States and by almost all
the states parties to the Berne Convention, the UCC
has successfully served its purpose as a pathway of
UNESCO IN ACTION
communication between different legal systems,
while also improving the international protection
of intellectual works.
The creators of the UCC set themselves another
goal in relation to the universality asserted by its
title. They wished to anticipate and provide for the
prospect following the Second World War of a con¬
siderable increase in the number of sovereign states
as a consequence of decolonization. Legal norms for
the protection of authors should be sufficiently flex¬
ible and open to accommodate states at different
stages of development, or states belonging to
different economic and social systems. These norms
could thus not be as precise and restrictive as those
of the Berne Convention, while nevertheless
providing sufficient recognition of authors' rights.
The 1952 Convention satisfies these two condi¬
tions. Its protective norms are expressed in the form
of general principles which can be given different
shades of interpretation depending on the specific
identity of each state. The Convention limits the
term of protection of copyright to twenty-five years
after an author's death, thus permitting the acces¬
sion of the USSR. But correlatively the Convention
provides for the works of the citizens of each con¬
tracting state the same protection in other con¬
tracting states as it does for the works of authors
belonging to those states. The prohibition of any
discrimination in a given state between authors who
are nationals of that state and foreign authors who
may invoke the Convention is evidence of a
universal concept of the protection of intellectual
works.
The 1952 Convention created a legal structure
which could accommodate the United States, the
USSR, the industrially developed countries and the
developing countries. It also influenced its
predecessor, the Berne Convention. Fruitful co¬
operation led to the closer alignment of the two
Conventions, which were revised in 1971. This revi¬
sion gave concrete form to the twofold movement
initiated in 1952 by the UCC: furtherance of the
legal rights of creators and acknowledgement of the
specific needs of developing countries.
ANDRÉ KÉREVER ¡s a former member of the Conseil
d'Etat (France).
