How far have
African musical
traditions
survived in
rock, jazz and
blues, whose
origins can be
traced back to
the slave
trade?
The birth of the blues
«U*
12

by Etienne Bours
and Alberto Nogueira
IN 1954, Elvis Presley recorded his first single.
On one side was his version of "That's All Right
Mama" by Big Boy Crudup, a black man, a blues
singer and the father of rock 'n' roll, and on the
other was "Blue Moon of Kentucky" by the
white father of bluegrass country music, Bill
Monroe. This was a key moment when black
music was transmuted by alchemy into white,
and white music into black. Presley turned up
in the right place at the right time. All he had
to do was pick the ripe fruit from the many
branches of trees whose roots had for centuries
been drawing sustenance from far away.
Many kinds of music which have since
become part of our culturerock, blues, jazz,
soul, rhythm and blues, and spirituals; reggae,
calypso and merengue from the Caribbean; samba
and capoeira from Brazilwould never have
existed if it had not been for the infamous trade
in "ebony wood". Today musicians who seek
their roots as well as new sources of inspiration
are creating exciting forms of hybrid music.
From Africa to the Americas
How long did Africa remain part of the musical
heritage the slaves took with them to the
Americas? Does it still provide inspiration for the
music we know today? Many writers have gone
back to Africa to try to answer these questions.
They have tried to discover the origins of the
blues and of jazz, revealing the incredible distance
that has been covered, always emphasizing the
possible linksand the inevitable breaks
between African traditions and Afro-American
music. On both sides of the Atlantic, music has
developed different idioms. "Any similarity to
what is heard in the African countries has disap¬
peared," wrote the Cuban writer Alejo Car-
pentier in 1977.1
These new forms of music were created and
developed by black people, but cross-fertilization
had diluted African memories to varying degrees,
depending on where the black communities were
established and the social conditions that existed
there.
"We might be called a people of dancers,
musicians and poets, since important events such
as a triumphant return from war or any other
reason for popular rejoicing, are celebrated by
Late 19th-century American
poster advertising a black and
white minstrel show.
dancing accompanied by appropriate music and
singing," wrote Olaudah Equiano, an Ibo slave
taken to Virginia in 1756.2 These celebrations
were not always tolerated. As a rule, the black
slaves in Latin America lived in relatively closed
communities and were able to preserve some
tribal customs as well as their traditional rites and
ceremonies. Catholicism allowed a certain lati¬
tude towards African religious practices in a con¬
text that was often syncretistic. As a result, ritual
music survived in such countries as Brazil, Haiti
and Cuba, where many cults of African origin
are still practised.
In contrast, the slaves who were transported
to the United States via the Caribbean, where
some features of their African culture were modi¬
fied or obliterated, had to live in fairly close con¬
tact with their white owners. All their ancestral
beliefs and means of self-expression were affected
from the start. In the despair of captivity they
clung to their cults, but practised them in secret.
Some of these cults survived, surreptitiously min¬
gling with white Protestantism and receiving a
new lease of life through contact with the waves
of black slaves imported from Haiti, Martinique
and Guadeloupe. Although certain beliefs were
expressed through a veil of symbolism, or
through the fervent singing of spirituals, other
African gods were worshipped in the open air,
in the depths of the Mississippi bayousas in the
case of the Vaudou cult, known as Hoodoo in
the southern United States.
Secular music, on the other hand, was forced
to comply with new functions in a new environ¬
ment that was hostile to African traditions. All
that survived were songs and dances that were
compatible with the economic and social struc¬
ture of the New World, such as the work songs
("field hollers"), born of African call and response
chants, which allowed the slaves to pace their
work and keep the overseer's whip at bay.


'Any Westerner
who dances is
unwittingly
paying tribute
to the genius
of Africa'
Abdelwahab Bouhdlba,
Pluralisme social
et pluralisme culturel,
Louvain, 1970.
1. "The Blacks in Latin America:
Africa's imprint on the art and
life of another continent", the
UNESCO Courier, August-
September 1977.
2. Paul Oliver, Savannah
Syncopators/African Retentions in
the Blues, Studio Vista, London,
1970. See also the April 1987
edition of the UNESCO Courier,
"Travellers* Tales". Editor 13

The slaves could also use their talents to
entertain their masters. Many of them played the
fiddle, fife or drums. More than one escaped slave
sought by his owner was described as an excel¬
lent singer or a skilled fiddle-player. They
fashioned their instruments out of whatever
materials were available, notably inventing var¬
ious forms of lute that developed into the banjo.
This instrument, which became virtually synony¬
mous with black music, took pride of place in
the minstrel shows which began to be produced
in the early nineteenth century. These entertain¬
ments, in which the music was provided by white
men with blackened faces, were parodies of the
life and culture of the blacks. Strangely enough
black musicians eventually played their own ver¬
sions of some of the songs, and even appeared in
the shows in their own right.
Musicians who refuse
to compromise with the market
The contact between English and Irish ballads and
1 4 dances, European instruments, work songs, the
Above, a Brazilian musician
playing the berimbau, an
instrument used in candomblé
music, which is very popular
in Bahia state.
Above left, the American
trumpeter, singer and
bandleader Louis Armstrong in
1958.
Top, the American jazz singer
Ella Fitzgerald.
ETIENNE BOURS
is a Belgian journalist who
specializes in music. He has
taken part in many radio
programmes on traditional
music, and is currently working
with the Médiathèque de la
Communauté Française in
Belgium.
ALBERTO NOGUEIRA,
Portuguese journalist, is music
adviser at the Médiathèque de
la Communauté Française in
Belgium.
cries of slave and master, spirituals and gospel
songs, gave rise to the bluesblack music in
essence, but already black American. The blues,
which came from the deep South, are crucial to
the history of the great intermixture of cultures
in North America. After the birth of the blues,
black music began to be recorded, along with
what could be described as the products of the
second wave of cultural fusion. In the early
recordings, the art of the rural blues singers
appeared in its raw and authentic state. It would
never be heard in quite the same way again.
In 1900 eight out of ten black people still
lived in the countryside. By 1930, half of them
were living in industrial towns and cities. This
exodus from the countryside gave birth to other
forms of musical expression such as urban blues,
rhythm and blues, and soul music. New commer¬
cial imperatives also emerged. Black music was
gradually being subjected to the laws of the
market. Did these developments lead to authentic
or spurious forms of cultural fusion? This was,
in fact, the last stage in a long journey, during
which the music had grown further and further
away from its original functions, and perhaps had
become so thoroughly blended that it managed
to please everybody.
At the same time, many musicians refused to
compromise their art for the market. To realize
this, one need only listen to Joseph Spence, a
remarkable guitarist from the Bahamas whose
music resists commercial exploitation and the
constraints of the recording studio. His work is
an authentic cultural blend, a mixture of different
traditions which have gradually become entan¬
gled and most of whose musical expressions have
been tinted black.
