Can Russian rock survive now that it has
emerged from underground?
In foreground, Pyotr
Mamonov, lead singer of a
Russian rock group.

The rockers1 lament
by Aleksandr Sokolansky
Re
ALEKSANDR SOKOLANSKY
is a Soviet art and drama
critic. His many publications on
the theory and practice of the
modern theatre, the avant-
garde and rock culture include
"The Images of Russian
Rock".
LOCK is more than music, it's a way of life,"
said Boris Grebenshikov, a leader of the Russian
rock movement in the 1980sa time when most
Russian rockers were well acquainted with
poverty, underground existence and persecution.
Rock music became assimilated into Russian
culture between the late 1960s and the late 1970s,
when it was perceived as bearing a dynamic and
attractive image of Western civilization. To listen
to this kind of music or to play in a rock group
was a relatively safe form of dissidence.
In the early days even the most rudimentary
equipment was in short supply, and for rockers
access to a stage or concert hall was difficult.
Singing to guitar accompaniment in private apart¬
ments became a tradition which is still widespread
today. The movement was strongly influenced
by such immensely popular poets and song¬
writers as Vladimir Vysotsky, Bulat Okudjava
and Aleksandr Galich. Rock lyrics, rich with
social and political meaning, are usually more
important than the music itself.
Russia's rock generation belonged to a cul¬
ture of dissatisfaction, disillusion and frustration.
"We know a new dance, but we have no legs.
We went to see a new film, but they suppressed
it," sang the Leningrad group Aquarium,
expressing all their resentment at a way of life
which disgusted them but seemed unchangeable.
In the early 1980s the rock generation estab¬
lished close contact with young post-avant-garde
artists, poets, film and theatre directors. They
lived and worked in the same underground
atmosphere conducive to an active exchange of
ideas. In this period rock music grew into a
unique and original phenomenon of Russian cul¬
ture. Tastes were shaped by such groups as
Aquarium, Kino, and Zoo, whose lead singer
Mike Naumenko included both traditional rock
'n' roll and captivating ballads in his repertoire.
Popularized clandestinely and through the
samizdat press, Russian rock gradually established
itself as authentic modern folklore. It mocked
official light music and came into direct confron¬
tation with the cultural establishment of an
authoritarian society. The repressive campaign
that was launched against rockers in 1983
wrecked many lives but failed to crush the rapidly
developing movement. By the mid-1980s the rock
movement was still working underground but it
had already developed a production network and
a recording industry.
In the mid-1980s the social climate relaxed
somewhat, giving rise to a new wave of optimism.
Perhaps the world had still not changed for the
better, but people had at least acquired a certain
freedom in their relations with it. The new frame
of mind was characterized by a spirit of solidarity
and a desire for action. Rock music rapidly
evolved a less aggressive, more thoughtful
philosophy.
Then, at last, it came out into the open. Rock
records were issued, mass concerts were held, tel¬
evision programmes were devoted to rock music,
and groups toured the country. Paradoxically,
however, legalization of rock music was followed
by a period of decline. In a more open society,
rock ceased to be a universal language of com¬
munication between non-conformist youth.
Many intellectuals also lost their enthusiasm for
it. Perhaps Russian rock was capable of anything
except becoming just another art form. The new
generation wants soft drinks; rock is too strong
a brew.
Nevertheless, a few Russian rock groups are
entering the 1990s with confidence. The most
prominent among them is DDT, whose lead
singer Yuri Shevchuk claims he is ready to meet
any challenge. Perhaps the swan song of Russian
rock has not yet been sung. 29
