
The current session of UNESCO's General Conference is taking
place at an exceptional moment in world history. In the last two
years we have seen radical changes in the order established by
the victors of the Second World War. Are UNESCO's activities going
to change as a result?


Of course they are adapting to these changes. Paradoxically,
UNESCO is thus returning to its original mission. The United
Nations Organization was created to maintain world peace. The
Charter of the United Nations defined several major principles:
respect for justice, the rule of law, human rights and fun¬
damental freedoms for all without distinction of race, sex, lan¬
guage or religion. UNESCO's mission is to develop intellec¬
tual co-operation in the fields of culture, education, science and
communication.
For over forty years its effectiveness was limited, for two
reasons. Four-fifths of humanity lived in colonized and depen-
Interview ú
dent countries where the basic principles of the United Nations
Charter could hardly be applied. The bipolar division of the
world had provoked the cold war and ideological opposition
between East and West. UNESCO's initiatives were confronted
and very often paralyzed by this situation. The UN itself could
only play a limited role in the prevention and solution of con¬
flicts. The situation today is totally new. Most of the former
colonies have become independent and their voices are starting
to be heard on the world stage. In the last two years the
totalitarian regimes of eastern and central Europe and the
Balkans have fallen. The USSR itself has begun a long journey
towards democracy and respect for human rights. South Africa
is attempting to put an end to apartheid.
The conditions now exist in which ideological confronta¬
tions and fear of the Other can disappear. The principles of
the United Nations Charter can be taken into account by
humanity without the arriere-pensees and manipulations we
have known for forty-five years.
Does this mean that from now on everything is for the best in
the best of all possible worlds?
Certainly not. But I wanted to make these observations
which allow us to be more optimistic today than ever before
in the past. The problems to be solved today and tomorrow
are enormous but we can try to solve them by talking the same
language and with a greater chance of success.
There are two things I would like to add. Firstly, although
these principles are accepted by everyone, they are not respected
by everyone. In its capacity as the intellectual component of
the United Nations system, UNESCO has a duty to identify
the obstacles which prevent their application and to help to
overcome them. Secondly, the principles themselves must be
further refined. We live in an inegalitarian world. Below a cer¬
tain level of poverty and deprivation, freedom loses its sub¬
stance, civic equality becomes an abstraction. If they are to be
given tangible form, these universal values must be accompa¬
nied by real acts of solidarity, by an ethic of sharing. If some
people enjoy prosperity, knowledge and culture in a rich world
while others are deprived of these benefits of civilization, the

íMSCOi Generd Conference
Fckrko Major
Birector-Generd
world cannot be at peace. The duty of fraternity is an ethical
imperative, for humanity is one and indivisible in its diversity.
We are still far from this state of solidarity.
That is why we are going through an uncertain transitional
period in which the best and the worst exist side by side, in
which the highest expectations are accompanied by terrible
risks. It would be more accurate to talk in terms of several tran¬
sitions, taking place in different time-scales and at different
rhythms, yet linked to one another, inextricably intertwined.
In some cases national sovereignty and independence are leading
to extremes of nationalism based on exclusivity and rejection.
Alas, from the blossoming of cultural identities in a framework
of freedom it is possible to take a^ pathological course which
leads to the exclusion of others. When there is a rapid recrudes¬
cence of nationalism which has been repressed for dozens of
years, only democracy can peacefully reconcile the active coex¬
istence of all cultures and languages.
The transition between totalitarianism and democracy is
not easy. It implies the passage from a war economy to a peace
economy, and above all from a war culture to a peace culture.
Our models of economic development have led to the sacrifice
of the environment and the human condition to the require¬
ments of productivity. Man and nature share an indivisible
destiny.
All these changes vary according to places and situations,
but today everything is changing rapidly as developments in
communications and the media shrink the planet. Humanity
has some interests and hopes that are held in common and
others that differ and are even contradictory. UNESCO must
in its thinking and in its action take account of this "living
matter".
Could you explain what you mean by different time-scales,
rhythms, interests and hopes?
Look at a world map. Africa, Asia, Western Europe, North
America, Latin America, Eastern Europe, the Arab world. The
configuration of problems and priorities differs widely from
one cultural region to another.
In Africa demands for democratization are making them¬
selves felt. Regional and international co-operation is necessary
to make possible an economic take-off based on the realities,
the genius, and the creativity of the African peoples.
In Eastern Europe the fall of totalitarianism is opening the
way to freedom and national self-determination but also to dis¬
trust and prejudices which are rooted in a more or less distant
past and which must be overcome because they threaten peace
and risk fomenting clashes between peoples.
In Latin America a common trend has become apparent
among the peoples of Latin culture since the fall of the dictator¬
ships. These peoples are tackling the problems posed by the
modernization of their societies, while at the same time bearing
a very heavy burden of external debt.
In Asia, modernization is already under way, but it is
accompanied by demographic pressure that is giving rise to new
contradictions in a world whose time-honoured cultures must
integrate the latest technological and scientific advances.
In Western Europe and North America, where the
privileges of wealth, knowledge and power are concentrated,
questions are asked about the meaning and use of these advan¬
tages. Even there inequality is increasing and leading to turmoil
as Western societies search for values adapted to new condi¬
tions of life, work and leisure. In a world that is both increas¬
ingly united and increasingly inegalitarian, the need for
solidarity and sharing is very strong.
What can UNESCO do in face of all these transitions?
It alone can help to encourage in the international commu¬
nity a meeting of minds based on the universal values defined
in the United Nations Charterespecially since it has had forty-
five years of unique experience.
There is an alchemy of intellectual co-operation, of the
gradual coming together of ideas, just as there is an alchemy
of incomprehension, discrimination and discord. The former
can only prevail if there is a relentless determination to defend
everything that brings people together and unites them. Clearly
this does not mean suppressing originality in the interests of
a generalized uniformity. Respect for differences is of vital
importance, for unity can only be achieved in a debate which
takes account of the individuality of each person, the specific
features of each culture, the flowering of each people.
Culture, the cultural dimension of peace and of sustainable
development with a human face, will be at the top of the polit¬
ical agenda, at the national and global levels. It has too often
been treated as ornamental in bilateral accords, as the cherry
on the cake, added for the sake of decoration without anyone
really believing in it.
Are there rules of emulation in creativity just as there are rules
for economic competition and rules for road traffic?
Yes. UNESCO has a duty to serve two complementary pur¬
poses: individuality and universalism. I must repeat that the
defence of one's own identity should not lead to the rejection
of other people's. We know, however, that this can happen and
we must fight against this perversion. It is thus of crucial impor¬
tance to respect the universal values and rules without which
communication and exchange would be impossible. 49

How can UNESCO help this process?

By increasing awareness of what is involved in making
choices, by extending the range of intellectual discussion,
UNESCO's programmes aim to put the experience of the inter¬
national community at the disposal of those States that wish
to profit from it when they take decisions on matters which
fall within the Organization's fields of competence. Some of
the main priority areas are: the generalization of basic education;
The Peace Fountain, a copper sculpture created by Charles Eugene Gagnon
for the Peace Plaza at Rochester, Minnesota (U.S.A.)
higher education; protection of the environment and manage¬
ment of natural resources; improving the flow of information;
encouraging freedom of creativity; taking into account the cul¬
tural aspects of all forms of development.
We must give support to decision-makers as they face
different choices and encourage them to act; we must offer struc¬
tures and means of co-operation; we must provide international
legal instruments. We can, for example, help to further the
advance of knowledge through our océanographie programmes
and through the programme on Man and the Biosphere. We
can bring together intellectuals and creative people from all
regions to discuss the major problems of our time, as we did
recently in Prague, where the theme of the meeting was Culture
and Democracy. The positive developments of the past few
years are helping to bring about an entirely new openness in
the East, the West, the South.
Do fields such as science and culture lend themselves to govern¬
ment action?
That question was asked when UNESCO was created. As
far as science is concerned, there can be no doubt. Without inter¬
national co-operation, it is not possible to study the oceans,
the atmosphere, space, watercourses, deserts, ecology and so
on. The fallout from Chernobyl did not respect frontiers.
The situation with regard to culture is more complex.
Intellectuals and creative artists need to be independent from
political pressure. They have said "No" to dictators, colonizers,
arms dealers, polluters. With the end of the bipolar world and
the resurgence of democracy, this distrust is tending to diminish,
and will continue to do so, even if the duty of intellectuals to
criticize is in a sense sacred as a protection against the excesses
and distortions of our society. UNESCO has valuable
experience of projects that bring together governments,
decision-makers and individuals, intellectuals and creators.
Is there a particular image or priority which you would like to
mention in conclusion?
The culture of peace seems to me to be of primordial impor¬
tance today. We need to work on this concept. We are intoxi¬
cated by our culture of war, often without even realizing that
we are. Rejection of other people is accompanied by recourse
to violence. We know the cost of war, but we don't know the
cost of peace: an active, speedy and respectful justice; an environ¬
ment protected by the conscious attitudes of everyone; suffi¬
cient food and a decent system of health care; but above all
an unfettered spiritual framework in which everyone can find
fulfilment. On the philosophical level as well as in more mun¬
dane ways, we must explore the values and customs that
encourage the culture of peace.
It is in this spirit that the United Nations system must
evolve without delay. Substantial differences separate the United
Nations Organization of 1945 from that of 1995, when it will
be celebrating its 50th anniversary.
The new world we are entering needs ideas and values.
A debate at both local and global levels should help the tran¬
sition from the bipolar world of the Second World War to the
new world born of decolonization and the fall of the Berlin
Wall.
