BLUEPRINTS FOR AN
HiLlSTORICAL studies of plans for ideal cities
tend to be preoccupied with geometry and sym¬
metry: they are all square, circular, polygonal or
hexagonal. Aristophanes, in his play The Birds,
makes fun of the concept of geometric cities, of
Plato and his disciples and of all rigid planners
of other people's futures.
The recurrence of geometric plans in utopias
down the ages is partly explained, of course, by
the nature of the walled and fortified towns of
classical and medieval times, and partly by the
fact that all these schemes are what economists
would call "models" or what sociologists would
call "ideal types". If they were ever realized, they
would be modified to accommodate existing
physical features, artefacts and social institutions.

IDEAL COMMUNITY by colin ward
There was little recognition of this among
Utopians before the humanist writers of the
Renaissance.
The fifteenth-century Italian architect Leon
Battista Alberti, for example, did not attempt to
design an ideal city (although his projects include
an ideal Fortress for a Tyrant, in which the palace
is protected equally against the external and the
internal enemy). He insists that it is enough to
discover the principles that can be adapted to any
site and the needs of the citizens.
During the Renaissance Europeans began to
travel the world as a prelude to conquest and
exploitation. The tales they brought back
influenced a series of Utopian books. Thus the hero
of Thomas More's Utopia, Raphael Hythlodaye,
Left, Work, by the English artist
Ford Madox Brown (1821-1893).
Above, 19th-century depiction of a phalanx,
the ideal community advocated
by the French social theorist Charles Fourier,
who was inspired by Renaissance images
of utopia.
is cast as a Portuguese sailor from the crew which
sailed with the explorer Amerigo Vespucci.
More's book, written in Latin, takes the form
of a discussion in the garden of a house in Ant¬
werp, between himself, Raphael Hythlodaye and
a Flemish friend, Peter Gilles. Hythlodaye
. remarks that life is fairer in the island of Utopia,
where property is owned by the community,
than in the England of their day.
To prove his point, he describes the common¬
wealth of Utopia. Particular attention is given to
the architecture and planning of Utopian cities:
"Their buildings are good, and are so uniform,
that a whole side of a street looks like one house.
The streets are twenty feet broad; there lie
gardens behind all their houses. ..every house has
both a door to the street and a back door to the
garden.... There being no property among them,
every man may freely enter into any house what¬
soever. At least every ten years they shift their
houses by lots."
In More's ideal city everybody understands
farming. Children learn it at school and in visits
to the country. Everyone turns out to help at har¬
vest time. If the population of any city grows,
they do not build over the gardens, but "fill up
the lack in other cities", or "build up a town in
the next land where the inhabitants have much
waste and unoccupied ground".
Utopian writing of the European Enlighten¬
ment in the eighteenth century also used stories
of the exploration of unknown regions as a device
to criticize the familiar world of the European
states. Even before Australia was "discovered" 35

h n n iizn
by voyagers, the French writer Gabriel de Foigny
published New Discovery of Terra Incognita Aus-
trails (1676). He was the first Utopian to conceive
of a society without government. Following the
French navigator Louis-Antoine de Bougainville's
exploration of the islands of Oceania in the 1760s,
Denis Diderot wrote his delightful Supplement to
Bougainville's Voyage. Published posthumously,
after the French Revolution, it consists of an
imaginary conversation between an old man from
Tahiti, who describes the freedom and plenty that
existed before the Europeans came, and a French
sailor who tells him of the misery of the poor
in pre-revolutionary France.
Worlds of industrial plenty
The nineteenth century changed everything,
including utopias. The steam engine, iron and
steel, the railway, the factory system and the huge
growth of towns and cities all led to Utopian
writing which projected the pace of industriali¬
zation into the future. In 1816 the philosopher
and economist Claude-Henri de Saint-Simon was
already predicting that France and its population
would be organized as one vast factory. Later
in the century, in The Coming Race: or the New
Utopia (1870), Lord Lytton foresaw a future
in which machinery and robots would be
powered by a new form of energy called vril.
This was followed by another widely read
industrial utopia by the American writer Edward
Bellamy, Looking Backward (1888), in which
the hero awakens from a hypnotic state in
the year 2000. His host explains what has
happened:
"The movement toward the conduct of bus¬
iness by larger and larger aggregations of capital,
the tendency towards monopolies, which has
been so desperately and vainly resisted, was recog-
XT
\festerday
tiring uní/ Working in the Smokt.
To-day
- :,;: ..... ' '.
uSaÈrWSi: - ,
..i ;-
living m l/tt Subiiili v IMin¡¡ m /At- Jknt*.
To-morrow
U v/rtfi* Uivtjrjp? ttti/teStmui »7
-
36 Ti» " "~~n~rr -tin-n-T
Publicity poster produced in
1921 was designed to attract
people to the new garden city
at Welwyn, Hertfordshire (UK).
It contrasts the industrial city
with the modern suburb and
shows the garden city as a
natural progression.
nized at last, in its true significance, as a process
which only needed to complete its logical evolu¬
tion to open a golden future to humanity....
When the nation became the sole employer, all
the citizens, by virtue of their citizenship, became
employees, to be distributed according to the
needs of industry...."
The optimistic scientific utopias of the
nineteenth century gave rise to a whole genre of
deeply pessimistic anti-utopian literature in the
twentieth: savage satires on the trends of indus¬
trial society by such writers as H.G. Wells,
George Orwell and Yevgeny Zamyatin.
A simpler life
There also arose in the 1890s a stream of alterna¬
tive Utopian thinking, looking towards what we
would now call a post-industrial, ecologically
viable human society.
The English poet and craftsman William
Morris was so outraged by Edward Bellamy's
vision of the world as one vast factory that he
wrote a history of the future that he wanted. In
News from Nowhere, the author awakens in a
future England which has abandoned not only
factories but government and money too. It has
become a nation of craft workers, delighting in
making beautiful things, whose idea of a holiday
is to row up the river to work in the fields at har¬
vest time. The "big murky places which were
once the centres of manufacture" have disap¬
peared, and the ecological change in the human
environment is the result of a change in the pur¬
pose of work.
Citizens of the future explain to the time-
travelling Morris: "The wares which we make are
made because they are needed; men make for
their neighbour's use as if they are making for
themselves, not for a vague market of which they
know nothing, and over which they have no con¬
trol.... Nothing can be made except for genuine
use; therefore no inferior goods are made.
Moreover, as we have now found out what we
want, so we make no more than we want; and
as we are not driven to make a vast quantity of
useless things, we have time and resources enough
to consider our pleasure in making them. All
work which would be irksome to do by hand is
done by immensely improved machinery; and in
all work which it is a pleasure to do by hand,
machinery is done without...."
Two contemporaries of Morris also had an
immense concern for the details of productive
work and the decentralization of human settle¬
ments. Peter Kropotkin, a Russian geographer
and anarchist, argues in favour of mixing factory
work with farm work, brain work with manual
work, and town jobs with country jobs, in his
Fields, Factories and Workshops (1899).
Looking at the enormous productivity of
small workshops and horticulture as opposed to
large-scale industry and farming, Kropotkin

The Ce>Z0SSOI STslTÏ7J5<i/"Jf0tr2fT\ATIfO$ s*rr7¡uC.
* StiJtrtt nÀ/'t/t mmS fa fatt sr<-*rt>/f /<'>/ /4<- n-n/crf/uif /¿¡t/t,//f\>tM Mr fap efmr /turn/tAurtt/fvm.rvútfirtM ¡ù*/ut/. *'- MP A' yíír* Jfrvr */ // ïw 4' /*/// MrlM fl <r¿y /?*st- tM
ÉMÉMU.Ml.t^l^l^l^MáHdhlllMMÍHII.^fiáÉni
The Greek architect
Dinocrates (died c. 278 BC) ¡s
best known as the designer of
the Egyptian city of
Alexandria. This English
engraving illustrates his
project to carve Mount Athos
into a colossal statue of
Alexander the Great. Water
from the mountain was to
flow into a basin held in one
hand of the statue before
running through a city on its
way to the sea.
claims that the future lies with the dispersal of
both. The significance of this book, which gives
it relevance almost a century later, is that it is a
plea for "a new economy in the energies used in
supplying the needs of human life, since these
needs are increasing and the energies are not
inexhaustible".
Another Utopian contemporary of Morris
was an obscure English inventor and shorthand
writer, Ebenezer Howard. The question he asked
himself was very simple. How can we solve the
problems of desperate overcrowding in the
metropolitan city, with all the human misery it
produces, and at the same time cope with the
depopulation of rural areas from which the young
and active escape precisely because of the lack of
opportunities?
Howard's answer was the garden city. His
book Garden Cities of Tomorrow (1898) advocates
a network of planned small towns, providing
homes and employment and incorporating
agriculture with industrial work, surrounded by
a green belt, and linked by public transport to
form a "Social City". It was very influential in
the ideology of town and country planning.
Howard himself founded two garden cities in the
United Kingdom, Letchworth and Welwyn
Garden City, and his work inspired the British
government's New Towns programme after the
Second World War.
Ecological Utopian thinking
There is an extraordinary gap between the widely
read Utopian writings of the 1890s and the new
environmental, ecological awareness that emerged
in the 1970s, with its consciousness of the finite
nature of the world's resources and the terrifying
rate at which they are being exhausted. Few Uto¬
pians have explored the implications of an eco¬
logically aware civilization.
One notable exception is the American
science fiction writer Ursula Le Guin. Her novel
The Dispossessed (1974) presents the experiences
of a visitor from one planet, where a Kropot-
kinian ethic of mutual aid has won a viable
society from an arduous environment, to another
planet where society is built upon self-indulgent
consumerism. Another American novel, Ernest
Callebach's Ecotopia (1975), carefully examines
the dilemmas which would face a society which
attempts to adopt a green or ecologically aware
ideology.
One book that I would like to put into the 37

.1 » IT ITT
i %
' I
V(/*iGIH<¡ OKU**
t Ö - , K, o_ «ttlAMAk "..».Kr
.«(»15 f>US«lAr
^.* .tt co-OPieA« V>..
ïkaSÀâôi»«
m
n
/
i
f.
í
H
H
T«SM AW.»AH
Totvoi^jn-j,
-i. *,.
I
/
/'
/
I
!
H»A«,H*«*A»'-" -
IJ^.' "
».».. . 	 - . ».«"^
lAHIKi »luí
Í*\ÍI*(* «0i«V-
(OiTHMr
hands of anyone interested in the connections
between utopia, architecture and ecological cons¬
ciousness is an older American exploration of Uto¬
pian imaginings. This is Communitas: Means of
Livelihood and Ways of Life (1947) by Paul and
Percival Goodman. They were brothers, a poet
and an architect, and they compiled this book
during the Second World War as a modest and
dissident contribution to the worldwide debate
"post-war reconstruction". Numerous workson
38
of this kind were produced in many countries,
most of which have been completely forgotten.
Communitas survives because, as the philosopher
Lewis Mumford put it, it is the only modern con¬
tribution to the art of building cities which "deals
with the underlying values and purposes, polit¬
ical and moral, on which planning of any sort
must be based".
The Goodman brothers saw a "community
plan" not as a layout of streets and houses, but
as the external form given to human activity:
"There is a variety of town schemes: gridirons,
radiations, ribbons, satellites, or vast concentra¬
tions; what is important is the activity going on,
how it is influenced by the scheme and how it
transforms any schemes, and uses or abuses any
site, to its own work and values."
Their book examines the three main types
of city plan which had emerged in the previous
hundred years, grouping them into Green Belt
Plans, Industrial Plans and Integrated Plans. They
see the first as a reaction against the ugliness and
squalor of the factory systemattempts to
recreate pre-industrial values, or to live decently
with industry. Next they turn to city plans
centred on production, with an absorbing discus¬
sion of forgotten urban utopias dreamed about
in the Soviet Union in the 1920s, and of the tech¬
nological solutions appropriate to an advanced
economy put forward by the American engineer
Buckminster Fuller. His "Dymaxion" house,
conceived in 1929-1932, was based on the mass
production of lightweight self-sufficient houses
which did not require public utilities, but did
Bibliography for Three Ways
of Life Today, by Paul and
Percival Goodman:
IEfficient Consumption;
IIElimination of the
difference between production
and consumption;
III Maximum Security,
Minimum Regulation.
COLIN WARD
is a British author whose many
books include Anarchy in
Action (1973), The Child in the
City (1978), Arcadia for All
(1984) and Welcome, Thinner
City (1989).
depend on an industrial system in the back¬
ground.
Finally the Goodmans examine those Utopian
plans which integrate city and country, such as
American architect Frank Lloyd Wright's dream
of Broadacre City where the whole population
is dispersed over the entire countryside and
dependent on small farming and vaguely decen¬
tralized industry. This formula was more effec¬
tively argued for many years by another
American, Ralph Borsodi, who declared that by
cutting out the costs of transportation and mar¬
keting and a host of middlemen, at least two-
thirds of the goods and services required in a
home could be more efficiently produced domes¬
tically with electrically powered tools.
Yet the brothers were sternly realistic. They
had the honesty to emphasize, rather than
minimize, the fact that we all have different Uto¬
pian dreams. Aware that someone's utopia is
someone else's hell, they arrived at three quite
different formulae for ideal communities.
The first is the City of Efficient Consump¬
tion, which can be recognized in most European
or American cities today. The second, the New
Commune, is an idealized version of the small
workshop economy that actually sustains the
Italian region of Emilia-Romagna today.
The third, in which they envisage a two-level
economy, they call Maximum Security:
Minimum Regulation. Everyone would be
obliged to work for a short time (as in military
conscription) in a basic economy, attending the
machines which provide food, clothing and
shelter, distributed free to all. The rest of the time
would be occupied in a luxury economy in which
the choice of activity is left to the individual.
Needs such as medicine and transport would be
taken care of by a financial arrangement between
the subsistence economy and the secondary
economy. This solution may well prove instruc¬
tive to politicians seeking to resolve the contradic¬
tions between the ideology of a welfare state and
the virtues of a free market.
