 UNESCO'S FIRST 45 YEARS (Part II 
by Michel Conil Lacoste 
  
Many newly independent 
countries join UNESCO 
1960 
General policy 
® In this year alone, 17 African countries (and one 
other) join UNESCO, which now has 99 Member 
States. Many newly independent and developing 
countries join UNESCO in the 1960s, bringing to 
the Organization its universality of thought and 
action. One important result of this broadening is 
the intensification of operational activities in the 
field. 
 
Education 
B® A resolution adopted by the General Assembly 
of the United Nations recognizes education, 
hitherto considered exclusively in 2 humanist per- 
spective, as a factor in economic development. 
This decision holds great importance for the 
future orientation of UNESCO's activities in 
education. 
® The Convention against Discrimination in 
Education is adopted. Today 76 States are Parties 
to the Convention. 
8 Three intergovernmental conferences are con- 
vened by UNESCO in Karachi, Beirut and Addis 
Ababa on educational needs in Asia, in the Arab 
States and in Africa respectively. At Karachi 18 
countries draw up a plan for the development 
of primary education in Asia. 
® The International Council of Sport and Phys- 
ical Education (later the International Council of 
Sport Science and Physical Education) holds its 
first General Assembly. The Council came into 
being as a result of co-operation, encouraged by 
UNESCO, between representatives of national 
and international bodies concerned with sport 
during the Olympic Games held in Melbourne 
(1956) and Rome (1960). 
Exact and natural sciences 
 
® The Intergovernmental Oceanographic Com- 
mission (a semi-autonomous body within 
UNESCO) is established. The Commission pro- 
motes scientific research into the ocean and its 
living and non-living resources through concerted 
action by its Member States. Its first task is to 
co-ordinate the International Indian Ocean Expe- 
dition (1959-1965). 
® The International Brain Research Organiza- 
tion (IBRO) is founded. 
® ECOSOC examines a survey carried out by 
UNESCO, at the request of the UN General 
Assembly, on current trends of enquiry in the 
natural sciences and on the dissemination and 
application for peaceful purposes of such 
knowledge. The results of the survey appear in 
a book, Current Trends in Scientific Research, 
produced under the direction of Prof. Pierre 
Auger and published jointly by the UN and 
UNESCO in 1961. 
Culture 
® The campaign to save the monuments of 
Nubia from flooding by the waters of the Aswan 
High Dam is launched. Presiding at a ceremony 
at UNESCO headquarters, André Malraux com- 
mends “the action of a man who snatches some- 
thing from death”. The campaign lasts 20 years; 
22 shrines and temples are moved, 40 technical 
missions from 5 continents participate, and the 
contributions of governments and other inter- 
national sources, public and private, total $56 
million. 
1%1 
General policy 
® November: following the resignation of Vit- 
torino Veronese for health reasons, René Maheu 
René Maheu In 1962, the year In which he was 
elected Dirsctor-General of UNESCO. 
 
(France) becomes acting Director-General. He is 
elected Director-General in 1962. 
® The International Convention for the Protec- 
tion of Performers, Producers of Phonograms 
and Broadcasting Organizations (the “Rome 
Convention) is drawn up jointly by UNESCO, 
the World Intellectual Property Organization 
(WIPO) and the International Labour Organi- 
sation (ILO). 
 
Education 
® An educational co-operation programme 
between UNICEF and UNESCO begins, 
notably in primary and early childhood edu- 
cation. 
® The first Regional Conference of Ministers of 
Education is held at Addis Abeba. Between 1961 
and 1986, 24 such conferences are held (for 
Africa; Latin America and the Caribbean; the 
Arab States; Asia and the Pacific; and Europe). 
® An emergency programme is launched as part 
of UN action to maintain educational services 
in Congo-Léopoldville (today Zaire). More than 
a hundred specialists are sent and help is provided 
for the recruitment of some 800 teachers. 
Exact and natural sciences 
 
® UNESCO sends a mission into the seismic 
zones of Asia, South Americaand Africa, leading 
to the creation of a study programme on earth- 
quakes and other natural hazards. 
® UNESCO establishes in Rome the Interna 
tional Computation Centre (ICC) later to 
become the Intergovernmental Bureau of Infor- 
matics (IBI). 
 
Culture 
® The UNESCO Collections of Traditional 
Music are launched in collaboration with the 
IMC (150 LPs released by 1986). Today the Col- 
lections have been issued on 50 compact discs. 
1% 
Education 
 
® In co-operation with the United Nations Spe- 
cial Fund, UNESCO begins action on projects 
to establish teacher training colleges (more than 
35 in Africa) at which thousands of teachers will 
be trained.


Above, Jean-Paul Sartre at a symposium 
held at UNESCO headquarters to close 
“Kierkegaard Year" In 1964; right, Werner 
Heisenberg (Nobel laureate for physics) at a 
UNESCO symposium in 19685. 
Below, covers of compact discs in the 
UNESCO Collection of Traditional Music, launched 
in 1961. 
     
     
ono SNS _ 8 - \ v 
pes UT 
  
mpn— or 
| Cans £1 JO 
  
| ne 
  
Exact and natural sciences 
® The International Cell Research Organization 
(ICRO) is founded. 
® The International Institute of Seismology and 
Earthquake Engineering is founded in Japan. 
 
Social sciences 
WM —A series of regional studies carried out by 
UNESCO on the status of women are published 
in a special issue of the International Social Science 
Journal, In tandem with these studies, 
experimental projects are launched in Chile, in 
Nepal and in Upper Volta in order to promote 
women’s access to education. 
Communication 
 
® A resolution adopted by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations acknowledges 
the role of the media in education and in eco- 
nomic and social progress, thus extending 
UNESCO's field of action to information and 
communication. 
193 
General policy 
® The first edition is published of the UNESCO 
Statistical Yearbook, which becomes a standard 
source of facts and figures on the world situa- 
tion in education, science and culture. Compiled 
each year with the co-operation of UNESCO 
 
National Commissions, national statistical 
services and the statistical office of the United 
Nations, its data are taken from periodical reports 
provided by Member States on laws, regulations 
and statistics relating to their educational, scien- 
tific and cultural activities and from replies to 
UNESCO questionnaires sent from some 200 
countries and territories, 
Education 
® The first fund in trust project is launched after 
an offer by the Swedish government in favour 
of the education of women in Africa. “Funds in 
trust” are put at UNESCO's disposal by certain 
countries to finance specific activities to be 
executed by UNESCO in a specific Member 
State. 
® The General Conference decides to establish 
the International Institute for Educational Plan- 
ning (ITEP), which opens the following year in 
Paris, The Institute’s activities are divided 
between training, research, and the dissemination 
of new concepts, methods and techniques in 
educational planning. Its annual training 
programme is mainly intended for educators 
from developing countries (42 participants from 
over 30 countries in the 1990-1991 academic 
year). 
Since it was founded, the Institute has trained 
927 educators from 131 countries through 
an annual training programme at its Paris 
headquarters, and through intensive courses 
and other training activities carried out directly 
in its Member States. Current research focuses 
on three themes: “Improving the quality of 
education”; “Financing management and 
administration of education”; “Development of 
human resources”. Publications: 650 titles to 
date. 
E
T

Exact and natural sciences 
® UNESCO publishes a survey of the natural 
resources of the African continent, carried out 
at the request of the Economic Commission for 
Africa. 
 
Social sciences 
Wm The European Co-ordination Centre for 
Research and Documentation in Social Sciences 
is founded in Vienna with UNESCO aid in order 
to simulate international comparative East-West 
research in Europe. 
Events 
 
® Colonel Yuri Gagarin (USSR), the first cos- 
monaut, visits UNESCO headquarters. 
Priority to literacy 
194 
Education 
 
MW 1964 marks the start of a period of intensive 
activity in education, especially in literacy work. 
® The General Conference decides to launch a 
five-year experimental world literacy programme, 
B® Three UNESCO missions are sent to Member 
States to work on the financing of education 
projects following the signature of an agreement 
with the International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (IBRD). 
® At its 13th session, the General Conference 
approves the terms of a programme of co- 
operation with the World Food Programme. The 
projects carried out aim to determine “how far 
food aid can contribute to improving school 
attendance and school results, and . . . facilitate 
adult education, with particular reference to 
literacy campaigns.” There is a connection, recog- 
nized by the United Nations, between food defi- 
ciency, on the one hand, and adult illiteracy and 
absenteeism among schoolchildren, on the other. 
Exact and natural sciences 
® UNESCO supports the launch of ICSU’s 
International Biological Programme. 
® Meeting in Moscow, 22 anthropologists and 
biologists from 16 countries, convoked by 
UNESCO, adopt a 13-point statement on the 
biological aspects of the race question. 
UNESCO's programme of major publications 
on this theme continues (authors include Claude 
Lévi-Strauss, Roger Bastide, Michel Leiris). 
UNESCO publications on race have been trans- 
lated into 16 languages (300,000 copies published). 
® An international conference on youth is held 
at Grenoble (France). 
Communication 
® UNESCO publishes Wilbur Schramm's work 
Mass Media and National Development. 
Events 
MW Jean-Paul Sartre, Martin Heidegger and Karl 
Jaspers participate in an international symposium 
to mark the centenary of the birth of the Danish 
thinker Séren Kierkegaard. 
An aduit functional literacy pliot project In 
Ecuador (19867). 
    
In 1965 UNESCO celebrated the fiftieth 
anniversary of Albert Einstein's general theory of 
relativity. Above, a medal Issued by UNESCO In 
1979 to mark the centenary of Einstein's birth. 
19%) 
General policy 
® In February Indonesia announces its with- 
drawal from UNESCO, but re-establishes rela- 
tions with the Organization before the decision 
comes into effect. 
Education 
W Meeting in Teheran, a World Conference of 
Ministers of Education on the Eradication of 
[literacy endorses the experimental world 
literacy programme carried out by UNESCO (12 
projects co-financed by UNESCO, the United 
Nations and the countries concerned). 
There is wide acceptance of the notion of 
“functional literacy”, which is a departure from 
a conception in which learning to read and write 
is regarded as an end in itself, and closely links 
literacy to the exercise of rights, responsibilities 
and aptitudes in the professional, social, civic and 
cultural fields. 
 
Exact and natural sciences 
 
® A first Regional Conference on the Applica- 
tion of Science and Technology to Development 
(CASTALA) is convened in Santiago, for Latin 
America. Six other conferences of the same type 
will be held until 1986, region by region. 
® The International Hydrological Decade 
(1965-1974), the first of several major inter- 
governmental scientific programmes, is launched. 
This programme co-ordinates research and 
training activities related to the evaluation and 
rational management of water resources in a 
hundred countries. 
® Nature and Resources, UNESCO's quarterly 
review of research on the environment, natural 
resources and the conservation of nature, is 
launched. It is currently published in English, 
French, Spanish, Arabic, Chinese and Russian). 
EEE © a le 2a MS SN TERR 2   Bo HE IR Re TATE HE UE Th We YY ERE Rn Ted nn 
  
T
A
R
 
r
m


Communication 
W In Paris a meeting of experts is held on the use 
of space communication by the mass media, 
including its implications for education and cul- 
tural exchange. This is the first step towards the 
Indian SITE satellite project which will bring 
television to 2,500 villages. 
 
Events 
® A Round Table and a commemorative ceremony 
are held to mark the 700th anniversary of the 
birth of Dante. Among the participants are Ilya 
Ehrenburg, Mary McCarthy and Diego Valeri. 
® J. Robert Oppenheimer, Werner Heisenberg, 
Louis de Broglie and Giorgio Santillana take part 
in a symposium on “Science and Synthesis” 
organized on the tenth anniversary of the deaths 
of Albert Einstein and Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, 
and the fiftieth anniversary of the theory of rela- 
tivity. Other participants include Sir Julian 
Huxley, André Lichnerowicz, Jacques Merleau- 
Ponty, B. M. Kedrov and Alexei Matveyev. 
® The Director-General awards the first Pierre 
de Coubertin International Fair Play Trophy, a 
prize designed to encourage fair play in sport, 
to Italian bobsleigh racer Eugenio Monti. 
Founded at the headquarters of the UNESCO 
Youth Institute at Gauting (Fed. Rep. of Ger- 
many), the International Fair Play Committee 
is accredited to UNESCO in 1976. 
1966 
General policy 
® The United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) is established through merger of the 
United Nations Expanded Programme of Tech- 
nical Assistance (EPTA) and of the United 
Nations Special Fund. The UNDP becomes the 
main contributor to UNESCO's operational 
activities. 
Wm For the first time, the General Conference 
adopts the Organization’s budget unanimously 
($61 million for 1967-1968). 
 
Charles de Gaulle, President 
of the French Republic, gives an address at a 
ceremony held at UNESCO headquarters on 4 
November 1966 to mark the Organization's 
twentieth anniversary. 
Education 
® The Recommendation concerning the Status 
of Teachers is adopted. 
Culture 
® The Declaration of the Principles of Interna- 
tional Cultural Co-operation is adopted. 
® UNESCO contributes to the First World Fes- 
tival of Negro Art, held at Dakar (Senegal). 
® On 2 December, after flood devastation in 
Florence and Venice, Director-General René 
Maheu launches an appeal to international 
solidarity. An exhibition is later held at 
UNESCO of flood-damaged carved panels by 
Donatello and Ghiberti from the Baptistery in 
Florence. 
 
Communication 
BW A meeting of specialists is held in Bangkok on 
broadcasting in the service of education and 
Visitors admire exhibits during the 1966 Festival 
of Negro Art in Dakar (Senegal). 
  
 development in Asia, leading eventually to the 
establishment of a number of national and 
regional institutes for the development of com- 
munications. 
 
Events 
® On 4 November, Charles de Gaulle, President 
of the French Republic, visits UNESCO on the 
occasion of its twentieth anniversary. “France 
feels an exceptional sympathy for your work,” he 
says, “because its purpose is to serve human 
1967 
Education 
B® The first International Literacy Day is 
celebrated, and will be subsequently celebrated 
each year on 8 September. 
Wm The first four literacy pilot projects (Algeria, 
Ecuador, Iran, Mali) financed by UNESCO and 
UNDP are launched. 
® The first Conference of Ministers of Educa- 
tion for the European region (Minedeurop) is 
held in Vienna. 
® Publication of Wilbur Schramm's The new 
media: memo to educational planners, an analysis 
of the experimental use of television and other 
non-traditional teaching techniques in several 
developing countries. 
 
Social sciences 
Wm A Statement on race and racial prejudice is pre- 
pared by a group of experts as part of 
UNESCO's programme to make known the 
scientific facts about race and to combat racial 
prejudice. 
mA UNESCO report is published on the effects 
of Apartheid on Education, Science, Culture and 
Information in South Africa. 
REE T0 BE CONTINUED 
a UM i  1  
