¿¿
A mirror for childhood
In the cinema, children seek an image of their own condition
lYlosT films about the young portray
childhood as a perpetual act of defiance
directed at the indifference and contempt of
the adult world. On screen, two camps-
children and grown-upsconfront one
another, though with occasional attempts at
reconciliation and understanding. The young¬
sters must struggle constantly to have their
rights and status recognized.
To understand why, one must go back to
events that predate the invention of cinema.
According to the French historian Philippe
by François Valet
Above, a scene from 300 mil do nieba,
a film by the Polish director Maciej Dejczer.
Ariès, "A considerable change in manners
took place from the end of the seventeenth
century".1 Previously children had lived in
the heart of the community. They learned
from teachers or from tradesmen or master
craftsmen to whom they were apprenticed,
sharing their work and worries but also the
world of the imagination, festivals and games.
Compare this fluid world of free exchange
and shared identity with the current situation,
in which children are pigeon-holed into school
and the family unit. Our century has seen 43

adults lose childhood from their lives, and
with it has gone a part of their soulsmaybe
the most important one.
Because of the wall that now separates
childhood from the adult world, children have
become mysterious to their elders, incompre¬
hensible, almost alien creatures. The result is
that young people have turned to cinema to
find their own self-image. Adults who wish
to help them must first break down the walls
separating the two communities.
Lonely and
misunderstood
Usually it is within the family unitwhat we
now call the "nuclear family"that children's
alienation becomes most disturbingly
apparent. Their isolation is dramatically
reflected in such works as François Truffaut's
Les Quatre Cents Coups (France, 1959) and
Robert Benton's Kramer versus Kramer
(U.S.A., 1979), which depict the effects of a
broken marriage. The children in these films
are truly "misunderstood", to borrow the title
of Luigi Comencini's masterpiece Incompreso
(Italy, 1966).
Another class of film depicts children
struggling against the established order at
school or in other institutions that prove
incapable of meeting their emotional demands.
These children are often shown trapped in a
kind of limbo, cut off from an adult world that
they cannot share and with which they are not
even able to identify.
Feeling unloved, they are tempted to
make a getaway which brings them a brief
taste of freedom. Sometimes they run away
to find a father figure. A similar quest provides
the plot of Jacques Doillon's Le Petit Criminel
(France, 1990), though in that case the search
is for an elder sister whom the main character
has never seen. Whatever their object, these
childhood odysseys can be alarming, as the
two young Polish protagonists of Marcel
Dejczer's 300 mil do nieba (Poland, 1990) find
out to their cost.
Children of institutions and the nuclear
family, all these rebels reject the persona
imposed on them by the adult world via
changes in social customs. Because the condi¬
tion of childhood as we now know it is a
product of the familya purely adult
inventionchildren in response feel the need
to invent themselves, to create their own
image. In this respect, cinema becomes not so
much a mirror of childhood as the search for
a mirror, in which the child's true quest is to
discover him- or herself.
44
Four scenes from recent films
about children.
Above: Pixote, directed by
Hector Babenco.
Below, left: Halfaouine,
l'enfant des terrasses,
directed by Ferid Boughedir.
Above, right: Salaam Bombay,
directed by Mira Nair.
Below, right: Incompreso,
directed by Luigi Comencini.
Street children
Early on, cinema found a spokesmanperhaps
"role-model" would be a better word, for



there is not much speaking in most scenes
where the young confront the adult world
for all children in the shape of the little vaga¬
bond, Charlie Chaplin's companion in The
Kid (U.S.A., 1921) and the hero of dozens of
later films. Whatever their setting, films seem
to get closest to childhood when they portray
it straightforwardly, without any elaboration.
The child is the simplest and most authentic
of human beings.
From The Kid to Charles Lane's Sidewalk
Story (U.S.A., 1990)a silent film made in
black and white that treats the same theme of
abandoned children helped by a down-and-
outa horde of homeless children have
paraded across the screen. The successors of
yesterday's little vagabonds now roam the
alleys of Third World megalopolises like
Bombay, Bahia or Sao Paulo in such films as
Ciro Duran's Los Gamines (Colombia, 1978),
Hector Babenco's Pixote (Brazil, 1980), and
Mira Nair's Salaam Bombay (India, 1988).

These films could hardly be further from
the cheery Hollywood comedies of the years
from 1930 to 1950, in which tiny troupers,
their heads haloed with curls, filled the screen
with their carefree capers. This was the time
when Shirley Temple, Judy Garland and
Mickey Rooney were turning out film after
film. Only a few exceptional productions
dating from this period still captivate audiences
today, notably Victor Fleming's unforgettable
Wizard of Oz (U.S.A., 1948), Charles
Laughton's Night ofthe Hunter (U.S.A., 1955)
and Fritz Lang's Moonfleet (U.S.A., 1955).
In the 1960s and 1970s, the cinema reacted
against the angelic image of a protected child¬
hood and instead made children the focal point
of a number of horror movies. Such films
established the point that the simplistic schema
by which childhood equalled good and the
adult world evil was outdated. Once the
images of innocence, children now became
witches and warlocks, creatures possessed by
Satan or the Antichrist or, in Wolf Rilla's Vil¬
lage of the Damned (United Kingdom, 1960),
dangerous mutants.
The Hollywood ideal of childhood was
just as far away when the young were depicted
in the heat of battle in Viet Nam, the Second



World War or elsewhere. The paradise-garden
of childhood was spattered with blood in such
works as René Clement's Jeux Interdits
(France, 1951) and Steven Spielberg's Empire
of the Sun (U.S.A., 1987).
Nor have films shrunk from confronting
children with the facts of life. Frerid Bough-
edir's Halfaouine, l'enfant des terrasses (Tunisia,
1990) treats the subject of sexuality with tact
and discretion. The shadow of death and its
effect on the film's young protagonists is the
theme of La fracture du myocarde by Jacques
Fansten (France, 1991). Children also serve as
witnesses counting the costs of racial prejudice
and segregation in such films as Louis Malle's
Au revoir, les enfants (France, 1987), The
Kitchen Toto by Harry Hook (U.S.A./U.K.,
1988) and Andrzej Wajda's Korczak (Poland,
1991).
The anti-hero
of the late 20th century
In most of the films mentioned above, the child,
in Truffaut's words, "invents life, knocks up
against it, but at the same time develops
powers of resistance." But children can also,
by a subtle role-reversal, watch over adults,
acting as their guide and protector. The child
thereby becomes father to the man, as Pinoc-
chio does when he pulls Geppetto from the
belly of the whale in Comencini's Adventures
ofPinocchio (Italy, 1972), or' in Cuore (Italy,
1984) when Rabucco takes his illiterate father
to school.
Throughout its history, the cinema has
shown us, in the most truthful way, childhood
as a state of exposure. Confronting real
dangers, accepting challenges and fighting
injustice, the child is the anti-hero of the
closing years of the century. There is nothing
of Rambo or Mad Max here. Children's
strength and resources lie in demonstrating the
sensitivity and intelligence of which they are
capable. The main reward, as ever, is a place
in the adult world.
For children have one formidable weapon:
their sense of humour, or to be more precise,
the unspoiled impertinence that is their most
characteristic quality. Long may the cinema
portray it. For even when so many films set
^ out to destroy the last illusions concerning
childhood, even though it may irritate over-
serious adults, the impertinence of childhood
remains our best guarantee of a different
future.
1. L'enfant et la vie defamille sous l'Ancien Régime,
Seuil, Paris, 1973.
FRANÇOIS VALLET
is a French novelist whose work focuses on the
condition of children and young people today. He
is the author of an essay on the image of the
child in the cinema (Cerf publishers, Paris, 1991). 45
