Citizens who
help themselves
by Jorge E. Hardoy and David Satterthwaite
To provide
themselves with
shelter, low-
income families
in Third World
cities often have
to take the law
into their own
hands
SOME 1,300 million people today live in the
cities of the Third World, an urban population
larger than that of Europe, North America and
Japan combined. Over the next ten years this
figure is likely to grow by around 500 million.
While governments and aid agencies discuss
strategies, the population of cities such as Karachi
and Bombay will grow by over 300,000 a year,
that of Sâo Paulo by over 400,000 a year, and that
of Mexico City Metropolitan Area by over
500,000 a year. Tens of thousands of small urban
centres will also experience rapid population
growth.
Despite enormous differences between the
societies, cultures and economies which build and
shape them, these cities are becoming more
similar in appearance today than they were
during colonial times when they were founded
although in many of them life is still shaped by
a strong colonial legacy in the form of legal
systems, institutions, land ownership patterns,
tenancy systems and poorly developed structures
of local government. Since the 1950s, a combi¬
nation of a rapidly growing low-income popula¬
tion and a scarcity of government investment in 17

Below, SuperBarrio, the
masked defender of victims of
the 1985 earthquake that left
over 300,000 people
homeless In Mexico City. This
colourful character, a self-
appointed champion of
popular causes, leads
demonstrations and
campaigns In support of the
homeless who are fighting to
obtain housing credits from
the authorities.
construction and maintenance has produced
urban forms that look increasingly alike. Third
World cities in different continents have many
common features, Including the intensity of their
street life and the dense use of space in their cen¬
tral districts and in most residential areas.
Most people who live in Third World cities
cannot afford a conventional house or apartment.
They buy, build or rent housing in the illegal set¬
tlements which surround the pockets of official,
legal architecture and are spreading to ever
growing distances from city centres. Many of the
things they do contravene laws or regulations
relating to shelter, work and even the food and
water they consume and the medical services they
use. They cannot afford to obtain these facilities
legally.
Most illegal settlements are built by the
people who live in them. Virtually all of them
are dusty, densely populated, without trees,
lacking paved roads, adequate supplies of water,
drains, and even schools and rudimentary health
centres. Dwellings which outside observers may
call a shanty town provide a home for between
CUITO
iE
18
a third and two-thirds of the inhabitants of most
Third World cities.
Government strategies
and people's needs
Until relatively recently, the transformation of
cities has usually been determined by powerful
men and technocrats whose actions were sup¬
ported by only a small minority of society. Many
of the assumptions used to justify the decisions
of these rulers have been unrelated to society's
needs, disguised under pretensions of a long-range
view of future national and urban development.
Rulers have been known to reshape cities and
order the eviction of tens of thousands of fami¬
lies to "beautify" the more visible districts. Such
examples of the divorce between the basic needs
of a society and the grand strategies of a ruler
abound in the history of urbanism.
Many "new cities" in the Third World have
been planned according to Western norms and

Above, modern apartment
blocks overlook makeshift
shelters In Bombay (India).
fashions and built parallel to existing indigenous
cities with long histories. They have drawn little
from the culture and society in which they were
implanted, and their avowed purpose of
separating the rich and powerful from the poor
majority reveals the elitist principles on which
they were based.
Poor people's needs have too often been
ignoredwhether in planned or unplanned cities,
new cities or projects to expand old cities.
Although it is often suggested that the policies
and expenditures of governments and aid agen¬
cies have an "urban bias", very few of the urban
poor benefit from it. Burglaries, muggings and
the ransacking of supermarkets and pharmacies
have become more common, as the price of food
and medicine rises far more rapidly than incomes.
Recession and economic crisis are the reasons
usually cited to justify neglect of the basic needs
of the poor. In earlier decades too it was said that
meeting this goal should be postponed until the
economy was performing more successfully.
Why urban problems deserve
s more attention
If current trends continue, the majority of Third
World city-dwellers will go on leading lives of
privation, millions will die prematurely every
year, and hundreds of millions will continue to
suffer from ill health or disablement, most of
which could be prevented with a very modest
outlay. Hundreds of millions will be deprived of
dignity if they are unable to obtain the credits
and resources to allow them to acquire a home
and enhance their own living conditions and, in
so doing, encourage their incorporation into the
social and economic life of each nation as full
citizens.
Urban problems also deserve more attention
because city-dwellers will play a vital role in the
political future of Third World nations.
Hundreds of millions of urban people want to
participate fully in the political lives of their coun¬
tries. The alternative between democracy and 19

20
dictatorship will be largely determined in the
cities.
Urban centres have important economic
functions, although these are often misunder¬
stood. Urban workforces and enterprises make a
substantial contribution to nations' Gross
Domestic Product (GDP)usually a far higher
share than the proportion of the population living
in cities. Much of this economic dynamism draws
heavily on what outsiders have labelled the
"informal" or "black" economy. Informal activi¬
ties constitute the sole source of income for tens
of millions of urban households in Africa, Asia
and Latin America.
One reason why government policies for
managing urban growth and improving living
conditions have achieved such poor results is that
governments do not properly understand how
cities function, how needy individuals and house¬
holds earn an income, how different social groups
use their time, and how the family and commu¬
nity organizations can play a role. Human lives
will not be saved and health will not be improved
if most government funds are spent on expanding
bureaucracies while leaving hospitals and health
centres without basic equipment and supplies.
If governments were to adopt new
approaches, basic needs could be met at relatively
low cost. Water supplies, provision for sanitation,
drainage and garbage collection, street paving,
health care systems and the like can be provided
cheaply and effectively if local knowledge, skills
and resources are used, and municipal govern¬
ments work in partnership with low-income
groups and their community organizations. The
channelling of more resources to meet the needs
of poorer groups does not necessarily imply a
diversion of funds from rural to urban areas but
rather a better use of existing resources.
The city of the future
The future cities of the Third World will be very
different from those we have known and thought
we understood. They will be different not only
in size but also in cultural values, codes of con¬
duct and in age and labour structures. There will
be massive numbers of children and adolescents
in virtually all of them, at least in the next two
decades. This will bring to urban life a mixture of
aggressiveness and solidarity, of expectations and
frustrations which only a new style of leadership
and governance can channel towards the develop¬
ment of more equitable places for all to live.
There is clearly a need to develop new forms
of local government within new processes of
decentralization and democratization. Metropo¬
litan governments or new types of city-region
governments are also needed for the larger
Right, In the shanty town of
Mezquital, 13 km from
Guatemala City, 25,000
peasant families are crowded
Into corrugated Iron and
cardboard shacks. Above,
election of delegates to the
neighbourhood association
responsible for seeking legal
title to land occupied at
Colonia de La Nueva
Esperanza, the most heavily
populated district of
Mezquital.
JORGE E. HARDOY,
Argentine architect and urban
planner, is president of the
International Institute for
Environment and Development
in Buenos Aires (IIED-AL) and
of the National Commission for
Historic Monuments in
Argentina. He has written
widely on both historical and
contemporary urban issues.
DAVID SATTERTHWAITE,
British historian and
development planner, is a
researcher who works with
NED in Buenos Aires and in
London. He has published
several books with Jorge E.
Hardoy, including Squatter
Citizen: Life in the Urban Third
World (Earthscan Publications,
London, 1989) and The Poor
Die Young: Housing and Health
in Third World Cities (edited
with Sandy Cairncross,
Earthscan, forthcoming).

agglomerations. One priority is to redefine the
scope of current legislation which at present
deems illegal hundreds of millions of squatters,
informal workers and traders.
Decision-makers must accept that their
projects should be guided by the priorities of low-
income citizens and implemented under their
supervision. Power, resources and trained per¬
sonnel should be decentralized in a new collabora¬
tive framework so that local government can
respond directly to demands from low-income
neighbourhoods. Of course city and national
governments must provide a broad planning
framework. Such a framework does not imply
a diminution in the role of government, but a
different rolemore developmental, more
activist, more decentralized and more represen¬
tative. The unco-ordinated efforts of dozens of
local governments and hundreds of community
organizations would produce chaos in any city
for transport planning and major infrastructure
investments.
The 1990s are beginning with global discus¬
sions of common causes. Sustainable development
with a priority to protecting the global commons
is receiving most attention. These discussions are
encouraged by the ending of the Cold War and
detailed discussions about nuclear disarmament.
But how long will peace be possible and how can
environmental degradation be avoided in regions
where there is mass poverty? Let us hope that the
1990s will concentrate on saving human lives,
eliminating easily preventable suffering and dis¬
ease and restoring dignity to the lives of the many
millions who live in poverty. This should be the
first goal of sustainable development.
21
