the spknàur of the pyramids
by Gérard Bolla
44
jTew groups of great monuments blend so
well with their natural surroundings as the
pyramids of Giza. At night beneath a canopy
of stars, or in the blinding light of the desert
in daytime, the pyramids rise, impressive and
alone in a world of rock and sand. Those who
built this royal necropolis long ago clearly
intended it to be a haven of peace, isolation,
and silence.
The tranquillity of the archaeological site
is today threatened by a rash of uncontrolled
building development, and the plateau is being
taken over by tourist coaches and amenities.
Some promoters have even envisaged making
golf courses and artificial lakes for pleasure
boats. In short, there is a risk that one of
the wonders of the world may lose its
splendour owing to the anarchic growth of
tourism.
To prevent this from happening and to
restore serenity to the plateau, the Egyptian
Minister of Culture, Farouk Hosny, has
decided to take a number of measures.
Access to the plateau, today open to all, will

UNESCO
be strictly controlled, as is the case with almost
all historic monuments elsewhere in the
world;
The modern buildings which have been con¬
structed near the site over the years, contrary
to the advice of architects, will be demolished.
Also scheduled for demolition is the structure
which houses the famous royal boat of
pharaoh Khufu and which disfigures one side
of the Great Pyramid near which it was exca¬
vated. The boat will of course not be removed
until all the necessary technical precautions
have been taken to prevent damage to this
fragile masterpiece;
The tarmac roads, whose colour clashes with
that of the site, will be replaced by roads made
of solidified sand;
Motor traffic, a source of noise and pollu¬
tion which damages the stone of the monu-
IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
ments, will be prohibited. Archaeologists and
service staff will use electric vehicles;
Unsupervised animals such as dogs and goats
which harm the monuments and discourage
visitors will be prohibited;
Bridle paths will be designed to provide spec¬
tacular views for visitors on camel and horse¬
back. They will also make it easier to keep the
site free of litter;
Also in the interests of tourists and visitors,
the area set aside beneath the Sphinx for son
et lumière shows will be extended. This area
will be lowered so as to improve the view of
the Sphinx and the pyramids from the eastern
access road to the plateau;
As is the case with other historic monu¬
ments, revenue from visitors will contribute
to the conservation of the irreplaceable
heritage left by the ancient Egyptians;
The existing buffer zone will be defined
more clearly and improved both aesthetically
and functionally, so as to provide a better view
of the monuments and to respect the dignity
of the site. The cafeteria to the east of the
pyramids will disappear.
It is clearly necessary that the plateau
of Giza should be fenced off to channel
the movement of visitorsat least in the
part which is accessible to everyone. Incon¬
spicuous light fencing would be quite suitable
for this.
Anyone who has ever marvelled at the
mysterious silhouette of the Sphinx and the
majestic mass of the pyramids as they suddenly
come into view from behind a sand dune will
appreciate the importance of safeguarding
their timeless splendour.
GÉRARD BOLLA, Swiss jurist and economist, is a
former Assistant Director-General of UNESCO.
From 1971 to 1981 he was in charge of UNESCO's
programme for the conservation of the cultural
heritage, and was notably responsible for archaeo¬
logical safeguard and rescue operations at Philae
(Egypt), Venice, Borobudur and Carthage. He has
served as chairman of an international advisory com¬
mittee of experts on the development project for
the plateau of the pyramids.
