Portuguese navigators made great maritime discoveries, brought
innovations to map-making, and propagated a new geographical
vision of the globe
28
ALFREDO PINHEIRO MARQUES,
of Portugal, is professor of
history at the University of
Coimbra. A specialist in the
cartography of the great
voyages of discovery from the
14th to the 16th centuries, his
most recent publications
include Or/gem e
desenvolvimento da cartografía
portugesa na época dos
descobrimentos (Lisbon, 1988),
and, in English, The Dating of
the Oldest Portuguese Charts
(1989). He is currently
preparing an International
Bibliography on the Discoveries
and Overseas Encounters.
jL/XTRAORDINARY developments in geography
took place in Ancient Greece and the Hellenistic
world. The work of Claudius Ptolemy, the Greek
mathematician and geographer who lived in Alex¬
andria, Egypt, in the second century AD, was a
major landmark in this intellectual enterprise. He
described the projection methods used in cartog¬
raphy and drew the first maps of the world as
it was then known to scholars of the eastern
Mediterranean. This corpus of knowledge disap¬
peared in the West with the barbarian invasions
and was only rediscovered in the late Middle
Ages.
A new type of map, the portolan chart,
appeared in the thirteenth and fourteenth centu¬
ries. Essentially destined for use at sea, its distinc¬
tive feature was a system of rhumb lines, lines
that radiate from a centre in the direction of wind
or compass points. Pilots used these lines to chart
courses which could be followed by compass
navigation and by estimating distances.
The great Mediterranean cartographers at
that time were the Italians (above all the Genoans
and the Venetians), the Catalans and the
Majorcans. The Catalan Atlas, one of the most
famous of its time, is attributed to the school of
Abraham Crescas, a cartographer of Majorcan
origin.
The portolan marked a new departure from
Ptolemaic cartography, which was exclusively ter¬
restrial, accepted the sphericity of the Earth, and
even represented the world by a system of projec¬
tion of latitudes and longitudes, but only showed
Europe, the Mediterranean, the Near East and
North Africa. The Indian Ocean was a closed sea
and the configuration of Asia was purely
speculative.
Throughout the fifteenth century, long
before the voyages of Christopher Columbus, it
was the Portuguese who opened up the era of
great transoceanic voyages by undertaking a
D
-\ h r * *CH\\>
*
systematic reconnaissance of the west coast of
Africa and the Atlantic islands. Courage was at a
premium in these early voyages, which were not
associated with any decisive technical innovation.
The Portuguese had learned from the Majorcans
the techniques of nautical cartography, and their
maps resembled the Mediterranean portolans.
Navigation by the stars began to be practised
by the Portuguese in the second half of the
fifteenth century, during thé reign of John II.
This new method made it possible to establish
a ship's position in relation to the height of stars
on the horizon and thus to sail far out to sea.

% q«*' 'Jfm
i
i bilDilh..!/
The Catalan Atlas of 1375 Is
attributed to the school of the
Majorcan scholar Abraham
Crescas. Drawn on leaves of
parchment glued to wooden
boards, It Is the oldest
surviving European map to
show the world extending as
far eastwards as China.
Cartographically speaking, it led to the introduc¬
tion into the portolan of a graduated meridian
which gave the latitude. This was a major con¬



tribution by the Portuguese to the techniques of
navigation and cartography.
The scale of latitudes found on Ptolemaic
maps was unusable at sea. In the Mediterranean
sailors did not stray far from the shoreline. The
Portuguese navigators found new solutions to the
new problems posed by ocean navigation. They
took aboard and adapted to nautical use, astro¬
nomical instruments, notably the astrolabe,
which were already known to the Arabs.
By opening up the way to the great maritime
discoveries at the beginning of the fifteenth cen¬
tury, the Portuguese inventors of astronomical
navigation propagated a new geographical vision
of the globe which was taken up by the other
European cartographic schools.
Many Portuguese cartographers worked in
other lands and spies were common in Lisbon.
The findings of Bartolomeu Dias, the Portuguese
navigator who had become the first man to sail
around Africa, can be seen in a map drawn in
Italy in 1489only a year after Dias' exploit-
by the German cartographer Henricus Martellus.
Later, an Italian agent named Camino took into
his pay a Portuguese royal cartographer, who
passed on to him an anonymous map which was
sent to Italy. Known as the "Camino Map", it
is still preserved at Modena.
The Cantino Map is possibly the most impor¬
tant map in the history of cartography. The first
known planisphere, it gives an almost complete
image of the world. It presents in recognizable
form the New World, Africa, India and a rough
Ptolemy's world map from
the Latin edition of his
Geographla published In Ulm,
1482.
29

Martin Waldseemüller's world
map of 1507. This was the
first map on which the New
World was named "America",
in honour of the Italian
navigator Amerigo Vespucci,
who Is shown (top right) with
Ptolemy.
outline of the Far East. The only map which can
be compared to it is the Spanish map of
Christopher Columbus's pilot, Juan de La Cosa,
which depicts the islands and coasts of central
Americaalthough Africa is very roughly drawn
and Asia is quite imaginary.



The geographical discoveries of the Por¬
tuguese and the Spaniards made a decisive con¬
tribution to the renewal of Ptolemaic cartography,
which was itself revolutionary in comparison with
the maps produced in medieval monasteries. But
information derived from the voyages of dis¬
covery had to be incorporated into Ptolemaic car¬
tography and this took time. The humanists who
were reviving Ptolemaic geography through the
spread of printing and the navigators who were
actually making the discoveries were separated by
different traditions of thoughtthe former scho¬
larly, the latter empiricalwhich did not facili¬
tate communication.
After 1490, there was a long gap before
the publication of new editions of Ptolemy's
Geographia. The reasons are not hard to find. In
1488, Dias sailed round the southern Cape of
Africa, in 1492 Columbus sailed to America, and
in 1498 Vasco da Gama arrived in India.
Ptolemy's work was not republished until 1507,
with new "modern" maps which take account
of the Portuguese and Spanish voyages.
In the early sixteenth century, the Spaniards
occupied central America, but the Portuguese
were present in many parts of the world: in India
(1498), Newfoundland and South America (1500),
in Persia, at Hormuz (1507), in Indonesia and
China (1513), and in Japan (around 1542). Most
of the maps printed in Europe in the sixteenth
century were based on surveys made by Por¬
tuguese navigators, the age's leading suppliers of
geographical information.
This knowledge was propagated by the
humanists, aided by the development of printing,
and paradoxically it was in Italy and northern
Europe that the new cartography inspired by the
Portuguese emerged. The map showing the New
World which appeared in 1507 in the expanded
edition of Ptolemy's Geographia was by Johan
Ruysch. Another edition of the same work
produced at Strasbourg in 1513 with maps by
Martin Waldseemüller circulated widely. In 1507
Waldseemüller published a map on which the
word "America" appeared for the first time, and
in 1516 an important planisphere, Carta Marina
Navigatoria Portugallensium. . ,
Dominated in the fourteenth and fifteenth "
centuries by the Italians and the Catalans, cartog¬
raphy thus had its golden age at the Renaissance
under the impulsion of the Portuguese. Then
came the turn of the Dutch, who systematized
the use of printing and introduced such innova¬
tions as Mercator's projection, the basis of
modern cartography.
But the Dutch cartographers developed their
work throughout the sixteenth century through
contact with the Portuguese. The projection
devised by Gerard Mercator is an application of
the theoretical principles set forth much earlier
by the Portuguese mathematician and astronomer
Pedro Nunes.
30
-yylir. ->v>i
