M ÙMS LONELY M)
70
I he pearls described in sixth-century-BC Sin¬
ghalese and Indian literature and the sponges
mentioned by Homer and Hippocrates must have
been fished by divers. The oldest unequivocal
reference to diving is in book sixteen of the
Iliad, in which Patroclus gives the following
description of the Trojan Cebhones whom he
has just hit with a stone and knocked from his
chariot: "Ha! Quite an acrobat, I see, judging
by that graceful dive! The man who takes so neat
a header from a chariot on land could dive for
oysters from a ship at sea in any weather and
fetch up plenty for a feast. I did not know the
Trojans had such divers." Thucydides and other
historians of Antiquity also describe how divers
managed to take enemy fleets by surprise.
The first skin divers certainly lived in parts
of the world such as the east Mediterranean and
Polynesia and on the shores of the Yellow Sea
in southeast Asia where there was a combina¬
tion of several favourable factors for diving,
including relatively calm seas, Clearwater, and
a temperature enabling divers to stay in the
water for a reasonable time.
Until the end of the Renaissance diving was
limited in time (by lung capacity) and depth (by
visibility). From the time of the Roman author
Vegetius in the fifth century to that of Leonardo
da Vinci in the fifteenth, people thought of con¬
necting the diver to the surface by means of
an air tube, but attempts to do so came to
nothing since certain principles of hydrostatics
(the branch of mechanics which deals with the
equilibrium of fluids) were only established by
Pascal in the seventeenth century. It then
became known that an underwater swimmer
breathing through a tube linked to the surface
needs to exert a force greater than the water
pressure in order to inhale. The human respira¬
tory muscles are weak. Two metres underwater
the effort to inhale is very tiring, and impossible
any deeper.
Nevertheless, experiments with diving bells
were carried out during this period. These bell-
shaped hulls open to the water at the bottom
were modelled on saucepans or on the urns
containing air which Roman divers placed on
the seabed, with the mouth facing downwards,
and used to supply themselves with air.
BELLS AND CAISSONS
In 1690, Edmond Halley invented a method of
renewing the air inside the diving bell from
barrels lowered to the seabed.
Taking up an idea formulated a hundred
years before by Denis Papin, the English
engineer John Smeaton (1 724- 1 792) went one
step further when he fitted a pump to the bell
in order to provide it with fresh air from a ship
on the surface.
But diving bells were heavy, unwieldy, and
difficult to use. A diver has to breathe air at the
surrounding water pressure, the inflow of air
must be sufficient to keep him or her supplied
with oxygen, and carbon dioxide must be elimi¬
nated so that it is not reinhaled.
Early in the nineteenth century, the German
engineer Augustus Siebe took the decisive step
of providing the diver with a "bell" tailored to
his own sizea diving suit in which the diver
was equipped with a copper helmet with port¬
holes, and supplied with compressed air
pumped from the surface. The supply of air was
continuous, and excess air escaped through the
edge of the helmet below the chin. By 1837
Siebe had developed an improved model with
a valve which let air out without letting water in.
Inventers next tried to make an autono¬
mous diving suit which would free divers from
the need to be in contact with the surface and
enable them to move about more easily.
Borelli (1680), Fréminet (1776), Forfait
(1783), Klingberg (1796) and de Drieberg with
the Triton (1811) had already tried to construct
apparatus of this kind, in which the diver
breathed through the mouth by means of a tube
connected to a container carried on his back
and caused the air to circulate by activating a
bellows with movements of the head.
Further improvements were added by W.H.
James (1825-1828) and then by Condert, who
designed a system for adjusting the supply of
compressed air, a primitive regulator and a free
escape system for surplus air. Cabirol improved
this apparatus even further in 1885.
SCUBA DIVING
In 1860, a French mining engineer, Benoît Rou-
quayrol, and a naval officer, Auguste Denay-
rouze, made a decisive improvement to the
diving suit when they invented a regulator, a
valve which provides air at a pressure equal to
the prevailing water pressure.
In 1864, a swimmer equipped with a gas
regulator supplied by a pump on the surface
could thus easily move around up to 40 metres
down.
In the following year, these brilliant
inventors devised a system for providing the air
supply directly from a container carried on the
diver's back. This was the birth of modern
SCUBA (self-contained underwater breathing
apparatus) diving.
Divers could now operate for up to half an
hour at a depth of ten metres without any link
with the surface. The apparatus was outstand¬
ingly successful. Jules Verne understood its
potential immediately and equipped Captain
Nemo and his men with it in Twenty Thousand
Leagues under the Sea.
Source: Revue de la Fondation Océanographique
Ricard, No. 7, 1984.
Right, "Got a spanner?"
Mechanics adjust a diver's
helmet (1927). Middle,
Halley's diving bell (17th
century). Top, diving hood
designed by the Roman writer
Vegetius (5th century AD).
A*à Jï
