Doing what comes naturally
A child at play is the toy of nature
In a temple of Angkor
(Cambodia), children play with
coloured pebbles on a grid
pattern traced out on a flat
stone.
VJHILDREN reveal an instinct for freedom in
everything they do, but especially when they
play. Everyone knows how much they love to
play and how completely engrossed they become
in games. For them, playing is what life is all
about, and they give themselves up to it whole¬
heartedly. This is something adults find hard to
understand.
Children experience an immediate psycholog-
22
ical need which is expressed as "I want...", and
adults cannot always persuade them to suppress
it or at least to wait for a while. Children feel
the same kind of urge to play: "I want to
play.. ..let me go out to play!" A refusal will lead
to conflict. Children also protest when adults try
to get them to stop playing, even if only for a
moment, so difficult do they find it at such times
to give attention to anything else.
The need to play does not cease when children
go to school, but adults attempt to channel it
towards learning and homework. Parents know
only too well that they will never have to force
their children to play, although persuading them
to study is a daily chore. The time-honoured for¬
mula is, of course, "First do your homework, then
you can go and play!" This kind of bargain is
struck in virtually every family, but is it a good
thing?
There is no clear-cut answer to this question.
If children are subjected to authoritarian pressures
at school, then parents, unversed in the subtle¬
ties of child psychology, also have to use their
authority at home in order to influence them. But
the motivation to learn goes askew when children
study not to acquire knowledge and get ahead,
but to win the right to play, to engage in an
activity they prefer.
The impulse to play
In children the course of development is very
intense. Nature itself is expressed through them.
At any given moment, some function or other
becomes dominant, pushing the child towards a
form of activity that offers it the fullest scope.
The foremost of these activities is play.
Hence children have good reasons for
playing, which owe more to internal stimuli than
to the environment. It is not the ball that asks
the child to play with it, but the the child's inner
functions that are looking for something that will


make it possible to satisfy an immediate develop¬
mental need.
The rules of the game
Children at play are free, even when there are rules
to be observed. Achild who does not abide by them
will soon be excluded by the other children: "Go
away", they'll say, "you're breaking the rules".
Children are thus free to choose whether or not to
play but, having joined in, they immediately lose
their freedom of action since they have to play
by the rules and not as they might have preferred.
In fact children are happy to comply with the
rules of a game and don't like to see them being
broken. They need rules and willingly submit to
them from the age of four or five. Their capaci¬
ties are pushed to the limit when they seek to
overcome the difficulties of a game. The tension
created gives the child a huge emotional pleasure
and is all part of the fun.
Game of skill (Afghanistan).
23

When the functions expressed through play
reach saturation point, they are switched off for
a while. Children stop playing and put aside their
toys. They stop as easily as they started. It is
usually a waste of time trying to persuade them
to continue. A moment ago they were fully
immersed in a game, now they're no longer
interested in it. Yet they may well go on directly
to another game or another kind of activity under
the influence of another set of functions.
When children want to play, the choice of
game is no small matter. They must choose the
game or toy themselves, and they will play until
the desire to do so has gone. An old and stub¬
born psychological theory has it that children
release surplus energy in the course of play. But
where do they find this surplus energy? And why
should it be released for no obvious reason? No,

nature does not create surplus energy, but just
what is needed to develop the functions which
will in turn sustain the individual's capacities for
work, creative endeavour and all the other activi¬
ties of adult life.
To forbid games and oppose the free expres¬
sion of the child's natural functions (and of his
or her potential abilities and skills) would be tan¬
tamount to interfering with the process of self-
realization, to opposing the play of nature itself.
Parents concerned about their child's progress
at school, or seeking to develop a special talent,
may succeed in excluding play from his or her
life. Is such a "far-sighted" policy conducive to
the formation of the child's personality and self-
fulfilment? The few known exceptions, such as
Mozart, whose father locked him in his room as
a child and made him study music for hours on
end, merely confirm the general rule. It will never
be known how many people have been irremedi¬
ably damaged through being thus prevented from
giving expression to the free play of nature during
their childhood.
A serious business
For children playing is not a way of shirking
difficulties or making things easier for themselves.
Adults should not assume that children play
games just for fun, as a means of avoiding
"serious" activities. We have all heard parents
complain: "All they think about is playing, they
never open a book, they don't want to learn any¬
thing!" Teachers sometimes complain to parents
that their children spend all their time playing
Below, miniature football in
Tombouctou (Mali).

Top, Shanghai children mime
a fencing match with wooden
swords.
Above, children at play In
northern Russia.
SHALVA AMONASHVILI
is a Soviet pyschologist. The
author of a series of popular
works on child development,
he is an active member of the
Academy of Pedagogical
Sciences of the USSR and
Director-General of an
educational research
association.
in class, never listen, never do what they are told.
But all that parents can do to influence their chil¬
dren is tell them off, lay down the law or punish
them. It is open to question whether such
methods ever achieve anything from the educa¬
tional point of view.
Of course children should not be allowed to
spend all their time playing while adults stand by
waiting for them to have had enough. Yet it has
to be recognized that children have a natural
instinct to play and that is essential for their
balanced development that they do so.
Nature bequeaths to children not only abili¬
ties, skills and functions, but also a wise internal
"instructor" responsible for directing their
activity and their development. The fact is that
since man took his first steps a million years ago
until the present so-called civilized age, nature has
not entrusted, and will perhaps never be able to
entrust, human beings to the care of parents and
teachers alone. Adults responsible for bringing
up children need to understand the role of play
in development so that they can create the
material and spiritual conditions whereby the
natural abilities of children can be freely expressed
and they can find self-fulfilment.
If more adults knew how to play with chil¬
dren, all would be well. Unfortunately, children's
games tend to disturb us, distracting us from what
we are doing and demanding that we assume a
more active educational role. Children have an
innate curiosity for things and will not wait for
someone to come along and oblige them to learn.
They want to know everything, but for this they
need to have well-developed cognitive powers.
I always assess the educational process by the
extent to which it shapes the growing child's per¬
sonality. I am of course in favour of a humanist
education, a pedagogy of co-operation that can
be instrumental in moulding the personality. And
I have analysed the psychology of play in order
to identify those aspects crucial to the develop¬
ment of a child's internal functions: freedom to
choose an activity and scope for exercising the
will.
The pitfalls of education
through play
It is fashionable today to claim that play is the
chief means by which children learn. Perhaps this
is a reaction to authoritarian methods of teaching.
But we should be wary of the pitfalls of educa¬
tion through play, because the longer that chil¬
dren are kept from serious study, the more
difficult they will find it later on. The primary
goal of education should be to make serious
things interesting.
Play alone does not result in the full develop¬
ment of children. Allowing children freedom to
play does not mean that they should be cons¬
tantly entertained or their every whim gratified.
Admittedly, play serves as a foundation for the
development of individuals who are useful to
themselves and to society, but lessons should be
serious and it is their very seriousness that should
engross children. This kind of seriousness does
not thwart their desires, but forcing them to be
serious might do so.
In order to learn, children should have a
feeling of free choice and of self-respect. If this can
be achieved they will not have to be coaxed with
promises of games or amusements. A serious
approach, respectful of the developing personality,
will be most likely to engage their attention and
help them come to terms with the complex
problems of learning, morals and behaviour. 25
