When mapping became a science
by Norman J, Thrower
Modern scientific
cartography was
born in eighteenth-
century Europe
D,
Above, frontispiece of the 4th
edition (Amsterdam, 1619) of
the Atlas of Gerard Mercator
(Gerard de Cremer). Mercator
Is shown at left and the
geographer Jodocus Hondius
at right.
'URING the eighteenth century, France
became the leader in topographic or general map¬
ping. The foundations of this achievement were
laid in the preceding century when the
astronomer Giovanni Domenico Cassini
(1625-1712) came from Bologna to the newly-
founded Paris Observatory. Through Cassini and
his successors France became the first country to
produce a detailed and accurate map of its national
territory in multiple sheets, based on triangula¬
tion, and using uniform symbols for roads, set¬
tlements, forests, rivers, and other features. A first
step was the accurate measurement of the length
of a degreeof latitude near Paris where mapping
was begun.
After the death of his father, the survey of
France was continued by Jacques Cassini
(1677-1756) under whose direction the triangu¬
lation network was greatly extended. In this work
the second Cassini was assisted by his son, César
François (1714-1784) who carried the
topographical mapping of France to virtual com¬
pletion following his father's death. A few sheets
not finished by the third Cassini before his death
were completed by his son Jacques-Dominique,
comte de Cassini (1748-1845). Thus it took the
dedicated work of four generations of the Cas¬
sini family over more than a century to produce
the 182 map sheets on the large scale of 1:86,400
which constituted the first true, topographic map
of a country.
A topographic survey of Britain (Ordnance
Survey) was begun in 1783 under the direction
of General William Roy (1726-1790). The French
and British triangulation networks, which are
fundamental to this type of mapping, were con¬
nected across the Channel in 1789. The value of
topographic mapping was quickly appreciated by
many rulers and administrators who introduced
the new survey in their realms. For example,
topographical mapping on the European model
was shortly initiated in Bengal, which led to the
Great Trigonometrical Survey of India.
Geodesy
and thematic maps
If more accurate maps of world or continental
areas were to be made, knowledge of the shape
of the Earth was necessary. As a result of the
French topographic survey doubts had been
raised about this. Isaac Newton (1642-1727) had 31

Measuring longitude. Detall of
an Illuminated manuscript of
the French mariner Jacques
de Vaulx's treatise on
hydrography (1583). The
Illustration shows the Sun,
Moon, and stars useful to
navigators.
32
postulated from the behaviour of the pendulum
at different latitudes that the Earth was a spheroid
flattened at the poles. Measurements taken on the
equator and in the high northern latitudes by
French scientists during the 1740s affirmed the
general correctness of Newton's hypothesis.
In his great work the Principia, Newton exa¬
mined many fundamental problems of physical
science and numerous mappable phenomena.
This work was promoted by Newton's younger
contemporary, Edmond Halley (1656-1742), who
made signal contributions to cartography,
including thematic or special-purpose maps.
During a year spent on St. Helena, Halley
prepared, and soon published, a southern
hemisphere star chart, and a terrestrial map which
has been called "the first meteorological [really
climatological] chart"of the trade and monsoon
winds. After two years at sea in the Atlantic on
a scientific voyage Halley also published in 1701
the first printed, isogonic map, i.e. a chart of mag¬
netic variation. Shortly after this he published a
map of the variable heights of tides in the English
Channel. Later, in 1715, Halley made a map of
the shadow of the eclipse over England in that
year, before the event it depicted. Halley became
Astronomer Royal at Greenwich Observatory in
1720, in which capacity he conducted investiga¬
tions into the problem of finding longitude at sea,
on the nature of the core of the Earth and other
geophysical phenomena.
Nautical charts,
longitude and the chronometer
As in the case of topographic mapping, the
French were the early leaders in scientific coastal
charting. The accurate mapping of the shorelines
of France led to the establishment of an official
hydrographie office in the country in 1720. In
Britain, much coastal surveying was at first
unofficial or quasi-official, with the East India
Company playing a prominent role in producing
nautical charts of overseas areas before the
founding of the British Hydrographie Office in
1795. During the eighteenth century, the maritime
nations of the world charted many coastal areas
of special interest to them.
Determination of latitude both on land and
at sea could be accomplished with considerable
accuracy from a fairly early date. This was made
possible by the use of a variety of instruments
such as quadrants and sextants which were
improved after telescopic sights were fitted to
them. Longitude measurement on land was
feasible by astronomical means provided the
observer had appropriate tables and referred to
a specific prime meridian. There is a natural
Chart of magnetic variation
was drawn by the English
astronomer Edmond Halley In
1700 and corrected In 1756
by William Mountalne and
James Dodson.

starting-point for latitude: 0° latitude equals the
equatorequidistant from the poles. By contrast,
the origin of a system of longitude is quite
arbitrary.
Through the centuries a number of prime
meridians have been used and in the eighteenth
century a line running through the Observatory
in Paris or Greenwich Observatory was gener¬
ally employed. The problem of finding the lon¬
gitude of a place is basically simple since 15° of
longitude equals one hour of time. Therefore, one
needs only to know the time at a chosen prime
meridian and the local time, wherever the
observer might be. But at sea the unstable deck
of a ship made impossible the necessary observa¬
tion, or the use of a pendulum clock. The
problem was solved only after the invention of
the marine chronometer by John Harrison
(1693-1776), an English artisan, in the second half
of the eighteenth century.
Captain James Cook (1728-1779), a trained
marine surveyor who charted much of the
world's unexplored coastline, took two chronom¬
eters on his second Pacific voyage (1772-1775).
One of these was set for Greenwich time and one
adjusted to local time with which he was able to
determine longitude at sea with great accuracy.
Cook's and other voyages also disproved the age-
old idea of balancing continents, with equal land
masses in the northern and southern hemispheres.
They revealed that the southern hemisphere is
predominantly water-covered, and that most of
the land is in the northern hemisphere.
Except in relatively shallow waters, the con¬
figuration of the ocean floor remained unknown.
However, Nicholas Cruquius (1678-1758) pub¬
lished an isobathic (depth) chart of a distributary
of the Rhine in 1729 and Philippe Buache
(1700-1773) one of the Channel in 1732.
Other developments in the eighteenth cen¬
tury included the invention of several ingenious
map projections. The Swiss/German mathema¬
tician Johann H. Lambert (1728-1777) con¬
tributed more than any other individual in this
\m;ii
Cadastral map showing land
use in the village of Banhars,
Aveyron (France, 1807).
Detail of an Isobathic chart of
the river Meuse by Nicholas
Cruquius (1729).
fieldthe conic equal area, conic conformai,
cylindrical equal area, azimuthal equal area, and
the transverse Mercator projections all being
attributed to him. A tradition of globe making
established by the Venetian, Vincenzo Coronelli
(1650-1718), continued during the eighteenth cen¬
tury with celestial and terrestrial globes of
different sizes and for different purposes being
produced in a number of centres.
The nineteenth century:
expansion, consolidation and diversity
The story of mapping in the nineteenth century
begins when Alexander von Humboldt
(1769-1859) landed in South America. Early in the
year 1800 Humboldt made a reconnaissance map,
based on his own explorations, of the drainage
between the Orinoco and Amazon river basins.
He then travelled in the Andes before arriving
in New Spain (Mexico) in 1803. During a year
spent in the area he compiled a map of that large
colony which served as a model for similar maps
of other continental interiorsAfrica, Asia,
North and South America and Australiaas
explorers from many countries provided the
necessary data. It would be many years before
these surveys were superseded.
Meanwhile, the coastlines of the continents
and islands continued to be charted, as, for
example, in Matthew Flinders' (1774-1814) map¬
ping of the Australian coasts. Occasionally a great
breakthrough was made, as with the work of the
American, Matthew Fontaine Maury (1806-1873).
Following his appointment in 1842 as Superin¬
tendent of the Depot of Charts (later divided
between the United States National Observatory
and the Hydrographie Office) in Washington,
Maury devised maps showing the quickest pas¬
sages for sailing ships between specific ports based 33

on winds, currents, etc. These routes were not
normally great circles (the shortest distance
between two points on the globe). Many lives
were saved by Maury's work before steamships
superseded sailing vessels in the second half of the
nineteenth century.
Climatic maps became more common as offi¬
cial weather stations were established. A wind
scale which bears his name was devised by Francis
Beaufort (1774-1857), head of the British Hydro-
graphic Office, and is still in use. For a short time,
Washington, D.C. was used as a prime meridian
on maps of the United States. But as the result
of an international conference held in
Washington in 1884, the problem of a universally
recognized prime meridian (0° longitude) was
resolved when Greenwich (UK), was selected. A
great advantage of this is that the antipodal inter¬
national date line (180° longitude) runs essentially
through oceanic areas.
Cadastral and geological mapping
An extremely ancient genre in cartography is the
cadastral map, which is concerned with land
ownership and taxation. Over most of the world
unsystematic land subdivision by metes and
bounds has been used. In a few areas, notably in
the western two-thirds of the United States,
cardinally-oriented, systematic, rectilinear surveys
were required. This resulted in a great flurry of
surveying and mapping activity as settlers
clamoured for land in the nineteenth century.
Similar rectilinear surveys were undertaken in
western Canada and some other more recently
settled, primarily agricultural areas of the world.
Economic exploitation of the land in the
nineteenth century also led to the development
of geological mapping. The father of geological
mapping is William Smith (1769-1839), who pub¬
lished his map "The Strata of England" in 1815
after nearly a quarter of a century of research.
Soon European scientists not only mapped their
own countries geologically, but were employed
in this work in Russia and elsewhere. In the
United States, geological mapping began in the
eastern states but it was in the west, in the second
half of the nineteenth century, that it came into
its own. So important was this activity considered
to be that when the United States established its
primary topographic mapping agency in 1879, it
was designated the United States Geological
Survey (USGS). This is in contrast to earlier
topographical surveys which had a geographical
or military foundation.
Censuses and thematic mapping
The holding of regular censuses as we know them
began in Sweden in 1749, in the United States in
1790, and in Britain in 1801. Other countries soon
followed so that in the nineteenth century a great
mass of statistical data became available for map-
34 ping. This included not only population but
education, crime, disease and other phenomena.
Henry Drury Harness, a pioneer in this field
employed by the Irish Railway Commission,
published in 1837 a series of highly original
thematic maps in which several quantitative tech¬
niques now employed in small-scale mapping
were used to show population density and traffic
flow. In 1855, Dr. John Snow (1813-1858) used
uniform symbols to show deaths from cholera
in London and thus identified a lethal water
pump in that city.
Atlases, globes and projections
Much of the geographical knowledge of the
period was disseminated and popularized through
atlases, which were produced in increasing
numbers in the nineteenth century. The inven¬
tion of lithography, which gradually replaced the
earlier copperplate and even earlier wood
engraving, facilitated the production of atlases.
Approximately 4,000 county cadastral atlases
were produced in the United States in the
nineteenth century. Some state and provincial
atlases were published and the first true national
atlasthat of Finland in 1899. Globes of many
sizes continued to be produced, including giant
spheres which were a feature of the expositions
that characterized the nineteenth century.
Among the new projections which were devised
in this period were the Albers conic, Molleweide
(homolographic) named for their inventors, and
the Polyconic invented by Ferdinand Hassler.
These projections remain popular today.
II
M
.»
Terrestrial and celestial globe
made In 1786 for Louis XVI of
France by Edme Mantelle.
NORMAN J.W. THROWER,
of the United States, is
professor of geography at the
University of California, Los
Angeles, and has been
appointed director of the
University's 1992 Columbus
Quincentenary Programs.
Trained in geography and the
history of science, he is the
author of many scholarly
articles and books. He has
recently edited a series of
essays, On the Shoulders of
Giants: Newton and Halley,
1686-1986 (1990), and is co¬
author of A Buccaneers Sea
Atlas: The 1 680 Waggoner of
Basil Ringrose, which will be
published later this year.
