GABRIEL
GARCÍA
MÁRQUEZ
Born in the Colombian village of Aracataca
in 1929, Gabriel García Márquez made his
mark as a master of the modern novel with
the publication of Cien años de soledad in
1967 (published in English as One Hundred
Years of Solitude in 1970). His reputation
was cemented with the award of the Nobel
Prize for Literature in 1982. In this interview
he speaks of his personal vision of Latin
America and evokes some of the principal
themes of his work, in which elements of fan¬
tasy and the marvellous mingle with the most
banal reality to give everyday life a mythical
and universal dimension.
García Márquez's other major works pub¬
lished in English include No-one Writes to the
Colonel, (1963), The Autumn of the Patriarch
(1976) and Chronicle of a Death Foretold,
(1983). His most recent work is Love In the
Time of Cholera.
In Latin America different cultures have
come together to create something new and
rich. Are Latin Americans aware ofthis inter¬
mixing?
Speaking for myself, I only became aware
of it a few years ago, even though my
experience as a writer and my frequent con¬
tacts with different societies and political
systems have increased my understanding of
other aspects of Latin American culture.
When I was travelling in Africa, I noticed
similarities between some forms of popular art
there and those of various Caribbean coun¬
tries. That gave me a clearer understanding of
our own cultural situation as well as of the
relationship between elements of different cul¬
tures generally.
Through such insights, you can discover-
both what is unique and what is universal in
a culture. There is a whole network of links
between peoples that they may not necessarily
be aware of.
Isn't that the starting-point ofyour novels?
Their main theme, even?
I wasn't really conscious of the multicul¬
tural influence when I was writing them. It
came to me of its own accord. It was only
afterwards that I realized that almost uninten¬
tionally there were elements of this cultural
Interview by Manuel Osorio,
8 Peruvian journalist

In the Caribbean, and in Latin America
in general, we consider so-called magical situations
part of everyday, life
mingling in my work, elements that had crept
in gradually as I was writing.
In Latin America various influences have
mixed and spread across the continent:
Western culture, the African presence, even
some Oriental elements, all added to the
native, pre-Columbian tradition. That's why
I don't think one can talk of a Mexican or
Colombian culture as such. Speaking per¬
sonally, I no longer think of myself as Colom¬
bian; first and foremost I am Latin American,
and proud of it.
I should add that it's a mistake to think
of the history of Latin America as starting
with the Spanish conquest. That's a colonial
viewpoint. We must never forget that the
nations forged by the Spanish viceroys were
the results of arbitrary decisions from outside,
not of our own special needs.
To understand our current problems, we
have to go back to the time before the Con¬
quest. The borders that were drawn between
the Latin American countries were only
created to manipulate us, and still, whenever
there's a need for it, the cry of nationalism
goes up. Obviously, that only sets us against
one another, stops us from seeing and feeling
the problems that we have in common. Each
country has its own special circumstances, but
what really matters is our underlying common
identity.
So is there such a thing as a Latin
American culture?
I certainly don't think one can say there
is a homogeneous Latin American culture. For
example in Central America, the Caribbean
region, there is an African influence that has
resulted in a culture different from that of
countries with a sizable indigenous popula¬
tion, like Mexico or Peru. You could make
a similar point about many other Latin
American countries.
In South America, Venezuela and
Colombia have more in common with the
Caribbean than with the Andean Indians, even
though both countries have an Indian popu¬
lation of their own. In Peru and Ecuador,
there is a divergence between the coastal
regions and the mountains. Similar situations
exist throughout the continent.
These diverse influences come together to
give Latin American civilization its special
flavour, its uniqueness in relation to the
world's other cultures.
What part does Spanish influence play in
this context?
There's no denying the strength of Spanish
influence in Latin America, and of Portuguese
influence in Brazil. It is there in every aspect
of our lives. We even speak Castilian Spanish.
It is a very rich influence, if also a con¬
troversial one that is often disparaged. Even
though the heritage is part of our cultural per¬
sonality, there is a mistrust of everything
Spanish in Latin America that complicates
everything and seems to me to be excessive
and dangerous. As far as I'm concerned, I am
proud to have inherited that culture, I'm not
ashamed of it in any way. Spanish coloniza¬
tion is no longer a problem today. It's true
that we were created in a way from a Euro¬
pean overflow, but we're no mere copy of
Europe. Latin America is something else again.
Where did the urge to write come from,
the storytelling inspiration that gave us One
Hundred Years of Solitude, The Autumn
of the Patriarch, Chronicle of a Death Fore¬
told, Love in the Time of Cholera. . . ?
I think it all comes from nostalgia.
Nostalgia for your childhood? For your
country?
Nostalgia for my country and for life itself.
I had an extraordinary childhood, sur¬
rounded by highly imaginative and supersti¬
tious people, people who lived in a misty
world populated by phantasms. For instance,
my grandmother used quite unselfconsciously
to tell me stories at night that would make my
hair stand on end.
Your grandfather seems to have been some¬
thing of a family legend. Did hé play an
important part in your childhood?
He was an enormous old man who seemed
to be suspended in time and in memory, and
I was very fond of him. He died when I was
eight years old, and I was deeply upset. He
used to tell me about his life and everything
that had happened in the village and the sur¬
rounding district since time immemorial. He
described in detail the wars he had fought in
and the terrible massacres in the banana plan¬
tations the year I was born, massacres that left
a lasting trace on Colombian history.
Did your mother also influence you as a
writer?
She's an enchanting woman. When
someone asked her about me, what she
attributed her son's talent to, she replied
without batting an eyelid "Scott's Emul¬
sion".* There's another revealing anecdote. I
have several brothers. Well, whenever one of
us takes a plane, she lights a candle and says
a prayer that everything will be all right. But
we're no longer all living at home, and the last
time I saw her she told me, "Now I always
keep a candle burning, in case one of you takes
a plane without my knowing about it".
All my family are very important to me,
and they all appear in one way or another in
my writings. I never forget that I am the son
of an Aracataca postal worker.
* A children's tonic. Editor

Life In Tenochtitlán,
by the Mexican muralist
Diego Rivera
(1886-1957)
evokes the ancient
capital of the Aztecs,
built on the site of
present-day Mexico City.
Originally you camefrom the Caribbean,
and your books reflect the feverish, over¬
flowing life of the region. Is that where you
found the magical realism that has made your
work so popular around the world?
In the Caribbean there's a perfect
symbiosiswell, let's say one more evident
than elsewherebetween the people, daily life
and the natural world. I grew up in a village
hidden away among marshes and virgin forest
on the Colombian north coast. The smell of
the vegetation there is enough to turn your
stomach.
It's a place where the sea passes through
every imaginable shade of blue, where
cyclones make houses fly away, where villages
lie buried under dust and the air burns your
lungs. For the Caribbean peoples, natural
catastrophe and human tragedy are part of
everyday life.
I should add that the area is soaked in
myths brought over by the slaves, mixed in
with Indian legends and Andalusian imagina¬
tion. The result is a very special way of
looking at things, a conception of life that sees
a bit of the marvellous in everything. You find
it not just in my novels, but also in the works
of Miguel Angel Asturias in Guatemala and
Alejo Carpentier in Cuba. There's a super¬
natural side to things, a kind of reality that
ignores the laws of reason, just like in dreams.
/ believe it's not
too late to build a utopia
that would allow us
to share an Earth
on which no one would
take decisions
for other people
I once wrote a story about the Pope visiting
a remote Colombian village, something that
seemed quite impossible at the time. Well, a
few years later the Pope visited Colombia.
In view ofthe influences you've described,
the presence of the marvellous throughout
your work, do you think critics are justified
in describing you as a fantasy writer, as
baroque?
In the Caribbean, and in Latin America in
general, we consider so-called magical situa¬
tions part of everyday life, like any other
aspect of reality. It seems quite natural to us
to believe in portents, telepathy, premoni¬
tions, a whole host of superstitions and fan¬
tastical ways of coming to terms with reality.
I never try to explain or justify such
phenomena in my books. I see myself as a
realist, pure and simple.
The relationship between Europe and
Latin America has always been full of
unhelpful misunderstandings. Do you think
it's necessary to clarify the relationship and
to put ill feeling behind us ifwe are to reach
a new equilibrium between North and South?
The problems our continent faces are so
huge that they prevent us from seeing things
clearly, even though we are right in the midst
of the situation. So it's not surprising if
Europe, absorbed by the spectacle of its own
culture, lacks adequate means of understanding
us. The Europeans have inherited a great
rationalist tradition, and it is only to be
10

expected that they should constantly judge us
by their own criteria, without taking into
account the differences that exist at other lati¬
tudes. It's not surprising either if they fail to
see that the need for prosperity and a sense
of identity is felt just as keenly in Latin
America, or in Africa and Asia, as it once was
in Europe, and still is today. Even so, any
attempt to interpret one part of the world
using the criteria of another is bound to lead
to terrible misunderstandings, and can only
entrap people more deeply in alienation, soli¬
tude and isolation.
Europe should try to see us in the light
of its own past. It's as if the present imbalance
has made it lose sight of the vicissitudes of its
own history. Who remembers that it took 300
years to build a wall around London? That
Rome wasn't built in a day but over many cen¬
turies, or that it was an Etruscan king who
took Rome into the arena of history? That
Tenochtitlán, the Aztec capital, was bigger
than Paris when the conquistadors arrived?
Europeans of vision, people doing their
best to create a more just and humane society
across their continent, could really help us if
they changed their way of judging us. Any real
sympathy with our dreams and hopes should
take the form of aid for people whose only
ambition is to live their own lives in a world
where there is a real sense of human
brotherhood.
Why shouldn't the southern nations
attempt to copy the solutions the Europeans
are adopting in Europe, even if the conditions
and methods are different?
Do the problems come from inside or out¬
side the continent?
I think we have to stop pretending to our¬
selves that all the violence, misery and dissen¬
sion that afflicts Latin America is the result
of a plot hatched thousands of kilometres
away, as if we couldn't imagine any other des¬
tiny for ourselves than being at the mercy of
the global powers.
Confronted with inequality, oppression,
exploitation and neglect, our answer must be
life itself. Not even centuries of warfare have
dimmed its obstinate affirmation. Forty years
ago, William Faulkner refused to accept the
possibility that mankind might come to an
end. Today we know that what he feared is
a straightforward scientific possibility. Given
that terrible fact, and the knowledge that the
links between nations are stronger than ever
before and that a new era is dawning, I believe
it's not too late to build a utopia that would
allow us to share an Earth on which no one
would take decisions for other people, and
where people on the margins would be given
a fresh chance. A world in which solidarity
could become a reality.
It's an aspiration that is reflected in your
work, bound as it is to Latin America and
an awareness of its destiny.
That's right. I don't think one can live with
such a nostalgia, try for so long to describe
a country or understand a continent, without
feeling deeply linked to them, and through
them to the entire world.
11
