jL-
ill
Hungary: the pitfalls of groivtli
by István Lang Since 1990 Hungary has been trying to redress an economy
long tilted in favour of pollution-prone heavy industry
Above, a petro-chemical
works emitting pollutants at
Kazincbarcika in Hungary.
A,LT the end of World War II, Hungary found
itself politically and economically attached to the
Communist bloc. From the beginning of the
1950s, a system of central planning and manage¬
ment was gradually developed. Companies came
into State ownership, co-operative farms were
formed and most of the service sector was
brought under the control of the State or of co¬
operatives.
Quantitative growth at all costs became the
watchword of industrial production. The
development of heavy industry was given pri¬
ority, energy-intensive technologies spread and
raw materials were used with scant regard for
economy. Nevertheless, the quantitative growth
that occurred between 1950 and 1975 made it pos¬
sible to raise the standard of living and well-being
of the population as compared to the levels of
the pre-war period.
After the first oil crisis, however, the limita¬
tions of the centrally planned system, its inability
to adapt and its lack of competitiveness, soon
became apparent. Failure to modernize the infras
tructure and to introduce computer technology
meant that Hungary, like the other countries of
Eastern Europe, began increasingly to lag behind
Western Europe. The position was made even
worse by increasing external debts and the
slowing down of economic development.
This falling behind in the economic field was
matched by a delay on the part of political leaders
in East European countries, including Hungary,
in recognizing the importance of environmental
protection. Although Hungarian scientists par¬
ticipated in UNESCO's Man and the Biosphere
programme from its inception, government agen¬
cies took six to seven years to react to the
environmental challenges raised.
During the 1980s, Hungary faced growing
economic difficulties. During the decade 1977 to
1987 the country's external debt grew from $43
million to $18,957 million. Various economic
reforms were carried out and central control of
planning and management was gradually reduced,
but this was not sufficient to lead to a smoothly
functioning, market-oriented economy. So when

A demonstration of
environmentalists in
Budapest.
26
ISTVAN LANG
is Secretary-General of the
Hungarian Academy of
Sciences in Budapest and a
member of the Executive
Board of the International
Council of Scientific Unions
(ICSU). He is also a member of
the editorial advisory board of
the World Resources Institute
in Washington D.C, From 1984
to 1987 he was a member of
the United Nations World
Commission on Environment
and Development (the
Brundtland Commission).
the importance of environmental protection was
finally recognized, Hungary was already in a
period of economic decline and it was not pos¬
sible to make the big investment needed to
replace polluting technologies or the energy-
intensive and raw-material-intensive structure of
industry.
The period 1989-1990 saw the beginning of
radical, but peaceful, political change. In spring
1990, free elections were held and with a new
Parliament and a new government Hungary has
set out on the road to parliamentary democracy,
with a multi-party system, a market-oriented
economy and independence from military blocs.
However, the new government inherited the
old environmental problems and it takes a long
time to change old production structures.
Nevertheless, data on the state of the environ¬
ment have been made public and municipalities
and voluntary environmental groups are being
encouraged to play a larger part in pollution con¬
trol by means of public debates and hearings.
Preparations for the 1992 United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development
have begun. A National Commission has been
set up, and an action programme for the solution
of local and national environmental problems has
been drawn up with the aim of arousing public
awareness. A panel of high-ranking experts has
been formed with the task of working out, on
the basis of the recommendations of the Rio Con¬
ference, a Hungarian strategy for the attainment
of sustainable development.
What, then, is the present position in key
policy sectors and what changes can be expected?
ENERGY POLICY
Energy policy is a key issue in the Hungarian
debate on environmental protection. For decades,
energy has been wasted on a vast scale in Eastern
Europe, including Hungary. Owing to the use of
out-of-date technologies, energy consumption per
unit of product (e.g. per ton of steel or per ton
of wheat) is on average 40 to 50 per cent higher
than in the Western European countries and the
proportion of energy-intensive sectors within
industry is high. Energy consumption per capita,
for example, in Austria and Hungary is practi¬
cally the same, but, in relation to Gross National
Product, Hungary consumes five times as much
energy as Austria.
Energy policy for the future has two main
objectives: to increase the efficient use of energy
and to reduce dependence on external sources of
energy. At present there is intense public debate
as to whether or not a second nuclear power plant
should be built, and if not, on what primary fuel
additional electrical energy will be based. This is
a matter of great public concern because,
although technological reconstruction of some
existing power plants has led to some improve¬
ment with regard to the emission of pollutants,
44 per cent of the population live in areas where,
at certain times of the year, the quality of the air
does not meet minimum health standards.
INDUSTRY
Transition to sustainable industrial development
and to market mechanisms entails considerable
economic and social change. One example of this
is that the previously established principle that
"the polluter pays" seems to be being replaced
by the new principle that "the polluter pays and
the consumer pays". Another is that because of
rising prices of raw materials and energy, coupled
with decreasing government support, heavy
industry is in crisis, with the unfortunate social
consequence that unemployment has increased to
an unprecedented degree. Paradoxically this is also
an environmentally favourable phenomenon, since
it means a decline in a sector of industrial activity
which pollutes the environment the most.
Privatization of Hungarian companies has
begun, mainly with the help of foreign capital.
This will have a positive effect on the moderni¬
zation of technological processes and thus will
benefit the environment. Some environmen¬
talists, however, are worried about this, since they
fear that polluting processes that are no longer
permitted in the European Community countries
will be transferred to Hungary. It is the gener¬
ally accepted opinion in Hungary that industrial
development must be judged on the basis of Euro¬
pean norms.
AGRICULTURE
Hungary's climate and soil are suitable for inten¬
sive agricultural production. In the 1980s, two-
thirds of the country's agricultural produce was
sold on the internal market, ensuring an ample

food supply (exceptional in Eastern Europe),
while one third was exported. However, inten¬
sive soil cultivation and the use of large amounts
of artificial fertilizers and pesticides, as well as
concentrated animal husbandry, have led to some
degradation of the environment. Damage caused
by wind and water erosion affects some 40 per
cent of the land, a significant part of the ground¬
water contains an excess of nitrates, acidification
of the soil can be observed on one third of the
arable land and, as a result of irrigation, saliniza-
tion has developed in many areas.
Privatization of the land has begun and there
will be considerable decentralization in both land



use and animal husbandry in the coming years.
On the whole this is expected to have favourable
environmental effects, but problems may arise in
ensuring the proper use of agro-chemicals.
When Hungary joins the European Commu¬
nity (this is thought likely to occur in the second
half of the 1990s), Hungarian agricultural exports
will probably decrease. This will make it possible
to shape the model of a low-energy-input
agriculture.
TRANSPORT
Transport is one of the biggest sources of pollution
in Hungary. Some 45 to 50 per cent of the carbon
monoxide, 40 to 45 per cent of the nitrogen
oxides and 90 per cent of the lead emitted into
the air come from transport. Road transport has
the greatest share in this emission with more than
85 per cent, the railways being responsible for 12
to 13 per cent and air transport for one to two
per cent. The development of the means of mass
transport is being given priority in the plans of
both national and municipal authorities.
NATURE CONSERVATION
Some 626 hectares of Hungary's total territory
of 93,000 square kilometres are protected.
Altogether there are four national parks, 44 pro¬
tected regions and 137 nature conservation areas.
All the 2,500 caves, 415 plant species and 619
animal species are protected. In addition there are
877 locally protected areas.
The national parks have been established
partly in forest areas and partly in lands which
are very valuable for nature conservation but not
easily usable for agriculture. Some problems have
arisen because the national parks are not all fully
owned by the State authorities responsible for
conservation. With the privatization of land, this
problem is growing more acute. The general
trend, however, is for protected nature conser¬
vation areas to remain under State ownership and
for their exploitation (for logging, grazing,
fishing, etc.) to be fully controlled by the nature
conservation service.
As can be seen from this short review, Hun¬
gary has inherited an onerous legacy from earlier
regimes. Under new circumstances the intention
is to adopt new methods to achieve sustainable
development. Environment and development
will figure jointly in the government's
programme and an environmentally aware public
will be there to encourage action and to ensure
that the proper decisions are made.
An avocet,
a bird which nests by
the lakes of Hungary.
