world fit to five in
by tester Brown
Christopher Mn
and Sandra Postel
In 40 years' time, solar panels may be as familiar a part
of the urban landscape as TV aerials are today
R
JL/UILDING a more environmentally stable future
clearly requires some vision of that future. If not
fossil fuels to power society, then what? If forests
are no longer to be cleared to grow food, then
how is a larger population to be fed? If a
throwaway culture leads inevitably to pollution
and resource depletion, how can we satisfy our
material needs? In sum, if the present path is so
obviously unsound, what picture of the future
can we use to guide our actions towards a global
community that can endure?
A sustainable society is one that satisfies its
needs without jeopardizing the prospects of
future generations. Unfortunately there are no
existing models of sustainability. For the past
several decades, most developing nations have
aspired to the automobile-centred, fossil fuel-
,. , . , driven economies of the industrial West. But
Taksang monastery, one of
the oldest in Bhutan, ¡s from the localized problems of intractable air pol-
eqmppe wi so ar ce s lution to the global threat of climate change, it
which provide electricity for ö ö '
lighting. is now clear that these societies are far from
28
durable; indeed they are rapidly bringing about
their own demise.
If the world is to achieve sustainability, this
will have to be done within the next forty years.
If we have not succeeded by then, environmental
deterioration and economic decline are likely to
be feeding on each other, pulling us into a down¬
ward spiral of social disintegration. Our vision
of the future therefore looks to the year 2030.
One assumption we make about the future
concerns population size. Current United
Nations projections have the world headed for
nearly nine billion people by the year 2030. This
figure implies a doubling or tripling of the popu¬
lations of Ethiopia, India, Nigeria and scores of
other countries where human numbers are
already over-taxing natural support systems. We,
however, assume a population of at most eight
billion that will either be essentially stable or
slowly declining towards a number the Earth can
support comfortably and indefinitely. Either soci¬
eties will move quickly to encourage smaller fami¬
lies and bring birth-rates down, or rising death-
rates from hunger and malnutrition will check
population growth.
The humane path to sustainability by the

year 2030 therefore requires a dramatic drop in
birth-rates. More countries will do as China and,
most recently, Thailand have donecut their
population growth rates by half in a matter of
years. As of 1990, thirteen European countries
have stable or declining populations; by 2030,
most countries are likely to be in that category.
THE DAWN
OF THE SOLAR AGE
The world of 2030 will not be powered by coal,
oil and natural gas. It is now well accepted that
continuing heavy reliance on fossil fuels will cause
catastrophic changes in climate. Avoiding this and
eventually stabilizing the climate depend on cut¬
ting global carbon emissions to two billion tons,
about one third of the current amount. Given
projected population growth, the world in 2030
will therefore have per capita carbon emissions
that are one-eighth of the level of those in Western
Europe today.
The choice then becomes whether to make
solar or nuclear power the centrepiece of energy
systems. We believe societies will reject nuclear
power because of its long list of economic, social
and environmental liabilities.
The late twentieth century is the dawn of the
solar age. When it comes to solar technologies,
today's political leaders, still captivated by coal
and nuclear power, are like those who in the
eighteenth century were sceptical about the
future of the steam engine. The glimmerings of
the new age are already giving the lie to such
sceptics. Some nationsNorway and Brazil, for
examplealready obtain over half their energy
from renewable energy resources. And these
resources are available in immense quantity. The
United States Department of Energy estimates
that the annual influx of currently accessible
renewable resources in the United States is 250
times the country's annual use of energy.
Solar power is by nature diverse; the mix of
energy sources will reflect the climate and natural
resources of each particular region. Northern
Europe, for example, is likely to rely heavily on
wind and hydropower. The economies of
northern Africa and the Middle East may instead
use direct sunlight. Japan and the Philippines will
tap their abundant geothermal energy. And
Southeast Asian economies will be powered
largely by wood and agricultural wastes, along
with sunshine.
Due to the abundance of sunlight, direct con¬
version of solar energy will be the corner-stone
A wind generator
in Australia
LESTER BROWN,
of the United States, is the
president of WorldWatch
Institute, a Washington-based
non-profit research
organization devoted to the
analysis of global problems. He
is also editor-in-chief of the bi¬
monthly magazine World
Watch, and project director of
the annual book series State of
tile World.
CHRISTOPHER FLAVIN,
vice president for research at
WorldWatch Institute, has
written widely on sustainable
development and on the
Implications of new energy
technologies and new
approaches to energy policy.
SANDRA POSTEL,
vice president for research at
WorldWatch Institute,
specializes in land use, water
and forestry Issues on which
she has published many
articles and papers. 29

Solar panels in Sweden. of a sustainable world energy system. Not only
is sunshine available in great quantity, it is also
more widely distributed than any other renew¬
able resource. By 2030, solar panels will heat most
residential water around the world, following the
model of Japan and Israel, which already use them
extensively. A typical urban landscape will have
thousands of collectors sprouting from roof-tops,
much as television aerials do today. And passive
solar architecture may by then cut artificial
heating and cooling needs to virtually zero in mil¬
lions of buildings.
Photovoltaic cells are a semi-conductor tech¬
nology that converts sunlight directly into elec-
30
Prototypes of a
solar-powered car and
aircraft.
tricky without the use of the mechanical
processes involved in solar thermal conversion.
As they become economical, the completion
of the solar revolution will be possible. All
Third World villages could be electrified with
this renewable source, with battery storage
for lighting and other uses in the dark evening
hours.
Wind power is an indirect form of solar
energy, generated by the Sun's differential heating
of the Earth's atmosphere. The cost of wind
energy fell by about 70 per cent during the 1980s,
making it at least 40 per cent cheaper than power
from new nuclear plants in the United States and
almost competitive with energy from new coal-
fired power plants.
Engineers are confident that they will soon
have improved wind turbines that are economical
not just in California's blustery mountain passes,
where some wind farmers are already generating
$30,000 worth of electricity per hectare annually,
but also in vast stretches of the US northern
plains, on the North Sea coast of the United
Kingdom and in central Europe. Among the
other regions where major wind farm projects are
now on the drawing boards are Germany and the
State of Gujarat, in India.
For hydropower, which now supplies 19 per
cent of the world's electricity, prospects for
future growth are most promising in the Third
World, where the undeveloped potential is still
large. Small-scale projects are likely to be more
appealing than the massive projects favoured by
governments and international lending agencies
in recent decades.

ENERGY FROM PLANTS
Plants provide another means of capturing solar
energy. Through photosynthesis they convert
sunlight into biomass that can be burned. Until
the industrial revolution, wood supplied most of
the world's energy. Today it still provides 12 per
cent of the total, chiefly in the form of firewood
and charcoal in developing countries.
One promising approach to augmenting
biomass energy capacity is to grow energy crops
on marginal lands not currently used for food.
Land that is too steeply sloping or not sufficiently
fertile or well watered for crops might support
trees that could be harvested periodically. The
wood could then be burned directly in a wood-
fired power plant or converted to ethanol. The
Solar Energy Research Institute has already deve¬
loped a process that brings the cost of wood-
derived ethanol down to $1.35 per gallon.
Virtually all Pacific rim countries, as well as
those along East Africa's Great Rift and the
Mediterranean Sea, are well endowed with
geothermal energy. Iceland, Indonesia and Japan
are among the nations with the greatest poten¬
tial. Geothermal energy can provide not only
electricity that can be transmitted over long dis¬
tances, but also direct heat for industries sited near
the Earth's major heat reservoirs.
Getting global carbon emissions down to two
billion tons a year requires vast improvements
in energy efficiency. Fortunately, many of the
technologies to accomplish such reductions are
already at hand and cost-effective. No technical
breakthroughs are needed, for example, to double
automobile fuel economy, triple the efficiency of
lighting systems, or cut typical heating loads by
75 per cent. Technologies developed in the
decades ahead will undoubtedly allow even
greater gains.
By the year 2030, a much more diverse set
of transportation options will exist. The typical
European or Japanese city today is probably
fairly indicative of this future. Highly developed
rail and bus systems move people efficiently
between home and work. In Tokyo, only 15 per
cent of commuters drive cars to the office.
Automobiles will undoubtedly still be in use
four decades from now, but they will be fewer
in number and their role will be smaller. Within
cities, only clean hydrogen-powered vehicles are
likely to be permitted and most of these will be
highly efficient "city cars". The energy to run
them may well come from solar power plants.
Families might rent efficient larger vehicles for
vacations.
The bicycle will also play a major role, as it
already does in much of Asia and in some
industrial-country towns and cities. There are
already twice as many bicycles as cars worldwide.
In the bicycle-centred transport system of the
year 2030, the ratio could easily be as high as ten
to one. _
Reconstitution of a forest of
conifers north of Tokyo.
3*
\%/--ú
ixsm
. G i
\ï \\ ''I
\
m
31
