Stress at an early age
by Tariho Fukuda
Angst, by Sabine Wagner,
age 13 (Germany).
NcI OBORU is an ordinary ten-year-old Japanese
schoolboy. His typical school day is much the
same as that of thousands of other children like
him. His mother Chiako wakes him up at seven,
saying: "Get up, son, your father is about to leave
for work." Noboru gets out of bed reluctantly
because he is still feeling sleepy, but he knows
he must greet his father, who had not arrived
home when Noboru went to bed at eleven the
night before.
His father, Takeo, who has been working for
an international company for many years, says
to Noboru as he is leaving:
"Good morning Noboru, how are you? Did
you study hard yesterday?"
"Yes. I think so, father."
"Keep it up and do your best. I'll see you
later."
When the stereotyped words of their
morning ritual have been spoken, Takeo closes
the door behind him. Noboru wishes he could
talk to his father more often, but he knows how
busy Takeo is. Even on Sundays he often has to
leave the house early to go and entertain his cus¬
tomers on the golf course.
Noboru has breakfast with his mother, who
asks him the same questions, wanting to know
who in his class at school and at the fyuku or prep
school he attends in the evenings got the best
marks in mathematics. She gets him so upset that
he refuses to answer.
AT HOME ALONE
In April last year Chiako asked her son if he
wanted to attend a good prep school not far from
home after regular school hours. Noboru
accepted, knowing full well that most of his class¬
mates were attending evening classes of this kind
in order to prepare for the highly competitive
entrance exams into junior high school. So for
the past year, four days a week, Noboru has been 29

going to evening classes and not particularly
enjoying it. But he also knows that his parents
hope that he will get into a good private junior
high school. If he does, he will not have to take
any other entrance exams before going to univer¬
sity. He tries to persuade himself that this, as his
parents have suggested, is the ideal solution . . .
but he is not convinced.
Noboru was surprised that his mother took
a job as an insurance agent when he began to
attend his Jyuku. Chieko explained that she was
working to pay for the extra school tuition, and
so now he feels more indebted to his mother than
Mother is always at me to do
my fessons,
by a 12-year-old (Norway).
30
TARIHO FUKUDA
is professor of social work at
Meiji Gakuin University, Tokyo.
A member of several Japanese
government advisory
commissions on children,
youth and the family, he is the
author of "Welfare for
Tomorrow", "The Japanese
Family" and a number of other
works.
ever. And no matter how much she insists that
the flexible hours enable her to spend more time
with him, the truth is that Noboru, like many
other Japanese children, returns to an empty
home when he finishes school.
When he gets home, he finds a note from his
mother which he glances at before throwing it
in the wastepaper baskethe knows what it says
by heart: "I put your favourite ice-cream in the
refrigerator. Be careful on your way to Jyuku.
Love, Mother." While eating his snack, Noboru
reads a comic book, watches television or plays
a computer game. When he cannot find the solu¬
tion to the game, he calls up his friend Fumio,
who has the same software. The two boys are
neighbours, but they would rather talk on the
phone than see each other because they attend
different prep schools at different times.
Before heading for school, Noboru spends
two hard hours on his homework both for
regular school and Jyuku. At about five o'clock,
he drops in for a light meal at a fast-food
restaurant where he meets up and chats with
some classmates before they all go on to school.
This is a rare moment when he can relax with
friends.
During the three hours of prep school, he
puts everything into his work, because whereas
at regular school the children are of different
levels, the pupils at Jyuku are all at the same level,
which makes it easier for the teachers. In addition,
the Jyuku teachers are specialists in the subjects
they teach, so that the work there is more
interesting, at least for the able pupils.
Noboru does not get home until nine in the
evening; he then watches television while eating
the meal his mother has prepared for him. But
the day's work is not over yet. His mother is soon
urging him to carry on studying until eleven.
This explains why foreigners visiting Japan
might be surprised to see children carrying
school-bags in the streets or in public transpor¬
tation at night. How did this situation come
about?
THE DEMANDS OF
AN INDUSTRIALIZED SOCIETY
For centuries, Japan was one of the most conser¬
vative societies in the world, with an apparently
unchangeable value system and static socio¬
economic and political structures. After the
Second World War, it unexpectedly became the
model of modernity. Although pre-war Japan was
a great Asian industrial power, in 1945 73 per cent
of the population lived in rural areas. In the next
twenty years, the ratio was reversed and today
80 per cent of the population is urban. Despite
its lack of natural resources, Japan is today one
of the world's most industrialized countries. It
has to import most of its raw materials and
manufacture highly value-added products for its
survival. The availability of top-level skilled
labour and advanced technology is vitally impor¬
tant for Japan.
One result of rapid urbanization was the
break-up of the extended family. The average size
of households dropped from 4.97 in 1955 to 3.1
in 1990 (2.3 in the Tokyo area), with 76 per cent
of households today constituted by nuclear fami¬
lies. The post-war birth-rate plummeted from 2.7
million in 1947 and 1948 to 1.2 million in 1990.
This means that Japanese couples are having
no more than one or two children. They love and
cherish their offspring, want them to be successful
in life, and, with the best will in the world, tend
to overprotect and expect too much of them.
They want to put their children on an escalator
that will take them to the top by trying to get
the best possible education for them, from kin¬
dergarten to university level. As a consequence,
entrance exams into private schools have become
highly competitive. Hence one comes across the
tragicomic situation in which infants are sent to
prep schools in order to help them to get into
good kindergartens! From the age of two or three
they have no free time to play.
DEVELOPING THE PERSONALITY
THROUGH PLAY
I have been involved for nearly fifty years with
child welfare in children's homes, hospitals, child-
guidance centres and mental hospitals in Japan.

We often use play therapy in the treatment of
problem children because we know that through
play children can express their feelings, their
impulses, their dreams and their fantasies, and act
out their hidden fears, anxieties, tensions and
uncertainties. If children were given more oppor¬
tunities to play freely, they would develop along
healthier and more wholesome lines and would
not need help from the social services.
Personality development begins at birth and
play has a considerable role in it. From this stand¬
point, I must confess that the situation of Japanese
children is very disturbing. They may seem
My father Is angry,
by Michiru Shioji, age 3
(Japan).
happy, they are well fed and well dressed, get a
good education and can play the most advanced
electronic games. Look more closely, however,
and you will see that they are deprived of time,
space and true relationships with their peers.
We are coming across more and more
problem children who are isolated, marginalized
and alienated at school because they have never
learned how to establish positive relationships
with others. I remember a teenager, Asako, who
could only answer yes or no when she first came
to my child-guidance clinic. For the first few
weeks I let her do whatever she wanted: read,
watch television, listen to music or paint. Then
one day she told me that she might be able to
express her thoughts in writing. So we began
exchanging letters. I suggested that she write
about her happy memories of her mother and her
early childhood, and she did this beautifully.
Asako had had a very harmonious relation¬
ship with her mother until she turned nine, when
her mother sent her to a prep school in order to
improve her chances of getting into a well-known
girls' school where only one out of twenty appli¬
cants was accepted. From then on, Asako had no
days off, no leisure time and no friends to play
with. Every Sunday she had to go to another prep
school to take a trial entrance exam for that par¬
ticular girls' school. "When she was accepted by
the school, the family was delighted, but soon
after that Asako found that she was incapable of
making friends with children of her own age or
of establishing rewarding relationships with
others. She confined herself to her study and
refused to speak to her parents, whom she held
responsible for her maladjustment. Finally, she
joined the growing ranks of Japanese children
who play truant from school. According to Edu¬
cation Ministry figures, there are about 40,000
"non-attenders" among junior high school chil¬
dren in Japan, while about 123,000 drop out of
high school altogether.
WHAT KIND OF FUTURE
DO WE WANT
FOR OUR CHILDREN?
Although the high-school drop-out rate is actually
only 2.2 per cent, I believe it is about time we
asked ourselves whether we want to provide the
kind of education we once did, that will turn our
children into physically, morally and socially
developed human beings, or whether everything
is to be sacrificed on the altar of achievement in
an advanced technological society that tends to
depersonalize all human relations.
Some glimmerings of a solution can be seen.
Japan has more than 3,700 community halls
where children can play and take part in creative
activities with play-leaders. At Children's Castle,
the national centre of these community halls, all
kinds of experimental activity programmes take
place for the wholesome physical and mental
development of the young.
Many youth organizations offer excellent
programmes where children and young people
can meet and get to know each other. Each year
about 170 child-guidance centres receive some
25,000 problem children, an increasing number
of whom are suffering from emotional and psy¬
chosomatic disturbance stemming from pressure
to achieve scholastic success and fear of failure.
When asked what would make them happiest,
most of them answer: "Good marks at school".
It is therefore urgent that our system of values
should be reappraised in terms of our future
society, the shape of which will depend on our
children. It is they who will transform our dreams
into reality. This is why, for our own good, we
should carefully examine the new United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child. When
all is said and done, our future welfare depends
on the happiness of our children. 31
