Atlases, ways and
provinces
by Sobhi Abdel Hakim
Building on the heritage of Antiquity, the Arabs made their own original
contributions to cartography, ushering in a golden age
It is very difficult to form a value judgement
of the Arab maps produced in the Middle Ages
since, despite all the searches made, only a very
small number of originals have been found.
The maps constructed by al-Khwarizmi (the
planisphere drawn at the request of Caliph al-
Ma'mun), al-Balkhi, al-Istakhri, Ibn Haukal, al-
Maqdisi and the anonymous author of the Limits
of the Universe, have been lost. Even al-Idrisi's
famous map is only a copy dating from the
fifteenth century.
The history of cartography among the Arabs,
as among all other peoples, is closely bound up
with the development of geography and its many
related fields. From ancient times the Arabs too
needed precise bearings to regulate the course of
their lives and their activities. The advent of Islam
made this all the more necessary. In order to fulfil
the obligations of prayer, fasting and ritual pil¬
grimage, they had to be able to decipher the
cosmic clock and know which way to turn to face
Mecca.
Heirs and successors
However, it was not until Arabic translations
were made of ancient books, especially those of
the Greeks and of Claudius Ptolemaeus (Ptolemy)
in particular, that Arab cartography became a
major field of scientific study. These translations
were made possible by the generous patronage
of the caliphs, who understood the value of the
knowledge built up by the ancients. Wishing to
incorporate that knowledge into Muslim culture,
they provided a variety of rewards for those who
translated the scientific works of Antiquity into
Arabic. Caliph al-Mam'un, for instance, paid
translators an amount of gold coins and bars
equivalent in weight to the works translated.
The Arabs were careful to preserve this
heritage and throughout the Middle Ages cons¬
tantly added to it, both with contributions of
-*c
SOBHI ABDEL HAKIM,
of Egypt, is professor of
human geography at Cairo
University, of which he was
formerly Vice-President.
their own and drawing on the work of Indian
scholars. In the period extending from the
seventh to the twelfth centuries, the pole of
geographical learning thus shifted. From Europe
it moved to the great centres of scientific study
and investigation of Baghdad, Cordoba and
Damascus. It can therefore be said without risk
of error and despite the lack of direct contact
between Arab and European cartographers, that
the resurgence of mathematics and astronomy in
Rome, Oxford and Paris in the thirteenth cen¬
tury was simply the direct result of the advances
made by the Arabs in cartography. The Arabs
kept the torch burning and paved the way for
the great blossoming of science that occurred in
the West during the Renaissance.
The Arabs were right to regard the work of
Ptolemy as the peak of the achievements of the
Greeks and Romans. Yet they did not follow
blindly the teachings of the great Greek
astronomer, mathematician and geographer. The
t

Arab travellers disputed a fair number of his ideas.
The Arab astronomers for their part calculated
anew the distance represented by a degree and
arrived at very precise results. They were not
merely links in the transmission of learning.
Eager to build on what was already known, they
naturally started out from where their
predecessors had left off.
These efforts culminated in the writings of
al-Battani and al-Mas'udi in the tenth century.
Al-Battani questioned many of the hypotheses
put forward by Ptolemy. Unlike Ptolemy, who
thought that Africa and Asia were joined near the
Malaysian peninsula, he believed that the Indian
Ocean was an open sea. Al-Biruni's writings on
the East and those of al-Idrisi on the West
rounded off the Arabs' knowledge of the world.
Several factors, which it would take too long
to list here, contributed to the development of
the geographic and cartographic sciences among
the Arabs. Islam, which had become their religion,
encouraged them to pursue knowledge to the
four corners of the Earth. Huge expanses of land
had been won through conquest, and the
resources they contained needed to be assessed
in order for the most suitable tax system to be
introduced. In addition, three of these territories
(Mesopotamia, Persia and Egypt) were cradles of
civilization. If the Arabs were to govern them,
they had to know about them.
Travellers and cartographers
So big did the empire become that a postal service
and a road system became necessary. These in
their turn were instrumental in developing trade,
fostered by the unification of language and
religion. Increasing numbers of books described
"the ways and provinces". The pilgrimage to
Mecca also played a great part in developing the
Arabs' taste for travel and for geography. The pil¬
grim would converse in the same language with
Detail of a map by the Arab
geographer Ibn Haukal
showing part of central Asia
and Transoxlana, the land
between the Oxus and the
Jaxartes rivers. Samarkand,
the chief city of Transoxlana,
Is shown at centre of map.
21

22
other Muslims from different places and from
different social backgrounds. These pilgrimages,
which took up a considerable amount of time,
often afforded invaluable opportunities for study,
exploration and trade. Upon their return, the
travellers-cum-pilgrims-cum-traders wrote
accounts of their experiences that were mines of
geographical information. There were many car¬
tographers among their number, including Ibn
Haukal, al-Mas'udi and al-Idrisi.
More than one Arab geographer was marked
by the teachings of Ptolemy, which served as the
starting-point for the mapping of the heavens and
the Earth alike.
Mohammed Ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi laid the
foundations for Arab geography. His Book ofthe
Configuration of the Earth (Kitab surat al-ard),
written in the early half of the ninth century,
incorporates and amends the findings of Ptolemy.
He is believed to have designed his work, together
with his celebrated planisphere, in collaboration
with other scholars, at the request of Caliph al-
Ma'mun. Unfortunately, most of the maps that
al-Khwarizmi helped to construct have been lost.
Only four of them have come down to us. They
are the oldest Arab maps known to exist.
In the tenth century the most famous Arab
cartographer was Abul Hassan Ali al-Mas'udi.
Born in Baghdad, he spent his early years travel¬
ling, visiting in turn India, Ceylon, the China Sea,
Asia Minor, Syria, Palestine, Zanzibar,
Madagascar and Oman. Towards the end of his
life he went to Egypt where he met his death,
at al-Fustat. Al-Mas'udi must have read a large
part of the geographic literature then available.
He mentions a large number of works which
have since disappeared. His major work, The
Meadows of Gold and Mines of Gems (Muruj adh-
dhahab wa ma'adin al-jawahir), is a conspectus of
his experiences. Al-Mas'udi wrote several other
works. His planisphere of the then known world
is one of the most accurate Arab maps of the
time. He believed that the Earth was a sphere.
He added two continents to the known world,
one in the South Seas and, for the sake of balance,
another on the opposite side of the globe.
A new kind of map, more like a cartogram,
then made an appearance with Ibn Haukal's map
of the world, which was a treasure house of eco¬
nomic information. This was an expanded ver¬
sion of al-Istakhri's Atlas consisting of a simpli¬
fied outline in which shores are shown as curves
or straight lines, and islands and inland seas, such
as the Caspian Sea and the Aral Sea, as circles.
The Golden Age
The golden age of Arab cartography, which had
started to develop a century earlier, was the tenth



century (fourth century of the Hegira). It was sig¬
nalled by the publication of a series of maps
Úte Atlas of Islam-which were inseparable parts
of a large number of works on "the ways and
provinces". The method employed to describe
the Muslim world, introduced by a man hailing
from Balkh (al-Balkhi), was taken up and deve¬
loped by a Persian scholar from Iran (al-Istakhri)
whose work served in turn as a starting-point for
a great traveller and geographer born in Baghdad
(Ibn Haukal) who revised, corrected and consider¬
ably expanded it.
There was no longer anything in common
between these maps and the Ptolemaic models.
The Atlas of Islam still contained twenty-one
maps, in an order laid down once and for all, with
the first showing a spherical world in its entirety.
This was followed by six maps representing
Arabia, the Persian Sea, the Maghreb, Egypt,
Syria and the Mediterranean. The last fourteen
maps represented the central and eastern parts of
the Muslim world. The aim was to show exclu¬
sively the Muslim world as understood by al-
Istakhri and, especially, Ibn Haukal: "I have con¬
sidered in detail the lands of Islam, province by
province, region by region, district by district..."
All this cartographic activity focused mainly
on the eastern part of the Muslim world, but the
western part was not forgotten. The final
flowering of Arab cartography, represented by
the work of al-Idrisi (twelfth century), occurred
in the Muslim west.
After studying in Cordoba, al-Idrisi settled in
Sicily, where the Norman king Roger II commis¬
sioned him to prepare a giant planisphere and to
write a detailed commentary on it. The-
planisphere showed the entire globe including,
in the geographer's own words, "the regions
together with their countries and cities, rivers,
lands and seas and roads, with an indication of
distances and all that was to be seen there". It
has been lost, but al-Idrisi's commentary has
come down to us in a work entitled The Pleasure
Excursion of One Who is Eager to Traverse the
Regions ofthe World {Kitab nuzhat al-mushtaqfi
ikhtiraq al afaq), better known by the name of
The Book of Roger {Kitab Rudjar).
This work helped Western geographers to
widen their field of knowledge, and also helped
the Portuguese explorers to find their way around
unknown regions in the fifteenth century. For
Al-lstakhrl's world map
(12th century). According to a
convention of Islamic
cartography, the south Is at
top of map.

al-Idrisi, the Earth was "as round as a ball; water
adhered to it naturally and did not fall off; and
land and water were suspended in the cosmos like
the yolk of an egg in its shell". Al-Idrisi appended
an atlas of the world to his commentary, with
some maps in colour.
The work of al-Idrisi, which is the crowning
glory of Arab cartography, also marks the begin¬
ning of its decline. The concepts of latitude and
longitude are missing. The Ptolemaic "climates"
are shown, but in bands of equal breadth, with
no regard for astronomical data. Details are not
as clearly identifiable as on al-Khwarizimi's maps.
There are also certain errors of calculation in the
distances and contour lines. But we must be indul¬
gent towards the cartographer: King Roger's
death and the ensuing unrest prevented him from
making the necessary corrections to his atlas. Al-
Idrisi stands at the meeting-point of two worlds,
the Christian and the Muslim. Small wonder then
that he was known as the "Arab Strabo". His
atlas, which is regarded as the major work of
Arab cartography, is also the one that enjoyed
the greatest success in the West throughout the
Middle Ages.
So far, but no further
Despite all these efforts, Arab contributions to
cartography are few to the amazement of all
those who study its history. Why should this be
so? The Arabs were familiar with the whole of
Europe (except for the northernmost part), the
southern part of Asia, North Africa as far as lati¬
tude ten degrees north, and the east coast of
Africa. Their geographic knowledge was not
confined to the Islamic countries. It extended far
beyond that of the Greeks, who were very
roughly acquainted with the regions beyond the
Caspian Sea and were completely ignorant of the
east coast of Asia north of Indochina. The Arabs
for their part were familiar with both the land
route leading all the way to the sources of the
Yang-Tse and the east coast of Asia, as far as
Korea. It is true that their knowledge of Japan
was uncertain. The Japanese archipelago was
already shown on eleventh-century maps, but
there can be no question that the Arabs ever
reached it by sea. Their image of Japan was
perhaps based on the information they had
picked up in Central Africa, a region they knew
well. As for Africa, the Arabs were the first to
describe it in detail and their description was to
serve as a bench mark until the arrival of the
European explorers in the nineteenth century.
These fabulous journeys, which could not
have been undertaken by any of their European
contemporaries, should have been a matchless
source of information for cartographers. But such
was not the case. Arab cartography, which had
managed to produce the wonderfully accurate
Atlas ofIslam, did not prove able to produce its
equivalent, even in the form of loose maps, for
the other parts of the world, highly knowledge¬
able about them though it was. It no longer
benefited from the accumulated stock of
geographical knowledge; instead of breaking new
ground, the most recent maps did no more than
copy earlier ones. It is true that at that time Euro¬
pean cartography did not show much originality
either and was just as much out of touch with
the latest advances in geography.
World map by the Arab
cartographer al-Idrisi
(12th century).
23
