Play and the sacred in Africa
by Barthélémy Comoe-Krou
30
IN 1817 Hegel wrote that "only man is capable
of being religious. An animal can no more be reli¬
gious than it can understand law or morality."
But, he added, where Africa is concerned, "What
we call religion, the state...none of that yet exists
for them.... In Africa all men are magicians". This
belief led the British ethnologists Edward Burnett
Tylor and James George Frazer to say that
"magic preceded religion",1 while the British
naturalist and prehistorian John Lubbock
declared that there were "races of men totally
lacking in religion".
It was demonstrated scientifically that "even
insects play",2 and at the same time it was said
that primitive peoples, including the Africans,
had no games.3 Lubbock did not know "any
children of savages who have played with a
rattle".4
However by around 1870 the law of the three
states or stages set forth by Auguste Comte in
1839 had been generally accepted. Comte held
that the evolution of human thought and
knowledge passes through three main stages: the
religious stage during which all phenomena are
explained by reference to supernatural agents, the
metaphysical stage, and the scientific stage. Tylor,
and after him Lewis Morgan, then set forth a law
of evolution by virtue of which societies
inevitably moved from savagery to barbarism,
and from barbarism to civilization. Savagery
naturally came to be associated with the religious
stage and civilization with the scientific stage.
Play and magic
As a result savages and primitive peoples suddenly
began to be considered more religious than civi¬
lized peoples. Their whole existence was suffused,
as it were, with religion. It was also discovered
that games did after all exist in these societies.
And since it continued to be held that primitive
peoples were incapable of invention, these games
were said to be derived from religious or magic
rites. Lubbock said that primitive peoples consi¬
dered the rattle to be a "sacred and mysterious
object."
In 1917, the Swedish anthropologist Yrjö
Hirn extended this thesis to all manifestations of

Above, Bambara statuette
representing a female
ancestor figure (Mali).
Opposite page, a ritual white
wood statuette of the Ewe
people of Togo perpetuates
the memory of a dead twin
sister.



play by children in all societies. In 1938 the
French ethnologist Marcel Griaule used it in a
study of the games of the Dogon people in which
he wrote that "When adults are asked about the
significance of anthropomorphic statuettes with
religious or magical uses, they sometimes say that
the statuettes are children's dolls. Even at Yougo,
the sacred cliff-side city, a blacksmith...maintained
that he often carved them for children, but this
seems doubtful.... His claim is quite interesting
in itself, however, since it reveals the narrow gap
through which an object slips from religion to
play."5
Roger Caillois, another disciple of Hirn,
wrote in 1958 that "A number of games are based
on forgotten beliefs or reproduce the form but
not the content of rites no longer practised."6
He concluded that "A sense of play is essential
to culture but in history games and toys have
always been the residues of culture, misunder¬
stood survivals of bygone ways or borrowings
from foreign cultures which lose their meaning
when transposed, and never seem relevant to the
functioning of the society in which their presence
is recorded."7
Even in the nineteenth century there was
some hostility to the theses outlined above, but
its impact was limited. As far as I know, the
Taylor/Hirn theory was only refuted by Charles
Béart between 1950 and 1970 as part of what
might be called an epistemological purge. "What
more can be said," wrote Béart, "when we are
shown dressed, articulated dolls exactly like those
we know in the world's oldest hypogea?... Even
when the maidens of Attica fastened dolls to trees
at the festivals of Icaria, these were dolls and not
sacred statues. Antiquity no more confused a doll
with a statuette of Tanagra or a Mithraic ex-voto
than we would confuse a doll with a piece of
Sèvres porcelain or a plaster saint. In regions
where Christianity has lost much of its influence
and where many religious statuettes lie forgotten
in the attic, no little girl would ever dream of
using such a statuette as a doll... A little Dogon
girl would be no more likely to use as a doll a
statuette carved for the altar of her ancestors than
a little Parisian girl would do so with the plastic
statuette of the Virgin that once adorned her
grandmother's bedroom. Dolls inhabit their own
special world. There may be a temptation to link
this world to the sacred world, but there is no
historical justification for doing so."4
The creative impulse
In all human societies there are joke-words and
words that serve as prayers or blessings and
thus express the sacred. No-one could seriously
maintain that jokes are derived from words of
prayer. Yet this has been and still is done with
regard to play. Words, like all the material ele¬
ments used by a society, can be used for different
purposes. Wood can be used as firewood or to
make games, chairs and houses. It can also be
carved to make sacred statuettes representing
ancestors or spirits. These are different expres¬
sions of different ideas.
Like all ideas and thoughts, the sacred is made
manifest by physical expressionsa resonant flow
of words, pieces of vegetable or mineral matter,
living beings, people. These entities already
existed in nature in what might be called a neu¬
tral state before they were used to express the
sacred, themselves becoming sacred objects in the
process, or before being used in play, before
becoming toys or material for games. Sacred
objects and material for games are both products
of the human creative impulse. They are cultural
data that exist in society. What possible interre¬
lations could there possibly be between the social 31

"Dolls inhabit their own
special world. There may be a
temptation to link this world
to the sacred world, but there
Is no historical Justification for
doing so".
32
BARTHELEMY COMOE-KROU
of Côte d'Ivoire is director of a
play study programme at the
University of Abidjan. A former
Director of Cultural Heritage at
his country's Ministry of
Culture and Assistant Director
of the Ivorian Ethno-
sociological Institute, he is the
author of several studies on
culture and African games as
well as methodological guides
for students in higher
education.



expression of play and the social expression of
the sacred?
Play, outside of both
law and religion
If someone happens to break a leg during a chil¬
dren's or adolescents' game, people simply say:
"They were only playing", and the matter is
closed. There is no complaint or punishment. If
a boxer dies as a result of injuries received during
a match his opponent need not worry even
though he has in fact committed murder. What
happens if the sacred is involved?
In the villages of Africa children and teenagers
are not allowed to play violent or noisy games
in the main street. Such games are only allowed
in an area far from the dwellings which is offi¬
cially regarded as a playing field. If a woman
returning from the well with a jar on her head
ventures onto the playing field and is jostled so
that the jar falls to the ground and breaks, then
she is the one who will be blamed, since "he who
unrolls his mat on the public highway is more
guilty than he who tramples on it."
However, if a diviner wearing his emblems
of office sets foot on the field the adolescents will
stand aside to let him pass. If he is jostled, the
parents of the culprits will immediately go and
apologize and make the appropriate offerings to
ward off misfortune.
Sometimes a false diviner is unmasked. The
impostor is considered a liar, a cheat and a
blasphemer, and is publicly mocked. If, as often
happens, he is an outsider to the village, he will
be expelled from it. The children ridicule his
gestures, his dances, chants and utterances. Could
this be the "narrow gap" through which a piece
of behaviour "slips from religion to play"? Not
at all. The children are laughing at a liar, not
turning a religious act into a game. The false
diviner is not a religious man, he is a man who
has cheated at religion just as one can cheat at
games. The children would never dare to imitate
a real diviner. His "spirit" would hear their
chants and see their dances and would "fall upon
them" (put them into a trance), exposing them
to serious illness or even death.
A fetish is not a toy
Historians today unanimously accept that, long
before they came into contact with the
monotheistic religions, the peoples of black
Africa acknowledged the existence of an all-
powerful Supreme Being, who had created the
world and was morally pure and infinitely good.
Like African hospitality, to which it is directly
linked, the idea of a Supreme Being is unfor¬
tunately disappearing.
Out of respect, Africans will not address the
Supreme Being directly. They approach Him by
way of his subordinate spirits which may inhabit
natural elements such as mountains, forests and
rivers or via manufactured objects commonly
known as fetishes. If these fetishes are defined as
objects from which protection is expected, how
do they differ from the holy water, scapularies,
miraculous medals and relics to which Europeans
are so attached?
Whatever the truth of this, for Africans no
fetish is absolute. It can be "spoiled" and lose its
power. When the spirit has left it, the object is
no longer sacred and is discarded. Does this mean
that children can use it as a toy? Never! It is often
said that human beings are only afraid of what
they do not understand. Familiarity casts out fear.
When people knew that a good spirit dwelt in
an object and that they could expect protection
from it, they were at ease with the fetish. But
once the good spirit went away, whatever the
reason, there was no guarantee that a wicked
spirit had not taken up residence there.
A desacralized object can never return to the
neutral state which it possessed before it became

sacred. This is what Béart noted in the case of
the religious statuettes that lie forgotten in French
attics. Take the case of a priest who leaves the
priesthood or a nun who leaves her Order. People
are always whispering behind their backs: "He
used to be a priest, he's an unfrocked priest, she
used to be a nun..." Their religious life has left
indelible traces on them. This is the natural atti¬
tude of all human beingswhether primitive or
civilizedfaced with what is holy, even those



who claim they are no longer believers.
Although play and holiness both proceed
from the idea of divinity, they are mutually exclu¬
sive and can never be present together.
War games and peace games
Ethnologists have been led astray by constant
reference to Greco-Roman civilization as a model
for all other civilizations. Today we talk of chil¬
dren's games, athletic games and Olympic games.
But ancient Greek and Latin had no generic term
that covered all these meanings. Agon, from
which the verb agonizomai, meaning to fight,
combat or compete is derived, designates games
played in a stadium and exercises to prepare for
war that were closely linked to worship of a god
(Apollo at Delphi, Zeus at Olympia). The Latin
word ludi has a similar meaning. Agon and ludus
are the origin of modern sport, the different dis¬
ciplines of which are called games.
The French word jeu, which is derived not
from ludus but from jocusrevels, joking and
jestingis closer to the majority of African words
used to designate this phenomenon whose expres¬
sions have nothing to do with the sacred.
An old proverb says: "When the Moon rises
all Africa dances". In the past African children,
adolescents, young men and girls would dance
and play on days of rest and moonlit nights. This
intense and continuous exercise of play was the
reflexion of a social state. Those who took part
were well-fed, healthy and joyful, for this was a
time when even sub-Saharan Africa had enough
food. Another old proverb says: "If a child owns
a pool, we fish there for him, not for ourselves."
This principle acts as a guarantee of the social
peace which is a pre-condition of inner peace,
mutual confidence and the enjoyment of play.
We can thus conclude that, in African
society, and probably in all other societies too,
play is not derived from expressions of the sacred.
It would be more accurate to say that man's con¬
ception of divinity determines his overall
behaviour, of which play is only one element.
One might even say, "Tell me who your God
is and I will tell you who you are and what games
you play."
In a Senegalese village,
women make fun of men's
wrestling matches.
1. Robert H. Lowie, History of
Classical Ethnology.
2. Charles Darwin, The Descent
ofMan and Selection in
Relation to Sex.
3. Charles Béart, Jeux et jouets
de l'Ouest africain, Dakar,
IFAN 1955.
4. Charles Béart, "Histoire des
jeux" in Jeux et sports,
Encyclopédie de la Pléiade, vol.
XXIII, Paris, Gallimard, 1967.
5. Marcel Griaule, Jeux dogon,
Musée de l'Homme, Paris 1938.
6. Roger Caillois, Les jeux et les
hommes, Paris, Gallimard 1958.
7. Roger Caillois, "Nature et
jeux" in Jeux et sports,
Encyclopédie de la Pléiade, vol.
XXIII, Paris, Gallimard, 1967. 33
