by Manfred Osten
Two kindred
Contemporaries and geniuses both, the composer of The Magic Flute
and the author of Faust were ahead of their time and hold out a mirror to our own
26
VJoETHE had a very high opinion of The Magic
Flute (K. 620, 1791), Mozart's last opera, and
staged it almost a hundred times during the period
when he was director of the theatre at Weimar.
In 1795, four years after the composer's death,
he began to write a sequel to The Magic Flute, but
got no further than the beginning of the second
act. Goethe's project may be seen as a late tribute
from one creator who was not of his time to
another whom he perceived as a kindred spirit.
When in 1830 Goethe evoked the long-dead
Mozart, the image that came to his mind was that
of the child prodigy, the "little man with his wig
and sword" who at the age of seven had given
a concert at Cologne. Was he conjuring up a
nostalgic picture of a rococo past that had gone
for ever? How in that case can we explain the
explosions of violence in some of Mozart's work,
a vehemence which is in flagrant contradiction
with the musical and artistic conventions of his
time?
Autonomy and clemency
To answer this question we must go back as far
as Mozart's second visit to Paris in 1778. The
vaudevilles and comic operas performed in the
French capital at that time contained social criti¬
cism which foreshadowed the coming political
upheavals. Melchior Grimm, Mozart's German
mentor and protector in Paris, made no secret of
his political affiliations as a friend of Voltaire and
Diderot. Something of this must have rubbed off
onto Mozart. His wife Constance told the music
publisher Novello that one of her husband's
favourite books was a nine-volume work that was
on the Index. "A revolutionary French work",
Novello concluded, and may well have been
right.
This hypothesis is amply confirmed by
Mozart's seven great operas, which were com¬
posed in the decade leading up to the French
Revolution. These ten years saw a growing dis
trust of religious and secular absolutism, and a
growing demand, both from thinkers and oper¬
atic librettists, for the independence of the
individual. The hermetic world of the baroque
dissolved into the fascinating yet terrifying
prospect of the modern. It was in the Utopian
world of the opera that Mozart celebrated this
moment of hope in a humanity whose members
could live together on equal terms. In his tragedy
Iphigenia in Tauris (1787) Goethe also saluted this
historic moment by expressing his faith in utopia,
although he did so only in passing and his tone
was ironical.
Goethe's Iphigenia and Mozart's Pamina are
characters who herald a time when mankind will
throw off its shackles, both literally and
metaphorically. They dare to imagine the eman¬
cipation of humanity from above and from
below. Goethe, however, insists that the
individual can only achieve complete autonomy
if "external and completely unexpected factors
come to his aid". This intervention is a form of
grace, a pardon, an act of clemency. Pamina
expresses this link between the realm of grace (the
ultimate and already resigned act of a single
person who is the sovereign) and the realm of
autonomy (that of the individual freed and
revealed unto himself). Pamina, like Iphigenia,
calls down an unexpected intervention from on
high. She persuades and even forces the sovereign
to be merciful to her.
In 1985 the dramatist and theatre critic Ivan
Nagel noted in his reflections on Mozart's operas
that "Initially musical classicism aspires to an
overall improvement in the human condition.
Such an aspiration could only emerge during the
brief alliance between the nobility and the bour¬
geoisie which took place in Vienna and Weimar
under the protection of enlightened despotism."
This "protection", Nagel added, "soon stood
revealed as a political daydream". Pamina and
Iphigenia thus seem united in a fleeting Utopian
moment.

spirits: Goethe and Mozart
The living present
Mozart is nothing if not elusive. He is, as Nagel
has pointed out, a truly protean spirit whose
genius oscillates between two poles: the Ancien
Regime's idea of pardon as an act of mercy
granted from above, and a belief in the autonomy
of the individual. For Mozart, the idea of pardon
is at the heart of eighteenth-century opera seria,
whereas autonomy is the guiding principle of the
great musical dramas which he composed
between 1781 and 1791 and which broke with
a form that had become ossified.
Was Mozart a traveller between different
worlds? During the summer of 1791, while in
France the people arrested the fleeing King and
Queen, he was composing for Emperor Leopold
II, who had been crowned King of Bohemia, an
opera celebrating a sovereign who is merciful to
all conspirators (La clemenza di Tito, K. 621).
If this was a step backward, it was cancelled
out by two steps forward. In Don Giovanni,
Mozart clearly anticipates the future, the rapid
and self-wrought eclipse of the Enlightenment by
ideology. In the person of Don Giovanni, an ego
of boundless autonomy is brought down by a
curse. The seducer's freedom is sacrificed in the
name of the same bourgeois morality as that rev¬
ealed in the second act of The Magic Flute. In the
masonic music it is possible to discern the out¬
line of a society which regards virtue as the only
universal value and shuns as evil any behaviour
that diverges from this norm.
Between these different worlds, Mozart has
a place of .his own, one that is simultaneously
visible and yet secretthe buffa movement at the
end of The Marriage ofFigaro (K. 492, 1786). Ivan
Nagel believes that this final movement reveals
with consummate perfection "a way of living in
the present unburdened by nostalgia, an
unprecedented freedom with regard to utopia
which is the culmination of the new musical art."
Why? Because here a sovereign incapable of an
act of pardon is graciously admitted into the
Knight of the opera. Above,
Mozart in the regalia of the
Order of the Golden Spur.
Anonymous painting (1777).
Left, Goethe in the
countryside near Rome (1787,
detail), by the German painter
Johann Heinrich Wilhelm
Tischbein (1751-1829).
27

singers' stage fellowship, into the "non-
totalitarian whole" that they form, in the unity,
the long dreamed-of fusion between happiness
and society, reason and nature.
It is hardly surprising that Goethe should see
in the prodigious creator of this operatic grace
the repository of a metaphysicalor rather
"demoniac"natural grace. "To tease and trick
humanity, demons often use solitary creatures
they have endowed with an irresistible power of
seduction. . . . They have made Mozart an
untouchable musical figure."
It is precisely this inaccessible aspect of
Mozart, the miraculous state of grace that his exis¬
tence represented, which makes him seem a man
who did not belong to his time. This would also
be the fate of Goethe, of whom Nietzsche
observed in 1886 that "His existence has no con¬
nection with his nation. He livedand still
livesonly for a few. ... In the history of the
Germans, Goethe is an interlude without a
sequel."
The solitude of genius
Mozart's early biographers saw a connection
between the disfavour into which Mozart fell at
the end of his life and his celebrity as a child
prodigy. The young Mozart and his sister were
admired as phenomena that could be tested by
musicians, analysed by philosophers, and coaxed
and wheedled by European princesses. But that
was not all. Their very existence seemed a
manifestation of divine grace in keeping with the
concept of the miraculous which was still widely
current at that time. The general public was more
than ready to admire the image of the child
prodigy. Mozart's final years, and the ever-
widening gap between current musical conven¬
tions and his own style were unable to affect this
^wuui.u
DON JUAN
-" '-/4
CAMILLE SCHUBERT
Mozart for the ballroom.
Dance music based on
Mozart's Don Giovanni.
(19th-century French
engraving).

limited vision. When in the middle of his life
Mozart chose freedom of personal expression, he
experienced increasing solitude. What posterity
considers a prodigious step forward in quality was
greeted by his contemporaries with amazement
and incomprehension.
The operas and chamber music in particular
aroused hostility. Haydn, who had developed the
classical string quartet from galante music, was
seen as a conciliator. He knew how to make the
new musical genre acceptable to music-lovers and
connoisseurs. Mozart, whose composition of
string quartets was so close to Haydn, was fiercely
criticized. In 1782 in the "Musikalischen Kunst-
magasin", the influential Berlin composer Johann
Friedrich Reichardt openly criticized Mozart's
instrumental music for being "extremely
unnatural" since it is "first joyful then suddenly
sad and then, just as abruptly, joyful again."
According to Nissen, one of Mozart's first
biographers, when Mozart's friend and publisher,
the composer Anton Hoffmeister, handed over
to Mozart the royalties for the quartets for piano
and strings (K. 478 and K. 493) which were selling
poorly, he begged him not to compose the other
four quartets included in the contract and advised
him to "Write in the popular style, otherwise I
cannot pay for or print anything else for you."
To set against this lack of understanding there
is the famous verdict which Haydn sent to
Leopold Mozart in February 1785, just after he
had heard the last and most audacious of the
quartets Mozart had dedicated to him, the "Dis¬
sonances" (K. 465). "I tell you before God,"
Haydn wrote, "your son is the greatest composer
known to me in person or by name: he has taste,
and what is more the greatest knowledge of com¬
position." Between the demands of his art and
the expectations of the public, there was no place
for Mozart's genius in his own time. Goethe

suffered a similar fate. Why? A genius of equal
stature, he made a similar attempt to accept
historicity while also sapping it from within. This
conflict ended in an act of renunciation, both the¬
oretical and practical. The writer who did not



belong to his time decided not to publish part 2
of Faust even though it was completed. He
refused to allow his central preoccupation to be
set before his contemporaries in his lifetime.
Goethe's legacy to Mozart
This isolation culminated in the paradox of an
existence divided between representativity and
marginality. Goethe lived much longer than
Mozart. After his youthful successes with Götz
and Werther, Goethe gradually ascended to a
"sovereign height"though this is not apparent
if we look at the long sequence of crises and
failures, half-successes and disappointments which
he experienced, a disharmony between a man and
his age which several times led him to flight.
Iphigenia, sister-figure of Mozart's Pamina, is part
of this flightthe play was, incidentally, a literary
failure. The same phenomenon can be seen in
Goethe's designation, four years before his own
death and thirty-seven years after that of Mozart,
of the musician as testamentary executor of his
"central preoccupation", namely his Faust.
The solitary writer of the Restoration,
hemmed in by the champions of Germanity and
by liberals, caught between ancients and moderns,
chose Mozart as posthumous witness of his
untimeliness and entrusted to him his great work.
This drama which expresses a disconcerting
hostility towards his age, albeit tempered by
irony and symbolism, this tragi-comedy of
humanity and its errors, Goethe handed to the
creator of Don Giovanni. His faithful secretary
Eckermann noted on 12 February 1829 that
"Mozart should have composed the music for
Faust."
Goethe, citizen of the world and inhabitant
of Weimar, cosmopolitan and provincial, subject
of a kingdom located somewhere between "no
longer" and "not yet", could be sociologically
defined as a transitional phase between the pre- and
post-bourgeoisie. In a letter dated 3 November
1820 he noted "... There are still many . . . fan¬
tastic errors. Our friend Faust should pass that
way too." Perhaps only Mozart could have com¬
posed the music to accompany these "fantastic
errors", this Faustian story, immemorial yet ever
topical, in which man passes from illusion to dis¬
appointment, a tale of love and violence, of war
and economic intoxication, right up to the final
moments of grace and redemption.
Goethe was certain that only Mozart could
have managed this successfully. The music
appropriate to Faust must contain elements that
are "repugnant, frightful and repellent," he
wrote, "and that would displease my contem¬
poraries. The music should be in the spirit oí Don
Giovanni. " For Goethe, Mozart's opera also con¬
tained features that were repugnant, frightful and
repellent, and he situated it at the opposite pole
to that of the Apollonian, solar grace, which
would give the age an aura that Wagner called
a "Mozartian ethos of love and light".
Goethe's Faust also has repellent features. In
his Xenies, Goethe said that the hero of Faust was
a man-devil (Teufelskerl): "The devil should be a
world unto himself/To harbour such repellent
things." On 6 May 1827, he even suggested a
parallel between the destiny of this "Teufelskerl"
and Don Giovanni's journey to hell: "There are
those who ask what idea I sought to embody in
my Faust; as if I could know and say! From
heaven to hell, passing through the world, one
could formulate it thus. . . ."
Are Faust and Don Giovanni, two hell-bent
travellers, kindred spirits? And Mozart and
Goethe? Contemporaries not of their time,
yesterday and today? Perhaps this is the secret of
their eternal timelinessnot the superior, tran¬
scendent human nature it is so often claimed that
they possessed, but rather the energy with which
each of them opened the door to the modern era.
The water spaniel (seated
Faust), by the French artist
Jean-Paul Laurens
(1838-1921).
MANFRED OSTEN,
German writer and diplomat, is
cultural adviser at the German
Embassy in Tokyo (Japan). He
has written poems, and essays
on Goethe, Mozart, Schubert
and Hölderin, and has
published many articles in
leading German newspapers.
He is currently preparing a
collection of literary portraits
of Japanese writers. 29
