'A desire for eternity'
by Alexandre Cioranescu
Novelists who are haunted by time, manipulate it in their work, and try to escape from it by the
very act of writing
Above, Where Do We Come
From? What Are We? Where
Are We Going? (1897),
by the French artist
Paul Gauguin (1848-1903).
0,'F all the familiar features of our daily lives,
time is the one we know least about. We shall
never fully understand its mysteries, still less iso¬
late and tame it.
Yet time is not a distant, indifferent truth,
like a star which we know to be inaccessible. We
are totally dependent upon it. Time makes and
unmakes us, obliges us to exist and yet not know
what will become of us. Our pact with time is
both metaphysical and make-believe. Yet though
it leaves a permanent and indelible mark, its
presence escapes us.
The important place time holds in literature
and the arts is revealing, for not only does it have
an impact on our lives and our thinking, it also
weighs like an obsession on our imagination and
on our feelings.
The old man with the scythe
Although no specific image is attached to it, the
concept of time is omnipresent in the plastic arts.
It has been portrayed countless times allegorically
or symbolically, in terms of its attributes and of
the traces it leaves behind.
First of all, time is seen as responsible for
physical decline and death. Thus it has been iden¬
tified with the figure of Death, traditionally por¬
trayed in Western art as an image of old age and
decrepitude and sometimes even as a corpse.
Generally speaking, however, Time is depicted
in medieval and Renaissance art in the shape of
a skeletal old man with a long white beard. He
holds a great scythe, the symbol of collective
death, and carries a lantern, indicating that a life
is about to be extinguished. This allegory is used
to portray both Time and Death.
Some painters have evoked the passing of
time by showing the contrast between old age and
childhood or between the ages of man. The suc¬
cession of the generations may be represented as
a peaceful guarantee of continuity. It can also be
portrayed as the violent irruption of the young
who eliminate the old, the classic example being
that of the Greek god Chronos (the Roman
Saturn), who toppled his father from the throne
only to be toppled in his turn by his own son
Zeus (the Roman Jupiter). The notion of time is
also evident in the theme of decomposition, as
seen in sculptures of the dead and in certain
paintings, the most eloquent of which is the
Spanish artist Juan de Valdés Leal's famous work 37

38
Finis Gloriae Mundi (1672). Another form of
reflection on the theme of the passing of time can
be seen in the studies of ruins which were
fashionable in the painting, poetry and garden
design of the late eighteenth century.
Novelists who conjure
with time
In literature, obsession with time is even more
central. There are many ways in which the dread
of time enters the process of literary creation, for
literature more than painting lends itself to the
evocation of time. In literature an image of time
can be created which, if not more exact, is at least
more intelligible and closer to our phantasms.
Literature has always drawn its inspiration
from real life, from the mysteries of the inner life
or the problems of human relationships. It is not
surprising, therefore, that time should be so
important in the structure of literary works, espe¬
cially in epic or narrative literature. Time punc¬
tuates the novelist's thoughts. As the French critic
Albert Thibaudet (1874-1936) once remarked,
temporality is the key to the composition of the
novel.
As in the theatre and in the epic poem (a
genre that today has disappeared), the content of
the traditional novelits plotis a voyage
through time that mimics what happens in life.
The episodes unfold in chronological order. It is
rather like what happens in the theatre, where
no actor would venture on stage before receiving
his cue.
Logical and easy to follow, this type of nar¬
rative has been used in imaginative literature for
Finis Gloriae Mundi
by the Spanish artist Juan de
Valdés Leal (1622-1690), an
allegory on the vanity of the
world and the flesh.
over 2,000 years. It also allows a writer to take
certain liberties. From time to time a classic
author may suddenly say "I forgot to say that..."
as a pretext for departing from a strict chrono¬
logical framework in order to recount an episode
which it would have been difficult to describe in
its proper time sequence. Some novelists make
excessive use of this subterfuge just for the
pleasure of playing with time. In Laurence
Sterne's Tristram Shandy (1759) the sequence of
the story returns so often to the past that the
action seems to go backwards rather than
forwards.
With the Romantics, playing with time
became current practice in narrative literature.
The simplest method was to use a kind of con¬
juring trick as the American author Washington
Irving did in his famous tale Rip Van Winkle, the
hero of which falls asleep for twenty years,
perhaps to escape from his shrewish wife, whom
he allows enough time to die.
Roaming through the centuries
The European Romantics gave a new importance
to the recapturing of the past through memory.
In the words of George Sand's Lélia (1833), "The
main occupation of my life was constantly to turn
back to lost joys". In the twentieth century,
Marcel Proust's novel A la recherche du temps
perdu is dominated by the narrator's search for
"lost time". But "the remembrance of things
past" is a difficult process because of what Proust
calls the heart's intermissionswhen feeling and
memory do not go hand in hand. Memory only
lights up the past in fits and starts. It is through
an involuntary memory, not true remembrance,
that time is regained.
Other writers have gone much further back
in time. The great nineteenth-century Romanian
poet Mihail Eminescu made his Poor Denis travel
back to the beginning of the fifteenth century.
Ravage, by the contemporary French author
René Barjavel, is a novel of paradox: his traveller
into the past finds himself unable to return to the
present.
Novelists move about just as freely in the
future. Anticipatory novels already have a long
and glorious history stretching from the seven¬
teenth century to the present day. One of the
earliest was the seventeenth-century writer Abbé
de Pure's Epigone. H.G. Wells's The Time Machine
(1895), is a classic of time exploration which has
inspired many modern works. Louis Sébastien

Death and the Woodcutter
(1859), engraving after a
painting by the French artist
Jean-François Millet.

Mercier's visitation of Paris in The Year 2440
(1771) is another notable example of the genre.
There is another form of literature that
delights in breaking the rules of time. Superfi¬
cially it appears to respect chronological order
but actually it scorns the notion of life-span, of
"real" time, and, like the Wandering Jew, its
characters roam across the centuries. The hero
of Virginia Woolf's Orlando (1928) is sixteen
years old at the start of the novel and thirty-six
when it ends. This would be a perfectly normal
period were it not for the fact that, in the mean¬
time, 342 years have elapsed, during which the
hero has assumed a variety of characters of both
sexes. In Borges' story The Immortal, a twentieth-
century antique dealer rubs shoulders with the
great figures of Antiquity.
Many modern writers have no scruples about
chronology and refuse to see time as a narrative
constraint. The novel ceases to be action and
becomes "stasis", or a contraction of time. In
Alain Robbe-Grillet's "film/novel" Last Year in
Marienbad (1961) the universe becomes "a per¬
petual present, which makes all recourse to
memory impossible". Chronological telescoping
and banality of action are the hallmarks of the
works of Claude Simon. In William Faulkner's
writing chronological disorder is so marked that
to his Absalom, Absalom! (1936), an exploration
across time which pays no attention to the
chronological sequence of events, he felt it neces¬
sary to add a chronology indicating the time and
place at which each episode occurred.
Seizing the moment
This deliberate attempt to banish temporality
from literature is liable to be seen purely as an
exercise in virtuosity. Is it not, perhaps, more
apparent than real? Even when the attention is
not drawn to it, the sense of time remains
indelibly in the background. To pretend to forget
time is to wish to eliminate the precarious,
ephemeral nature of all that is touched by time.
It is not time that the writer seeks to suppress
but the fragility that time imposes on all things.
Here the absence of time implies not a void, but
a desire for eternity.
The mind is troubled by the eternal, the
desire to endurethe dread of history is only a
passing anxiety. Anguish comes from the cruel
knowledge that eternity can only be attained
within the void of the after-life. It is felt by all
writers and poets. This is what William Blake was 39

Imaginary View of the Grand
Gallery of the Louvre in Ruins
(1796), by the French
landscape painter Hubert
Robert (1733-1808).
40
ALEXANDRE CIORANESCU,
Romanian-born writer
specializing in literary studies,
has published a number of
works on French, Spanish and
Romanian literature, as well as
essays on comparative
literature including "The
Baroque or the Discovery of
Drama" (in Spanish) and "The
Mask and the Face" (1983, in
French). He has also translated
Dante's Divine Comedy, the
writings of Christopher
Columbus, and other historical
works.
thinking of when he wrote that it was his duty
to "open up eternal worlds".
How can this challenge be met? Some valiant
attempts have been made to identify the point
at which the contradictions of time disappear. For
Dante, these contradictions are resolved in a
present that he finds in God. For Shelley, in a
concomitant vision of past, present and future.
For Novalis, time is a condensation into a
spiritual present which identifies past and future
by merging one with the other. If all these intui¬
tions are no more than subterfuges of the imagi¬
nation, they are nevertheless ways of giving
permanence to time.
One much-used way of achieving this con¬
cretion is to make time stand still at a given
moment. Jean-Jacques Rousseau relates how, on
the island of Saint-Pierre, he experienced
moments of happiness in which time ceased to
exist and the present seemed to be eternal.
According to Proust, "a minute freed from
the order of time has recreated in us, so that we
can feel it, a man freed from the order of time"
it liberates us from what we have called the dread
of history. In Finnegans Wake (1939), James Joyce
condenses (or expands) the content of a moment's
experience into 600 pages. The experience,
however, is frustrating, since the time it takes to
read the book dilates and dispels its time frame.
Writers have other ways of dispelling the
dread of history. One of them is to create an
artificial paradise. For Baudelaire, intoxication by
wine or hashish is one way of obliterating time.
Suicide, apologia for which are to be found in the
works of Schopenhauer and in John Donne's
Biathanatos, is another. Any method is valid if
we accept Baltasar Gracián's proposition that
"living is a way of dying every day". Yet it is
a hollow victory to defeat death by dying.
What, then, is time in terms of the writer,
the time experienced by the creator at work?
Writing is a way of arresting time or escaping
from it. Mircea Eliade wrote of "liturgical time",
which vitrifies the present, links all such vitrified
moments outside real time, and thus gives us a
glimpse of eternity. Whether in literature, the
visual arts, or scientific research, the creator is
enmeshed in an imaginary present which, like
mystic meditation or the contemplation of an
artificial paradise, obliterates awareness of other
times.
What does time mean for the reader? My
own view is that the possibility of eluding the
dread of history by escaping into what is perma¬
nent, if not eternal, has a counterpart in the free
space of time spent reading. Readers are also cre¬
ators in their fashion, since they rebuild in their
imagination images which would otherwise
remain lifeless and inert. At the same time they
are immersed in the fixed time of reading. They
may feel anguish but it will be a cathartic anguish
that will affect their own present.
Reading, too, is a kind of liturgy. Perhaps
Cortázar's "dear reader" was right in feeling, as
he read, that "everything had been decided from
the beginning".
