At peace with the past
Chinese humanist thought contemplates the passing of time with equanimity
I
20
XIONG BINGMING,
Chinese writer and philosopher,
was formerly professor of
philosophy and Chinese
literature, and director of the
Chinese department, at the
Institut National de Langues et
Civilisations Orientales, Paris.
His publications include Zhang
Xu et la calligraphie cursive
folle.
N Chinese culture, the supreme goal is the
accomplishment of an ideal person. This hu¬
manism is so deeply embedded in Chinese
thought that strictly speaking it leaves no room
for philosophical debate about the nature of time.
The Chinese have always been strongly aware
of the relationship between space and time and
the living world, as the very terms used in their
language to describe the world and the universe
attest, but they have never sought to study these
concepts in the abstract. Instead they set about
developing instruments and techniques for meas¬
uring time. China had a functioning calendar by
the second millennium BC, and it was in China
that the sundial and the clepsydra or water clock
were first developed.
What philosophical problems has the idea of
time raised in China? And how has the subject
been treated in Chinese literature, especially in
poetry? These are the questions I intend to
address, starting from the definition of time given
in the Huainanzi, an important philosophical
work written in the second century BC: "time
is that which goes away and becomes the past;
that which arrives and becomes the present."
'The Sun at its zenith
is already going down'
For the ancient Chinese, the world was not the
work of a Creator. Only later do texts describe
the creation of the world by Bangu, a "cosmic
man" whose body gave birth to the different
parts of the world. And not until the fourth cen¬
tury AD, with the pantheon of Taoist gods, do
we find a symbolic conceptualization of the var¬
ious aspects of the universe at its creation. Then
the original, undifferentiated state of non-being
becomes the August Lord of the Way of Empti¬
ness (Xu huang daojun), who engenders existence.
If we can divide the past into two great
channels, the history of the universe and of the
human race respectively, it becomes apparent that
the followers of Kongzi (the man better known
in the West as Confucius) were primarily
interested in the latter, which is to say in history
properly so-called, putting the emphasis on social
life and on cultural tradition. When Confucius
refers to history, he is really only speaking of the
reigns of the emperors Yao and Shun. In his view,
cultural life and moral consciencethe great Con¬
fucian principlesonly made their appearance in
Chinese life under these two exemplary
emperors.
The Taoist vision, though, extends beyond
human life to examine the origins of the Earth
and the heavens. According to Laozi (or Lao-tzu,
as he used to be known in the West), the author
of the basic Taoist text the Daodejing ("The Book
of the Way and its Power"), "There was an
indeterminate being before the formation of
Heaven and Earth." In another passage he pushes
back the horizons of time: "The Dao begot One.
One begot Two. Two begot Three. And Three
begot all other beings."
This "succession" obviously takes place in
time, but it also goes beyond the very notion of
temporality. For "non-being" does not disappear
with the creation of being; on the contrary, it is
the very basis of being. Its primordial importance
can be compared with that of the space in a house,
the emptiness without which the house itself
could not exist.
Laozi has nothing to say about what preceded
non-being at the very origin of the universe. Two
centuries later another Taoist philosopher, Zhu-
angzi (Chuang-tzu), turned his mind to the
problem, only to conclude that reason cannot
provide any satisfactory response because of the
limitations of language. For him as for Laozi
before him, true knowledge transcends language:
"Who knows does not speak, who speaks does
not know."
The Legalists of the eighth to the third cen¬
tury BC were particularly interested in the theory
and practice of politics. The only history that
concerned them was social history. Their greatest
figure, Hanfeizi, who died in 234 BC, had a
"dialectical" conception of social development
that has parallels with the theories of some
modern historians. He introduced the idea of
progress in history, departing radically from the
Confucianists and Taoists for whom the ancient
world was the ideal.

The bl, a flat disk with a hole
in the centre, was an
astronomical instrument in
ancient China, where it was
also regarded as a symbol of
heaven. A hollow tubular
eyepiece fitted into the hole.
Left, the notches around the
circumference of the jade
model shown here (c. 500 BC)
correspond to the bearings of
the major constellations.
But it was Huishi and Gongsun Long, the
philosophers of the school of thought known as
the Dialecticians, who in the fourth and third cen¬
turies BC became the first to consider time in
itself as an abstract principle. Unfortunately, vir¬
tually nothing remains of Huishi's works other
than the "Ten Paradoxes" that his friend Zhu-
angzi passed down without, however, including
the reasoning that would explain the master's
thought processes.
One of Huishi's formulas, "The Sun at its
zenith is already going down", emphasizes the
way in which time is both instantaneous and
continuous. Another much-discussed paradox
that has been explained in many different ways
runs: "Today I am going to Yue (a region of
southern China), and yet I arrived yesterday." Its
purpose seems to be to underline the relative
nature of such notions as "today", "tomorrow" or
A Chinese-designed
clepsydra (water clock) in
which time was measured
by the water level rising in
the lowest reservoir. It was
used in the 11th century.
(19th-century German
engraving).
21

"yesterday". Almost as soon as we use the word
"today", it has after all passed into yesterday.
Two of Huishi's other paradoxes "An arrow in
flight is motionless even though it has not
stopped", and "The flying bird's shadow does not
move" seem inspired by the philosophical thesis
that it is not possible to conceptualize movement.
The Chinese interest in history showed itself
very early on. In the Shang era, eleven centuries
before the birth of Christ, court chroniclers were
already recording events and discourses. When¬
ever one dynasty succeeded another, scholars
were summoned to write the history of the
dynasty that had ended. Many historical works
were also written by individuals. Confucius
initiated the genre with his Annals ofSpring and
ofAutumn, which sought to provide both moral
instruction and a critique of the past.*
The Chinese live in a symbiotic relationship
with the past. This explains the importance of
the clan and the cult of ancestors in daily life. In
philosophy, it leads to a stress on the continuity
of Chinese cultural traditions from the remotest
past. Chinese writing has not changed over the
centuries, and the problems debated by thinkers
3,000 years ago are still topical today. The events
and personalities of China's long history still
inspire writers and artists, who keep them alive,
rich with symbolic associations, in the collective
consciousness.
Ways of defying time
"We do not even understand life, so how could
we possibly know death?" Confucius asked.
Although his followers paid great attention to
funerary rites and to the etiquette of mourning,
they were not much concerned with the thought
of what happens after death or the fate of the soul.
They did believe, however, that dead people lived
on in the memory of the living, and they pro¬
posed rules of conduct to assure that kind of sur¬
vival. In the sixth century BC, for instance,
Shusun Bao defined "Three things that will not
decay": "practise virtue", "acquire merit" and
"write texts to pass on to posterity".
For their part, the Taoists were so enamour¬
ed of life that they sought actively to prolong it.
Laozi thought that it was possible to achieve lon¬
gevity and defy the passage of time by preserving
a child's vitality. The Taoist religion came up
with various ways of doing this, from breathing
exercises to the consumption of cinnabar-based
elixirs. It sought to change humankind radically
and give it immortality.
Buddhism, through the doctrine of samsara,
introduced the idea of reincarnation. An adept
who accumulated sufficient merit in the course
of one life could be reborn in the next on a higher
plane of existence, continuing in the same way
through subsequent lives until he finally reached
Sage beneath a Willow
or The Drunken Poet,
anonymous Chinese painting
of the Song dynasty
(10th-13th century).
r\r\ * See tne article by Huo Datong, "The emperor's all-seeing eye",
¿.¿. in the UNESCO Courier, March 1990.
a state of timeless perfection in which the wheel
of reincarnation would cease to turn. The Budd¬
hist way thereby became a quest for self-annih¬
ilation "without life or death" as the monk Faling
put it at the beginning of the Tang era.
Buddhism also introduced into Chinese
thought the idea of the end of the world, which
was to come only after long and precisely-
calculated cycles of creation and destruction. Both
the concept itself and this way of enumerating
the different stages in the process were adopted
and developed by the Neo-Confucianists of the
Song dynasty, from the tenth to the thirteenth
centuries AD. It is typically Chinese that the

annihilation of the world, however tragic it might
seem, is nevertheless seen as a natural
phenomenon rather than a punishment visited on
the world by the gods.
The present: action or contemplation?
"Everything flows like water, nothing stops by
day or night," Confucius wrote with feeling. The
sight of running water brought to his mind the
passage of time, tormenting him with a tragic
awareness of the way in which life confronts man
with tasks he knows he cannot accomplish. It is
the first poetic meditation on the ephemeral in
Chinese culture.
Faced with such transience, how should we
react? Confucianists believe that people should
seize the passing moment, develop strong perso¬
nalities and make themselves useful to the com¬
munity. Such restlessness and social responsibility
are alien to the Taoist ideal, which is concerned
with contemplation and communion with the
universe. The Taoist sage seeks a path to the time¬
less even in the passage of time itself. His only
Celebrants light incense
sticks during a ceremony held
to honour ancestors at the
Temple of Foshan, Guangdong
province, southern China.
ambition is to enjoy existence in the quietude of
a peaceful and simple life. Time's passing causes
him no anxiety that cannot be dissipated through
the exercise of wisdom.
There is a well-known story by Zhuangzi, in
which the author dreamed that he was a butterfly
fluttering hither and thither without knowing it
was Zhuangzi. When he woke up, he did not
know whether he was Zhuangzi dreaming that
he was a butterfly, or the butterfly dreaming that
it was Zhuangzi. Maybe life itself, the story
implies, is just a long dream from which death
will awaken us.
It was, however, the writers and poets rather
than the philosophers who were to express most
sublimely the terror of time's passing. Expressing
his anxiety about serving his country in a long
autobiographical poem, the Lisao, at the turn of
the fourth century BC, Qu Yuan, one of the
founders of the nation's poetic tradition, speaks
of his disillusionment and laments the flight of
time. "Old age is taking me/Before I have been
able to win renown." By the end of the Han era,
in the second century AD, the attitude of poets
diversified. Some chose Epicureanism ("Let us
rejoice today./Why wait until tomorrow?").
Others pursued fame and reputation: "The
human body.. .dies like everything that lives.
Making a name, that's the real treasure." Yet
others' sought a solution in alcoholic oblivion.
"It's an illusion, swallowing the drugs of immor¬
tality; better drink good wine and go dressed in
silk."
In its ambiguity, the attitude of the best-
known of the Song poets, Su Dongpo (1037-1101)
seems particularly indicative of the Chinese poetic
sensibility. In his Memory of the Red Cliff, he
praises the heroic age of the Three Kingdoms
while at the same time regretting that they have
disappeared like so many chimeras. Is he
optimistic or pessimistic? I would say both. He
has a Confucian ardour for addressing worldly
matters, yet at the same time shows a
metaphysical detachment, not to say lack of
involvement, that derives from Taoism.
23
