y tí í mi i
Sport and play
Have the critics of modern sport gone too far?
by Georges Magnane
MLodern sport has been criticized by many
writers who have expressed their disapproval of
those sporting activities that no longer contain
an element of play. They maintain that, whether
the element of play has been destroyed by too
serious an approach or has simply degenerated
into childishness, what is left is no longer a game
but what the Dutch historian Johan Huizinga
called its "grimace".
If competitive sport really did extinguish the
spirit of play, we should unhesitatingly suggest
that it be banned. But careful consideration sug¬
gests that training for sport, whatever the level,
does not deserve so severe a condemnation.
Even professional and amateur stars of such
particularly demanding sports as soccer, cycling
or boxing have not necessarily ceased to consider
themselves as people at play. One might even say
that those athletes who are the hardest on them¬
selves and approach their task with the zest of
an artist, only succeed if they keep the sense of
boundless freedom and audacity which alone can
produce the spark of geniusin artists we would
call it inspirationthat allows them to surpass
themselves. And that is precisely the attitude of
the adult or child who plays just for the fun of it.
Exceptional sporting achievementsrecords,
victories in international matches or the
Olympicsare to athletes what masterpieces are
to artists. The poet Guillaume Apollinaire once
wrote that "Artists are above all else men who
want to become inhuman". Adapting his for¬
mula, one might say that champions are men
trying to make themselves superhuman. In
attempting to achieve something extraordinary-
something that Huizinga, speaking of poetry,
described as "exorbitant"the champion is
demonstrating play's highest vocation, which is
to surmount human nature.
Never mind, then, if the faint-hearted or ill-
informed find training cruel or frightening. As
long as the athletes themselves fix the amount
of effort they put into it, they are free and can
be said to be playing....
Anyone who practises a competitive sport
voluntarily and conscientiously for a single
season has an opportunity to realize that training
has an element of play in it. However completely
athletes submit to the demands of their trainers,
they never forget that they have freely chosen
this apparent passivity. They know that they can
withdraw from the situation if they want to. But
the chances are that they won't. The humilia¬
tion of quitting would be too great, so a sense
of honour keeps them from giving in to dis¬
couragement or irritation.
Athletes thus voluntarily submit to an
apprenticeship that can justifiably be called work.
But it might just as accurately be described as
play, since it serves no useful purpose. It was not
the "serious" aspect of training that Huizinga
had in mind when he complained that the spirit
of play had virtually disappeared. He himself had
written, after all, that "Play can perfectly well
have a serious element". In fact it is only when
athletes lose their freedom that the element of
play disappears.
The French philosopher Alain (Emile
Chartier) defined the difference between work
and play thus: "If what matters is the action itself,
it is play; if the main thing is the purpose
achieved by the action, then it becomes work."
The entirely unproductive activity of the
sportsman or woman would be the best possible
illustration of his point, but the antithesis he
draws seems less than convincing.
Training is both a playful kind of work and
an industrious form of play. There is no clear
dividing line between work and play. Some
might argue that amateurs play whereas profes¬
sionals work, but that would be a gross oversim¬
plification. A few minutes' conversation with
Above, soccer on the beach, 120 km south of
Dakar (Senegal). 39

40
professional athletes is enough to show that their
attitudes are not necessarily different from those
of amateurs. Professionals only keep the quali¬
ties that have brought them success if they do
not lose the special kind of enthusiasm, akin to
a state of grace, which only exists in play.
Work becomes play if the worker does it for
its own sake, without considering the results.
When Aldous Huxley wrote "Work is fun, of
course", he was thinking of work which people
do willingly because it is the thing they do best.
He was talking about the work of a writer, which
he knew to be an end in itself. True writers put
pen to paper because they need to write, regard¬
less of whether they will get fabulous royalties
for their efforts or none at all. In the same way,
true sportsmen and sportswomen compete to
enjoy a sense of achievement, because the game
is their vocation.
So the distinction between amateur and
professional seems relatively unimportant, if not
actually a red herring. Instead of evaluating the
payments made to star players, we should exa¬
mine the conditions in which sports are practised.
When they take part in the sport they love, ath¬
letes give of their best without being paid. They
play for the sake of playing; and in so doing they
experience that sense of freedom and potential
that can transform people profoundly enough to
deserve the name of culture.
For sport, like any other form of play, is a
cultural activity. In Les jeux et les hommes, the
French thinker Roger Caillois recalls how when
he read Huizinga's book Homo Ludens, he began
to wonder whether "Everything might have
started with play". Although he goes on to reject
such an exclusive hypothesis, he still claims else¬
where in the book that "Culture and play are
consubstantial".
There is an obvious similarity between atti¬
tudes associated with play and attitudes associated
with culture. Both allow man to achieve spon¬
taneity. Never mind whether this spontaneity
is the result of a miracle or of long effort. The
discoveries of poets and scientists can be made
in either way, but the sublime moments of dis¬
covery are always accompanied by the burning
enthusiasm and the sense of doing something for
its own sake that characterize play.
Doubtless sport is not one of the major con¬
duits of culture. It is one of them, nevertheless,
and it is accessible to great numbers of people,
not just the tiny, gifted minority whose perfor¬
mances are celebrated as masterpieces. Those who
take part in sport at any level experience the same
emotions, the same moments of triumphant
freedom.
A love of accuracy and the search for balance
and control are essential preconditions for any
kind of cultural activity. Those who do not dis¬
cipline themselves firmly right from the start will
never travel far along the path of knowledge.
Spectators at sporting events want to know
every detail of the rules of the game they are
watching so that they miss nothing and under¬
stand everything that happens on the pitch. A
French factory worker explained his love of sport
in this way: "At least you're sure to see some¬
thing real. Everything happens before your
eyes."
Sporting events constitute a system of evalu¬
ation which is offered to the public. This explains
the extraordinary atmosphere on the terraces.
The cry of 100,000 spectators swelling up like
a sudden storm is the modern equivalent of the
catharsis the ancient Greeks expected from clas¬
sical drama. The sporting public is wildly
generous in its enthusiasms; it offers its applause
without reservations, because it has complete
confidence in what is happening on the pitch.
As the factory worker said, the spectator feels
he is taking part in something real....
Complaints about excessive publicity
accorded to some stars of sport, the persistence
of the old controversy about professionalism, the
disdain that many intellectuals still show for
physical exerciseall these factors suggest a
malaise, a feeling of guilt on the part of the
Tense moment in a basketball -
game at the Seoul Olympic
Games (Republic of Korea) In
1988.
community as it is forced to recognize the extent
of the social problems posed by sport. Everyone
seems to underestimate the importance of the ele¬
ment of play.
If sport loses touch with its origins and ceases
to be first and foremost a game, it may become
a kind of drug and stir up increasingly violent
emotions while also stripping them of all their
deeper significance.
Yet this malaise does not seem particularly
alarming. It is only a question of growing pains,
and if these sometimes seem to be catastrophic,
it is because the growth has been rapid, hasty and
disorganized. Modern sport is a colossal and
sometimes overwhelming phenomenon. For the
time being, however, the colossus is in pretty
good shape.
Encyclopédie de la Pléiade, vol. XXIII, Gallimard,
1967
