Children of the streets
by Flor Romero
Adrift in the world's great cities, millions of young people live, sleep,
and sometimes have children of their own
%
Untitled,
by Dolores Rocha Sánchez,
age 4 (Mexico).
16
FLOR ROMERO,
is a Colombian writer who has
published a number of
biographies, novels and short
stories. Crépitant Tropique, a
French translation of her novel
Triquitraques del Trópico,
features in the UNESCO
Collection of Representative
Works.
HO are they, the children who haunt the
streets of our big cities? Where do they come
from, those streetwise juvenile hippies whose
very existence municipalities do their best to
conceal?
Underage urban guerrillas, some people call
them. Self-raised, they live on next to nothing.
Street children have always been with us,
their presence recorded in such novels as Victor
Hugo's Les Misérables. What is new today is the
scale of the problem.
One hardly dares guess how many hundreds
of thousands of street children there are in the
world's capitals, swarming like flies around the
passers-by begging for hand-outs. They first
appeared in Latin America thirty years ago. They
made their entrance on the streets as shoe-shine
boys or newspaper-sellers, then never left, drawn
to the pavements as if by magnetic attraction and
unwilling to leave them to go home.
In fact many of them have nowhere else to
go. Typically they come from broken homes:
they are the offspring of single mothers, or of
wife-beating fathers who cruelly mistreat their
own families. Home for them is hell, a den of
poverty where there is little money for food and
even less to pay for school equipment or bus
fares.
Worn out by looking after the home and the
children, their mothers struggle to feed them, and
can only watch helplessly when they take to the
streets. Their fathers bring home next to nothing,
and their rage at working so hard for so little
makes their rule over the household all the more
brutal.
THE OFFSPRING
OF POVERTY
Abandoned children are the offspring of poverty.
Impoverished communities that cannot look after
their children simply leave them to the streets.
One would think that no society could have
any goal more important than to take care of its
young, to educate them and provide for their
future, to take pains to form them into citizens
healthy in body and mind. Yet that is evidently
not the case, since the problems of coping with
street children are often left to religious organi¬
zations and charitable institutions.
The grim truth is that the poorest developing
nations face so many other problems that they

have neither the time nor the means to protect
their young.
When Pope Paul VI announced his intention
to visit Bogotá in 1968, the city authorities took
it upon themselves, as part of the feverish prepa¬
rations for his arrival, to round up all the young¬
sters at large in the city's streets and lock them
in the Santamaría amphitheatre. They did not
want the Supreme Pontiff to discover that in a



Catholic country there were children wandering
the streets begging for bread and stealing from
shops, or simply looking for a newspaper or a
cardboard box to cover them for the night. They
wanted to hide the realities of Colombian child¬
hood from the Pope. At least they felt ashamed
of the situation, and that was something in itself.
ON THE STREETS
Anything from three to eighteen years old, these
ragamuffins wander the thoroughfares of the big
cities, importuning passers-by. Up to all kinds of
mischief, they heedlessly put off all thought of
settling down until they have grown up, when
they may change their ways but may equally well
persist in their delinquency, a course for which
their lengthy schooling in insolence and indolence
naturally prepares them.
It is instructive to strike up a conversation
with a Bogotá street urchin.
"Why do you keep moving around?"
"I have to keep moving, otherwise my
mother will find me."
"What do you want to do when you grow
up?
"Have lots of money to give to my mother
and my brothers and sisters."
Such children are always on the move. Tire¬
less vagabonds constantly en route from one
place to another, they scour the town hanging
from the back of buses. Most talk fondly of
their mothers; they want to protect them, to
console them for the loss of the fathers they
never knew or against the stepfathers who beat
The Junior Red Cross in
San Salvador,
by Mirtala Francisca Guevara
Zelaya, age 15
(El Salvador).
V 17

Untitled,
by Mercedes Castillo,
age 13 (Guatemala).
them. As the conversation suggests, their greatest
ambition is often to support their mothers. They
talk of them as though they were saints.
"She came from Medellin," one of them
told me. "She used to work in a café, but she
didn't earn enough to feed us two kids. They
wanted her to have us adopted, but she refused.
She decided to come to Bogotá instead. I think
she and dad used to quarrel, and that's why
they split up after five years together. She met
Raúl Rocha here. He likes her, but I get on
his nerves. He used to tell me off or punish me
every chance he got. That's why I left the
house."
"I'm nine years old, and I've already been in
several reform schools," he went on. "At the
Redeemer, we used to call the streets lleca (an ana¬
gram of the word calle, Spanish for "street"). The
lleca is something else; it's our home. During the
day, we're on the lookout for the police, but at
night it's great. We sleep snuggled up head to toe
to keep warm. Me, I'm with the Grand Gautier
Vf* '"i«
mob. I feel safe and strong with them, I'm not
afraid of anything."
Street children cannot survive on their own,
so they naturally form gangs. They devise their
own special languages for protection, if not by
rearranging words then by a secret vocabulary of
gestures, cries, whistles or grimaces. They give
each other aliases so they won't be recognized:
Stoneface, Eagle Eye, Rat, Rabbit, never their real
names.
As agile physically as they are mentally,
they are extremely adroit, and can whip off a
windscreen-wiper or remove a tyre in the twin¬
kling of an eye. Their manual dexterity is
amazing.
Because chance rules their lives, they are
superstitious. There are streets they will not ven¬
ture into and words they will not utter. They do
not "work" on Sundays, because it's bad luck:
instead, they play football with their friends,
sleep, bathe in any pool they can find or go to
the cinema with their girlfriends, who are gener¬
ally street-dwellers like themselves.
"MY KIDS WILL GO TO SCHOOL
AND LEARN A TRADE"
For there are girls on the streets too, though not
as many as the boys. They sleep under bridges
or between sewage outlets, doing what they can
to avoid selling their bodies. They may have run
away because they had been punished, or to
escape harrassment by fathers, brothers, cousins
or uncles. But it usually isn't long before they
turn to prostitution.
Listen to the old newspaper seller: "Not that
one, not her". "Why not, if she's the one I
want?" the man replies. "Someone's looking after
her. Don't forget these girls have boyfriends to
buy them presents and take them to the cinema.
You shouldn't touch a gang-leader's girl."
Her cousin Theresa had already had two kids
by the time she was sixteen, and they lived with
her in the street. Two restless babies the street
children looked after, taking turns to give them
the bottle.
The girls are just as unruly as the boys, whose
behaviour they ape, but even though they beg
and sometimes steal they are less aggressive. Only
rarely would they snatch a handbag; more often
they are the lookouts, warning their companions
when danger is approaching.
They are more docile than the boys, and it
is easier to persuade them to learn a trade. You
can find girls who have left the street sewing,
embroidering, weaving or working as shop assis¬
tants. They try to get a regular roof over their
heads, above all to protect their children.
"I wouldn't let my kids go on the streets for
anything in the world," one of them told me
recently. "I'd make sacrifices, I'd work till I
dropped for them not to want what I never had.
My kids will go to school and learn a trade. You
can count on that."
