After stopping off in Thailand and Indonesia, the Fulk al-Salamah, the Ship of Peace which is carrying UNESCO's
Maritime Silk Roads expedition, approaches the coast of China, one of the highlights of its long voyage
The fahubm Und of Cathay by François-Bernard Huyghe
Above, the silk and ginger
trade, a miniature from a
15th-century version of The
Travels of Marco Polo.
Opposite page left, the
minaret of the Amin mosque
(19th century), Turfan,
Western China. This former
trading-post on the Silk Road
was the capital of the Uighur
In the 8th-9th centuries.
Opposite page right, 18th-
century watercolour showing
porcelain being packed before
shipment to Europe.
0,
46
'n 8 February 1991, the Fulk al-Salamah set
sail from Manila in the Philippines for the Chinese
ports of Guangzhou and Quanzhou, formerly
known as Canton and Zayton. Since leaving Oman
we have been retracing the legendary voyage of
Sindbad the Sailor, just as navigator Tim Severin did
ten years ago at the helm of the Sohar, a replica of
a traditional dhow fitted out by Sultan Qabus of
Oman.
At lunchtime on that day the captain took the
ship several miles off course in order to identify a
curious immobile blip that had appeared on the
radar screen. The blip turned out to be a junka
vessel one could well imagine in an eighteenth-
century painting. On board the craft, which was
shipping water, were eight fishermen who, we later
discovered, were from the Fujian region. One of the
Chinese academics taking part in the expedition was
drafted in as an interpreter. From the bridge of the
Fulk al-Salamah, he called out to the hapless sailors
through a loudhailer in their own dialect. We took
them aboard and they told us that they had been
blown 245 nautical miles off course and had been
adrift for two weeks. Their engine and radio had
broken down. They had had nothing to eat for five
days, and no water for three. Soon they would have
been too weak to bail out. When we arrived on the
scene four sharks were already circling around the
junk. An hour later, after being rescued, fed,
showered, shaved and interviewed, the sailors were
sleeping aboard our ship.
The next day we dropped them off at the port
of Canton, and then made our way to the mouth
of the Pearl River and the temple of the god of
Nanhai, the South China Sea, who has protected
voyagers from the perils of the sea since the sixth
century. At the gate of the sanctuary is the statue
of a "foreigner", possibly Bodhidharma, who
introduced Great Vehicle Buddhism to China. When
we sailed from Quanzhou on 19 February we

UNESCO
devoted our last morning in China to another
divinity, thereby following the example of the for¬
eign sailors who asked the protection of Heaven
before embarking on their return journey. In the
palace of the celestial empire, our hosts prayed to
the wind and made a sacrifice to the sea-god, a rite
which had not been performed for 600 years.
Surrounded by a host of romantic and exqui¬
site things, how could we resist the fascination of
China?



Where the Silk Roads began
Everything seemed to have been leading up to this.
Throughout the voyage there had been constant
reminders of the fabulous country where the Silk
Roads began. Every museum contained objects
which, directly or indirectly, through Arab or Indian
intermediaries, the Middle Empire had despatched
to the then known world.
Ever since we had left Oman, we had discovered
traces of Zheng He, the admiral who at the begin¬
ning of the fifteenth century led a vast fleet to dis¬
play the power of the Ming dynasty. We had also
come across traces of the itinerant monks Faxian,
Xuanzang and Yjing who, between the fourth and
the seventh centuries, set out for India in search of
the purity of Buddhist doctrine.
Western travellers to China brought back tales
which had prepared us for all kinds of astonishing
things. Among their number were Ibn Battuta from
Tangiers, the Venetian Marco Polo, and many more
including the Arab merchant Soleyman whose
reminiscences inspired The relation of India and
IN ACTION
THE SILK ROADS
China (851). In Pratica della Mercator, a manual pub¬
lished in 1340, the Florentine merchant Francesco
Balduccio Pegolotti gave much judicious advice about
trading with China, where he had never set foot.
The Franciscan friars Joannes de Plano Carpini
and William of Rubruquis were commissioned, in
1245 and 1253 respectively by Pope Innocent IV and
St. Louis, to find out about the "Tartars" of whom
Europe was then so terrified. Giovanni di Monte
Corvino set out to convert the land of Cathay, then
under Mongolian domination. His fellow mis¬
sionary, Odoric of Pordenone, visited China around
13 16, and his writings provided the substance of the
fabulous traveller's guidebook generally known as
Mantkville's Travels.
As we continued our voyage, the presence of
China became increasingly strong. After leaving Sri
Lanka we found traces of ancient kingdoms which
at one time or another in their history paid tribute
to the Middle Empire and were included in the com¬
plex politicc-commercial system which was the basis
of Chinese power and wealth.
Brunei was one of these kingdoms. Before the
arrival of Magellan in 1521, next to nothing is
known of its history except through dynastic
chronicles. The very name of the sultanate may be
of Chinese origin. At least since the tenth century,
Brunei had paid tribute to China and traded with
the empire. As time went by and as the prosperity
of the sultanate, a great exporter of camphor, waxed
and waned, these links strengthened and weakened
by turns. But when Manajakelana, the first sover¬
eign of the present Brunei dynasty, came to power
at the beginning of the fifteenth century, he jour¬
neyed to Nankin where the emperor received him
warmly. This outward-looking diplomacy was neces¬
sary to Brunei, which depends entirely on maritime
traffic, and inaugurated a period of growing power
which lasted until the arrival of the Europeans.
Manajakelana was honoured by his protectors, and
died at Nankin where his tomb has been discovered.
As early as the ninth century, the Philippines
also entered the Chinese tribute system and the great
commercial network of the Silk Roads. Under the
Song (tenth-thirteenth centuries) and above all the
Yuan (1280-1368), the archipelago profited from its
strategic position and attracted the Chinese mer¬
chant fleet. But here European colonization played
a different role. In 1570 the Spaniards inaugurated
the transPacific route, and for three and a half cen¬
turies, Spanish vessels plied between Manila and
Acapulco, transporting Chinese products and
47

bringing silver from Mexico. Via Latin America this
itinerary led to Europe so that the Silk Roads girdled
the globe. The Hispanic world, whose cultural
presence is so strong in the Philippines, thus reached
China by different ways.
"The biggest port in the Universe"
It is impossible not to feel that you are approaching
the centre of the labyrinth as you sail towards
Canton and Zayton, the two ports which vied for
the title of capital of the Silk Roads. In the thirteenth
century Marco Polo wrote that the former was the
biggest city in the worldit was said to have a mil¬
lion inhabitants. He added that it was possible to
enjoy so many pleasures in Canton that a man might
think he was in paradise. A little later, Ibn Battuta
considered Zayton to be the biggest port in the
universe.
For centuries, under the Han dynasty (206
BC-220 AD), but above all under the Song and the
Yuan, and even under the Ming (1368-1644) and the
Qing (1644-1911) who were on occasion tempted
to prohibit trade, thousands of sailing ships followed
the itinerary which is being retraced by the Fulk al-
Salamah. 'They were laden with unguents and per¬
fumes, precious stones, spices, silver and ivory (not
forgetting the supposedly aphrodisiac rhinoceros
horn). Some of them sailed as far as the East African
coast, their holds laden with ceramics, silks and of
course satin (the word is derived from a deforma¬
tion of Zayton).
All the great trading cities we have sailed
through seem to be modelled on Canton and
Zayton, places where, more than elsewhere, trade
encouraged the meeting of cultures and the settle¬
ment of foreign minorities. Persians and Arabs,
whose communities Soleyman described in ninth-
century Canton, have doubtless left the most visible
traces.
At Chen Dai, near Quanzhou, we were wel¬
comed to the "village of the Hui". The 17,000
inhabitants, all of whom bear the patronymic Ding,
believe that a thirteenth-century Arab merchant is
their common ancestor, and claim their Islamic iden¬
tity. At Quanzhou, we were shown the tombs of
two of the four disciples of Muhammad who are
thought to have come to preach Islam in seventh-
century China.
Many other religions flourished in the Middle
Empire. Hinduism was brought to China by Tamil
merchants. Buddhism was also brought by mer¬
chants and has left many sanctuaries such as the
1,500-year-old temple of Guangxi in Canton, whose
monks offered us tea.
There is strong evidence of the presence of
Christianity in the thirteenth century, when Mon¬
golian tolerance enabled Giovanni di Monte Cor¬
vino, appointed archbishop of Beijing by Pope Cle-
48 ment V in 1307, to convert thousands of the dreaded
Virgin and Child In a procession at Malolos,
on the Island of Luzon (Philippines).
Tartars. At Zayton, the tombstones of bishop
Andrea Perugia, who died in 1332, and of other
Christians give some idea of the important Catholic
cemetery which archaeologists hope to find there.
Paradoxically, we never saw so many sanctuaries
nor breathed incense before the altars of so many
gods as we did in China, which is said to be attached
to atheistic materialism.
At Fangzhou, the Silk Roads team saw the
gigantic inscriptions dating from the Song dynasty
to the Qing dynasty, carved in the rock to "pray
for the wind". The return of the monsoon deter¬
mined the great annual voyage to the Indian Ocean.
With what religion was this wind-cult connected?
In another village, Su-Nei, we entered the last
known Manichaean convent and contemplated the
image of a solar divinity which popular belief
wrongly holds to be the Buddha. Some suggest that
Manichaeism may have been perpetuated into our
own day in this guise.
This syncretic doctrine which originated in Iran
incorporated elements of Zoroastrianism (which also
reached China), Buddhism and Christianity. It
reached China around the end of the seventh cen¬
tury, probably via the overland Silk Road. An
imperial edict of 732 declares that although this
religion is perverse, its followers should not be per
secuted. In due course Manichaeism became the
official religion of the Uighur of Turkestan until
they were crushed in 842 and their faith persecuted.
Other religions reached China by other routes,
such as Nestorianism, the heresy of bishop Nestor
who proclaimed the divine and human natures of
Christ and was condemned in 431 at the Council
of Ephesus. How did this abstract theological thesis
give rise to the religion which in 635 reached China,
where many Nestorian convents were founded and
where Nestorianism, after being proscribed in 845,
reappeared much later in the encourage of Genghis
Khan?
How can we explain the destiny of the Jews of
China, who lived in isolation from the Hebrew com¬
munity and whose existence the Jesuits rediscovered
in the sixteenth century?
One of the great mysteries of the Silk Roads is
how doctrines could survive the centuries and travel


for thousands of kilometres without changing. At
the same time, China and Europe lived in a state
of extreme mutual ignorance. In Rome, at the time
of the Yuan, it was believed that beyond Cathay
lay the Christian kingdom of Préster John, whose
troops would vanquish the Tartar hordes and deliver
Europe from their terrors.
FRANÇOIS-BERNARD HUYGHE, French writer
and journalist, is a former member of UNESCO's
Division of Cultural Heritage.
