The concentric bands of colour In
agate, right, correspond to successive
layers of deposition from solution in the
cavities of rocks.



Present imperfect
by
Trapped between a mythical past and radiant visions of the future, the present in Latin America is
often overlooked
JLh.HE further the boat goes the more its pas¬
sage becomes a journey into time and the history
of the landscape." Thus, in surprise, the hero of
the novel Canaima, by the Venezuelan writer
Rómulo Gallegos, as he travels up the Orinoco
to its source in the heart of the forests of Guiana.
His character needs no Wellsian time machine to
cross the watertight bulkheads of seemingly time-
arrested Latin American history.
Such an experience is no mere literary
gambit. Travellers who range the continent may
get the impression that they are living in another
era. By boat or plane, on foot or on muleback,
they can trace the course of history backwards
from ultra-modern capitals to villages and tribes
living as at the dawn of history. Past and present
lifestyles coexist cheek by jowl, albeit separated
and insulated from one another like the geolo¬
gical strata that mark out the history of mankind.
This gives any thought about the perception of 29

time a spatial connotation. "Latin America is a
continent in which prehistoric man, medieval
man and modern man can shake hands with each
other", to quote the striking image of the Cuban
writer Alejo Carpentier.
This characteristic, which means that the
successive layers of pre-Columbian, colonial,
African and modern art can all be seen at one
and the same time, sometimes in a single land¬
scape, has intrigued many travellers. When André
Breton visited Mexico in 1938 he thought
that in this world of superimposed eras he had
found the natural setting for the Surrealist revo¬
lution. Others were to use expressions such as
"magical realism" and "marvellous reality" to
describe various features of the Latin American
scene.
The perception of time has clearly become
a matter of controversy since the European dis¬
covery of America. Past, present and future suc¬
ceed one another not in a smooth sequence but
in a chaotic evolution closely related to subjec¬
tive factors such as intentions, wishes, life itself,

and to the feeling that Oswald Spengler called the
"organic character" of time.
The idealized past of the pre-Hispanic Indian
world contrasts strongly with the notion of a
future of high technology and the hectic pace of
international economic activity. But the past
stands also for the nostalgia evoked by a pre-
industrial, rural, patriarchal order of a kind that
survives in many parts of the continent. It is a
past that may be the model for a future sought
both by reactionary conservatives and romantic
revolutionaries.
No sooner was America discovered by Euro¬
peans than it became the repository of beliefs no
longer current in Europe. There were many signs
to suggest that the golden age of the origins of
mankind existed in the New Worldan era of
plenty, of human happiness and loving coexis¬
tence, as celebrated by the poets and historians of
Greece and Rome, with heavenly Arcadian land¬
scapes, a warm climate, and a cornucopia of fruit
a state of nature. The time lost in Iron Age Europe
was caught up in sixteenth-century America.
Street scene in Cuenca
(Ecuador).
Christendom was to find a new eschatology
in America. Instead of the traditional view, under
which a temporal earthly world is set against an
eternal celestial one, America saw the outset of
an immanent dualism in which "times past" were
part of this world. The era of early Christianity,
the golden age and Paradise lost could be repro¬
duced in a different setting here below.
Moreover, as the Mexican historian Miguel
León-Portilla has pointed out, pre-Hispanic
myths collected by missionaries and chroniclers
themselves refer to an era in which mankind lived
in happiness and plenty. Some people saw the
American Indians as a people naturally inclined
to justice, knowing nothing of the evils of pro¬
perty. There were even forecasts of a "silver age
of the Indian Church", in which the virtues of
the early Church would be recreated thanks to



this rediscovery of spiritual purity.
This idealized version of the Indian past was
served up by historians throughout the sixteenth
century, became a commonplace, and survives to
the present day in many books about ancient
American civilizations. Endowing the pre-
Columbian past with the virtues of an ideal eco¬
nomic, social and political system eventually leads
people to believe that all the continent's subse¬
quent ills stemmed from the Spanish conquest.
This Manichean simplification of the situation
before and after 12 October 1492 is still keenly
topical. Five centuries after the shock of the
encounter between two worlds, the conflicts bet¬
ween America's past, present and future still give
rise to controversy and polemic.
The future as change and progress
The ideas of the Enlightenment, and a century
later of positivism, gave America an acute per¬
ception of time to come. The passage of time
became "evolution", and could even bring radical
changes. Thus when their nations achieved inde¬
pendence people aspired to invent the future.
Politicians and intellectuals began to organize
what they called new times.
Time and change became inseparably linked,
but the extent of change proposed for a given
time span varied. Some peopleSarmiento in
Argentina and Vasconcelos in Mexico, for
instancehad such faith in progress that they
thought of the future as a present in continual
evolution, its growth depending on education and
the momentum of population increase, whether
stemming from immigration or a "cosmic" race
born of interbreeding.
Others favoured radical, revolutionary
change. A clean break should be made with the
past. An impatient sort of trust in providence
guided revolutions that shook countries in which
nothing would ever be the same again.
Such telescoping of the future tends to make 31

The Incas, an 18th-century
French wallpaper motif
inspired by Jean-François
Marmontel's philosophical
romance Les fncas ou fa
destruction de l'empire du
Pérou (1777), which
denounced intolerance and
religious fanaticism.
the consciousness of individuals coalesce on a
shared time scale. And this collective time scale
is at one with a world view that has its own
rituals, social values, beliefs, metaphors and lan¬
guage. In this situation time is not merely repre¬
sented; it is also experienced. It produces a spe¬
cific feeling.
Between past and future
This feeling about time seeks its bearings in an
oscillation between past and future. Human
beings naturally tend to idealize the past and see
it as better than it was, and also to neutralize their
illusions about the futurethe more so as they



get closer to the present. This habit of continually
upgrading the past and the future seems to meet
people's deep need to justify their existence and
give direction to their lives. The French writer
and sociologist Jean Cazeneuve, who has inves¬
tigated relationships between time and happiness
in various cultures, speaks of recognition (in the
sense both of acknowledgement and gratitude) of
everything that becomes a memory. The
archetypes of anticipatory awareness, on the
other hand, are sustained by many clichés about
the past. The Mexican essayist Alfonso Reyes has
emphasized the need people feel to think that
they have come from a better age and are moving
towards another better agethe urge to counter¬
balance memories and hopes.
This dialectic of old and new, which has enor¬
mous symbolic significance, is not always fully
appreciated in historical writing. Perhaps great
literature can take account of it: Jorge Luis
Borges, in Historia de la eternidad (1936), says that
"preservation and creation, though at variance
here below, are synonymous in heaven". In other
words, the only possible reconciliation between
the conflicting components of time is in eternity.
Such a solution is not likely to satisfy an empiri¬
cist, for in Latin America this reconciliation bet¬
ween past and future is related to the difficulty
of living in the present.
The great majority of the peoples of Latin
America, a prey to problems of surviving in mar¬
ginalized poverty or exposed to political instabi¬
lity and economic inflation, can only live from
day to day. They are condemned to perform a
daily balancing act, ignorant of the past and
unable to rely on the future. The very word
mañana, so often repeated in this context and
habitually associated with the Latin American
condition, is simply a way of deferring the solu¬
tion of immediate difficulties to an equally ques¬
tionable future.
Rather than idealizing or denigrating the past,
or placing undue faith in the future, the best thing
in this continent which is still known as the New
World would perhaps be to engage in a search
for the present. Such a search, as Octavio Paz said
in his Nobel Prize acceptance speech in 1990,
means neither renouncing the future nor forget¬
ting the past. "The present," he said, "is the meet¬
ing place of all three times." This is true time
"the present, being present".
32
FERNANDO AINSA,
Uruguayan writer, is a UNESCO
staff member. He is the author
of many essays and novels
including Identidad cultural de
Iberoamérica en su narrativa
(Gredos, Madrid, 1986), and
Necesidad de la utopía (Nordan
Comunidad, Buenos
Aires/Montevideo, 1990).
