N I
Current systems of measuring economic performance often conceal
widespread human deprivation and degradation of the environment
Reviewing the accounts
by Michel Bâtisse
nu environmental problems today
can be analysed as assaults on the
biosphere by modern Industrial
civilizationthe technosphere.*
Without this profusion of industrial,
agricultural, medical and other inven¬
tions, we should not be able to feed,
clothe and shelter (with varying
degrees of success) the present
world population of some six billion
people, still less to provide a fraction
of them with the comfort and abun¬
dance which are the hallmarks of the
so-called developed countries.
We have cast in our lot with
technology. But technology is not
neutral, as the science of which it is
an offshoot seeks to be. It is marked
by the choices of what has been
called the sociosphere* and notably
by the principal motor of the so¬
ciosphere, the economy.
Does this mean that the
economists are responsible for the
current environmental crisis? And
that no share of the blame attaches
to engineers, agronomists, architects
and consumers? It would be far too
MICHEL BATISSE,
French engineer and physicist, is
internationally known for his work on
the environment and natural
resources. A former Unesco staff
member, he was instrumental in
launching the International
Hydrological Decade (1965-1974)
and Unesco's interdisciplinary Man
and the Biosphere (MAB)
programme. Currently a consultant
with Unesco and with the United
Nations Environment Programme, he
has headed the Blue Plan Regional
Activity Centre for the Mediterranean
at Sophia Antipolls, France, since it
was created in 1985.
simplistic to look for a single
scapegoat In this way, but it cannot
be denied that there is something
wrong with our economic models and
that they are not entirely blameless.
The most widespread economic
thinking today is still dominated by
the Keynesian macro-economic
model, which combines consump
tion, savings, investment and public
expenditure and is concerned with
attaining, as far as possible, full em¬
ployment.
Keynesian economics takes no ac¬
count of the role of natural resources
In production, perhaps because it
was elaborated during the colonial
era, after the great depression of
Soil erosion In Amazonia due to deforestation.
1929, at a time when natural
resources still seemed Inexhaustible
and It was not generally realized that
they constitute the prime source of
wealth of almost all developing coun¬
tries. Perhaps also because the im¬
pact of economic activity on the
biosphere was then still at a tolerable
level. With a world population of only
two billion people, annual production
was equivalent to today's monthly
output.
The more a country
pollutes,
the richer it seems
to be...
The spectacular rise in industrial
output after the Second World War
whetted a growing appetite for all
kinds of material goods, of which the
automobile Is perhaps the most
striking symbol. Countries wanted to
have statistical records for meas¬
uring their progress and their posi¬
tion in relation to others. Income
levels were considered to be the best
Indicators of wealth.
Since then, governments have
set annual growth of national income
as their major target. Accounting
systems for measuring economic ac¬
tivity were established and the notion
of Gross National Product (GNP) was
invented, as well as its more sophisti¬
cated variants such as Gross
Domestic Product (GDP). There was
a great temptation to measure a
country's standard of living exclu¬
sively in terms of per capita GDP and
to establish a pecking order of coun¬
tries on this basis.
This is still current practice and the 45

criteria associated with it divide the
world into developed and developing
countries. However, it has long been
accepted that GDP is a rough and
ready indicator. One example of its
Inadequacy is the way in which it to¬
tally ignores unpaid work such as
that done by the countless numbers
of women in the Third World who
fetch and carry water and firewood.
Regarding the environment, GDP
makes no distinction between
productive work and palliative
measures. Thus the production costs
of a factory which causes pollution
are added to the costs of combating
that pollution. According to this
system of accountancy, the more a
country pollutes, the richer It seems
to be!
Even more serious and contrary to
the practice of businesses, which
keep a capital account from which
they deduct the depreciation of their
capital goods over time, states cal¬
culating their GDP take no account
of the depreciation of the capital
comprised by their natural resources
and their environment. Generally
speaking, in the exploitation of non¬
renewable natural resources such as
oil and fossil groundwater, and also in
that of so-called renewable resources
such as tropical forests or soils, which
are actually only partially renewable,
current economic calculations simply
consider what is taken from capital
as income. Here too, the more a
country exhausts its potential in
terms of resources, the more its GDP
increases and the richer it seems.
In the national accounting system
adopted by almost all countries
under the auspices of the United Na¬
tions, there is currently no means of
taking into account the cost of the
degradation of resources and en¬
vironmental factors which do not
form part of market mechanisms.
There is no generally accepted
method of calculating the value of
pure air, clean water, wild animals or
the beauty of sites. Everything which
cannot be considered as property or
which cannot be expressed in terms
of a price is considered as a gift of
Providence, set.at our disposal to be
used or abused. This inadequacy of
economics and this attitude of
modern society are bound to en¬
courage the waste of resources and
the sack of the environment.
This being so, it is not surprising
that advertising should urge us to
use more electricity or detergent,
that there should be overt or hidden
subsidies to encourage the use of
more fertilizer and pesticides, and
that there should be bulk-user price
concessions to encourage us to con¬
sume more water, cement or energy.
Until relatively recently, for example,
extensive deforestation in Brazilian
Amazonia was encouraged by tax
relief and subsidies in favour of en¬
terprises which embarked on risky'
animal husbandry projects.
Sustainable human
development
In spite of all its inadequacies, the
concept of GDP is unlikely to disap¬
pear immediately. It is an economic
instrument for quantifying market ac¬
tivity in the short term. We should
simply not read more into GDP than
it really means. It grows as a result
of technological progress, but its
growth cannot be limitless. In any
case growth cannot be based on
constantly increasing consumption
of natural resources, which is physi¬
cally impossible. Did not Aristotle be¬
lieve that the accumulation of
"wealth" is not an end in itself? The
purpose of life is rather to achieve
sustainable human development
through optimizing the material and
spiritual possibilities available to
every human being, while not com¬
promising the capacity to satisfy the
needs of future generations.
The United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) took a first step
in this direction recently when it
created a composite human develop-
ment index (HDI) which integrates
into GDP the adult literacy rate, life
expectancy and the purchasing
power to buy commodities for satis¬
fying basic needs. It is interesting to
note that the United States, which
has the world's second highest per
capita GDP (after Switzerland), is only
in nineteenth position on the HDI. It
is also comforting to note that some
developing countries with low per
capita income, such as China, Costa
Rica, Jamaica and Sri Lanka (or coun¬
tries with a very low income such as
the United Republic of Tanzania)
score comparatively well in this
evaluation of human development.
The HDI is not much better than
GDP as a reflection of the environ¬
mental situation, but it shows that
GDP can be improved as an ac¬
counting system. In fact various at¬
tempts have been made in the last
two decades to take account of the
quality of the environment and
natural resources in economic anal¬
ysis. Mineral reserves, forests, water
and soil have been taken into ac¬
count. France has evaluated its
natural heritage and Norway is en¬
gaged on a similar exercise.

Above, a small boat applying a non¬
toxic dispersant chemical cuts a clean
swathe through an oil slick at sea.
Right, "states calculating their Gross
Domestic Product take no account of
the depreciation of the capital
comprised by their natural resources
and their environment".
Opposite page below, "efforts are
being made to apply more widely the
principle that the polluter should pay".
An attempt can also be made to
set a monetary value on those com¬
modities which do not figure in
market exchanges and to establish
"satellite accounts" relating to the
main operations which have an im¬
pact on the environment. When this
is done the result is a downward cor¬
rection of GDP which may be ex¬
tremely instructive. An in-depth study
of this kind on Indonesia shows that
the country's GDP increased by 7 per
cent annually between 1970 and
1984, but that if account Is taken of
losses In terms of soils, forests and
oil, the increase was actually only 4
per cent per year. Similar calcula¬
tions carried out for other countries
could even show a gradual reduction
in national wealth.
Perhaps more important than
these adjustments, at the somewhat
abstract national scale, is the inclu¬
sion of environmental impacts in the
cost-benefit analysis of major de¬
velopment programmes such as road
and dam construction, forestry and
mining. Natural resources and the
environment have so far hardly
figured in methods of calculation, for
the reasons given above. However,
thanks notably to the work of the
World Bank and UNDP, attempts are
today being made to modify cost-
benefit analysis procedures and to
respect a certain number of
minimum safety norms relating to en¬
vironmental impacts.
Efforts are also being made to
apply more widely the principle that
the polluter should pay, that those
who cause pollution should be made
to pay for the damage they cause.
The principle is relatively easy to
apply in the case of an oil company
responsible for an oil spill that has to
be cleaned up or an industrialist who
discharges chemical products into a
river and can be taxed accordingly.
The situation is more complicated
when all the farmers in a region pol¬
lute water with pesticides but cannot
be identified individually. And what
can be done when the air polluter is
simply the average motorist?
An ecological economy
It must be admitted that the accounts
of the difficult marriage between
economics and ecology have not yet
been fully put in order. The debate
is far from academic, since develop¬
ment decisions are still largely based
on Keynesian economic analysis, and
no country or place is unaffected by
these decisions.
The fact is that the globalization
of markets is ineluctably bringing rich
and poor countries together and im¬
posing on them a system of trade,
prices and regulations which, by
glorifying GDP and Ignoring capital
resources, is dangerously ag¬
gravating pressures on the environ¬
ment thousands of kilometres from
the place where the decisions are
taken.
Thus poor accounting in one
country may lead to wrong decisions
for itself and for others. Some trop¬
ical monocultures for export would
doubtless not have been cultivated
if it had been possible to calculate
their ecological and social disadvan¬
tages. Conversely, it would be In¬
teresting to explore other paths of
development than those prompted
by excessively simple forms of eco¬
nomic calculation. It has, for example,
been shown that the sustainable ex¬
ploitation of fruit and other small
products of the Peruvian forest could
bring in two or three times more than
felling for timber, and would have the
obvious advantage of leaving the
forest intact.
These methods of sustainable de¬
velopment, which help to conserve
ecosystems and benefit the local
populations which take part in them,
are encouraged in the biosphere
reserves supported by Unesco. Cer¬
tain precautions clearly have to be
taken, especially that the crops
chosen should be marketable, for if
economics must take account of
ecology, the opposite is also true.
Classical economists such as Adam
Smith, David Ricardo and Robert
Malthus, and even Karl Marx, took
account of the value of agricultural
land, but until very recent times the
economy has simply ignored ecology
and development has paid no heed
to the environment. At present the
economy is trying with more or less
good grace to mitigate the most
visible forms of ecological damage.
Pollution is combated, national parks
are created, policies for the environ¬
ment are announced. These are
steps in the right direction but they
are not enough. We must move more
resolutely and more swiftly towards
a new stage which will effectively
integrate economic systems with
ecological systems and will lead the
world as a whole to the sustainable
development which hitherto has been
talked about rather than effected.
We may feel that there is little we
can do about the issues raised here.
This is not so. Our dally choices and
behaviour define the forms of de¬
velopment adopted in different parts
of the world. The protection of the
environment begins on our own door¬
step. It is not only a matter for other
people, for businesses and govern¬
ments. Are we, for example, ready to
reduce pollution and economize on
oil consumption by using our cars
only when we really need them? Are
we ready to buy only "environment-
friendly" products? To take a stand
against building up coastlines and
green spaces? To avoid despoiling
nature and wasting resources? Are
we ready to support new ethical stan¬
dards for the relationship between
economic activity and ecology? Or do
we wish to remain accomplices of the
world environment crisis? We should
all re-examine our accounts.
* See the article by Michel Bâtisse in the
November 1990 Issue of the Unesco Courier.
