INTERVIEW



MANU
DIBANGO
Born in Cameroon, Parisian by
adoption, Manu Dibango is one of the
first musicians to blend traditional
African music and jazz. His music
has been called American in France,
European in Africa, and African in the
United States, but he refuses to be
labelled and proclaims that he
belongs to the "race of musicians".

What are your earliest memories?
I was born at Douala in Cameroon. My father
and mother were Protestants. When I was very-
young they enrolled me at the village school
where I first learned Douala, one of my country's
main languages. After school I went to the
chapel, where my mother led the women's choir
and the pastor commented on the Old and New
Testaments translated into Douala. It was there
that I caught the magical virus of music.
Were you a musical family?
My father was a civil servant, a job which car¬
ried some prestige. At that time there was no
radio. But we were lucky enough to have a
gramophone. I listened to it surreptitiously when
my parents weren't there. My mother was a
dressmaker and taught apprentices at home. We
sang all day long. I was the conductor. What I
liked most of all was to marshal the voices into
a human instrument that sounded right and true.
Eventually the tunes I learned became so much
a part of me that later on when I was in France
and heard a Bach cantata that I had learned at
chapel I thought at first that I was listening to
music from back home...
What kind of music did you listen to when
you went out?
After being a German colony, Cameroon
became a French protectorate. When the French
navy came to Douala, they brought modern
Western music with them. African performers
played in the bars and hotels where white people
stayed. When the Africans came back to the dis¬
trict where they lived, they taught us the
fashionable tunes. Well, more or less... We chil¬
dren changed these approximations in our turn.
There was also initiation music, which was
played with drums and wooden instruments such
as tom-toms. And we heard traditional guitarists
at weddings and funerals.
But the guitar isn't an African instrument...
Yes and no. The guitar reached Cameroon
with the Portuguese in the fourteenth century. In
Cameroon we use the guitar to play assico, dance
music which is also found in Nigeria. Its rhythm
is binary and not ternary like jazz. The Cameroo-
nian guitarist achieved the feat of playing tune¬
fully, harmoniously and percussively.
There was also another form of popular
music, Ambass B, an abbreviation for "Ambas¬
sade de Belgique", a derivative oí assico, but more
strongly marked by Western influences. This
music originated with the Africans who worked
for the whites. Within a few years it had become
popular. It's immediately recognizable, with a
harmony from the West and a typically
Cameroonian rhythm.
When you heard Western music in Cameroon,
did you feel that you were listening to foreign
music?
When I was a child I didn't know the differ¬
ence. We assimilated the songs we learned from
the sailors and gave them a flavour of our own.
We were curious and absorbed all forms of music
without troubling to find out in each case what
came from the blacks and what came from the
whites....
What about instruments?
My African schoolteacher played the violin
and the piano. The Cameroonians quickly
adopted the musical instruments introduced by
the Westerners. Some Cameroonians even played
string quartets.... I came across these instruments
at the chapel and at home. They were part of
my life.
How did you become a musician?
My elder brother had a guitar. I wasn't allowed
to touch it, of coursethat's why I played it! I
also had a harmonica that my father had bought.
I was feeling my way. It was only when I arrived
in France at the age of fifteen that my father paid
for me to have piano lessons. I soon realized that
I was a musician because I loved music. But at
that time I never dreamed of becoming a profes¬
sional.
Why did you go to France?
To study for a diploma, as some of us chil¬
dren did in those days. I took piano lessons as
well. I should have liked to learn the violin, but it
was too late. You have to start when you are five.
The piano plus Protestantism add up to jazz.
This is certainly one of the key factors in my
musical environment. In jazz you always find
traces of gospel, the religious melodies which
American blacks transposed into their music.
How happy I was the first time I heard Louis
Armstrong humming on the radio! Here was a
black voice singing tunes that reminded me of
those I had learned at the temple. I immediately
felt at one with the warmth of that voice and
with what it was singing. The voice is the most
beautiful instrument.
How did you discover the saxophone?
By chance. I chose the piano. But the sax began
as a joke between pals: "You're getting on our
nerves with your piano... Can't you play the
sax?" "OK!" I accepted the challenge and then
I got down to business. I took lessons. And as
a good jazz-lover I daydreamed about American
jazz musicians. Our heroes at that time were
black American sports champions and musicians
like Sugar Ray Robinson, Louis Armstrong and
Duke Ellington.
When was this exactly?
The middle and late 1940s. In Paris it was
the time when Saint-Germain-des-Prés was
musically a very exciting place to be. We Africans
came from the provinces to Paris just to listen
to jazz, Latin American musicmambo,
sambaand the beguine from the Caribbean.
Creole music had an important place in France
in the 1950s.
But jazz was your favourite music. What did
it bring you?
A kind of freedom, fresh scope for the imagi¬
nation. Jazz is the invention of a link between
one continent and anothereven if the story
behind it is a terrible one. But the most beau¬
tiful flower can grow on a dunghill.
You're thinking of slavery?
Of course. The dunghill is slavery and all its
works. The flower is jazz, the fruit of what came
from the West, on the one hand, and from Africa
on the other. It is the twentieth-century music
par excellence. It even introduces you to other
kinds of music. Through jazz I discovered all the
music that I love, starting with classical music.
Jazz is a much more rigorous form of music than
is generally thought.
What do you mean by that? Aren't you con¬
tradicting what you said about freedom a
moment ago?
Not at all. Improvisation is easier if there is
a solid framework for it. In jazz you know the
theme in advance; it's Gershwin or Duke
Ellington. Everyone is supposed to know it. The
jazz musician expresses himself within this pre-
established framework. It's like the subject for

an essay at school which you have to structure
into a beginning, a middle and an end. A jazz
musician will never play the same piece in the
same way twice. In classical music, on the other
hand, you have to reproduce down to the last
note exactly what the composer created. The jazz
musician thus has a certain freedomthe most
wonderful kind because it's the most difficult.
What happened after your encounter with
jazz?
When my parents realized that I was
neglecting my studies, they stopped my
allowance. I had to learn more about musical
technique and literature. It was essential. In the
cabarets where I worked, for example, I had to
provide the accompaniment for a ballet or for
a singer. This was invaluable experience and
helped to shape my musical personality. I treat
music like painting, and I learned to orchestrate
and mix sounds and instrumentsto marry
colours together. Gradually I became aware of
my identity.
Yourpersonal, national or cultural identity?
All of them. First of all there were the sounds
of independence movements. At the end of the
1950s, after passing my baccalaureate, I left
France and went to Brussels where I intended
to continue my studies and at the same time earn
my living. In 1960 negotiations were being held
in Brussels under United Nations auspices about
an independence agreement between Belgium and
the Congo. In the Porte de Namur district where
I lived, I experienced the tensions and clashes
between whites and Africans. I discovered the
price that history makes people pay.
All the same I had the good fortune to be
hired as bandleader at the Anges Noirs, a
fashionable nightclub run by a Cape Verdean,
which was frequented by the leaders of new-born
Zaire. For the first time an African band, African
Jazz, arrived from Zaire to record in Europe. Its
leader, the famous Zairian singer Joseph Kaba-
sélé, spent his nights at the Anges Noirs. At that
time all Brussels and all Africa were dancing to
Indépendance cha-cha, the record he made when
Zaire became independent.
You never left the black music scene?
Of course I did. The nightclub where I was
working belonged to a black man, but not all
the entertainers were black. Whites from Europe
and America, West Indians and Latin Americans
all turned up at the Anges Noirs and met Africans
there. I even played Gypsy music there. All this
music, of course, was based on rhythm. In addi¬
tion to the tango and the paso doble, people
danced the samba, the cha-cha and the mambo.
We also played jazz for dancing. No one kind
of music dominated our repertoire.
How did you discover African music in the
strict sense of the term?
My meeting with Kabasélé led to a series of
lucky breaks. He liked the way I played the sax,
and invited me to record Congolese music with
him. The records we made together were a
tremendous success. In 1961, the first piano
recording I madeAfrican Jazz had no pianist-
had a wonderful reception in Zaire, which was
the chief market for black music in Africa
because of the powerful radio transmitter the Bel¬
gians had built there! Everybody in Africa
listened to Radio Kinshasa, which broadcast until
three o'clock in the morning.
While I was in Zaire, I started to compose.
Then, in the mid-1960s, I returned to Cameroon.
I saw my country with new eyes. The doors of
Africa were slowly opening for me.
How did it feel to be back in your native
country?
I returned to Cameroon twelve years after I
had left.... I really wanted to rejoin the society
from which I had come. But I had lived in
another society, with other rules. It's hard to go
back to your country after being away for so
long. .
Do you mean that after your long stay in the
West youfelt somewhat remote from the society
into which you had been born?
Yes, I found an environment that was more
restrictive for the individual than that which I
knew in Europe. I was no longer very familiar
with the rules of that society, but I was still
strongly attached to it. A break is inevitable and
normal for anyone who has a foot in two
cultures. The important thing is not to lose your
soul. And to be at one with yourself you need
to know who you are.
Was music a way of resolving these con¬
tradictions?
It was one way. It is the most spontaneous,
natural form of contact between one person and
another. It starts with the voice. The voice in
itself is music. You make music as soon as you
leave your mother's womb. People have always
used sounds to soften or harden human feelings.
Music is one of the essential factors of knowledge.
Dialogue is first and foremost a form of music.
But once you have learned something you
have to learn it over again. You have to go
beyond the environment in which you have been
shaped. That's the kind of curiosity researchers
and creators have and I think you find it in all
crafts and professions, not just music. Basically
it's a universal problem.
It's also the problem of the universal.
What do you mean by the universal?
That's a really difficult question. Universal in
the singular or the plural? Is there plurality in
universality? I don't know. For some, univer¬
sality is an idea which has emerged from Western
civilization alone. Let's say rather that if the
people of the West didn't actually invent the idea,
they knew better than anyone else how to sell
it. It's their talent for marketing.... Others didn't
use it in the same way, that's all.
Let's accept their formulation of universality
as a working definition and ask a few questions.
Can anything else be grafted on to it? It's like
asking whether a law can be amended. Can the
universal be amended? Or, if you prefer, the
universal seems to me as an African an attrac¬
tive garment but one that's a bit tight.

You have been writing music since the 1960s.
What public do you write for? For the whole
world or rather for Africans?
Neither one nor the other. I try to reach the
human being.
A tension leading to the universal...
Perhaps because of the noble side of music.
Because anyone can communicate with anyone
else by means of musical vibrations. Since I like
people who listen to me, I am ready to listen to
people too. I am always ready to get to know
other kinds of music. At least I have learned to
learn. I am always guided by my curiosity.
What has been the most important factor in
your creative work?
This curiosity. My appetite for getting to
know others. But what does it mean to say that
one creates? I would be more inclined to say that
one participates. Sound is a magma. You have
to give it a form. It's never the same. But you
always mould the same magma.
So you've been doing that for thirty years?
What contribution have I made? I have built a
bridge between my starting point and my curi¬
osity. I contribute a sound which is unmistak¬
ably African. I add my difference.
But in Africa doesn't your music sound some¬
what foreign?
At first people in Africa said that I made
Western music, that I was a black-white. I carried
that label around for a long time. In France people i
often told me that I made American music. And|
when I went to the United States, the Americans |
thought that I made African music. It's impos¬
sible to be more of a traitor than that!
A gift has no race. There is a race of musicians
and that's all there is to it. To belong to that race
you need knowledge. The musician, even more
than the composer, hears agreeable sounds around
him and digests them. He likes them, they are
part of him. The voices of Pavarotti and Barbara
Hendricks have taught me to love opera. In my
imaginary museum they join Louis Armstrong,
Duke Ellington, and Charlie Parker. I haven't
found anyone better. Mozart doesn't stop me
from being African. I like mixtures.
In a sense you span several continents.
you're a musician you don't say to your¬
self when you get up in the morning "I make
African music", you say "I want to make music".
And that's that.

Above, Manu Dibango
with the French musician and composer
Michel Portal. Left, with the American
trumpeter Don Cherry.
Isn't choosing instruments a problem?
It's the same for all musicians! When you've
learned to play an instrument you become a
good, average or excellent instrumentalist. The
important thing is to have a sound that sticks
in people's minds. Why are Stan Getz, Arm¬
strong or Manu so immediately recognizable?
Each has a sound that gets across. ,
But ifyou introduce into a given musical cul¬
ture instruments which are alien to itthe piano
or saxophone into Arab music for exampledo
you not destroy something in that music?
Yes, of course. But you never get ahead
without breaking something. When Arab instru¬
ments were invented there was, of course, a code.
But is that code immutable or can it change? Can
you add instruments to a music which existed
without them? It's for the musicians to answer
that question first. It's the instrumentalist who
will say: "Hey, this instrument does nothing for
me." Or else, "That one gives me something that
I'm going to adapt to the music I play."
How do you get the best out of a new
instrument?
Let me give you an example. There is a tradi¬
tional African instrument that I adore. It's a kind
of zanza with wooden tongues. I wanted to
include it in my own idiom, but it can only be
played in a certain tonality. What could I do?
In the piece that I composed, I prepare for it to
come in by a modulation. Then I play for a while
with the zanza, in its own specific style and
«?mode. The next problem is to phase out the
äzanza and bring in something else.
And so I decided to include the instrument
Swithout altering its nature. But you might also
¿want to modify its sound: "Hey, the zanza
S sounds good, but if I add a bit of cotton here or
la matchstick, won't I get a quarter tone more?"
lit' s a personal choice.
You don't see it in terms ofcultural references?
I The references ought to come naturally. In
S music there is neither past nor future, only the
j present. I must compose the music of my time,
g not yesterday's music. I have always been accused
I of "pinching". How can you create if you don't
take from that which gives the age its substance?
|All creators have something of the vampire in
them: painting, literature, and journalism func¬
tion like music.
Some musicians are afraid of reaching that
universal. But without that perspective what are
we here for? What's the point of curiosity,
energy, movement, if we live for seventy years
tucked away in a corner, bound hand and foot?
