Copyright is everybody's business
For almost forty years UNESCO has been working to promote a universal copyright system which protects the rights of creators,
facilitates the diffusion of their work and contributes to international understanding. In this interview Ms Milagros del Corral,
director of UNESCO'S Book and Copyright Division, describes what is at stake.
48
Why is UNESCO concerned with
copyright?
Copyright, the legal framework for the pro¬
tection of literary, artistic and scientific works,
is a human right and as such is recognized in
Article 27 (2) of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, which states that "Everyone
has the right to the protection of the moral
and material interests resulting from any scien¬
tific, literary or artistic production of which
he is the author". The right of creators to the
protection of their works is an aspect of the
right to culture. A delicate balance exists
between copyright protection and access to
culture, education, information and scientific
research. Copyright protection and access to
culture are also crucial to the development of
any country. In view of UNESCO's constitu¬
tional concerns in these fields and with the
defence of human rights, one might well ask
how UNESCO could fail to be closely
involved with copyright.
Could you tell us more about the role of
copyright in today's world} Who is affected
by it?
Everybody is affected, whether they realize
it or not. The copyright chain is a very com¬
plex one. In the first place, of course, there
are writers, musicians, creators of the plastic
arts, software authors, photographers, and
translators. Their work is made available to
the public by a large number of "mediators"
who acquire copyright by contractor licence
and assume the risk of producing and dis¬
tributing their work. Traditional mediators
include the publishers of books, periodicals
and newspapers, radio and television broad¬
casters, programme producers, cinema and
video corporations, theatres, and the adver¬
tising and show-business industries. Relative
newcomers to the field are distributors of
programmes by cable television, satellite trans¬
mission and the software industry.
In short, there is a very wide range of cul¬
tural industries that use protected works as the
raw material of their commercial activities. In
the industrially developed countries, industries
working on the basis of copyright contribute
between 3 and 6 per cent to the Gross
Domestic Product (GDP). Last in the
copyright chain comes the general public.
When we read a book, a magazine or a
newspaper, listen to the radio, watch televi¬
sion, use a personal computer, or attend a con¬
cert or theatre performance, we are "con¬
suming" copyright materials.
The role of copyright is to ensure that
authors are recognized by society and
remunerated for the use of their works. The
law should also prevent any distortion that
may prejudice an author's reputation. In an
increasing number of countries the rights of
performing artists are also protected.
So the sale of every single copy of a
work should provide remuneration for
the author and in some cases for the
performer?
Exactly. Unfortunately, however, copyright
is very vulnerable and the development of new
reproduction and communication technologies
represents a challenge to it. Unauthorized
copies can be produced very cheaply and can
compete illegally in the market, representing
immense losses for authors, copyright and
other intellectual rights holders throughout
the world.
Piracy represents a clear violation of
authors' rights and is causing enormous
damage. Free private copying authorized by
national laws has also attained dangerous levels
in many countries as it has gone far beyond
the original intentions of legislators. It is
impossible for authors to control the
increasing number of uses of their work, and
collective administration of rights by authors'
and performers' societies is the only reasonable
way of coping with the problem. At the inter¬
national level much work has already been
done to solve these problems, but they remain
on the agenda because of the speed of techno¬
logical change. It is not always easy to adapt

legal notions to these changing scenarios and
we have to proceed with caution.
What you have said relates to protection
at the national level. How can copyright pro¬
tection be ensured internationally?
This is a very important point, since the
circulation of protected works knows no
frontiers. The use of protected works in for¬
eign countries is governed by two major inter¬
national conventions, the Berne
Conventionthe International Convention
for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works, which is administered by the World
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO);
and the Universal Copyright Convention
(UCC), which was adopted under the auspices
of UNESCO.
The Berne Convention seeks more exten¬
sive and stronger protection. To take one
UNESCO IN ACTION
The French mime
Marcel Marceau
uses gestures to explain
copyright.
copyright are discussed by experts from
different regions. A data base on copyright
legislation, including a detailed analysis of
national legislations and international conven¬
tions, is being compiled for CD-ROM publi¬
cation in 1994-1995. We also intend to include



a compendium of selected case law along with
a bibliography in the copyright field. This
ambitious project has been made possible
through voluntary contributions from the
USA, the UK and, we expect, from Spain and
France. It is a huge task but we are confident
that this data base, once completed, will prove
an irreplaceable tool for governments,
decision-makers, lawyers, and users of
copyright works all over the world.
example, it requires recognition of moral
rights and a fifty-year term of protection fol¬
lowing the author's death. The UCC is more
sensitive to the needs of developing countries,
many of which are net "copyright importers"
and seek easier access to copyright materials
for educational purposes. The UCC is less
extensive in its recognition of rights, allows
more exceptions from protection, and the
term of protection is twenty-five years after
the author's death.
What are UNESCO's activities in the
copyright field?
UNESCO's copyright programme is
divided into three principal areas. First,
encouraging accession to international conven¬
tions. UNESCO also encourages its member
states to adopt legal measures in conformity
with certain recommendations adopted by
UNESCO's General Conference, with regard
to the protection of translators, the
safeguarding of folklore, the status of the artist
and the safeguarding of works in the public
domain.
Second, UNESCO has recently embarked
on a major effort to introduce the teaching of
copyright into university studies. A syllabus,
a textbook and a basic bibliography have been
prepared, and universities in Latin America,
the Arab countries (and soon Africa and Asia)
are being encouraged to use them. The
training programme also includes seminars for
judges and magistrates, who play a key role
in law enforcement, and for journalists and
librarians, who can do much to increase social
awareness of copyright matters.
UNESCO's third concern is to inform
specialists and the general public. We publish
a quarterly Copyright Bulletin in English,
French, Spanish and Russian, in which the
main principles and problems of international
We are also trying to heighten public
awareness of copyright through video cassettes
that make the principal copyright notions easy
to understand. The first one is a remarkable
twelve-minute performance by the French
mime Marcel Marceau, who explains with
humour and sensitivity what copyright is and
why it needs to be protected and respected.
Finally, UNESCO is making preparations
for an international debate on the role of
copyright in the societies of today and
tomorrow, on an interdisciplinary basis. All
the international organizations involved, as
well as a number of famous authors,
producers, publishers, television stations,
copyright experts, sociologists and economists,
will be invited to discuss how copyright could
help to foster sound cultural and economic
development and to establish an open dialogue
for better eo-operation between developed and
developing countries. We feel this could also
be the best way to commemorate the fortieth
anniversary of the Universal Copyright Con¬
vention in 1992. 49
