Stage and screen actress, deputy and minister, You were very young when you first
Melina Mercouri has had an eventful career which has been became interested in the theatre. Tell us some-
..... -t    j   OKf fc ctor' ! CM'/f. W% < ! f  GrfCKcrowned with success m many feMs. A standard-Dearer     ,  
of liberty at the time-of the co/oneh'reg/me, she is think about the stage ?
regarded with affection by the Greek people, for whom-My family has been involved in politics for
...,,.. < t-n generations. My grandfather, who adored meand whom 
I adored, was mayor of Athens for
more than twenty years. The house was
always full, for at that time the mayor of
Athens was as powerful as a minister, maybe
even more so. That was theatre for me. I had
a stage, an audience, partners, dialogues, some-
times even long tirades.
8

. Were there women in politics at that time ?
- No. Politics was for men. But when I was
a child, I often used to imagine what it would
be like to be In my grandfather's shoes. Politics
didn't enter into it, I understood nothing
about hat. What mattered was the drama, the
speeches... and the audience.
So the theatre was a part of me from my
early years. And then my grandfather often
took me with him to see plays. I felt at home
there, even though I couldn't follow the plots.
In some ways it was like being at home.
Even when I was very young, I was a
rebel. When I was seven or eight I used to
MEDNA MERCOUR)
tatksto
Bahgat E ! na (t ! an () A (te ! Rifaat
escape from the house and go off with a friend N things were as you describe them, how
to the cinema or to a cafe to listen to music. did you set about 0'ucrcom ! ? !  f osfc/es*'
Once we got dressed up in our mothers'finery-I got married at seventeen ! To a wealthy
and went to a sailors'tavern, where they aristocrat who had studied at Cambridge
served tea and played music. In all innocence, University. Politically he was conservative,
we got up and danced. We just enjoyed per-not to say reactionary, but he had extremely
forming, putting on a show and being liberal ideas on the role of women. He didn't
applauded. My mother soon put an end to that try to turn me into a submissive wife. He
little adventure. A woman who had seen us didn't even make me take his name, as was
tipped her off, and she came looking for me. normal at the time. I stayed Melina Mercouri,
She took me back home and severely punished for him and for everyone he introduced me
me. Never mind. I had made my decision. I to. Thai's how I broke free from my family
wanted to go on the stage. I wanted applause ! and how I was able to study and prepare for
Obviously, my parents didn't see things In the the audition that would get me into the Drama
same way. School of the National Theatre of Greece.
N Why not ? Was the life of an actor or actress · Then came the war and the Occupation.
considered isreputable ? Could you describe what it was like ? Or is
- No. But for the Athenian upper middle it something you prefer not to talk about ?
class to which I belonged, It wasn't done to-Why shouldn't I talk about it ? We had three
go on the boards, even to play a heroine of years of Occupation. I saw swollen bellies and
Sophocles or Euripides. What's more, there people dying of hunger. I saw carts going by
was no security in the artist's life. One day with the corpses of men and women piled up
you could be rolling in money and the next on them like carcasses of cattle. I saw people
you could be starving. For children of good living from day to day, not knowing what
family, the theatre was risky, tomorrow would bring. I saw the continual
I don't think my parents thought there uncertainty drive some to heroic acts of
was anything dishonourable about acting, resistance and others to collaboration.
They would have had no objection if they Nobody in my family collaborated with the
could have been certain that I would be a enemy. My younger brother was in the
success ! They were behind me throughout my Resistance. Not me. It's the one thing I really
political and artistic career. It would certainly regret. But it wasn't through lack of courage
have been the same with my grandfather, if or fear of death.
he hadn't done me the dirty trick of dying in One day I was in a tavern with three
the meantime, friends when three SS men entered. They were
9

A scene from Topkapi (1964), directed by Jules
Dassin. In foreground, Maximilian Schell,
'Melina Mercouri, Peter Ustinov and Robert Morley.
. Are audiences different, or is there really
only one audience ?
- 
Audiences are different. In England,
1
t sf
', 4s i
brawl. In Greece they're colder. You have to
y
/, t 
·
.-Audiences 
America, even France, audiences are often
ready for the fray as soon as they've got their
tickets ; they're expecting to take part in a
work hard to win them over, to warm them
up, get them to react, take part.
dead drunk. They asked us to sit at their table. talk to me. At length and tirelessly. He talked * Z.  so fc r/M or < ! n c
When we didn't move, one of them drew a to me about Greek tragedy, about Its poetry, audience has been conquered. Who does it
revolver. My three friends got up then and the tradition, the significance it had for the applaud : MMfrcoKn, o ?' ; Mp<H
went over to join them. I don't know what Greek people. Eventually he convinced me. played ? Does each character have its own
got into me because my head was empty, but He made theatre a religion for me. That is no reality, its own message, or is it really always
I didn't move. The SS man was furious, he exaggeration ; there was something religious Melina who is in control ?
kept on at me. He pointed the pistol and about my devotion to Greek tragedy. Back-Melina is always there, naturally, but to give
started counting. " Ein, zwei, drei...."I still home, I would rehearse Marguerite's mono-birth to a role created by someone else, a
didn't move. I wasn't scared. He fired, and the logue on my knees. I rehearsed it so many character for whom she is only a surrogate
glass in front of me shattered. Now I was times that I wore out the carpet. mother. At every performance, Melina gives
furious, and I got up and started shouting What could the SS do against Medea or birth. Now, there are some people who talk
insults at him. I never considered that he Antigone ? Thanks to them, I moved through down the role of the surrogate mother.
might keep on firing. I wasn't thinking of any-the war like a sleepwalker. Without getting They're wrong. The baby Melina brings forth
thing. Then the military police arrived and into psychoanalysis, I think you have to look for the audience has been in her guts after all.
dragged him out of the tavern, to my love of the theatre for one of the essen-It's no longer the exclusive property of the
I didn't know what fear was. Even so, I tial keys to my behaviour, author, any more than it's exclusively
didn't join the Resistance. When I think about Melina's. It has a life, a reality of its own. It's
it now, I wonder If the main reason wasn't N Fo « <M yoMr career on the stage just incredible, what I'm saying, but that's what
my burning ambition to be an actress ! At after the war. What does playing a role happens. And it's wonderful.
drama school from two till six every day, the involve for you ? What goes through your It's all the more outrageous because the
outside world ceased to exist. There was no head when yoK'rc performing a part that director is also mixed up in this process of no
more Occupation, no more Germans, no someone else has written ? longer knowing who is who. The director is
more Melina even. There was only Mar--It's when I'm rehearsing that the most a go-between. And a good director will know
guerite, Ophelia, la Locandiera, Electra. And important hings happen. It's during rehearsals how to make the actor part of a whole corn-
then there was the sublime Dimitris Rondiris, that the character, who as you say has been pany on stage. Without that, even an actor
our teacher. He demanded from us a commit-created by someone else, becomes alive in me who is a genius will end up like a meteorite,
ment to the theatre as total as his own. His and through me. Actors carry their roles inside lost in too much space. In the theatre it's team-
Oresteia remains the greatest theatrical them, just as pregnant women carry babies. work that works wonders.
experience of my life. You can feel it physically, like a pregnancy.
It was Rondiris who taught me to control It's a very sensual experience. It's that gesta-N W% crc o c !' ? ! cm< !  !'n fo < !//1 Ws
and modulate my voice. He used to say that tion that constitutes the creative part of acting. it part of your adolescent dreams ?
I was made for tragedy. I was quite prepared Later, when you confront the audience, it's-It certainly was ! Mind you, in the early
to admit that Electra was the greatest role an more like bullfighting. You have to kill them, 1950s, Greek cinema only wanted actresses to
actress could play, but even so I used to beg of course, but the instruments are already play young innocents. Above a)) they had to
him, sometimes with tears in my eyes, to there. You've prepared them during have big eyes and tiny little mouths. I wasn't
admit that I wasn't Electra ! Then he would rehearsals, built for the job. I was too big and my mouth
10

was too wide. Even so, I didn't give up hope.
. sy, h s. Gt "2 ; 
somewhere else, in France or England. And
u
Korda gave me a screen test. We both burst
out laughing when we saw it ; I looked
., a 1' s 7 9  :  lt
 
! II k
everyone else too, that the theatre was the
only place for me. When Iacovos Campanellis
I told myself that maybe I'd have a chance ` 
 t ̀  ̀ 
sure enough, one day in London Alexander
ridiculous. 'wi i
I'd finished up by convincing myself, and s'_, k "' !
 il, Iy (I !
wrote the part of Stella for me, he saw it as
a stage role. By chance, though, he had asked Melina Mercouri between
Anthony Perkins and Jules Dassin (right)Cacoyannis to direct it. There was a moment 
men  "
when things were touch-and-go. Cacoyannis Cannes Film Festival, where I almost won the
wanted to make it into a film, but Campanellis Best Actress award. It was the start of M, by a long chalk. Then that wonderful
didn t want anyone but me to ptay Stella. As Cacoyannis's international career. Thirty-five film Celui qui doit mourir ( " He who Must
far as he was concerned, I was Ste !) a,"the most years later, the film hasn't aged a bit. They Die "). It came out of the encounter between
emancipated woman in Greece". So they showed it on television recently and the Kazantzakis. Jules Dassin a d Crete. Crete is
decided to give me a screen test. That was a viewing figures were exceptional. The splendid, Kazantzakis a genius and Dassin aweird experience. Cacoyannis started by pho-character Campanellis created remains abso-very director
tographing me from every angle, then he set lutely modern. Cacoyannis used to say of I can still visualize the village where It was
up the camera in front of me, made me howl Stella : " She's gay. She's vibrant. She's proud shot. They'd never seen acamera before. We'd
with laughter and shot me with the camera of her body. She's proud of her liberty. She agreed that all the villagers hould appear asfocused halfway down my throat. When I saw has lovers and she has friends. She refuses to extras, and we'd assembled them in the church
the rushes, I understood that something had think of marriage as a form of security, and 
square. Dassin read the script and I translated.
happened. It was the start of a love-affair she doesn't want society's blessing. She's sus-There were good and bad characters in the
between me and the camera, picious of everything society approves of. " script, rich people and poor people.
Stella was a success. It was shown at the When we came to give out the roles,
- 0//<- y   r -,   py e goodies, which is
tional career, which one stands out for you to say the poor people. It was no use my telling
Mercouri. in a scene from the f)) m 10. 30 p. m."0.   g gj g weren't JUSt rich, they a scene from the film 10.30 p. m.
Summer (1966). also had more important parts, so the people
who played them would make more money. I
still couldn't persuade them. Finally I told them
that I couldn't do anything about it, that that
was how Kazantzakis had plotted the story.
of them didn't know how to read. But the
None of them had read the novel, in fact most
wanted them to. It brought tears to my eyes.
moment I mentioned Kazantzakis's name, they
: all immediately agreed to play whatever role he
I made other films with Dassin. In each
of them he managed miraculously to create
an atmosphere of camaraderie and joie de vivre
that transfigured everyone involved. I would
like to mention here the film he made about
11

the unrest at the Ecole Polytechnique in moments ? Well, here are two that come to over a whole people, seemingly for ever. The
Athens. The whole film was shot indoors, In mind. Greek people seemed to have been reduced to
one room. Yet through Dassin's magic, all the First of all, there was the Greek sailor I silence. But my sailor's gesture showed how
anger, all the nobility, all the beauty of the met in the docks at Genoa in Italy. It was five deceptive the silence could be. I've learned
Greek people are there in it. It's a pure gem. o'clock In the morning. He was heading back since then never to believe that a people is
to a merchant ship with some other sailors, happy with its government just because It is
* Now do you explain the stir Melina made My heart started pounding. Any Greek you silent. Silence never indicates contentment.
when she weMt into politics ? Melina, who met at that time immediately became a com-Contentment is voluble, noisy. Silence can
hadn't joined the Resistance during the War ? rade, a brother. I went up to talk to them. I only be imposed by force.
- 
That wasn't he same at all. During the War wanted to discuss the situation in Greece, The other incident made me reflect above
I was very young, and there were the Drama invite them to a meeting we were holding that all on the fragility of human intelligence. How
School courses to isolate me, literally to spirit evening. We hadn't exchanged a word when could anyone believe such an obvious absur-
me away from the fighting.. their officer arrived and ordered them to dity as that story of 50, 000 communist
With the dictatorship of the colonels, it return to their ship immediately. My sailor invaders ? But leaving the'details aside, the
was very different. I had reached a completely went off with the others. I just stood there, question Is still relevant oday. How Is it that
different emotional and political maturity, my arms stretched out to nothing, suddenly people can be conditioned to the point of
The coup d'etat affected me like a rape. You feeling very alone. But then just before he dis-losing their sense of logic, of applauding the
can't react calmly to being raped. You shout, appeared from view, without even turning very people who are tormenting them ? It can't
you protest, you scratch. I was abroad when round, my sailor put his hand behind his back all be explained In terms of economic or polit-
the colonels eized power. Well, I shouted as and gave me the victory sign. I cried for joy. ical self-interest. There were plenty of sincere
loud as I could. I shouted, I sang, I danced for The second memory is very different, people among the colonels'backers who stood
liberty. I wasn't a spoiled child anymore. I was because you must realize that I wasn't popular to gain nothing from the dictatorship.... I
someone to be reckoned with. with all Greeks. Far from it. In America, have to admit that I still haven't found a satis-
Europe too, there were Greeks who would factory answer to the question.
N What special memories do you have of that insul me, boo me, threaten me. How can I
time ? forget the demonstrators who shouted under N One gets the impression that you gradu-
- Special memories ? Every minute of it is a my window that I was a communist bitch, or ally lost interest in the theatre and the cinema
special memory ! The phone ringing. Or the person who rang me up to tell me-in after becoming involved in politics....
maybe not ringing, or not when you expect Greek, what's more-that " the colonels had-Wrong ! I didn't lose interest. It was the
it to. Getting caught up in action, and then stopped 50, 000 communists who were getting cinema nd theatre producers who lost interest
the agony of doing nothing. It's all there, ready to invade Greece from Yugoslavia nd in me. I got fewer and fewer offers of work.
lurking somewhere In my memory. If I let It Bulgaria ", before going on to add that It would I was living dangerously, under constant threat
all out, we'd be here till tomorrow morning, be just as easy to " stop me " too. of attack. I was travelling from country to
How can I choose the most striking Those two incidents how two faces of the country, and the insurance companies didn't
tragedy of the dictatorship. Unscrupulous want to know about me.
Melina na M.,.. ur. and p. err. vaneck 
colonels, in Greece as elsewhere, can cast a pall
in a scene from HB wnc Must Die cssn, · Eventually the colonels fell, but you stayed
directed by Jules Dassin. ZZZ polItZCS..
- 
When we went back to Greece, after the
fall of the colonels, I hesitated for a bit. Should
I stay in politics full time ? Then Andreas
 : Papandreou rang up to ask me to be a candi-
date in the legislative elections, for the Piraeus,
the second istrict. It was a difficult consti-
tuency for a woman. The voters were sailors,
miners, macho types. I pointed out that I
would feel more comfortable in Athens,
where, as I said earlier, my grandfather had
been mayor and my father had been a deputy.
. 
Ir  x ;` '' .'2'Papandreou won me over by his reply. He
said, " Melina, you celebrated Piraeus in Never
on Sunday and made it known around the
w
12 

Medea for two months. That was the role of there, side by side. It was strange how much
my life, the greatest role ever written for the easier conversations became.
ta'theatre. It was my greatest uccess, too. Medea
!. 
. 
 was the reward for all my efforts for the · Was it di ; cult to make up your mind ?
theatre, for the cinema, for Greece.-All the more difficult when the competing
After we won the legislative lections on projects were good ones, and it was only
$. aS))) ! ''tt) tt  October 1980, Andreas Papandreou asked because of a lack of resources that one had to
me to become Minister of Culture. It was a choose between them. It's horrible to abandon
new challenge. I was caught up in the general a project because you don't have enough
" ' euphoria, I thought that at last the world money to carry it through. But you have to
belonged to us, so I accepted. Those were eight force yourself to decide.
F-,  =,  happy years. We made mistakes and we paid
for them. But we also achieved a great deal. · Did that cause problems for you ?
- Yes, of course. But that's the kind of
i · Being a minister was a new role for you problem I can stand. In the office, I never let
to play-one you were thrown into without any of my regrets show. It was only when I
>v
any chance to rehearse.... got back home that I would sound off, and
- There weren't any rehearsals, that's for sure. it was my friends who suffered from my bad
But the field the ministry covered was familiar temper. But I never went back on a decision
to me ; it included theatre, music, cinema. once it was taken.
Which is to say that I wasn't entirely an
intruder. There was archaeology as well, cer-· Don't you ever feel that a life as full and
tainly. But for that I surrounded myself with diverse as yours can be a heavy load to carry ?
competent people.-Oh no ! Just the opposite ! If I hadn't become
When I took up office, the ministry of involved in politics, I would now just be a has-
Culture was a small one. Then its responsi-been of stage and screen. That would be awful.
_ 
xH bilities were extended to include athletics, I'm very happy that people don't talk about
world. In Piraeus you' ! ! be able to smash the sport, youth, Greeks living abroad.... It me in the past tense. I'm still " Melina " for
right and the left as well. " I put forward my became a very big ministry. To cope, I had them, just as I always have been. It even goes
! candidacy. to decentralize. I decentralized like mad. further than that. Because at a time of very
I campaigned in the same way that I For the ministry people and my visitors great distress I expressed their hist for life,
rehearse parts in the theatre. Furiously, but as well, I was the barefoot minister, I never because I loved them then and still love them
with pleasure. I used to go into cafes and play wore shoes. I was also a minister who never now with all my heart, they sculpted a mask
t backgammon with the old men. That received people sitting at a desk. Desks create of me and engraved on it : " Our Melina ".
t improved my standing, because I used to win. a distance between people. So I had a table They know I'm " their " Melina. For me, that's
I campaigned door to door, and people would brought in, and when people came to see me, a source of very great happiness. N
t gather groups together in their homes, any-I would get up and we'd go over and sit down
thing from ten to thirty people. I immersedmyself fr  ten to thirty people. I i mersed
were huge. There had been terrible rains that me$ Dassin and Inge Morath.
year, and there were serious drainage
problems, all the more urgent because the " °-s
buildings didn't have very solid foundations
and the state of the roads was deplorable.'`
Gradually these people's problems became my
own. One day I even took to the streets with
them agamst the police.
There were five candidates for the seat,
and I won it in the first round of voting.
I still pursued my theatrical career. Dassin
staged Brecht's ThYeepenny Opera, and it was
a huge success. Then I went to Salonika to play
13
