V-/REATED in Sweden, the United States and
Switzerland, the first toy libraries were institu¬
tions which lent out games and toys. Their coun¬
terparts in Latin America, known as ludotecas, are
something quite different in that their centre of
interest has shifted away from games and toys
towards the players, who are offered a range of
play activities.
In societies suffering from chronic economic
crisis, the creation of institutions for play may
seem like a luxury. In the name of this miscon¬
ception those children who most need to play are
often deprived of the opportunity to do so. With
its interaction between communication and cre¬
ative expression, freedom and self-discipline, play
is extremely valuable in child development and
in helping children to fully belong to their cul¬
ture and society.
Latin American ludotecas seek to do more than
fill the gaps in the formal education system. The
experience of the network of ludotecas extending
from Mexico to Tierra del Fuego which has been
set up under the auspices of the Federación Latino¬
americana de Ludotecas (FLALU), created in 1986
on the initiative of Argentina, Brazil, Colombia
and Uruguay, shows that they can also help to
solve some serious problems of the Third World,
such as dropping out of school, illiteracy, juvenile
delinquency and marginalization.
Making toys from scrap materials or using
local craft techniques, inventing disguises, games
of skill and competitions, discovering nature and
the environment, as well as introductory courses
in music, theatre and dance, are just a few of the
activities offered by these institutions which give
pride of place to imagination and initiative.
Most Latin American ludotecas are associated
with projects to combat marginalization. They
operate in conjunction with educators and socio-
cultural workers, but in most cases it is the com¬
munity associations that decide to set them up and
run them. Whether it forms part of an extracur¬
ricular education project, of the social develop¬
ment centre of a poor district, or of a children's
dispensary, each ludoteca has its own methods of
work and its own objectives. But they all have a
social and educational function, the idea being that
play will encourage the development of more cre¬
ative, self-reliant individuals, better equipped to
contribute to society.
One notable example is the ludoteca started in
the big top of a circus as part of an itinerant cul¬
tural programme in Brazil's mining district. The
creative and organizational abilities that both child
and adult participants discovered in themselves
thanks to the ludoteca led to the establishment of
an association to improve living conditions in the
neighbourhood.
RAIMUNDO DINELLO
is a Uruguayan professor of the
sociology of education. A
specialist in educational
guidance and training, and an
educational consultant with
several European and Latin
American universities, he has
written several works on his
speciality. 29
