Quartz time
The modern world has shattered the
concept of time on which Western
society was nurtured
Quartz (the colourless
variety known as rock
crystal), from Brazil.
X ACED with the imponderables of time, history
and the meaning of life, the so-called post-
industrial societies of the West are chanting the
sad refrain of crisis. Yet what is seen as a crisis
is often no more than a period of change from
one state of the human condition to another, the
death rattle of one system of symbols challenged
by another more capable of reflecting a new
vision of the world. Modernity's cry of terror
could only emerge from a way of thought still
rooted in a vanishing world.
Modernity is, by definition, in a state of cons¬
tant rupture, firstly with the old worldthat of
the Christian universeand secondly with the
new world, itself destined to become old in its
turn. Condemned to continual renewal, moder¬
nity is a perpetual process of drift. Freed from
the rationality of the past, the most insignificant
aspects of the present break off in all directions.
The legendary rivers of time, which once charted
a linear vision of History, have merged into an
ocean in which anything is possible. The history
of events, with its clear-cut succession of cause
and effect, has disintegrated, and a host of
thematic studies attempt to reconstitute, step by
step, a prism with an infinite number of facets.
What has been lost, seemingly for ever, is the
sense of a continuum that held everything
together. What substitute could there be for linear
time stretched between two pointsfrom sin to
redemptionother than a discontinuous percep¬
tion of a fragmentary temporality? Bereft of the
will of God and of the unity of values that gave
it cohesion, time becomes no more than an
absurd succession of isolated moments. The
vision of the flow of time is replaced by that of
the passing of individual seconds. The notions of
duration and expectation are replaced by those
of instantaneity and precision. As the French
thinker Gaston Bachelard said, "Time no longer
flows, it erupts".
Quartz and the search for precision
Yet, subjected though we are to this senseless dis¬
persal of moments, are we not still aware of a
"code of poetic fidelity" to time? Where concep¬
tual vision is lacking, are there not new
metaphors of time? When we moved from geo¬
metric, space-defined time to more functional
numerical time, we thought we were finally rid
of time metaphors. Not a bit of it. Time may
have pulverized space, but the dust of space is a
new metaphor. And what if, against all expecta¬
tion, in an allegedly disenchanted world, we are
all wearing a metaphor on our wrists?
In a quartz watch, time is no longer meas¬
ured by mechanical movement but by the
vibration of a quartz crystala mechanically
immobile, electronically regulated vibration that
takes just one forty-thousandth of a second.
Quartz has no part in any theological vision of
time. Here, time emerges from the vibration
immanent in the original matter and from that
immanence alone. Instantly, just before they
vanish for ever, the seconds show up in a flicker 33

34
of light. Liquid crystals display their hasty passage.
Then, more slowly, the internecine warfare of
minutes and hours is revealed. Time is "crystal¬
lized" to satisfy our compulsive interest in details,
details, details. The contemporary mind is
obsessed with the infinitesimal. Infinity is



reversed and reconquered in the perfect density
of the crystalline instant. Liquid crystalsthe
metaphor reunites discrete particles and reinvents
flow. Time's crystals melt into duration and
spread out into daily life.
Thus, the vibrations of a quartz crystal are
calculated so as to attain extreme precision, which
in turn determines the value of the watch itself.
Yet, although they may be indispensable for
scientific research, ultra-sophistication and pre¬
cision in the measurement of time have little
impact on our ordinary sense perceptions. Our
eyes ignore the gaps between one numerical ins¬
tant and another, thus recreating the sense of
duration. There is, indeed, a larger time scale than
that of the self-consuming second; there is a sense
of duration that the micro-eternity of divisibility
cannot smother. Watches go out of fashion, bat¬
teries run down, wrists become wrinkled.
Living at top speed
At the very heart of his existence, modern man
is enmeshed in a tangle of time scales and a var¬
iety of distinct yet simultaneous rhythms.
Whether we like it or not, Universal Time con¬
trols our collective time. The same throughout
the world, time has become a form of currency.
The division of time into fixed units enables us
to sell or to buy packets of activity which have
become virtually autonomous objects.
Thus time becomes a closed dimension, a
complete assemblage of empty compartments
that have to be filled, that is to say, to be used
in the best possible way. When time is not used,
it is lost: nothing has been produced in it. The
purpose of technology is, above all, to gain time,
in other words to turn out, in the shortest pos¬
sible time, products that will be consumed in an
even shorter time. The time gained is used for
further production.
Spare time, paradoxically, is subject to the
same pressures. It is like capital that we possess
and must not lose. Spare time is taken up with
leisure activities and entertainment, just as work
takes up time, and we apply ourselves to it in the
same spirit of productivity. The product that we
consume is a sense of well-being which we put
to the service of greater productivity, which
remains the only real objective.
This induces in us the absurd feeling that time
is shrinking. The pace of life accelerates to com¬
pensate for this terrible diminution. That "life
is short" is not a new perception, yet the Western
Monumental clock face
(c. 1500), by the Flemish
artist Quentin Metsys.
world no longer builds cathedrals that will
endure. A comparison of the quartz watch and
another, very ancient, method of measuring time,
the clepsydra, or water clock, will help us to grasp
the change that has occurred.
The clepsydra measures the passing of each
hour taken from us by the flow of water from
one receptacle into another. However, the time
that passes, like the water that flows, is not lost,
but is stored in memory just as the water is stored
in a receptacle. Loss is converted into gain, the
gain increases as time passes and something
remains of what is no more. Finally, when
nothing is left, the receptacles are exchanged and
the cycle starts again.
The notion of the cumulative nature of time
and of perpetuity ensured by transmission (of a
collective, linear memory) are lacking in contem¬
porary perceptions of time. On the face of a dig¬
ital watch the seconds flare briefly but for
nothing. Nothing remains, nothing is gained.
Time seems to be rushing headlong, wasted,
towards. ..nothing.
By breaking with the notion of a linear con¬
tinuum which, as it were, propelled humanity
towards its ideal goal, and within which every
event was meaningful to the extent that it
favoured or compromised its achievement, we are
breaking with a whole range of valueshistory,
progress, hope for a better future. The hope that,
at the end of time, all this would be achieved
which kept people in suspense has given way to
an anguished search for instant satisfaction. The

quest for day-to-day pleasure is a more modest
and less uncertain goal.
With no future in our sights, our desires can
only be fulfilled by frantic consumption of the
present. When the objective is eliminated, it reap¬
pears in many places but in impoverished and
diminished guise. Just as the death of God as
announced by Nietzsche has led to a desperate
proliferation of the sacred, so the lack of a final
justification for existence has spawned a desire to
give some kind of meaning, however derisory,
to even the briefest spans of time. Nevertheless,
however rapid the pace of consumption and the
acceleration of the rhythms of life, people die,
finitude bears them ineluctably away.
Rhythm and repetition
Contemporary art forms reflect this rupture
of the time continuum. One piece of evidence
for this is the demise of the long book. In litera¬
ture, narrators seem to have run out of steam;
they no longer tell stories. At best they describe
the trivial course of ordinary lives. Beckett is
the supreme example of the writer of contem¬
porary tragedy. He evokes a world of hiatuses,
a world which is, along with language, at the
point of dissolution.
However, though the tale may dissolve and
fiction be impossible, the timbre of the voice, the
punctuation, the scansion and the pace give time
a new lease of life. The problem brings its own
solution. Unity is rediscovered by expressing the
The Genitron, a digital quartz
clock, was started in 1987 at
the Georges Pompidou Centre,
Paris. It is counting down the
number of seconds until the
year 2000. For 13 years, with
no maintenance, it will be
accurate to within a
thousandth of a second.
fracture that has destroyed it. The death of time
can only be evoked in time reborn.
This time reborn, however, is a different sort
of time. Its unity is not that of a homogeneous
flow, but lies in regularity and the mastery of
rhythm. In music, rhythm has taken the place
of harmony. It brings order to multiplicity,
and makes a compromise between the tumult
of the perceptions and the rationality of the
senses.
The novelty does not lie in the new rhythms
introduced by technology, but in the develop¬
ment of rhythmic technology. No longer merely
one possible interpretation among many, rhythm
has become the fixed, autonomous framework
within which variations are set. The "rhythm
machine" dictates the broad outlines of a piece
of music; everything else is a kind of musical small
talk. In order to retain some freedom for inven¬
tion, we have to concentrate on the technolog¬
ical production of new sounds or, as a last resort,
on exaggerating the constraints of rhythm and
giving vent to a terrifying torrent of verbal vio¬
lence from between the ever more closely spaced
bars of a cage of sound.
Contemporary music reflects the bewilder¬
ment of the voice caught up in the repetitive,
impersonal world of technology. Xenakis was
very near the mark when he spoke of the impos¬
sibility of communicating through repetition. All
that technology has to offer is the possibility of
manipulating and juggling with the basics of
sound.
The cybernetic age
In its present state, music, par excellence the art
of tempo, of manipulating tempo within time,
gives us a picture of how, within the logic of
cybernetics, the instant is assimilated to the
notion of duration. For a computer, duration is
simply a series of instants and their storage, and
memory is merely a data bank. It is not just by
35

Micrographie image of a grain
of sand taken through a
polarizing filter.
36
AYYAM WASSEF,
Egyptian essayist, is preparing
a doctoral thesis at the
University of Paris I (Sorbonne)
on the theme of the individual
in contemporary philosophy,
and writing an account of her
experiences as an Egyptian
living in Paris.
chance that the logic of cybernetics has emerged
in an age when children can be conceived of
fathers who died several years earlier. The future
is no longer controlled by the laws of transmis¬
sion, but by those of composition.
The age of creation by composition is
equipped to combine temporalities in a general¬
ized anachronism. It is still too early to say what
effect this will have on our common perception
of time, but it will certainly be considerable, since
we are here touching upon one of humankind's
oldest certaintiesthe laws of birth and death,
reproduction and transmission. Already the
immense capacities for storing information
everything, from the genetic code to the master¬
pieces of the Renaissance, has become
"information" have rendered obsolete the
notion of collective immortality based on the
transmission of knowledge. It would seem that
we are returning to a certain form of deter¬
minism, in the sense that everything is already
there and that the future will depend upon com
binations of pre-existing possibilities. The past
and the future are becoming merged into a com¬
pound present.
The age of creation by composition began
with the visual industries, of which television,
which creates more varied time warps than the
cinema, is the most typical. With "live" broad¬
casts there is every likelihood that viewing time
will become confused with real time. Television
abhors the messiness of reality, and (like nature)
it abhors a vacuum. When, due to some technical
failure, there is such a vacuum, the presenter
stammers away in real time perhaps the only
real time ever seen on television and a moment
which seems to the viewer painfully long and
inadequate. But the messiness of real life is never
shown. Every effort is made to filter out the
coarse realities and to blend them into a
homogenized narrative sequence.
Television time comes to replace all other
forms of time in our awareness. An event only
happens if it has been seen on television, and
however long it may actually have lasted, its
importance is gauged by the viewing time allotted
to it by the producer. A news item, the same
pictures of which have been shown over and
over again, becomes a tragedy with as many acts
as the number of times it is screened. What
does it matter, it may be asked, if the impression
is false, provided that it has been collectively
experienced? Are there, in fact, any truths other
than shared lies? The viewer is reduced to a
terrifying state of solitude. His or her only
interlocutor is television itself, which indulges
in endless self-appraisal and ensures that there is
never the slightest moment of silence. Time is so
crowded with images that it becomes impossible
to see.
Is there any family resemblance between the
liquid crystal display of a quartz watch, which
registers a succession of instants frozen in time,
and the television screen on which images appear
in an artificially recovered continuum? Perhaps
there is, but it is too approximate to be worth
dwelling upon.
The uninterrupted procession of images on
television has nothing in common with the agility
of crystals suspended in an invisible flux. Time
exists between the inscription of two seconds;
above all, there is the possibility of a meaning.
Between two recorded seconds, there is some
empty, lost time. All that is needed to dispel the
absurd is to build a bridge between the two
seconds. Just as it makes a break between two
instants, this gap alone makes possible their true
reconciliation.
Thus, time torn apart, time interspersed with
gaps, time shot through with emptiness, so
bewailed by moderns, is perhaps the best hope
of rebuilding new links between man and the
world, between reality and meaning.
