CITIES UNDER STRESS
The urban experience
by Wolf Tochtermann
Are urban decay
and a declining
quality of life
the inevitable
consequences of
rampant growth
in the world's
burgeoning cities?
A,. town or city is essentially a place where men
and women work, move about, meet one
another, improve their minds and amuse them¬
selves. Obviously the range of opportunities it
offers is proportional to its size, the number of
its institutions, and the intensity of its economic,
commercial, social and cultural life.
But the inhabitants of cities all have different
perceptions of the urban environment in which
they live, depending on their origins, their edu¬
cation, their professional concerns and their ambi¬
tions. For many people the city is simply
somewhere to live, a place of work, and the
journey between the two; while others regard it
as a far more complex environment offering
much greater scope.

Opposite page, the
mountainous site of La Paz
(Bolivia).
Left, the spiralling streets of
Pérouges, a village north-east
of Lyon (France) which dates
from the Middle Ages.
Below, Toronto (Canada), an
example of the urban grid
pattern.
For the mayor and the municipal councillors
a city is primarily a political entity posing
management problems that need to be solved in
the interests of its population. It is also a place
that calls for leadership, in the sense of putting
forward or encouraging projects likely to give it
a character of its own and differentiate it from
other cities.
Urban planners see the city as a sphere of
operation that makes demands on their
knowledge and experience in the organization of
built-up areas. They seek to bring order to chaos
and give shape to the urban fabric, and they are
usually convinced that their work responds to
users' aspirations. Historians of urban planning,
on the other hand, see cities in terms of a process
of continuous development through periods
characterized by successive architectural styles.
Each period has its own conception of develop¬
ment, its own ways of exercising power, and its
own modes of production, all of which may
explain the prosperity of a conurbation or its
decline.
Intellectuals, research workers, philosophers
and artists find in towns and cities the rivalries
and confrontations conducive to creative work
and the interplay of ideas they need to stimulate
their imagination. One scholar even worked out
that he needed a city with a population of at least
one million in order to find the five or ten people
essential to the progress of his research.

14
For people who live in the countryside, cities
are magnets. With their opportunities for
material gain and entertainment they hold out a
promiseor a mirageof a better life, and so have
led to an exodus from the land whose scale has
varied at different times. This migration was par¬
ticularly substantial in the nineteenth century,
when it was justified in the sense that jobs and
pay were more attractive in the towns than in
the country. Today, especially in developing
countries, towns and above all the major conur¬
bations still attract rural people even though there
is no longer any work, at any rate in the formal
sectors of the economy. Yet even though they
do not enjoy the privileges of city life, migrants
still hope that by settling in an urban area they
will manage to move a step or two up the social
scale.
Why some cities grow
and others lag behind
It is usually hard to ascertain the origins of a
conurbation, and the factors that have helped or
hindered its development down the centuries are
often obscure. Why should one city have become
prominent while another with the same advan
tages have lagged behind and developed less exten¬
sively or less quickly? The reasons may not be
exclusively economic, although many towns did
start from a favourable situation at the junction
of trade routes, along a river or at the site of a
natural harbour. But a town or city might also
be founded by the decision of a temporal or
spiritual ruler, or as a result of the discovery and
working of natural resources or the setting up of
an industrial plant. These factors often coincide
and generate a dynamic conducive to urban
development.
Many urban planners make a distinction
between the "traditional" towns and cities, which
developed organically, and "planned" towns and
cities created by the decision of a ruler or govern¬
ment, but this distinction is not as clear-cut as is
claimed. Medieval cities were unplanned, but this
did not prevent them from being thoroughly
organized; and twentieth-century new towns,
though planned, are usually not truly urban in
character.
Traditional cities, which have developed
organically over the centuries, have a certain
homogeneity as a result of their structure, the
uniformity of their building materials, and the
human scale of their narrow streets and open
A covered street in Ghadamis
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya).
Opposite page, detail of the
recently built Institute of the
Arab World, Paris.
WOLF TOCHTERMANN
is in charge of Unesco's
human settlements
programme. A specialist in
urban problems and town
planning, he is currently
concerned with a project
entitled "The future of cities in
the face of social and cultural
challenges: ways of organizing
and improving the living
conditions of disadvantaged
population groups". He is
writing a book on this project,
which will be published by
Unesco in 1992.

spaces. Some people think that such growth owes
nothing to urban planners or administrators, for¬
getting that these towns conformed to the stan¬
dards of their time and that cathedrals, castles,
fortresses, ramparts and other monuments were
the result of a collective effort. It is true that many
of their inhabitants were fated to live in penury
and without any kind of comfort. Noise, dirt,
insecurity, difficulty in obtaining supplies and the
threat of epidemics were the normal conditions
of urban life for centuries.
Planned towns and cities have existed in most
parts of the world. The ideal cities of the Italian
Renaissance, Baroque cities, the Spanish cities of
Latin America, Beijing in China and Jaipur in
India all stemmed from steps deliberately taken
by rulers who wanted to control not only the
shape but also the destiny of their cities.
Many cities were remade in the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries because of explosive
population growth and the migrations brought
about by the Industrial Revolution. Regular and
often rectangular layouts were juxtaposed with
traditional urban ground plans. The extensions
of Barcelona and Berlin, and the street plans of
Washington, New York, Chicago and Canberra
strikingly demonstrate the difference between an
organic urban fabric and a city whose shape and
functions have been determined from the outset
by rigorous planning.
Many architects and urban planners, con¬
vinced that they could solve the social as well as
the architectural problems of cities, have drawn
inspiration from the industrial towns and cities
that are so characteristic of the twentieth century.
Under the dictatorships the monumental had to
make way for the colossal, and a disturbing var¬
iant of the planned city made its appearance. The
Berlin development plan drawn up by Albert
Speer at Hitler's request in 1937, and the Bucharest
plan put forward by Ceausescu in 1981 in the
name of "urban systematization" entailed ruth¬
lessly gutting the existing cities and implanting
in them urban structures that were alien to their
original character and revolved around the centres
of power.
Many countries, especially since the 1950s,
have embarked on plans for new towns in order
to relieve congestion in cities and focus growth
on particular points. In some cases capitals have
been built to give a country or a region a new
identity. Two of them, Brasilia and Chandigarh,
are world famous, notably for their spectacular
architecture. Other countries such as Nigeria and '
the United Republic of Tanzania have also begun
to build new capitals. It will be interesting to see
how they turn out, for makeshift dwellings are
already proliferating around them.

Urban decay
In industrialized countries urban decay is leading
to a disintegration of the urban fabric, especially
in those cities that are witnessing the disappear¬
ance of once-important economic activities.
Several mining and industrial areas in Europe
and the United States have been affected by
this phenomenon, the signs of which are patches
of waste ground, derelict industrial estates,
and disused buildingsa breeding ground for
social problems such as unemployment and
delinquency.
In developing countries the rural exodus and
vigorous population growth are leading to the
accelerated urbanization deplored by demo¬
graphers, by urban planners and especially by
local administrators. No arrangements are made
to receive the people who flock in from the
country, attracted by the possibilities of city life.
towns) are generally regarded as a blight on the
face of a city, and their inhabitants as delinquents,
intruders or undesirables. What tends to be over¬
looked is that in many cities they now represent
the bulk of the population.
Municipal authorities usually accept that it
is no longer feasible to evict these people from
the sites they have illegally taken overespecially
since the construction of subsidized housing does
not solve the problem of the influx of new¬
comers. Moreover the public purse can no longer
afford operations of such magnitude.
The quality of life is declining in all great
conurbations. Pollution, noise, the constant
threat of epidemics or starvation, rising crime
rates and a chronic shortage of public facilities
are the price to be paid for rampant urban
growth. The situation seems unlikely to improve
lOIJ I'»«"
, ¡Em wcMta« i
America Mm
-Profil
MAY 20, I**»
Helping America' Hungry
75 CENTS
I
*>>
SA
PUBLIC
HOUSING:
JATale of Two Cities
BROKEN «UT OF
DREAMS THE
i ^AJamUtba^x .
Stark urban contrasts In a
residential district of Bangkok
(Thailand).
Street News,
a New York newspaper
for homeless people launched In
November 1989. Published fortnightly,
It Is sold In the streets by the homeless themselves.
16
They are unfortunately obliged to look after
themselves as well as they can on the outskirts
of the cities, on insalubrious pieces of land or dan¬
gerous slopes, where they gradually erect
makeshift accommodation in districts that are not
without cohesion but are desperately short of
infrastructure, facilities and services.
Their presence is resented by the city authori¬
ties and the rest of the urban population. Squatter
settlements, barrios, favelas and bidonvilles (shanty
in the next few years. In a world that will become
increasingly urbanized, the role played by
architects, urban planners and designers will,
sadly, continue to be insignificant.
Towns and cities, especially in developing
countries, are becoming the end product of
"informal" planning, the process whereby people
take possession of a piece of land, settle on it and
build modest shelters there. Some sociologists
regard this as the beginning of a new urban cul¬
ture, born of the traditions of historic towns and
cities and of a so-called "vernacular"
architecturean architecture without architects.
We do not yet know whether this new urban
culture will take root, but we do already know
that towns and cities in poor countries will con¬
tinue to grow without any overall urban planning.
