by Ana Vásquez
The foundations of tomorrow's multicultural Europe are being laid in primary schools
across the continent
ÍE speak Arabic and French at home."
"At our place we speak Chinese with our
parents, but my brother and I talk in French."
"I've got a Spanish grandfather, and I've
already picked up a few words from him."
This conversation between Mohammed,
Paula Li and Véronique, three French schoolchil¬
dren not yet twelve years old, illustrates a situa¬
tion that is becoming increasingly common in the
schools of Western Europe's main urban and
industrial centres. In Liverpool and Liège, Got¬
tingen, Geneva and Lyons, changes in the so-
called migrant population are altering the tradi¬
tional nature of the school enrolment. With this
in mind, my colleagues and I have for the past
three years been studying the social interaction
between pupils, both French and foreign, in a
state primary school in a working-class district
of Paris.
WHO IS FRENCH
AND WHO IS FOREIGN?
What makes a child foreign? Of those considered
as such in the class we were studying, 70 per cent
were born in France and 85 per cent had attended
local kindergartens, and so, from the age of three
or four, had gone through the normal process of
socialization provided by the French school
system. As for the parents, most had lived in
France for at least ten years. This shows how
ambiguous the term "foreigner" can be. It is
always hard to know whether it refers to place
of birth, to family culture, to a value system
acquired in childhood, or simply to an uncons¬
ciously accepted set of stereotypes.
As Paula Li explained to her friends, she
speaks Chinese with her parents but French with
her brother. Mohammed speaks Arabic at home.
Both, in other words, continue to speak their
parents' language while also mastering French.
The same was true of almost all the children of
foreigners in the class. All but one of them (a girl
who had recently arrived from Haiti) spoke
French at school without any noticeable accent
and even when playing.
This situation had an effect on the children
whose parents were French, as Véronique's com¬
ment indicates. Her conversation with Paula Li
and Mohammed took place when the pupils were
asked to say what languages they spoke at home.
Véronique felt that she too ought to come up
with a foreign relativein her case a Spanish
grandfatherto show that she was learning
another language than French.
Her reaction is significant in two ways. First,
it indicates that speaking another language at
home is not necessarily demeaning. But it also
suggests that the issues raised are global, and that
the problem is not so much one of the integra¬
tion of foreign children as of a new situation
common to all young people, no matter where
their parents come from, in which questions of
ethnic identity and difference are everyone's
concern.
Who do these children play with and how do
My classmates as animals,
by Sylvia Voss, age 8
(Germany).
25

26
they choose their friends? In the course of our
three years of observation at the school, the com¬
position of some of the playgroups remained
stable, but the children receiving the most
widespread acceptance or rejection did not stay
the same.
Ethnic origin was not the main factor in the
choice of playmates; other criteria influenced the
forming and breaking up of groups. The children
explained their choice of friends, whether for
play, study or discussion, in terms of likes and
dislikes, sentiments they could not clarify further.
Paula Li was voted the most popular pupil, and
Mohammed and another boy named Hubert
were the least. This was not the case at the start
of our study, when Paula was not very well-liked.
She was shy and uncommunicative but eventu¬
ally developed new qualities, notably a capacity
for study and a serious approach to life. The result
was that many children trusted her, not only
when it came to work or discussion, but also at
playtime, for she was scrupulously honest.
HOSTILITY TO FOREIGNERS
In the course of our study, we noted only one
case of aggressive behaviour towards a foreign-
born child.
The dispute took place between Hubert and
Mohammed in the course of a school outing.
These two pupils aroused the most negative
feelings among their schoolmates, and although
very different in personality both had serious
problems in relating to other people. Mohammed
was talkative and sometimes very funny, but also
anxious and often unstable. He could attract a
group around him, but then usually irritated the
others and reacted aggressively to their dis¬
pleasure. Hubert, on the other hand, was a loner,
reserved, unfriendly and often bad-tempered at
play.
The two began to squabble during a visit to
a museum. Both wanted to be closest to the guide
and the objects on display. On the way back to
school they started a fight over a seat, which
Mohammed eventually won. Hubert then began
to chant in an undertone racist slogans about
Mohammed the Arab, the foreigner, someone
stupid and ridiculous.
Their schoolfellows, half of them children of
foreigners themselves, seemed confused and said
nothing. Not knowing how to react, they simply
moved away from the disputants. Mohammed
lost his temper. After telling Hubert to shut up
two or three times, he dug himself down into his
seat. The whole episode only lasted for a few
minutes until the mistress in charge, realizing that
something was going on, came up to the group
and made Hubert shut up.
The incident was significant in several ways.
In situations where different ethnic groups mix
together, it is easy for interpersonal conflicts to
take on racist overtones. Offensive remarks of the
kind that were made are of course never harm¬
less, but in this case they served to mask the
difficulties in relating to others experienced by
the two boys, especially Hubert. Hurt,
Mohammed was incapable of defending himself
as he normally would have, whether by words
or blows. The attitude of the other pupils showed
how disturbing this kind of aggression is for chil¬
dren of their age. The only way they could find
of expressing their distaste was to move away. It
is also worth noting that the scene took place out
of the classroom, where the schoolmistress is
always in charge.
The teacher was aware of these problems, and
had often stressed, both in her lessons and in her
attitudes, the importance of respect for others.
In this case, she simply told Hubert to stop
chanting, and stayed close to Mohammed without
Children ot Mindo,
by Lusmira del Valdes Baeza,
age 12 (Chile).

saying anything further. Back at school, she
neither reprimanded nor punished Hubert, but
she did change the work schedule so as to be able
to talk about the need for mutual respect between
peoples. She took time to speak of the cultural
and scientific achievements of the world's
different peoples, specifically mentioning the
Arab invention of algebra. Later in the year, she
also organized other activities with the same aim.
WHO AM I?
We also had to find out how the children see
themselves. Through games and questionnaires
concerning their qualities and defects, we
obtained several self-portraits of the pupils.
Knowing how adult immigrants react to this
kind of enquiry, one would have expected
national origin to have figured prominently in
the responses, and skin colour or the shape of the
eyes to have been seen as dominant physical traits.
Yet only one of the children mentioned ethnic
origin, and the same was true of skin colour, and
then only as part of a list ("I am: black, black-
haired, dark-brown eyes, I can run very fast.")
Néryal's drawing
(see article).
Even so, the influence of different cultures
did show through to some extent in the students'
attitude to beauty. Among the children of French
parents, it was the girls who called themselves
beautiful or said that they had beautiful hair or
eyes, while among those from North African
backgrounds it was more likely to be the boys.
There was not enough evidence, however, on
which to base a definite conclusion.
The qualities and defects the pupils consi¬
dered important reflected the same influence.
Some attributes were seen either as positive or
negative, depending on family background and
values. For some of the children the word
"patient" had good connotations, for others bad,
and the same was true for "obstinate", "ambi¬
tious" and "inquisitive". All the children consi¬
dered wearing spectacles a significant physical
trait, while other characteristics such as big or
small and fat or thin were often overlooked. The
conclusion seems to be that in a multicultural
environment ethnic origin is less important than
other traits in forming an individual's self-image.
DESIRES AND DREAMS
In order to understand how the children saw their
place in French society, we had to explore their
desires. We devised a drawing game in which the
pupils were asked to imagine a situation other
ft* frtft Yf>W&
27

than that familiar to them in daily life. By
requesting them to show their ideal of family life,
we hoped to gain an understanding of the ties
binding the foreigners' children to the land and
culture of their parents.
Confronted with real-life problems,
individuals often seek to escape into an imaginary
never-neverland. In the case of adult immigrants
© EH!
m / /.¿ 'lu 1«
lltRt
Paula Li's drawing
(see article).
28
ANA VASQUEZ,
Chilean-born French
psychologist, is currently
engaged in research with the
French National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS) in
Paris. She is the author of
many studies and essays on
the problems of exile and the
processes of transculturation.
(and foreigners in general), this usually takes the
form of the country they have left behind, seen
in an idealized light. The same holds true of inter¬
personal ties. There is a tendency to romanticize
the way things were before the old country was
left behind.
What we learned from the children, however,
was that, regardless of their place of origin, they
shared a common dream of a luxurious and exotic
retreat in which they could live like millionaires
on a permanent holiday close to nature. In their
ideas of happiness and their aspirations to greater
well-being and comfort, they all looked to similar
models, drawn in large part from the media.
Two drawings were especially revealing.
Paula Li showed her family in a huge, luxurious
mansion. While she played with her little sister,
her mother read and sunbathed by the swimming-
pool, her brother swam, and her father lay on
an inflatable mattress with a drink by his side.
Perhaps this vision of comfort and luxury was
shared by her parents, who both worked hard
and lived in confined surroundings.
A girl called Néryal was less specific. In her
drawing, the tip of a palm-tree sufficed to indi¬
cate that the scene lay somewhere far away, in
a tourist-brochure version of the tropics. But
there was nothing ambiguous about the way in
which she portrayed her family. Her sister dis¬
appeared entirely and Néryal, easily recognizable
by her spectacles, appeared as an only child. Even
more striking were the changes made to her
family, in real life extremely conservative in their
dress and style. She removed her father's
moustache and depicted him in tie and shorts, a
symbolic image of the ideal father on the perfect
holiday. The woman with him looked totally
different from NéryaPs own mother, indicating
how feminine role-models can change in the
course of long-term social displacement.
It would be wrong to conclude that the chil¬
dren had no interests or values in life other than
material comfort. Paula Li was one of the most
promising pupils in the class, and also, as we have
seen, one of the most popular. Néryal was a hard
worker who had made steady progress and she
talked of joining the medical charity Médecins
sans Frontières. ("I want to help poor people. .
. . Thousands of people are dying of hunger, and
I want to stop them from dying that way.")
Despite the fact that they had grown up in
a district where the foreign population was large
and mixed, all the children in the class had
imbibed the same values and role-models as
French children from the same background: they
did not consider themselves as foreign, or even
different. And their ambitions were centred on
the land where they now lived. Some of them
obviously could expect to encounter difficulties
in the course of their school careers, but they
would be the same as those confronting their
French counterparts.
More important than ethnic origin, the
lifestyle and academic level of the children's
parents, on the other hand, did appear to have
had a real influence on how well each was doing
at school. The children's own level of curiosity
and interest had also to be taken into account,
as did the amount of family support from which
they had benefited.
THE SCHOOL AS A PLACE
OF SOCIALIZATION
In France, the school provides all children with
a set of models and norms that contribute to the
socialization process and help new generations to
learn to live in society. For children whose
parents are French, the values expressed are
largely those encountered within the family,
although there may be some divergences . in
different social classes from what is taught at
school.
In the case of foreign children, the role of the
school is even more crucial. It is there that they
learn the language and become familiar with rou¬
tines and habits that form a kind of cultural
imprint, affecting such matters as rules of polite¬
ness, table manners, and the organization of time.
School also provides a setting outside the family
circle in which they can meet other local people,
both children and adults, French and foreign-
born. It is a place where the pupils can establish
social relationships of their own.
It is largely because they have spent so many
years at school that these children can succeed,
without too many shocks, in crossing the cultural
divide and participating in the social life of the
land in which they live. In many European coun¬
tries, this new generation of under-twelves is
laying the foundations of the multicultural
society of the 1990s.
