Coming to terms with time
by Paul Ric
Mankind has invented powerful symbolic structures in order to cope with the immensity of cosmic
time and the brevity of human life
Xwo extreme viewpoints on time suggest them¬
selves to us, and we try to mediate between them.
On the one hand there is the harrowing
experience of life's brevity, with death looming
on the horizon. This fundamental experience is
not endured in silence. The groans of the suffering
are translated into language in the lyrical mode
of lamentation, which mobilizes all the resources
of poetry. Attached to lamentation is a corpus
of popular wisdom which tells of the passage of
time by means of metaphors that are rich in
philosophy.
Thus we say that time flows or flies, sug¬
gesting that its somehow furtive passage prevents
the present from staying with us forever. We also
say that our recent experiences sink into the past
and that once they are in this receptacle they can
no longer be changed, even though the memory
which we have of them and which preserves them
is threatened with destruction by forgetfulness.
Again, we say that the future, which we both
desire and fear, is uncertain, although feared
events arrive too quickly and longed-for events
too slowly, and that in any case what happens
will thwart calculation and foresight.
Antithetical to this elementary symbolization
of the experience of time passing in an existence
that is all too short, is the symbolization of the
immensity of cosmic time which unflaggingly
returns in the great cycles of years, seasons and
days. We say that this time is all-enveloping. We
represent it symbolically as a great immobile
receptacle. Thus we say that our existence takes
place "in" time, and suggest by this spatial
metaphor the precedence of time over thought,
which aspires to circumscribe its meaning and
envelop it.
It is true that ways of measuring time, which
will be discussed below, express a certain mastery
of thought over something which eludes all
attempts to grasp it. But these forms of measure¬
ment, which are themselves inordinately vast,
strengthen the feeling of an enveloping immen¬
sity which contrasts with the experience of life's
brevity.
Other symbolic structures seek to overcome
the disparity between cosmic time and human
time. But to appreciate their significance we must
look more deeply into the nature of this disparity
by identifying some of the speculative resources
of the two metaphors of flight and envelopment.
The paradox of experience
With regard to cosmic time, major scientific dis¬
coveries have brought a keener appreciation of
the ways in which increasingly long time spans
fit together. In Western culture, for example, the
world was long considered to be several thousand
years old6,000 was a figure sometimes men¬
tioned.
The story of how these limits have been
transgressed is fascinating in itself. Improved
knowledge of geological eras has forced us to
accept the idea that the Earth is much older than
anyone could have guessed a few centuries ago.
The discovery of fossils has shown that there was
life on Earth far earlier than was once believed.
Human origins are also being dated further and
further back on a time scale reckoned in millions
of years. The concentric durations in which we
trace the origins of man, the origins of life, the
origins of the Earth and the origins of the solar
system are themselves enveloped by astronom¬
ical time calculated in light-years. Thus the
immediate experience of an immense and all-
enveloping time is reduced to a manageable level.
But the disparity between human time and
cosmic time is not expressed in numerical terms
alone. The main significance of the discordance
between the two viewpoints is qualitative.
Let us return to the phenomenon of time
passing in a fleeting instant. The notion of an ins¬
tant has two distinct and irreconcilable meanings, 11

depending on which of the two viewpoints we
adopt. From the viewpoint of cosmic time, which
precedes human consciousness and to that extent
is without witness, an instant is simply some kind
of breach in the continuity of movement or,
more generally, of changes in dynamic systems.
To talk of a breach is to imply that any instant
can be "now", like a point on the line of time.
However, for there to really be a "now" it
must be experienced by a consciousness which
perceives it as the passage of the future towards
the past across its present. The real disparity
between cosmic time and lived time is that
between quantitative time and qualitative time,
between a time without a present and a time with
a present.
This incommensurability can be expressed in
the form of a paradox. It is within the most insig¬
nificant of time spans, in quantitative termsthat
of a consciousness stretched between birth and
deaththat the very question of the meaning of
time arises, at the heart of the living present, with
its retentions and protensions. By using the imagi¬
nation it is possible to extend the range of
memory until it equals the immensity of sidereal
time, and that of foresight until it reaches a pos¬
sible end of the world. However, in addition to
the fact that the imagination is overwhelmed by
McMath solar telescope at the
Kitt Peak National
Observatory, Arizona (USA).
12 * Cultures and Time, 1976.
an excess of grandeur, as in the experience of the
sublime in Kant, there will always be something
missing between the immeasurable past and the
future and that is the pivotal experience of lived
time, which does not belong to the representa¬
tion of quantitative time.
Taking this phenomenon of disparity as a
starting point, it is possible to appreciate the
power of symbolic structures which, by medi¬
ating between cosmic time and lived time, con¬
stitute what can properly be called the cultural
experience of time.
To get some idea of the immensity of this
enterprise of mediation we must go back to
myths and to mythical time. Cultural anthropol¬
ogists refer to what the French comparative phi¬
lologist and mythologist Georges Dumézil called
"great time", the function of which is to syn¬
chronize cosmic time with the time of societies
and of people living in societies. Dumézil did this
by making a single, global scansion of time, so
that cycles of different duration, the great celes¬
tial cycles, biological recurrences and the rhythms
of social life can be related to each other. By the
regularity of its celebration, ritual expresses a time
whose rhythms are vaster than those of ordinary
action, and gives to the representations of myth
the complement of a practical scansion.
I will say no more about the problem of
mythical time, which I discussed in an earlier
study published by UNESCO.* I will deal
directly with those symbolic structures which can
be situated at the point of inflection between
mythos and logos. It is at this median level that it is
possible to place the temporal structures which
one philosopher, Krzysztof Pomian, has called
"chronosophies" to distinguish them from the
chronographies with which they are intermingled.
Chronosophies and calendars
At this level history is divided into major periods,
eras or epochs. This is a scansion of time which
takes its cue from events which can be described
as "epoch-making" in the sense that they are
linked to the origin of something. In a perspec¬
tive which is still mythical, the most archaic divi¬
sions into periods of time attach these epoch-
making events of history to the acts which them¬
selves created the cosmos. Political chronology
then takes over from religious chronology, while
retaining the imprint of cosmic time.
We need only think of the distinction
between the Golden Age, the Bronze Age and the
Iron Age, or the division into four monarchies
that the prophet Daniel deciphered from the parts
of the image whose head was made of gold, the
arms of silver, the thighs of brass, and the feet
of iron and clay. Later, St. Augustine divided the
history of humanity into six episodes, each of
which was supposed to correspond to a day of
the Creation and an age of life, before the eternal
Sunday of eschatological time. These two forms
of dividing time into periods deal with linear
time, whereas that of Ibn Khaldun applies to a
form of cyclical time in which there is a super¬
position of astral conjunction, the duration of
dynasties and the ages of human life.
These half-theological, half-political ways of
dividing time moved into the background of
European thinking in the late Middle Ages, but
the need for divisions of some kind can still be
seen in school textbooks today. After all, the
notion of the Renaissance evokes a form of

Instruments at the
18th-century astronomical
observatory at Jaipur,
Rajasthan (India).
PAUL RICwUR,
French philosopher and former
professor of philosophy at the
University of Paris X (Nanterre)
and at the University of
Chicago, is director of the
French philosophical journal
Revue de métaphysique et de
morale. Among his many
published works translated into
English are Fallible Man:
Philosophy of the Will
(Fordham University Press,
New York, 1986), The Rule of
Metaphor (University of
Toronto Press, 1977/Routledge
& Kegan Paul, London, 1986),
and Time and Narrative
(3 vols., University of Chicago
Press, 1984, 1986, 1988). He
has edited 2 collections of
studies for UNESCO, Cultures
and Time (1976) and Time and
the Philosophies (1977).
division in which any innovation is justified by
the revival of Greco-Roman Antiquity. As for the
idea of progress, which seems to exist in a single
linear time, it evokes new divisions. In addition
to the great divide between ancient and modern
times, it projects a universal history which, from
Voltaire to Hegel, divides time into reigns or
kingdoms (in Hegel, the Oriental, Greek, Roman,
and Germanic).
The major function of these chronosophies
is to establish, over and above ephemeral
individual lives, and even the lives of peoples and
their changing dynasties, a time which is more
than human and which, in one way or another,
constitutes a transition between the time of the
cosmos and that of ordinary mortals.
Chronographies have survived the
chronosophies with which they are mingled since
they constitute a more fundamental attempt at
mediationnamely an inscription of human time
in sidereal time. This inscription consists of the
invention of a third time, calendar time. There are
many different calendars, but they do possess cer¬
tain common features which enable us to talk in
terms of calendar time. Together, these features
make possible the computation of time: a founding
event, which is considered to open a new era (the
birth of Buddha or Christ, the Hegira, the acces¬
sion of a sovereign), is the starting point from
which all later events can be dated.
In this way chronological time is connected
to chronosophical time, from which it neverthe¬
less differs since it provides an axis of reference
in relation to which it is possible to pass through
time in the two directions, from the past to the
present and from the present to the past: our own
lives are part of these events to which we look
back or forward. We decide on a set of units of
measurementdays, months, yearsto designate
the constant intervals between the recurrence of
cosmic phenomena.
Calendar time is a symbolic mediation struc¬
ture in the sense that it is inscribed both in cosmic
time (on the basis of astronomical knowledge),
and in human experience (on the basis of
founding events which belong to the collective
memory and are commemorated in celebrations).
The pastthe absentee
from history
With calendar time we have entered historical
time, with its dual value as the time of events
which really happened and the time of the dis¬
course which reports them. At first it seems that
this duality is the result of an unfortunate con¬
fusion, since in many languages the same word
history designates the res gestae (things done) and
the reconstructions which historians make of
them. The justification which can be offered for
this apparent ambiguity leads to the heart of the
cultural experience of time. 13

On the one hand, the past is that of the
actions (and sufferings) of people like ourselves,
and this activity demands to be saved from ob¬
livion, demands to be recounted. But all that
remains of these past actions are the traces which
the historian treats as documents by assembling,
selecting and criticizing them. As for the past, it
is the absentee from history.
On the other hand, if we ask ourselves about
the relationship between written history and a
given segment of the past, we must start with the
fact that historians' history is not a carbon copy
of the past. It is of course impossible to compare
the supposed copy with the lost original, and yet
constructions of chains of events linked together
by causes or reasons do set out to be reconstruc¬
tions of what took place.
This link between scholarly construction and
reconstruction characterizes history as a major
symbolic structure of the cultural experience of
time. To represent the past is to construct an icon
of it, not a copy but a kind of model in which
what is written is tantamount to..., stands for...,
that absentee from history which is the past. This
representational, proxy relationship is inherent
in the intentionality of historical knowledge. It
justifies the dual meaning of the word history
mentioned above.
A similar duality exists with the word time
as used in the expression "historical time". On
the one hand there is time as experienced collec¬
tively by people in the past; on the other there
is time in the written account which is made of it.
In the first sense of the term, historical time

is vaster than that of mortal beings although it
is not on a par with cosmic time. It is the time
of peoples, nations and, in general, of social enti¬
ties which are more durable than individual lives.
People are only of historical interest to the extent
that they are considered with reference to nature
and to changes in a specific society at a specific
time and place. To emphasize the reality of this
vanished past, it must be noted that the events
connected to the event constituted by the actual
writing of the historical account are dated in the
same calendar time.
This historical time is the correlative of the
time involved in the narration of events.
Recounting takes time and above all organizes
time. Composing a written account is a con¬
figuring act which, from a simple succession,
extracts temporal forms organized in closed total¬
ities. This configured time is structured by machi¬
nations which combine intentions, causes and the
workings of chance. Corresponding to it is the
time of the persons who feature in the written
account, which, one might say, simultaneously
becomes a machination in its own right. Thus the
actors of history are given a unique identity: the
narrative identity.
It then becomes possible to connect the two
aspects of historical time. The written account
can confer a posteriori on the historical entities
which are peoples and nations, and on commu¬
nities of all kinds, a narrative identity which is
comparable to that of the characters in a story.
These communities become the collective heroes
(and also the victims) of machinations which take
place on the historical time scale. Between the
time when the events actually happened and the
time of historical account there is the same sym¬
bolizing relationship which makes the latter the
representative of the abolished past, the absentee
from history. History as it is told takes the place
of history as it is collectively experienced.
The force
of the present
Let us now return from historical time to
individual time, which we left on a note of lamen¬
tation and lyricism.
The following observation provides us with
a transition: historical communities, although
they cannot be decomposed into a dust of
individual actions and reactions, cannot be
defined without reference to the individuals
which are their partners, i.e. those who take part
in them as if they are characters in a story which
concerns them personally. The link between col¬
lective time and individual time is a corollary of
this link between society and the individual. Just
as the notion of narrative identity can be applied
analogically to individuals and to historical com¬
munities, so the structure of the present, pregnant

Photomontage
by Hervé Bernard.
with the recent past and the imminent future (in
memory and nostalgia on the one hand, in plans
and hopes on the other), applies analogically to
collective time and to individual time.
Historical time can be seen as a relationship
between what the German philosopher Rein¬
hardt Koselleck calls the horizon of expectation
and the space of experience. By space of
experience he means the totality of all the
heritages transmitted by tradition to the histor¬
ical present; by horizon of expectation, the
deployment of projects and hopes which insert
the future into the present. The space of
experience can be narrow and poor if the
heritages are sclerotic, dead, immobile. The
horizon of expectation can be brought nearer in
the short term of the everyday organization of
time, or pushed back almost infinitely in utopias
of regeneration, reconciliation and reintegration.
Koselleck points out that we cannot derive
the horizon of expectation from the space of
experience. Only in the present does the concen¬
tration of the past in the space of experience inter¬
sect with the deployment of the future in the
horizon of expectation. But the exchange is only
fruitful if the present is itself a force of initiative
(Nietzsche spoke in this sense of the "force of
the present").
This triple structurethe horizon of expec¬
tation, the space of experience, and initiativeis
exactly symmetrical to the constitution of
individual time in the living present. St.
Augustine wrote in his Confessions of time as
engendered by the threefold present. "The
present of things past," he says, "is memory. The
present of things present, sight; the present of
things future, expectation." The "still" of the
recent past and the "already" of the imminent
future are each rooted in the force of the present
which, in terms of representation, is called
vigilance, in terms of action, the capacity to begin
something in the course of things.
This analogy between the structure of histor¬
ical time and that of individual time can be under¬
stood in two ways. The first may be thought of
as the interiorization of the way in which a com¬
munity is located in historical time; the second
as the extrapolation of the triple present of the
individual soul. This double reading is justified
by the resemblance between individual narrative
identity and the collective narrative identity
which in its turn reflects the parallelism between
plot and character in written history and
biography.
We have now come full circle. We began with
the lamentation of the poet deploring the flight
of time, the erosion of memory, and disappointed
expectations, and contrasted this elegy of the
unhappy awareness of individual time with con¬
templation of the sidereal order and its immense
time. We have not covered all the ground. We
have simply discussed a series of mediations
which propose ¿pacified crossing of the interval:
the great time of myths, eras and chronosophies,
calendar time, historical time which is vaster than
the individual, and individual time which can be
seen as the final point of an interiorization of all
these times which, degree by degree, symbolize
the immense time of the universe.
Lamentation has not been refuted. It has
simply been compensated for by experience of
the initiative and the vigilance which give the
present its force. And it is in the element of lan¬
guage, carried by its symbolic structures, that we
have followed the gradual constitution of the cul¬
tural experience of time. 15
