The new history of cartography
hy IB, Harley
Long portrayed as essentially
European, cartography
is now seen as a much more
universal visual language
10
A world map dating from
1109. It belongs to a
tradition of rectangular maps
that can be traced back to a
now-lost prototype In the
Commentary on the
Apocalypse of Saint John by
the Spanish monk Beatus
of Llebana.

IN the beginning there were maps. There has
always been a mapping impulse in individual
consciousness. The sensing of space and the
development of cognitive structures to under¬
stand it can be traced from the earliest societies



to the present. It was, however, only with the
first visible act of cartographic representation
the drawing of a map on whatever medium was
to handthat a documented step in abstract
thinking initiated the history of cartography.
By substituting an analogical space for a real
space in the process of mapping, human beings
acquired intellectual mastery over their world. In
many societies maps preceded both writing and
mathematical notation. Only much later in the
nineteenth century were they associated with the
modern disciplines we now call cartography. Yet
maps produced before then penetrate to the
deepest roots of our culture.
What may be regarded as the oldest authen¬
ticated map in the world, dated to approximately
6000 BC, was unearthed in an archaeological exca¬
vation at Çatal Hüyük in west-central Turkey in
1963. Its subject was the neolithic town of that
name. Painted on a wall, it showed the streets and
houses in plan form, lying beneath the profile of
the mountain of Hasan Dag with its volcano
erupting. But though this map, which shows a
layout corresponding to that of the excavated
town, bears some resemblance to a modern plan,
its purpose was very different. The site from
which it was excavated was a shrine or holy
room, and the image was created as part of a ritual
act, as a "product of the moment", and not
intended to last beyond that event.
A Eurocentric vision
Only in recent years have maps such as that of
Çatal Hüyükand comparable engravings and
paintings in the rock art of Africa, the Americas,
Asia, and Europebeen studied as a distinctive
category of prehistoric cartography. That this
should be so is not merely a reflection of
problems of identifying maps in these early cul¬
tures. It is also an expression of a more deep-
seated tendency in the history of cartography that
has restricted the canon of "acceptable" maps.
From the nineteenth century the history of
cartography has been portrayed largely as that of
Western tradition, originating in the ancient
Near East, Egypt, arid in the Greco-Roman era,
and reaching its culmination via a European
pedigree in the developed world of today. Though
interrupted in the Middle Ages, and exhibiting
both minor reversions and major revolutions,
that cartographic history was seen as proceeding
developmentally from simple forms toward a
more advanced level of numerical application.
Maps were assigned a position in the evolu¬
tionary sequence. The corollary was to exclude
from serious study those maps judged to show
no signs of progress toward the goal of objec¬
tivity. Even some of the earlier maps of Euro¬
pean culture, like the great world maps of the
Christian Middle Ages, were once dismissed as
being unworthy of study. Thus, at the beginning
of the present century, Charles Raymond Beazley
could describe two of the most celebrated world
maps of the later Middle Ages, the Hereford and
Ebstorf maps as "non-scientific. ..monstrosities",
and write of their "complete futility".
Maps in non-European cultures were consi¬
dered even further alienated from the epicentre
of cartography. Traditional approaches to the his¬
tory of Islamic cartography, for example, reflect
this tendency of European scholars to see the
world in their own image. The maps of Islam
were explained largely as a Greek heritage,
ignoring the extent to which translations into
Arabic of works such as Ptolemy's Almagest and
Geographia had been ingeniously appropriated
and adapted to the specific purposes of Islamic 11

culture and religion. Arab maps such as those of
the Balkhi School of geographers in the tenth cen¬
tury were assessed by a Ptolemaic yardstick rather
than being understood as a fusion of mapping tra¬
ditions, even though they embodied Persian as
well as Greek elements.
The maps of non-European cultures were
only allocated more space in Western histories
when they revealed features similar to those deve¬
loped on European maps. The focus was on car¬
tographic similarities in these distant cultures
rather than on their differences. Thus the rich his¬
tory of Chinese cartographywith datable
artefacts surviving from the fourth century BC
was recognized by one leading scholar as "the
same science" that had earlier developed on the
European scene. Much emphasis in this compara¬
tive cartographic history was placed on the iden¬
tification of mathematical aspects of mapmaking,
on the codification of methodological principles
for cartography (such as those of Pei Xiu



[223-271], the "father of scientific cartography"
in China), and on the appearance of technical
innovations such as grids, regular scales, abstract
conventional signs, and even contoursall aspects
that fitted the Western model of cartographic
excellence. Thus the maps from the Han dynasty
found in a tomb near Chansha in Hunan
province were seized upon by both Chinese and
Western scholars as confirmation of an early
scientific development of cartography. They
became the lineal ancestors of the modern map.
The "scientific" traditions of mapping in
Chinaand their diffusion into Japan and
Koreareceived an attention that was not
accorded to cultures that had no analogy with
Western mapping practices. Thus the indigenous
maps drawn in India before the British occupa¬
tion, with their unfamiliar signs and pictorial
style, have found no place until recently in con¬
ventional accounts of cartographic history. They
were either not recognized as maps at all or dis¬
missed as quaint curiosities, to be collected with
other ethnographic specimens. Lowest of all on
the ladder of rational progress were the "primi¬
tive" maps of preliterate non-Western cultures.
Detail from the mosaic map of
Madaba, which formed the
floor of a 6th-century church
In Madaba (Jordan). It shows
the estuary of the river
Jordan.
12

Ranging from paintings produced by the
Aboriginal peoples of Australia to maps of the
Native Americans, and from the stick-charts of the
Marshall Islanders to the battle plans drawn on
the ground by Maori warriors in New Zealand,



they were widely regarded as an inchoate stage
in the cognitive history of cartography. To the
extent that they lacked orientation, regular scales,
and the Euclidean geometry of modern maps, or
were drawn on unfamiliar media, little effort was
made to crack their codes of representation. They
remained on the periphery of Western carto¬
graphic achievement.
In such ways, the history of mapping became
a prisoner of the categories and definitions of
scholars. The rich variety of ways in which space
has been represented in the global mosaic of
human culture still had to be recorded. It was to
remedy this Eurocentric perspective that in 1987,
in the first volume of a new History of Cartog¬
raphy, we adopted a definition of maps that would
allow a measure of relativism into the study of
the history of maps.
A universal language
In the belief that each society has, and has had,
its own natural ways of seeing and producing
images of space, we came to define maps simply
as "graphic representations that facilitate a spa¬
tial understanding of things, concepts, conditions,
processes or events in the human world." The
rationale of such a broad definition was that it
applies to maps in all cultures at all times, and
not only to those of the modern age. Moreover,
it allows the writing of a more contextual history,
by treating maps as a form of "knowledge" as
a whole and not solely as the products of long-
term technological diffusion from a European
hearth.
So, a new shape is starting to emerge for the
history of cartography, one in which cultures
speak for themselves. It has two main strengths.
First of all, there is now a growing awareness that
cartography is not only much older but also,
despite the many gaps in the artefactual record,
a much more universal visual language than was
formerly supposed. By accepting some of the pit¬
falls of cross-cultural comparison and by
expanding the definition of what a "map" can
beso that it now embraces, for example, cos-
mological and celestial representations as well as
those of the Earthwe are beginning to inscribe
mapping traditions that were previously blank
spaces in the history of cartography. The develop¬
ment of mapping in India serves as an illustra¬
tion of these changes in the writing of the his¬
tory of maps.
Despite India's major contribution to the
development of the mathematical sciences, rela¬
tively few geographical maps have survived from
the pre-European period. What fills the carto¬
graphic archives are largely cosmographical maps.
All three of the main ancient religions of India-
Buddhism, Hinduism, and Jainismhave left a
complex legacy of cosmographical representation.
In some maps, the Earth and the universe are
often centred on the axis of Mount Meru
(Sumeru) around the base of which the continents
are arranged. On other maps, the universe is ver¬
tically stratified, with graphic representations of
numerous heavens and nether worlds through
which the soul could travel.
Natural features might be given fabulous sizes
and shapes: in Buddhist cosmography, for
example, the world containing India was known
and portrayed as Jambudvipa, the Rose-apple
Island, after the jambu tree which grew at its
centre. To judge India's cartographic history in
the light of the European tradition of terrestrial
mapping is to misunderstand fundamentally the
Weltanschauung of Indian culture and to fail to
grasp concepts of space and time that are
unfamiliar to Western eyes.
Not only are traditional histories of cartog¬
raphy dramatically enlarged by embracing this
"new" corpus of cosmological mapsand estab¬
lished concepts vastly enriched by the Asian map
experiencebut we learn also a new respect for
maps from other regions. As we extend our car¬
tographic encounter into Southeast Asia and into
Tibet, into pre-nineteenth-century Africa, or into
Sumerlan terra-cotta tablet
(c. 2100 BC) showing plots of
cultivated land belonging to
the city of Umma (today Tell
Jokha, southern Iraq).
J. B. HARLEY,
of the United States, is
professor of geography at the
University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee and director of the
Office for Map History in the
American Geographical Society
Collection of the University's
Golda Meir Library. He is co-
editor, with Prof. David
Woodward, of a multi-volume
History of Cartography of
which vol. 1, Cartography in
Prehistoric, Ancient, and
Medieval Europe and the
Mediterranean was published
in 1987 by the University of
Chicago Press. Further
volumes are scheduled for
publication from 1991
onwards. The History of
Cartography project is
supported by the National
Endowment for the Humanities
of the United States
Government and by several
private foundations. 13

pre-Columbian America and the Pacific realm
before Cook, we meet other map traditions that
bear no resemblance to modern European maps
but that are no less valid cartographies. The old
preconceptions about the scope of maps in
human history have been challenged and the old
histories of cartography are in continuous
revision.
Jain mándala (Gujarat,
18th-19th century).
The 7 oceans and the
divisions of time are disposed
around Mount Meru, the pivot
of the world.
Thus the second strength of the new history



of cartography is a greatly enlarged understanding
of the purpose to which maps have been put.
There are few aspects of human action and
thought that have not been mapped at one time
or another. The more we explore the terrain of
maps across the major cultures of the world, the
longer the list becomes of different activities to
which they may have "made a difference". Uses
range from the prosaically practical to the seem¬
ingly speculative.
In ancient China, for instance, the utility of
maps as instruments of political power as
boundary and cadastral maps, as bureaucratic
record, as diplomatic protocol, as plans for water
conservancy, as a means of assessing taxes, as stra¬
tegic documents in military logisticsare all well
documented. Equally, Chinese maps enter into
other cultural dialogues. Far from being just a
science of measurement, maps have been closely
linked to literature and painting. They have been
integrated into historical scholarship; they have
been used to reconstruct geographies of the past
and have been carved on stone in public places
as witnesses to cultural continuity. They have
been used in ritual, as is confirmed by their
14

presence in tombs; they became tools of divina¬
tion or were used as talismans to mediate between
unseen forces. They have been used in the astro¬
logical prediction of celestial events.
Mental images
China was by no means unique in the range of
uses it developed for maps. In Western as much
as Eastern societies, maps have resulted in a car¬
tography that invariably combines the objective
with the subjective, fact with value, myth with
documented event, and locational silence with
coordinated place. If in traditional Eurocentric
histories we have neglected the mythic, the psy¬
chological, and the symbolic uses of maps in
favour of the practical, it is our obsession with
scientific models rather than with the actual his¬
tory of cartographic practice that is to blame.
The insights thus gained from the study of
non-Western mapping traditions and practices



can be applied to the history of maps throughout
the world. As we identify many more local tra¬
ditions of mapping, cartographic history can no
longer be seen as part of a one-way process by
which cultural hegemony was exercised by Euro¬
peans over colonized peoples. In the Americas,
for example, evidence is mounting of the extent
to which maps of colonial territories published
in Europe from the sixteenth to the nineteenth
centuries were underpinned by geographical
knowledge contributed by indigenous peoples.
Even in situations of conflict, maps in many parts
of the world were a means of cultural exchange
that reached over the barriers of language. And in
other cases, maps were also a means of resistance
by which colonized peoples sought to oppose the
appropriation of their culture and territory.
In order to explore these new directions, map
historians are embracing theories derived from
the humanities and social sciences at large. The
well-worn story of the achievements of a numer¬
ical technology in the way the world is
represented is being challenged. No longer are we
content to accept that even our modern maps,
though generated by Landsat satellite and com¬
puter graphics, are above the machinations of
power. No less than a map of an Indian cosmog¬
raphy or an Aztec map of the universe, these
satellite-based maps are socially constructed. Car¬
tography, we now begin to realize, is the product
of wider discourses, a form of power-knowledge
caught up with the major transformations of
world history, created and received by human
agents, exploited by elites, to materialize as a
world seen through a veil of ideology.
From the beginning maps have been a mental
image. Today they are still recognized as a way
of seeing, but we begin to understand what
"seeing" is. Rather than thinking of maps as the
mirror of the world, we now see them as a
simulacrum: sometimes preceding the territory;
constantly redescribing the world in all its cul¬
tural diversity.
Redrawing the Earth
In 1973, a German cartographer, Arno Peters, unveiled a new map projection which
he had devised In an attempt to give a true representation of the relative sizes
of the Earth's land masses. One of the avowed alms of the Peters projection is
to eliminate the "geographical superiority" enjoyed by countries of the northern
hemisphere In a number of other projection systems, Including that established
by the Flemish cartographer Gerard Mercator In 1569 and described In the text
below. However, it Is impossible to reproduce the spherical Earth on a flat sur¬
face without some kind of distortion, and the Peters projection has stirred up
vigorous controversy In many quarters, including within the United Nations system.
The Mercator projection
The Mercator projection (Map 1) provided European seafarers with the
fidelity of angle they needed to line up their compass bearings with points
on the map. But to achieve this Mercator had to place the lines of latitude
progressively further apart as they moved away from the equator. This
makes Greenland and all northern hemisphere countries grossly exagger¬
ated in size, and Europe appears to be at the centre of the world.
The distortions of Mercator's map did not seem strange to Europeans
in the sixteenth century, an era of expanding colonial empires. Yet today,
although European colonialism belongs largely to the past, Mercator's
sixteenth-century map still retains much of its grip.
Many attempts have been made to improve on Mercator, for example
by using a rounded grid as in the Winkelsche projection (Map 2). But this
means that north-south and east-west directions are lost. Also the coun¬
tries on the edges of the map are distorted in shape.
Things would be simpler if we could replace these various versions with
just one projection reflecting what most people actually want from a world
map. This is precisely what Arno Peters has tried to do.
Fidelity of area and direction
Peters fixed on two things which a world map must have to be interna¬
tionally acceptable: fidelity of area and true north-south and east-west direc¬
tions. Beyond these two fixed principles, the compromises have to start.
As no map can give any country exactly the same shape it has on the globe,
the ideal is to minimize distortion.
The Peters map
On the Peters map (Map 3) the maximum shape distortion occurs in the
polar region where countries like Iceland tend to be flattened, and along
the equator, where Zaire and Sumatra look longer than we are used to.
But maximum shape distortion on the Peters map is never more than 2:1,
compared with a 4:1 distortion of Europe on the Mercator map.
This new, equal-area map is the first fruit of what Peters sees as "a
new cartography", free of the historical perceptions that have shaped
earlier world maps.
Source: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
15
