by Carl Rogers
The tragedy of inner-city
youth drawn into
delinquency and drug trafficking
A HE 1980s witnessed the explosive resurgence
of an historic American urban social problem:
children and youth in gangs. From New York
to Los Angeles, from Chicago to Miami, over
forty-five American cities have an identified
youth gang problem.
The number of youth gangs in the United
States is on the rise and their involvement in the
drug trade is resulting in dramatic increases in
gang-related violenceincluding homicideand
arrests for criminal activities in almost every
American city. The scope and the nature of the
problem vary widely from city to city, but it has
been estimated that over 50,000 children and
youths are gang members in the city of Los
Angeles and that there are over 600 youth gangs
in California alone.
Popularized in "the 1950s musical West Side
Story, youth gangs have been a recurring social
problem in U.S. cities at least since the second
half of the nineteenth century. Their emergence
and growth, primarily in poor, urban neighbour¬
hoods, were frequently fuelled by successive
waves of immigrants arriving in the United States,
and were symptomatic of the problems these
groups encountered in trying to adapt to a new
and at times radically different culture. Today
many youth gangs continue to reflect the difficul¬
ties of assimilation of immigrant populations.
Youth gangs are usually defined as groups of
young people who frequently engage in illegal
activity on a group basis. They are usually ter¬
ritorial in nature, identifying with a particular
neighbourhood and protecting their "turf" from
encroachment by other gangs. Better organized
gangs often control economically motivated
crime such as burglary, extortion or drug-
trafficking at the neighbourhood level. They may
also sell "protection" from criminal activity to
legitimate merchants. Youth gangs usually iden¬
tify themselves by a name ("Crips", and
"Bloods" are the names of two Los Angeles-based
gangs), and may further distinguish themselves
by a particular style or colour of clothing, by use
of symbols, or by wearing certain kinds of
jewellery.
A MILLION DOLLARS A WEEK
FROM CRACK
The recent dynamic growth of youth gangs and
related violence is directly attributed by most
sources to the increased sale of cocaine, particu¬
larly in the form known as "rock" or "crack".
This lucrative illegal activity is helping to trans¬
form gangs into drug trafficking criminal organi¬
zations. In 1988 Los Angeles police officials
acknowledged that they were aware of at least
four gangs in their city grossing over $1,000,000
per week through the sale of cocaine. A recent
article in the U.S. magazine Time ironically noted
that the crack cocaine trade may be one of the
biggest job programmes for inner city youth in
the United States.
Drugs, by Ewa Szydtowska,
age 18 (Poland).
19

Graffiti on New York
subway cars.
20
CARL ROGERS,
of the United States, is an
expert on child and family
issues. He serves as the public
policy liaison officer for the
American National Council on
Child Abuse and Family
Violence, a U.S. private sector
initiative for the prevention and
treatment of child abuse,
based in Washington D.C.
One reason why children become involved
in drug trafficking is that the laws governing
juvenile crime are more lenient than those
governing adult crime. Ironically, as the U.S.
"war on drugs" has intensified, with both
increasing arrests for drug trafficking and more
severe penalties for adults convicted of drug-
related crime, the value of youth gang members
has increased. While an adult convicted of selling
drugs in most states is subject to a mandatory
prison sentence of anywhere from two years to
life imprisonment, a young person under the age
of eighteen will seldom be committed to a cor¬
rectional facility for a first offence, and even if
committed is not subject to mandatory sentence
lengths. It has become both increasingly



profitable and safer for adult criminals to enroll
children and youths in the drug trafficking
business.
PEEWEES
AND WANNABEES
The average age of youth gang members con¬
tinues to decline. Most experts place the figure
at around thirteen to fifteen years of age, while
law enforcement officials in Los Angeles, Chicago
and other cities note that children as young as
nine or ten years are frequently found in today's
gangs. These young recruits, often called
"peewees" (slang for little members) or "wan¬
nabees" (slang for "want to be" gang members),
become casually involved with older gang
members who live in their neighbourhood, attend
their school, or are members of their own fami¬
lies. Initially, younger children may be asked to
perform "favours" for older gang membersto
watch for police in the neighbourhood, or to
deliver packages which may contain drugs,
money or weapons. In exchange, the children
often receive expensive gifts or money.
As they demonstrate their trustworthiness
and reliability, these children assume more
difficult and more dangerous roles. Children as
young as ten or eleven years of age are frequently
involved in gang-related drug trafficking. Younger
children are routinely employed as "spotters"
watching and reporting on police activity in their
neighbourhood to other gang members, as
"weapons carriers" for older gang members, or
in other roles, and earn anywhere from $200 per
week to $100 per day. "Runners", usually slightly
older children, may earn up to $300 per day
keeping street corner dealers supplied with drugs
from a hidden cache. Enterprising youths as
young as fifteen or sixteen may advance to the
level of street corner dealers, routinely earning
between $400 and $1,000 per day. In a particu¬
larly good market such as New York City,
authorities indicate that dealers can make up to
$3,000 per day.
Few dealers, however, work full time, and
two different studies in Washington, D.C. would
suggest that a street corner dealer's average
earnings are more likely to be in the range of
$4,000 to $7,000 per month. In contrast, most
states in the U.S. set a minimum employment age
of sixteen years, and most legal entry-level jobs

available to young people pay less than $40 per
day, or approximately $800 per month.
Once a child is involved with a gang, it may
be virtually impossible for him to quit. Gang
membership usually leads to truancy and ulti¬
mately dropping out of school, closing off escape
from a criminal lifestyle through education. The
gang member also finds it difficult to give up a
more lucrative lifestyle in exchange for unem¬
ployment or employment at minimum wage.
The gang member who attempts to quit is
also subject to social pressures to continue his or
her involvement. At best, attempting to leave the
gang may lead to social ostracism; at worst it may
lead to direct intimidation.
IMPOVERISHED INNER-CITY
NEIGHBOURHOODS
To truly understand the youth gang problem it
is important to understand the social context
within which the gangs emerge. First, they are
almost universally a product of impoverished
urban neighbourhoods, where unemployment
routinely exceeds 20 per cent of the workforce
and in some cases exceeds 50 per cent. Families
consist overwhelmingly of single mothers with
children and often rely primarily on public
assistance for their livelihood. Nationally, 20 per
cent of all children in the United States live in
families at or below the established federal
poverty level. In many inner-city neighbour¬
hoods this figure approaches 100 per cent. These
communities are characterized by generally high
crime rates, limited legitimate business activity
or employment opportunities, and poorly func¬
tioning public education systems.
In contrast to the phenomenon of street chil¬
dren in many Third World countries, or to the
problem of runaway or "throwaway" children
(children, usually teenagers, expelled from their
homes by their parents), most youth gang
members live at home with their families. Some
parents actively support their child's gang
involvement or are totally indifferent, but most
parents do care. Even the best intentioned parent,
however, can find it difficult, if not impossible,
to keep his or her child from becoming involved
with a local gang. Every neighbourhood has its
history of gang revenge against individual chil¬
dren or their families for resisting the gang. The
combined factors of intimidation on the one hand
and some financial support on the other eventu¬
ally result in tacit collusion on the part of these
parents. An uneasy truce develops where the
parent, while not condoning or supporting the
child's gang involvement, nonetheless does little
to try to stop this involvement and welcomes the
child's periodic financial contributions to the
family budget.
So far, the overall public policy approach to
this social problem has focused on three broad
strategies: suppression of drug use and drug
trafficking; suppression of youth gangs; and
prevention of youth involvement in gangs. To
date, while national statistics suggest an overall
decline in the use of illegal drugs, this decline
appears to have had little effect on the growth
of the gangs or on the frequency of gang-related
violence. Similarly, attempts at direct suppression
of the gangs through law enforcement activities
appear to have had limited effects, despite the
mobilization of extensive resources. It is argued
by many, however, that these efforts have slowed
the growth and spread of gangs. Alternatively,
some have suggested that efforts at gang suppres¬
sion through arrest and detention of gang
members actually lead to increased levels of gang-
related violence as other gangs compete for con¬
trol of territories once controlled by the sup¬
pressed gang.
Most experts agree that the only viable long-
term solution to the problem is to prevent chil¬



dren and youths from getting involved in gangs
in the first place. Most current programmes seek
to provide support for high-risk children and
their families. They focus on children between
the ages of six and fourteen, since it appears to
be generally agreed that prevention efforts must
begin before young people develop well-
established patterns of delinquent behaviour or
become seriously involved with gangs. Key ele¬
ments in many of these programmes include the
provision of social and recreational activities, and
educational assistance, as well as efforts to prevent
the children from dropping out of school and to
enhance their self-confidence and self-esteem. The
success of prevention efforts ultimately depends
on whether these children and young people have
a sense of hope in their own future and a belief
that through their own efforts they can lead
useful, productive lives.
Graffiti by Axone,
age 19 (Paris).
