N W
Daniel T. Boorstin
The distinguished American historian
Daniel J. Boorstin directed the
Library of Congress in Washington
D.C. for twelve years and is now
Librarian of Congress Emeritus. Here
he talks about the American past
and its influence on the development
of his country's institutions.
Professor Boorstin's many books include a trilogy, The Americans (Random
House, New York, 1958-1973/Cardinal, London, 1988); The Image, A Guide
to Pseudo-Events in America (Atheneum, New York, 1988); and The Dis¬
coverers, a history of man's search to know the world and himself (Random
House, 1983/Dent, London, 1984, Penguin Books, London, 1986). He is now
at work on The Creators, a companion volume on the history of the arts.
With the movement towards democracy in Eastern
Europe, the idea that we are seeing the "end of history"
is gaining currency. As a historian, what do you think of
this?
I don't think history has any end. Moreover, I think of
history as a cautionary science, one of the purposes of which
is to warn us against just such generalizations. Historians
should not play the role of prophets. It's difficult enough
to be a historian. I think that among the excesses which
historians should caution us against are prophecies of Utopia
or Armageddon, or the beginning, or the end. These prophe¬
cies have been made again and again, more often by reli¬
gious fanatics and by people frustrated with their own lives
than by serious students of history.
The events in Europe suggest that we may have been
a little hasty in assumptions about the impossibility of
change, or the necessity of change only in one direction.
In the United States, we are a nation of immigrant people
who procured democracy simply by becoming democratic,
simply by coming to our country. We assume that it's very
easy for people to change their political attitudes without
reference to the history that they inherit.
Is it very easy? Or is this specific to pioneer countries?
It depends on what you mean by a pioneer country, but
I think that one of the characteristics of people living in
many pioneering situations in the United States, for example
in the movement westwards, is that they were not conscious
that they were building political institutions. The wagon
trains that moved West formed their own constitutions, and
they had to have rules of conduct, a way of trying people
for crimes they had committed. I don't think they ever
thought of it as creating a political life, it was a matter of
convenience when crossing the prairies together. One of the
consequences of the American experience of moving across
a sparsely-populated continent was that people became polit¬
ical through force of circumstance. When they found them¬
selves in Wyoming or one of the Dakotas, they had to make

legislation to protect their property and their families,
whereas in Europe they would have left that to the people
who had always had the job of protecting others.
People became political through force of circumstance,
but did they become democratic?
One of the characteristics of the movement West is that
people were forming new communities, which led to a very
vivid sense of solidarity. They knew that they had to co¬
operate with their fellows. Another feature of American
society, perhaps one of the most important, has been the
lack of ideology. In more settled communities, such as
England, where there was a long inheritance of established
law and institutions reaching back to the Middle Ages, if
you wanted to change those institutions, you had to develop
a theoretical argument, and so you find a succession of polit¬
ical theoristsLocke, Hobbes and othersrationalizing
institutional changes. For Americans, who came out to a
continent that had been barren, there was no history, you
might say there was only geography. This meant that people
had to invent institutions to serve their convenience. They
were not living near their ancestors, in fact there were no
ancestors, once in the West. And of course the same story
was repeated in a different, urban, landscape in late-
nineteenth-century New York.
My grandparents came to America from the ghettoes
of Poland and Russia, they came to start a new life.... One
of my grandfathers went to a country town in the state of
Georgia and opened a store. His brother then came and
settled in the same town, and they had shops on opposite
sides of the same street under different names, because the
immigration officer hadn't been able to pronounce the name
that he'd been given. It was very puzzling, but it was a
symbol of the way in which the movement to America sepa¬
rated people from the kind of necessary and self-evident affili¬
ations which a long life in the same village would have
created in Europe.
As I wrote many years ago in The Genius ofAmerican
Politics,1 one of the paradoxes of American political life
is that we have been relatively successful in the United States
in building political institutions empirically, and yet con¬
spicuously unsuccessful in producing great political
philosophy. I suggested that those two facts are not
unrelated. In the United States we have been willing to work
out a political society without always knowing what we were
doing or worrying about the long-term end. The great debate
in American political life is of course about our Constitu¬
tion, which I call a piece of political technology, not a polit¬
ical philosophy. It was the product of an effort to find ways
for people who had come from different countries, different
cultures, different religions, to live together by forming their
own communities. This is what the federal system is, an
interaction of communities, and it was not necessary to agree
upon a political philosophy.
Jefferson, whom we sometimes think of as our great
political philosopher, was not really a philosopher, he was
a student of law and English institutions. His A Summary
View of the Rights of British America, the book he wrote
The signing of the United States Constitution,
by American artist Howard Chandler Christy (late 19th century).

Above, Black slaves on a tobacco
plantation In one of the southern states.
Italian engraving, c. 1820.
Opposite page, Gary Cooper plays the role
of a heroic town marshal In the classic
Western High Noon (1952).
Below right, pioneers cross the Arkansas
river In the early 1880s.
in 1774 which became the legal raison d'être of the American
Revolution, was really a description of the way in which
the old Anglo-Saxon customs preserved people's rights; and
the Declaration of Independence, which he drafted, is really
a list of rights. Most of what is a long legal document con¬
cerns the way in which the traditional legal privileges of
Englishmen had been violated in America, and the Preamble,
the part most often quoted, is a way of inviting the sym¬
pathy of people all over the world. So the American Revo¬
lution was really an affirmation of traditional rights, and
in that sense it's very different from the French Revolution
of 1789, which talked about the rights of man. The Decla¬
ration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen is a list of
abstract rights which didn't exist anywhere in the world.
We still have many problems and many injustices in our
country, but I am amazed when I come back to the United
States from any other country and see how many different
races of people and different ways of life have been brought
together. It's relatively peacefulwe've never had a religious
war, for example. The only other country in the world of
which that's true is probably Japan. We had a terrible Civil
War, the bloodiest war of the nineteenth century, but it was
not a religious war.
.¡4s regards the reasons for the Civil War, why didn't
Jefferson abolish slavery when drafting the Declaration of
Independence?
Jefferson didn't live in the air, he lived in a particular
community in Virginia, and there were institutions of which
he was part. It would have taken a great deal of boldness
at that time to insist on the abolition of slavery, but in his
original draft he had included a clearer statement against
slavery, and there is still a shadow of that in the Declara¬
tion. But slavery was an established institution and a basis
of the economy in itself.
Isn't it striking that American political and democratic
institutions evolved parallel with the fight against the
Indians, and later, with the repression of the slaves?
Slavery was a regional institution, which only existed in
the south and certain other parts of the United States.
Yes, but didn't the existence of slavery give rise to the
fear of an enemy within?
No, I don't think so. There were some slave uprisings,
but these were relatively few. I don't think that the planta¬
tion owners in the south considered their slaves as enemies,
but rather as part of the family. I'm not saying it wasn't
unjust, but at the same time the plantation wives played a
very positive role in delivering babies and looking after the
health of people in the slave quarters. They considered that
they had a duty to do so. It was like a feudal community
in Europe where the lord didn't consider that he was
oppressing his vassals or his peasants, he saw himself as their

protector. For many people, too, the belief in the inferi¬
ority of the Black race was very strong. They thought that
they were protecting people who were helpless or feckless.
That was the way they looked at it. You and I may find
that immoral but nevertheless that was how they saw things.
They didn't feel that they were living in a fortress, that their
plantation houses would be besieged by the slaves. This did
happen, but very rarely.
To come back to history, or the end of historyisn't
there a certain logic in the idea that the history ofmankind
passes through several stages ofdevelopment which, in the
way that Marx imagined it, lead to communism?
To say that there's no history because there isn't the kind
of history that Karl Marx described is to commit the Marxist
sin doubly: first to accept it, then to become the prisoner
of it. I've already suggested that history is a cautionary
science. I also think it's the science of uniqueness, a way
of discovering how everything differs from everything else.
I don't believe in cycles, I'm not a millenarian. I don't believe
that we can ever come to the end of change because I think
that man's possibilities are infinite in all directions. One of
the many mistakes or over-simplifications of Marxism is to
give an excessive importance to political and economic insti¬
tutions. There are many other kinds of institutions that Marx
discounted, religious ones for examplelook at the charisma
that people attach to certain kinds of leaders. Or look at
the way in which the art of Proust or Joyce transforms
people's consciousness, which seems to me to have no visible
relation to the infrastructure of society. That's history.
Shakespeare was history, Chaucer was history, Homer was
history, and to say that we've come to the end of history
is to deny our humanity, because our humanity consists in
a need to pursue the unknown and the new, to be prepared
for the unexpected. We cannot stop creating new kinds of
art, we cannot stop research into microgenetics and atomic
physics. That's the penalty and the glory of being human,
that's the meaning I attach to having eaten the apple in the
Garden of Eden. We can't stop knowing.
There's another aspect to this question. Sometimes
people, especially historians, talk about the difficulty of
remembering, as if history is the product of memory. Our
problem is not so much that we can't remember, but that
wè can't forget. It's much more difficult to forget than to
remember, and that is one of the consequences that the
world has to face when any nation has committed crimes.
The massacre of millions of people by the Nazis, for
example, is unforgettable, and it will affect attitudes towards
Germany for ever.
Do you think so?
I think so, unfortunately for those who happen to be born
in Germany, because it's not their fault. They're just as

Above, taking the oath in a naturalization ceremony on Ellis Island,
the former immigration station in New York Harbor.
8
virtuous as anyone else, but that is their inheritance and the
price of memory. If we're going to have peace in the world,
our problem is to find ways of remembering without being
overwhelmed by it.
If we're going to have peace in the world, do you think
democracy will have to grow? Do you think the whole
world is ripe for it?
I don't believe in that kind of generalization, or that any
country can prescribe institutions for other countries. I think
that fulfilment, the apple that I referred to, is that every
nation should seek its own way. I don't believe it's the des¬
tiny of the world to become American, for instance. It would
be very dreary if that were the case.
There have been Americans who thought that we should
try and enforce our will on the world. But the same thing
has happened in the Soviet Union, and in many other coun¬
tries. The ancient Greeks and Romans were perhaps more
tolerant in that respect. I think it's futile to try to assimi¬
late the world, our object ought to be to find the means
to allow people to pursue their own ways.
You mean that you don't accept the idea that there
may be universal laws which govern humanity?
I'm not saying there are none, but I don't know any.
Coming back to what I said earlier, one of the purposes of
history as a cautionary science is to make us wary of people
who pretend to know the ideal laws of the world. The
United States does in my opinion have a mission in the
world, and that is to be an example of the possibility of
people living together without political ideology, even
without the same religion. We see in the Soviet Union now
the consequences of not having found a way for allowing
people to live together, with their different religions and
different traditions.
In so many places there have been wars over language,
but in the United States we've had the curious and, until
now at least, instructive experience of people coming to
another country and learning another language without
losing their dignity. My grandparents spoke Yiddish. They
learned to speak English and they didn't feel that their life
had been ruined or that they had been deprived of their per¬
sonality. On the contrary, people here have discovered that
it's possible to learn another language and still be fulfilled.
This sense of openness, of starting anew, is illustrated
in my recent book, The Discoverers, one of the leitmotifs
of which is that the enemy of progress is not ignorance but
the illusion of knowledge. This is applicable to political life.
People who always have doubts, who have the courage to
doubt, are those least likely to impose their ways on others.
People who acquire a sense of rectitude and believe that they
know best are the enemies of decent society.

Do you feel that people in the United States have found
the best way for them to live in harmony?
Possibly...but I think that if you travel, you discover that
other people's way of life is just as valid. In this respect,
one of my great experiences was living in Japan, where I
taught a number of years ago. I discovered that almost all
the categories of history that I was accustomed to didn't exist
in Japan. It was possible for people to be human, to treat
one another decently, without anything that Westerners
would call religion, for example. So much else is entirely
different. The architect in the West tries to build something
that will last for ever, like the Parthenon or the Pyramids,
while traditional Japanese architecture is in wood. You
expect it to disintegrate, and you rebuild it. The architect
is not fighting a battle against time, he's co-operating with
time, accepting it. In Japanese wrestling, you try to over¬
come your opponent by yielding to him, not by aggression.
That's how you bring him down. There is a temptation to
believe that our way of doing everything is right, and it's
discomforting to discover that there's another way of doing
it. That's what it means to be human, to accept that price,
to fulfil ourselves by acquiring the capacity to doubt and
a willingness to have the new displace the old.
The same is true of the progress of science. We see scien¬
tific ideas as great additions to our knowledge, but every
advance of scientific knowledge is also a kind of subtrac¬
tion. When Copernicus persuaded people that the Sun didn't
go round the Earth, he caused a lot of trouble. The idea was
wonderful, it was a step forward, but it also destroyed a
whole world of folklore and theology. The most explosive
thing in the world today is the atom, which for most of
history people thought of as unbreakable by definitiona
good example of the advance of science subtracting from
our sense of security.
When Apollo sent back the first pictures of the Earth
seen from the Moon, surely that created new myths about
our planet?
Science is not always subtractivewe can still learn some¬
thing from Aristotlewhereas the arts, it seems to me, are
always additive. There's no work of art that subtracts from
another work of art. Michelangelo doesn't subtract from
Phidias, Picasso doesn't subtract from other modern
artists.. .if anything each work adds to our understanding
because it creates a new contrast. That's one of the reasons
why the arts become increasingly important with the
advance of technology, which tends to reduce cultural diver¬
sity. With television, for example, there is obviously much
less difference between being there and being here, and the
same applies to advances in transportation and communi¬
cation. But the arts encourage cultural specificity. The artist
creates a difference between now and then, and here and
there, and me and you, and this and that. So there is a mis¬
sion for the arts which is increasingly urgent.
1. The Genius ofAmerican Politics, Phoenix Books, University of
Chicago Press, 1953.
