7M an exiled nMCC M ! CM SMCCO CTMM  MMMP Mf <MMt
between Orient and Occident
) ated ! nes tndtcate th
txtenston of Islamic territory
n the) ber) an pen) ntu) a in
! 50. 1100, 1200 and 1257.
i. N the year 93 of the Islamic era-the Hijra-
and 711 of the Christian era, the great Muslim
Arab empire was ruled from Damascus in Syria
by al-Walid I, sixth caliph of the House of
Umayya. From Kairouan in the country now
called Tunisia, al-Walid's governor, Musa ibn
Nusayr, was pursuing a policy of westward
expansion spearheaded by his Berber freedman
Tariq, commander of some 7, 000 Berbers from
North Africa. Before the end of the spring of 93
Tariq was on the rock from which Gibraltar takes
its name-Jabal Tariq, " Mount Tariq ".
Tariq's landing was the first step on a long,
hard road which led 200 years later to the estab-
lishment of the caliphate of Cordoba by a scion
of the House of Umayya. The second step was
the conquest of the lands beyond Gibraltar. With
his Berber troops, greatly reinforced from North
Africa, Tariq soon defeated the Visigothic King
Rodrigo, already harassed in the north by the
Basques. The tottering, unpopular Visigothic
regime was now doomed. The fall of its capital,
Toledo, to the north was followed in October
711 by the capture of Cordoba in the south.
July 712 saw Musa himself in the Iberian
peninsula. Grudging his freedman the glory of
conquest, he had crossed the Straits of Gibraltar
with some 18, 000, mainly Arab, troops. His rela-
tionship with Tariq was strained, but this did not
prevent them from pursuing their common
objective of conquest. By 714 Musa and Tariq had
conquered all but the most inaccessible parts of
the peninsula and gained for the Umayyad crown
in Damascus a jewel of impressive resplendence.
To this new, rich province the Arabs gave the
name " al-Andalus ", which is thought to derive
from " Vandalicia ", the name the Vandals gave
to the old Roman province of Baetica In southern
Spain. In English, " al-Andalus " is often translated
as " Andalusia ", but in its strict sense it designates
Muslim Spain.
Like Rome, the Cordoba of the Umayyad
caliphate was not built in a day. The glitter of
that golden city did not materialize like Aladdin's
genie at the rub of a magic lamp. It was born of
the Umayyad emirate, and behind its glitter there
lay a long and complex history.
The establishment of
the Umayyad emirate in Spain
In 750 the'Abbasid revolution in the east swept
away the Syrian Umayyad caliphate and savagely
butchered its princes. Miraculously, one of the
latter,'Abd al-Rahman, grandson of the caliph
Hisham, cheated his hunters of their prey and
embarked on a perilous odyssey that took him
to Morocco, where he won the protection of his
mother's Berber tribe. After careful thought he
decided to go to Spain, banking on support from
elements owing loyalty to the Umayyads. Once
on Andalusian soil, he played his hand and
won-despite some militant opposition to his
cause. In May 756, his final battle won, he entered
the provincial palace of Cordoba. There, in the
city's mosque, he led the Eriday prayer and was
proclaimed emir of al-Andalus. A young man in
his mid-twenties at the time, he was to reign for
over thirty years as the first of five Umayyad
rulers of Spain to bear the name'Abd al-Rahman.24

Copy of a map by ai-istakhri
showing the Iberian peninsula
(right) and North Africa
(14th century).
The establishment of the emirate was on !)
the start of a gruelling climb to power whos<
complexity is explained by the pattern of Andalu
sian society at that time. Al-Andaius was ;
country in which Arab and Berber immigrant :
had, at different times and under differing con
ditions, settled among the great mass of thé
HIspano-Roman population. Many Hispano
Romans had converted to Islam and, as neo
Muslims (muwalladun), become completel)
Arabized. Yet there remained a large Christiar
HIspano-Roman community of Mozarabs- :
term taken from the Spanish form of an Arabi (
word meaning " Arabizer ". As well as their owr
language, the Mozarabs spoke Arabic and adoptee
many Arab customs. Finally, there were the
native Iberian Jews.
The Mozarabs and Jews caused'Abd al
Rahman no trouble. They were only too glad tc
be rid of Visigothic tyranny and to live in peace
The Arabs, however, were to turn any dream :
of peace he may have cherished into something
of a nightmare born of tribal feuds, jealousies anc
grievances, which led to sedition, armed conflict
and open rebellion. Moreover, the Berber :
resented not being treated as equals by their Arab
fellow-Muslims, whose traditions and culture
were quite different from their own.
And so, the prospect of revolts and uprising :
was very real. The emir perceived the risk oJ
siding with any single group within al-AndaIus
He could count on unselfish loyalty from no one
not even from his Umayyad relations and clients
And so he recruited a highly disciplined profes
sional army of Berber mercenaries and slave
troops from Europe north of the Pyrenees. This
was the only answer to internal turmoil anc
external danger from the Christian north.
'Abd aI-Rahman was a Syrian, and the
administrative system he created In Muslim Spain
was in the Syrian Umayyad tradition. At It<
centre he made his own office of emir a unifying
symbol, and in the provinces he appointed loyal
and capable governors.
When he died In 788, he could be said to have
proved himself an extraordinarily able statesman ;
whose greatest achievement had been to pacify
and defend his realm. Today we see him as the
founder of a dynasty that lasted more than twice
as long as that of his Syrian ancestors and became
a light that far outshone the brightest lights In
contemporary Europe.
An eventful history
All his successors sought, with varying degree*
of success, to consolidate their political and mill-
tary strength In a situation that was fraught with
danger.
In many areas of the Iberian peninsula corn-
munications and transport militated against firm
central control. Local notables, appointed a<
governors to uphold Umayyad authority in
regions far from Cordoba, acted as powerful over
lords serving not their ruler's interests but their
own, and often taking the opportunity to rebel.
This was particularly the case in the"Marches".
sprawling tracts of nomansland separating the
Christian realms to the north from the emirate's
Muslim lands In the south.
The attitudes of the nee-Muslims and
Mozarabs also changed, leading to insurrection
and disorder. Cordoba itself was the home of cer-
tain Muslim political and religious malcontents. 25

The site teofMad) nata)-Zahra'
the ceremonial capital of the
Umayyads founded tn the
10th century near Cordoba.
At the same time, the emirate was saddled with
the perennial need to protect its northern borders
against Christian invaders.
During the reign of ai-Hakam I (796-822)
there was a spate of troubles : disaffection in
Toledo, savagely crushed in 797 by the massacre
of its mainly neo-Muslim notables ; the mass
uprising in 818 of the so-called Suburb
( " Arraval ") of Cordoba, encouraged by disgrun-
tled Muslim religious leaders and ruthlessly put
down ; protracted campaigns In the Marches of
Saragossa, Toledo and Merida against recalcitrant
leaders ; and, finally, the permanent loss of Barce-
lona to the Christians.
The emirate faced two other thorny
problems. First, the initially peaceful Mozarabs
became involved in a serious religious protest
begun by Christian fanatics seeking martyrdom
through public denunciation of the Prophet
Muhammad. The protest, starting late in the reign
of the kind and tolerant ruler'Abd al-Rahman
II (822-852), led to tensions and conflicts which
neither the prince nor many of his Christian sub-
jects relished. Secondly and more importantly,
the reign of Muhammad I (852-886), witnessed
In 880 a determined attempt by Ibn Hafsun, a
rebel of neo-Muslim descent and later an apostate,
to make himself ruler of aI-AndaIus from his
centre of power, Bobastro, in the south of Spain.
His insurrection, which commanded wide non-
Arab support, dragged on for almost fifty years.
Largely because of ai-Hakam I's draconian
measures to enforce peace, his son'Abd al-
Rahman II, a very able monarch, enjoyed some
thirty years of relative calm and prosperity,
marked by significant improvements in the
administrative system and a sharp rise in stan-
dards of culture and civilization. The emir's
enthusiastic patronage of music and the arts was
matched only by his zealous preoccupation with
the creation of a strong navy capable of out-
classing Norse squadrons that had found his
shores a gateway to rich pickings.
An exceptional ruler
The most disastrous period In the emirate's his-
tory came with the reign of'Abd Allah (888-912),
whose legacy to his grandson and successor'Abd
aI-Rahman III (912-961) was nothing but an
empty treasury and the general disintegration of
Umayyad Spain. This legacy of leaden metal was
to be miraculously transmuted into gold by the
alchemy of a ruler who at the time of his acces-
sion was barely in his twenties. Endowed with
patience, emotional stability and maturity of
judgement beyond his years, the young'Abd al-
Rahman combined the energy and stamina of
youth with political acumen and unswerving
devotion to duty. As much European as Arab-
his mother and paternal grandmother were of
Christian stock-he was an observant Muslim but
no fanatic. Throughout his reign he adopted,
whenever possible, a generally tolerant policy
towards Mozarabs and Jews.
26

Upon his succession,'Abd aI-Rahman
brooked no opposition to his authority.
Governors who refused or ignored his request for
allegiance had to yield either to diplomatic per-
suasion or to force. In 913 he imposed his rule
on the important city of Seville. The next year
saw the start of a long war of attrition against Ibn
Hafsun of Bobastro, the master of much of
southern Spain. The struggle, continued by his
sons after his death In 917, ended only in 928.
It was not until 932 that the pacification of al-
Andalus was complete, with the submission of
the AIgarve, eastern Spain, Toledo, Saragossa and
other important strongholds.
The apogee of the caliphate
The most memorable event in Spanish Umayyad
history took place in 929 : the establishment of
the caliphate. In proclaiming himself caliph,'Abd
aI-Rahman III assumed, In addition to the caliphal
title " Commander of the Faithful ", the throne-
name"Defender (aI-Nasir) of God's Religion ".
The decision to revive the caliphate, lost by the
Syrian Umayyads in 750, was largely his response
to the growing power and prestige of the Shi'ite
Fatimids, who had proclaimed their own
caliphate in North Africa and were coming dan-
gerously near to al-Andalus.
When he died In 961, al-Nasir had enforced
respect for the frontiers of a country united under
J DEREK LATHAM,
of the United Kingdom. Doctor
of Letters in the University of
Oxford, isprofessor emeritus
of Arabic and Islamic Studies
and former head of the Muir
Institute in the University of
Edinburgh. He has been joint
general editor and contributor
to The Cambridge History or
Arabic Literature and a
contributor to Encyclopaedia of
Islam (new edition). Notable
among his other published
works are Isaac Judaeus : On
Fevers (Arabic text and English
translation with notes. 1980).
and From Muslim Spain to
Barbary : Studies in the History
and Culture or the Muslim
West (1986).

a strong central government. Me had made al-
Andalus second to none in the Western world,
prospering thanks to a thriving domestic
economy and a lucrative network of pan-
Mediterranean trade. Cordoba, with about ten
times the population of Paris, far outshone any
other capital in Europe. In reputation and pres-
tige, it surpassed Baghdad and rivalled Byzantine
Constantinople, through diplomatic exchanges
with which the caliph had ensured that his realm
was seen as its equal. European envoys from
France, Germany, Italy and elsewhere had eagerly
made their way to his court. In addition to mis-
sions from North Africa, part of which he actu-
ally ruled, he had received delegations from Chris-
tian Spain, some of whose rulers he had made his
tributaries.
His successor, aI-Hakam II (961-976), was able
to preserve his father's heritage of peace and
prosperity. One of the biggest and best libraries
of Islam was born of his passion for books and
learning-a passion which also compelled him to
promote scholarship, both religious and secular
(astronomy and mathematics, for example), and
to provide some education for the poor. In the
Great Mosque of Cordoba, which stands to this
day as a lasting memorial to Umayyad glory, he
expressed his deep piety and refined artistic taste
by almost doubling Its size through the addition
of a most pleasing extension and enhancing its
prayer niche with ornamentation so exquisite as
to make it a masterpiece.
Al-Hakam's death was the death of true
Umayyad rule. The reign of his son HIsham II
(976-1013)-a mere boy at the time of his
accession-led to the caliphate's slide into extinc-
tion in 1031. t
Smat ! tvory casket bearing
the name of at-Mughira.
one of the sons of'Abd a !-
Rahman III, the illustrious
Umayyad caliph of Cordoba
(10th century).
27
