The concept of
utopia, an imaginary
ideal society, has
been a fertile source
of controversy. For
some it has been a
beacon of hope for
the future. Others
regard Utopian
thinking as
anathema, and see
Utopians, however
well-intentioned, as
the unwitting
accomplices of
totalitarianism. A
third school of
thought believes that
while utopia can
never be a practical
proposition, it can
stimulate a fruitful
quest for knowledge.
Right, depiction of a 21st-
century space colony by the
American painter Don Davis
(1975).
Opposite page, anonymous
engraving for a 1518 edition
of Thomas Mores Utopia.

4
-' ? »¿¿3??
DO WE NEED UTOPIA?
BY FERNANDO AINSA
J.AKING its name from the fictional land
depicted in Sir Thomas More's book of 1516,
utopia has become a generic term for all imagi¬
nary worlds in which a society radically different
from our own existsone that is normally in
every respect superior to the real world. It is a
notion that is currently out of fashion, for
nowadays Utopian thought is suspect for its sup¬
posedly totalitarian tendencies.
Recent years have seen the collapse of more
than one would-be real-life utopia, and the dream
of an ideal societylong considered essential for
the fulfilment of human potentialhas for many
people turned into a nightmare. Even the way
the word is now used in everyday speech reflects
its current discredit. It has become synonymous
with pipe-dreams, unrealistic ambitions, and airy-
fairy ideas. For many people, the Utopian vision
has finally been laid to rest.
Such a view may be premature. Contem¬
porary historical, political and philosophical
thought has not entirely lost its Utopian dimen¬
sion. Although utopianism has been condemned
for the ideological wrong turnings it has
encouraged, perhaps it remains indispensable if
we are to conceive of alternative models of the
future.
It is often wrongly thought that utopianism
is a form of literary escapism. Its practitioners
have usually been deeply involved with the polit
ical, social and economic concerns of their day.
The aim of most Utopian works has been to make
people reflect critically about their time. The ideal
societies they have depicted have always been
related in some way to the values of the world
around them.
Thomas More himself was a humanist,
diplomat and politician who rose to be lord chan¬
cellor of England. The marvellous island he
described in his Utopia housed an ideal society
that served to contrast with descriptions of an
existing England sapped by poverty, taxation and
rapacity. More was to pay for his audacity with
his head.
Similarly, the Italian author Tommaso Cam-
panella, writing from prison, proposed the ideal
community of his City of the Sun (1602) as an
alternative to the injustices of the contemporary
world; in fact he even sought help to turn his
ideas into reality. James Harrington's Oceana,
published in 1656, was a challenge to the England
of Oliver Cromwell, while the philosopher and
statesman Francis Bacon, in his New Atlantis of
1627, drew up a programme of political action
for an enlightened monarch.
History may have inspired these imaginary
worlds, but some utopias have in their turn
affected history. Writing in the first shock of the
European encounter with America, Thomas
More thought that things no longer possible in 13

,p
. Ñ1Ü
The Utopian community
imagined by Rabelais in the
16th century Is shown in this
engraving by the French
illustrator Albert Robida
(1848-1926).
14
FERNANDO AINSA,
Uruguayan writer, is a Unesco
staff member. He is the author
of many essays and novels
including Los buscadores de la
utopia (Monte Avila, Caracas,
1977), Identidad cultural de
Iberoamérica en su narrativa
(Gredos, Madrid, 1986), and
Necesidad de la utopia (Nordan
Comunidad, Buenos
Aires/Montevideo, 1990).
the Old World could perhaps be brought to fru¬
ition in the New. In fact there were several
attempts to put his ideas into practice in sixteenth-
century Latin America, from the communes of
farmers and craftsmen established at Michoacán
in Mexico by Bishop Vasco de Quiroga to the
ideal world of Verapazliterally, "True Peace"
that Bartolomé de las Casas sought to create at
Chiapas.
In the succeeding centuries, the missions and
Indian settlementsthe so-called "Reductions"
set up by the Jesuits over a vast area of Brazil,
Argentina and Paraguay drew the inspiration for
their theocratic regimes from both Campanella
and Plato. In the nineteenth century, various
attempts to set up Utopian socialist communities
were made in England, France, the United States
and Latin America.
Criticizing the present
to change the future
Every project for an ideal society is an attempt
to invent the future. That is what distinguishes
utopianism from ideology. As Karl Mannheim,
the author of Ideology and Utopia (1929), put it,
utopias bear a message of hope in the sense that
they signify that change is possible. Whilst
ideology is a vehicle for the world view of people
in power, utopias are by their very nature sub¬
versive; they oppose existing authority and
challenge the view of reality that it imposes.
Some authors consider poor living condi
tions, and the protests they inspire, to be the Uto¬
pians' greatest ally. For E.M. Cioran, author of
Utopia and History (1960) and an acerbic critic
of modern values and of Western civilization,
"The wild thoughts of the indigent set things
moving....; a crowd of hotheads want another
world, and they want it now. These are the
people that inspire utopias, and it is for them that
they are written." Utopian thinking turns to its
own purposes the ancient myth of the Land of
Plenty, and assimilates all the Lands of Cockayne
in which the hungry peasants of the Middle Ages
dreamed of filling their bellies without effort.
Utopianism has in fact often provided an
inspiration for social progress. Many recent
improvements in living conditions were long con¬
sidered Utopian fantasies. Whether with regard
to working hours, sexual equality, welfare poli¬
cies, leisure, alternative energy sources, environ¬
mental protection or town planning, More,
Campanella, Bacon and others can now be seen
as prophets whose dreams have in some cases
become reality.
By no means -all of the realized visions,
however, have been constructive. In the course
of the present century some have come to fruition
in ways that have inspired anxiety and even terror.
Numerous works have described the
increasing mechanization of modern life, the
growth of bureaucracy, the depersonalization of
the individual and the increasingly intrusive
powers of the state, and have denounced their
alienating effects and the assaults on liberty they
represent. Such books normally exaggerate their

Below, model of the
"Matrimandir", the enormous
sphere of meditation which is
the focal point of Auroville
(Tamil Nadu, India), an
international cultural
community inspired by the
work and ideals of the Indian
mystic and philosopher Sri
Aurobindo (1872-1950).
Auroville was founded in
1968 with Unesco support.
Below right, a scene from
Brazil (1984), a film directed
by Terry Gilliam.
Bottom, plan of "Las
Delicias", the capital of an
ideal country described by the
French-born Argentine writer
Pierre Quiroule In his book La
ciudad anarquista americana
("The American Anarchist
City"), published in Buenos
Aires in 1914.
critique of present-day conditions to the point of
caricature by projecting them into the future: a
future which, unlike that of traditional, idealist
utopias, is the stuff of nightmare.
The classics of this pessimistic school include
Yevgeny Zamyatin's We, published in 1924,
Aldous Huxley's 1946 masterwork Brave New
World, George Orwell's 1984 (which first
appeared in 1949), and Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit
451, which came out five years later. In these
works, the benevolent monarch of classic Utopian
fiction gives way to the tyrant who sweeps aside
human rights in the name of order and state
security, violates the human conscience and
denies either privacy or individuality to his
victims.
Analysing the way in which totalitarian
systems impose a supposedly rational social order
by means of state violence, the philosopher Karl
Popper came to wonder whether totalitarianism
is not inherent in the Utopian vision. In the name
of rationalism and idealism, those who dream of
perfect societies, he claimed, always became dog¬
matists once in power.
The Russian thinker Nicholas Berdyaev
(1874-1948) presented the idea in a different way.
For him, the twentieth century has proved
utopias to be more attainable than anyone had
imagined. He saw the totalitarian results in the
many would-be ¡deal societies around him. That
insight led him to a bitter question: How can we
be spared utopia?
The fascination of the impossible
The odd thing is that those views of the future
that have historically had the greatest influence
and that people have most often tried to turn into
reality have not, as one might have expected, been
the most realistic, and hence realisable, ones. Take
the case of the author of A New World ofLove,
Charles Fourier, whose radically original ideas
have had great significance for two divergent
groups of people, for totally different reasons.
.":-**-
iß . --X-
"^^: ^£&¡m * \ / . ~p.
^ pp^^f- &
i
Mp^Bt mi-í ^>
.
i
1 J
EM
¡Clip!];
^i'- ví
On the one hand, disciples who took his message
at face value set up communes faithful to his ideas
in Argentina, the United States, Brazil and
Mexico. On the other, the surrealists who were
fascinated by the visionary and subversive aspects
of Fourierism precisely because they considered
them to be unrealisable.
Whether or not it is confronted by the test
of reality or has the fascination of the impossible,
the vision of utopia seems to be one of the motors
of human history. Ultimately it is the measure
of the hope that drives humankind forward.
Although Cioran is generally hostile to social
idealism, even he recognizes that utopias are
part of the quest for human happiness. However,
he attacks the very concept of happiness, which
he holds responsible for many of the great
tragedies of history. Products of history, most
utopias in his view degenerate into tyranny and
servitude.
Other writers would be less willing to dismiss
the quest for a perfect society as merely a cata¬
logue of forlorn hopes. For the Italian essayist
Ignazio Silone, a world without a Utopian dimen¬
sion would be claustrophobic and suffocating,
and would end in a stagnation worse than mad¬
ness. The American theologian Paul Tillich was
even more emphatic: "Without utopias to open 15

up possibilities, the present is sterile and stag¬
nant.... Without utopias, a culture... rapidly falls
back into the past. The present is only fully alive
in the tensions between the past and the future."
On the other hand, a modern social theorist,
Ernst Bloch, draws attention to the risks of "auto¬
matic optimism" and a "blind and limited faith
in the future". He prefers realistic pessimism to
false optimism. In his view, social utopias need
not lead to alienation. They can be realistic and
liberating, just so long as they represent a clearly-
held position free of all adventurism.
Ideal and
nightmare worlds
16
The alternative societies that Utopian literature
has sketched out are much more varied than
might be suggested by the everyday use of the
word, which is now loosely taken to describe
anything from anarchy to tyranny or liberty to
dictatorship, and can be applied to either ideal
or nightmare worlds. Basically, though, they can
be divided into two categories. On the one hand
are those that stress order, with Campanella as
their original inspiration; on the other are those
inspired by liberty, which trace their descent to
the work of Thomas More.
The first kind depicts ideal states; their
imagined worlds are institutional and collective,
not to say totalitarian. The seconddrawing on
popular and revolutionary traditionsdescribes
the best imaginable ways of being. Fear of seeing
the totalitarian utopias turn into reality can easily
blind us to the liberating potential of the other
variety.
"Do what you will" was the motto of the
Abbey of Thelema, the paradise of pleasure
Rabelais depicted in Gargantua and Pantagruel.
It could serve as a rallying-cry for all the liber¬
tarian utopias, from the Renaissance through the
socialist model societies of the nineteenth century
to the alternative communities of the present day,
giving them their "light of dream and passion",
in the phrase of William Morris, author of News
from Nowhere (1890). This sense of wonder shines
like a flame in every work in which the aspira¬
tion towards liberty struggles to overcome all the
rational obstacles that confront it.
For libertarian Utopians, the task is to restore
humanity to the fullness of its nature. In
Morelly's Basiliade of 1753, everything that stands
in the way of individual liberty is abolished:
property, politics, marriage, privilege and law all
go, and humanity is finally free to live in har¬
mony with nature. A similar quest for total liber¬
ation reappears today in the work of the
American fantasy writer Ursula Le Guin, partic¬
ularly in her novel The Dispossessed (1974). The
utopia it depicts arouses both hope and terror,
neatly encapsulating the current uncertainty the
concept provokes.
Maybe it is time to overcome our ambiva¬
lence, and to look beyond the real-life experience
of social engineering that has thrown the whole
idea of ideal worlds into disrepute. In so doing,
it might be possible to recapture the liberating
vitality and dynamism of the original Utopian
dream.

