Ik %k ojÄ ad tk Mm ofAto
by François-Bernard Huyghe
lis UNESCO's Maritime Silk Roads expe¬
dition set sail from the Chinese port of Quan¬
zhou on 19 February 1991, crowds of school¬
children gave us a rousing send-off from the
quayside, waving flowers, streamers, and card¬
board lions and dragons. Our ship the Fulk
al-Salamah's two visits to China had taken
place in an atmosphere of constant festivity.
In addition to our scholarly work, the mara¬
thon seminars and visits to historic sites, many
less serious moments were still fresh in our
memory. Whole villages had turned out to
greet us. We had been entertained with fire¬
work displays (our arrival had coincided with
the Chinese New Year) and acrobats. There
had been many colourful scenes and much
laughter.
Our hosts had spared no efforts to give
the expedition a spectacular welcome. They
had deepened a harbour so that the Fulk al-
Salamah could enter, built a museum, and
brought forward by several weeks the spring
parade in which thousands of people take part.
In addition to this generosity we would not
soon forget the infectious joy and vitality of
the Chinese.
Thus we began the last part of our
journey. We were about to follow a branch
of the maritime silk route that would lead to
its easternmost extremity.
Before making for Japan, our ship sailed
for Korea, where the links between China and



Japan were forged in the ancient kingdom of
Silla, once a meeting place for the peoples of
central Asia and the Far East, for the mari¬
time route and the land route across the
steppes. Our port of call was Kyongju, which
was the capital of Silla for a thousand years.
In the last century of the pre-Christian era,
this region was settled by the Si-Ro, one of
many tribes of obscure, possibly Ural-Altaic
origins, which occupied the Korean peninsula.
After a conflict which lasted several centuries
and was often arbitrated by the Chinese, Silla
conquered and subjugated the rival kingdoms
44 of Paekche in 660 and Koguryo in 668, before
Above, one of the statues guarding
the burial mound of King Kwaenung in the
Korean city of Kyongju, formerly the capital of
the kingdom of Silla.
Top, Chinese children welcoming
the Silk Roads expedition.
driving out Chinese troops. This kingdom,
known as "Unified Silla", lasted until 935.
Silla or the age of friendship
The golden age of Silla, from the seventh to
the ninth centuries, coincided in China with
the consolidation of the political power of the
T'ang, who reunified the empire, and in Japan
with the victory of the central government
over the clans. This period of political stability
was also a period of intensive political, com¬
mercial and cultural exchanges which estab
lished via the Silk Roads what a speaker at one
seminar in Japan was to call "the age of friend¬
ship" between the three nations.
The Unified Silla kingdom sent a hundred-
odd ambassadors to the court of the T'ang,
who were in theory sovereign rulers. China
sent ambassadors in return. As a result of these
diplomatic missions Silla came into possession
of Chinese writings such as the Taoist classic
the Tao-te Ching and important Confucian
texts, and sent students to study in China,
whence they returned with more treasures for
Korean scholars.
Korean envoys also journeyed to
Maracanda (present-day Samarkand), the cap¬
ital of Sogdiana. Late-seventh-century wall
paintings discovered in Samarkand show
figures dressed in the Korean style among the
delegations received by the ruler of Sogdiana.
Perhaps, as a Korean scholar suggested during
a seminar held at Pusan, they were envoys of
the Koguryo kingdom who were in
Maracanda to negotiate an alliance to coun¬
terbalance that which the rival Silla kingdom
was working out with China.
By way of trade or tribute, Silla sent to
China horses, artefacts produced by its excel¬
lent jewellers and metalworkers, silk, which
had been cultivated ever since the first tribes
had settled in Korea, and medicinal plants. To
Japan it exported its own products and mer¬
chandise which passed through its ports,
including, oddly enough, horses and camels,
whose presence in seventh-century Japan is
mentioned in the "Written Chronicles of
Japan".
But Silla was also in contact with the Per¬
sian and Arab world, and traded with the
Muslim merchants who travelled through
China, where some of them eventually settled.
As early as the middle of the ninth century,
the writings of Arab travellers and geographers
tell of a fabulous kingdom, described by Ibn
Kurdadbih who wrote that "Beyond China
is a land where gold abounds and which is
named Silla. The Muslims who have gone

UNESCO IN ACTION
THE SILK ROADS
there have been charmed by the country and
tend to settle there and abandon all idea of



leaving."
Later, the Arab geographer al-Mas'udi also
penned a description of Silla, which he located
behind the Great Wall which protected men
from the demoniac hordes of Gog and Magog.
He wrote that the kingdom had been founded
by Alexander the Great, whose myth (which
kept cropping up throughout the maritime
Silk Roads expedition) here makes a surprising
appearance. Other texts describe, with greater
credibility, how Shiites sought refuge in Korea
during the Umayyad period. Many objects
discovered in Korean tombs were certainly
brought to Korea by Muslim traders.
The physical type and dress of two of the
statues we saw guarding the tumulus of King
Kwaenung at Kyongju suggest that Persian
mercenaries may have served the Silla court.
Kyongju, a city which attracted many
foreigners, enjoyed great prosperity. The court
was reputed for its luxurious way of life, and
especially for its finery. The clothes people
wore were determined by their rank, and the
common people were forbidden to wear silk
clothes or gold and silver jewelry. "The houses
of the leading ministers possessed boundless
resources", says the Chinese chronicle. "Some
of them had as many as 3,000 slaves." A Korean
historical document, the Samguk yusa (1285;
"Memorabilia of the Three Kingdoms"), says
of Kyongju that "There is not a single cottage.
The houses touch, wall follows wall. Singing
and music fill the streets without ceasing day
and night."
The Buddhist ferment
Two of the three Koreans on the Fulk al-
Salamah were musicologists, and the spotlight
was on music during our visit to Korea. On
board ship they accompanied their demonstra¬
tions, one instrumentally, the other with a fine
baritone voice, and ashore took care that the
pieces we heard were authentic. They revealed
to us a little-known musical culture, showing
the extent to which it influenced court music
in Japan and describing its origins in China,
central Asia, and in Buddhist songs. Music
gradually came to symbolize for us the cul¬
tural flowering of the Silla kingdom.
Buddhism, one of the major sources of
Korean music, was brought to Korea largely
by Chinese monks. But soon Korean monks
Above, the drum pavilion
in Toshodaiji temple, Nara (Japan).
Middle, lantern on mount Jiu-Ri, Korea.
Top, the Chumsungdae (7th century),
one of the earliest known astronomical
observatories, In Kyongju.
in their turn were setting out along the Silk
Roads to study the Buddhist canon.
One of them, Hye-cho, who travelled as far
as India at the beginning of the eighth century,
wrote a "Diary of a journey to the five coun¬
tries of India" a fragment of which was dis
covered in 1908 in the famous grottos of Dun-
Huang in western China. Writing in Chinese,
the Korean monk described various stages of
his initiatory journey, and gave details of the
different Buddhist sects and their monasteries,
the regions through which he had travelled
and the customs of the people who lived there.
The journey, which was to take him to
Kashmir and a number of central Asian coun¬
tries, provided him with opportunities to
engage in historical and political reflection,
and to observe Arab incursions into India.
Like the great Chinese pilgrims who preceded
him, Hye-cho was a witness of the great move¬
ment of intercultural contact generated by
Buddhism.
This movement is also reflected in the
flowering of Buddhist architecture and sculp¬
ture, strongly influenced by T'ang China, and
by more distant India. The Korean chronicle
even reports the Indian emperor Asoka, a
major figure in the spread of Buddhism, as
having sent a model of the image of the
Buddha directly to Korea and describes the
installation of a reproduction of it in the
temple of Hwangyong-sa. But the influence
of Buddhist art in Korea was exercised on a
culture profoundly influenced by shamanism
and the art of the steppes.
Our visit to Korea brought us into con¬
tact with another silk route, part of which
would be explored by an expedition through
the Islamic republics of the USSR between 18
April and 18 June. During a seminar in Pusan
Korean specialists described to us Korean
weapons similar to weapons discovered in
Kazakhstan and Turkestan, a Korean animal
art close to that of the Scythians, and the
presence of Uighurs in Silla.
This affinity with central Asia is nowhere
more evident than in the many royal burial
mounds at Kyongju. The wall paintings and
jewelry such as the famous Silla gold crown
with shamanistic symbols, as well as the
weapons found there, testify to a heritage that
China would not supplant.
The Shoso-in treasures
The ocean routes extend much further, and
lead firstly towards Hakata, on the island of
Kyushu, Japan. It was via this port, at once
an administrative, military and trading centre,
that relations with China and Korea were
established at a very early period. Our first 45

visit was to the remains of the Korokan, an
important guest-house where ambassadors
from Silla and China were lodged between the
seventh and the eleventh centuries. Diplo¬
matic, commercial and cultural missions set
out from Hakata, and in the eighth century,
the imperial court sent monks and students
to Chan'an, present-day Xian, in China. There
is evidence that relations with China existed as



early as the first century of the Christian era.
The maritime expedition ended at another
symbolic place, the Shoso-in repository of
imperial treasures at Nara, which was built
after the death of emperor Shomu in 756 and
is often referred to as the eastern terminus of
the silk roads. Most of the treasures were gifts
made to the Todaiji, the temple of the imperial
family, in whose precincts the Shoso-in stands,
and objects relating to an important moment
in the history of Buddhism in Japan, the con¬
secration of a giant statue known as the
Daibutsu, or Great Buddha. The immense log
building was thus a storehouse of art which
reached Japan from China along the Silk
Roads.
For thirteen centuries the Shoso-in has
preserved these treasures in a state comparable
to that which modern technology could be
expected to achieve. The building is only open
to the public once a year, and even then only
a small part of it can be visited. It is a mys¬
terious and, for scientists who would like to
understand its secrets, a somewhat frustrating
place. Scholars who have studied the collec¬
tions have identified many works produced
by T'ang craftsmen with materials brought to
China from across the sea: ivory and
rhinoceros horn from India, tropical timber,
pearls and tortoiseshell, wood from Indochina,
metal artefacts from Persia and Sogdiana.
The objects in the emperor Shomu's col¬
lection had a considerable impact on Japanese
society, introducing a new taste for foreign arts
and thus contributing to the opening of Japan
to the outside world.
The treasures of Shoso-in possess a sym¬
bolism which is perhaps even more powerful
than their outstanding aesthetic qualities. They
remind us that the silk roads were not only
a conduit for trade in everyday commodities,
and that the travellers who for centuries
braved great risks as they wended their way
in caravans, across steppe and desert or plied
the oceans in their fragile craft were also
serving an inexhaustible appetite for beauty.
FRANÇOIS-BERNARD HUYGHE, French writer
and journalist, is a former member of UNESCO's
46 Division of Cultural Heritage.

