Exciting new sounds
and rhythms from
the Third World
are bursting onto
the Western pop scene
by Alain Gardinier
'World Music'
or sounds of the tunes
HE international success of musicians such as
Kassav', Ofra Haza, The Sabri Brothers, Mory
Kante, Johnny Clegg and The Gipsy Kings, who
hail from the Caribbean, Israel, Pakistan, South
Africa and France respectively, has turned them
into representatives of a new musical trend of
major importance, an audio revolution which has
been variously described as "World Music",
"sono mondiale" or "musique métisse".
In the developed countries, the standardiza¬
tion of sounds and musical trends and the extreme
harmonic simplification resulting from the fierce
competition to make hit records, has jaded the
public, which has turned to new kinds of music
as a source of unusual and original sensations. At
the same time, the spread of long-distance travel,
the attraction of new technology and the need
of artists everywhere to widen their horizons,
have paved the way for new musical textures.
Today, World Music knows no frontiers.
Some Third World performers have made records
that have achieved international success. "Yeke
Yeke", a song adapted by Mory Kante from the
traditional music of the Malinke people of West 37

Africa, became a worldwide hit. The Senegalese
singer Youssou N'Dour joined international stars
Sting and Bruce Springsteen on a world tour in
support of Amnesty International.
There is nothing new about solo performers
and groups from Asia, Africa and Latin America
who win a reputation in the West. What is new
is the musical and technical collaboration which
has developed between them and Western per¬
formers and has enabled them to enrich their art
and to take advantage of modern recording and
production techniques. Naturally, what they
want most of all is access to distribution networks
which can bring their work to a wide public,
unlike traditional music labels which only reach
a limited audience.
This is not just a one-way exchange. Rock
groups have been taking an interest in traditional
forms of music ever since the 1960s, when the
Beatles visited India and became so enthusiastic
about Indian music that they tried to popularize
it in the West, incidentally bringing fame to the
sitarist Ravi Shankar. The Rolling Stones in their
turn helped to make known Moroccan musicians.
Around this time many other Western artists reis¬
sued adaptations of hits from other parts of the
world, notably Latin America.
The scope of the movement is wider today,
and is in many cases associated with a real desire
to learn from other cultures. Playing alongside
African, Indian and Latin American musicians,
artists such as Paul Simon and Peter Gabriel have
created a new dynamic. The success of Paul
Simon's Graceland album, based on traditional
South African rhythms, has helped a number
of South African artists to break into the inter¬
national market.
38

It remains true that many more artists from
disadvantaged countries are flocking to the West
than vice versa, usually to their former colonial
metropolis. Indians tend to head for London,
French-speaking Africans for Paris. At the
moment this trend shows no signs of changing,
but perhaps the new movement towards World
Music will also encourage exchanges between
Asia and Latin America, and between Africa and
the Caribbean.
Specialized record labels
The decisive factor will probably be the big
record companies, which are making positive
moves in this direction. Multinational companies
have set up subsidiaries specializing in World
Music to stimulate encounters between musicians.
The hi-tech studios of Real World Records, for
example, founded by Peter Gabriel in Bath (UK),
produce a wide range of artists including The
Musicians of the Nile, Tabu Ley from Zaire,
Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan from Pakistan, The Guo
Brothers from China and Elio Revé from Cuba.
These musicians are also supported by WOMAD
(World of Music, Arts and Dance), an organiza¬
tion founded by Peter Gabriel in 1980 to promote
the arts of many different cultures through Euro¬
pean concert tours, since live shows play a deci¬
sive role in an artist's career.
In order to reach the widest possible
audience, is World Music being forced to "wester¬
nize" itself by the use of more modern instru¬
ments, rhythms or sounds? The answer is yes,
Opposite page: the South
African singer Johnny Clegg
(centre) and his group Savuka
at Angoulême (France) in
1987.
Above left: Cheb Khaled (left)
and The Gipsy Kings at the
"Gypsy Mosaic" festival held
at Nîmes (France) In 1990.
Above: the Ugandan singer
Geoffrey Oryema.
ALAIN GARDINIER
is a French journalist with a
special interest in World Music.
He contributes to a number of
music magazines and
television programmes.
judging from the great success of "mixed" forms
of music which have a foot in both the traditional
and the modern camps. But the answer is no
insofar as the listening public is becoming increas¬
ingly familiar with strikingly different sounds.
"The main thing is to offer artists the technology
they need for top-quality recording, without tam¬
pering with their art, unless they themselves
initiate an exchange," emphasizes Peter Gabriel.
In any case World Music is not always a
direct product of the Third World. Some Western
artists are also successful exponents of it. The
Israeli singer Ofra Haza had a hit with a tradi¬
tional Yemeni song. In France Caribbean groups
such as Kassav', and a Gypsy group from the
South of France, The Gipsy Kings, are increas¬
ingly popular. The Négresses Vertes, a French
group of second-generation immigrants, recently
provided the music for the American film Dick
Tracy.
A surprising success
For the record industry, which sees World Music
as a minor phenomenon although one with a
promising future, these breakthroughs seem
difficult to analyse. Why, for example, should the
South African singer Johnny Clegg and his mixed
band Savuka be so successful in Germany and
France, while he is virtually unknown in the rest
of the world? And since Clegg's music contains
an anti-apartheid message, should we conclude
that World Music is necessarily committed music?
By assimilating disparate rhythms might it not
lose its identity and become commonplace? Might
too many concessions not compromise its fresh¬
ness and innovative spirit?
For the moment, the communications society
in which we live seems bound to encourage the
development of World Music, and the confron¬
tation of cultures which it promotes must surely
help to discredit racism and intolerance. It
remains to be seen what support for World Music
will come from governments, the media, cultural
associations, concert promoters, radio and tele¬
vision programme planners, and multinational
record companies. Will World Music be the
sound of the twenty-first century? 39
