N N M T
Coping with uncertainty
by Michel Bâtisse
How far are science and scientists responsible
for solving environmental problems?
Ihe many environmental problems with
which our planet is faced stem from the capri¬
cious, unpredictable effects of "development",
that is to say, the increasingly large-scale
application of industrial, agricultural, medical
and other techniques in economic and social
life. Technology, the term we use to describe
techniques in their totality, is today
omnipresent, and upon it depends the func¬
tioning of the modern world. Technology is
sometimes referred to as the daughter of
science. Today, however, science and tech¬
nology are closely intertwined in so many con¬
tinuous lines of fundamental and applied
research that it has become very difficult to
distinguish disinterested research from
research whose sole object is development.
Should we, then, blame science for being
the source of those imperfect techniques that
are degrading the human environment and
squandering the natural resources of the
biosphere? Some do not hesitate to make this
criticism. They forget, however, that we cannot
put the clock back. Some applications of
science, especially in the fields of medicine and
public health, have led to a rapid proliferation
of the human species. Only through other appli¬
cations, particularly in agriculture, has it been
possible to feed these increased numbers.
Nevertheless, we have every right to ask
whether the science upon which our material
civilization is based does not bear some respon¬
sibility for the way in which we handle the
environment, through its fundamental approach
rather than through its applications, and to try
to find out how, and to what extent, it can help .
us to escape from the rut into which we have
fallen.
Science as a conceptual attempt to under¬
stand the universe dates back to the ancient
civilizations. The scientific method, which
44 ensured the astounding progress of science,
is a more recent development dating from the
seventeenth century and emerging from the
promptings of Bacon, Descartes and Galileo.
Depending primarily on reasoned analysis, it
attempts to break down seemingly complex
phenomena into simpler, more easily meas¬
urable elements.
Based on a deterministic confidence in the
order of nature, the analytical method rapidly
met with dazzling success, particularly in the
fields of mechanics, physics and chemistry. Its
achievements gave rise to the notion of
progress and opened the way to the great social
changes of the Enlightenment in Europe and
America. It led on triumphantly to the industrial
revolution of the nineteenth century which is
still going on today. There can be no question
now of abandoning a tool that has been such
an effective instrument in the advancement of
knowledge and action.
The convergence of
disciplines
The limitations of the analytical method become
evident, however, when applied to phenomena
of a higher degree of complexity where deter¬
minism no longer seems to operate and where
the whole seems to be greater than the sum
of its component parts. This is especially the
case when the method is applied to questions
concerning the life of living beings and of soci¬
eties whose constituent elements react
amongst themselves and with their environ¬
ment. The striking successes being achieved
in biology today are doubtless due to the fact
that the scientific method has begun to go
beyond its traditional, analytical and reduc¬
tionist approach and to search for a conver¬
gence of disciplines in an attempt to achieve
a better grasp of the complexity and unpredic¬
tability of living systems.
Environmental problems are by nature
complex precisely because they involve human
life and life in the biosphere. Because they are
the incidental result of an excessively linear
technology, they are linked together by a chain
of multiple, often harmful interactions between
factors that may not have been suspected.
Because they are unforeseen and often
menacing, they appear to demand urgent solu¬
tions. Although scientists have never been
afraid to tackle difficult problems in fields they
have chosen to explore, the environment sud¬
denly faces them with extremely complex
problems which are not of their choosing and
which have to be handled with tools which are
still basically imperfect. It is true that consider¬
able methodological progress has been made
in the study of complex phenomena and their
evolution. Against the necessary interdiscipli¬
nary background two broad streams of scien¬
tific research have taken their place at the heart
of environmental concerns: ecologywhich
involves the study of the totality of the inter¬
relationships of human beings with one another
and with their environmentand geography
which is today capable of tracing the links
between the physical, biological, economic and
social factors that clash and interact within a
given territorial area.
Does this mean that science in its present
state can provide the eagerly-awaited answers
to environmental problems and in some way
correct the errors engendered by its own appli¬
cations? The answer is not so simple. Scientific
research is not immune to the inertia of habit
that affects all human behaviour. The interdis¬
ciplinary approach, which alone can enable real
progress to be made in our understanding of
complex systems, is still far from being
accepted by the scientific community. This is
because many scientists feel lost without their
traditional landmarks and are afraid of being

Cattle enclosure In the Mount Kulal biosphere
reserve (Kenya), where the capacity of the
environment to support livestock is being studied as
part of a project on arid lands within UNESCO's Man
and the Biosphere programme.
taken in by worthless research work in fields
they have not fully mastered. The long-awaited
marriage between the natural and the social
sciences has either not come about or has led
to conflict and as a result a great deal of tech¬
nically unimpeachable scientific research is
either not applied or leads to failure simply
because it is not adapted to sociological and
economic requirements. Under these circum¬
stances, the persistent development of the
classic disciplines, especially when there is a
possibility that they will lead to applications in
industry, is still the most reliable route for
researchers to follow in order to obtain honours
and funding. The very structure of research
institutions favours isolation between dis¬
ciplines rather than contact with the realities
of the outside world.
Truth and value
judgements
In the last twenty years, however, praiseworthy
efforts have been made to place the analysis
and management of environmental problems
on the soundest possible scientific basis,
whether the concern be with threats to human
health, with the deterioration of natural
resources or with threats on a planetary scale
to the climate, the oceans or the atmosphere.
UNESCO's Man and the Biosphere (MAB)
Programme is one example of a remarkable
attempt to explore, on an interdisciplinary basis,
possible sustainable use of terrestrial
ecosystems and to provide useful information
for those who have to make decisions con¬
cerning their management.
It is not up to scientists to make decisions.
Scientists can attempt to evaluate the risks
involved in using this or that technique and
shed light on ways of handling those risks, thus
helping to ensure the avoidance of accidents
or errors. Science attempts to distinguish what
is true, what is possible, probable or certain, but
it does not make value judgements. It would be
a serious misjudgement of the nature of
science to ask it to decide what is right and
what is wrong. Every decision, even when it is
based on all the knowledge available, implies
a judgement of value and of expediency. In the
environmental field, in which the interests of
individuals, businesses, local authorities, the
state, or even the whole of humanity are
involved, every decision is necessarily political
rather than scientific. The same is true of deci¬
sions in the economic spherein industry,
why the climate is getting warmer.. nor what level of biological diversity is
necessary to sustain ecosystems...
We do not know exactly...
nor why the ozone layer Is thinning. But we can't afford to wait until we
know everything. We must act!
45

46
agriculture and transport, and in the social
spherein housing, employment and security.
In none of these fields, however, is the scien¬
tist called upon to act as arbiter.
Why then do we turn so readily to the scien¬
tist when environmental questions come up?
Perhaps because, when faced with unexpected,
worrying, complex problems, which seem to
cast doubt on the very basis of our calm belief
in material progress and the benefits of tech¬
nology, the authorities feel an overwhelming
need to understand and to be reassured. We
appeal to the scientist as we would to a magi¬
cian or a judge. We want to know the truth
about all the alarming threats and all the poten¬
tial catastrophes we hear people talking about.
Governments and the general public look to
science to provide certainties upon which
action can be based.
The difficulty and it is a considerable one
that there are no certainties about many
environmental problems because of their
extreme complexity, their novelty and their
chaotic, unpredictable evolution, coupled with
the multiplicity of the interactions involved.
These are problems that have a profoundly dis¬
turbing effect on our ingrained habits, and yet
we may not even be sure that they really exist.
We do not know, for example, precisely what
level of biological diversity is necessary to sus¬
tain the functioning of ecosystems. We do not
really know why the ozone layer in the upper
atmosphere is thinning. There is no undisputed
certainty about the greenhouse effect, which
is thought to be caused by the accumulation of
MICHEL BATISSE, French engineer and physicist, is
internationally known for his work on the environment
and natural resources. Currently a consultant with
UNESCO and the United Nations Environment
Programme, he has headed the Blue Plan Regional
Activity Centre for the Mediterranean at Sophia
Antipolis, France, since it was created in 1985.
"The interdisciplinary approach Is still
far from being accepted
by the scientific community."
Reforestation at Namche
In Sagarmatha National Park (Nepal),
i site inscribed on UNESCO's World Heritage List.
carbon dioxide and other gases of industrial or
agricultural origin, and its consequences remain
largely unpredictable.
Yet at the same time, responsible scientists
are telling us that all these things are happening,
that the loss of species diversity related to the
felling of the tropical forests, the influx of ultra¬
violet rays related to the destruction of the
ozone layer, and the warming up of the climate
due to the oil and coal we so light-heartedly
burn, are all just around the corner, even though
we do not know what is really going on.
Hard decisions and
soft information
Faced with this problem of uncertainty, the con¬
servative reaction of certain leaders is simply
to say that more research must be done before
any action is taken. It would not be easy for a
government to decide that it had, for example,
to tax motorists on the gases emitted from their
exhaust pipes. Such an attitude, however, might
very quickly be seen as irresponsible, if not
criminal, with respect to future generations. It
is clearly necessary to continue and intensify
research in an effort to find out more about
these phenomena which are so complex that
they may never be fully mastered, but it would
be wrong to delay acting until the situation
worsens. Regardless of the uncertainties, action

must be taken if we have legitimate grounds
for thinking that time is not on our side.
This is what was done recently to limit the
production of the chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
that are destroying the ozone layer. In this case
it was possible to draw up an international
agreement because a specific product with
clearly defined uses was involved, because
industry was ready to provide substitute
products and because compensation could be
made to developing countries that would be
handicapped by this technical change. The
important thing to remember, however, is that
this exemplary action was undertaken despite
uncertainties about a number of scientific
aspects of the problem, thus avoiding further
deterioration of the ozone layer while waiting
for absolute certainties to be obtained. Imper¬
fect scientific knowledge of environmental
problems should never be an excuse for inac¬
tion. As a British researcher once remarked,
governments today have to take hard decisions
on the basis of soft information.
To aid them in this formidable task, govern¬
ments naturally try to base their action as far
as possible on scientific opinion. They hope
thus to give a certain legitimacy to their deci¬
sions by basing them on accepted knowledge
and thus to shelter behind the objective façade
of science. The major economic leaders tend
to follow their example, as do associations for
the defence of the environment and of the con¬
sumer. Thus scientists find themselves torn
between various conflicting interests, each of
which seeks to make the scientist an advocate
of its own cause. Because of the divergent
interests of states the struggle is increasingly
coming into the open at the international level.
Various countries have laid down standards of
chemical quality for certain food products, on
the basis of so-called scientific norms, with the
sole aim of preventing the import of such
products. In these circumstances, what
becomes of scientific rigour and objectivity?
Experts and
the scientific ethic
The fact is that when they are asked to give
their opinion on these complex questions,
scientists no longer act as scientists, in accor¬
dance with the search for a consensus that is
part of the scientific approach itself, but as
experts called in to provide arguments in sup¬
port of one theory rather than another, so as
not to harm the interests of those who have
commissioned them. This is a thankless role
and one which some do not play, preferring to
remain within their ivory towers. However, if
scientists or independent engineers are not pre¬
pared to assume this role, who will play it?
Would it be better to have administrators,
jurists, or engineers employed by the great
state institutions undertaking this task on their
own, with the attendant danger of confounding
judge and plaintiff, as we have seen from time
to time in military, nuclear and even forestry
matters? It would be better to gather together
a sufficient number of competent scientists
from a variety of disciplines and to observe how
far they agree.
At all events, the important thing is for
scientists, in their role as experts, to retain the
same ethical standard by which they are guided
in their scientific work. The political choices
facing governments in environmental affairs will
never be easy, especially so long as ecology is
not fully integrated into the economy. But in the
end, given the uncertainties that will always per¬
sist, these choices must be guided by respect
for the scientific ethic.
The situation is somewhat similar with
regard to public opinion and to associations.
Here too there is a need for expert advice if
wrong or unrealistic paths are to be avoided.
Here too there must be an appeal to scientists,
even though they may not be inclined to put
their knowledge on display or may fear that, by
co-operating with the media, they may incur the
disdain of their colleagues. This descent into
the arena does not give scientists the right to
use the prestige of their scientific status to
express dogmatic opinions, but it should pro¬
vide public opinion, whether as partner or
privileged adversary of the government in
"The scientific culture
must become part of the daily
experience of each one of us."
democratic discussion about the environment,
with reliable information about the issues, thus
avoiding cacophonous arguments and arbitrary
judgements. It.means that scientists, who are
too often regarded as inaccessible, obscuran¬
tist or indecisive, retain the credibility earned
by their mastery of a difficult branch of
knowledge. They must emerge from their
habitual reserve and not hesitate to speak out
against policies they consider harmful or activi¬
ties they see as potentially dangerous for the
environment.
Public opinion may also fear that scientists
are accomplices of the government or of
powerful economic interests. Here, perhaps, is
an opportunity for scientists, in acting as
experts for the government on the one hand
and for movements for the defence of the
environment on the other, to place the scien¬
tific ethic at the high level it should maintain
in these difficult debates and thus to acquire
a more highly respected role and power within
modern society, just as Bacon recommended
over 350 years ago.
The rehabilitation of science in the environ¬
mental fieldwhere it has been rather too often
accused of being the prime cause of many
problems and of failing to provide solutions
depends not only upon scientists but also upon
the public at large. Although during the past
fifty years the applications of science have
become so widespread as to upset all our
behavioural and value systems, how many of
us have made the effort to understand the
impulsions and constraints of this technolog¬
ical universe now unfolding before our eyes?
How can we expect governments, the world
community and motivated public opinion to
stem the degradation of the planet while this
scientific culture, which influences our lives and
ensures our survival, is still not fully integrated
into the daily experience of each one of us?
There, perhaps, lies the real challenge we must
face if we are to achieve responsible manage¬
ment of our uncertain future. 47
