Portrait of a
continent
'N
by Miguel León-Portilla
AKED as the day they were born. . . .
Handsome men with well-propor¬
tioned bodies and fine faces, hair
almost as thick as a horse's mane and cut short.
. . . Neither white nor black." This was how
Christopher Columbus described in the log of
his first voyage the indigenous people who
came to meet him on the island of Guanahani,
which he christened San Salvador. Convinced
that he was near the Indies, he called them
simply "Indians".
The inhabitants of these islands, and of
larger neighbouring ones such as Haïti, Cuba,
Jamaica and Puerto Rico, were Arawaks, while
the Lesser Antilles were peopled with Caribs.
These "Indians" and their counterparts in the
Paria region of Venezuela and Darién in
Panama engaged in hunting, gathering and agri¬
culture, and lived in small villages of mud huts

with roofs made of branches. The Spaniards
quickly learned that they belonged to "tribes"
and obeyed one or several chiefs.
There were other surprises in store for the
Europeans in their encounters with the peoples
of this extraordinary continent. Columbus
himself on his third voyage was told of Mayan
merchants who travelled by boat along the
Honduran coast. An even more impressive
spectacle awaited the shipwrecked sailors who
were washed ashore on the Yucatán peninsula
in 1511, and the navigator Juan de Grijalva
when he landed on the same coast in 1518 and
saw "a settlement that seemed at least as big as
Seville, with houses of stone, towers and a large
square. ..." This was the Spaniards' first
contact with one of the Mayan cities of Meso-
America, a region encompassing all of central
America and part of Mexico.
Left,
a fresco in the Museum of
Mexico City depicting
chinampas, gardens made by
the Aztecs on floating rafts
of earth and mud dredged
from swamps and lakes. This
type of pre-hispanic
agriculture is still practised
in parts of Mexico.
Below, growing tubers as
depicted in a 16th-century
manuscript, the Codex
Florentino.
CEMANAHUAC: A LAND BETWEEN
TWO OCEANS
Meso-America, or Cemanáhuac, was the cradle
of a civilization which for thousands of years
had boasted great cities richly endowed with
palaces, temples and monuments, paintings and
inscriptions, and schools where books were
written on figtree bark or deerskin treated in
the manner of parchment. Besides the great
cities, several states flourished in this region of
more than two million square kilometres. Each
one was virtually an empire in itself with its
own political, economic and religious centres.
In 1492, the Mexicas or Aztecs, heirs to the
Toltecs, governed the region from their capital,
Tenochtitlán, which stood on the site of what
later became Mexico City and was even then
one of the world's greatest cities. Their ruler
Ahuitzotl, the predecessor of Montezuma, held
sway over a realm stretching from the Atlantic
to the Pacific and from the Panuco Basin to
Guatemala. A network of trade routes linked
the high plateaux of central Mexico with the
Mayan territories, reaching as far as the most
remote northern districts of the empire, in what
is now the southwestern United States.
«e.
The art of working with
feathers. An illustration from
the Historia general de las
cosas de Nueva España
(General History of the
Things of New Spain) an
encyclopaedia of Aztec
culture compiled by the
16th-century Spanish
Franciscan Fray Bernadino
de Sahagún.
8
MIGUEL LEON-PORTILLA
is Mexico's ambassador and
permanent delegate to
Unesco. Professor emeritus of
the National Autonomous
University of Mexico, his
many works on the pre-
Columbian cultures of Mexico
have been translated and
published in several
languages.



The power and culture of the Aztec empire
extended over much of the continent. A variety
of languages were spoken within it, including
Náhuatl, Otomí, Huastec, Tlapanec, Totonac,
Mixtee and Zapotee. The Meso-Americans
were remarkable agriculturalists. Their ances¬
tors had domesticated maize almost 7,000 years
earlier and had acclimatized it to almost all the
region. But maize was by no means their only
gift to the world. From Meso-America and the
Caribbean also came cocoa, groundnuts, cas¬
sava root, tomatoes, red peppers, tobacco,
various kinds of squashes, haricot beans and
cotton, as well as such fruit varieties as water¬
melon, papaya, avocado, guava, mammee apple
(or Saint Domingo apricot), soursop, chayóte
and prickly pear, not to mention a large
number of medicinal plants. Their domestic
animals included a species of hairless dog and
they also reared the turkeys which, along with
the cuetlaxóchitl, or poinsettia, grace the tables
of the year-end festive season in many parts of
the world.
To the north of the Aztec lands, many other
groups lived in mountainous areas, on the great
plains, close to rivers and lakes, or on the coasts
of the two oceans. These "Indians" were fewer
in number than in the southern part of the
continent and had managed to adapt to every
kind of climate, from the frozen wastes of what
are now Canada and Alaska to the torrid deserts
of California and Arizona and the Sonoran
desert. Today's Inuit (Eskimos), Athapascans,
Iroquois, Algonquins, Sioux, Navajo and
Papago are all descended from these peoples,
who from the closing years of the fifteenth
century had to contend with the inroads made
by the Spanish, and subsequently by the
English, French and Dutch.
In South America there were many other
groups including tribes which lived in small vil¬
lages in the vast forests of the Orinoco,
Amazon and Paraná basins. The civilization of
the Incas, which rivalled that of the Aztecs and
also drew on a tradition dating back thousands
of years, had developed in the foothills of the
Andes and along the Pacific coast.
TAWANTINSUYO: THE REALM OF
THE FOUR PARTS
From 1493 Huayna Cápac ruled over the Inca
empire, which was known to the Incas them¬
selves as Tawantinsuyo, the Realm of the Four
Parts, and stretched from the south of present-
day Colombia to northern Argentina and
Chile, taking in a large part of Ecuador, Peru
and Bolivia. This vast area was studded with
towns and villages, temples and palaces, and
countless monuments. The seat of Inca power
was the splendid city of Cuzco, almost 4,000
metres up in the Andes.
The roads criss-crossing the empire, from
the Chibcha lands in present-day Colombia in
the north to the territory of the Araucanians in
Chile at its southern extremity, were used by
the Incas for their intensive trading system. In
the Andes region, various animals belonging to
the camel family, such as llamas, alpacas and
vicunas, had been domesticated to serve as
beasts of burden and for their wool. Among
the loads they carried were potatoes, the
Andean peoples' great gift to the rest of the
world. Other products cultivated in the region
that would also later become widely known
included quinine, a remedy for fevers, and the
coca shrub, whose leaves, when chewed, pro¬
vide a powerful stimulant and can also be used
to make cocaine, a pain-killer, which drug traf¬
fickers, unlike the Incas, have since turned into
a source of ill-gotten gain.
The Andean cultures boasted remarkable
craftsmen who created unique alloys like tum¬
baga, which combined silver, gold and copper.
The works of decorative and sacred art they
produced over the centuries commanded the
admiration and provoked the greed of Euro¬
peans. Their metalworking techniques spread
as far as Central America and Mexico. Some of
those, like the painter Albrecht Dürer, who saw

the "golden Sun and silver Moon" sent by
Cortés to the Emperor Charles V thought them
the most remarkable objects they had ever set
eyes on.
THE ENDURING HERITAGE OF THE
AMERINDIANS
The Aztecs, Maya, Zapotees and other Meso-
Americans, like the Incas and Aymarás of the
Andes, were the heirs of highly developed and
ancient civilizations whose cultural influence



extended over the greater part of the continent.
They all had a number of features in common.
They were deeply religious. They shared the
same love of the soil, which they saw as sym¬
bolizing motherhood, and worshipped the Sun
as the source of all life and as a paternal symbol
radiating light and warmth. They respected old
people, whom they regarded as the repositories
of time-honoured wisdom. Their myths, sto¬
ries, festivals, songs and music show how spi¬
rits and the supernatural were part of their
daily lives. They strove to live in perfect har¬
mony with nature and all its creatures, whether
plants, animals, mountains and rivers, lakes or
the sea.
It is not known exactly how many they
were when the two worlds came into contact in
1492. A figure of 100 million indigenous inha¬
bitants of the Americas has been advanced, but
some people think this is far too high. What is
certain is that the culture shock and the spread
of previously unknown diseases subsequently
decimated the Amerindian population. But
they were by no means wiped out, and their
descendants are still fighting vigorously to keep
their cultures and languages alive. Today, 500
years later, forty million people of Amerindian
descent are living evidence of the force of their
creativity, their tenacity and their courage. O
Aztec painters and colourists
are shown at work in this
modern fresco in the
Museum of Mexico City.
Illustration from the Codex
Tudela (1553) showing an
Aztec woman preparing
chocolate.
èt> We, peoples
ofAmerica»,
To mark the Fifth Centenary of the
Meeting of Two Worlds, Unesco has
organized a number of meetings for
representatives of the indigenous peoples of
America. People of Amerindian descent who
met in June 1991 at San Cristóbal de Las
Casas, where Bartolomé de Las Casas,
the "Ápostle of the Indies", once exercised
his ministry, adopted the following
declaration:
"Fully conscious of the fact that we share a
common destiny, we know that the future of
our peoples depends on our ability to create an
America based on solidarity, andthat the
America ofour dreams is Indian and will
remain so, for the original peoples of the
continent are at the very heart of its identity.
"We are the heirs to civilizations which
flourished on the highlandplateaux and in the
tropical regions ofour continent and have
continued to contribute to the enriching of its
culture.
"We assert the enduring strength and vitality
ofIndian identity, as borne out by the
increasing extent to which it is taken into
account in drawing up nationalprojects	 We
invite the leaders ofour countries to heed the
many voices crying out for dignity, justice and
solidarity for all the peoples of the continent".
At their Summit meeting held in Guadalajara,
Mexico, on 19 July of the same year, the
Presidents and Heads of State of all the Ibero-
American countries made the following
declaration:
"We recognize the enormous contribution the
indigenous peoples have made to the
development and pluralism ofour societies,
and we reiterate our commitment to their
economic and social well-being and our
obligation to respect their rights and cultural
identities".
