líaciai discrimination in culturai life]]
by Sipiio SepmlB
Hostel for Migrant Worker
(1978), a composite sculpture
by the South African artist
Michael Goldberg that
incorporates three alarm-
clocks as well as steel, wood,
fibre and horns.
SIPHO SEPAMLA,
South African novelist and
poet, IS the director of FUBA
Academy, a school of fine arts,
music, drama, dance and
writing, which he established
fifteen years ago for black
children The present article is
based on his contribution to
the Workshop on issues of
human rights for a post-
apartheid South Africa,
organized at Banjul, The
Gambia (18-21 June 1991), by
UNESCO and the African
Commission on Human and
People's Rights
T.HtRf, is no cultural life for most of the people
of South Africa today. Nc5 more writing is being
produced by Africans living in the country. The
origins of this situation can be traced to the Land
Act of 1913, which took away the right of black
people to own land. The population was
arbitrarily separated into locations for blacks,
Indians, coloureds and whites. Halls and other
facilities were built for weddings, funerals and
football matches, but not for plays, concerts and
other cultural events. The black population had
to adapt these halls for all-purpose use. Develop¬
ment of the arts has thus been controlled in the
African townships ever since 1913. Things
became even worse in the 1970s.
In the 1950s there were many cultural activi¬
ties in the townships, with famous singers like
Miriam Makeba, an active literary scene, and the
emergence of political leaders like Mandela and
Tambo, Some people have referred to this period
as a golden cultural age.
This creative activity died out in the 1970s
as a result of a number of government measures.
The Entertainment and Publications Act in 1963
led to a large number of African writers being
banned, even if they were not involved in policies.
Many left the country. Censorship was tightened
even further by the Publications Act of 1974,
which prohibits access to literature from abroad.
Censorship operates on two levels. Officially it
functiims through a Censorship Board. On the
other level, superintendents in the townships,
ostensibly officials whose functions are to collect
rent and repair street lights and potholed streets,
are also censors. A play cannot be performed
unless the superintendent considers it suitable.
The Censorship Board is discriminatory. The
publicatitm of books by white writers is autho¬
rized, even if they are politically critical, whereas
anything written by a black writer, especially in
English, is banned. It was only when writers like
Nadine Cíordimer or André Brink weri; banned 33

that public outcry and protests occurred. By that
time black creative activity had come to a
standstill.
Because of the Group Areas Act, even when
you went to a library, you could not borrow a
book, but only consult it there. The depressed
state of the cultural scene fs aggravated by the
kind of education received by Africans. Other
groups are allowed to study arts at school, but
black children have few alternatives and no
opportunity for training in the fine arts, music,
museums, theatre, etc.
So far the Government has done very little,
and real change can only be expected when a
representative Government takes over. In the
meantime assistance and donations from the
international community would be welcomed.
Qualified teachers, arts equipment and the con¬
struction of new premises are all needed. As far
as pressure on apartheid structures is concerned,
the cultural boycott is being maintained.
However, relevant assistance to the majoritv
population should be stepped up, in keeping with
the recommendations of the United Nations.!
34
Left, a scene from IVoza
Albert!, a South African
musical by Percy Mtwa,
Mbongeni Ngema and Barney
Simon that was staged In
Paris in December 1989 in
the framework of the Year of
Human Rights and Liberties.
Written for the black
townships and carrying a
political message, the play
was a major international
success that gave a new
impetus to black South
African theatre.
Above, a young poet recites
"freedom poetry" at the
funeral of a victim of social
unrest at Bethal in the
northeast of South Africa.
