INTERVIEW
SUSANA RINALDI
talks to
Fernando Ainsa
Susana Rinaldi is one of the world's
great tango singers. In this interview
she retraces the origins and
development of this original blend of
poetry and music that was forged in
the cultural melting-pot of the Río de
la Plata region and draws inspiration
from eternal themes such as
solitude, time, love, and death. As a
tribute to her efforts to promote the
ideals of Unesco, Susana Rinaldi was
earlier this year appointed Goodwill
Ambassador for Unesco.
You were already a well-known actress
when you started out as a tango singer. How
and when didyou discover this vocation?
I started to dance and sing the tango when
I was four. Later on, when I was a student, I
used to enjoy singing tangos for my friends,
although like all young Argentines of my
generation I was also mad about the bolero,
rock and the Beatles. Then I went to drama
school, and later pursued a career in the
theatre and television. In 1966, when I was
asked to make a record of poems by the Spa¬
nish poet Miguel Hernández, I refused
because I was afraid that I wouldn't do it as
well as Maria Casares, who had recorded
them earlier. I asked whether I could record
some tangos instead, and to my great sur¬
prise the record company agreed. So I made
my first tango record, which featured some
of the numbers that I have often sung since,
such as Melodía de arrabal ("Melody of the
Slums"), María and Sur ("South").
Since then I have tried to carry on the
tradition of the tango, with its recurrent
themes of injustice and the solitude of men
and women in big cities. I try to convey the
human qualities of the Argentine people and
their profound sense of solidarity with
others, something one does not often find
elsewhere.
During the dictatorship in Argentina,
between 1976 and 1982, I mainly sang
abroad. I tried to present an image of the
tango that was unfamiliar to Europeans. I
tried to show that it is not only a slinky and
spectacular dance, but a total experience,
whose poetry is a blend of music, words and
dance.
What is the tango, in your opinion?
First and foremost, it is a form of music so
distinctive that even a newcomer to it can
distinguish it from other Latin American
rhythms. But it is much more than that. The
lyrics are often pieces of literature that have a
poetic language of their own and express a
vision of the world. And of course the tango
is also a dance. Perhaps the best definition is
that given by the great tango composer
Enrique Santos Discépolo, who called it "a
sad thought that is danced".
To those who do not live on the banks of
the Río de la Plata, the tango seems very
complicated.
It is true that dancing the tango is an art
full of virtuoso touches; its cortes, quebradas,
sentadas, pataditas and lustradas ire all steps
that are rigorously codified and ritualized.
The tango dancer's body seems to be divided
into two parts. The top half is almost immo¬
bile, and the dancing is concentrated in the
bottom half. This is why the tango was
accused of being suggestive and sensuous
when it first appeared.
I wonder whether the tango is a not a
way of walking rather than a dance. When
the porteños the people of Buenos Aires
look out across the pampa to the horizon
and when they think of the aggressive
immensity of the city, they feel a kind of
4

melancholy that affects their way of walking
and gives the tango its hidden rhythm. It is a
dramatic, introspective dance. Ernesto
Sábato once said that Italians dance the
tarantella to enjoy themselves, but the por¬
teños dance the tango to brood on their fate
and chew over their bitterness.
All over the world, the tango is identified
with its legendary exponent, Carlos Gardel.
Yes. This is because the tango is above all a
performing art. The great tango singers like
Gardel have had a style of their own, their
own particular way of singing. The style
may be mannered to the point of caricature.
This is often because of the words, the way
in which lyricists have tried to outdo each
other in embroidering familiar themes. For
years, the tango was a prisoner of these cli¬
chés. The myth of "Carlitos", "the magician
of the tango", dictated the behaviour and
physical appearance the clothes, the hair¬
style, the smile of any tango singer who
wanted to succeed. At the same time, tango
singers had to act tough the tango was a
dance for hard men.
In his novel 62, modelo para armar, Julio
Cortázar caricatures the Argentine male as a
man of mature age, greying at the temples,
with his hairplastered down, and dressed in
apin-striped double-breasted suit.
People who are into tango do tend to have
a certain style, something that goes far
beyond the way they look. Don't forget that
this music from the poor districts of Buenos
Aires has become our trademark, at home
and abroad. Horacio Arturo Ferrer, a pro¬
lific writer of tango lyrics, says that the
tango is an emotional state specific to the
culture of the Río de la Plata. When young
rock fans say that the tango is old-fashioned,
they do not realize that it is an expression of
the cultural identity of a people. That way of
life still goes on in the streets of Buenos
Aires. The tango may be a passing fashion in
other countries, but for us it's the expression
of our deepest experience.
Whether people like it or not, the tango
is the supreme expression of the culture of
Buenos Aires of the rather sceptical atti¬
tude to life of people who don't believe in
anything and never have, and who have
"seen it all" even though they haven't been
anywhere.
Is this why the tango is so full ofsadness?
As a rule popular music prefers sadness
and despair to gaiety and optimism, except
in the case of political songs, and the opti¬
mism in them seems forced. But tangos do
tend to be on the gloomy side, I must admit.
A tango like Cambalache ("Bric-à-
brac") has done a lot of harm. It says that the
"world has been and always will be a rotten
mess" and that "the twentieth century is one
of evil triumphant", so that "it's all the same
whether you go straight or whether you are
a traitor, a fool, a wise man, a thief, a gen¬
erous man or a crook". It has done harm
because it lends justification to the ideas of
Argentines who want to shirk their responsi¬
bilities on the grounds that nothing is worth
doing since "one thing is as good as another,
an ass is just as good as a professor". This
philosophy of life justifies drifting and resig¬
nation. It's always somebody else's fault,
never one's own.
Do you think that this attitude can be
traced back to the origins of the tango: the
homesickness of immigrants, the resentment
of the indigenous population, the lack of
stable values in a changing world?
There has been a lot of argument about
the origins of the tango. Popular music in
Latin America is largely the outcome of the
transplanting of nineteenth-century Euro¬
pean dance-rhythms and their adaptation and
"cross-breeding" with indigenous and
African rhythms. Take the case of the Vien¬
nese waltz. It was transformed into the
Boston waltz, which was danced at a slower
tempo on the east coast of the United States,
the creóle waltz of the Río de la Plata, the
Brazilian "valsa" and the distinctive Peruvian
waltz. The mazurka was Americanized and
became the Uruguayan pericón oriental and
the mazorca or refalosas during the Rosas era
in Argentina.1 Paraguay adopted the polka.
The same thing happened with the tango,
but the process was far more complex. It
first appeared in the port cities of Monte¬
video and Buenos Aires. It is rather like the
alluvium from a river with many tributaries,
in which muddy water, organic and spiritual
matter, silt and sand are all blended together.
I defy anybody to retrace the origins of all
these influences and explain why the tango
became what it is on the banks of the Río de
la Plata!
Its origins clearly have something to do
with African rhythms like the candomblé, as
well as American music such as the habanera
and the danzón, and European dance-forms
like the Spanish, and especially the so-called

Andalusian, tango, with its popular subjects
and tunes. All these formed the fertile sub¬
soil of a musical form that began in the so-
called "Negro" dance-halls of Montevideo
and in the brothels and piringundines
(dance-halls) of Buenos Aires, the shady bars
which a famous dictionary of lunfardopor¬
teño slang describes as "places of amuse¬
ment where people of dubious character
congregate". Even in colonial times, decrees
were drawn up to regulate the gatherings at
which "negro tangos" were danced.
It is virtually impossible to know how all
these different influences amalgamated to
form the tango as we know it. It is impossible
to say precisely when the tango was created,
but there is no doubt that it soon became a
popular dance in the poorer districts of
Buenos Aires, where gauchos, soldiers and
members of the underworld all met.
From 1870 onwards, there was a new
development, as wave after wave of immi¬
grants arrived on the banks of the Río de la
Plata. Many of them lived in tenement houses
known as conventillos. By 1887, 61 per cent of
the population of Buenos Aires was of foreign
origin and, in the thirty- to forty-four-year
age-group, there were seven foreigners to
every Argentine. Some 20 per cent of the
population lodged in conventillos, where
people of widely differing cultures lived
side-by-side. This is the world described in
El tango de la casera ("The landlady's
tango"), a late nineteenth-century tango and
one of the first with music and words by a
well-known composer.
The first tango from the poor districts to
be accepted by "respectable" society was La
morocha ("The brunette"), which was sung
in 1910 by the Uruguayan Flora Rodriguez
de Gobi, mother of the celebrated violinist
Alfredo Gobi. The appearance of the phono¬
graphic record in 1906 undoubtedly contrib¬
uted to its popularity. A few years later, the
brothel pianist Rosendo Cayetano Men-
dizábal composed El entrerriano ("The man
from between the rivers"), whose rhythm
has a very modern sound.
By the end of the last century, the tango
already had its "academies", its dance-halls,
and its milongas or creóle cabarets, in which
the passion for the tango reached fever pitch.
The dancing in these places was regarded as
being a contest between compadres1, who
drew arabesques on the beaten-earth dance-
floors with their high-heeled boots. They
were also meeting-places for immigrants and
native-born Argentines from very different
social backgrounds. They were frequented by
seamen from passing ships, the "black sheep"
of respectable families, jailifes (from the
English "high life") looking for thrills, and
calaveras, bachelors or married men on the
look-out for an easy pick-up, all drawn by
the tango and by the places where it was
danced. In these dives, some of whose names
are still nostalgically remembered, the
mythology of the tango was born, including
many of the stereotypes that still exist today.
These myths die hard. Is there any future
for the tango ifit cuts loosefrom the old style?
Television, radio and even advertising have
imposed this nostalgic image of the tango
and the idea that the old days were better
than the present. But as the Argentine writer
Maria Elena Walsh once said: "Try telling a
woman or a workman that the old times
were better than today".
Until the media decide to support a
modern repertoire of songs reflecting life as
it is in Argentina today, there will always be
a gap between the country as it is and the
way in which it finds expression in music.
It's not surprising that young people should
think that the tango is old hat, "old people's"
music in which they do not see the signs or
the myths of their time. A modern repertoire
does exist, but it is never broadcast, partly
for commercial reasons, but above all
because of a failure to appreciate the new.
There are tangos about topical issues,
depicting in few words the simple things of
life, the streets of Buenos Aires, and the hap¬
piness and despair of men and women in big
cities. There are tangos that celebrate imagina¬
tion and fantasy threatened by routine and
mediocrity. One of them is Horacio Arturo
Ferrer's Balada para un loco ("Ballad for a
madman"), which metaphorically celebrates
the new Don Quixotes of the twentieth

century, who wear a bowler hat instead of a
helmet and have exchanged Rocinante for a
taxi.
Many writers, including Roberto Arlt,
Julio Cortázar, Ernesto Sábato and Jorge
Luis Borges, havefelt attracted to the tango.
The great strength of the tango is that it has
fascinated writers as different as Borges
who wrote a poem entided "Tango", inciden¬
tally and a popular author like Homero
Manzi. The tango has enabled Ernesto Sábato
to come into contact with composers who
have put his words to music. It has stimulated
the thinking of essayists like Ezequiel
Martinez Estrada, who devotes a chapter to it
in his book Radiografía de la Pampa, and
Vicente Rossi, who has delved into its African
origins. The tango is the theme of poems by
Enrique González Tuñón. Writers like Baldo-
mero Fernández Moreno and Petit de Murat
have written lyrics for a number of tangos,
and so has Homero Expósito, a reader of
Homer, Baudelaire and Góngora. I sing
tangos with words by another "serious"
writer, Héctor Negro.
This ispan of"yourfight fornew standards.
You have to create a balanced repertoire
and resist the temptation to take things easy
and sing songs that are sure to be successful.
I could go on singing Sur, El motivo ("The
motive") and Tinta roja ("Red ink") for ever,
but I don't because I feel I owe something to
the authors and composers of my own time.
The great performers have always found
sustenance in the past, while at the same time
encouraging the new and making it their
own. Carlos Gardel made a rigorous selection
of the repertoire he inherited. He discarded
some famous numbers and revived others
that were little known. He sang old tunes in
an original way and introduced new ones.
But don't forget that recognition in Argen¬
tina only came to Gardel after his death. At a
time when he was playing to packed houses
in Europe and the United States, he could
scarcely fill two rows of the stalls in Argen¬
tina. As he said himself, "You have to learn to
love Buenos Aires from afar".
I have tried to do the same thing for my
own time. I have revived the songs of the
poet Cátulo Castillo, who was an excellent
lyric-writer of the 1940s and 1950s and the
author of successful plays like El Patio de la
Morocha ("The brunette's garden"), but who
was unjustly regarded as a superficial, light¬
weight writer. Yet he created a vocabulary
that is now part of the language of Buenos
Aires. If I had not made my LP Trova in the
1960s, Castillo would still be stuck with the
label that was foisted on him twenty years
earlier. I believe that every generation should
rediscover the past so as better to understand
the present.
I started out in the theatre and what I try
to do is to tell a story through each tango by
getting rid of all the platitudes which have
collected around it over the years and ob¬
scured its deeper meaning. There is no pre-
established formula for singing the classics.
Each one has a main theme that has to be
presented.
I Is it a handicap to be a woman in the
world of the tango?
There have always been women tango sing¬
ers, ever since the days of the pioneer Rosita
Quiroga, but they always sang about men,
stories told "by" and "for" men, in which
women stayed in the background. Singers
like Eladia Blásquez, Carmen Guzman, Mar¬
garita Duran and Mangui all tell human sto¬
ries with which anybody, men and women
alike, can identify. They refuse to think in
terms of male or female stereotypes.
I like to "put across" these stories written
and composed by women. I include them in
my repertoire because they go beyond the
usual clichés and give a new dimension to the
tango. Their lyrics express a philosophy of
living that is very different from that of the
"old guard". Musically too, the new tangos
represent a break with the traditional sub¬
jects and ideas. A composer like Astor Piaz-
zolla has brought to the tango a harmonic
conception so original that he influences all
the young composers, whether they realize it
or not. These days, nobody can compose in
rigid harmonies, in the style of the 1940s.
Do you think that the tango still has some¬
thing to say to the younger generations?
I want to try to get young people to
appreciate the tango as a modern form of
expression, as a type of music that reflects
current problems and preoccupations, and
not as music for oldies. I would like to teach
them to listen to this sort of music, which is
still so vibrant, and above all to discover the
splendid poetry of the lyrics. I feel sure that
if they knew more about our musical tradi¬
tion, it would help to solve in what one
might call a natural way many of the prob¬
lems of Argentine society. This is what I try
to express when I sing. It is my way of fight¬
ing for what I believe.
1. Juan Manuel Rosas, Governor of Buenos Aires,
dominated the Argentine political scene between
1828 and 1852.
2. Tough, quarrelsome and arrogant gang-leaders
who were typical figures of the Buenos Aires
working class districts.
