'Homes not slums' by Marta Irejosi
A self-help
project that built
a sense of
community as
well as decent
housing for
homeless families
VJuARARÍ, a housing complex built five years
ago on the outskirts of San José, the capital of
Costa Rica, is the result of an extraordinary
experiment undertaken by a group of women
who campaigned under the slogan: "Homes, not
slums". Their daily struggle against poverty gave
them some ideas for solving their housing
problems.
The women represented more than 30,000
families, most of which were of rural origin. They
missed the fresh air of the countryside, and
wanted to do something about the problems of
urban overcrowding.
The building and town-planning regulations
applied by the authorities recreated in new
housing projects the urban structures that had
given rise to shanty-towns. The women reacted
strongly to this and rejected official housing
programmes. "We want a house to live in, not
a roof to sleep under," they proclaimed. "We
need a school and a dispensary nearby; we want
our children to be able to play in safety, climb
trees and enjoy nature; we want jobs."
The homeless families seemed to regard all
social problems as interlinked. They wanted to
get rid of the shanty-towns, and at the same time
they wanted to make sure that their families were
properly fed and their health and education needs
were provided for. They fought for genuine
improvements in their living conditions along
with their new housing.
Lending a hand
The women were helped by the Feminist Infor¬
mation and Action Centre (CEFEMINA), an
institution dedicated to the defence of the rights
of women which had already backed similar
projects in several other Costa Rican towns. To
get a house in the new development, each family
had to put in 700 hours' work. Not all this time
necessarily had to be spent on the building site.
Other options included looking after children,
preparing collective meals, and serving on com¬
mittees concerned with such matters as health,
legal questions and the environment.
A volunteer group of women technicians
designed a new type of housing to meet the needs
expressed by the women of Guaran. Government
experts yielded to pressure from them, especially
since the projects the women put forward were
s less costly than the alternatives.
Next the women buckled down to the con¬
struction of the houses. No task was too hard for
them. They took everything in hand, from
directing the teams of workers to providing
building materials and organizing the thousands
of volunteers who gave up their spare time to
work on the project. At weekends the site was
34
MARTA TREJOS,
Costa Rican sociologist, is the
Executive Director of the
Feminist Information and
Action Centre (CEFEMINA) in
Costa Rica, and co-ordinator of
the "Woman and the
Environment" movement in
Central America.
*5« j^*í-
V . A' ." --Kr**
	
:*
___

Above: "The women buckled
down to the construction of
their houses. No task was too
hard for them."
Left: "Everyone lent a hand,
including the old. . . ."
a hive of activity as people crowded in to help
to build the houses. Everyone lent a hand,
including the old, the handicapped and children.
During moments of relaxation on the site, the
volunteers gave advice to groups of women on
such subjects as food hygiene, breast-feeding,
birth control, social legislation and sanitation. As
a result of this active solidarity, not only did the
houses go up in record time but the new com¬
munity developed a way of life that seems likely
to endure.
Contact with nature
Constructed in blocks of a hundred, the houses
were built in a variety of forms adapted to the
lie of the land. They give onto shared internal
courtyards, where trees can grow in sheltered
conditions. In this respect, Guarari is a model
development, for it has encouraged the protec¬
tion of numerous endangered plant species,
including trees that were formerly associated with
coffee growing but are now superfluous because
of modern agricultural techniques.
Thanks to its leisure areas and communal
green spaces, the Guarari district has plenty of
land that everyone can enjoy while keeping up
the neighbourly relationships formed during the
construction work. The cultivation of vegetables
and medicinal plants and animal rearing on a
small scale provide jobs and bring in money to
finance a variety of activities which are co¬
ordinated by a large community centre. Known
as the Casa de la mujer (the Woman's House), the
Centre houses a dispensary, a legal advice bureau,
a centre for battered women and children, old
people's associations and sports and leisure clubs.
Traffic is restricted in Guarari. Most of the
roads are for pedestrians only, so that children
are shielded from the danger of road accidents and
that while they are playing their mothers can
keep an eye on them from their kitchen
windows.
Modern construction techniques, using
materials light enough for women to handle, have
also provided a solution to the problem of waste¬
water disposal. Guarari has a water-treatment
plant that cleans effluent before discharging the
water into watercourses. The opening of the plant
coincided with the launch of an anti-pollution
campaign aimed at cleaning up the local rivers.
It was decided to protect the basin of the river
that crosses the district and to turn it into a park,
primarily to save the stream from being used as
a public drain that would create social and sani¬
tary problems for the community. The river's
flora and fauna have been inventoried and pro¬
tected. Children learn to live in harmony with
nature while playing on the river-bank.
In the course of coping with the difficulties
of everyday life, the people of Guarari have found
solutions to wider problems, thanks to an active
community life and particularly to the dynamism
of the womenfolk. The last word should be left
to one of them. "Everyone's an expert and an
instructor here. We go to specialists for advice
so we can find out how to get by without them.
We learn from one another, and everyone gets
the advantage. Our real triumph is that the entire
community now recognizes that bringing women
into its public life has benefited everyone." 35
