Bruiil: fumy footwork for survival
by Roberto DaMatta
T
20
ROBERTO DAMATTA,
of Brazil, is The Reverend
Edmund P. Joyce Professor of
Anthropology and Senior
Fellow of the Kellogg
Institute, University of Notre
Dame (USA). Among his
works published in English
are Carnivals, Rogues and
Heroes (University of Notre
Dame Press) and A Divided
World: Apinayé Social
Structure (Harvard University
Press).
HERE are", so runs a popular Brazilian
saying, "only three really important
things in life cachaca, the lottery and
football." In other words, the national
consensus in Brazil revolves around an alco¬
holic drink, which helps one to celebrate the
joys or forget the sad moments of life, a game
of chance based on numbers, on which are
concentrated the dreams and aspirations of
social advancement, and a modern sport,
invented by the English and adopted by Brazi¬
lians with a passion equalled only by the skill
with which they practise it.
Of the three, football is the most foreign in
origin, since it was brought to Brazil by the sons
of rich families who had been bitten by the foot¬
ball bug while in England, where they had been
sent by their parents for their schooling. This
was how the venerable British game of Associa¬
tion Football, re-named futibol, came to be
adopted by the people of Brazil and to become
an abiding interest, evoking a passionate sense of
both individual and national identity.
After a brief initial period of resistance,
football, a pastime which combines the element
of competition with free and uninhibited
bodily expression, became the most popular of
sports. Perhaps this was because it is a team
game, incorporating the notion of a community
as close-knit a community exclusive as the
household or the family and to which one
is bound by unbreakable bonds of affinity,
sympathy and love.
Another reason for the Brazilians' irresis¬
tible fascination with football is that it is a game
played with the feet and not with the hands;
this adds the further element of chance,
requires of the players a high level of skill and
does much to ensure the "fine uncertainty of
the sport", even between unequal teams.
It is interesting to compare this with the
position in the United States, where a variant of
football has been adopted which involves hand¬
ling the ball and requires a high degree of tech¬
nical and tactical skill; this virtually eliminates
any element of chance in an encounter between
two unequally-matched teams. Thus the hand¬
ling code makes too great a disparity between
teams impracticable, which reflects, perhaps, an
inclination towards that scientific rationalism,
abstraction and specialization typical of soci¬
eties with a strong democratic tradition.
The Brazilian
touch
The use of the feet, as opposed to the hands,
nevertheless entails the use of the entire body,
and particularly the legs and the haunches, a
part of the anatomy which, in Brazil, is, sym¬
bolically, highly-charged. For example, we say
of someone who is adept at fending for himself
and getting out of awkward scrapes that he is
"swivel-hipped" and this expression is
equally applicable to a sly politician and to a
skilful footballer.
To the Brazilians, the type of football

"Football is a symbolic re¬
affirmation that the best and
most skilful can win . . . that
the rules of the game are the
same for everyone."
Agile legwork is a feature of
the capoeira, a form of
wrestling which originated in
Africa and has given its
name to a dance popular in
northeastern Brazil.
played in their country is characterized by
great skill in the use of both body and legs.
And perhaps, in football's exclusive reliance
upon the feet, there is a far-off, lingering
memory of capoeira, an indigenous form of
wrestling practised by the slaves brought over
from Africa, in which only the legs and feet
were used to "throw" an opponent.
Because it is a powerful force for social inte¬
gration, football has become, as it were, a dra¬
matization of many aspects of Brazilian society.
It has shown that Brazilians can act together in
a co-ordinated fashion to achieve victory. In
fact, this kind of open, positive identification is
comparatively rare in daily life in Brazil, where
most institutions seem to have lost their way
under economic pressures and a favours system
which the average citizen finds discouraging.
Football also promotes integration in that it
enables everyone to share in the experience of
victory and getting on in the world, in every¬
thing that is conjured up by the magic word
"success" something that few Brazilians are
likely to experience in a society with a strict
hierarchy and in which wealth is concentrated
in the hands of a few. The collective ecstasy of
the public at the football stadium the ecstasy
of a crowd, a prey to every form of mental and
physical anguish, that is body and soul behind
its team and its idols is no empty experience,
since it may lead on to victory.
Providing a complex spectacle, yet governed
by simple rules that everyone can understand,
football is a symbolic re-affirmation that the
best and the most skilful can win, that training,
technique and a dash of luck can bring victory
and, above all, that the rules of the game are the
same for everyone champions and minnows,
rich clubs and poor, blacks and whites, the edu¬
cated and the unlettered. In this respect football
is a school of democracy and egalitarianism. As
we watch our team performing in the grass
arena, we know that the rules of the game are
universal, that they are clear and must be res¬
pected by all, and that the referee is there to
ensure that they are respected even when pas¬
sions run high.
The spectator knows that, contrary to what
may happen in other circumstances, neither the
winners nor the losers can arbitrarily change
the rules since they transcend the desires and
impulses of the competing teams. Football
teaches us that the very immutability of these
rules is the guarantee of an alternation between
winners and losers. It is precisely because of
this association of the formal with the informal,
of rule with reality, that in Brazil and, indeed,
throughout the Third World football has
become an unparalleled focus of the emotions.
At all events, it is through football that Bra¬
zilians have, at last, come to identify with such
symbols of the nation-state as traditions, the
national anthem and the flag. It is through this
sport in which heart and head, strength and
ingenuity are allied and which gave us "fancy
footwork" (which we all need to survive) as a
national expression through football that
Brazil exists as a society and as a nation. Yes, it
was the wonderful, staggering experience of
winning three World Cups that gave us confi¬
dence in the creativity and generous spirit of
the Brazilian people.
21
