Above, the oldest known
terrestrial globe. It was
made in 1492, shortly before
Columbus's voyage.
Below, Magellan discovers
the strait that bears his
name. Engraving by
Théodore de Bry (1592).



The Pacific
shuttle
By Alfonso de la Serna
If
A maritime network of
communication between three
continents
THE German geologist Alfred Lothar
Wegener (1880-1930), who died in
Greenland while attempting to prove his
theories on continental drift, claimed that at the
beginning of geological time there had been a
single large protocontinent. He believed that at
some time there had been an enormous convul¬
sive fracture and that what is now America had
become detached from the main block and had
drifted westwards to take up a position in the
middle of the ocean between the Euro-Afro-
Asiatic "West" and the "East" of Asia. If this
theory is correct, America might be said, geolo¬
gically speaking, to have "chosen" to look out
across the Atlantic towards Europe, and to
back onto the Pacific, being positioned to the
west of Europe and to the east of Asia. The sole
purpose of this rather literary digression is to
shed some light on the human affairs that have
been superimposed on these mysterious phy¬
sical processes.
Millions of years after the displacement of
continents, three small ships with a great des¬
tiny ahead of them, crossed the ocean deeps
created by that ancient gash in the face of the
Earth, stumbled across the enormous detached
fragment and, in a manner of speaking, brought
it back into the lap of Europe again.
Paradoxically, the Spanish had set out in
search of the countries of the Orient, which at
29

Anonymous 18th-century
painting of 3 caravels, the
speedy and manoeuvrable
craft that were much used
on the great voyages of
discovery.
that time were shrouded in a legendary aura.
Columbus's voyage was supposed to take him
to the Indies, which were already being visited
by the Portuguese in the long sea voyages they
undertook in the opposite direction, towards
the mythical land of Ophir. As a result of their
extraordinary maritime expeditions, the Portu¬
guese and Spanish alike were to show that the
Earth was round just like the globe which
Martin Behaim had constructed in his work¬
shop in Nuremberg! rather than an enormous
flat surface bounded on the west by the
Atlantic Ocean and on the east by the remote
seas of Asia. They sought successfully to prove
that it was spherical and hence inherently one.
A year after Columbus's epoch-making
voyage, Vasco Núñez de Balboa, a soldier and
adventurer from the Andalusian city of Jerez,



began to look for a route to the Pacific Ocean
through Central America. Pitting himself
against the difficulties of the wild and unex¬
plored terrain, he led his troops through the
tropical forest and, after countless hardships,
succeeded in crossing what is now known as
the isthmus of Panama. At dawn on 26 Sep¬
tember 1513, from the top of a promontory, he
saw, glistening in the rays of the rising Sun, the
vast ocean that would come to be known as the
Pacific. On reaching the shoreline, he waded
dramatically into the water dressed in his suit
of armour, with the standard of Castile in one
hand and his sword in the other, and solemnly
took possession of it in the name of his
monarch.
'PRIMUS CIRCUMDEDISTI ME'
Then began what might be called Spain's cen¬
tury in the Pacific, with the voyage of Magellan
and Elcano (1520-1521) who sailed across the
Atlantic, and then crossed the newly discovered
Pacific. Magellan died in the Philippines, but
Elcano continued across the Indian Ocean,
rounded the Cape of Good Hope on his way
back to Spain and completed the first circum¬
navigation of the globe in history. Following
30
his exploit, he had a terrestrial globe placed on
his coat of arms, with the Latin inscription
Primus circumdedisti me ("You were the first to
sail round me"). In addition to the great
voyages of all those who crossed the Pacific in
one direction or the other, or in both directions,
such as Loaysa, Elcano and Salazar in 1526, Saa-
vedra in 1527-1529, Villalobos in 1542-1545,
Legazpi and Urdaneta in 1564-1565, Arellano in
1565, Mendaña and Sarmiento de Gamboa in
1567-1569 and Fernández de Quirós in 1605-
1606, a host of other less ambitious Spanish
expeditions which set out to explore the vast
expanse of the ocean.
By the end of this "Spanish century", Spa¬
nish sailors had discovered and named the
archipelagos of the Philippines, Marianas,
Carolinas and Marquesas, New Guinea, the
Santa Cruz Islands, the Solomons, Hawaii,
Wake Island, Guam, Iwo Jima, the New
Hebrides, Guadalcanal, the Gilbert islands and
the Marshall islands, the Galapagos, Juan Fer¬
nandez, Flores and Bikini, as well as the Torres
Strait and Austrialia or Australia, named in
honour of the Spanish kings of the House of
Austria, not to mention many other lands with
whose names we are no longer familiar.
At the same period, gallant English sailors
also ventured into the Pacific, but their main
purpose was to attack Spanish galleons and
their rich cargoes, and to report to their sov¬
ereigns on the activities of the Spanish crown.
In spite of these forays, the Pacific remained a
Spanish preserve.
In the eighteenth century, when her power
was starting to wane, Spain was still dispatching
naval and scientific expeditions along the coasts
of British Columbia and Alaska, the "Califor¬
nias of the North". The place-names of the
region perpetuate the memory of the Spanish
sailors and scientists who, between 1773 and
1793, methodically explored the western coast
of North America and investigated its physical
contours, its fauna and flora and its human
populations up to latitude 60° North, beyond
the Aleutian islands not far from the Bering
Strait.
THE FIRST
REGULAR MARITIME SERVICE
IN HISTORY
It is no exaggeration to speak of the "Spanish
century" in the Pacific, when it is borne in mind
that during this period the Spanish established
their presence in the region over a period of 250
years through the creation, for the very first
time in history, of a regular maritime service
connecting two oceans. This service was pro¬
vided by the celebrated "Manila galleons".
Between 1565 and 1569, another Spanish
soldier, Miguel de Legazpi, conquered the Phi¬
lippines, so named in honour of Philip II, on
behalf of the Spanish crown, which made it one
of its most substantial possessions and its main
base in the Pacific. This large archipelago was

an enduring legacy of the Spanish presence in
the Far East, since it belonged to Spain for
more than three centuries, until 1898. The Spa¬
nish came to display close affinities with the
Asian world in their outlook and even in some
of their customs.
Manila, in the Philippines, was the home
port of the Spanish galleons that plied regularly
across the Pacific to Acapulco on the Mexican
seaboard.
The first crossing to Mexico took place in
1573, the last in 1811, 238 years later. The gal¬
leons, some of which had a displacement of as
much as 2,000 tons, were designed in Spain but
were built in the shipyards of Cavité, south¬
west of Manila, of tropical hardwoods capable
of withstanding the difficult sailing conditions
to which they were exposed.
The voyage from Acapulco to Manila,
which followed the trade-wind route, took
about sixty days, However, the return trip
from Manila to Acapulco took much longer
and was more dangerous. It was necessary to
sail northwards, almost up to the latitude of
Japan, in order to pick up the westerly winds
and then make for the coast of Mexico across
regions that were frequently swept by heavy
storms. The outward and return voyages
totalled some 18,000 nautical miles. For nearly
two and a half centuries ships came and went
with almost perfect regularity. And that was in
an age of sails and the compass, navigation
charts that left a great deal to the imagination,
the trade winds, the Kuroshio or Japan current,
typhoons, solitude, heat, scurvy, beri-beri and
pirates.
The Manila galleons provided a regular
link between Asia and Latin America but also
with Europe, since their voyages were syn¬
chronized with the movements of the Spanish
Atlantic fleets that plied between Spain and
the Central American isthmus. Hundreds,
indeed thousands of ships sailed the two
oceans and formed transport networks that
linked the three continents.
The Spanish port of Manila came to be a
centre of world trade through which goods
from Japan, Borneo, Java, the Spice islands,
India, Ceylon, Siam, Cambodia and Malaysia all
transited, either directly or via China. The gal¬
leons came there to take on board fabulous trea¬
sures that fascinated Westerners, such as gold,
pearls, sapphires from Siam, ivory, lacquers,
Chinese silks, amber, sandalwood and camphor,
The port of Acapulco, an
engraving by Théodore de
Bry (1602).
ALFONSO DE LA SERNA,
Spanish writer and diplomat,
was formerly director of
cultural relations at the
Spanish Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. He has a special
interest in the Spanish
presence in the Pacific and
the Philippines, a subject on
which he has lectured and
written widely. He is the
author of Imágenes de Túnez
(1990; "Images of Tunis")
and Embajadas de España y
su historia (1990; "Spanish
Embassies and their
History").
31

32
jade, Ming porcelain, musk, cinammon, cloves,
pepper and curry. Along with these precious
cargoes, however, they also carried away the
ideas, tastes and traditions of the Asian Orient,
which left their mark on Spanish America and
captivated Europe, helping to arouse European
interest in trading with Asia. A large number of
"East Indies Companies" were founded, then
and later.
A BRIDGEHEAD
BETWEEN
EAST AND WEST
It is true that prehistoric Asiatic peoples settled
on the American continent by crossing the
Bering Strait or by sailing to America from
Polynesia, but it was the "discovery" of the
Pacific in modern times that really opened up
the gateway to America.
As the Mexican writer Eduardo Espinosa has
noted, America has suffered from a loss of a
sense of direction. Since Americans inherited the
European outlook, they speak of Asia as being
the Far East, although the east is actually
situated to the west of America and America
itself lies east of China and Japan. This unques¬
tioning acceptance of geographical and cultural
concepts specific to Europe has prevented Ame¬
rica from seeing that Asia, which it regarded as
being a long way away, was actually "some¬
where else" and was coming ever closer to it
across the Pacific, seeming to tap America on the
shoulder and remind Americans of its existence.
Indeed, there it is, dispatching to the shores of
America wave upon wave of immigrants, whose
burgeoning communities are contributing to a
new racial mix and perhaps to the formation of a
new ethnic and cultural melting pot with conse¬
quences that cannot be foreseen.
America is coming to realize at last that its
position between two great oceans, the Atlantic



and the Pacific, midway between Europe and
Asia, is making it a bridgehead between East
and West. These are two conceptual rather than
geographical entities, which for centuries were
thought to be at the opposite ends of a kind of
huge rectangle, whereas in reality they are
located on a sphere where the perspective keeps
on changing according to one's viewpoint. As
America looks out on one side on to a purely
conventional "West" and on the other on to a
no less conventional "East", it may one day be
in the position to amalgamate the two, just as
when it was discovered five centuries ago it
contributed to the world the idea of its own
sphericity, in other words of its possible unity.
Will America, after having been settled by
people from Asia at the dawn of the human era
and then resettled later by people from Europe,
eventually become the ideal birthplace of what
the Mexican philosopher José de Vasconcelos
called "the cosmic race"? O
"Rio de Janeiro",
a drawing by a Russian
traveller,, L. Visheslavtsev.

