Discovery
and self-discovery
By José Augusto Seâbra
rv
The quest of Spanish and Portuguese navigators who
plied the oceans and explored unknown lands had a
universal significance
Above,
a page from a 16th-century
parchment manuscript, the
Codex Azcatitlán, showing
Hernán Cortés being saved
from drowning by an Indian.
Opposite page,
the Stone of the Sun, a
massive monument (height
3.35 metres, weight 24
tons) also known as the
Aztec calendar (Mexico City,
early 16th century).
EVEN today, when we live in an intercon¬
nected world that is reaching out into
interplanetary space, it is hard to contem¬
plate dispassionately the achievements of those
who, by crossing the oceans five centuries ago in
search of other continents, other peoples and
other civilizations, gave, in the words of Camoes
in The Lusiads, "new worlds to the world".
What took place in those times can be des¬
cribed either as a discovery or as an encounter,
depending on the point of view of the observer.
Be that as it may, the impulse behind it was a
quest, a search for knowledge, a reconnaissance
of other people and their ways. In its anthropo¬
logical and cultural effects the movement was
two-way. The navigators who set out from
Europe came back enriched by new values and
symbols that set the beliefs and thought-pat¬
terns of the Old World in a fresh context.
There is still fierce debate over the correct
interpretation to put on this turning-point in
the history of civilizations. Therein lies the
proof of its continuing relevance. The historical
record, with its areas of light and darkness, is
there for all to see: even if, alongside their ack¬
nowledged goal of Christian evangelization, the
Portuguese and Spanish navigators were also
driven by selfish motives that sometimes led
them into terrible aberrations, it was nonethe¬
less in search of a universal humanity that they
rode the waves and explored unknown lands.
Some recent commentators have attempted to
rank the great discoveries in terms of the degree
of distance between the civilizations which they
brought into contact. On this score Columbus's
discovery of America rates, according to the critic .
Tzvetan Todorov, as the only one in which what
he calls "the discovery of the other" could be
considered to be total. "There was never the same
sense of radical strangeness in the 'discovery' of
other continents and other peoples," he writes.
"Europeans were never entirely unaware of the
existence of Africa, India or China"1.
THE NATURE OF THE QUEST
Certainly "there was no European or African
element in the indigenous American civiliza¬
tions," as the Portuguese historian Vitorino
Magalhaes Godinho has pointed out, and "reci¬
procally, there was no American contribution
to the civilizations of Europe or of Africa until 23

the fifteenth century". But Magalhaes Godinho
also notes that there was definitely a link
between the Amerindian peoples and the civili¬
zations of the Far East by way of the Pacific.
"There were frequent contacts and migrations
between the two regions; what is more, cultural
property travelled from west to east." 2 In other
words, virgin civilizations, totally isolated from
the rest of the world, may never have existed,
even if examples of relative insularity can be
found at certain times and places in history.
Nonetheless, the urge towards the unfamiliar
that underlies the process of discovery has varied
in intensity from people to people, or more accu¬
rately between the civilizations to which they
belonged. For to discover others is ultimately to
discover or rediscover oneself. To paraphrase
the French philosopher Paul Ricceur, it is always
a quest for "oneself in the guise of someone else".3
That is why the anthropologist Claude
Lévi-Strauss sees in "Afnerindian dualism" the
explanation for "a receptivity to other people
that revealed itself strikingly at the time of the
first contacts with the whites, although the
latter saw things very differently." 4 He thereby
reverses, in a sense, Tzvetan Todorov's pers¬
pective: in his view it was really the indigenous
peoples who discovered the Spaniards rather
than vice versa. Even if Columbus could write
of his adventure in 1492, "What I want is to see
and discover as much as I can. . .", one must
also remember, as the French writer Régis
Debray has reminded us, that the Spanish navi¬
gator also sought inspiration from Old Testa¬
ment prophecies to justify his conquests. "We
too easily forget," Debray writes, "that the
'great discoveries' were seen by contemporaries
as rediscoveries of things hidden in the
memory, as a verification of the archives".5
Such, at any rate, are some of the interpreta
tions put upon the "encounter between two
worlds" whose anniversary is being celebrated
this year. There are others too, if one extends
the canvas to include the other lands the Spa¬
niards and Portuguese shared out between
them, with differing intentions, under the
sponsorship of Pope Alexander VI at the
Treaty of Tordesillas of 1494.
TOWARDS A UNIVERSAL
CIVILIZATION
Despite certain obvious similarities, the beha¬



viour of the Portuguese and Spaniards was in fact
very different throughout the era of discovery.
While the Spaniards tended to emphasize their
own culture, the Portuguese, whether in Africa,
Brazil or Asia, were more sensitive to the interac¬
tion of peoples, notably as symbolized by racial
intermixing. Even the Portuguese language aided
the process; its flexibility encouraged the forma¬
tion of Creole dialects, the so-called papiamento
tongues, while it was concurrently serving as a
lingua franca on both sides of the Atlantic as well
as in the Pacific and Indian Oceans.
Jaime Cortesao, the historian of the Portu¬
guese discoveries, brings two crucial points to¬
gether when he writes that, "In exploring the
oceans and discovering the techniques necessary
to cross them, the Portuguese not only gave
European civilization its most powerful instru¬
ment for establishing global hegemony: they also
opened up the path to the unification of human¬
kind." In this way "the first step towards the
creation of a universal civilization was taken".6
A universal civilization what René Maheu
and Leopold Sedar Senghor called the civilisa¬
tion de l'universel lay at the end of the great
quest for oneself in others that inspired the dis¬
covery of "new worlds". sFor as Fernando
Pessoa reminded us, the most important of all
discoveries is the concept of discovery itself. O
1 . Tzvetan Todorov: La
Conquête de l'Amérique: La
question de l'autre. Seuil, Paris,
1982.
2. Vitorino Magalhaes
Godinho: Les Découvertes
XV.-XVI'.: Une Révolution
des Mentalités. Autrement,
Paris, 1990.
3. Paul Ricceur: Soi-même
comme un autre. Seuil, Paris,
1991.
4. Claude Lévi-Strauss:
Histoire du Lynx. Pion, Paris,
1991.
5. Régis Debray: Christophe
Colomb, le visiteur de l'aube.
La Différence, Paris, 1991.
6. Jaime Cortesao: "The
Expansion of the Portuguese in
the History of Civilization".
Imprensa Nacional, Lisbon,
1983.
JOSE AUGUSTO SEABRA,
Portuguese poet and
essayist, is Professor of
literary theory and
Portuguese literature at the
University of Oporto. A former
member of parliament and
minister, he is now his
country's ambassador to
Unesco.
The line of demarcation
traced from north to south
by the Treaty of Tordesillas
(1494) can be seen in this
16th-century planisphere by
Domingos Teixeira. Spain
was given exclusive rights to
the region west of the line,
Portugal to the east.
24
'1 I. "i '" y'0,F i
3^ f
IU>5l »\ i ».
* Â
glRC) L\ S L'Ai CRI-
TOKIO.--ZON K jjÉjffîtTlARm
Toiy.n.v 7 .-^gpF-N. \-
clke\ i.\ í kPft 'icoiv- ¡0- 'ÄSifjlsI
ra
. ? ? ;; xi t
.'s
8V ítí¿J^*n¿^
. .*- : *U '
. - s;
*
:' K^ If
SpTEf'r 7: OK \- . . "J
j -'äi, tîriuiw-S^BÎrtk^unpn
M \ i*J»M\ul
|
ffí Ó
\7
î i
a
r-: *
