The cire
by Alice van Buren
IN an industrial section of Paris, a big
brown tent straddles a two-lane strip of
cement. Beat-up cars, street bikes and
skateboards whip back and forth on the
tarmac. Flatbed trucks loaded with motor¬
cycles roar past the stands. Vacuum pumps
spew rivers of dust into the tent, while a
heavy metal band rides in on the top of a
moving van. Belching carbon monoxide and
fire, the parade unfolds like a punk comic
strip, unleashing jugglers, trapezists and
clowns, a squadron of human cockroaches
and a bare-breasted dominatrix on stilts.
Miming gang fights and urban crime,
Archaos, as this burlesque is called, is a slap
in the face of classic circus tradition. It is also
a bald and uncensored attempt to put the
street back into an art form that quit the
streets a long time ago.
Like it or not, Archaos is in the front line
of a movement to turn the conventional



circus upside down. It is one of nearly forty
experimental circuses that have sprouted out
of French soil in the last twenty years. A
rebel seed of the 1960s, a throwback to the
Dadaist years, the movement has tendrils in
Italy, Spain, Britain and Canada. Some of
these troupes are as refined as spun sugar: for
instance, the travelling Cirque Invisible, a
two-man confection mounted in 1971 by
Victoria Chaplin and Jean-Baptiste Thierée.
Some are frankly plebeian, like the Bread and
Puppet Theatre that was born in the anti-war
street scene of the 1960s in the United States.
Using giant puppets, wordless scripts and
13

Portraits of acrobats adorn
an ancient Greek vase.
crowds of volunteers, Bread and Puppet still
performs for free in public parks and mounts
a mock circus each summer in a stubbly field
in Vermont.



The circus of protest, of satire, of silence
it takes many forms is in a strange way more
true to the populist roots of the circus than the
grand spectacle under the Big Top with the
opera-priced seats. It is, at least in spirit, more
democratic. The circus, we're meant to
believe, can happen at any time, in any place: a
spontaneous explosion of mischief, as
occurred in West Africa when the British
troupe Ra Ra Zoo balanced tea cups on their
skulls for a street full of porters carrying bas¬
kets of fruit and grain on their heads.
Popular, vulgar, on the outskirts of town,
the circus has always had one foot in the
gutter. Formal circus artists, for the most
14
A bear-leader is
depicted in this piece of
medieval stained glass
(France, c. 1350).
part, detest this. The circus, they say, has
nothing to do with the street. They insist on
their dynasties, their coteries and traditions,
and take a dim view of the new anti-circus
where, so they say, anything goes. In the last
200 years, the European circus has lifted
itself up from the muddy camp grounds and
squalid country fairs and produced an art
form as jealously defended as the ballet.
Devils
on horseback
The circus arts were born in obscurity in
the market place or the temple, nobody
knows exactly where. By the time they
appear in the record, they must have been
familiar sights on the streets. Acrobats dance
in the friezes of Egyptian tombs. Juggling
and tight-rope walking were ancient arts in
the Far East, long before Marco Polo docu¬
mented such acts at the court of Kublai
Khan. Bull dancers adorn the palace walls at
Knossos in Crete, and every cavalry known
to man Greek, Roman or Mongol
boasted some kind of daredevilry on. the
back of a horse. As for lions, tigers and bears,
animal acts can be traced to the menageries of
Babylon, the Pharaohs' pet cheetahs or the
trained crocodiles kept by their priests.
Bull-dancing (and its Spanish heir, the
bullfight) had cultic beginnings, as did Greek
drama. In Dorian Hellas, acrobats and mimes
clowned on the stage at festivals, arid at large
in the streets. The phallus was the centrepiece
of the costume. Holy or not, the antics
around it were far from polite.

A few centuries later across the Adriatic,
the fun took a turn well past the ribald, when
the politicians of Rome organized the first
full-fledged circus.
Panem et circenses, loosely translated as
bread and circuses, was the formula for paci¬
fying the Roman public. What it came to
mean was a bloodbath in a ring. To wit: the
Circus Maximus of Rome, a roofless, oval
hippodrome, where 150,000 bloodthirsty
Romans cheered on the slaughter between
chariot races. Elephants, bears, and jungle
cats were put to the knife by the dozens
sometimes the hundreds in a day. Later,
in the Coliseum, convicts and Christians
went the same way. As the Roman legions
marched north, the circus of violence spread
over Europe. Amphitheatres went up at
Verona, Capua and Pompeii, in Sicily and
Spain, at Aries, Nîmes, Bordeaux and in
Britain to be turned into quarries once the
empire collapsed.
Mountebanks
and mummers
The word "circus" was lost from common lan¬
guage. Mass entertainments would not recur
on such a scale until the twentieth century.
The Roman circus was dead, but its less orga¬
nized elements took to the roads. Through the
Dark Ages, animal trainers and acrobats wan¬
dered across Europe, Asia and Africa, sleep¬
ing in wagons or under hedges, entertaining
at rural markets or before royalty on com¬
mand. King Alfred was treated to a "Wilde
Beaste Showe" with mountebanks and mum¬
mers. William the Conqueror imported a
troupe of performers from France. Hannibal's
thirty-seventh elephant, the sole survivor of
the giant trek from Carthage, was said to have
founded a herd of performing pachyderms in
Europe remarkable if true, since elephants as
a rule don't breed in captivity.
Jean Villiers, an archivist with France's
Centre National des Arts du Cirque, finds
traces of the circus in medieval church car¬
vings. When 13,000 men were brought in to
build a cathedral, he says, the entertainment
soon followed in the form of mountebanks
and their troupes. Pickpockets plied their
trade, while the mountebank climbed onto
his stage and distracted the crowd (the name
derives from the Italian for "hop onto a
bench"). A vantage point for spying out
trouble, the bench also served as a spring¬
board for acrobats. Funambulists hooked up
their ropes to cathedral spires, and illusionists
turned the trapdoors and machinery of the
Church's mystery plays into trade secrets.
Some of these tricksters were charged with
sorcery and burned at the stake, but some
were far too clever like the wit who taught
his trick horse to bow in front of a cross.
The medieval laity adored these spec¬
tacles. The church was less enthusiastic but
condoned them at fairs, when pilgrims
gathered from all over the countryside on the
feast days of saints. Held in abbeys and
cathedrals, the fairs overflowed into neigh¬
bouring fields where merchants and entertai¬
ners set up their stalls. Once a year, a Chris¬
tian could tend to his soul, his business
affairs and his pleasure at once.
The most famous of these fairs was St.
Bartholomew's, at a priory outside London.
A tightrope walker in
fifteenth-century Venice,
after a contemporary
engraving.
J1-'
m ßx
ry^Ül
15

St. Bartholomew's Fair in
London is depicted in this
engraving made in 1809 by
the English caricaturist
Thomas Rowlandson, and
A.C. Pugin.
16
In 1133, a prior named Rayer, who had once
been a jester to Henry I, talked the king into
a charter for a three-day fair. Bartholomew's
Fair lasted 700 years, becoming something
like an annual circus convention.
Rayer had a reputation for working mira¬
culous cures. A hundred years later, other
kinds of miracles were being admired: a
woman doing headstands on the points of
two swords, another on stilts with a water
jug on her head and a baby in her arms.
Bartholomew's Fair stretched to a fort¬
night and then to six weeks. Under Henry
VIII, the religious dimension vanished. The
lines of booths became streets, which were
paved and eventually railed. In 1614, the
playwright Ben Jonson described a riot of
stalls with rattles, drums, halberds, pipes,
puppet shows, mouse traps, hobby horses,
dogs that danced the Morris, an eagle, black
wolves, a bull with five legs and a hare that
played the tambourine.
Fifty years later, "dancing on the ropes"
was the leading attraction. The tightrope acts
of today are mild compared to those of the
seventeenth century: horses and elephants
walked the ropes, as did one Italian who
danced on a rope with a duck on his head,
pushing a wheelbarrow loaded with two
children and a dog, singing a song as he went.
Each fair developed its strength: some
specialized in freaks, others in puppets. Bar¬
tholomew's Fair became headquarters for
impresarios who toured the rest of the
country during the year. It was also home
base for a travelling menagerie, always a great
passion among the zoo-minded British.
Parades and clowns



The circus parade or its prototype reached
its finest flower in Renaissance Italy. The tra¬
dition of the Roman victory parade was
revived in 1500 by Cesare Borgia, and a few
years later by the Florentine Guild of Mer¬
chants. Elaborate floats, with characters from
allegory and comedy, wafted through the
streets of Florence and Milan. They included
fantastic machines, revolving spheres, ships
and globes full of singing cherubs. Leonardo
da Vinci built a mechanical lion for one such
occasion that advanced a few steps and
opened a breast full of lilies. In Siena, a
twelve-person ballet sprang out of a great
golden wolf.
The other Italian gift to the circus was the
clown. Dozens of comic types evolved in the

A touring circus in Spain
(1984).
raucous street theatres of the Commedia dell'



Arte. The classic pair of zanni the two
comic servants can be seen to this day in
nearly every circus in the world. The harle¬
quin or clever rogue is a truly ancient
figure, descended from early representations
of the devil, while his dull-witted victim
became the gentle, moon-struck fool
Pierrot of the loose white garments and
chalk-white face so beloved of the Romantics.
Out of the ring
and into the streets
It was not until the late eighteenth century,
in London, that all this was codified and put
in a ring. The circus as we know it is uni¬
formly attributed to Philip Astley, the
horsey son of a cabinet-maker. Astley would
one day win a diamond-studded medal from
the French queen Marie-Antoinette and leave
his successors with two gorgeous amphi¬
theatres, one in London and one in Paris. He
also bequeathed a consummate spectacle of
horses, acrobats, aerialists and clowns in a
ring with a 42-foot diameter still the stan¬
dard ring dimension.
Astley's fortunes began, however, in a
muddy field near London's Westminster
Bridge. He had two horses, two fifers, and a
wife who played the drum and passed the hat.
Within two years he put a roof over his act
and called it "Astley's British Riding School".
For 150 years, the equestrian act was the
lynchpin of the European circus. Everything
depended on it. The horse was to Astley and
his heirs what the motorcycle is to a circus
like Archaos: the ritual steed that will propel
its entourage out of the mud or off the streets
into glory.
The irony of all revolutions in the circus
and elsewhere is that the new order becomes
the old. Every new circus, in a sense, is
condemned to reinvent the wheel. The Amer¬
icans invented the three-ring circus, put it
under the Big Top, and called it the Greatest
Show on Earth. Hollywood got in on the act,
and now the American circus is a synonym for
monumental kitsch. In other countries, circus
masters cultivated other values, developing
the very high art that still obtains in the old-
school circuses, from the famous Moscow
Circus to the Knies in Switzerland or the
Gruss family circus in France.
And now we have the alternative circus
the Other Circus as it has been called
that wants to bring the circus back to its
roots. The names speak for themselves: The
Tin Can Circus, the Suitcase Circus, the Kit¬
chen, Archaos. . . . The vision is ecological,
post-modern, baroquely bleak or gay.
Animal acts are out. Street theatre is in.
Many of these groups do indeed start out on
the sidewalks busking for dimes. But once
they start charging admission, or competing
for grants, or winning airtime on television,
the revolution is endangered by its own suc¬
cess like Canada's meteoric Cirque du
Soleil that began as a club to promote the
street arts in 1981. Thanks to a 97 per cent
government subsidy, in a mere ten years it
has developed a show as stellar and cold and
remote from the street as outer space.
Still the roots of the circus are always
there, under the pavement; a riot of weeds as
wild as the itch to get up on stilts or a horse or
a motorcycle and startle a crowd. The props
change. But the circus, ladies and gentlemen,
remains. O
ALICE VAN BUREN
¡s an American essayist who
lives in Paris. She is also a
book artist and painter, and
has edited a number of
magazines in the arts. She is
presently writing a memoir, A
Wandering Gentile, some of
which has appeared in the
literary magazine The
American Voice and has won
her a citation from PEN
International for work in
progress.
17
