MEDIATORS BETWEEN GOD AND MAN
The Gum andhis Disdple
by Dima S. Oueini
Above, disciple bows to the
Master. Detail from an 18th-
century Indian miniature.
16
FROM very ancient times, the great texts
that stand out like landmarks in the reli¬
gious history of India the Brahmanas,
the Upanishads, the Dharma have laid special
emphasis upon the Master/Disciple relation¬
ship in all its diverse forms.
In Sanskrit, the word used for a "spiritual
master" is guru. The primary meaning of guru
is "heavy" or "weighty", in the sense, for
example, of parents' moral weight in relation to
their children or that of the eldest child in rela¬
tion to younger siblings. It is from this concept
that the religious meaning of the word ("vener¬
able") derives.
In the spiritual sense, the guru teaches how
to live rather than how to think, and by his
moral "weight" becomes a model to follow.



Faced with this spiritual power, the whole per¬
sonality of the disciple is Drought into question,
and this is the key factor in the Master/Disciple
relationship. The benevolence of the Master and
the vulnerability of the Disciple are the two
poles of the relationship and the determining fac¬
tors in a quest which will test the Disciple's inner
defences to breaking-point, but yet, going
beyond considerations of personal salvation, will
open up the prospect of liberation (moksha).
Living in the Master's presence will be deci¬
sive. Imitating the Master and acquiring confi¬
dence (sraddha) in him are made easier for the
Disciple by the family-style life the Disciple
lives with his guru in the ashram (communal
religious centre), where the aim is to achieve
spiritual detachment.
As the Hindu spiritual leader Vivekananda
once wrote, if liberation is the objective of the
Disciple's quest, the guru is the living embodi¬
ment of it. "The guru is the radiant mask that
God assumes to come to us. As we look fixedly
upon him, the mask falls away and God is
revealed to us." The Disciple's encounter with
the guru goes beyond the bounds of moral
guidance. The liberation embodied by the
Master implies divesting oneself of all forms of
possessions, and at the same time becoming
detached from the "self" and from the world so
as to achieve pure being.
As in other religious traditions, the Hindu
guru fulfils a Master's threefold functions. As
transmitter of knowledge, he initiates the Dis¬
ciple into the tradition of the community, into
the collective memory. That is his most secular,
outward function. As spiritual guide, he directs
the Disciple's inner journeying, showing him
the "ways" and protecting nim from the perils
of the quest. As mediator, his major function,
he shares his own experience to encourage the
Disciple's spiritual awakening.
To succeed in his or her quest, the Disciple
must share fully in the life of the guru. In the
words of the poet Abhinavagupta: "The Dis¬
ciple's questions and the Master's answers
emerge from the same consciousness." There
are different methods of thought transmission:
direct, from spirit to spirit or from heart to
heart, rather as one candle is lit from another;
the physical, by touch, voice, exchange of
breath and even embrace. Whichever may be
used, the Disciple must keep his defences
lowered and confidently yield to the Master.
Most gurus give a benevolent welcome to
potential Disciples without distinction of caste,
sex, nationality or even religion. This remar¬
kable attitude is no doubt due to the very nature
of the spiritual experience that places the guru
beyond the sway of external rules. It may be due
to the Tantric influence and also, perhaps, to a
certain symbiosis between Islam and Hinduism.
According to Jean Filliozat, a French spe¬
cialist on India, the guru, like the Muslim sufi,
expels the self "from this phenomenal world"
and places "all its being in the eternal equili¬
brium that is God".
DIMA S. OUEINI, who is of Lebanese origin, is a
specialist in Linguistics and in Arabic. She is at present
preparing a study on poetics and the translation of
sacred writings.
