THE UNESCO COURIER
v^
NOVEMBER 1992
* -» "-/»pt»
EDITORIAL
Lei's mate í/í£ worldacleaner
place by France Bequette
The /besr it/ay io ai/o/d drowning in our own waste is to produce as
little of it as possible. Tliis calls for efficient technology and invest¬
ment, but there is no time to lose. The automobile industry has
already taken some steps in the search for a solution. There are 500
million vehicles on the planet, 80 per cent ofwhich are private cars.
Most manufacturers are now showing some concern about the ugly
wrecks that disfigure the environment everywhere from Mali to Sri
Lanka. It is easy to recast scrap metal and to recycle plastic parts. One
multinational corporation is offering an 85 per cent recyclable model.
The big German car-makers are using readability as a sales pitch.
In a recently published brochure, the international organization
Greenpeace notedfurther examples ofgood practices in other sectors. In
Bielefeld, Germany, 90 per cent of the polyvinyl chloride (PVC) used in
the construction ofpublic buildings has been replaced by wood, ceramic
material, linoleum and clay, a move that has turned out to be particu¬
larly cost-effective. In the United States, the city ofPortland, Oregon, has
banned the use ofexpanded polystyrene. The 2,200 restaurants that had
been serving hamburgers in packaging made of this material have had
to find other solutions such as washable crockery or containers made of
recycled paper. Most customers approved. A Swedish paperfactory uses
oxygen to bleach the pulp so as to avoid using chlorine, which affects the
ozone layer. Even though the paper is a shade darker than the usual
white, publishers have willingly agreed to use it. As a result, Sweden has
reduced its use ofchlorine by 25 per cent.
In 1989, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
launched a Cleaner Production Programme, the objectives ofwhich are
"to increase worldwide awareness of the cleaner production concept,
help governments and industry develop cleaner production
programmes, foster the adoption of cleaner production, and facilitate
the transfer of cleaner production technologies." The programme
contains five features: the International Cleaner Production
Information Clearinghouse (ICPIC), which the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) updates continuously;
working groups on leather-tanning, solvents, pulp and paper,
petroleum, and biotechnology, among other specific topics; a newsletter,
Cleaner Production; training activitiesfor governments and industrial¬
ists, and finally, technical assistance for developing countries. This
important programme deserves to be more widely known.
Editorial
26 World
Dossier
28 Living with waste
by France Bequette
29 The health hazard
factor
30 Where danger
roams
31 A training manual
on hazardous waste
32 Voices from the past
A bird in the hand
-Li
25
_

World
fit rom
In the United States, a farmers'
co-operative in Michigan came up
with the unusual idea of using
cherry pits as fuel for its fruit-
processing plant. Under this plan,
1.5 million kilograms of waste will
save $321,000 a year. The pits are
shredded, dried, and then com¬
pressed into briquettes. Their rich
mix of methane, hydrogen and
carbon monoxide content is used to
fire a boiler, and the steam pro¬
duced drives a turbine that gener¬
ates electricity. Among its other
advantages, the system reduces
waste and saves energy.
Rapid industrialization in the last
thirty years has led to serious envi¬
ronmental degradation in twelve
Brazilian states, where poor air qua¬
lity, contaminated drinking water,
and toxic wastes are a health
hazard. Heavy industries such as
steel, petroleum, petrochemicals,
fertilizers and coal mining, are the
leading contributors to pollution.
According to Samia El Baroudy,
Senior Country Officer for Brazil at
the World Bank, "industrial pollu¬
tion is a very serious problem for
the Brazilian people, more so than
deforestation. ... It reduces life
expectancy and the productivity of
the workforce, while increasing
disease and infant mortality." The
World Bank has granted loans for
the development of environmen¬
tally-sound economic growth
through a number ofprojects, ten of
which are currently being imple¬
mented. Twelve more are in the
pipeline.
26
According to Greenpeace, waste
produced by 71 million persons gets
poured into the Baltic Sea annually.
The landlocked sea also serves as a
dump for 200,000 tonnes of carbon
chloride per year from the paper
industry, 1 million tonnes ofnitrogen
from fertilizers, and 50,000 tonnes
ofphosphorus from detergents.
Environmental issues
are given lively and infor- I
mative treatment in Our I
Planet, the bi-monthly I
illustrated magazine of the I
United Nations Environ- 1
ment Programme (UNEP). »3
The 20-page magazine,
published in English,
French, Spanish, Portuguese,
and Arabic, is available free
of charge. If you wish to
receive it, please send your
name and address and an
indication ofyour preferred
language version to:
Circulation Manager,
OurPlanet, UNEP,
P.O. Box 30552, Nairobi,
Kenya. I
It is often said that biological diversity is endan¬
gered because of demographic growth, expanding
human settlements, the impoverishment of ecosys¬
tems by people, and the inadequacy of the laws and ins¬
titutions set up to protect it. Another factor is the ram¬
pant growth of certain plants which are introduced
into ecosystems and prey on species that are already
established there. Two such plants are the tropical
alga Caulerpa taxifolia in the Mediterranean, and a
plant which in Cameroon is called ndognmo, kon-
dengui or Laos weed, and which stifles other vegetation
and is of no use to humans or animals. In Australia, a
species of St-Iohn's-wort, introduced by a Frenchman
nostalgic for a plant that he knew in his homeland, is
proliferating and, as it is poisonous to livestock, pre¬
sents a threat to stockraising. Such thoughtless acts can
have incalculable consequences.
A bilingual (English/French)
Directory of Non-Governmental
Environment and Development
Organizations in Member Countries
of the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development
(OECD) has been published by the
OECD Development Centre in a col¬
laborative effort with the non¬
governmental organization, ENDA
Third World. Its price is US$68, but
it can be obtained free ofcharge by
NGOs and development research
institutes based in developing coun¬
tries, provided that their request is
accompanied by a description of
their activities and that they intend
to make the Directory widely avail¬
able for consultation (e.g. in a
library or documentation centre).
For further information, please
write to OECD Development
Centre, External Co-operation,
Room 807, 94, rue Chardon-
Lagache, 75016 Paris, France.

Q Climate Change
\..ri":'llr»íl!"< r.flum iln'ihlV« CUMlOdMTBMIllAtMMnftM mil. i't
pmdife <«r l'.nlh WhIhhii llirin. llv L.nllrar-JiPK- .1 (n".n ill-I' IjHuiliitr
¡llj'-iiTJl/ccBh-wf.lClmEthc M*'l UV (humph r-flt IMfpn* *-rrt i.ílfiv 'i..' M
irfnrlnhi-It-fajMli-dlr.Kt I|mimi>.kIr> M...,IMi 1 11» n'i,i.l
Mm Ai MMlMI-ilMrth| f»w\ bmmmM) ¡"i** wmiptoM mm mb
<j.*jiHHi K iijfftil j».) ihc rfinunphrrr li> .1. nrr
rttnrnrirwrnfitmflltffTj nfchfi wriwmfniiniiit«lliit<wiii»l(^iffiii.fc
rifcu-iiPfryfhc hirriHnj; nl Vi*«( h>tl>. 1!r NOlfmMM lliMtithi ikilrwim« nf
«C*1><|»*. Mjuih iullm|(*HMlmr.t. Tlcrml-tn *v, litt i"( (I. In.! f.lr^.- n
' »"< 	 k 	 «V..i, Cllk.|,-h.ff.,J,l. II.Mh.,1,1,1,.1,,1
ssrr.? /:
1
0
15*3*- '
* ' ' " !"* 	 - |
ïïaï:.;
ISSUES AT A GUNCE
A remarkable set ofeight posters has been produced by Unesco and UNEP in the framework
of their International Environmental Education Programme. Each poster presents an envi¬
ronmental issue in a nutshell, illustrated with beautiful photos, drawings and diagrams. The
eight topics are climate change, fresh water, oceans and coastal areas, deforestation and
desertification, biological diversity, the environmental effects of industry, quality of life, and
environmental education. The complex issues presented are so clearly explained and laid out
that they can be taken in at a glance. The set is distributed to educational institutions free of
charge, in English only for the time being, by Unesco's Environmental Education Section, 7 Place
de Fontenoy, F75700 Paris
Following a campaign launched
by the secretariat of the United
Nations Conference on Environ¬
ment and Development at Rio de
Janeiro, Unesco has already col¬
lected the signatures of over nine
million individuals personally com¬
mitting themselves to the protec¬
tion of the planet. Director-General
Federico Mayor wrote to all Unesco
Member States inviting them to
organize seminars in educational
institutions in order to get young
people involved. Activities for pro¬
moting endorsement of the Earth
Pledge include the translation of
the Pledge into local languages, the
organization ofseminars, theatrical
performances, essay and painting
competitions, trips to forests, tree
planting, and campaigns to keep
schools, cities, and their surround¬
ings clean. Unesco National
Commissions are acting as focal
points for the project.
America's love affair with the
automobile was never any secret in
Los Angeles. Built around the car,
the Californian megalopolis is the
biggest gas guzzler in the world. Its
13 million residents drive 9 million
cars over 386 million kilometres a
day, using up 68 million litres of
gasoline and diesel fuel, and pro¬
ducing 60 per cent of the city's noto¬
rious smog. Environmental educa¬
tion programmes aimed at drivers
have met with some success though
not enough, and so the South Coast
Air Quality Management District
has further extended its campaign
in favour of ride-sharing and car-
pools, even offering financial incen¬
tives. Parking around shopping
centres, concert halls or stadiums,
for instance, is free or at a discount
for carpoolers, while an extra charge
is made for lone drivers. Electric
cars are also being promoted to help
reduce daily fuel consumption.



nr
EimW 11 IM
NEP notes that out of the
more than 10 million chemi¬
cal compounds that have
been synthesized worldwide
J since the turn of the century,
100,000 have been marketed. In
addition, between 1,000 and 2,000
new compounds are produced
each year. Some of them, such as
pesticides or fertilizers, are used
straight, but most of them enter
into the composition of millions of
ordinary consumer goods. Every
sector of human activity uses and
benefits from these products.
And yet it has been known for
thirty years that all chemical pro¬
ducts are to some degree hazard¬
ous. How seriously they affect
health depends on how deadly
they are and on the duration of
exposure to theip. A brief expo¬
sure to a tiny amount of dioxin,
for instance, is enough to make
people ill, whereas they have to
be exposed to high doses of fer¬
rous oxide for a long period of
time for its ill-effects to be felt.
Scientists have recently begun to
focus more attention on long-
term effects such as birth defects,
adverse genetic and neurological
changes, and forms of cancer.
A tragic illustration of the
consequences of careless waste-
dumping occurred in Minamata,
on the Japanese island of Kyushu,
where between 1956 and 1967 an
industrial plant dumped its waste
in the sea. The waste contained
mercury, which was absorbed by
plankton, then by the small fish
on which the big ones feed, lead¬
ing to a mercury concentration
in the food chain. As a conse¬
quence, 20,000 people were affect¬
ed by nervous disorders, and 857
of them died. The problem is par¬
ticularly disturbing since infor¬
mation about the effects on
health is available for only 2 per
cent of the chemical compounds
on the market.
The substances that contami¬
nate soil, water and air can cover
long distances, regardless of bor¬
ders. This is a matter of concern
for the whole planet. 29
_


ÁÍMIGimiEAZlMSIS1TE
The UNEP Programme Activity
Centre has prepared a remark¬
able training manual, Hazar¬
dous Waste Policies and
Strategies. A fictitious country,
Udanax, is the object of a com¬
plete assessment. The nature of its
hazardous wastes is examined in
detail, along with its facilities for
treatment and disposal. One
chapter is devoted to an exposition
of the Basel Convention and its
implementation. The document is
clear and straightforward, a model
of its kind. It is used at seminars
conducted by UNEP for decision
makers and national officials on
request by local authorities and with
the co-operation of many other
organizations.
Further information may be
obtainedfrom:
UNEP,
Industry and
Environment/Programme
Activity Centre,
Tour Mirabeau
39-43 quaiAndré Citroën
75739 Paris Cedex 15
Fax:(331)4058 88 74. 31

Voicesfrom thepast
Cover of a
collection of
Nasrudin Hodja
stories
translated from
Azeri into
Russian (1962).
E m
32
The comic stories featuring
Nasrudin Hodja, who is
thought to have lived in
Anatolia in the thirteenth
century, are celebrated
worldwide for their wry
humour. Full of mischief,
which led him into all sorts of
amusing and sometimes hair-
raising scrapes, Nasrudin
became a legendary folk hero,
a "jester" whose irreverent
attitude to life is a form of
wisdom.
The story on this page appears in an anthology
entitled Compagnons du Soleil ('Companions of the
Sun") co-published (in French) by Uxesco , Editions de la
Découverte (Paris) and the Fondation pour le progrès de
l'Homme. Ttie anthology has been prepared under the
general editorship of the African historian Joseph Ki-
Zerbo, in collaboration with Marie-Josèphe Beaud.
One day, Nasrudin Hodja had bought a
piece of liver and was taking it back home.
On the way, he met a friend who said to
him:



"Let me write you down a wonderful
recipe for cooking liver and you'll find what
a mouth-watering meal it will make for
you!"
Without more ado, he took out a piece of
paper from his pocket and wrote out the
most marvellous recipe.
Hodja was delighted at his stroke ofgood
fortune and went cheerfully on his way,
already licking his lips at the thought of
eating such a delicious stew.
Suddenly, a great hawk swooped down
out of the sky and snatched the piece of liver
out ofhis hand with its powerful claws.
Completely taken aback at being robbed
ofhis tasty morsel, Nasrudin Hodja held out
his right hand and brandished the piece of
paper at the thieving bird as it sped away
and, barely concealing his disappointment,
cried out:
"Don't count your blessings too soon. You
can't make a meal of that liver because I've
got the recipe. Here it is!"
