Big screen, small screen
by François Garçon
Is television a
rival or an ally
of the cinema?
Robert Mitchum and Marilyn
Monroe starred in Otto
Preminger's River of No
Return (1954), above.
IT is fashionable to criticize television.
Many people hold it responsible for all the
problems facing the cinema today. They
blame it for plunging attendance figures and
for the closure of movie houses and their
transformation into car-parks or supermar¬
kets. To listen to television's detractors, its
power to keep paying customers away from
all forms of live entertainment, including
sport, is virtually boundless. People connected
with the performing arts complain bitterly
about the increasing encroachments of the
small screen.
There is nothing new about complaints
against television. Stories of the bitter combat
between the large and the small screen are
legion, and in some cases barely credible. In
1960, for instance, cinema-owners in Paris's
Latin Quarter protested about the appearance
of television receivers in the bistros of the rue
de la Huchette and the boulevard Saint-Michel.
They claimed that the black-and-white sets
perched above the bars were providing free
film shows for a clientele of penniless students.
Countless misdeeds have been laid at televi¬
sion's door. It is high time that someone took
on the thankless task of stating the case for tele¬
vision and answering its critics. 43

"Making films is a very
costly business. . . ." Above,
shooting The Name of the
Rose, filmed by Jean-Jacques
Annaud in 1986.
Below, Neil Jordan's Mona
Lisa (1986) was financed by
Britain's Channel Four
television network.
A GARGANTUAN
APPETITE FOR FILMS
Making films is a very costly business. In 1991,
the average budget for a Hollywood feature
stretched to $28 million, and a French film
typically cost more than FF25 million to make.
Sums like that are not easy to come by, and
television has now become an indispensable
source of supplementary finance for film¬
makers. Backing from public and subscription
channels in Europe and North America cur¬
rently makes up about 30 per cent of film
financing. No producer today outside the big
Hollywood studios or such well-capitalized
groups as Gaumont in France can start shoot-
44 a
ing without having pre-sold his film to televi¬
sion especially since crucial public subsidies
often depend on a contract guaranteeing televi¬
sion screening.
What is more, most films cannot pay their
way on theatre showings alone. Statistics from
the United States, which may also be valid for
the industry worldwide, show that only one



film in ten makes a profit on the big screen,
while at least seven lose money. Losses would
be even greater were it not for the second lease
of life films get on television, and in recent
years through video. The development of new,
movie-oriented television channels like Canal+
in France, Premiere in Germany and Sky
Movie in the United Kingdom has brought
considerable extra financial support for film
companies.
So television provides the film industry
with substantial additional funds and regular
receipts of the sort that makes backers happy.
Financially speaking, when the broadcasters
catch a cold as is the case today for RTVE in
Spain or Britain's ITV network the whole
production business sneezes.
The additional market television represents
for the film industry also helps film studios to
operate more efficiently. The film industry has
always had to cope with the problem of slack
periods between. productions, when overheads
such as studio maintenance costs and the sala¬
ries of full-time employees still have to be paid.
Making films for television, because of its pre¬
dictable, quasi-industrial nature, can be fitted in
between shooting films for the cinema. Tele¬
film production helps studios to pay their over¬
heads and to manage their operations more
rationally.
Furthermore, television is a natural outlet
for low-budget films that often have difficulty
in finding distributors for cinema release. In
the United States in 1986, independent produc¬
ers made some 470 films, only sixty-nine of
which were shown in theatres. More than
three-quarters of this output would thus never
have had an audience if they had been rejected
by television. Because of TV's gargantuan
appetite, however, that was fortunately not
the case.
A NEW SHOWING
FOR MOVIE CLASSICS
But television offers more than just financial
support. It has helped promote the film as an
art form, especially among young people.
Arthouse films that were once relegated to off-

peak hours are now the staple diet of cinema-
heritage channels such as France's Ciné Cinéma
and Ciné Cinéphil. In the United States, where
cable has existed since the 1950s, the American
Movie Classics channel, which only shows
films made between 1930 and 1970, had
twenty-eight million subscribers in 1991. The
Nostalgia Channel, which also shows old films,
has ten million. A new public is thereby becom¬
ing acquainted with films it would otherwise
never have the chance to see unless it fre¬
quented the British Film Institute, Belgium's
Cinémathèque Royale, the cinémathèques at
the Palais de Chaillot and the Pompidou
Centre in Paris, or the Cinémathèque Suisse in
Lausanne. Such institutions are few and far
between, and announce their programmes only
shortly before they are shown.
Television has also been in at the birth of
several recent movements in film-making. Pres¬
sure from television has brought new life to
British cinema. Britain's leading contemporary
directors have all worked in television, and
such well-known films as Mona Lisa, My
Beautiful Laundrette, A Room with a View and
The Draughtsman's Contract were all commis¬
sioned by Channel 4. The role of the French
subscription channel Canal+ has been even
more influential, permitting, as no other insti¬
tution could, thirty or so directors each year to
make their debut behind a camera.
It would be wrong to assume that televi¬
sion today only produces bland films with
unadventurous story lines. Its commitment to
film can be judged from the growing number
of film subsidiaries attached to the BBC,
Canal-i- and Italy's RAI even though, if
the head of Thames Television International
is to be believed, the profitability of these
companies is far from assured. Finally, tele¬
vision has forced the film industry to differen¬
tiate its products from those of the TV stu¬
dios. The films that prove the biggest
international money-spinners, such as The
Bear, The Big Blue, Who Killed Roger Rabbit?
and Terminator 2, have generally been made
for theatre showing.
The very limitations of television can help
cinema in a way by drawing attention to the
size of the cinema screen and thus justifying the
ever-rising cost of seats in movie-houses. The
best-frequented cinemas tend to be the most
impressive ones: Kinepolis in Brussels, Kinopa¬
norama or the Max Linder in Paris. In Stock¬
holm cinema complexes with modern sound-
systems pull in the crowds, as they do in Aus¬
tralia, whose modern cinemas have the highest
attendance rates in the world after Norway's.
In the United Kingdom, figures for cinema-
going have just risen back above the 100-mil-
lion mark, and that at a time when the quantity
and quality of televised material on offer have
never been so high.
So if television has been detrimental to
cinema in the past, today things seem to be
moving in the opposite direction. On the one
hand television needs more and more films; on
the other, the public fed up with the small
and distorted image it sees on the television
screen is starting to go back to the cinema.
Curiously enough, the expensive and anar¬
chic competition that came from TV in the 1960s
and 1970s may have helped to modernize the art
of cinema and so enabled it to survive. Thanks to
television, people still love the cinema. The film
industry has been forced to look to its laurels
and is today emerging from its lethargy at last.
We may be witnessing the start of a long and
necessary period of co-operation. G
"The films that prove the
biggest international money-
spinners . . . have generally
been made for theatre
showing." Above, Robert
Zemeckis's Who Killed
Roger Rabbit? (1988).
FRANÇOIS GARÇON,
of Switzerland, is Professor of
History, Cinema and Society
at the Ecole Polytechnique in
Paris and is also director of a
film finance company. He is
the author of De Blum à
Pétain cinéma et société
française 1936-1944 (1981)
and, in Italian, La televisione
in Europa (1990). He is
currently working on an
economic history of the video
cassette recorder, to be
published in 1993.
45
