There is much for the West to
learn from the original art,
religion and society of black
Africa. But first of all Africa must
learn to believe in itself
Africa's long march
by Ahmadou Kourouma
"When your friends do not tell you the truth, ask your
enemy andpay him to tellyou"
Malinke proverb
FOR an African, taking a view of European
civilization poses two problems at the
outset. The first stems from the extent to
which he or she is imbued with European cul¬
ture. For myself, I went to a European school
and I write in a European language. Each day I
live, function, and (thanks to the European
media) think like a European. How can I stand
back far enough to take a genuinely African
view of this civilization? Europe's economic,
political, military, technological and intellectual
strength nowadays allows it to make its culture
universal. Nothing totally escapes its influence
or the ideas behind it. As they say in my village,
I shall have to dance and watch myself dancing
at the same time. And that is no easy matter.
The second problem is how to define 31

Marble head of Athene
(460 BC)
from Aegina, Greece.
32
African culture. That vast continent contains
several Áfricas and hundreds of cultures: hence
a myriad possible views of European civiliza¬
tion. For the sake of simplicity I shall divide
Africa into two, a Muslim Arab area and black
Africa, and confine myself to presenting the
black African view of European civilization.
For this purpose we need to examine the main
features of European cosmogony and religion,
and compare them with their traditional
African counterparts.
Starting with Gods, the European God and
the black African God have one feature in
common: each of them is a single God who
created the world. It was only after they had
completed this tremendous fundamental task
that their functions became differentiated. The
European God is a God revealed to humankind
by prophets, and those who have heard the
Gospel have a duty to spread it to the world.
This God ascended into heaven, but before
doing so He left humankind in sole charge here
on Earth. He granted human beings a soul, and
put the whole universe at their disposal. He can
use them as he wishes, even if it means des¬
troying them. Humankind is free and at the
same time a prisoner, since it is God who
governs everything here below: it is God who
marks out the path everyone must tread. When
a person dies that person disappears for good,
is recalled by God forever.
So much, in brief, for the essential features
of European culture. They still exist, although
after the Renaissance Western thought tended
to become secularized and decided to separate
itself from religion. But the axiology, the
system of moral values and the ontology,
remained linked to Judaeo-Christian ideas.
This Judaeo-Christian conception of the deity
is common both to Europe and to the Muslim
world.
IN THE BEGINNING
WAS POWER. . . .
The black African God is a natural God. He
has revealed himself to no one. He sent no one
to preach the good word, did not become flesh,
and asks no one to make him known. He will
not sit in judgement after death. He ascended
into heaven, like the European God, but will
stay there for good. He no longer concerns
himself with the world or takes an interest in
what happens here below. Less unjust, he gave
all his creatures (things, plants, animals and
men) souls, or "Powers" as black Africans say.
Life is essentially a constant struggle between
these powers. As an animist priest from Casa-
mance explained to us: "In the beginning was
Power. God, the supreme power, created all
power by infinitely diversifying his own. God
created all energies at one stroke, and life on
Earth is now no more than an interchange of
powers, willed and planned by God. Man
intervenes in the structure of the world by
words and sacrifices, since in this way he can
ask God to move powers about. This is why
the world is at the same time both completed
and inchoate."
For black Africans language is not merely
an instrument of communication: it is the
expression par excellence of the power of
Being, the release of life forces. The words of
the ancients are sacred, and the dead are not
dead: they never went away, but exist in things,
beings and plants. Above all, it must not be
thought that traditional African religion is a
thing of the past: that is not true. Even when
converted to one of the great world religions,
Africans retain part of their religious heritage.
When we analyse the value systems and onto¬
logies of black Africans, we find that they are
still rooted in the concepts of traditional reli¬
gion. Thus their views about Western civiliza¬
tion are mainly derived from what are called
animism, naturism, vitalism and even fetishism.
For Europeans, nature and the environment
are there to be dominated. The environment was
created by God for humankind. For black Afri¬
cans, however, people live not merely off nature
but with nature. They are not its exploiters but
its allies, and they survive and reproduce only

by knowing how to come to terms with the
other powers that animate it. There is no super¬
natural world separated from nature. Religion
is not independent of a given setting or a given
Earth or heaven, any more than it is of a given
society: it is closely linked to them. Proselyti-
zation and conversion are meaningless: a reli¬
gion is not something people belong to. Thus
there is no place for intolerance.
ART AS THE MYSTIFICATION
OF THE SENSES
In the field of art, artists drawing inspiration
from a civilization born of Christianity and
Graeco-Roman culture seek to define the out¬
lines of their subject in order to take it and pos-
Kaolin-palnted wooden
mask of the Fang people,
Gabon.
sess it, use it and subjugate it. They do so in
order to demystify the subject, to ensure that it
is dissociated from themselves and is no more
than what they see. Black African artists take
the opposite approach. They take the subject
from within and make it implode, in order to
express its complexity. They strive to erase or
blur its outlines in order to heighten its mys¬
tery. Whilst European artists aim to please,
African artists aim to frighten, to make you
doubt the evidence of your senses, to make you
believe that what you are seeing has other
dimensions, meanings and languages which are
beyond you.
In the field of law, a European is an indivi¬
dual. Europeans are solely responsible for what
they do: they act and the consequences of their
actions do not jeopardize or bring shame on
their community. They can do what they like:
create, innovate and change, or alternatively
blaspheme, lie, contradict themselves, be unjust
and destructive, without any aftermath or
punishment here below. The victims of their
actions and. turpitudes carry within themselves
no immanent powers to constrain their ways of
thinking and behaving. Black Africans, wher¬
ever they are and whatever they do, never
forget that they belong to a community which
is held to account for their every action. Res¬
ponsibility is collective. There is an immanent
power which can avenge the victims of injustice
and untruths. Things destroyed needlessly and
for no reason react. Black Africans grow up in
a world marked out with signs to be inter¬
preted and powers to come to terms with.
The basic cultural features of European civi¬
lization have turned out to be much more
efficient and much more favourable to man's
social, technological and economic develop¬
ment than those of black African culture. They
made Europe the hub of the universe and
master of the world, and enabled it to dominate
the black African peoples, directly or indi¬
rectly, for 600 years. This domination has taken
various forms. At every stage European culture
has managed to secrete an ideology, a utopia, a
doctrine or a mirage sufficiently uplifting and
motivating to persuade Europeans to launch
out on the adventure of conquest without
second thoughts. The efficacy of a culture may
also be gauged by this ability to turn out new
myths and doctrines.
The colonial utopia, or the quest
for Paradise Lost


Let us consider the stages in the history of
Europe's domination of Africa and the Afri¬
cans. European civilization has produced
various ideologies, utopias and doctrines to
motivate the adventurers who set out in search
of the point "where the Sun falls into the sea".
The Judaeo-Christian religion describes this 33

Allegory of Peace
(1929-1930),
a fresco by the French artist
Ducos de la Haille.
It is now in the Museum
of African and Oceanian Arts
in Paris.
34
Ahmadou Kourouma, a
writer from Côte d'Ivoire,
currently lives in Togo. His
novels, Les soleils des
independences (1970) and
Monnè, outrages et défis
(1990), have won several
prizes.
lost Paradise, which only the chosen will attain
after the Last Judgement. Europeans have
always dreamed of such a Paradise, and when
in the Middle Ages they found themselves tor¬
mented by hunger they hoped to find it else¬
where, in distant lands. This was the colonial



utopia: "Somewhere where life is deliciously
warm, easy and sparkling, where all Nature's
generous juices set out to produce good things,
so easily come by" (Maurice Lencellé).
The quest for this idyllic land took Euro¬
pean seafarers to the coasts of Africa in the
mid-fifteenth century, and the Africans wel¬
comed them as spirits from the sea. The Euro¬
peans traded with the black Africans on terms
greatly to their advantage: gold and silver in
exchange for shoddy baubles. They continued
for a century and a half, with ever-renewed
enthusiasm and obstinacy, to explore the coasts
of Africa. Their religion turned trade into a spi¬
ritual mission: they were the soldiers of Christ,
spreading the good word among the savages.
Europe next discovered America, and mas¬
sacred the Indians there. Then shortage of man¬
power for the planting of sugar-cane and coffee
led them to institutionalize the slave trade. The
Renaissance, one of the most brilliant periods
in human history, coexisted with slavery. Here
again, European religion found the myths
needed to salve people's consciences: negroes
had no souls, and were descended from Cain.
Hence they could be tortured or killed with a
clear conscience.
We must of course pay tribute to the aboli¬
tionists who, Bible in hand, fought coura¬
geously against slavery and denounced the
imposture of its advocates. Towards the middle
of the seventeenth century they were joined in
their struggle by the churches and by intellec¬
tuals and governments. On every sea and in
every port slavers were pursued and slaves set
free. This struggle was carried through in the
name of humanism as well as of Christian
morality, but the moment slave labour turned
out to be less profitable than hired labour,
things changed. Immediately after the abolition
of slavery, European civilization launched out
into colonization.
A dialogue
OPEN TO ALL
People tend to mention only the drawbacks of
colonialism, but it must be said that it also had
its advantages, and not only for the colonists. It
contributed to the advent of the Industrial
Revolution; it opened up many lands to social
and economic progress, and made possible the
creation of the frontierless world that is at last
taking shape. The questions we need to ask
ourselves are the following: did Africa not pay
too high a price to be thus opened up? Without
the colonial powers, would Africa, left to itself,
not have found the way to economic and social
development and receptiveness to the world by
itself?
The universal civilization that is taking
shape will be a civilization that has incorpo¬
rated all cultures, with none barred. The West,
which is the master of the world by virtue of
its weapons, its economic power, its means of
communication and its spirit of enterprise, has
the duty to enter into genuine dialogue
with other civilizations in order to understand
others and accept them along with their
differences.
Africa for its part must realize that a man at
the bottom of a well cannot be pulled up unless
he makes the effort to grasp the rope that is
lowered to him. The failure of Africa is perhaps
due to cultural reasons. Africa and only Africa
must recognize this and reform itself. Europe
can go along too, but Africa must make the
journey by itself. C
