Safiel women fight desert advance
by Joséphine Ouedraogo
Re
A village that
owes its survival
to its womenfolk
38
JOSEPHINE OUEDRAOGO,
of Burkina Faso, is a
sociologist and former
government minister. She is
currently working at the
Panafrican Development
Institute at Douala (Cameroon),
where she is the co-ordlnator
of a project on Women and
Health In Sub-Saharan Africa.
LOURFA is a village in the Sahel region of Niger.
Since the last great drought some fifteen years ago,
it has owed its survival to its womenfolk.
The people of Kourfa, which is situated 260
kilometres north-east of Niamey, are farmers and
former herdsmen condemned to a sedentary life
because of the degradation of pastureland. Reduced
rainfall and the drying-up of watering-places and
vegetation, combined with violent sand-storms, have
virtually deprived the village of harvests for the past
five years. The men have had to travel far away to
find seasonal work, and sometimes they have not
come back. In 1988, there were only 900 people left
in Kourfa, most of them women, children and old
people.
It is the women who keep Kourfa alive. Despite
the few resources at their disposal, the solitude and
the hard physical labour which they are forced to
perform because of the absence of their menfolk,
they have succeeded in supporting the most vulner¬
able members of the community, the old people and
the children. To survive, they gather dead wood and
dry grasses which they sell as fuel in the market at
Abala, seven kilometres away. The money they earn
enables them to buy some provisions.
Each day brings a new round of domestic tasks.
Looking for wood and water is an exhausting busi¬
ness involving several hours' walking and effort
beneath an implacable sun. The children suffer from
nutritional deficiencies, and the nearest chemist is
seventeen kilometres away.
Until 1984 the village had only one well, 60
metres deep and overused, which barely sufficed for
the domestic needs of Kourfa and the neighbouring
villages. The Association of Women of Niger
obtained a grant from the American Development
Foundation to finance the drilling of another well,
and to provide equipment for market gardening and
small-scale farming.
With the help of an agricultural adviser, the
women have laid out a small market garden around
the well. One hundred and forty of them have plots
there in which they grow vegetables to feed their
families. A small part of the harvest is dried for sale
in the market at Abala, providing the women with
the wherewithal to procure other goods, including
the cereals they lack since Kourfa no longer receives
sufficient rainfall to permit the cultivation of millet.
Men returning to the village have been surprised
to find that life has become possible there again
thanks to the courage of the women. Some are
tempted to stay and take up vegetable-growing
themselves, but there are not enough allotments to
go round, and too little water. So Kourfa's women
are now calling for a second well, an extension of
the market garden, agricultural materials and seed.
They are willing to pay the necessary price "so the
men won't go away again".
In the last twenty years, the social and economic
problems associated with the desertification of the
Sahel have generally grown worse. Hundreds of vil¬
lages in the area are now in danger of disappearing.
Let us hope that the decisions taken at this year's
Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro will bring the
people of these steadily deteriorating areas some
improvement in their living conditions.
