UNESCO'S FIRST 45 YEARS (PART VIII)
46
by Michel Conil Lacoste
1989
General policy
October-November: At its twenty-fifth
session, the General Conference approves a
budget of $3 78,800,000 for 1990-1991. It also
adopts the Third Medium-Term Plan (1990-
1995) whose structure "aims at strengthening
the interdisciplinary and inter-sectoral
approach to the action of the Organization".
Education
February: The Director-General launches
the Regional Programme for the Universali-
zation and Renewal of Primary Education
and the Eradication of Adult Illiteracy in the
Arab States (Arabupeal).
4-6 September: UNESCO hosts the annual
Inter-Agency Meeting on Co-ordination of
the Activities of the Organizations' of the
United Nations System in Matters of Inter¬
national Drug Abuse Control, attended by
UNESCO, the World Health Organization
(Who), the Food and Agriculture Organiza¬
tion (Fao), the International Labour Organi¬
sation (Ilo), the World Bank and other agen¬
cies. The three main items on the agenda are
the availability of international funds, pre¬
ventive education and co-ordination.
6 December: International Literacy Year
1990 is officially launched in New York, in
the presence of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. The Year is being prepared
by 107 National Committees.
Exact and natural sciences
With the support of the United Nations
Development Programme (Undp) and the
Federal Republic of Germany, Madagascar
sets up its first biosphere reserve at Mana-
nara-Nord, to provide long-term protection
for an exceptionally wide variety of plant
and animal life.
Social and human sciences
June-July: The International Congress on
Peace in the Minds of Men is held at the
Headquarters of the Houphouët-Boigny
International Foundation for Peace at
Yamoussoukro (Côte d'Ivoire). One of the
main issues discussed is the link between
peace education and people's responsibility
for their environment.
September: An International Symposium
on the access of women to salaried employ¬
ment is held in collaboration with Hacettepe
University in Ankara (Turkey).
«*T^ . JS
> >
SAFEGUARDING FOLKLORE
Culture
November: The General Conference
adopts the Recommendation on the Safe¬
guarding of Traditional Culture and Folk¬
lore, the first international legal instrument
of its kind to include folklore.
December: An International Symposium
on Illicit Traffic and Theft of Works of Art
and Cultural Property is held at the Head¬
quarters of Interpol in Lyons (France).
Unesco has co-operated with Interpol for
many years.
In 1988-1989, 68 Member States benefit
from UNESCO's book promotion activities.
With UNESCO's assistance, more than 20
training courses for people working in the
book industry are organized in all the world
regions.
Unesco launches its 16th travelling exhi¬
bition of reproductions of works of art, on
Buddhist art.
Communication
March: The Ministers of Information of
Latin America hold a meeting in Quito
(Ecuador) on the future of public broad¬
casting services in the region.
NEWS AGENCY DEVELOPMENT
May: UNESCO and the Federal Republic
of Germany take part in a joint evaluation
mission to 6 of the 1 3 countries covered by
the West Africa News Agencies Develop¬
ment (Wanad) project. The Frg decides to
allocate $4 million to the project, notably to
equip the agencies with computer facilities.
The Mananara-Nord biosphere
reserve (Madagascar).
November: Under UNESCO auspices, the
Asian Pacific Broadcasting Union and the
South Pacific Union hold a regional seminar
in Suva (Fiji) on the introduction of televi¬
sion in the Pacific islands and the promotion
of nationally produced programmes.
Intersectoral activities
November: The General Conference
adopts a new intersectoral and inter-agency
project on "The young child and the family
environment", in co-operation with the
United Nations Children's Fund (Unicef)
and other organizations. The project's four
priority areas are nutrition and early child¬
hood stimulation; parent/child/family interac¬
tions; childhood disabilities; and preschool
education.
Sources, a new illustrated monthly maga¬
zine, is created by UNESCO. Published in
English, French, Spanish and Portuguese, its
goal is to show UNESCO at work and make
the Organization better known to the general
public.
Events
January: The "Music and Musicians of the
World" series of recordings, which forms
part of the UNESCO Collection of Tradi¬
tional Music, is awarded the Grand Prix of
the Académie du disque français.
June: At a ceremony in Manila (Philip¬
pines), the first UNESCO Architecture and
Landscape Architecture Prize is awarded to
two teams from the University of Trigakti,
Jakarta (Indonesia), for their projects to
rehabilitate a run-down housing area.
10 October: Addressing UNESCO's Execu¬
tive Board in Paris, Willy Brandt analyses
the reasons for what he calls the "waning of
the North-South dialogue". He advocates a
"serious review of the United Nations
system" and suggests that a "kind of Secu-

rity Council" be created to deal with "global
environmental and developmental matters".
November: An exhibition on the life and
work of Jawaharlal Nehru is held in Paris on
the occasion of the 100th anniversary of his
birth.
November: At the Institute of the Arab
World in Paris, the UNESCO-International
Music Council Prize is awarded to the Iraqi
musicologist and performer Munir Bachir
and to the Fédération internationale des jeu¬
nesses musicales.
THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD
H 6 December: Following the adoption of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child
by the United Nations, young people play a
leading part at a ceremony organized at
UNESCO Headquarters to celebrate the 30th
anniversary of the Declaration of the Rights
of the Child, the first standard-setting instru¬
ment adopted in this field and now supple¬
mented and strengthened by the Convention.
1990
General policy
March: The first collective consultation of
Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in
Latin America and the Caribbean takes
place in Quito (Ecuador). UNESCO currently
maintains official relations with 585 NGOs
throughout the world.
In the 11 years from 1978, when it was
established, to 1989, the Committee on
Conventions and Recommendations, which
is an organ of UNESCO's Executive Board
with responsibility for dealing with cases of
violations of human rights in UNESCO's
fields of competence, has received 355 com¬
munications calling for its intervention.
Education
5-9 March: The World Conference on
Education for All, jointly convened by
Unicef, Undp, Unesco and the World
Bank and prepared by means of a series of
regional and international consultations, is
held at Jomtien (Thailand) and is attended
by 1,500 participants. The main United
The Citadelle de La Fernere (Haïti), a site which
has been included on UNESCO's World
Heritage List.
Nations agencies involved promise to step
up their contributions in the coming years.
The Conference also notes that an enor¬
mous volume of funds could be made
available by cutting back arms expenditure.
March: An International Congress on the
Planning and Management of Educational
Development is held in Mexico City, with
the participation of the International Insti¬
tute for Educational Planning (IlEP).
April: A World Ministerial Summit to
Reduce Demand for Drugs is held in
London. The participants agree on UNESCO's
key role in promoting education for the pre¬
vention of drug abuse.
April: A World Consultation of Teachers'
Organizations on education for Aids pre¬
vention is organized by UNESCO in co-op¬
eration with Who, Ilo and four interna¬
tional teachers' organizations and held at
Unesco Headquarters. It is attended by 400
participants.
ENVIRONMENT-FRIENDLY MICROBES
Exact and natural sciences
September: In collaboration with UNESCO's
MlRCEN (Microbiological Resources Centres)
network, the University of Montreal hosts a
symposium which examines the contribution
of biotechnologies to environmental manage¬
ment and conservation through microbial
mechanisms. The MlRCEN network was es¬
tablished by Unesco in 1975 and comprises
24 Centres in 19 countries.
October-November: Meeting in Geneva,
the Second World Climate Conference, with
which Unesco is associated through its
environmental programmes, and especially
the activities of the Intergovernmental
Océanographie Commission (loe), recom¬
mends the negotiation of an International
Convention on the Climate.
November: An intergovernmental meeting
on the issues raised by biological diversity is
held in Nairobi. The establishment of an
international standard-setting instrument is
envisaged.
At UNESCO Headquarters, more than 150
hydrologists from all over the world cele¬
brate 25 years of international co-operation
in their discipline.
As part of a project being carried out by
Unesco and the International Union of
Geological Sciences (lUGS), the first interna¬
tional conference on the use of expert sys¬
tems for quantitative modelling of mineral
deposits is organized in co-operation with
the Geological Survey of Canada, and other
organizations. These techniques have far-
reaching implications for developing coun¬
tries, where they will make it possible to
optimalize the prospection and extraction of
mineral resources.
February and November: The governing
bodies of the Man and the Biosphere Pro¬
gramme approve the designation of 17 new
biosphere reserves.
Social and human sciences
March: The Second Festival of Fez is held
on the theme of "Arab women and creati
vity: women and writing". The Festival has
been organized by the municipality of Fez
with Unesco support since 1989. The theme
chosen for 1991 is "Women and image".
An urban rehabilitation programme gets
under way in the town of Ngaoundere
(Cameroon). A team of young community
organizers has been formed to help the inha¬
bitants of an area on the outskirts of the
town to build or improve their homes.
S.O.S. ANGKOR
Culture
April: An expert mission is sent to Giza
(Egypt) to examine the flaking stonework of
the Great Sphinx by means of ultrasonic
equipment. Following the Director-General's
visit to the monument in 1988, UNESCO made
a grant of $100,000 towards the cost of the
work.
June: The first round table of experts for
the preservation of the monuments of
Angkor lays the groundwork for co-ordi¬
nated action to protect the site.
Ten years after the campaign to preserve
the Citadelle de. La Ferrière (Haiti) was
launched, work on the site is completed.
October: The UNESCO Crafts Prize is
awarded for the first time at a Crafts Fair held
in Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso). It goes to the
Ivorian artist Sangho Oumou for her jewellery
designs and to two other prize-winners, from
Niger and Burkina Faso respectively.
The General Conference adopts a Resolu¬
tion establishing a World Day for Cultural
Development, to be celebrated each year on
21 May.
General History of Africa: Volume III of
the French edition, L'Afrique du VII' au XI'
siècle, co-published by UNESCO and Nou¬
velles Editions Africaines, appears, along
with the abridged versions of Volumes II
and VII of the English edition. >
. Communication
27-28 February: an informal meeting of
journalists representing the new media of Eas¬
tern Europe and leading figures from the press
of Western Europe, the United States and
Canada is held at Unesco Headquarters. The
meeting, organized by Unesco, enables the
representatives of the East European written
press to indicate their needs in terms of
training, equipment and legal and financial aid
at a time when democratically elected régimes
are being established in their countries.
April: The International Radio and Televi¬
sion University (Irtu) and UNESCO's Office
of Public Information bring together senior
officials of the main radio and television
broadcasting organizations of Eastern and
Western Europe, in order to identify their
most urgent needs and study practical ways
and means of fostering co-operation be¬
tween the audiovisual media throughout the
continent.
The programme for news agency develop¬
ment in Africa is extended to two other
regions of the continent. Thirteen countries of
southern Africa and ten countries of central 47

Africa are covered by two projects, one for
South-East Africa News Agencies Develop¬
ment (Seanad), the other for Central Africa
News Agencies Development (Canad), with
the support of funds-in-trust from Germany.
April: In Bucharest, the Director-General
launches an appeal on behalf of the rebuilding
of the city's Central University Library.
SAILING THE SILK ROADS
Intersectoral activities
An expert meeting on "The view of the
other and the first intercultural contacts" is
held as part of a "Series of Encounters com¬
memorating the Fifth Centenary of the
Encounter between Two Worlds".
July-August: UNESCO's Integral Study of
the Silk Roads: Roads of Dialogue enters its
operational phase. Two scientific expedi¬
tions take place: the first, in July and August
1990, covers 10,000 kilometres along the
desert route in China, from Xian to Kashgar
and back via Urumqi; the second, from
October 1990 to March 1991, sails 27,500
kilometres from Venice to Osaka, stopping
at 21 ports in 16 countries.
The World Heritage Committee, meeting
in Banff, Alberta (Canada), includes the
island of Delos (Greece), the natural reserve
of Taingy de Bemaraha (Madagascar), San
Gimignano (Italy) and the Kremlin and Red
Square in Moscow among 17 newly-chosen
sites and monuments placed on the World
Heritage List.
Events
20-21 January: Almost 100,000 books are
collected in a Books for Romania Operation
promoted by Unesco and the Pen Club.
7 June: Nelson Mandela is given a standing
ovation at UNESCO Headquarters. The day
ends with a recital by the American soprano
Grace Bumbry, organized in collaboration
with the Danielle Mitterrand "France
Libertés" Foundation and coinciding with
the publication of a number of the UNESCO
Courier entitled "Winds of Freedom".
June: The Simón Bolívar International
Prize is awarded to Vaclav Havel. The Jury,
meeting at UNESCO Headquarters, wishes by
its choice of laureate to honour "a struggle
Vaclav Havel receives the 1990
Simón Bolívar prize from the
Director-General of UNESCO.
which goes far beyond the borders of his
country to become universal in scope".
10 December: Vaclav Havel is awarded the
UNESCO Prize for Human Rights Teaching
at a ceremony at UNESCO Headquarters.
September: The Second United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Coun¬
tries (Ldcs) is held at UNESCO Headquarters.
The UNESCO Prize for Peace Education is
awarded jointly to Mrs. Rigoberta Menchú
Tum (Guatemala) for her work on behalf of
her Indian compatriots and the rights of the
indigenous populations of Latin America,
and to the World Order Models Project, an
of researchers and intellectuals
engaged in research, education and dialogue
to promote an equitable world order.
1991
General policy
15 October-7 November: At UNESCO
Headquarters, 2,000 delegates take part in the
26th session of the General Conference,
which also coincides with the Organization's
45th anniversary. The Director-General states
that the Conference "is much more than a
fresh opportunity to gather together: it is a
second birth. For the first time since 1946 a
General Conference is being held in a climate
of freedom and hope".
The General Conference adopts a budget
for 1992-1993 that is $11,000,000, or 2.6%,
less than that of the previous biennium. The
Regular Budget for 1992-1993 is $444,700,000.
October-November: UNESCO's Constitu¬
tion is amended, when the General Con¬
ference decides that, with effect from its next
session, the Executive Board shall consist of
States chosen from among the Organiza¬
tion's 163 Member States. It also calls on the
Executive Board to "set up an ad hoc forum
of reflection composed of a select number of
eminent men and women in UNESCO's areas
of competence from all the world's regions".
November: Mrs. Marie Bernard-Meunier,
Ambassador and Permanent Delegate of
Canada to UNESCO and a member of the
Executive Board, is elected by the Board to
serve as its Chairperson. This is the first
time in UNESCO's history that a woman has
occupied this office.
UNESCO has 163 Member States, 152 of
which have established National Commis¬
sions. The most recent Member States are
Lithuania (7 October), Latvia and Estonia
(14 October) and Tuvalu, the former Ellice
Islands (21 October).
Education
A number of meetings are convened atv
UNESCO's initiative, or in co-operation with
Unesco, on a wide range of issues including:
education in Latin America and the Carib¬
bean (Promedlac iv, Quito, Ecuador, in
April); education in Africa (a Ministerial
Conference, MiNEDAF VI, Dakar, Senegal, in
July); the application of the Recommendation
concerning the status of teachers, with ILO
(UNESCO Headquarters, July); the Interna¬
tional Network for Information in Science
and Technology Education (Iniste), created
in 1984 (Headquarters, July). A meeting be¬
tween the deans and rectors of 60 African
universities on university planning, adminis¬
tration and management is held in Accra
(Ghana) in November, and the follow-up to
the Jomtien Conference (the first meeting of
the International Advisory Forum on Educa¬
tion for All) at Headquarters in December.
HIGHER EDUCATION: A UNESCO CHAIR IN
CHILD DEVELOPMENT
September: As part of the UNITWIN Pro¬
gramme, a UNESCO Chair in nutrition,
health and child development is established
at the Kenyatta University in Nairobi.
Unitwin's objective is to encourage the
twinning of higher education establishments
and co-operation between them in training
and research in higher education.
The General Conference amends the
International Charter of Physical Education
and Sport adopted in 1978 by introducing a
new Article on the protection of ethical and
moral values in this field.
June: In conjunction with the United
Nations Drugs Control Programme
(Undcp), a ceremony is held to proclaim
Anti-Drugs Day (16 June) and the United
Nations Decade against Drug Abuse (1991-
2000).
Exact and natural sciences
March: At UNESCO Headquarters, the
16th session of the Assembly of the IOC
focuses on the Commission's programmes
concerning ocean observation systems, tsu¬
nami warning systems, training in the
marine sciences and related subjects.
March: The governing bodies of the Mab
Programme approve the designation of two
areas in Brazil, Vale de Ribeira Serra de Gra¬
ciosa and Tijuca-Tinga-Orgaos, as biosphere
reserves. This is the first time that Brazil has
proposed that such areas on its territory be
included in the international network of
biosphere reserves.
May: The 10th anniversary of UNESCO's
Coastal Marine Programme (Comar) is
marked by an international conference in Paris
on "Coastal Systems Studies and Sustainable
Development", organized by UNESCO and
sponsored by the United Nations Environ¬
ment Programme (Unep) and the Interna¬
tional Council of Scientific Unions (Icsu).
November: Mab's International Co-ordi¬
nating Council approves the programme on
biological diversity being jointly carried out
by the International Union of Biological
Sciences (lUBS), the Scientific Committee on
the Problems of the Environment (Scope)
and Unesco.
MOBILIZATION AGAINST AIDS
Social sciences
June: At a session held in Santander (Spain)
the European Social Sciences Conference,
organized by National Commissions for
Unesco, puts forward the idea of an "Inter-

governmental Programme in the Social and
Human Sciences", and this is subsequently
taken up by the General Conference.
July: At an inter-agency meeting on popu¬
lation activities held in New York a prepara¬
tory timetable is drawn up for an interna¬
tional training and research programme
(1991-1995) financed by the United Nations
Population Fund (Unfpa).
8 June: The "Venice Appeal" is launched
to collect funds to help the African countries
combat AIDS. Some thirty leading figures
from the worlds of science, culture, busi¬
ness, and the media, along with dignitaries
from different religious denominations,
human rights activists and show business
and sporting celebrities, join the Director-
GénèjJal in signing the Appeal, which bears
the ^double imprint of UNESCO and the
World Health Organization (Who).
July: The signature of an agreement be¬
tween UNESCO, the Council of Europe and
the Portuguese Government is the signal for
the launching of "Youth Links: North-
South", a pilot project whose purpose is to
foster closer North-South co-operation in
connection with cultural exchanges between
young people and to set up a network for
co-ordinating governmental and non¬
governmental youth policies.
July-August: At the 16th meeting in
Geneva of the Working Group on Contem¬
porary Forms of Slavery, an organ of the
United Nations Commission on Human
Rights, Unesco presents a report (the
Pennstate Report) on the 1949 Convention
for the Suppression of Traffic in Persons.
Culture
June: Senior officials of art institutions
meet in St. Petersburg to discuss freedom of
cultural and artistic exchange and approve the
creation in the city of a Network for the pro¬
motion of international exchanges in the arts.
November-December: The Director-
General visits Cambodia, where Prince
Norodom Sihanouk, President of the
Supreme National Council and Head of
State, signs the instrument of acceptance of
the World Heritage Convention (1972). At
Angkor the Director-General addresses an
appeal to the international community for
the safeguarding of this magnificent site.
The General Conference adopts a Resolu¬
tion requesting the Director-General to es¬
tablish, in collaboration with the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, an
independent World Commission on Culture
and Development.
The Draft Programme and Budget for
1992-1993 provides for the launching of acti¬
vities, to be known as the Arabia Plan, to pro¬
mote the Arab heritage and contemporary
Arab culture by enlisting the support of scien¬
tific and cultural institutions in all regions.
Communication
April-May: For the first time in Africa, a
seminar for the development of an indepen¬
dent and pluralist African press is held. It
takes place in Windhoek (Namibia) under the
auspices of Unesco and the United Nations,
in co-operation with the United Nations
Development Programme (Undp) and in
apport
sur l'éducation
h
\
consultation with various other institutions.
Plans are made for activities and projects to
promote the independence of the media and
step up co-operation and exchanges between
organs of the written press in the North and
the South.
June: Some sixty Directors of Regional
Communication Training Institutes, meeting
at UNESCO Headquarters, draw up a strategy
for communication training worldwide.
The German-funded PACJOURN project,
providing for the training of journalists and
the development of the written press in the
Pacific Region, comes to an end. Over a
three-year period, it has trained more than
300 journalists in the Region and has helped
a number of newspapers to be equipped
with computer-assisted production facilities.
September: UNESCO dispatches a mission
to the library of the Academy of Sciences in
St. Petersburg in connection with the resto¬
ration of the book collections damaged in
the 1988 fire.
December: The first technical seminar
takes place on the Pan-African Network for
a Geological Information System (Pangis),
under which 15 national database centres
were established in 1990-1991.
UNESCO's Office of Public Information
(Opi) launches Unescopress to publish daily
news about the Organization's activities.
Intersectoral activities
January: A formal agreement on the
UNESCO-Chernobyl Programme, covering
technical assistance in UNESCO's fields of
competence and measures to alert interna¬
tional opinion, is signed with the three
governments concerned.
April-June: A number of activities are
undertaken in connection with UNESCO's
Integral Study of the Silk Roads: Roads of
Dialogue, including an expedition along the
Steppes Route, the launching of a series of
international research programmes on cara¬
vanserais and postal systems; epics along the
Maritime Silk Route, languages and scripts,
and other aspects; a fellowship programme;
and initial preparations for a Silk Roads Fes¬
tival to be held in 1993.
November: A meeting in connection with
the "Amerindia '92" project, attended by
representatives of American Indian groups,
is held at the Museum of Civilizations in
Ottawa-Hull (Canada) on the subject of
"Developing in accordance with one's cul¬
ture".
June-July: The mayors of forty-four his¬
toric cities protected by the World Heritage
Convention meet in Quebec City (Canada)
to discuss the management problems raised
by the conservation of the cultural values for
which their cities have been included on the
World Heritage List and decide to create a
network for collaboration between World
Heritage cities.
8-18 May: UNESCO dispatches a mission to
Lebanon which recommends that priority be
given to helping to save the National
Museum of Beirut and restoring the
country's educational facilities.
TEACHING COPYRIGHT THROUGH MIME
The first copyright training video-cassette
produced by UNESCO is issued in five lan¬
guages. In this case, however, priority goes to
gesture rather than language, since the cas¬
sette features an explanation of copyright by
the celebrated French mime Marcel Marceau.
Events
The bicentenary of Mozart's birth is cele¬
brated at the Paris-Sorbonne University by a
concert and gala evening and the award of
UNESCO's Mozart medal to the soprano Eli¬
sabeth Schwarzkopf. In May, UNESCO pays
tribute to Roger Caillois, one of the distin¬
guished authors who have served as members
of its staff.
Debates, lectures and seminars are held at
Headquarters on a variety of themes, in¬
cluding: the contribution of Islamic civili¬
zation to European culture (May); ethics
(with the Goethe Institut, Paris, June); reli¬
gious toleration and world peace, with the
participation of Hans Küng, (November);
and "Science and tradition: interdiscipli¬
nary prospects" (December).
September: The Unesco Peace Education
Prize is awarded to Ruth Leger Sivard of the
United States for her work in favour of disar¬
mament, and to the Cours Sainte-Marie de
Hann, one of UNESCO's Associated Schools.
October, the Sultan Qaboos Prize for Envi¬
ronmental Preservation, awarded for the first
time, goes to the Instituto de Ecología
(Mexico).
November-December: The Fourth World
AIDS Day is held at UNESCO Headquarters in
Paris on the theme "Sharing the Challenge".
6 December: The Director-General makes
public a telegram to the Yugoslav Secretary
of Defence in which he states that he has
"learned with consternation and outrage" of
the shelling of Dubrovnik and goes on to
say: "Your attention is called to the specific
commitment you and the federal authorities
have entered into to respect and protect the
world cultural heritage, in accordance with
the international conventions to which
Yugoslavia is a signatory". Since 28
November, two permanent UNESCO obser¬
vers have been posted in Dubrovnik to
record any damage caused to the historic
centre of the city and to report daily on the
situation to the Director-General. l~J 49
