THE UNESCO COURIER - SEPTEMBER 1992
EDITORIAL
Learningbreeds respectfornature
by France Bequette
~"1 ducation is the only way to achieve true respectfor the environ-
il ment. How many of us have unthinkingly poured some toxic
J matter down the drain or thrown it away with the garbage
I without the slightest awareness of the possible consequences?
¡Now that the alarm bells are ringing the effects of actions of
. -A this kind can no longer be ignored. There must, however, be
easy accessforall to clear, specific information adapted to tlie economic
level and the culture ofpeoples throughout the world. Obviously,
the message, cannot be the same everywhere. The averageAmerican
generates about 3 kilogrammes of waste every day, and dumping
grounds in the United States arefull to bursting. The very least that
must be done is to learn to sort wastefor recycling. In Haiti, people do
not throw anything away. Soda-bottle caps are shaped into spoons,
orange peel is dried and used to spice a famous liqueur, paper is
used in schools to make up for the scarcity ofcloth when teaching
young girls how to sew. We are hardly in a position to tell these
Haitian champions ofrecycling that they should not cutdown thefew
remaining trees on their eroded hills to cook their meals.
Even ifwe know what ought or ought not to be done, there is a
hugegap between knowledge and behaviour. It is not enough simply
to inform. As Ramón Folch, President of the Spanish Man and the
Biosphere (MAB) Committee put it: "It is more important to educate
than to inform. Knowledge alone educates no one; education also has
to include moral values. "A newform ofethics is being born, which
encourages humankind to live in harmony with nature. Primary
andsecondary school teachers have excellent educational tools at their
disposal. Documents produced by the UNESCO-UNEPInternational
ProgrammeforEnvironmental Education arefull ofpractical exer¬
cises that pupils will love doing. Ifyou would like to keep up to date
with what is happening in Environmental Education write to:
Connect
UNESCO/UNEP Newsletter on Environmental Education
7, Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris, France
23 Editorial
24 World
26 Dossier
Who benefits from
debt-for-nature
exchanges?
by France Bequette
28 Interview
with
Francesco di Castri
30 Voices from the past
The waterfall

World
The city of Bangkok pumps up
more than a million cubic metres of
water per day from several under¬
ground sources ofwater. This pump¬
ing rate depletes the groundwater
reserves faster than they can recu¬
perate naturally. The city is now
facing a double threat its sole
water reserve is being contaminated
by salt water, and its land area is
steadily sinking as much as 10
centimetres per year. This is espe¬
cially alarming because Bangkok is
located almost at sea level and is
highly populated (about 6 million
inhabitants).
AT
A remarkable brochure, written
for children, called Help to Save the
World, has been published by the
World Scout Movement and the
World Wide Fund for Nature
(WWF). It contains hundreds of
practical examples illustrated by a
series of drawings including: how
not to waste drinking water, how to
feed wild birds, how to cook food
with as little fuel as possible, how to
use solar energy, and so on. This
160-page brochure is valuable
because it can be referred to daily by
children both in the North and in
the South. For information, write
to the World Scout Bureau, BP 241 ,
1211 Geneva, Switzerland, or
contact the World Wide Fund for
Nature, Avenue du Mont Blanc, CH
1 196 Gland, Switzerland.
$> i*
HELP TO
S AVE
THE WORLD
PROGRAMME RESOURCE MATERIAL
ON CONSERVATION
24
In Costa Rica, the National Biodiversity Institute
hires village dwellers and pays them as para-taxono-
mists, that is, assistant medicinal-plant classifiers. They
accompany researchers into the forest and show them
what samples to harvest. Ethnobotanists on the spot
interview traditional practitioners on how they use the
plants they harvest and dry. Chemists then attempt to
isolate and extract the active principle and consult with
pharmacologists as to the possible medicinal value of
the plants. An active component against a number of
viruses, including those causing herpes and influenza,
has already been isolated. The first clinical tests are
encouraging. A large chemical company has already
paid Costa Rica US$1 million to help in the conserva¬
tion of its forests. If the medicine is marketed, part of the
profits will go to the protection of tropical forests.
Mussels have been put under close watch. Under the
auspices of the Intergovernmental Océanographie
Commission (IOC), the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) and the US National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), an international
mussel watch has been launched. Just as, in the past,
canaries taken down inside mines revealed the presence
of toxic gas, mussels today serve as pollution "indicators".
Any over-use on the land of fertilizers, pesticides or other
potentially toxic substance by careless farmers can
immediately be detected in the mussel samples that are
now regularly examined by specialists.

After the Clean AirAct, the United
States can now show off its Clean
Water Act, according to Robert
Griffin Jr., a science writer speciali¬
zing in health and environment.
The fish are returning to the
streams. Swimming and water
sports are once again allowed in
rivers, lakes and certain beaches
where they had been forbidden
because ofpollution. But pollution
has taken on a treacherous form
called "non-point source" pollu¬
tion. Take, for instance, a street or a
carpark. Oil, mineral salts and toxic
substances of all sorts sink into the
ground when it rains or snows
the surface water, then the water
table are contaminated. Cities are
not the only culprits. Agriculture
adds its share of fertilizers and pesti¬
cides. And according to the United
States Environmental Protection
Agency (USEPA), the list of non-
point source polluters includes:
abandoned mines, the building
trade, forestry and septic tanks. The
battle against non-point source pol¬
lution will be neither easy nor inex¬
pensive, but it has begun. Its first
objective will be to clean up the
coastline.
In Kinabulu, in the Sabah region
of East Malaysia, a programme is
being developed to raise mouse
deer {Tragulus javanicus) to feed
village dwellers. Although theore¬
tically a protected species, these
tiny deer, about the size of a house
cat, are still being hunted down
because the delicious deer-meat is
believed to have medicinal value.
In addition, the selling price for each
little creature is the equivalent of
the average weekly wage. Since the
species breeds quite well in capti¬
vity, it was decided to encourage its
farming. The relatively undemand¬
ing mouse deer feeds on bean
stems, wilted vegetables or fruit.
Cages and enclosures can be built
easily with local materials.
Brochures written in the local lang¬
uage are distributed to potential
breeders. To combat poaching,
births are registered and the ani¬
mals are tattooed. There is only one
obligation every breeder receives
three deer and must, in turn, within
three years, provide four deer for
new candidates participating in the
programme. Not only does this ope¬
ration protect the wildlife, it also
provides extra income for the
women who farm the land and are
traditionally responsible for animal
breeding.
il IUI OIL SPILL WITH
In January 1991, during the Gulf War, some six to
eight million barrels of oil were poured into the
waters of the Persian Gulf. The ensuing oil slick, the
largest ever recorded, was cause for much concern.
What would become of the maritime fauna and flora?
To find out, the Mt Mitchell was fitted out and sent to
the Gulf by the US National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), which also co¬
ordinated an expedition set up in association with
the Regional Organization for the Preservation of the
Marine Environment (ROPME) and UNESCO's
Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission
(IOC). Divers have already made over one hundred
dives in four coral-reef zones off the shores of Qatar,
Bahrain and Saudi Arabia. At first sight, the hydrocar¬
bons do not appear to have caused any damage.
Nonetheless, the Mt Mitchell took to the sea again
last May for a period of 100 days, in order to compare
the winter and the summer situations. Next year, the
research team will analyse the samples collected and
will make its findings known in January 1993 during a
symposium in Dubai (United Arab Emirates) .

Dossier





Voices from thepast
m
uE11
One of the three great Chinese Taoist philosophers i, Lieh-tzu (or Liezi) was the author of Ch'ungHsii Chih
Te Chen Ching, which can be translated as the "Pure Classic of the Perfect Virtue of Simplicity and
Emptiness". This collection ofTaoist anecdotes, divided into eight books, was composed around the year
AD 300. The extract reproduced here comes from the Second Book.
Introducing a volume ofclassic Taoist texts, the Frenchwriter Etiemble observed: "Perhaps we might find here
an aspect ofTaoism that could inspire us to address the greatest problem threatening our species: the death of
the seas, the earth, the air. To all those who play around with viruses, climates, marine currents, genetics, tera¬
tology, the Taoists cry 'Lunatics! Madmen! Destroyers!' Without knowing it, theywere the first ecologists."2
Ska
" i il.
M
Confucius was looking atLü-
liang waterfall. The water
dropped two hundredfeet,
streamingfoamfor thirty miles;
it was a place wherefish and
turtles and crocodiles could not
swim, hut he saw a man
swimming there. Taking himfor
someone in trouble who wanted
to die, he sent a disciple along
the bank to pull him up. But
after swimming afew hundred
yards the man came out, and
strolled along singing under the
bank with his hair hanging
down his back. Confucius
proceeded to question him:
"I thoughtyou were a ghost,
but now I can look you over I see
you are human. May I ask
whetheryou have a Way to
tread in water?"
"No, I have no Way. I began in
what is native to me, grew up in
what is natural to me, matured
by trusting destiny. I enter the
vortex with the inflow and leave
with the outflow, follow the Way
ofthe water instead ofimposing
a course ofmy own; this is how I
tread it."
"What do you mean by
'beginning in what is native to
you, growing up in what is
natural to you, maturing by
trusting destiny'?"
"Having been born on land I
am safe on land this is natural
to me. Ido it without knowing
how Ido itthis is trusting
destiny."
The Book of Lieh-Tzu,
Translated by A. C. Graham
©A.C. Graham, I960
l.The two others are Lao-tzu and Chuang-
tzu.
2. Philosophes taoïstes, Lao-tseu, Tchouang-
tseu, Lie-tseu. With aforeword, preface and
bibliography byEtiemble. Texts translated
and annotated by Liou Kia-Hway and
Benedykt Grynpas. Revised by Paul
Demiéville, Etiemble andMax Kaltenmark.
Bibliothèque de la Pléiade, Unesco and
Gallimard, Paris, 1980.
This passage from The BookofLieh-tzuappeais
m an anthologyentitled Compagnons du Soleil
("Companions of the Sun") which is to be co-
published (in French) by Unesco, Editions de
la Découverte (Paris) and the Fondation pour
le progrès de l'Homme. The anthology has
been prepared under the general editorship of
the African historian Joseph Ki-Zerbo, in col¬
laboration with Marie-Josèphe Beaud. The
idea for the anthology came from the Vézelay
Group, an international panel consisting of
eight members, including Joseph Ki-Zerbo
(see the Unesco Courier, June 1992, p. 30).
Left, A fishing village,
by Nang'chen, detail
from an 11th-century
Chinese scroll painting.
