Human interest
This is
their life
by Justine Boissard
'Reality shows'
attract big
audiences by
putting ordinary
people in the
spotlight ON the set of L'Amour en danger, a pro¬
gramme broadcast by France's TF1
channel, Danielle and Alain unasham¬
edly reveal their sexual and marital problems. A
psychoanalyst helps them understand why
their relationship is not working.
On the same channel, a reunion takes place
on Perdu de vue, a programme in which view¬
ers phone in to help someone in the studio
trace a missing person. After thirty-six years of
separation, Josiane is reunited with her father.
Tearfully she declares that the programme has
given her the best day of her life.
La nuit des héros, on the A2 channel, tells
stories with happy endings. Everyman becomes
a hero in the shape of Michel, a young man
who saved his young brother from the flames.
On television screens all over the world,
similar programmes, somewhere between
documentary and fiction, feature human
dramas, anguished couples, families torn apart.
They use some of the techniques of documen¬
tary investigations, with interviews playing an
important role. The facts are recounted by a
journalist, relived by the protagonists or staged
by actors. Emotion on camera is the one ingre¬
dient all the shows have in common.
The "reality show" was born in the United
States as the brainchild of local TV stations
eager to compete with the national networks
which, noting their success, proceeded to take
over the genre. NBC was the first off the mark,
with Missing Persons, which set out to trace
people who had disappeared. CBS followed up
with Rescue 911, the big brother of La nuit des
héros. In America's Most Wanted, no longer on
the air, viewers were invited to help find a cri¬
minal on the run. Today's star programme is
Studs, in which men are confronted with girls
they have seduced, who have to answer indis¬
creet questions put to them by the host,
inventor of the reality smut show.
In Europe, the Italian show Chi I'ha visto,
on the RAI3 channel, seeks to trace runaway
wives, husbands or children or lost loves. In
Britain, BBC2's Crimewatch UK asks viewers
to help track criminals or witnesses.
What all these programmes have in
common is low costs and big audiences a
winning formula that attracts 100 million
regular viewers in the United States alone, pro¬
viding seven of the top ten prime-time shows.
Reality shows have also hit the jackpot in
France, where six of them were launched
within six months. Perdu de vue reaches almost
30 per cent of the prime-time audience.
Voyeurism triumphant
More than just audience-pullers, reality shows
have become a social phenomenon. People dis¬
cuss them everywhere, and also question their
role, for they arouse strong feelings. Intellec¬
tuals, journalists and critics can hardly find
terms strong enough to express their distaste.
"Garbage", "voyeurism", "pick-up shows" and
"smear television" are among the phrases that
have been used.
In France the viewers' association known as

Eyeball to Eyeball (1992), a
drawing by Villoría.
JUSTINE BOISSARD is a
French freelance journalist
who writes for the film
quarterly Panoramiques.
"Les pieds dans le PAF"1. is a particularly
severe critic of reality shows. What worries us,"
says Stéphane Pocrain, the association's vice-
president, "is the way in which emotion and
distress are used for purely commercial ends."
The shows cover real social problems such as
Aids, unemployment, insecurity and marital
problems. "But they only skim over the prob¬
lems," he adds. "All that matters is the emo¬
tion, which guarantees good viewing figures.
The shows are staged so that the dramatic
intensity steadily increases to the point at
which the individual in front of the cameras,
whether he or she is an Aids victim or someone
looking for a close relative, bursts into tears.
There's invariably an advertising break imme¬
diately afterwards."
In the association's view the overwhelming
importance attached to emotion leads to all
sorts of chicanery. "With the reality shows,
voyeurism is in control. Viewers see a produc¬
tion full of drama and sentiment. But they are
duped. The emotion is faked, because when the
programmes are recorded in advance only the
high spots are kept for transmission."
Another danger is the threat of smears,
unsubstantiated accusations and the settling of
scores perpetrated under the pretext of the
search for lost loved ones.
The producers of these programmes band
together in face of their detractors. Bernard
Bouthier of TF1 insists, "We haven't gone too
far. Thanks to careful checking, there have been
no false witnesses on Perdu de vue. There is a
high-minded élite that criticizes our shows in
principle, but can't find anything concrete to
attack us with."
When they are accused of profiting from
emotional turmoil and tear-jerking, the produc¬
ers protest. "Viewers recognize themselves in
our programmes," Bouthier explains. "When
we present couples' problems or trace a loved
one, the viewers feel involved. They're not
voyeurs, because they are sharing the emotion
of the participants. Nobody complained of
tear-jerking when Serge Gainsbourg talked
about his sexual conquests or when Michael
Jackson's sister revealed that her father had
raped her. But when ordinary people are
involved, suddenly it's a scandal."
'Don't forget meV
The reality shows are television-as-neighbour,
prying into the most intimate corners of
people's lives. This confessional branch of
broadcasting has emerged at a time when "the
stars make people dream less and less," explains
sociologist Gilles Lipovetski. "Big shows with
glitter and fake jewellery have become so com¬
monplace that they have lost much of their old
fascination. As for fiction series, they are too
academic or just too repetitive." The reality
shows, on the other hand, "touch the heart¬
strings of the millions." Lipovetski claims that
they are more unpredictable and so generate
stronger emotion. "Reality outdoes fiction." 4 _
The programmes allow anyone to get on the JLw

air, and that is doubtless the secret of their suc¬
cess. "There's a process of identification and
involvement," notes Philippe Plaisance of La
nuit des héros. "In an individualistic society like
ours, it's a way for everyone to say 'Don't
forget me'."



In Gilles Lipovetski's view, "This type of
programme would not have been possible a few
years ago. In 1968 people wouldn't have been
interested in reality shows because they
thought politics could solve all social problems.
Today, with the crisis of ideologies, there is a
return to the values of listening and helping one
another, to a certain morality." Television
seems to be playing a new role as a kind of fairy
godmother.
The producers of Perdu de vue receive more
than 2,000 letters a month. "People write to us
because they don't know who else to turn to,"
says Bernard Bouthier. "And most of the
couples that appear on L'amour en danger have
never dared to consult a psychotherapist. They
are more scared of specialists than of television."
"It may not be Lourdes, but it has helped
me to discover how much my husband needs
me," says Florence, one participant in the
show. "TF1 surrounded me like a family."
People who take part feel they are really being
listened to. In exchange, they make their story
public property.
But television is interested in people and
prides itself on doing a good job. Before and
after the show, there are frequent discussions
between the programme-makers and those
taking part. Perdu de vue solves about thirty
cases a week, including some that never get on
the air. "People think we are more Machiavel¬
lian than we are," Bernard Bouthier claims.
"Actually we are providers of social hygiene."
On Perdu de vue on France's
TF1 channel, a young woman
is reunited with her father
after 20 years' separation.
16
As mediator and healer, television is cur¬
rently trying to get closer to people, as is
shown by the success of the televised charity
appeals known as telethons. Viewers express a
desire for co-operation, solidarity and compas¬
sion merely by switching on their sets. Viewing
becomes a noble deed and ordinary people
become stars. In La nuit des héros, a volunteer,
filmed on location, undergoes various sporting
trials with the audience's encouragement so as
to win 100,000 francs for charity.
Television is already omnipresent. Is it
likely to become omnipotent? How far can the
cameras go in exalting civic virtue and viewers'
generosity without doing harm?
And what about Mea culpa, one of the
newest French reality shows, which has taken
on the noble but perilous task of enabling vic¬
tims to confront their repentant persecutors so
that each side ceases to feel hatred? In one pro¬
gramme, the parents of a little boy called Yann
who had died of Aids met other people from
their village, Grez Neuville, who had rejected
the sick child, thereby causing great suffering to
the family. Now the neighbours came to
confess their error. They went away disap¬
pointed after the programme. "We felt we had
been tricked," the mayoress claimed. "We came
across almost as savages, as scum. Now we're
getting hate mail." The production team of Ber¬
nard Bouthier and Pascal Breugnot has since
made its own mea culpa, recognizing that the
programme had not been adequately prepared.
As for Perdu de vue, they insist that "We're
no substitute for the police or the judiciary. We
do everything with the consent of the people
involved, we don't run the risk of disappoint¬
ing people. If the person we are looking for
does not want to contact his or her relatives, we
give up. And we double-check the information
we receive."
Are reality shows introducing a new kind of
humanitarian activism? The role played by the
emergency relief organization Médecins du
monde in one sequence of Perdu de vue, in
which representatives of the organization act as
a link between viewers and people who are look¬
ing for a job or a place to live, is noteworthy in
this respect. But for every case that is settled,
how many appeals for help go unanswered?
Reality shows have introduced a new type
of television, in which everyday life becomes a
piece of real-life fiction. By voluntarily reveal¬
ing their secrets over the airwaves, anyone can
become a star for as long as the programme is
on the air. Everyman and Everywoman get a
chance to have their day. Viewers listen to what
they have to say sympathetically, because it
often echoes their own experience. Tomorrow
it could be their turn to be in the limelight. D
1. PAF = Paysage audiovisuel français (French
audiovisual landscape).
