The road to Sagarmatha
by José Serra Vega
46
JOSE SERRA VEGA,
a Peruvian engineer and former staff
member of the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), has worked in the '
Indian sub-continent on technologies geared to
environmental conservation, during which
time he spent two months in Tibet.
SAGARMATHA, Everest or
Qomolangma, as it is known in
Nepal, Europe and Tibet respec¬
tively, is the world's highest mountain,
with an elevation of 8,848 metres above
sea level. It is also one of the world's most
extraordinary places, for at least two rea¬
sons; On the one hand, it is the highest
point in the Himalaya (a Sanskrit word
meaning the "abode of the everlasting
snows"), the great mountain range sepa¬
rating the hot plains of India from the
high plateaux of Tibet, where two of the
sacred rivers of Hinduism, the Ganges and
the Brahmaputra, have their sources. On
the other, its spectacularly beautiful set¬
ting harbours a wide variety of plant and
animal life, as well as ethnic groups with
highly original cultures.
Some forty million years ago, as a
result of continental drift, the Indian sub¬
continental plate, which was moving at a
rate of ten centimetres a year, collided
with that of the Euroasiatic continent and
caused a powerful tectonic uplift. "Slices"
of the sub-continent were piled on top of
one other like a gigantic layer cake. In this
way the Himalayan chain began to take
shape, and from that day to this the
summit of Sagarmatha has risen at a
constant rate of two millimetres a year.
The Tibetan name Qomolangma,
which means "mother goddess of the
world", appears on a map drawn by the
Jesuits in the seventeenth century. More
recently, in 1852, it was recorded as "Peak
15", the highest mountain in the world, in
the great Trigonometrical Survey of India

carried out by the British on the initiative
of Sir George Everest. The survey in this
part of Nepal, which Europeans were for¬
bidden to enter, was made by Hindu
topographers, often disguised as pilgrims
and equipped with rosaries with a hun¬
dred beads instead of the usual 108 to help
them to count their paces and measure
distances. The surveyors also used ther¬
mometers hidden in their walking sticks
to measure the altitude by observing the
temperature at which water boiled.
At the foot of Sagarmatha is the high
valley of Solu-Khumbu, gouged out of the
rock by the Dudh Kosi, or "river of
milk", which rises in the mountain gla¬
ciers. There live the Sherpas in Tibetan
the "shar-ba" or "people living in the
east" who arrived in Tibet in the six¬
teenth century. The rhythm of their lives
was punctuated by the transhumance of
yaks and dzos (a hybrid between the yak
and the domestic cow) to the high pas¬
tures during the short summer, and the
movement of caravans which carried
cereals to Tibet through the Nangpa La
pass and returned with salt and wool. This
peaceful way of life was only interrupted
once in the eighteenth century by an inva¬
sion of Tibet by Gurkha warriors and a
counter-attack by Chinese forces in a bid
to help the Dalai Lama, which obliged the
Nepalese to withdraw and pay tribute to
the Celestial Empire.
Around 1950, the king of Nepal
decided to open his country's borders.
Mountaineers from all over the world
now had an opportunity to pit themselves
against the world's highest peaks, but this
brought a far-reaching change to the
Khumbu region and the life of the
Sherpas. In the 1980s international tour¬
ism became a mass phenomenon. In the
spring and autumn of 1990 alone some
12,000 tourists (approximately two tour¬
ists for each local inhabitant) visited this
fragile region.
Sagarmatha
National Park
In 1976 the Nepalese Government
decided to create the Sagarmatha
National Park, with an area of some
1,240 square kilometres, in order to
safeguard the region's exceptional plant
and animal life. Sir Edmund Hillary,
who with Sherpa Tenzing Norgay had
been the first to conquer Sagarmatha, in
1953, played an important role in this
initiative. Previously he had also made a
significant contribution, through his
Himalayan Trust foundation, to provid¬
ing the people of Solu-Khumbu with
schools, hospitals, bridges and drinking
water systems.
Reforestation is urgently needed and
several small-scale projects have been
started using the most common native trees
found in the Park, such as juniper, pine and
silver fir. A campaign, targeted especially at
young people, has been launched to make
the population aware of the problems
caused by massive deforestation over a
long period. Perhaps it would also be a
A snow leopard
good idea to plant copses around each vil¬
lage to provide the villagers with wood, as
is the practice in the arid zones of China.
In addition to Sagarmatha, the Park
includes some of the world's highest and
most beautiful peaks: Lhotse (8,501 m),
Cho Oyu (8,153 m), Nuptse (7,855 m),
the majestic Pumori (7,651 m), gigantic
glaciers and many lakes and ponds.
A number of rare and endangered
animal species are found in the Park. They
include the mysterious snow leopard,
which is rarely seen in its natural surround¬
ings but whose fur, supplied by poachers,
can be seen in the shops of Kathmandu; the
Himalayan thar, a goat capable of scaling
almost vertical slopes; the small musk deer,
which Tamang hunters from the foothills
hunt because of the commercial value of
the "musk pod", a gland which is consid¬
ered to have medicinal and aphrodisiac
properties by the Chinese and whose value
on the international market is higher than
' the average annual income of a Nepalese
villager; and the striking Impeyan pheasant
which has plumage of nine colours and a
green pennant-like crest.
It would be impossible not to men¬
tion the yeti, "the abominable snow¬
man". This legendary creature, a pro¬
duct of the Sherpa imagination, is
supposed to devour villagers, but no
other proof of its existence can be found
than a wall-painting and a fur-covered
skull (probably that of an antelope) dis¬
played in the Pangboche^.monastery.
Ancient Pathways
For tourists with enough time and phy¬
sical energy, the best way to reach the
Park is on foot. It takes around twenty-
five to thirty days to walk from Lamo-
sangu to Kala Pattar, directly opposite
the summit of Sagarmatha, along the
route from Kathmandu to the Tibetan
frontier, via Jiri, where the asphalt road
comes to an end.
After leaving Jiri, the traveller has to
cross the peaks of six mountain chains,
alternately plunging into tropical valleys
where there are multicoloured butter¬
flies, occasional snakes and, during the
monsoon, countless leeches, before
climbing again through woods and giant
rhododendrons which flower in March,
to cols some 3,200 metres high from
which the snowbound peaks can be
seen. The path wends its way through
villages where the houses have large bal¬
conies decorated with prayer-flags, past
small Buddhist monasteries with dark
sanctuaries redolent of yak butter,
beside many cultivated terraces, over
precarious bridges crossed by caravans
of nimble yaks, through pine forests,
and along the edges of sheer-sided
gorges. A swing hanging over a 600-
metre-deep precipice, at the bottom of
which a stream rushes, is a challenge to
the bravest.
Wayfarers can stay in the dwellings of
hospitable Newar and Gurung villagers
in the foothills, and share their tasty
dishes of rice and potatoes. After several
days' walk the first Sherpa houses come
into view. They are built of stone and
have multicoloured wooden windows,
flat roofs and Buddhist prayer-flags with
ribbons fluttering in the wind.
The World of Sherpas
The heart of the Sherpa home is the
kitchen with its burnished kettles,
copper saucepans and an ever-burning
fire. Visitors are invited to take part in
the life of the family, and are offered a
cup of chang, strong beer made from
malted rice. In many houses which are
also small restaurants, Western tourists
may be offered a menu more suited to
their taste, with sweetmeats, pancakes
with honey, cereals and dried apples. 47

48
Sherpa society is exogamous and is
noted for its extremely liberal sexual
mores (there is a tradition of both poly¬
gamy and polyandry). It is divided hierar¬
chically, with the higher ranks being
occupied by descendants of the founders
of the villages; and blacksmiths, basket-
weavers and butchers belonging to the
lower orders. However, the opening-up
of Nepal to the outside world and the
closing of the Tibetan border by the
People's Republic of China in 1951 led to
far-reaching changes in the organization
of Sherpa society. Today it is common for
the more prosperous tradespeople to go
to Hong Kong and Bangkok to buy tex¬
tiles and electronic equipment. In the
shops of Namche Bazar, the region's
Sherpa centre, it is even possible to buy
Maradona T-shirts.
The Sherpas, who do not appear to
have been very religious in the early cen¬
turies of their settlement in Nepal, now
observe a stricter form of Buddhism, per¬
haps due to the influence of missionaries
from Tibet. Sherpa society today contrib¬
utes generously to the maintenance of the
famous monasteries of Thame and
Thyangboche.
In the courtyards of these monasteries
the annual festivals of Mani Rimdu are
magnificently celebrated in broad daylight
or at full Moon. Monks dressed in bro¬
cade and wearing masks depicting demons
or animals, mime the triumph of Bud¬
dhism over the forces of evil and dance to
the sound of flutes made from human
shinbones, drums and enormous copper
trumpets. These festivals provide the vil¬
lagers from all around with an opportu¬
nity to get together, see old friends and
arrange marriages.
A Himalayan black bear
The monastery of Thyangboche
stands in a spectacular setting amidst high
snowy mountains, on a summit covered
with woods that are fast disappearing.
Not long ago the monastery was badly
damaged by fire, but it is now being
rebuilt. On entering its kitchens full of
enormous bowls and churns for prepar¬
ing the roasted barley flour known as
tsampa, and salty tea whipped with
butter, a restorative drink for travellers
who have just come in from the cold, one
has the impression of travelling back in
time to the Middle Ages.
Beyond the monastery the path con¬
tinues to rise. Trees no longer grow. Tra¬
vellers would be well advised to make a
halt at Pheriche, around 4,300 metres
high, or at Lobuche, to let the effects of
altitude sickness wear off. After two days'
walk across wide stretches of glacial
morane, it is possible to begin the ascent
of the 5,545-metre-high Kala Pattar, from
which, in late afternoon, the golden peak
of Sagarmatha can be seen. Makalu, the
fifth highest mountain in the world, can
also be seen, along with the great swathe
of snow joining Lhotse and Nuptse,
which have still not been fully explored.
An Urgent Task
The next day's stage is across the specta¬
cular Khumbu glacier, which is covered
with masses of extraordinarily shaped
pieces of ice glistening like thousands of
diamonds in the Sun, as far as the base
camp of the expeditions which set out to
climb Sagarmatha. Sometimes four or five
groups of mountaineers will be waiting to
UNESCO IN ACTION
WORLD HERITAGE
begin the ascent, each by a different
route. Tents and containers are every¬
where, and also, unfortunately, piles of
rubbish which earlier expeditions have
not bothered to take away with them.
The federations and clubs to which the
belong ought to work out
some kind of scheme to provide funds for
keeping the site clean.
It is intended to increase the area of
the Park to some 3,900 square kilometres,
and the Chinese government proposes to
expand neighbouring reserves on the
Tibetan side to some 10,400 square kilo¬
metres, thus creating one of the world's
biggest conservation areas.
Safeguarding the site is now an urgent
task because of the increasingly serious
threats to the environment. Since 1950
tourism has had a devastating effect on
the forest resources. Owing to runaway
growth in the demand for firewood,
entire stretches of woodland have disap¬
peared. Many small hotels and houses
have been built along the paths, and
mountaineering expeditions have become
complex organizations employing hun¬
dreds of porters and sometimes camping
for several months waiting for the
weather to improve before they start on
the climb. The deterioration of the land¬
scape is extending to other regions such
as the high valley of the Arun, near Solu-
Khumbu, which was hitherto virtually
unaffected but is now being burned and
cleared to provide farmland and wood
supplies.
Some steps have already been taken to
encourage the use of fossil fuels and to
oblige expeditions to bring their own fuel
in the form of kerosene or gas. Two small
hydroelectric power stations have also
been built, one for Namche Bazar and the
other for the Thyangboche monastery.
By including this exceptional region
on the World Heritage List, UNESCO is
contributing to its conservation, but there
can be no doubt that more financial sup¬
port will be necessary from the developed
countries, which are the Park's main
users, to carry out large-scale reforesta¬
tion and meet the energy needs of the
population. Only energetic and concerted
action will make it possible for people,
plants and animals to continue to live on
these marvellous slopes for many genera¬
tions to come. O
