18
y Nafis Sadik
One person in five lives in absolute poverty
A HE elimination of poverty is first and foremost
a moral imperative; but it is also essential for the
protection of the global environment and for the
health of the global economy. On all these
grounds, we can no longer tolerate a situation in
which one in five human beingsa total of 1 bil¬
lion peoplelives in absolute poverty.
Protection of the environment is a require¬
ment for ending povertya ruined and plundered
resource base could not support our current and
future numbersand slower, more balanced
population growth is both a precondition for, and
an outcome of, finding solutions to the twin
problems of the environment and poverty.
In the past, economic development was seen
as the solution to poverty, and demographic tran¬
sition (see box page 17) as the eventual solution
to population growth. Some damage to the
environment was accepted as a necessary, but
only marginally important, cost of development.
These assumptions are no longer justified.
In many cases development has not only
failed to eliminate poverty but has actually
increased it, with deadly effects on population
growth and environmental damage. For when
development efforts are ineffective, they disrupt
existing social and economic systems without
providing compensating benefits. Even when
development is effective it vastly increases human
sources of pollution and environmental destruc¬
tion. The industrial technology in use in most of
the world was developed without thought for its
environmental effects.
An unwanted side-effect of incomplete
development has been to encourage rapid popu¬
lation growth. Mortality has fallen and life expec¬
tancy has risen, but there has been much less
effect on birth rates. Increasing income and
improving child survival leads in the first place
to larger families. Only when development
programmes include a family-planning element
does family size fall significantly.
Another unintended side-effect of incomplete
development has been massive and sustained
urban growth. Classic development theory relies
on the city as the engine of economic growth and
therefore encourages urbanization. However, no
one foresaw rates of urban growth of between
4 and 7 per cent such as are being seen now in
many developing countries where urban growth
has spiralled beyond control.
The crisis is produced as much by numbers
and concentrations as by technologies and struc¬
tures. This is a peculiarly difficult dilemma. If
i
i
*'.-. j%
Several well-known musical
duos have helped spread the
family-planning message
through their songs: below
left, Nigeria's Onyeka Onwenu
and King Sunny Adé; centre,
Tatiana Palacios of Mexico
and Johnny Lozana Correa of
the Puerto Rican group
"Menudo"; right, Lea Salonga
from the Philippines and
Charlie Masso, a former
member of "Menudo".

development is simply the replication of world
experience to date, it condemns the environment,
and therefore itself.



The keys
to modern development
Education, health care and balanced population
growth, with special attention to the status of
women, are the keys to modern development.
They also form a basis for the elimination of
poverty and protection of the environment.
Developing countries' own resources of food
and raw materialsand above all their human
resourcesare sufficient for balanced develop¬
ment, if they are exploited in a thoughtful way
rather than for short-term gain. The aim- of all
who are committed to development must be to
work towards the marriage of public policy with
private interest and a full sense of community
combined with respect for human rights and
dignity.
There are many reasons why so many people
are and remain so poor. One is the sheer scale
of the problem; the poor are the fastest-growing
segment of the population in any country and
in the world as a whole. Another reason is that
the poor are trapped in a vicious cycle where
poverty, lack of education, lack of earning power,
poor nutrition and poor health feed on each
other. However the main reason for continuing,
large-scale poverty is quite simplethe lack of a
concerted will, nationally or internationally, to
do something about it. Many promises have been
made, but few have been kept. Many develop¬
ment theorists have pointed out that poverty can
kill us all, but they have not been heeded. Ending
poverty has simply not rated a high priority in
most countries, whether industrialized or
developing.
The poor themselves certainly have the will
and the motivation to defeat their poverty.
Anyone who has ever set foot in a slum, a poor
village or a shanty-town knows what ingenuity,
skill and effort go into the daily struggle to sur¬
vive. We in government and the development
business must learn not to get in the way. This
is not the same as abdicating responsibility; con¬
sider how many ready-made anti-poverty
programmes have come to grief because the poor
were not involved in their design and execution;
consider how many more have failed because
they ran foul of some contradictory policy.
Consider in particular how women have been
excluded and how their contribution to the
The father of eight children,
this Nepalese farmer
volunteered for sterilization.
He holds family-planning
meetings and literacy courses
for his family and neighbours
at his home.
19

Brazilian street children learn
a trade in a carpentry
workshop.
national and local economy and society has been
undermined by schemes with the word "develop¬
ment" in their titles. The pattern is so consistent
across continents and levels of development that
it is difficult not to conclude that the intention
was to exclude women from the new society and
to keep them safely at home with the children.
Community
involvement
Experience shows that the successful grass-roots
development programmes are those which
respond to national needs through local action
and involve both men and women, rich and poor.
For national policy to succeed, effective and
appropriate services must be delivered locally and
at the family level. Even more important, fami¬
lies and communities must be involved in the
policy-making and management process.
There is considerable scepticism today about
the ability of governments to deliver develop¬
ment services to the poor and even more about
governments' ability to involve communities in
decision-making, although in most countries this
has scarcely been given a fair trial. Where govern¬
ments are committedas, for example, in Sri
Lanka, or in Costa Ricathe experience has cer¬
tainly been that services such as education, health
care, family planning, agricultural extension and
even housing can be delivered with community
co-operation. Recent reports say that the State of
Kerala, in India, has achieved universal literacy
largely through a combination of official and
community action.
The other aspect of service delivery is, of
course, self-help. The poor are almost completely
self-reliant, because they have no one else to rely
on. Considering what they achieve with so few
resources, it should come as no surprise that they
can do a great deal when resources are more plen¬
tiful. With small amounts of outside help and
organization, shanty communities in Sri Lanka
have made themselves the model for a national
self-help housing programme. The Grameen
Bank in Bangladesh is a famous example of
success in extending credit to the poor.
Can successful community-based experience
be transferred to productive areas of the
economy, for example to industry or agricultural
policy? A growing number of economists and
other analysts of the development process now
think so. If, for example, the supply of water for
irrigation is controlled and paid for by user
groups, the result is that less water is used and
it is used more effectively.
The mix depends upon the country and the
community. Flexibility is the key to a successful
approach. Above all,' understanding that
improving services to the poor is an important
development goal must be inculcated at all levels.
The banking industry in Indonesia was very scep¬
tical about making loans to women's groups, but
it has been shown that with outside funding
women's groups will both repay on time and
make profitable investments. Commercial banks
are now much more enthusiastic about such
business.
If the global importance of small-scale
development is to be recognized, the big
organizationsinter-governmental groups, mul¬
tilateral agencies, international policy-making
institutions must give it their seal of approval.
It is very difficult for the very big to see the
very small, but it is important for them to learn.
There are too many, examples of massive,
internationally-funded development projects that
NAFIS SADIK
is Executive Director of the
United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA), the world's largest
source of multilateral
assistance to population
programmes. On her
appointment, in 1987, she
became the first woman to
head a major voluntary-funded
UN programme. A physician of
Pakistani nationality, she is the
author of many articles in the
field of family planning and
health, and has edited a book
Population: The UNFPA
Experience (New York
University Press, 1984).

have ended in expensive, environmentally dan¬
gerous and socially catastrophic failure.
A role for the United Nations
The United Nations system is being given more
work to do in the post-cold war era. The system
has already proved its value as a neutral forum
for discussion of different approaches to develop¬
ment. It has proved its value as a channel for
development assistance which is not tied to one
ideology or approach. Greater resources are now
needed so that the system can work towards a
new international consensus on the shape of
development.
Even more important, perhaps, than
resources for the future effectiveness of the
United Nations system will be a clearer sense of
direction. The United Nations is an inter¬
governmental system and, in the end, govern¬
ments decide how effective they want it to be.
It is quite clear that the various parts of the system
need better co-ordination. It is equally clear that
our agencies and their mandates, their political
direction and their management, are fragmented
and need to be reviewed and revised so as to meet
the needs of the next century. After three
development decades, the best we can sayand
it is a considerable boastis that we have sur¬
vived. We are supporting the largest number of
humans ever to have inhabited the planet at one
time. We have escaped nuclear war and we seem
to have reassessed the risks of nuclear melt-down.
The United Nations has not collapsed, blown
apart or withered away. Some of our institutions
are stronger than before and some of them have
learned how to work effectively. There is inter¬
national consensus on the need for action to pro¬
tect the environment, even if there is disagree¬
ment as to what that action should be. There is
a very strong and practical consensus on the need
for slower, more balanced population growth
worldwide.
There seems to be an even chance that the
female half of the population will get its share
of development investment in the future and be
allowed to make a full contribution to develop¬
ment work. The international community may
come to understand that enabling the poor to
escape poverty may be the key to survival for the
rest of us.
Health workers are taught
about birth control methods
as part of a family planning
programme in Lahore
(Pakistan).
21
