CA it
Vo&Bre, crKsafer ^aîbjî fynww)/
by Jean Lessay
Above and following
pages: sketches by the
Swiss painter and engraver
Jean Huber (1721-1786)
show Voltaire in a variety
of moods.
Below, Voltaire pledging
his support to the Calas
family, an engraving
by Pierre-Nolasque Bergeret
(1782-1863).
IN social terms a value, and in those who
practice it a virtue, tolerance nevertheless
seems to have been a new idea in the eigh¬
teenth century. This may not seem to square
with the usual stereotype of that period,
which in Europe was supposedly marked by
great sophistication in all the arts, lively intel¬
lectual curiosity and brilliant social life. But it
becomes less surprising when we recall that
the wars of religion were then still fresh in
everyone's memory, and that fanaticism, albeit
in retreat, was not yet dead.
Conversation in the salons was unfettered,
but in France many books were forbidden,
seized and destroyed. Some unconventional
opinions and behaviour were connived at, but
that is not to say that they were tolerated:
tolerating means accepting the existence of
that which is different. Many men tolerant by
instinct and conviction were to be found even
among princes and potentates, but that did not
stop fanaticism from rearing its head under
cover of the institutions. Exclusion and perse¬
cution stemmed partly from the automatic
enforcement of laws, even those privately
regarded as outdated, and partly from the
demands of a section of public opinion which
used minorities as scapegoats for its own frus¬
trations and its taste for violence.
The word tolerance was still viewed with
caution, mistrust and sometimes hostility.
Though the Encyclopaedists had already had a
14
JEAN LESSAY,
a French writer specializing in
the American Revolution,
published studies on Lafayette
(Paris, 1983), Washington
(Paris, 1985) and the Count of
Rivarol, a royalist in the age
of the French Revolution
(Paris, 1989). He wrote the
present article shortly before
his recent death.

profound influence in educated circles, there
were still theologians ready to defend intol¬
erance in the most spectacular form it took
in France, namely the prohibition of Protes¬
tantism by the revocation of the Edict of
Nantes in 1685. The negative effects of this
measure were still deeply felt several decades
afterwards, both in the intellectual sphere (in
the form of a brain drain) and in the economy
(in the form of an exodus of skilled craftsmen
to work abroad).
The advent of tolerance, or rather its rec¬
ognition as a factor for civil peace and a safe¬
guard against injustice, was largely the work
of philosophers, from Pierre Bayle (a refugee
in Holland) to Diderot, d'Alembert, d'Hol¬
bach, Jean-Jacques Rousseau and especially
Voltaire, who was its real champion.
THE CALAS AFFAIR
From his earliest days as a playwright, Vol¬
taire (1694-1778) indirectly attacked the
scourge of fanaticism that he was to fight
throughout his life. Thus in 1728, in his epic
poem La Henriade, he praised King Henri IV
for setting out to be the wise, enlightened
monarch of all Frenchmen, whatever their
beliefs. The concept of tolerance he tackled
directly in his Lettres philosophiques (1734),
his Dictionnaire philosophique (1766) and his
Questions sur l'Encyclopédie (1772). Three,
years before his death, under the title Le cri du
sang innocent ("The cry of innocent blood"),
he was to petition Louis XVI to review the
trial of a victim of fanaticism whose cause he
made famous, the Chevalier de la Barre.'
His main contribution to this war of ideas,
however, is still his Traité sur la tolérance
(1763). The exceptional importance of this
text, apart from the cogency of its arguments,
lies in the fact that Voltaire's treatise, unlike
John Locke's Letter on Toleration (1690), to
which he pays tribute, is not simply a philoso¬
phical dissertation. Thought here stemmed
from action, from what we would nowadays
describe as the writer's "commitment". For
over a year Voltaire had been waging an unre¬
mitting campaign to secure the rehabilitation
of a fabric merchant from Toulouse, Jean
Calas, a Protestant falsely accused of mur¬
dering his son. Calas was sentenced to death,
and in 1762 was broken on the wheel after
refusing to confess under torture. Actually a
majority of the judges were out to gratify an
ignorant fanatical crowd, which accused Jean
Calas, without a shred of evidence, simply
because on the basis of hearsay it ascribed to
Protestants a duty to kill their children if they
intended to convert to Catholicism. This was
supposedly the situation of the unfortunate
son, Marc-Antoine Calas: in actual fact he
committed suicide.
Voltaire dissected out all the intricacies of
this iniquitous business, and stirred up France
and Europe. Though the press then existed
/» ¿Slnui^S
y

only in an embryonic state (France had fewer
than twelve newspapers), it is no exaggeration
to speak of a media triumph; the role of the
media was played by salons, clubs, cafés and
private correspondence. The Calas affair to a
large extent foreshadowed the Dreyfus case at
the end of the nineteenth century: a nation
aroused by the decision of an ordinary
tribunal which was regarded as an injustice.
Voltaire won over all liberal-minded people
in France, even those in circles close to the
Court, in favour of a formal review of the ver¬
dict and the payment of compensation to the
innocent victim's family, and thus gained public
acceptance of three points: that judges can make
mistakes; when they do, they must unequivo¬
cally admit as much and take the consequences;
if a minority is not respected, offenders are
likely to be sought first among its ranks.
Though no one religion had a monopoly of
fanaticism, the ultimate in intolerance (poli¬
tical ideologies did not yet exist), after Louis
XIV's decision to deprive Protestants of all
their rights, including that of possessing a civic
status, Voltaire came to regard France as fer¬
tile ground for all the abuses of fanaticism.
1. Beheaded at Abbeville in
1766 for an "impious crime",
though no evidence of it
was ever adduced. 15

A page of Sebastian
Münster's Cosmographia
universalis (1544) illustrated
with a portrait of Erasmus.
The Cosmographia, which put
forward original ideas
about the Earth's physical
features, was censored
by the Inquisition.
Liber III 407
mcnclatu/áfcirns omuto
quoi ipfc nofti.i
Im. Augufti, anno* CM
fío ffrimo« natfljM. LX
\M I I I N
16
He recalled that between 1745 and 1762
eight Protestant pastors had been hanged for
preaching according to their faith, and hun¬
dreds of their followers sent to the hulks.
This situation, according to him, could not
arise in England, Germany or Holland, for in
those countries religious pluralism existed
and members of different faiths could "live as
brothers and contribute equally to the good
of society". Doubtless Voltaire painted a
somewhat idealized picture of what went on
in those countries as regards freedom of
belief, but he did so in order to condemn the
laws in France, where "abuse of the most
holy religion has produced a great crime [the
Calas affair]". Hence it is "important for the
human race to consider whether religion
should be charitable or barbaric."
A UNIVERSAL VALUE
AND VIRTUE
In order to denounce fanaticism, which runs
counter to the spirit of the Gospels, the
writer presented a brief survey of religious
customs in Europe and Asia since Antiquity.
According to Voltaire, neither the Greeks
nor the Romans persecuted individuals on
the grounds that their beliefs offended the
local deities. The Athenians even took tol¬
erance to the point of building an altar dedi¬
cated to foreign gods they were unac¬
quainted with; and the Romans very wisely
held the view that it was for the gods them¬
selves to worry about offences committed
against them. If Christians were martyred in
the empire, it was not on account of their
beliefs, but because they disturbed public
order.
Voltaire saw evidence of this desire to let
people believe what they wished even in the
Old Testament. Not greatly enamoured of
the Hebrews of the Bible, nor yet of the
ancient Egyptians, he nevertheless saw "rays
of universal tolerance" shining out through
the story of Moses's followers. The Emper¬
ors of China and Japan also tolerated a
variety of beliefs when this did not endanger
the state. "Go to India", he wrote," "or Persia,
or Tartary, and you will see there the same
tolerance and the same serenity."
He did not attack any religion, for
"wherever there is an established society, a
religion is necessary; the laws guard against
known crimes and religion against secret
ones." But religion, essentially benign itself,
is corrupted by superstition and tolerance.
"Superstition is to religion what astrology is
to astronomy the very foolish daughter of a
very wise mother."
To combat superstition and intolerance is
the task of reason, the reason that "daily
spreads in France, into the merchants' shops
and the noblemen's houses;" it is for reason
to demonstrate the inanity of ridiculous,

monstrous practices such as the Inquisi¬
tion whose very name, the Abbé Grégoire
was later to say, is an offence against the
Gospel forced or bought conversions, and
autos-da-fé.
The author of the Traité sur la tolérance
regarded the review of the Calas trial as a
victory for philosophy, and this can hardly
be denied. He says that all beliefs should
have an opportunity to express themselves
"It would be foolish to claim to bring all
men to think in the same way about meta¬
physics. It would be far easier to subjugate
the entire universe by force of arms than to
subjugate the minds of every dweller in a
single town." In his conception of tolerance
he goes further than John Locke, who in his
famous 1690 letter excluded papists and
atheists from it; but he still does not present
a materialist or atheist view. For him
atheism, far from being synonymous with
tolerance, can on the contrary drift into
fanaticism like any religion. "A rational
atheist who was fiery and powerful," he
wrote, "would be just as disastrous as a
bloodthirsty superstitious man."
Tolerance, the antithesis of fanaticism, is
respect for others in their difference from
oneself. Paul Valéry was surely right to say
that it "can only be conceived, and make its
way into law and customs, in an advanced
age, when people have gradually enriched
and enfeebled themselves by the interchange
of their differences."
For Voltaire, this value/virtue also
contains an element of gentleness and bene¬
volence, and he often uses the word "indul¬
gent" to mean tolerant. "What is needed to
be happy in the next life is to be just. To be
happy in this one, insofar as the poverty of
our nature permits, what is needed ... is to
be indulgent."
According to him, the fight against intol¬
erance requires recourse to irony and
humour, in order to bring out its grotesque
inconsistencies. Thus we need to demonstrate
the absurdity of condemning those whose
opinions differ from ours to punishment in
the next world, whilst having to maintain
courteous relations with these same people
for purposes of living together. "Fanaticism
is not merely horrible, it is absurd."
In 1787, twenty-four years after the
publication of the Traité sur la tolérance,
Louis XVI signed the Edict of Toleration,
which gave Protestants a civic status which at
last allowed them to get married, make wills
and inherit, like the rest of his subjects. This
was only a modest step forward, but in the
right direction. Voltaire had cleared the way.
His aim, however, was not merely to enable
a category of French citizens to be given
back the rights they had been unjustly
deprived of: he claimed tolerance as a uni¬
versal value. No people on Earth, no indivi¬
dual, should suffer for lack of it. His words
are uncompromising: "I say to you that we
must regard all men as our brothers. What, a
Turk my brother? A Chinaman my brother?
A Jew? A Siamese? Yes, without doubt: are
we not all children of the same Father, and
creatures of the same God? But these peoples
despise us, and call us idolators! Well, I shall
say to them that they are quite wrong."
Eleven years after the writer's death,
freedom of thought and expression, for
whose recognition he had battled so hard,
were on 26 August 1789 proclaimed to the
world by the National Constituent
Assembly in the Declaration of the Rights of
Man and of the Citizen. In Articles 10 and 11
of this Declaration, which claimed to be uni¬
versal, tolerance in the widest sense of the
term at last found its philosophical and legal
basis although the word itself was not used.
All that remained was for people to show
tolerance to their fellows in daily life. But
will this struggle ever be won?
T 11 A I T É
it> it
TOLERANCE.
Title page of the first edition
of Voltaire's celebrated work,
published in 1763.
Below, one of the last
thoughts written down by
Voltaire, a few months
before his death in 1778:
"I die worshipping God,
loving my friends, hating not
my enemies and detesting
superstition."
/ST*
¡ÉÊÊ _J
Í 17
