THE UNESCO COURIER OCTOBER 1992
EDITORIAL
A long-term threat
by France Bequette
Thegreenhouse effecthas some points in itsfavour, accord¬
ing to a recent report on the subject from the French
AcademyofSciences. As the reportpoints out, it is thanks
to the greenhouse effect that water exists in liquidform
on the surface of the Earth, a phenomenon which has
helped to make the planet inhabitable. But as Mostafa
Tolba, Executive Director ofthe United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), has noted: "During the 300 years of the
industrial and agricultural revolutions, man began to replace
nature as the motor ofclimatic change. " During that period,
concentrations in the atmosphere of some of the so-called
greenhouse gases constantly increased: there was, for example,
a 25 per cent increase in carbon dioxide (0.5 per cent peryear),
and over 50 per cent in methane (0.9 per cent peryear). These
figures may seem insignificant, but while methane remains in
the atmospherefor ten years, it is estimated that carbon dioxide
stays therefor 50 to 200years. We have now inherited a situa¬
tion "which presents a serious enough long-term threat (within
one century) to warrantprevention and adjustment measures
which callforextreme vigilance."Experts on the Earth's atmos¬
phere are warning the insatiable energy-consumers that we are
that we must save energy and press for the development of
renewable energies such as wind and solarpower.
21 Editorial
22 World
24 Dossier
How clean is nuclear
energy?
by France Bequette
26 Ecology
A key resource at risk
28 Voices from the past
The rainbow song

World
In 1970, 0.64 hectares of arable
land were theoretically available per
inhabitant in the developed coun¬
tries, as opposed to 0.28 in the deve¬
loping world. In 1990, the figure
declined to 0.56 hectares, for the rich
but plunged to 0.20 for the poor. The
reason is that urban areas in the
developing countries will more than
double in size between 1980 and the
end of the century, rising from 8 mil¬
lion to 17 million hectares. Rural
depopulation is also leaving land
fallow.At least 0.60 hectares ofarable
land is necessary to feed one person
using traditional farming methods,
so that these methods are no longer
meeting current needs. One piece
of good news, however, is that bet¬
ween 1970 and 1990, cereal produc¬
tion increased by 15 per cent in deve¬
loping countries and by 32 per cent
in industrialized countries. (Source:
EarthAudit, a document published
in five languages by UNEP in
January, 1992).
22
TheYanomami Indians ofBrazil havejustbeen granted
94,000 square kilometres ofreserve land an area three
times the size of Belgium following an order signed
last year on 14 November. This brings the total area of
land that has been turned over to the country's 200,000
Indians up to 800,000 square kilometres.
Autumn rains, bird migration, commercial and leisure
fishing, wine and olive cultivation, and forest fires are
among the themes explored by Mediterrania, aweekly
TV documentary series presenting the "seasonal diary"
of the Mediterranean ecosystems. Mediterránea is an
educational project being carried out by the Spanish
Committee ofUnesco's Man and the Biosphere (MAB)
programme. The series is broadcast by Televisió de
Catalunya, a Barcelona public television channel which
airs 100 hours a week in Catalan.
Since 1985, Swiss shop-keepers have been required to
take backused batteries, which maynot be thrown away
in garbage dumps. But so far much of the 3,500 tonnes
of batteries the country discards each year has been
dumped in neighbouring countries. A few months ago,
a plant, the first of its kind in Europe, was established to
incinerate 2,000 tonnes of batteries per year, thereby
reducing their mercury, zinc and ferromanganese
content to less than 10 tonnes of vitrifiable slag.
Shareholders in the company that commissioned the
plant include the Swiss Post Office and railways, the city
ofZürich, Migros (a supermarket chain which is closely
involved in environmental protection) and a number
ofprivate businesses.

OF IM AID
Although some whaling is autho¬
rized for "scientific research", com¬
mercial whaling is still subject
to a moratorium. Meanwhile, mass
strandings of whales on beaches
continue to occur. One explanation
which is currently being advanced
for this phenomenon is that sonar
equipment used during military
manuuvres may be scrambling
the cetaceans' sonar orientation
capabilities.
The best way to avoid the traffic jams that clog the
world's megacities is to promote the use ofnon-moto¬
rized vehicles. Michael Replogle, a consultant to the
World Bank and the Institute for Transportation and
Development Policy, hopes that governments will take
prompt action on this issue. Asia has more than 400 mil¬
lion bicycle owners, and in India, for instance, 30 to 50
per cent of the vehicles on the main city thoroughfares
are bicycles.
In northern Europe and in the United States, the
number of species of edible and non-edible mush¬
rooms, the total numbers ofmushrooms and the ave¬
rage weight of individual mushrooms are all declining.
Mushrooms are closely linked to trees, with which they
exchange water and mineral salts for glucides (carbo¬
hydrate compounds), and their diminishing numbers
represent a serious threat to forests. The likely culprit
is air pollution, particularly that linked to nitrogen-
based fertilizers.
The adoption in 1977 of Protocol I as an addition to
the 1949 Geneva Conventions resulted from a deter¬
mination to protect the environment in wartime. Article
35 of the Protocol reads that in case of armed conflict,
"It is prohibited, to employ methods or means ofwar¬
fare which are intended, or may be expected to cause
widespread, long-term and severe damage to the
natural environment." Article 55 states that "Care shall
be taken in warfare to protect the natural environment
against widespread, long-term and severe damage
"What refreshing optimism!


Dossier
i1 IS MMEl




Voicesfrom thepast
m
The Pygmies, hunter-gatherers dispersed through the
African equatorial forest from the Atlantic Ocean to
the great lakes, are notable not only for their small
stature but also for the extraordinary way in which
they have adapted to forest life. The forest is a prodigal
and benevolent tutelary deity which, in return for the
performance of a small number of magic rituals,
guarantees their day-to-day survival in conditions of
relative abundance.
In their study on the religions of black Africa,* L.V.
Thomas and R. Luneau write that "Whenever he sees a
rainbow, which is a symbol of the divinity, any
Pygmy or the chief speaking for the whole group if
they are gathered together must stop whatever he is
doing and stand facing it. He draws his bow to resemble
the rainbow, but in such a way as almost to hide it from
view. He then sings, or rather chants in a monotone
and, except at the end, almost on a single note, the
celebrated Rainbow Song. "
* Les religions d'Afrique noire (Fayard-Denoël publishers, Paris, 1969)
The Pygmies' Rainbow Song appears in an anthology entitled Compagnons du
Soleil ("Companions of the Sun") which is to be co-published (in French) by Unesco
Editions de la Découverte (Paris) and the Fondation pour le progrès de l'Homme. The
anthology has been prepared under the general editorship ofthe African historian
Joseph Ki-Zerbo, in collaboration with Marie-Josephe Beaud.
Khwa, yé, oh! Khwa! Rainbow, oh Rainbow!
Shining up there, so high,
Above theforest so wide,
In the midst ofblack clouds,
Splitting the dark sky,
You have cast down beneath you,
Victorious in the struggle,
The rumbling thunder
That rumbled so loud,
Angry, was it with us?
In the midst ofblack clouds
Splitting the dark sky,
Like a knife rotten fruit,
Rainbow, oh Rainbow.
Now he hasfledfrom you,
The Thunder, the Man-killer,
Like the deerfrom the panther,
Now he has taken flight.
Rainbow, oh Rainbow,
Strong bow of the hunter on high,
Who chases the cloud-herds,
Like herds ofscared elephants,
Rainbow, thank himfor us,
Tell him, Do not be angry.
Tell him, Do not be wroth.
Tell him not to kill us.
For we are very scared.
Rainbow, tell him that.
