From Socrates to Spinoza
by Pierre-François Moreau
The Philosopher's Garden,
or Plato and his followers in
the gardens of the Academy
in Athens (1834),
by the Hungarian artist
Maté Strohmayer.
IN the Western world, philosophy is often
seen as an autonomous activity involving
the use of reason, free from interference by
the authorities and answerable only to itself,
each philosopher being responsible for his or
her own thinking rather than the inheritor of a
tradition or of a particular line of thought.
Socrates, as he emerges from the pages of
Plato's early Dialogues, epitomizes this approach
to philosophy, rejecting the teacher/pupil rela¬
tionship, teaching no pre-established doctrine
and simply verifying the solidity of his interlo¬
cutor's argument. Agreement between two
people reached in this way, if based on truth,
seems preferable to public approval based only
on probability.
This free-wheeling approach does not,
however, exclude a certain element of struc¬
tured teaching that is inseparable from the
notion that philosophy engenders truth. At the
end of his dialogue Phaedrus, Plato tells the
story of Thoth and Tammuz. The Egyptian
god Thoth, founder of the arts, is the inventor,
amongst other things, of writing. He takes his
inventions to Tammuz the king of the gods,
expecting to be congratulated on his work.
Tammuz does indeed praise him for some of
his inventions, but he rejects others. With
regard to writing, however, the king scolds him
roundly for having done the exact opposite of
what he had set out to do, namely to banish
forgetfulness. With writing, men would lose
their memory since they would rely on texts set
down in inanimate characters.
17

Socrates, who relates the story, sides with
Tammuz. A written text, he declares, is an
orphan, a fatherless speech with none to defend
it. You cannot ask it for further explanation as
you would a speaker and it is even more defence¬
less in that it has been placed in the hands of all
and sundry. "Once it has been committed to
paper, a discourse journeys as the wind blows
it, falling willy-nilly into the hands of those
who are knowledgeable in such matters and
those whom it does not concern at all. Further¬
more, it has no means of knowing to whom it
should or should not be addressed."
From soothsayer
to scholarch
The story only holds good in the light of a cer¬
tain vision of the truth, namely that the truth,
far from having a value in its own right, has no
substance unless upheld by the word of a
Master. Neither Tammuz nor Socrates claim
that written discourse was untrue. It may well
be true, but it is an erratic truth that requires
someone to guide it and to know to whom to
impart it and from whom it should be with¬
held. That someone should also know how to
impart it, since teaching is not just a matter of
Saint Augustine with a group
of monks and nuns.
12th-century manuscript.
18
reciting a discourse, but also of defending it and
explaining it in face of objections that the
written word cannot foresee. The listener is
thus in the position of a disciple, since the dis¬
course must not only propound the truth, it
must do so at the appropriate time and in the
right manner. Without the authority of a
Master there can therefore be no truth.
This concept gives us a key to the structure
of Plato's Dialogues. In the late Dialogues,
Socrates (or the Stranger from Athens who
replaces him) propounds a doctrine. He teaches
what is good, how pleasure relates to it, and how
to build an ideal city. In the earlier Dialogues,
rather than stating what is true, he lays down the
conditions under which the truth will emerge.-
Only when we are in agreement, he says, will we
be able to accept a thesis as being true.
Thus Socrates, who neither writes nor
teaches, is seen as the Master of the truth, less
with regard to its content than with regard to
the conditions under which it emerges. In this
he is the incarnation of a form of Greek
thought that existed even before the time of
Plato. As early as the Homeric age, the poet
played the role of propounder of the truth, as
did the soothsayer and the king. What they said
required no proof or supporting argument. As
the French Hellenist Marcel Détienne has
pointed out, the mere fact of the positions they
held sufficed. Thought was thus the appurte¬
nance of certain men, who were themselves
bound to certain social functions, such as the
exercise of power or the administration of
sacred rites.
This structure later developed other forms
with the advent of philosophy as an indepen¬
dent discipline. The great innovation was that
serving the truth became the Master's sole
social function. The philosopher no longer
looked to the soothsayer or the poet as his gua¬
rantor of the truth, but rather to the scholarch,
or head of his particular school of philosophy.
To be a thinker one had to become an Aristote¬
lian, a Stoic, a Cynic or a Sceptic. Hellenistic
thought came to be characterized by its oppo¬
sing schools with their succession of heads, or
scholarchs, and their perpetual reference back
to the Founder, and this practice was later
passed on to the Romans.
This conception of the truth as inherent in
the teaching of a Master meant that the various
schools had a number of common characterist¬
ics personalization, harking back to the past,
orthodoxy even though their doctrines
diverged. The Master/Pupil relationship was a
replay of the Master/Disciple relationship at a
different level. The pupils of Epictetus, for
example, saw him as the embodiment of the
Stoic ideal. Each successive Master had tempo¬
rarily to take on the personality of the founder
of his school. Arguments had to be re-cast and
re-thought. One had to be immersed in philo¬
sophy before one could begin to philosophize.
Learning appeared to be the best route to dis¬
covery, and imitation seemed to be the surest
way to learn.

The inner teacher
Learning by imitation can be seen either as an
indication that the heirs of a great master are
not of the same stature as he, or as a laudable
form of respect for tradition and evidence that
a coherent line of thought does not necessarily
involve radically new individual thinking. It is a
method that is encountered at other periods in
the history of Western thought in the com¬
mentaries of the Schoolmen, for example, or in
the Cartesian, Kantian and Hegelian schools,
which perpetuated a system and spread it
through the universities.
Can the religions based on revealed scrip¬
ture be said to have rejected this system? At
times they appear to have revived and perpe¬
tuated it, but, above all, and this is fundamental,
they interiorized it.
What a human Master teaches us may well
be true, said St. Augustine, but such truth
cannot enter us unless it is already awaited by
an existing inner truth the presence of God in
our innermost being. This refusal to be subject
to another's teaching leads to the discovery of a
wiser and more convincing Master. "When the
Masters have explained in words all those
branches of knowledge that they claim to teach,
including even virtue and wisdom, those whom
we call disciples examine their innermost selves
to see if what they say is true by reference to
this inner truth." (St. Augustine, De Magistró).
It is at this point that the disciples' learning
process begins, and the praises they lavish on
their human, external Masters are addressed
also to the Master within themselves. This
marks the introduction of another way of prac¬
tising philosophy, by means of meditation or
confession. Instead of turning his thoughts
towards his predecessor, the philosopher looks
into the secrets of his soul. A major part of this
approach consists of stripping away the in¬
essential and examining the innermost "soul of
souls", where the hidden regulator of the philo¬
sopher's thoughts and actions is situated. That
is where the Master lives, his power enhanced
by this favoured location.
Truth without strings
Is it possible to arrive at the truth without fol¬
lowing the instructions of a Master? or without
setting oneself up as a Master? This is what the
philosophies of the seventeenth century set out
to do, as is shown notably by the case of the
Dutch philosopher Spinoza.
The trouble Spinoza took to remove his
The Death of Socrates, by
the Danish artist Christoffer-
Wilhelm Eckersberg (1783-
1853).
19

Baruch de Spinoza
(1632-1677) Dutch
17th-century engraving by an
unknown artist.
20
PIERRE-FRANÇOIS MOREAU
is a French professor of
philosophy and the author of
a number of books including
Spinoza, Éditions du Seuil,
Paris, 1975, and Le Récit
Utopique ("Visions of
Utopia"), PUF, Paris, 1982.
His latest book L'Expérience
et l'éternité ("Experience and
eternity") is to be published
shortly by Éditions du Seuil,
Paris.
name from any of his works is very revealing in
itself. There may well have been a degree of
wise caution in this. Knowing that his teaching
was in contradiction with the doctrines of the
Churches of his day, Spinoza did not want to
draw attention and persecution upon himself.
His major work published during his lifetime,
the Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, did not
bear the author's name and the name of the
publisher and the place of publication were fic¬
titious, so as to cover his tracks.
Yet there was more to all this than mere
caution, since even his posthumous works were
published anonymously (they bore only his
initials). Furthermore, as we learn from his cor¬
respondence, Spinoza never hesitated to make
his convictions known or to defend his opi¬
nions vigorously.
For Spinoza, anonymity was a necessary
adjunct of his philosophical theory. He saw a
desire for fame as a sublimation of intellectual
passion. In his Ethica, quoting from Cicero, he
inveighs against those who write treatises
decrying the thirst for glory, yet never fail to
sign their own writings. But what for the
Roman orator and philosopher was no more
than a brief piece of moral sermonizing was
inserted by Spinoza into an analysis of the blind¬
ing effects of the emotions. So long as man is
possessed by desire, he is driven by concern for
his own image, a concern which is strengthened
by all the other passions. Desire being the
essence of the individual, the thought process,
whether we are examining its roots or a specific
example of thought, is inevitably an expression
of this emotion. One might say that only emo¬
tion is individual and that therefore only emo¬
tion can assume the mantle of the Master.
Mathematics
as Master
What else is there, then, which can replace the
Master and enable us to do without him? The
laws of mathematics. The full title of Spinoza's
greatest work, usually referred to as Ethica, is
Ethica in Ordine Geométrico Demonstrata.
("Ethics Expounded in Accordance with the
Rules of Geometry"), a clear indication of the
author's intentions. The work is presented in
the form of a series of axioms, theorems and
demonstrations, but, more deeply than this, it
attempts to make use of the analytical approach
of geometry in establishing basic definitions.
The objection might be raised that this,
mathematical model is also a kind of Master,
but the model has no control of the conclusions
to which it leads. It provides a powerful tool
(demonstration), but this tool is available to
anyone who wishes to make use of it. There is
an objective, impersonal aspect to mathematical
reasoning which is far removed from the per¬
sonal, dual relationship that exists between
Master and pupil. There are indeed teachers of
mathematics, but they make no distinction bet¬
ween the esoteric and the exoteric what the
pupil understands is determined solely by his
or her ability and level of advancement. In this
sense, mathematics occupies precisely the same
position as that ascribed to writing in Plato's
Phaedrus. It may seem surprising to find the
mathematical model being placed in opposition
to the Platonic approach. After all, the Academy
in Athens that Plato founded was the recog¬
nized authority on mathematics. However,



although Spinoza and Plato agreed about the
importance of mathematics, they differed pro¬
foundly on the relationship between mathema¬
tics and philosophy. What appealed to Spinoza
in the mathematical model was the opportunity
it offered to describe causes quite indepen¬
dently of any possible end effects.
The anonymity on which Spinoza insisted
became another established practice among
philosophers. It was adopted by the Free¬
thinkers of the Enlightenment, a period during
which anonymous philosophy developed into
clandestine philosophy, with the circulation of
texts, theses, and collections of writings of un¬
known authorship. Manuscripts published
during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
had perforce to be anonymous if their authors
were to avoid censorship or imprisonment. But
apart from these considerations, these anony¬
mous publications were a further blow to the
old concept of magisterial authority. The
author of a clandestine publication had no idea
who would read it, through what channels it
would circulate, who would take up an idea
and insert it in a new piece of writing, or who
would give a different slant to its conclusions.
Paradoxically, these writings were "clandes¬
tine" precisely because they were open to all.
Multiplication of the means of access to and
diffusion of the truth excludes the relationship
between two individuals that between Master
and Disciple. O
