The sporting ideal
THIS Olympic year has, once again, given us
all an opportunity to appreciate the impor¬
tance of the sporting spirit and universal
values whose flame burns as brightly as ever in
the world's athletes. In Barcelona I was able to
witness the universal appeal of the Games for
myself. Over 10,000 athletes, 65,000 spectators in
the Montjuic Stadium and close on three-and-a-
half billion television viewers were united during
the opening ceremony in an ardent desire to cele¬
brate the sporting ideal.
Observing that vast and motley crowd, I was
reminded of the words of Baron Pierre de Cou¬
bertin: "The ideal sports spectator is an athlete
who has taken a break from his or her own exer¬
tions to watch the performance of a more skilful
or better trained fellow athlete". Of course ath¬
letes watching as spectators are fully conversant
with the rules of the sport and the controlled
movement it involves; they are in a better posi¬
tion to judge the technical and tactical aspects of a
competitor's performance. But in a world where
the mass media make it possible for the peoples of
the five inhabited continents to follow Olympic
events as they take place, the spectator has
become considerably more sophisticated. Nowa¬
days, while often thrilled by the excitement of the
spectacle, the amateur has learnt to appreciate the
aesthetic quality of movement and excellence of
performance.
We all also know, alas, that spectators and ath¬
letes sometimes behave in a way that can mar the
educational function of sport. I shall not dwell on
the reasons for these lapses for which remedies
exist and which have been analysed and
condemned by all who strive tirelessly to defend
the sporting ethic. I shall simply lay stress for it
seems to me to be crucial on the need to encour¬
age fair play from the earliest possible age, at
school and through youth movements and asso¬
ciations, with the assistance of the media.
At its most recent session, UNESCO's General
Conference added an article to the International
Charter of Physical Education and Sport in which
it called on public authorities, specialized non¬
governmental organizations, the Olympic Move¬
ment, the world of sport, educators, health pro¬
fessionals, parents, and particularly the media, to
co-operate in averting the harmful influences that
threaten sport.
Happily, the harmful trends are counter¬
balanced by the exhilarating images that remain
etched in our memories. I am thinking of the
behaviour of the winners of the trophies awarded
annually by the International Fair Play Com¬
mittee as a tribute to the moral and sporting
qualities of athletes representing a multiplicity of
nationalities and sports.
I am also thinking of two athletes who ran in
the women's 10,000 metres at the last Olympic
Games. These two African women, whom poli¬
tics had put in opposing camps, found themselves
united by sport; running shoulder to shoulder,
they acknowledged each other's existence in their
shared effort. The image of the lap of honour they
ran together after the race, hand in hand, pro¬
jected the glow of fellowship in sport to the four
corners of the Earth. O
