If North and South are to meet,
both must make an effort-the
North to stop thinking it has a
monopoly on universal values,
the South to incorporate the
principle of universality within its
own value systems
An allegorical,
revolutionary
representation of Equality
and Liberty. 18th-century
French engraving.
Opposite page,
Metaphorical Salute to
Europe 1992, by the
French artist Marc Pio
Maximilien Salvelli.



The common ground
of humanity
by Mahmoud Hussein
20
THE European Enlightenment ushered in a
new conception of humanity, based on
the idea that certain fundamental charac¬
teristics the need for individual autonomy and
freedom, the ability to think for oneself by
exercising the power of reason, the aspiration to
progress are common to all human beings.
Over and above all differences of race, nationa¬
lity, region or class, the individual was acknowl¬
edged as belonging first and foremost to uni¬
versal humanity.
This truly modern view of the individual
seen independently of all his or her religious
and social affiliations was developed in the West
from the time of the Renaissance onwards and
assumed its final form in the eighteenth century.
Since then, however, the West has betrayed it.
No sooner had the bastions of feudalism and
absolutism in Europe been rocked to their foun¬
dations or toppled than the principles of huma¬
nism, which had hitherto been articulated with
crystal clarity, gradually came to be swamped by
the demands of financial and industrial capital¬
ism, for which the French Revolution had
opened up great prospects. A scheme for exer¬
cising world domination began to take shape,
boosted by the astonishing achievements of
industrialization. From then on, Europe would
export to other societies not the unabridged
message of a universal humanity but rather a
piecemeal collection of universal characteristics,
chosen to cater for the requirements of coloni¬
zation in those societies. Generations of emi¬
nent European thinkers did their utmost to
resist this betrayal of the principles of 1789. By
doing so, they saved their honour, but they did
not change the course of history.
The clash between universalist ideas and the
urge to dominate continues to this day. The
prime concern of the ruling political and eco¬
nomic classes is to hang on to their positions of
strength and sources of wealth in what used to
be called the Third World. The profits they
reap from a trading system based on inequality,
the exceptional sums they make from the sale
of arms, the pressures they can bring to bear as
a result of the indebtedness of the poorest
nations all these are arguments strong
enough, in the eyes of many governments and
private companies, to ensure that their interests

prevail over vague and half-hearted talk of
worldwide solidarity.
These interests are being defended all the
more fiercely today because their future seems
less assured than it once did, because of the
general instability of the world economy and
because of the growing frustration and unrest
which they arouse. In some extreme cases, their
defenders justify their actions by aggressive
ideologies based on claims of national, cultural
or even racial superiority.
In the countries of the South, where the
choice between fundamentalism and demo¬
cracy is starting to be posed, such attitudes are
grist to the mill of fundamentalism. Confronted
with a West whose power is so manifestly
geared to safeguarding its own privileges, those
who subscribe to the universal principles of
freedom and equality which came from the
West in the first place find themselves on the
defensive against opponents who are intent on
dismissing all such universalist pretensions as
mere camouflage to cover up injustice and
inequality on a global scale. Fundamentalism 21

North-South
^
22
uses the selfishness of the rich as a pretext for
giving an aura of respectability to the
selfishness of the poor and insisting that com¬
munities should keep themselves to themselves.
Some leading intellectuals and a handful of
statesmen in the West are trying to grasp these
home truths from the developing world and to
develop a strategy which is receptive to the uni¬
versal hopes of freedom heralded by the wide¬
spread emergence of people as individuals in
their own right. But the stakes involved in such a
change are too high for the burden to be shoul¬
dered by a handful of thinkers alone. It demands
a drastic shake-up in people's attitudes generally,
and a radical transformation of the very nature
of the ties binding the North and the South.
An immense moral privilege
Apart from the self-interest of the major powers
and the calculations of international financiers,

so far-reaching a change comes up against a fun¬
damental feature of Western consciousness. It
would entail making a sacrifice whose psycholo¬
gical consequences would be incalculable. It
would mean that the West would have to face
the loss of the immense moral privilege it has
enjoyed for the past five hundred years that of
being the motive force of universal history.
Throughout the period marked successively
by the Renaissance, the age of the great inven¬
tions, the intercontinental voyages, the Reforma¬
tion, the Enlightenment, the Industrial Revolu¬
tion and finally colonialism, European society
gradually forced everyone else to dance to its
tune. Other parts of the world had to adjust
their ways of thinking, acting and producing in
order to fit in with European demands; they
even had to take lessons from Europe when they
came to resist European domination. The West
felt it was justified in considering itself to be the
heartbeat of the world and in assuming that its
own new ideas and discoveries, not to mention
its own spiritual, moral and aesthetic expe¬
riences, had an immediate and universal validity.
Now it faces the threat of losing the power
to speak for others and to create in the name of
all. The graft of individualism that it has
implanted all over the world is beginning to
take in the most varied soils. It is giving rise to
modern democratic movements which are
rooted in desires, fears and dreams that are dif¬
ferent from its own, and through which a host
of rapidly changing societies are trying to assert
themselves, forge their own identities and set
their own stamp on the future.
The West is thus called upon to adapt to a
contemporary world that will move in increas¬
ingly unpredictable directions, and whose inner
resources and secret workings will often tend to
slip from its control, for they will draw on
memories and loyalties that are not its own. As
the West is forced to take on board intellectual
landmarks and constructs which it has had no
part in making and which will be transmitted and
given universal relevance by citizens from other
shores, it will have to think in terms of a future
which it is no longer alone in desiring or shaping.
It will have to learn how to become once more
one element in human society among others.
The West already realizes that although its
historical reign still continues, it is no longer
absolute; that although it may have invented
Mahmoud Hussein is the
joint pen-name of Bahgat
Elnadi and Adel Rifaat,
respectively the director and
editor-in-chief of the Unesco
Courier. Egyptian-born
political scientists, they have
lived for 25 years in France,
studying the problems of the
Arab world and, more
generally, of the societies of
the South. Their most recent
work is Versant sud de la
liberté: essai sur l'émergence
de l'individu dans le tiers
monde (1989; "The Southern
Slope of Liberty: an essay on
the emergence of the
individual in the Third
World").
23

Project (1938).
Painting on newsprint by
Paul Klee.
the concept of the modern individual, it no
longer holds exclusive rights to its invention;
and that other possible models for man are
emerging. But the West has not yet come to
terms with this change nor agreed to pay the
price for it. To do so would mean abandoning
the benefits it has reaped from a historical
situation in which it has for so long been able
to identify the promotion of its own cultural
landmarks with the forward march of civiliza¬
tion and the furtherance of its own interests
with the welfare of humanity.
From the specific to the universal
In these closing years of a millennium that has
seen the peoples of the world emerge one after
the other from tribal, national or regional isola¬



tion, become caught up in the maelstrom of a
common history and feel that they share a
single destiny, it is becoming clear that this des¬
tiny will be democratic only if two conditions
are met. The peoples of the West and the
peoples of the South will have to find a new
way of relating their own specific values to the
values they have in common. Let the former
stop thinking that what is good for the West is
good for the world, and let the latter start to
incorporate a modern, universal dimension into
their own particular value systems.
In taking it for granted that it held the key
to universality because it had invented the
concept of the modern individual, the West not
only overestimated its own genius but also
depreciated its own achievement. It forgot that
other cultures and civilizations have, especially
in art and religion, reached out to values tran¬
scending space and time in a bid to encompass
the human condition in all its mystery; that
they have produced accomplished expressions
of universal preoccupations in metaphysics,
ethics, aesthetics and rational thought; and that
the West drew on all these sources before creat¬
ing in its turn a new vision of modern Man.
This new vision is destined to unite the
whole of humanity, for several reasons. It is the
culmination of so much that has gone before; it
draws inspiration from so many sources; it
marks the completion of so many initiatives
and experiments cut short by the vagaries of
history. It responds to the potential which is
latent within all people but was previously
confined within the straitjacket of their many
local allegiances. Now, without denying any of
these allegiances, it can illuminate them all.
The idea that modern Man is a creation of
the West that people elsewhere in the world
can only emulate by adopting Western ways
and surrendering their own identity is a mis¬
representation of the West's essential contri¬
bution to humanity. That is the mentality that
underpinned colonialism, corrupting the minds
of the colonialists and tormenting those of the
24

peoples they colonized. This double misun¬
derstanding can now be avoided.
THE FRAGILE FLOWERS OF FREEDOM
It is not for the West to export to others a value
which belongs naturally to it but would be alien
to them. Instead, the West should help others to
adopt, of their own free will and in their own
way, a value that is needed by all. That value was
first formulated by the West and long monopo¬
lized by the West for its own ends. Now the
West must serve the value it created. Let the
West protect the first, timid shoots of freedom
that need the universal nourishment provided by
human rights if they are to take root in very dif¬
ferent political and cultural soils.
Until now, the only way in which the
peoples of the South could try to protect their
personality was through confronting their iden¬
tity with that of others and rejecting out of hand
everything they regarded as specifically Western.
It is true that they have come to acknowledge
modern science and technology as necessary
aspects of the universal, but they have remained
convinced that these could easily be superim¬
posed on their own, unchanged identity. Now
Ntshak, raffia cloth
decorated
with divinatory symbols
by an artist of the Kuba
people (Zaire).
they are starting to realize that the concept of the
individual human being is the driving principle
behind modern universalism. They will have to
come to terms with this realization by volun¬
tarily doing violence to a part of their innermost
selves, by reappraising the core of values in
which the tyranny of the community, the habit
of despotism and the temptations of fatalism and
superstition are all closely intertwined. The
democratic imperative requires, in short, that
they must accept, a mutation and regeneration of
their very identity.
For intellectuals in the South who support
democracy, the time has come to accept this chal¬
lenge. They must do so if they are to follow the
same path" as their counterparts in the West and
the East and are to embark on the road to mem¬
bership of a global community experienced as an
intrinsic part of their own individuality. And
they must do so in order that all" those societies
which, in five hundred years of disorder and vio¬
lence, have moved from the stage at which their
identity was defined by community and religion
to the stage at which it is defined by the nation
can together, in a spirit of solidarity, embark on
the era of planetary identity. O 25
