The pathfinders
AS early as 1946, William Carr, one of the founding
fathers of UNESCO, pointed out that UNESCO's cen¬
tral task of promoting the right to education could
not be achieved without the participation of teachers. He
became the advocate of an international charter that would
be acceptable to all countries, and twenty years later, in
1966, served as rapporteur at the Special Intergovernmental
Conference on the Status of Teachers.
The importance of this international standard-setting
instrument should not be underestimated: it is the only one
of its kind to cover the entire range of problems facing the
teaching profession. Its 146 provisions still provide useful
guidelines, in all countries, both for national legislation and
for collective bargaining.
The status of teachers is far from satisfactory in many
parts of the world. The rapid expansion and democratiza¬
tion of education have posed a tough challenge to education
systems in the developing countries. Underqualificd and
underpaid teachers with no access to in-service training,
making do with the scanty means available to them, seek to
awaken inquiring minds in their charges.
This alarming situation can be seen at a time when all
countries, whether developed or developing, have begun to
realize the importance of having an educated population. By
"educated" I mean not only knowing how to read, write and
express one's thoughts, but also having a knowledge of the
principles of tolerance, respect and understanding of others,
which are the foundations of peace and co-operation among
nations.
The World Declaration on Education for All, adopted
by the international community in Jomtien (Thailand), is an
eloquent expression of the twofold need both to develop
and to improve education. After the family, the teacher is
the child's main educator, and in this capacity he or she is a
necessary partner in any educational undertaking.
THE TEACHING
DIMENSION
The Jomtien Conference established a set of priorities, and
pointed out, among other things, the need for parallel and
non-formal structures and programmes to supplement
regular schooling. An estimated 134 million children bet¬
ween the ages of six and eleven, and 283 million adolescents
between the ages of twelve and seventeen have neither
schools nor teachers. The rapid expansion of the out-of-
school sector is such that it should be given greater consider¬
ation in the future. Teachers and their associations can play
a decisive role in this effort, especially by ensuring that staff
in the non-formal sector receive adequate training and sup¬
port, and that their teaching is of a standard comparable to
that provided in school.
I regret the fact that an instrument as valuable as the
Recommendation concerning the Status of Teachers,
adopted in 1966, has not had wider repercussions, and that
its provisions have not been put to better use. Let us inject
fresh life into it by urging governments and non-govern¬
mental organizations to join forces in implementing pro¬
jects that they have drawn up together.
We are currently examining the possibility of creating a
UNESCO "chair" in various universities that would be dedi¬
cated to the overall objective of teacher training. Furthermore,
it is clear that more could be done to promote awareness of
the Recommendation, particularly among professional groups
involved in education at the policy-making and practical
levels.
We can also take care that the "teaching dimension"
like the "human dimension" is included in all projects
aiming to enhance the quality and effectiveness of educa¬
tion. In suggesting this, I am merely arguing in favour of
the application of one of the Recommendation's guiding
principles, which states that: "advance in education depends
largely on the qualifications and ability of the teaching staff
in general and on the human, pedagogical and technical
qualities of the individual teachers".
THE KEY TO THE FUTURE
Institutions of higher education also have their part to play
in promoting the teaching profession. We should be wise to
encourage them to adopt a higher profile in such action
through pilot projects or research with a view to developing
innovative approaches.
Finally, wc must give teachers and their elected represen¬
tatives the role that is theirs by right in the drafting and admi¬
nistration of education policies. They must be able to make
their voices heard. This assumes, of course, that they have the
determination to do so, and if they do not always seem as
motivated as they might be, it is perhaps because they do not
see much reason to hope that things will improve.
We must endeavour to show teachers the gratitude they
deserve. This year we are celebrating the four hundredth
anniversary of the birth of Comenius, the great Czech
humanist. Each year we should honour the teaching profes¬
sion, so that the teacher's role may be better known and
appreciated by everyone from decision-makers to the ordi¬
nary citizen. For educators are the key to the future and the
shapers of democracy. They are the disseminators of respect
for others, dialogue, understanding and love.
It is our Organization's greatest hope to contribute to
the public recognition of teachers, and to sustain it by,
among other things, instituting annual UNESCO Prizes. We
could also encourage Member States to create their own
national prizes, on condition, of course, that the objectivity
and professionalism of the assessment of candidates, and
indeed the entire selection process, is guaranteed.
It is up to us to facilitate the task of these educational
"pathfinders". D
