IRAN RELIGION,
SECULARISM AND DEMOCRACY
byEhsanNaraghi
B
EHSAN NARAGHI,
founder of the Teheran
Institute of Social Research
and currently an adviser to
Unesco, ¡s an Iranian
sociologist and historian. His
published works include
L'Orient et la crise de
l'Occident (Paris, 1977) and
Des palais du chah aux
prisons de la révolution
(Paris, 1991). This article has
been extracted from his
latest book Enseignement et
changements sociaux en Iran
du 7° au 20" siècle, Islam et
laïcité, leçons d'une
expérience séculaire (Maison
des Sciences de l'Homme,
Paris, 1992).
EFORE the revolution of 1906, Iran's
public secular schools were the symbol
and crucible of democratic thought. The
aim of the revolutionaries at that time was to
increase the number of these schools, for they
knew that democracy could not take root in
Iranian soil without them. But an entrenched
landowning system resisted the expansion of
secular schooling in the rural areas where most
Iranians lived. Economically, politically, and
administratively, Iran's rural majority remained
under the thumb of major land holders. With
positions in parliament and power in the coun¬
tryside, even after the revolution, this class suc¬
cessfully opposed the spread of modern educa¬
tion on its turf.
In 1911, 'there were 125 public secular
schools in Teheran, with some 10,500 students.
There were about the same number of pupils in
secular education in the provinces. This repre
sented a mere two per cent of school-age chil¬
dren. The secular school system advocated by
the new regime therefore did not develop.
When Reza Shah Pahlavi (1878-1944) came to
power in 1925, he introduced his authoritarian
regime without great difficulty. While he
allowed secular schooling to develop to some
extent during his reign, the schools were
purged of democratic leavening and became
institutions whose main purpose was to train
state functionaries.
The same approach prevailed under his son,
Mohammad Reza Shah (1919-198Ö). The main
idea was to provide young people with degrees,
not to educate them as citizens. As a result,
while secular education had more than eight
million students enrolled on the eve of the
Islamic Revolution in 1979, it provided no bul¬
wark against the growing influence of religion.
The growth of secular schooling opened up
38

Religious and secular
education at Isfahan.
Left, students arrive at a
government school (1958).
Above, a teacher and his
pupils at a Qur'anic school.
a socio-cultural abyss. Economic development,
the Shah's hobby horse, took no account of
cultural values or social relations. A form of



secularism that was hostile to participation in
political life and to culture was bound to pave
the way for an Islamic revolution, which would
declare itself able to fill the void by a return to
values anchored in Iranian society.
Under Reza Shah, traditional schools of
religious instruction, the madrasas, had shrunk
in number, but around ten thousand students
were enrolled in them. They offered the only
training for the clergy in Iran. All religious
ceremonies and practices came under the juris
diction of the marjataqlid, or guides, who were
taught in the traditional teaching establish¬
ments. They continued to exert an undoubted
influence, albeit reduced, throughout the reign
of the Pahlavisfrom 1925 until 1979.
The rupture
Religious and secular currents coexisted in the
school system for years. It was only in 1963,
with the expulsion of the ayatollah Khomeyni
(c.1900-1989) and his exile in Iraq, that the
confrontation between the regime and the mul¬
lahs became overt. The police intervened bru¬
tally in the school where Khomeyni taught and
arrested him.
Mohammad Reza Shah's regime prided
itself on its economic and social achievements;
in its eyes, the old days were finished and their
legacy was negligible. Meanwhile, the religious
bodies, under pressure from the bazaris, or tra¬
ditional merchants, were developing an "anti-
modernist" mentality that was notably hostile
to the regime. The bazaris did not fit well into
Iran's new economy, where a certain form of
private industrialization was favoured by state
protectionism. In particular, the export of tra¬
ditional Iranian staple products was slipping
out of their hands.
Pointing to the faults in this monopolistic
type of development, which favoured a thin
slice of society, clergy and bazaris began syste¬
matically to criticize the regime's accomplish¬
ments. The bazaris subsidized the works of the
mullahs (doctors of Qur'anic law), who were
duly grateful and gave them moral support.
This phenomenon took a special hold in the
cities, where many mosques were built.
Meanwhile, the state had no strategy for
assimilating the populations who, partly
because of demographic pressure, were flock¬
ing from the countryside into the cities. Few of
these newcomers could identify with a moder¬
nity increasingly based on foreign models and
symbols from which they felt alienated.
Thrown back onto traditional structures and
patterns of behaviour, they were easily
influenced by the mullahs, who exploited the
laxity of the media in order to win over this
population marginalized by technological pro¬
gress and an inegalitarian regime.
In its direct confrontation with the regime,
the Shiite clergy devised new methods and
encouraged the acquisition of new skills. A
1965 study on structures and teaching methods
in the religious schools of Qom, Mashad and
Teheran showed how students wanted to learn
foreign languages above all English but
refused to watch television or listen to the
radio, because they were the Voice of Power. 39

For the most part, these students came from the
lower classes for whom education was a means
of improving their social status.
In the absence of political parties, trade
unions or associations, which were banned by
the regime, the only possible setting tolerated
for communal activities was that of religion,
where uprooted country people found a fami¬
liar world whose language, symbols and struc¬
ture they understood. Moreover, the Shiite
clergy, adept at the dramatic use of rhetoric,
knew how to exploit the taste of illiterate Ira¬
nians for the spoken word. They used cassette
recordings with great skill.
Without directly attacking the Shah or the
regime, the mullahs managed to completely
debunk the lifestyle of the West by denying it
any legitimacy. The denunciation of certain
forms of behaviour as "satanic" (meetings be¬
tween the sexes, sports clubs, culture centres,
beaches, television and alcohol), went straight to
the hearts of conservative townspeople and of
the newly urbanized class that did not know
where it stood in relation to modern "Western"
life. The latter became a growing source of
anxiety, upsetting the moral values which people
from a traditional background hoped to instil in
their children, especially their daughters.
Unaware that this was happening, the Shah
talked on about the "great civilization" he
intended to build, while Islamic militants capi¬
talized on the malaise aroused by a lifestyle that



most of the population did not adopt. Under
the Pahlavis, people increasingly identified with
religion as the main defender of culture and the
Iranian community.
The lessons
of a dual experience
If in Iran, as in other parts of the world, reli¬
gion is engaged in a struggle against secular
society, it is partly because secularism has
claimed the right to assume the power that
once belonged to religion. The defence of cer¬
tain interests and moral traditions is as these
closing years of the century go to show the
last, and still very solid, bastion defended by
these religious forces. When the instruments of
emancipation become automatic or dogmatic,
and hence instruments of oppression, when
principles of social and moral justice are
systematically violated, religion, with its guid¬
ing spiritual and moral principles, aspires to
return to the centre of the stage.
In refusing to separate politics and faith,
clergy and state, transcendance and commu¬
nity, Islam presents itself as a way to combat
the disintegration of the social fabric in
contemporary societies. However, secularism
in Iran did not have its necessary concomitant
in the form of the exercise of democracy by all
citizens, the refusal of exclusion, the reduction
of privileges and social injustice, and respect for
freedom of thought. The vast majority of the
population was prey to a process of marginali-
zation on every front: social, economic, cultural
and political. Secularism in Iran led to a spiri¬
tual backlash.
As for Islam, which has today stepped into
the gap, its attitude is still defensive rather than
receptive, in spite of its claims to solve all prob¬
lems. There is a risk that it will exclude the
population from the modern world at a time
when new chapters are opening in history, eco¬
nomics, science, education and culture.
Secularists and Shiites should be fighting the
same battle, according to their own principles:
the battle for knowledge, which knows no
exclusion. Iran is the only country in the East to
have experienced two such extremes of social
organization, each in reaction to the other. Cer¬
tainly, Iranian men and women today have been
"enriched" in the sense that they have known
both experiences and their two underlying
conceptions: on the one hand earthly man, with
his responsibilities as citizen, and on the other,
spiritual man with his transcendent aspirations.
Can the lessons drawn from these two
conceptions experienced in daily life reconcile
the demands of the spirit and the need for
material progress? Or will they unleash a new
despair? The revolutionary ferment of ideas
and events seems to be dying down. Tradition
and revolution are not reason. They are visions
of man and society which leave traces. Perhaps
coming generations, educated in the ways of
history, will take a road that leads to spiritual
riches, as well to a better organized society.
May they lose nothing of what has been gained
from either side, .and be protected from the
darker aspects of each of them.
Exile (1986), oil on canvas
by Françoise Leroy-Garioud,
a French artist of Asian
origin. The painting is at
once a salute to a people
scarred by war, a tribute to
the constructive role of
women in crisis situations,
and a message of hope.
A village surrounded by
gardens near Shiraz.
