Ziryab,
master of
Andalusian
music
by Mahmoud Guettât
74
"There never was a man of his profession,
either before or since, who was so unanimously
loved and admired. Even in the twilight years
of the kingdom of Granada, which fell in 1492,
poets were still finding in his glory a subject
for their songs."
THE man the historian al-Maqqari so
described in the Naß al-tib ("The
Perfumed Breath"), a celebrated lit¬
erary-historical compilation on the subject
of Muslim Spain, was Abu al-Hasan 'Ali ibn
Nan', known as Ziryab ("blackbird")
because of his dark skin, sweet tones, fluent
speech and pleasant character. Although we
have no record of the dates of either his birth
or death, the circumstances of his biography,
and in particular his passage from the Orient
to the Islamic West, suggest that he was born
about 787 and died in approximately 857.
Apprenticeship
in Baghdad
Ziryab was a fervent disciple of the cele¬
brated Ishaq al-Mawsili (767-850), the
uncontested master of the 'Udist' school of
music in Baghdad. He learned all he could
from the master without drawing attention
to himself, until the day came when Ishaq,
perceiving his talent, introduced him at the
court of Harun al-Rashid (786-809). The
? *J I Uli wivvt v
^y^ril^J
young singer made a great impression,
showing off an 'ud he had designed himself.
"Like many others I know how to sing," he
told the caliph, "but I also understand things
that other people don't. My art can only be
appreciated by a connoisseur such as your¬
self. If you will permit me, I shall sing you
something that no-one has ever heard
Then he disdainfully pushed aside
his master's lute, claiming that his own was
about a third lighter, even though it was
made of the same wood and was the same
size as a normal instrument. "The first two
strings are made of silk spun in cold water,"
he explained. "They are stretched tight, are
supple without being slack, and are stronger
than normal strings made from silk dam¬
pened in hot water before it is spun. The
third and fourth strings are made from the
gut of a lion's cub, which makes them melo¬
dious and gives them a clear, dense sonority.
They are harder-wearing and resist changes
in temperature better than strings made from
the intestines of other animals."
Then, with the caliph's permission,
Ziryab sang, to the accompaniment of his
special 'ud, an ode he had written glorifying
the Prince of the Faithful, who was duly
charmed, convinced that such a talent could
not fail to enhance the splendour of his
court. Ishaq, who had not suspected that the
haughty and insolent young musician har¬
boured such virtuosity, was less pleased.
"You have tricked me with your filthy dis¬
sembling," he shouted when they were alone
together again. "You were only out to do me
down in the eyes of the caliph! Now you
must choose: either you disappear, first

V UlUM
swearing that I shall never hear of you again,
in which case I shall give you the money you
need to go away; otherwise I won't answer
either for your possessions or your life."
From Kairouan
to Cordoba
Realizing that the odds against him were too
great, Ziryab decided to go into exile and
travelled first to Africa, where he entered the
service of the emir of Kairouan, Ziyadat
Allah I (816-837), the most illustrious ruler
of the Aghlabid dynasty, where he found
himself in the company of several other
renowned musicians. His reputation soon
grew, and his name was given to a bustling
district of the capital Al-hay-al-Ziryab
renowned for its artistic activity. The stay in
Kairouan, often underestimated in accounts
Moor and
Christian sing
together to their
lutes. Illustration
from Las Cantigas
de Santa Maria, a
book of poems
written by Alfonso
X, the Wise, king
of Castile and
León (13th
century).
of Ziryab's life, brought him wealth and
honour, until the day, sometime around the
year 821, when he was condemned to be
whipped and banished, after offending the
ruler with one of his songs.
Mansur al-Mughanni, an envoy of the
Umayyad emir al-Hakam I (796-822), wit¬
nessed the incident and invited Ziryab to
Córdoba. So the musician set off westward
again, crossing the Mediterranean and
disembarking at al-Jazira (Algeciras), only to
learn the unwelcome news that al-Hakam I
had died. He was preparing to set off on his
travels again when word reached him that
the dead ruler's successor, Abd al-Rahman
II (822-852), was as fond of music as his
father had been. The new emir received
Ziryab with the respect his great reputation
merited, and treated him with the greatest
consideration. Even before he had been
given a chance to demonstrate his talents,
Ziryab was granted a pension of 5,640
dinars, 300 measures of cereals and an estate
valued at 40,000 dinars. Ziryab wasted no
time in showing the sovereign that his lar¬
gesse had not been distributed in vain. His
incontestable musical abilities, along with his
fine manners, elegance and artistic tastes,
soon established him as one of the emir's
three favourites, along with sultan Tarub and
the poet Yahya al-Ghazal.
The emir's generosity towards Ziryab
attracted a great deal of attention in the
Muslim world, and a celebrated musician of



the Abbasid caliph of Baghdad, al-Mahdi,
complained to his master that he would end
up dying of hunger "while Ziryab, at the
court of the Umayyads of al-Andalus, had
30,000 dinars and a thousand slaves or
more". It was even rumoured that when the
treasury of al-Andalus jibbed at paying the
considerable sums allotted to Ziryab, "the
sultan made them up from his own privy
purse", thereby confirming his personal inti¬
macy with the singer.
Arbiter of taste
and fashion
Ziryab, whose reputation as a man of the
world spread throughout Muslim Spain,
quickly became the accepted arbiter of
fashion, taste and manners. He was respon¬
sible for various innovations, which are des¬
cribed in detail by al-Maqqari. Under his
influence, the people of al-Andalus altered
their domestic habits, the furnishing of their
homes and their cooking as well as their way
of dressing. The people of Córdoba, who
had been used to let their hair grow long and
separate it with a parting, now took to wear¬
ing it in a crown around their heads, follow¬
ing the style set by Ziryab. They learned to
dress seasonally, wearing light materials and
bright colours in spring, loose white gar¬
ments in summer, and cloaks and fur hats in
winter. Girls wore saffron-coloured dresses
and headscarfs with verses embroidered on
them. Ziryab even invented a kind of deodo¬
rant (al-martak) to replace the powdered
rose, basil and myrtle used until that time,
which had the disadvantage of leaving stains
on clothing though he also found a way of
removing these.
He invented new carpet designs, blan¬
kets that were softer than linen, and leather
tablecloths that efficiently protected wooden
surfaces and were also easy to wipe clean.
He took an interest in the way banquets
were organized and in table settings. He
advocated the use of fine glassware in place
of metal cups, and recommended that
flowers be arranged in gold and silver vases.
He radically changed culinary habits, intro¬
ducing many new and delicate foodstuffs, 75

including asparagus (al-isfiraj) and the pas¬
tries known as naqaya', made of almond and
pistachio paste sprinkled with sugar and
coriander-flavoured water. The delicious zla-
biya, honeyed fritters that are popular in
North Africa to this day, even owe their
name to him: the word is a contraction of
ziryabiya.
A peerless musician
First and foremost, however, Ziryab was a
peerless musician who was universally
appreciated and admired. He had a prodi¬
gious memory, and knew more than ten
thousand songs (aghani) and their melodies
(alhan) by heart; furthermore, he knew how
to expound them as a teacher. As the
founder of the Andalusian musical tradition,
he carried on the work of the great classical
composers while also being an innovator
whose genius enabled him to combine the
art of an Ishaq and the science of an al-Kindi
(796-874).
In his teaching and through his pupils he
introduced reforms that profoundly affected
the art of his time. He continued to improve
the 'ud, adding a fifth string to the instru¬
ment and replacing the wooden plectrum
with an eagle's quill to obtain a richer sound
and a lighter touch.
As a singing instructor, he developed a
rational and progressive teaching method.
He worked step by step, always starting off
by testing a new pupil's voice. The candidate
was asked to sit up straight on a stool and
either to shout at the top of his voice Ya
hajjam ("Hey! Barber!") or else to sustain a
prolonged "aah" up and down the musical
scale. This test enabled him to judge the
power of the voice, to confirm that there was
nothing nasal about the tone and that the
singer had no breathing problems. If the
voice was perfect, he started teaching
without further ado. If it was not, he would
order the pupil to wrap a turban around his
stomach to compress the middle of his body
and facilitate correct voice projection. He
advised pupils who had difficulty opening
their mouths to the fullest extent to clench a
piece of wood three fingers wide between
their jaws for several nights running.
The lessons he gave ranged from the very
simple to the extremely complex. Poems
were recited to a tambourine accompani¬
ment, in an attempt to encourage apprecia¬
tion of different rhythms and especially the
place of accents. Pupils were introduced to
the rudiments of melody, before moving on
to the study of ornamentation, nuance and
the possibilities for improvisation that
constitute the charm of a work and the skill
of an interpretation.
Another of Ziryab 's innovations was
the development of the nawba, the perfor¬
mance of a suite of pieces composed in one
mode. "It is customary in Andalusia," al-
Maqqari wrote, "to start with a nashid
(recitative), then to continue with a basit
(full-throated song) and finish with muhar-
rakat and ahzaj (light, lively numbers), fol¬
lowing the rules laid down by Ziryab." One
characteristic of these songs is the primacy
of musical rhythm over poetic metre, giving
birth to new styles: an elaborate form of the
type of poem called the muwashshah and of
its popular version, the lyrical zajal, subdi-
This craftsman of Fez, Morocco, descends from a long line of famous lutemakers from Andalusia.
76
vided into stanzas (aqfal) that are them¬
selves composed of a variable number of
short lines (aghsan). Ziryab was thus the
architect of a veritable musical revolution
that shattered the rigid framework of the
old qasida poetry and opened the way for
new metrical combinations.
From Spanish lyrics to the
troubadours' songs
The musical tradition of the Islamic Orient
accorded to music mysterious properties
that were both magical and mystical, as well
as expressive and therapeutic powers linked
to its powerful effects on the human psyche.
Under Ziryab's influence, these conceptions,
which in the East were enmeshed in fruitless
speculation, acquired new vigour in the
Muslim West and came to constitute the very
foundation of the musical edifice. Twenty-
four imaginary nawba formed a symbolic
"tree of temperaments" (shajarat al-tubu),
each in its own tab' (mode). In addition,
close links were forged between music's
magical-religious origins and cosmology,
medicine, mathematics and ethics. The
strings of the 'ud were associated with
cosmic influences and the elements of



human physiology. In the direct line of mys¬
tical aspiration of the traditional Arab
school, the fifth string added by Ziryab to
the instrument's sonorous and living body
was described as "red, like blood" and
because of its central position was con¬
sidered to symbolize life and the soul.
The music Ziryab bequeathed to Anda¬
lusia profoundly influenced the music of
medieval Europe, both in theory for most
of the Arab musical treatises, of which some
250 were produced between the ninth and
fifteenth centuries, were studied if not pla¬
giarized in the great monasteries and in
practice, in the evolution of plainsong and
early Roman chant. It shaped important
aspects of the Spanish lyrical tradition, as
well as of the poetic and musical repertoire
of the Provençal troubadours. Under the
influence of Ziryab, several Arab instru¬
ments, including the 'ud and the rabab, came
to be widely used under their Arab names.
Ziryab's music had no need of a translator to
be understood, and it contributed more than
literature or philosophy to the extraordinary
influence of Andalusian civilization. O
1 The traditional school of Arab music, so called
because of the importance attached to its principal
instrument, the W, or short-necked lute.
Mahmoud Guettât, Tunisian musician and
musicologist, founded the Institut Supérieur de
Musique in Tunis and introduced musicology to
the syllabus of the Tunisian university system.
He has published many books and articles in
Arabic and in French, including La musique
classique du Maghreb (1980) and La tradition
musicale arabe (1986).
