Art goes underground
by Marianne Ström
Below: Tsertanovskaya
station, Moscow (CIS);
right: Civic Center station,
Atlanta (USA);
above right: Vastra Skogen
station, Stockholm
(Sweden).
THE year 1863 was a milestone in the
history of London. It saw the opening
of the Metropolitan Railway, the city's
first underground line. Having an under¬
ground railway, variously called the tube,
the subway, the underground or the Métro,
was soon to become the hallmark of a pros¬
perous modern city. A century later, in
1963, twenty-eight of the world's cities
were the proud possessors of this form of
mass transit system. Today they number
almost 120, and it is thought that by the end
of the century there will be more than 150
of them worldwide.
The coming of the subway revolutio¬
nized the aesthetics of urban life. Many of
the early stations were designed by indivi¬
dual architects such as Otto Wagner, who
created the thirty-six pavilions of Vienna's
S-Bahn, and Leslie W. Green, who designed
more than fifty stations for the London
tube. French architect Hector Guimard
created 141 entrances to the Paris Métro. The
eleven stations of the Budapest Földalatti, the
first underground railway in continental
Europe, were also designed by a single
person. As time went by, however, subway
stations came to be built in prestressed
32

Above: Port de Lille station,
Lille (France).
Top, Hankar station,
Brussels (Belgium).
concrete to a standard design by teams of
engineers.
In the last few decades the subway has
again become a fashionable showcase for the
arts. When stations are built or modernized,
the commission usually goes to well-known
artists or architects to whom it brings consi¬
derable prestige. In many cases, perhaps, the
encounter is only a brief one, a monologue
rather than a dialogue. Where there is a real
meeting, however, and the chemistry bet¬
ween artists and architects is successful, a
long-term dialogue ensues.
Painted stations and grottoes
The grotto-stations which make up a third
of the stations on the Stockholm subway are
a remarkable example of collaboration bet¬
ween the arts. Hewn from granite between
twenty and forty metres underground, they
are the work of individual artists or groups
of artists. Each one is different from the
rest. All they have in common is their cave¬
like character. The history of sport is the
keynote of the decoration at the Stadium
station. The style is straightforward and the
theme is presented in unmistakable fashion.
It would be hard to imagine a traveller get¬
ting off at the wrong station, even if he
could not read its name.
Let us take the Brussels Métro and stop
off at Hankar station. The walls and ceilings
are decorated with a vigorous painting exe¬
cuted in bright, strident colours. The striking
communicative power of this monumental
work, Notre temps, by Roger Somville, pre¬
vents it from being overwhelmed by the
heavy concrete volumes of the architecture.
The play of light
Toronto's Glencairn Station is a tour de
force of lighting as much as architecture.
Light pouring through stained glass vaulting,
painted in vivid colours by Rita Letendre
and entitled Joy, suffuses the whole station.
At Yorkdale, another Toronto station,
Michael Hiden's Rainbow is a veritable fire¬
work display. An electric system consisting
of fluorescent tubes inserted into the arches
of the vault lights up from one end of the
station to the other whenever a train passes.
In the United States, at Atlanta's Civic
Center station, we find the same play of
light, but this time it is natural. Two mainte¬
nance passages run beneath glazed arcades.
To camouflage them, artist Paul Freundt,
working in collaboration with the architects
(Reynolds and Partners), made twin
painted-steel sculptures, each measuring
33

34
Top, Avtovo station, St.
Petersburg (CIS);
above, a station on the
Beijing underground;
right: remains of a circular
altar, at Pino Suárez station
in Mexico City. The altar
once formed part of a
pre-Columbian temple.
MARIANNE STROM
is a Swedish-born art
historian, writer and
photographer. She has
organized a travelling
exhibition, "Métro-Art, Art et
Architecture des Metro-
Poles", and is the author of
many published articles and
books including Métro-Art
dans les Métro-Poles, Art et
Architecture dans les Métro-
Poles, (Jacques Damase,
Paris 1990), and a
contribution to a collective
work, L'Art Public, peintures
murales contemporaines,
peinture populaires
traditionnelles, (Jacques
Damase, Paris 1981).
more than 47 metres and weighing 21
tonnes. They project a profusion of colours
through the vaulted space and refract the
daylight into a multicoloured display.
Palaces and treasures
Some of the stations on the Moscow under¬
ground can only be described as palatial.
One of them is Komsomolskaya station,
with its resplendent baroque decor and
fairy-tale lighting. Designed by architects
Shchusev, Mokorin and Zabolotnaya, it was
built in the 1950s. At Tsertanovskaya sta¬
tion, built in 1983, a woman architect, Alio-
shina, has created an area where the light
effects bring to mind Gothic cathedrals.
Avtovo station in St. Petersburg, with its
magnificent portico, is equally impressive.
Lille, in France, is a city which has only
recently built itself a Métro, in this case a
fully automatic driverless "ghost train".
Here too the arts have been given plenty of
exposure.
Louvre station on the Paris Métro dis¬
plays copies of masterpieces in the museum
above. When it was inaugurated in 1967 it
sparked off a fashion for "cultural" stations.
In Rome the works of art that cover the
walls of Termini station are genuine ancient
mosaics, while in Lyons (France), Gallo-
Roman remains unearthed during excava¬
tions for the Métro are on show at Bellecour
station. Architecture has pride of place in
Mexico City, where travellers at Pino
Suárez station can admire the base of an
Aztec pyramid.
Subways are increasingly being used as a
meeting place of the arts. In the last decade,
the London tube has embarked on a vast
renovation and modernization programme.
Similar schemes are underway in the Paris
Métro and the German U-Bahns, where art
exhibitions are often held. Each subway city
has a special feature of its own. The tradi¬
tional tilework for which Portugal is cele¬
brated is prominently displayed in the sta¬
tions of Lisbon. The New York subway is
being redecorated. Beneath the vigilant eye
of "Arts on the Line", the Boston subway is
setting off on new rails. Chicago's overhead
railway, the Loop, remains faithful to ks fin
de siècle image.
Our last train stops in Hong Kong,
where the subway system is so smart that
only the well-heeled can afford to take it.
Here the subway has ceased to be the
"popular" mode of transport it has always
been since it first puffed its way into the
history of public transport. O
