The demographic
dimension
Now 5.4 billion, world population will
probably double before it stabilizes
U
14
'NDER the guidance of its first Director-
General, Julian Huxley, the 1948 General Con¬
ference of UNESCO highlighted three major
groups of problems facing the postwar world-
nationalism, obstacles on the path of technolog¬
ical advance and population growth. The gravity
of "the problem of world population" led
Huxley to the view, expressed in "The Report
of the Director-General on the Activities of the
Organization in 1948", that "somehow or other,
population must be balanced against resources,
or civilization will perish".
In the same report, Huxley noted with alarm
that world population had already reached 2 bil¬
lion and that the 3 billion mark would certainly
be topped early in the twenty-first century. This
turned out to be a very optimistic forecast. The
world today has a population of 5.4 billion and
recent United Nations projections indicate that
by 2025 it will have reached 8.5 billion, almost
three times the figure forecast by Huxley, and
that demographic growth will not be halted until
the twenty-second century, when world popula¬
tion will stabilize at around 11.6 billion.
The very magnitude of these figures puts
population growth into the category of what the
National Research Council of the United States
recently described as "self-evident problems, such
as crime, sickness, illiteracy, hunger and poverty,
which must be resolved by means of appropriate
social policies". Since then, better knowledge of
the relationships that exist between demographic,
economic, social, political and cultural factors has
undermined some of our old certainties without
providing others to replace them.
Few today would venture to suggest that a
slowing of the rate of demographic growth would
of itself be enough to ensure a rapid improvement
in the standard of living of the world's most
impoverished classes. Nor would those who are
not unduly alarmed by present demographic
changes go so far as to deny that lower popula¬
tion growth rates and a more even distribution
of populations would make it easier to combat
underdevelopment and poverty and environ¬
mental problems arising from excessive popula¬
tion pressure. What, then, are the most effective
forms of action we can take to correct present
demographic trends?
Possible scenarios
The World Population Conference, held in
Bucharest in 1974, was the scene of a clash
between two contradictory theories as to how to
reduce population growth. The first of these,
which received the backing of a majority of the
developing countries, has been summed up in the
catchphrase "development is the best contracep¬
tive". According to its supporters, an improve¬
ment in the standard of living, coupled with
educational advances, would inevitably lead to a
better acceptance of, and demand for, means of
birth control.

The opposing viewpoint, described as "neo-
Malthusian" by its detractors, despite the fact that
it diverged considerably from the theories of
Malthus, was based on the principle that a reduc¬
tion in the rate of population growth, achieved
by means of a reduction in fertility, was a pre¬
requisite and not a consequence of development.
Supporters of this theory therefore advised the
organization of huge campaigns for the spread of
information and the distribution of con¬
traceptives.
The World Population Plan of Action,
approved at the Bucharest Conference, adopted
a less dogmatic tone and succeeded in taking some
of the initial virulence out of the debate.
Nevertheless, ten years later, at the International
Conference on Population, held in Mexico, in
August 1984, to assess the working and results
of the Plan, this debate re-emerged, but in a very
different political and ideological context. Dressed
up in neo-liberal guise, the "development first"
argument received the support of the United
States, whereas, this time, the developing coun¬
tries were calling for vigorous family-planning
programmes.
The defenders of the neo-liberal standpoint
maintained that a development model based on
free, individual initiative, with the market as the
principal regulator of the economy, was the only
Placards on the back of
Indian buses advertise the
benefits of the two-child
family. India was one of the
first developing countries to
sponsor birth-control
information campaigns.
mechanism capable of ensuring lasting develop¬
ment and of creating the necessary conditions
under which couples would, in their own interest,
come to modify their perception of the family
and themselves choose to have fewer children
better spaced out. This transformation of the scale
of values and of family preferences would
generate a demand for contraceptives which the
market could itself meet with only marginal
assistance from the State.
The principle of non-intervention by the
State applied also to the question of internal
migrationsany interference by the public
authorities would be likely not only to infringe
individual liberties, but also to distort the
workings of the market in goods and services and
this in the end would aggravate the very social
and community problems such interference was
designed to resolve.
Although to do so was in contradiction with
the principles they stood by, for political reasons,
the governments and many of the theoreticians
supporting this view treated international migra¬
tion as a separate case, as though in this field the
laws of supply and demand did not apply.
The argument of those who favoured family-
planning programmes seemed to find some justifi¬
cation in the rapidity of the demographic transi¬
tion (see box page 17) in Latin America and in
certain Asian countries, which appeared to con¬
tradict the notion that a reduction in birth rates
is conditional on structural change and to entail
acceptance of the view that the fall in the birth
rate is due, at least in part, to an evolution in the
understanding of and the aspirations, attitudes
and values relating to procreation.
On this basis, some have sought to draw the
conclusion that a vigorous family-planning
programme could act as a brake on fertility
without the need to introduce major social and
economic reforms. At this stage in the debate,
such a conclusion seems premature. Comparative
historical studies that have been made on the
demographic transition have shown that whilst
too much emphasis may perhaps have been
placed on structural factors as the prerequisite of
a reduction in the birth rate, their importance
cannot be entirely denied.
Learning
from experience
Social and demographic indicators concerning all
countries were recently published in "The State
of World Population, 1991", the annual report
of the United Nations Population Fund. They
reveal that:
the highest rates of population growth are to
be found in the poorest countries;
there are, however, some exceptions; in some
countries the population growth rate is lower
than might have been expected in view of the
level of the per capita Gross National Product;
the reverse is true in other countries where, 15

although the economic indicators, comparatively
speaking, are not so low, population growth rates
are high;
whether or not there is an official population
policy, the percentage of women making use of
family-planning services is, almost without excep¬
tion, higher in the more developed countries.
Given these facts, it might well be asked
whether there is any means by which population
growth rates can be significantly reduced. United
Nations projections according to which world
population will stabilize around the middle of the
twenty-second century, at about 11.6 billion, are
based on the supposition that there will be a dimi¬
nution in the overall fertility rate in the
developing countries, which will reduce from 3.8
to 3.3 births per woman by the year 2000. For
this to occur, the percentage regular use of con¬
traceptives in these countries would have to rise
from the present 51 per cent to 59 per cent. In
absolute figures, this would mean that, within a
period of nine years, 186 million women would
have to be persuaded to make regular use of
contraceptives.
Experience over recent years indicates that it
is extremely difficult to achieve a rise of these
proportions in the regular use of family-planning
methods. With the exception of Latin America
(excluding central America), the Caribbean, east
and southeast Asia, the other regions, which are
those that contribute most to world population
growth, would have to achieve a reduction of at
least 1.1 in the average number of births per
woman; in Africa south of the Sahara the average
would have to be reduced by more than half
(from 6.8 births per woman to 3.3).
Although they have been prime recipients of
international aid over recent years, the poorest
countries still have high fertility rates. Judging
Births per woman
1960-65
6.1 6,1
5,9
2.7
I
6,2
All developing
countries
Fertility trends in the
developing world, by region
(Source: United Nations,
1990).
NAMiBlANS
16
Poster advertising Namibia's
1991 census, carried out with
the aid of the United Nations
Population Fund. Lack of
reliable demographic data is
making it difficult to draw up
Namibia's first national
development plan, due to
come into effect in 1993.
MAKE SURE
YOU ARE
COUNTED
^Ä^A ^ THE GOVERNMENT
IN PLANNING THE FUTURE OF NAMIBIA
PARTICIPATE IN THE CENSf. )fi
by results, the efforts made to stem the rising
demographic tide through campaigns for the dis¬
tribution of contraceptives, coupled with infor¬
mation, education, communication and family-
planning programmes, have clearly not been very
effective. This relative failure casts considerable
doubt on the theory that dissociated demographic
evolution from economic progress and leads us
to ask what other options are open to us.
In theory, there are three such options. The
first is to establish an obligatory maximum limit
to the number of children per family. This,
however, would be contrary to paragraph 29 of
the World Population Plan of Action, which
recommended that all countries "respect and
ensure, regardless of their overall demographic
goals, the right of persons to determine, in a free,
.informed and responsible manner, the number
and spacing of their children".
The second option is to rely on "the magic
of the market economy" in the hope that it will
quickly rescue the poorest countries from the
abyss of underdevelopment, change family atti¬
tudes concerning numbers of children and
encourage the public and private sectors to
respond more effectively to the demand for con¬
traceptives. It is questionable whether such faith
in the market economy is justified, at least as far
as the poorest countries are concernedtheir
market mechanisms are weak and they are in
competition with the industrialized countries
which firmly protect their internal markets and
erect trade barriers against the importation of
products from the developing countries.
The third option, put forward primarily by
economists and social science experts of the
developing countries, is also supported by the
regional institutions of the United Nations as well
as by a number of eminent specialists of the deve¬
loped countries. It proposes that the newly-
developing international division of labour be so
oriented as to favour more equitable trading
between the developed and the developing coun¬
tries whilst enabling national economies to give
priority to the elimination of extreme poverty
and to raise the level of well-being of the general
public.
This third option, sometimes referred to as
"equitable development", involves raising

381
Numbers in millions
1960-65 1985-90
217
94
I
All developing East Asia Latin America South Asia
countries
Africa
Trends in the number of
contraceptive users, by region
(Source: United Nations,
1990).
RAUL URZUA
is co-ordinator of UNESCO's
population programmes and
director of its Division of
Population and Human
Settlements. A sociologist, he
is a former director of the
Roberto Bellarmino Centre for
Sociocultural Research at
Santiago and professor of
sociology at the Catholic
University of Chile. His many
published works include
Desarrollo Regional,
Migraciones y Concentración
Urbana en América Latina
("Regional development,
migrations and urban
concentration in Latin
America", 1985) and La opción
preferencial por los pobres: de
la teoría a la práctica ("The
preferential choice for the
poor: from theory to practice",
1987).
JACQUES VÉRON
is a French demographer
engaged on research at his
country's National Institute of
Demographic Studies (INED)
and its Centre for Population
and Development (CEPED). His
interests include the
epistemology of demography
and the relations between
population and development.
governments' social policieseducation, public
health, housing and employmentfrom their
present secondary role and placing them on at
least an equal footing with strictly economic poli¬
cies aimed first and foremost at growth. Among
these policies, demographic policies concerning
population growth rates and distribution should
be given priority if population pressures are not
to become an obstacle to the fight against
poverty.
Action along these lines seems to offer the
best chance of achieving the goal of preventing
the pressures of population growth and distribu¬
tion fuelling even more alarming trends than
those forecast by the United Nations. This will
only be possible if the developed countries, which
hold the reins of world economic power, are pre¬
pared to accept that demographic and environ¬
mental problems will not be resolved so long as
long-term objectives are sacrificed to the benefit
of short-term interests. Furthermore, the
experience of recent decades demonstrates that,
in the struggle for justice and against poverty and
social inequality, a necessary prerequisite is a
major effort to establish, consolidate and extend
democracy.
Whether we like it or not, the probability is
that the world population will double before it
becomes stabilized. Resolution of the problems
that this entails and preventing them from
growing to unforeseeable proportions is not a
question of means but of political will. The cur¬
rent upheaval of the world political scene pro¬
vides an opportunity, perhaps unique, to give a
new momentum to efforts by the international
community to increase the well-being of ordinary
people everywhere.


