Kenya's Green Belt Movement by Wangari Maathai
A community-based project created and directed by women
I
A tree nursery of the Green
Belt Movement near Nairobi.
HOUSANDS of Kenyan women are today
playing an active part in a nationwide environ¬
mental protection campaign which takes the tree
as a symbol of hope and an indicator of what
must be done to conserve the environment and
ensure development that meets today's needs
without jeopardizing the world of tomorrow.
The campaign is being waged by the Green
Belt Movement, which was launched in 1977
under the auspices of the National Council of
Women of Kenya (NCWK) as a grassroots
struggle against desertification, deforestation, soil
loss and fuelwood scarcity. Its main practical
objective is to halt desertification by encouraging
tree planting and soil and water conservation in
rural communities. At the same time it is com¬
mitted to increasing public awareness of the rela¬
tionship between environmental degradation and
such issues as poverty, unemployment, malnutri¬
tion and the mismanagement of natural resources,
and the impact of these problems on the polit¬
ical and economic situation throughout Africa.
23

If you are interested in supporting the
Green Belt Movement you should write to:
The Green Belt Movement,
P.O. Box 67545, Nairobi, Kenya
24
Above, cover of a brochure produced
by the Green Belt Movement.
Right, Kenyan village women get
together to try to continue food
production for their families on land
earmarked for the cultivation of sugar
cane on a commercial scale.
The story of the Green Belt Movement began
in 1977 when a small group of NCWK members
launched a tree-planting project called "Save the
Land Harambee". (Harambee is a Swahili expres¬
sion which means "let's all pull together"). We
had no tree nursery, no staff and no funds, only
a conviction that there was a role for ordinary
country people in efforts to solve environmental
problems.
We held our first tree-planting ceremony in
Nairobi on 5 June 1977, World Environment
Day. From then on interest in the project grew
rapidly, and soon people from all over the
country were asking us where they could find
tree seedlings.
To help them we approached the Depart¬
ment of Forestry in the Ministry of Environment
and Natural Resources, which has a national net¬
work of tree nurseries. The head of the Depart¬
ment laughed when we told him that we intended
to plant a million trees, and without hesitation
promised us all the seedlings we needed. Less than
a year later he had to go back on his decision
when he found that we had distributed more
seedlings than he could afford to give away. From
then on we had to pay for seedlings from govern¬
ment nurseriesfortunately at low prices and
with useful guidance and support from govern¬
ment foresters.
The project grew by leaps and bounds. In the
last fourteen years over a thousand nurseries have
been established at which women grow seedlings
that are then released to small farmers and to
public institutions such as schools and churches.
The women are paid for the seedlings they grow,

and many jobs have been created, mostly in the
rural areas. To date some 10 million trees have
been planted and have surviveda survival rate
of about 70-80 per cent. Up to 80,000 women are
today involved in work at nursery sites.
The trees have been planted to meet
immediate community needsto provide fuel-
wood and material for fencing and building, and
to give shade. Gradually, however, people learned
that trees also prevent soil erosion and the con¬
sequent loss of soil fertility. They came to see the
link between loss of soil fertility, poor crop yields
and famine.
The Green Belt Movement harnesses local
expertise and resources and encourages commu¬
nities to stand on their own feet. We deliberately
discourage direct participation by high-powered
technicians and managers from outside. We want
to create confidence in local people who are often
overwhelmed by experts and come to think that
they are incapable and backward.
The aims of the Green Belt Movement are
inspired by the needs and problems of Kenya
we encourage, for instance, the use of indigenous
trees and shrubs in order to help protect the
genetic resources of Kenya's different ecological
zones (see box). Four years ago, however, our
Movement entered a new phase of its activities
when it approached a number of other countries
in eastern and southern Africa and launched what
will, it is hoped, become an All-Africa Green Belt
Movement Network. Our objectives are valid for
many other countries, not only in Africa but else¬
where in the world.
WANGARI MAATHAI,
of Kenya, is the founder and
co-ordinator of the Green Belt
movement. She has received
many awards for her work,
most recently the 1991 Africa
Prize.
Seven steps
to conservation
In our 1 5 years of field experience in Kenya, we have deve¬
loped a procedure for spreading the conservation message
that has produced good results. The elements of this proce¬
dure, listed below, may also work in other developing
countries.
The message should respond to a local need.
Most people in developing countries are poor and concerned
about basic needs such as food, water, firewood and
clothing. Conservation cannot be presented to them as a
luxury issue. The Green Belt Movement introduces the idea
of environmental conservation through trees because trees
meet many basic needs of rural communities. We encourage
small farmers to plant trees to meet their own needs, and
as we work with them we try to help them appreciate that
trees also do a lot for their communities and for the country
as a whole.
The message must make good sense.
How is it possible to explain the importance of protecting
genetic resources to members of a women's group, most
of whom are illiterate?
We explain that trees which have survived in a certain part
of the country since time immemorial are better suited to
our environment than recently introduced foreign trees. We
often ask members of women's groups to list the ways in
which they or their parents use local treesas a source of
medicine, perhaps, or as pest-resistant wood, or in traditional
ceremonies. This type of discussion helps to make the
environment seem a real and living part of their community
life.
The project must be honest.
If the members of a community feel that a project is honestly
run and designed specifically to benefit them, they will sup¬
port it.
The project should work patiently to motivate
communities.
Spreading the conservation message is a slow process. It
is not easy to motivate rural communities, but if they come
to believe in your own motivation they will begin to walk
along with you and eventually to work on their own for the
message.
Ensure that the project offers some short-term
successes.
It is important for people to see some success stories within
a reasonable period of time. Developing both short-term and
long-term objectives will create momentum for a project.
When a Green Belt nursery Is set up, for example, the first
crop of tree seedlings are released to the community within
three to six months. The women's group responsible for the
nursery then receives compliments and gains respect from
the community.
Try to reach the decision-makers as well as reaching
the rural communities.
Decision-makers in the developing world often pay lip service
to conservation. Without their support, however, it is impos¬
sible to take the conservation message effectively to rural
communities. Decision-makers must realize that they will
benefit if the masses work to prevent desertification.
The message should thus be taken to the powerful and
to the communities almost simultaneously. Even though it
may take a long time before the support of decision-makers
is more than rhetorical, it is essential that they should give
a verbal commitment to the project. Rural communities will
be even more enthusiastic about the project if their leaders
are supportive.
Create a forum for continuous dialogue.
In taking the message to rural communities, the teachers
must also become the pupils. We all have much to learn from
each other. There must be continuing dialogue until people
believe that the protection of our world is for the benefit of
all.
