EclS irape: an uphill road to freedom
by Antonin Liehm
Dialogue (1989),
wood and oxidized iron
sculpture by the Slovak
artist Juraj Melis.
Post-communist societies face
many pitfalls as they seek to
modernize themselves
LESS than three years have gone by since
the collapse of communism in central
Europe, and we are only beginning to
realize the extent of the fall-out and to come to
terms with the problems its heirs and by
extension all Europe will have to resolve.
Central Europe had been subjected to total¬
itarian régimes first nazi, then communist
for more than fifty years, leaving two genera¬
tions with no experience of any other system,
least of all democracy or a market economy,
which were not even a distant memory. Such
systems survived only as dreams, fleeting
images whose shape changed according to
whatever scraps of rhetoric or other informa¬
tion people had gleaned at random, mainly
from hearsay.
Like all dictatorships, the communist
régimes were profoundly conservative in their 47

48
structures and manner of operation. Despite
the resolutely forward-looking beginnings of
communism, its ethics and even its aesthetics
remained firmly rooted in the nineteenth cen¬
tury. In its turn, it provoked anti-communist
trends that also took their cue from the past,
whether in the form of rampant economic lib¬
eralism, a certain form of nationalism or an aes¬
thetic of rejection. So when exponents of these
trends came to power two years ago, they gra¬
dually transformed the anti-communist revolu¬
tion into a restoration of the ancien régime.
Only in Germany was there any kind of cor¬
rective counterweight.
A DISMAL LEGACY
We knew that the fall of communism would
reveal the depths of the ideological and political
Athletes
(1928-1930),
oil on canvas by the
Russian artist
Kazimir Malevich.
pit the communist movement had dug, in
flagrant contradiction with its own doctrines.
Nevertheless, many of us thought that the
vacuum would soon be filled, first by a return
to religion and then by a restoration of demo¬
cracy, tolerance and political ecumenism, at
least in those countries that had a democratic
tradition. It was clear, of course, that commu¬
nism had done nothing to solve the problems
of nationalities, which it had merely glossed
over or concealed. Even so, few of us foresaw
that the nationality issue would erupt as sud¬
denly as it did. In some countries, nation¬
alism with the backing of the churches filled
almost the entire ideological vacuum left by the
collapse of communism.
Half a century of totalitarianism had also
left other dismal legacies, among them the
myth of social equality, which was for the most
part achieved by a levelling downwards, and the

Repairmen
(1960),
by the Azerbaijani artist
Tahir Salakhov.
illusion of full employment. The very idea of a
society made up of the rich, the poor and the
unemployed is a difficult one for most people
to accept. A sense of responsibility (except for
one's own destiny) and the spirit of individual
initiative have also both disappeared. The
middle class hardly exists except in a form
inherited from communism, namely a mass of
state employees and functionaries on the one
hand and a class of small or big-time specula¬
tors, crooks and parasites on the other. The
latter group is best placed to benefit from the
new situation. One interesting development is
the growing esteem in which the old titled nobi¬
lity is held, echoing the respect once enjoyed by
the party élite, the nomenklatura. One last
factor we have to bear in mind is the complete
absence of structures governing labour rela¬
tions, as well as the lack of trade unions and
employers' and business organizations.
A PRECARIOUS BALANCE
In politics, the organized successors of the
communist party, which, surprisingly, remain
relatively strong, have been boycotted by all
the other formations, thus upsetting the normal
democratic process of alternation in power.
Confronting them is a liberal right intent
on putting the clock back, flanked by a chauvin¬
istic and often racist extreme right wing. In
between lies a fragile centre-left and various
timid social democratic groupings that hardly
dare mention the words "social" or "left" for
fear of being tarred with the communist brush.
This virtual deadlock will continue until the
market economy and all that goes with it have
been restored, for these are indispensable to the
proper functioning of democratic politics.
In the meantime, there may be and in some
cases already have been political explosions
and recklessness that could have dangerous
consequences.
Economic reforms aimed at restoring earlier
market structures were of course already under
way well before the collapse of the old régimes.
In its death throes, the communist state sought
with a kind of desperate energy to find a way
out of the impasse in which it found itself by
creating a mixed system, inspired on the one
hand by the parallel economy (which was par¬
ticularly developed in Hungary) and on the
other by Polish experiments in associating the
unions with the running of the economy and
attracting massive foreign aid. In Czechoslo¬
vakia, because of the panic fear of liberalization
shown by the communist régime installed after
49

About Love
(1990),
oil on canvas by Alex
Belyakov, a young Moscow
artist. The work is inspired
by the Yin and the Yang, the
two opposing but
complementary principles of
Chinese philosophy on
whose interplay the universal
order is based.
50
Antonin Liehm, a Prague
journalist, left Czechoslovakia
in 1969 and took up
university teaching. In 1984
he founded Lettre
Internationale, a periodical
published in nine European
countries. His publications
include Trois générations:
Entretiens sur le phénomène
culturel tchécoslovaque
(1970), Socialisme à visage
humain (1974), Le passé
présent (1979) and Le
cinéma de l'Est (1979).
the 1968 invasion, the reform programme was
prepared almost surreptitiously. Its proponents
were a handful of reformist communists run¬
ning the Institute of Economic Planning and a
group centred on the Prime Minister, Vaclav
Klaus. The former were basically Keynesian in
their approach, seeking a "third way", a gradual
transformation of the economy based on large-
scale state participation. The second group,
drawing its inspiration uncompromisingly
from F.A. Hayek and Milton Friedman, aimed
at a restoration of the situation before commu¬
nism. They sought the dismantling of the exist-
' ing system, then a return to classic liberalism
via a more or less uncontrolled privatization, as
well as by opening up the economy almost
unconditionally to foreign capital. By and large
this latter view prevailed in the three main
countries of central Europe, Hungary, Poland
and Czechoslovakia.
In view of the fact that the European
Community is not in a position to open its
doors to the central European nations in the
immediate future, or to finance their transfor¬
mation in the meantime, decision-makers in
these countries are looking increasingly to the
United States as a last hope. The Americans are
fully aware of this situation, and they view
central Europe as a not unimportant area for
their long-term influence and a significant
factor in their policy towards the European
Community. This seems natural to the extent
that current economic doctrine in the United
States closely matches that of central Europe
another factor promoting the belief that central
Europe will long remain one of the corner¬
stones of European conservatism.
It remains to be seen whether such conser¬
vatism will speed up or slow down the process
known as the "return to the European fold".
Will the urge to return to an earlier status quo
move central Europe closer to or away from
Western Europe as it is today?
The American model
The same questions arise in the field of culture,
taken in its widest sense. In cultural terms, the
situation in central Europe is coming to
resemble American practice more than the
Western European norm, with the arts be¬
coming an object of speculation, a speedy route
to riches. Yet this is the field in which the
American model is in fact least applicable. In
Czechoslovakia, for example, there are about
3,000 publishing houses but no law protecting
them or defining their financial position.
Attempts are being made to propagate the idea
that privately-owned television is synonymous
with independent television. Meanwhile, local
film production is coming to a halt as its pro¬
ducts lose access to distribution networks satu¬
rated with American B-movies. Cuts in subsi¬
dies to public libraries, museums and similar
institutions are being contemplated.
Such, in brief, are some of the pitfalls and
dangers confronting post-communist societies
in the throes of change. The much-touted risk
of a return to communism seems to me per¬
sonally to be one of the least of them.
Every communist nation had an opposition
of sorts, whose strength and visibility varied
from country to country. The "dissidents", as
they were known in the West, only enjoyed
solid popular support in Poland. Elsewhere
they represented protest movements of nation¬
alists or intellectuals, drawing their strength
only from the contrast between the moral sense
of individual citizens and the immorality of the
ruling class. In this way the very concept of
morality was identified with the anti-commu¬
nist cause.
This association was largely illusory, as the
first years of the post-communist era have
demonstrated. In a recent essay entitled Summer
Meditations, Vaclav Havel writes: "The return of
freedom to a world in moral decomposition
inevitably involved a phenomenon that was

wholly predictable in the nature of things but
that nonetheless turned out to be much graver
than might have been expected. This was the
extraordinary and almost blindingly blatant
explosion of every imaginable base human ins¬
tinct. It was as if a whole range of shady or at
the very least ambiguous inclinations, which
had insidiously festered within society for
years (while also being requisitioned into daily
use by the totalitarian system), were suddenly
released from their straitjacket and granted
complete freedom to express themselves and
spread. their wings. A certain discipline, if one
may use the term, that had been imposed by
the authoritarian régime (which, in doing so,
had also 'legalized' these base instincts), had
been shattered, while a new one based on
freely-accepted collective responsibilities,
which would have smothered them rather than
giving them rein, had not yet grown up. Nor
could it have, for it takes many years for such a
development to mature.
"So we find ourselves confronted with a
bizarre situation in which societies that have
indubitably become freer in many ways behave
worse than in the days when they lacked
freedom. Criminality of every kind has
increased rapidly, and the sensational press has
unleashed the nauseating flood that always
seems to spurt out of some dark corner of the
collective memory in times of great historical
change. Worse still, even more disturbing phe¬
nomena are beginning to become apparent: sus¬
picion and rancour between nationalities,
racism, even manifestations of fascism, brazen
demagogy, intrigues and deliberate lies, poli¬
tical chicanery, shameless and unrestrained
promotion of vested interests, naked ambition
and the thirst for power, fanaticism of every
variety, new kinds of confidence trickery,
Mafia-style venality and a general absence of
tolerance, mutual comprehension, good taste,
reflection or a sense of proportion	"
The communist countries have gained their
freedom, but they are far from achieving a
healthy democracy or economy. They will only
attain these objectives if political leaders do not
confuse ends and means and choose suitable
paths to reach the desired goals. O
In Our Fathers' Footsteps
(1988),
polyester and concrete
sculpture, painted
in acrylic, by the Slovak
artist Josef Jankovic.
