From left to right, Frederik de Klerk, Abdou Diouf, Nelson Mandela, Henry Kissinger and Federico Mayor.



Unesco makes joint award to
Nelson Mandela and Frederik de Klerk
Nelson Mandela and Frederik de Klerk
are the first winners of the Félix
Houphouët-Boigny Peace Prize. Named
for the President of Côte d'Ivoire, the
award was established in 1989 to
encourage individuals, bodies or
institutions that have made a significant
contribution to promoting, seeking,
safeguarding or maintainingpeace
through education, science and culture.
The jury was chaired by Dr. Henry
Kissinger, former US Secretary ofState
and himselfa Nobel Peace Prize laureate.
The award ceremony was held on 3
February at UNESCO Headquarters in
Paris, and was attended by President
Abdou DioufofSenegal.
The speeches of the two award-
winners, the chairman of the jury and
the Director-General of UNESCO were
recorded by UNESCO Radio (seepage
43). The following extracts are taken
from their respective addresses.
De Klerk: The time has come, also for
South Africa, to come back in from the
cold and to play its proper role, which
will be a constructive one in Africa and in
world affairs. Mr. Director-General, I
hope that the award of this prize will also
bring South Africa closer to all the efforts
and all the plans and all the information
and everything available within UNESCO.
Kissinger: The role of every great leader
is to take his people from where it is to
where it has never been. No two contem¬
porary leaders symbolize this task more
than our two honorées today.
Mayor: History is not predictable pre¬
cisely because people like Nelson Mandela
and President de Klerk exercise their
freedom to challenge the past in order to
construct the future.
De Klerk: We in South Africa are simi¬
larly dedicated to this approach of peaceful
dialogue, discussion and negotiation, and
sincerely trust that we shall succeed in
laying the foundations of a new nation of
which all our citizens may be proud. . . .
The irreversibility of the current initiatives
is no longer in question. The good faith of
the South African Government has been
demonstrated beyond doubt.
I am sharing this platform and this
peace prize with my compatriot, Mr.
Nelson Mandela. We have indeed arrived at
this point along very different routes, but
our presence here together does, in a very
real sense, demonstrate our real desire, and
that of most other South Africans, to over
come our differences and embrace the
future together in a new, just, reconciled
and fully democratic South Africa.
Mandela: It is a hopeful sign of the
potential of my country that this year this
prize is shared by two people who trace
their respective political ideals to opposing
poles on our national political spectrum.
It is the hope of all South Africans that
this joint award signifies the convergence
of our aims and a growing consensus that
has begun to emerge amongst the over¬
whelming majority of South Africans
about the future direction of our country.
South Africa cries out for peace and
for democracy. It is our considered judge¬
ment that we shall not have the one
without the other. What we seek to build
in South Africa is a society centred on
human needs and aspirations.
The oppressed majority in South
Africa have waged a struggle to capture
for themselves the right to determine their
own destiny, including the right to deter¬
mine for themselves what to do with their
future. The indispensable condition for
that is the achievement of democracy. We
consider that a goal that is worthy of the
support of the entire international com¬
munity. This prize to us has meaning 39
because it symbolizes that support. g^
