Learning the lesson
of toletance
"God of all beings, of all worlds and of all time . . . grant . . . that the
little difference between [our] clothes, between all our different and
inadequate forms of speech, between all our ridiculous customs and
imperfect laws, between all our senseless opinions and our estates, so dis¬
proportionately different in our eyes and so alike to Thee; grant that these
little nuances that distinguish the atoms known as men from one another
may not be signals for hatred andpersecution ".
VOLTAIRE
(Treatise on Tolérance)
THE world whose emergence can be discerned who are different from us. We must force ourselves
as we stand on the edge of a new era does not to make such an approach, hopefully as a first step
inspire whole-hearted enthusiasm. Religious towards recognizing them in their own right. Tol-
fundamentalism, nationalism, racial and ethnic preju- erance will then cease to be the shadow of its oppo-
dice, anti-semitism: the winds of freedom have site and will take on a force of its own. It will cease
rekindled the embers of hatred. The disappearance of to be a woolly concept; instead it will be trans-
familiar frameworks and standards, the disintegra- formed into bright, metallic clarity,
tion of geo-ideological demarcations, the challenging Of course, the temptation to turn in on oneself
of orders once thought to be eternal and inviolable and exclude the "other" increases as those who are
have encouraged the recrudescence of many types of different from us assert themselves and come ever
extremism. The collapse of the old order has left the closer to us in a shrinking world. But history has
field open for all kinds of new initiatives, some of shown what happens when people retreat into a
them extremely chaotic and violence thrives in a closed identity and want everyone to "stay where
vacuum. Instances of rejection and exclusion are they belong". We must not forget the inevitable
becoming more and more common. Although in outcome: the weakest and most vulnerable social
some cases irrational forces are clearly at work, in and ethnic groups become scapegoats and the most
others political, intellectual and public debate is flagrant injustices are made worse,
being contaminated in more insidious ways. Let us abandon that dubious tolerance which
There is an urgent need for us to examine our allows us to tolerate the intolerable the poverty,
tolerance or what we think of as tolerance criti- hunger and suffering of millions of human beings. If
cally and uncompromisingly. Why does it give the we do, we shall encounter the warmth of the sun-
impression of a "fall-back" solution? Does it always shine of compassion and fraternity. Tolerance will
spring from the heart, or at least from a conscious become a fundamental part of our lives. This is my
act of will? Our answers to these questions will fervent hope, as a millennium which has known so
inevitably cause us to question the way we much light and shadow draws to an end which is
approach, or in some cases fail to approach, those itself marked with many contrasts. O
