Current affairs News non-stop
by Mouny Berrah
America's CNN
channel, which
specializes in
round-the-clock
international
news coverage,
is leading a
media
revolution
B
10 Above, a hijack at Beirut
Airport, 1985.
EIRUT 1985. A TWA airliner has been
hijacked. But another event steals the
headlines. It is the coverage organized
from the airport by the American television
channel Cable News Network (CNN), which
launches seventeen days of on-the-spot report¬
ing, broadcast live around the clock. Relayed
by five satellites, the information is picked up
across the globe. The impact is worldwide. The
coverage itself becomes the event.
Baghdad 1991. War has broken out. The
only, tenuous connection between Iraq and the
rest of the world is the voice of CNN reporter
Peter Arnett, linking the field of operations to
millions of homes.
Moscow 1991. CNN has the scoop of the
year when it announces the resignation of
Mikhail Gorbachev from his post as General
Secretary of the Communist Party. But the
channel's coverage of the dismantling of the
Berlin Wall and the demonstrations in Beijing's
Tienanmen Square has already confirmed its
international pre-eminence.
An information
GIANT
CNN has built its empire on twin foundations
of hard news and international reporting, both
underestimated by its competitors. Nor does it
neglect human-interest stories and business

news, even though both these fields are tar¬
geted, and even over-exploited, by America's
three major television networks, ABC, CBS
and NBC. After winning awards for its report¬
ing of the San Francisco earthquake and the
stock market crash of October 1987, CNN
smashed audience records with its coverage of
the rescue of a child who had fallen down a
well, the Smith-Kennedy rape trial and the hear¬
ings involving Judge Thomas, the candidate for
the U.S. Supreme Court who was accused of
sexual harassment by a former colleague.
The CNN network actually consists of two
channels: CNN1, which goes out to 55 million
American subscribers, and CNN Headline
News, received by 35 million cabled homes.
While the former puts out a bulletin every two
hours, the latter has continuous transmission
with two-hourly updating. Both limit their
coverage to news stories, approached in a very
flexible manner.
About half the organization's 2,000 journal¬
ists and technicians work at its headquarters in
Atlanta. There is satellite linkage to ten regional
offices and fifteen bureaux outside the United
States. CNN images, transmitted by more than
200 independent stations in the United States as
well as by twenty more in Asia, Europe and
Latin America, feature in many news bulletins.
Nobody could deny that CNN is currently
the world's largest news outfit, but the univer¬
sality of its audience raises some ethical prob¬
lems for subscribers and professionals alike.
Its achievements in the field of the democrati¬
zation of information are unquestionable. It has
opened up to a large audience aspects of poli¬
tical and social life that were hitherto reserved
for élites or specialists, and has made it possible
for viewers in countries where the flow of
information is controlled to hear commentary
and analysis by independent journalists. The
network's coverage also benefits from the edi¬
torial freedom that direct and continuous
coverage of an event can provide. All these
attainments, made possible by a combination of
democracy and technology, help guarantee the
press its status as the "fourth estate".
One-way
communication
But the problems raised are on a par with
CNN's global impact. The network operates in
one direction only, North-South. Its broadcast¬
ers not only have the technology and the finan¬
cial resources but also the last word on every
subject they cover. In the developing countries,
on the other hand, there is often no-one with
responsibility for news-gathering. Worse still,
information may be manipulated. Even when it
is not taboo, press freedom is frequently no
more than an abstract notion. In this context,
the question of the content and objectivity of
news broadcasts received from the North is
overshadowed by another, more fundamental
one, that of the availability of information.
Matters become more complicated if the
broadcaster, caught up in the power game,
decides to pass over certain facts in silence.
That raises a fresh problem, for the retention of
information is ultimately a form of censorship.
Viewers who feel uneasy about it may react in
different ways, either identifying with or reject¬
ing the broadcaster's message.
The results are particularly upsetting since
television, because of the power of the image,
has established itself as the most credible of the
news media, while at the same time providing
ample evidence to show that it is also the most
easily manipulated. It has introduced an
approach to news that emphasizes speed over
accuracy, and makes appearances more impor¬
tant than the truth. Newspaper journalists and
photographers have been dragged along in tele¬
vision's wake, trapped by the fact that viewers,
seeing the world through the lens of the small
screen, forget that the field of reality shown is
only a camera-frame wide even when the
CNN images (from top):
a correspondent in Moscow,
1988; demonstrators in
Tienanmen Square, Beijing,
1989; riots in Los Angeles,
1992.

scene has not in fact been set up, because of the
need for speed or so as to claim a scoop.
Television has passed on its obsession with
speed to the press. To meet the challenge,
newspaper stories are less and less likely to be
held back for want of checking. Editors are
increasingly inclined to run them, accompanied
by the now-classic disclaimer "According to
unconfirmed reports. . . ." Television also sets a
particular reporting style, favouring emotion
and on-the-spot coverage over analysis and
reflection. This puts pressure on the press to
modify its own way of presenting the news.
Nowadays many articles read like screenplays,
employing verbal effects, suspense, subplots,
dying falls. As a result, news reports that once
had the authority of public records have
become, with a few honourable exceptions, as
transient as television images. Journalists are no
longer dispassionate observers. Now they are
witnesses, like the television camera itself.



The press has also borrowed the idea of star
quality from television. More and more news¬
papers publish photographs of their reporters,
who thereby become media figures themselves.
Techniques learned from advertising have
taken the place of editorial policies: the reader
is subjected to a non-stop barrage of media-
speak. Obliged to follow television's lead as to
what the big stories are, the press increasingly
tends to pass over important events whose
significance is not immediately apparent, and
the headlines end up by neglecting matters of
considerable moment. All these linked factors
lead to outrageous simplifications and the pre¬
sentation of facts without any context.
The five pillars
of the contemporary
WORLD
The results of this process can be surprising.
The world emerges portrayed in five categories,
with news, politics (itself often handled in
terms of human interest), the weather, business
and sport featuring in varying orders of pri¬
ority. Radio, the press and television all bear
daily witness to this new order of things.
Paradoxically, seeing the same television
images again and again can actually reduce the
impact of some subjects alarmingly. Regular
coverage of the developing world as menaced
by overpopulation, underdevelopment, disease
and intolerance ends up by creating a cliché that
then becomes accepted as the truth. It is not a
question of conscious and deliberate distortion
on anyone's part; this image of the South simply
flows naturally from a system that favours
shock-value because it attracts big audiences.
If the South is shown as under threat, the
North too is reflected in a distorting mirror.
One only has to live in a peaceful suburb of
Washington, D.C., to know just how partial
and deceptive the city's image as the "capital of
crime" can be despite the fact that crimes do
occur. But the misdeeds of a drug dealer or
Madonna's latest publicity stunt make juicier
leads for news programmes than the altruism
shown by voluntary fire-fighters or the middle-
class virtues of the silent majority.
But the danger is not so great for the North,
which is in a position to defend itself. Contrary
to the commonly-held view, American broad¬
casting is not a monolithic bloc, despite the
dominating role of the major networks. There
are masses of independent newspapers and tele¬
vision stations: from seventy in 1972 their
numbers have now swelled to more than 300.
They have a 25-per-cent audience share, and
are protected by strict legislation, as well as by
regulatory mechanisms befitting American
society's view of the defence of liberties.
In the countries of the Third World,
however, the problems inherent in the globali¬
zation of information are acute. The developing
nations are unable to challenge the process
either with their own media or with their per¬
ception of world affairs. It is not so much the
Third World's failings as its crying needs that
have been highlighted by the functioning of the
world information system over the past few
years. The South has responded to the domi¬
nance of CNN, whose founder sensed at the
right moment that the provision of information
would be the growth area of the twenty-first
century, with old-fashioned debates about the
role of the public and private sectors, freedom
of the press and state control, freedom of
expression and archaic taboos, a policy of
openness or one of closed doors.
The debate on the dangers of one-way com¬
munication is still taken more seriously in the
North. Here too CNN is in the front line. O
Left, President George Bush
in Saudi Arabia during the
Gulf crisis in 1990;
right, CNN reporter Peter
Arnett in Basra, 1991.
MOUNY BERRAH
is an Algerian sociologist and
journalist who lives in
Washington D.C. She is a
correspondent for the French
monthly journal Le Monde
diplomatique and the film
review Panoramiques.
