A NEW image of
THE WORLD
By WilcombE. Washburn
%
Within a matter of years, the great
maritime discoveries brought
sweeping changes to cartography
Left,
a 12th-13th century
map of the world with
(above) a depiction of
Adam and Eve in the
Garden of Eden.
Right,
a world map from the
first modern atlas, the
Flemish cartographer
Ortelius's Theatrum
Orbls Terrarum (1570).
Aglance at the two maps on this page and
the page opposite shows the remarkable
change in the cartographic representa-
tiqn of the Earth's surface brought about
during what has been called the "Great Age of
Discovery". Both maps derive from European
sources, and hence might be considered "Euro¬
centric" in character. But they represent almost
diametrically opposed intellectual conceptions,
one reflecting medieval thought, the other
Renaissance thought.
The medieval map is the product of a
Europe wedded to the ideals of Christianity, an
inward-looking vision of man's corrupt nature.

The Renaissance map is the product of a
Europe excited by the possibility of escaping
from such a grim fate to a more optimistic
future defined by space rather than time and
controlled by man rather than God.
It is true that those Europeans who, like
Columbus, sought to go beyond the bounds of .
the unknown, often. stated their motives in
terms of Christian ideals. But there was an
inevitable mixing of worldly and pious
motives. On the one hand, Columbus was
always conscious that his given name "Christo¬
pher" signified "Christ-bearer". On the other,
the wealth that he hoped to obtain (for his
sovereigns and for himself) by his great enter¬
prise of sailing west was to be obtained largely
by trade.
In the eastern portion of the medieval T and
O maps so called because their outline form
resembled the letters T and O was located the
Christian Paradise. The stylized land masses of
Asia, Africa and Europe were grouped around
the centre of the map where Jerusalem was
located. The Mediterranean Sea separated
Europe and Africa, and a band of water a cir¬
cumambient Ocean Sea surrounded the three
land masses, which made up the oikoumene or
orbis terrarum, the inhabited world known to
Europeans.
Although some ecclesiastical figures and
many ordinary people assumed the Earth to be
as flat as their senses perceived it, knowledge of
the sphericity of the Earth was widespread
among the learned. The circle of the T and O
maps can represent an attempt to depict a globe
as well as a flat disc. The narrow river of ocean
encircling the oikoumene can be imagined to
extend around the unseen portion of the globe.
A SEA ROUTE TO ASIA
The sphericity of the Earth was, of course, the
underlying basis for assuming that one could
reach the east by sailing west Columbus's
guiding navigational principle. The practical
basis for believing in the possibility of such a
voyage was the comparatively short distance
between the western shores of Europe and the
eastern shores of Asia. Classical writers such as
Seneca had anticipated the time when the
Atlantic Ocean would be crossed and Thule
(Iceland) would no longer be "ultimate", that



is, the end of the European world. The
fifteenth-century Florentine scholar Paolo
Toscanelli encouraged King John II of Portugal
as well as Columbus to try to sail across the
Atlantic because he believed it could be done
in a matter of days. Convinced by this and
by many other arguments and "proofs",

The first signed and dated
Portuguese portolan chart,
that of Jorge Aguiar (1492).
16
Columbus would for years beg support for his
scheme from a succession of sceptical European
monarchs.
In order to counter the argument that he
had probably underestimated the distance to
Asia via the western route, Columbus argued
that he would be able to replenish his ships at
known offshore islands' of Europe (such as the
Canaries), unknown but imagined islands like
Antillia, and islands such as Cipango (Japan)
known to exist but never visited by Europeans,
to say nothing of the myriad isles reported by
Marco Polo in the ocean south and east of
India. Some of the latter, which can be equated
with the Indonesian archipelago and other
Pacific or Indian Ocean islands, were reported
by Polo to be occupied by naked people.
Hence, when Columbus found islands inhab¬
ited by naked people in America, he could
confidently assume that he was in Asian waters.
Columbus continued to believe that he had
reached Asia, even after concluding, on his third
voyage, that he had discovered in South America
a "new" or "other" world. Columbus's under
lying Christian assumptions also led him to
speculate on whether he had not also found the
location of the Terrestrial Paradise the
Garden of Eden in South America, and to
postulate that the globe was not precisely
round like a ball, but formed with a slight pro¬
tuberance which he compared to the nipple
on a woman'-s breast which would bring
Paradise closer to Heaven, as it was reported in
the theologically-tinged travel literature of the
time.
The French scholar Abbé Raynal wrote in
his Philosophical and Political History of the
Settlements and Trade of the Europeans in the
East and West Indies (1770) that "No event has
been so interesting to mankind in general, and
to the inhabitants of Europe in particular, as
the discovery of the new world, and the passage
to India by the Cape of Good Hope."
The cartographical results of those two
events are illustrated in the manner in which
the narrow surrounding sea around the orbis
terrarum on maps of the medieval period
explodes and forces cartographers to redraw

their maps with new projections and new lands
to emphasize the existence of what increasingly
came to be called a "New World", separate and
distinct from the "Old World" of the medieval
oikoumene. Among the many myths that were
discarded was the medieval assumption of a
torrid equatorial zone that could not be crossed.
NEW LANDS AND NEW
PROJECTIONS
The map that marks the transition between the
medieval past and the Renaissance future is the
large wall map made by the monk Fra Mauro
in Venice in 1459, and which is now in the
Biblioteca Nazionale Marciana in that city.
Extensive legends on the map provide informa¬
tion and speculation about the outlying regions
of the orbis terrarum. Notable is the absence of
a closed Indian Ocean, which was a feature of
the world maps incorporated in the late-fif¬
teenth-century editions of the text of the first-
century-AD Greek scholar Ptolemy's Geo¬
graphy. That text, already known to the Arabs,
was translated from the Greek into Latin in
1406. Soon manuscript and, later, printed edi¬
tions appeared throughout Europe.
Ptolemy's text, as it comes down to us from
the original Greek through various sources,
suggests that the Indian Ocean was a closed sea,
though a strong case can be made for the oppo¬
site view. It is significant that both Arabic car¬
tography of the period for example the
twelfth-century cartographer Al-Idrisi's map
and the 1459 Fra Mauro map, compiled long
before the actual doubling of the Cape of Good
Hope by Bartolomeu Dias, assumed an Indian
Ocean open to voyagers from Europe hoping
to reach the east.
When Bartolomeu Dias returned to Lisbon
afteiTounding the Cape of Good Hope on his
1487-1488 voyage, Columbus was in Lisbon
still hoping to convert King John II to his plan.
According to Columbus, he was with the king
when Dias presented his findings that the way
to India was open in this direction. The voyage
effectively meant defeat for Columbus's efforts
to enlist Portugal's support for his proposed
western route; another monarch would have to
be persuaded.
The actual results of the voyage of Dias, the
culmination of the long Portuguese effort to
send vessels down the coast of Africa (well
recorded in fifteenth-century portolan charts),
is best seen in the map of Henricus Martellus
Germanus, a German working in Florence,
from about 1489. The map records, on its
African portion, the experience of actual Portu¬
guese navigators. Further east it reflects the
more speculative Asia represented on the world
maps of the Ptolemaic atlases of the fifteenth
century. The long Golden Chersonese penin¬
sula on Ptolemaic maps represents the Malay
peninsula, which Columbus was trying to sail
around during his last voyage, as Marco Polo
had done when he returned from China to
Europe by ship in the thirteenth century.
Perhaps the best representation of the world
as visualized by Europeans on the eve of
Columbus's first voyage is the globe of Martin
Behaim of 1492. Behaim, a native of Nuremberg,
spent much of his life in Portugal, where he was
involved with the royal court, apparently in pro¬
moting and/or evaluating schemes for explora¬
tion and discovery. His globe makes understand¬
able the confidence of Columbus in believing
that he could cross the Ocean Sea with the aid of
stops on the way at the islands of Antillia and
Cipango.
THE FIRST TRUE MAPS
The origins of the scientific cartography that
rapidly developed in this period derive jointly
from the theoretical work of ancient Greeks
like Ptolemy, the development of portolan
charts by Mediterranean mariners, and the evo¬
lution of scientific instruments such as the
compass, the quadrant and the astrolabe. The
understanding of much of the theoretical and
practical geographical knowledge of the ancient
Greeks was conveyed to medieval Europe by
the recovery of Ptolemy's Geography.
The two most notable features of Ptolemy's
work were his sophisticated instructions for
projecting the Earth's curved surface accurately
on a flat surface, and the conceptual framework
by which any point on the globe could be repre¬
sented as the intersection of two geographic
A 13th-century copy of a
world map produced in 1154
by the Arab cartographer Al-
Idrisi. In accordance with a
convention of Arab
cartography, the south is
shown at top of map. At left
is the Indian Ocean, open to
the Orient.
7 "**%,
17

A 17th-century
watercoloured engraving
showing Dutch sailors poring
over their maps and
navigational instruments.
Skilled navigators, the Dutch
brought Iberian maritime
supremacy to an end.
18
WILCOMB E. WASHBURN,
of the United States, is
director of the American
Studies Programme of the
Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C. He is a
noted expert on the history
and culture of the American
Indian on which he has
written several works,
including: The Indian in
America (1975) and, as co¬
author, The American
Heritage History of the Indian
Wars (1977). He has also
written several studies on the
history of discoveries.
co-ordinates. For this purpose, the Earth's sur¬
face was divided into 360 degrees of longitude
and latitude, a technique devised by Ptolemy's
predecessors. Ptolemy's Geography was, in
large measure, a listing of places on the face of
the Earth recorded according to their geogra¬
phical co-ordinates.
The oldest surviving example of the portu¬
lans or marine charts that were heralded by
Charles Raymond Beazley as "the first true
maps", date from the late thirteenth century
and are contemporaneous with the medieval T
and O maps and religious mappaemundi such
as the famous Hereford Cathedral world map



of about 1290. The new form, the product of
the Mediterranean sailors' firsthand experience,
continued to evolve for the next three centu¬
ries. The Mediterranean Sea is the focus of vir¬
tually all such portolan charts, although they
increasingly incorporate the Atlantic coastlines
of Europe and Africa, as well as the islands
immediately adjacent to both.
As befitted their practical purpose, the por¬
tolan charts were usually accompanied by a scale
of miles and a network of rhumb lines. The
emphasis on coastal navigation from promon¬
tory to promontory and from port to port is
evident in the care with which the coastal
regions are recorded while the interiors are
normally left blank. The marriage of the navi¬
gational chart and Ptolemy's graduated maps
begins with an anonymous Portuguese chart of
about 1500, the first upon which is incorpo¬
rated a scale of latitudes.
With the breaking of the chains of the ocean
sea by seamen like Columbus, the portolan
charts gave way to larger mappaemundi, world
maps increasingly combining the meridians and
latitudes inherited from the Greeks through
Ptolemy with the careful attention to precise
location made possible by astronomical obser¬
vations of the Sun and stars by use of the astro¬
labe, and calculations of lunar eclipses. The
invention of printing allowed astronomical
tables, such as Abraham Zacuto's Almanack
Perpetuum (1496), showing the declination of
the Sun at particular times and places, to be
more widely disseminated than when they
remained in manuscript.
Columbus and Dias, and many other early
explorers, were badly "off" in their calculations
of latitude in both western and southern hemi¬
spheres. More accurate (but still imperfect) cal¬
culations were made by learned men of the
period, such as Mestre José Viwinho, the Jewish
astronomer who sat on the Portuguese commis¬
sion that turned down Columbus's proposal in
1485. Even more difficult was the determination
of longitude, a problem that was not finally
solved until the invention of the chronometer,
or marine clock, by John Harrison in 1761, in
response to the prize announced by the British
parliament in 1714 for a practical way of finding
longitude at sea. Until that time estimates of a
ship's longitudinal position on the face of the
globe depended largely on "dead reckoning",
the subjective estimate of speed and distance
travelled. Little wonder then that early maps
reflect the limitations of determining both lati¬
tude and longitude accurately!
Cartographic examples of the increasingly
accurate vision of the globe are illustrated in
maps like Abraham Ortelius's world map of
1570 from the first edition of his Theatrum
Orbis Terrarum (the first modern atlas),
Gerhard Mercator's world map from his atlas
of 1595, issued after the great cartographer's
death, and Jodocus Hondius's Novissima ac
exactissima totius orbis terrarum, published in
Amsterdam in 1634.
The growing prominence of English, Dutch
and French exploration and colonization activi¬
ties in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth
centuries, challenging Spanish and Portuguese
claims in both western and eastern hemi¬
spheres, and the development of printed rather
than manuscript maps by the cartographers of
the northern European countries, resulted in a
shift of the cartographer's craft from the sou¬
thern Mediterranean countries to the northern
European countries, and were additional fac¬
tors in the increasingly accurate rendition of
the Earth's surface.
It was not until the eighteenth century,
however, particularly as a result of Captain
Cook's voyages to the Pacific and the use of the
chronometer, that the form of the entire Earth
including the Pacific as well as the Atlantic
basins began to take on the cartographic preci¬
sion with which we are familiar todajr. G
