Islands in majesty: Nobel
by Edouard J. Maunick
HBHRMHHHEmMPVV S599MSWI : i
48
ONE summer evening in 1962, in Castries, the capital of St.
Lucia, I went to see a play, The Malfinis. After the per¬
formance, I made a point of going up to the author,
Roderick Walcott, and telling him how much I had enjoyed his
work. Roderick thanked me for my compliments, but confided
to me with a smile that his talent stood no comparison to that of
his twin brother Derek.
My curiosity was aroused and I knew that I would not rest
until I had met Derek Walcott, who was then living not in St.
Lucia but in Trinidad. In the meantime I bought a copy of the only
book of his that I could get hold of. Entitled In a Green Night
(1962), it was a collection of poems of rare quality. To read it was
to enter the presence of a shaper of words fit for a teller of islands:
his own, as one of many other islands in the Caribbean, but more
than this, as partaking of the universal although none of its quid¬
dities was denied, neglected or ignored. Here was a profound
voice, in its utterances and in its silences. A voice which I was later
to encounter in other collections of Derek Walcott 's work: The
Castaway and Other Poems (1965), Sea Grapes (1976), The Fortu¬
nate Traveller (1982), The Arkansas Testament (1987) one of my
particular favourites but this is only a partial list.
When I eventually did meet Derek Walcott in Berlin in 1964
at a get-together of Black and Western writers and poets it was
as if we had always known each other. No ceremony, no pedantic
talk: just a warm, simple handshake, a dinner with beer, and a
long walk through the streets of Berlin during which we made no
attempt to pick at the wounds of a past heavy with night and fog.
All that mattered was our own inner Suns, which we want to
shine out to the world from our poetry. We spoke English, a bit
of French, and a lot of Creole. Strangely enough, the patois of St.
Lucia is very similar to that spoken in Mauritius. We were on
common ground.
Now that he has been awarded the Nobel Prize for Litera¬
ture, I am happy for him and for poetry, but also for the islands.
By honouring Derek Walcott, without in any way belittling the
genius of this immense poet, the jury salutes him for sailing to his
own compass, of braving winds and tides, and bringing his native
St. Lucia and with her the islands of all the seas in the world
safely to port.
It goes without saying that when a poet's work is hoisted to
such pinnacles of international recognition, it is bound to attract
widespread public interest. And a good thing too. But what a pity
that we have to wait for an event of this kind before a poet's voice
is heard and listened to. I don't know how widely or how well
Derek Walcott has been translated, but I do know that in France,
for example, no collection of his work was published until last
October, when Editions Circé of Strasbourg brought out a trans¬
lation by Claire Malroux of The Star-Apple Kingdom (1979).'
And yet much had been done over the years I am thinking of
translations published in the magazine Présence Africaine to
draw attention to the existence and range of a major body of
work, one which had, incidentally, won considerable recognition
in England, a stone's throw away from Paris.
It is constantly being drummed into us that nobody reads
poetry any more, a euphemism for the fact that not much poetry
gets into print. Publishers and readers although poets them¬
selves are not wholly blameless do not realize that to ostracize
poetry is to condemn the most consummate form of prayer,
whether it comes from the mouths of believers or pagans. I feel
that this has to be said. Best-sellers have abolished miracles;

Prizewinner Derek Walcott
syrupy stories anaesthetize us with their blandness, and magnify
trivialities into high drama. Pseudo-poets, for all the world like
pirates on dry land, bore us with hard-luck stories of interminable
length that is when they aren't busy claiming to be the popes of
phantom churches, speaking for congregations of which they are
the only member. But enough of that! Let us render to the voice
its full measure, and to words the magic of saying. Poetry is not a
luxury, a sweet; it is a necessity, it is sustenance itself.
When Derek Walcott writes (I take a few lines at random
from his collection The Fortunate Traveller):
The moon shines like a lost button;
the black water stinks under the sodium lights on
the wharf. The night is turned on asfirmly
as a switch, dishes clatter behind bright windows,
I walk along the walls with occasional shadows
that say nothing. Sometimes, in narrow doors
there are old men playing the same quiet games
cards, draughts, dominoes. I give them names.
The night is companionable, the day is as fierce as
our human future anywhere. I can understand
Borges's blind love ofBuenos Aires,
how a man feels the veins ofa city swell in his hand \
he is not only telling his own story, he is telling ours, too. He
whispers to us the delicious temptation to look around so that we
can see, feel, experience the moment as a piece of eternity. He
summons us to our own assembly, wherever we may be from.
And he often awakens in each of us the possibility of our own
personal Odyssey. Again I quote:
At the end of this sentence, rain will begin.
At the rain's edge, a sail.
Slowly the sail will lose sight of islands;
into a mist will go the belief in harbors
ofan entire race.
The ten-years war is finished.
Helen's hair, a gray cloud.
Troy, a white ashpit
by the drizzling sea.
The drizzle tightens like the strings ofa harp.
A man with clouded eyes picks up the rain
and plucks the first line of the Odyssey. 3
1 Le royaume du fruit-étoile.
2 From "Port of Spain" in The Fortunate Traveller, Faber & Faber © 1982,
by Derek Walcott
3 "Archipelagoes", in the collection cited above.
EDOUARD J. MAUNICK, Mauritian poet and writer, is the author of a
number of books including Ensoleillé vif (Apollinaire Prize, 1976), Antholo-^ ACk
gies personnelles (1984) and Paroles pour solder la mer (1989). ^w
