One world
by Tom Krol
Above, a Chinese kite. The hobby of kite
flying, which probably originated in China,
spread rapidly throughout the world.
Aflash of colour rises swiftly into the
wind, dances softly, then comes to
rest as a meditation against a bright
blue sky. A tradition more than 2,000 years
old, the serene act of kite flying continues to
lift our spirits beyond the insistent gravity of
earth.
A universal symbol in art, literature and
folklore, the kite is an efficient and peaceful
aircraft. The earliest historic references date
to the fourth century BC, when Kungshu
Phan, a Chinese engineer, reportedly sent
aloft a "wooden bird". Accounts of kites are
also found in the annals of ancient Egypt and
Greece.
From Benjamin Franklin's experiments
with electricity to the Wright Brothers' first
flight, kites have played key roles in
scientific discovery and the study of weather.
But even for scientists, kite flying can repre¬
sent a way to relax and have fun. Alexander
Graham Bell, the inventor of the telephone,
designed a massive six-sided kite that could
carry a person into the air.
In the modern world, the venerable kite
is experiencing a renaissance that may carry
with it a new role as a symbol of global co¬
operation. The historic 1985 summit meeting
of Presidents Ronald Reagan of the United
States and Mikhail Gorbachev of the USSR
marked a significant step towards peace be¬
tween the super-powers. The spirit of that
meeting inspired American kite designer
Jane Parker-Ambrose to create a kite com¬
memorating this new promise of global har¬
mony. The flags of the US and the USSR are
joined on the face of the kite. Halley's
comet, which revisited the Earth in 1986 for



the first time in seventy-six years, is shown
as a portent of peace.
On a "people to people" visit to Moscow
in that year, Jane presented her kite, along
with a letter of friendship signed by some
300 kite flyers from the US, Canada, Japan
and the United Kingdom, to the Soviet
Women's Peace Committee. This gesture of
international goodwill gave birth to the idea
for One Sky, One World, an annual global
kite-fly held each year on the second Sunday
in October. A non-profit organization based 77

in Denver, Colorado, its mission is to focus
the entire planet's attention on the need to
maintain peace and protect the environment.
'Painting
the sky' for peace



The first One Sky, One World kite-fly took
place in 1986, with more than 10,000 kites
and 40,000 participants at ninety locations in
fourteen countries. In just six years, the
event has grown to include more than
250,000 people in twenty-four countries. In
"bird" kites a few inches long, and "stun-
ters" with as many as 250 kites in train. They
appear as airborne dragons, centipedes,
hawks, bats and geometric shapes. Some are
rooted in centuries-old tradition, while
many incorporate high-tech design and
materials such as nylon, mylar, fibreglass and
carbon fibre. Kites have inspired colourful,
spinning wind socks and giant streamers in
the shapes of fish, cows, pigs and even chile
peppers.
Most likely originating in China, the kite
Right, kites and banners by the American
artist George Peters are displayed at the One
Sky, One World meeting in Denver, Colorado,
on 13 October 1991.
Below, a giant kite in Guatemala.
78
Tom Krol, of the United States, is a media
consultant and video producer with wide
experience in broadcast journalism. He
prepared the present article in collaboration
with Larry Ambrose.
October 1991, One Sky, One World events
were held in Moscow, Washington DC,
Bombay, Berlin, Sydney, Beijing and many
other major cities. Kite-flyers from Japan,
France, Colombia, Guam, Chile, England,
Hungary, Italy, The Netherlands, Scotland,
Spain, Hawaii, Alaska and many other US
locations joined in.
Jane Parker-Ambrose has travelled
around the world to promote her message.
In April 1991, Jane and a One Sky, One
World delegation visited the Weifang kite
festival in China, an annual event that draws
up to 30,000 people, and then went to Bei¬
jing's Tienanmen Square, where they flew
kites along with Chinese citizens.
The custom of "painting the sky" is
common to people around the globe. Like
their kites, flyers come in all shapes, sizes
and colours. The kites themselves display an
incredible diversity of design, flying
methods, colours and sizes. There are tiny
spread quickly throughout Asia, becoming a
sacred ceremonial object in some cultures.
Marco Polo wrote of man-carrying kites that
bore a passenger whose spirits were often
lifted beforehand by alcohol. A successful
flight indicated a prosperous outcome for a
. proposed sea voyage.
Japanese legend tells of an exiled samurai
who built a kite to carry his son Minamoto-
to-Tametomo from the island of Hachijo to
the Japanese mainland. Today, the kites of
Hachijo traditionally carry the likeness of
Tametomo. Many Japanese have become so
involved in kiting that they have been
labelled "tako kishi" or kite crazy.
In Guatemala, elaborate and colourful
patchwork kites are flown at cemeteries each
year to mark the "day of the dead". At day's
end, the Guatemalans burn their kites to
ashes in honour of their ancestors.
The highly manoeuvrable "fighter" kite,
developed in India, is now popular world-

wide. In the "civilized" pursuit of kite
fighting, the object is to sever the line or
force down an opponent's kite.
The Malay kite, used in Malaysia, Indo¬
nesia and Java for centuries, was adapted in
the 1890s by the American photographer
William Eddy, who used it to carry his
cameras into the sky.
Kite technology began to accelerate in
the nineteenth century. In the 1870s, the
German engineer Otto Lilienthal studied the
shape of birds' wings in order to create a
manned glider. A few years later, the Austra¬
lian Lawrence Hargrave designed the highly
efficient three-dimensional box kite, which
soon led to the bi-wing aircraft of the Wright
brothers.
Francis Rogallo, an American aerospace
engineer, invented the first truly modern
kite, the delta-wing, in 1948. The delta is the
precursor of the hang-glider as well as the
most popular kite in use today, the stunt
kite. With two kite lines, and sometimes as
many as four, "stunters" are capable of pre¬
cise aerobatics. "Stacked" one behind the
other, they create a spectacular stream of
colour and speed.
Kiting's latest development is the para-
foil, invented by the late Domina C. Jalbert.
A wing-shaped aerofoil, it is now used
widely to make steerable parachutes that
allow for remarkable pin-point landings.
Kiting can be both simple and complex,
meditative or competitive. Spectators at
competitive events witness graceful and ela¬
borate air shows featuring synchronized
movements, aerobatics and music.
Attracted by the mixture of technology
and tradition, more and more people are
attending kite events and joining kite clubs.
New clubs and speciality stores are springing
up. Annual kite sales world-wide have
boomed to more than $216,000,000.
A One Sky, One World meeting held at Foligno,
Italy, in October 1989.
One Sky, One World
takes place each year on the
second Sunday in October.
For information about how to take
part, write to:



One Sky, One World,
Box 11149, Denver,
CO 80211, USA.
79
