%J return to South Africa by Ruth Lazarus
An expatriate's eyewitness account of a country in the throes of change
Below, the Khayeiitsha
township outside Cape Town,
to which black South African
families were sent after the
demolition of squatter camps.
Below right: a house in a
residential district of Cape
Town.
IjLn absence of twenty-five years from one's
country of origin is a long time: and on returning
to it on a visit, as I did recently, one would natur¬
ally expect to find changes. But to return to South
Africa at this point in time is to witness a country
that is undergoing particularly profound and dra¬
matic changes.
The dismantling of apartheid has begun and
the process is, I believe, irreversible. The last few
years have seen a new willingness on the part of
the Government to review many of the apartheid
laws and to work together with the national
movements towards a new democratic constitu¬
tion and full franchise for everyone regardless of
ethnic origin. This process began in 1982 and
accelerated when President de Klerk took office
in 1989. "One person one vote", long the dream
of all non-whites, is now a possibility in the fore¬
seeable future.
Talk of the "new South Africa" is on
everyone's lips, but the expression often means
different things to different people, depending on
their origins, colour and political bias.
Some changes are very noticeable to the
visitor. Petty apartheid is disappearing, people of
different ethnic origins are now seen together,
and there are no separate queues in shops, at bus
stops or in banks. Schools (in theory at least) are
now desegregated. But the vast majority of blacks
cannot afford to send their children to the better
schools, and they are still dependent on "Bantu
Education", an inferior and inadequate primary
school system. Many of the blacks are, in fact,
not in school at all.
More important, all political parties, national
movements and black trade unions are now legal,
and many although not all political prisoners
have been released. The old and hated "Pass
system", controlling freedom of movement for
blacks, has been abolished.
There is, in general, a greater recognition
among the white population of the legitimate
rights of blacks and other oppressed groups to
equality in social and political life. Television and
radio programmes are much freer. However, at
least one third of the whites (the conservative
Afrikaners) rigorously oppose these changes, and
some have already formed a "state within a state"
Jh.-^' wmnmmm

RUTH LAZARUS
was born in South Africa and
left the country m 1946. A
former head of UNESCO's
Literacy Activities Section, she
IS the author of many articles
and studies on adult education
and literacy.
called Orangia in the Western Cape, to maintain
their segregated lives. I also suspect that the
majority of whites would still wish, and expect,
to maintain their economic supremacy.
During the last twenty years there has also
been an unprecedented exodus of highly skilled
and professional whites (doctors, lawyers, accoun¬
tants, etc.), most of whom have settled in Canada,
the United Kingdom and Australia. This exodus
still continues, and might well grow during what
many of them consider to be the uncertain years
of the future. The motivation varies, but manv
oppose the new wave of change and fear for their
privileged economic position.
Many of the oW structures
still remain
Yet despite these changes, the apartheid structures
are at present still very much in place. The right
to vote is still the privilege of the whites. Residen¬
tial apartheid is still entrenched. A high propor¬
tion of the whites live in beautiful homes with
swimming pools and large gardens in the richer
residential suburbs of the cities, fortified and
bolted inside with their luxury possessions.
Meanwhile, the majority of blacks are still
living in segregated, desolate towmships, in the
urban areas on the edges of the big cities, in very
inferior houses or shacks, in overcrowded homes
often lacking elementary urban amenities, such
as sanitation or electricity. Rural conditions are
even worse. These inhuman surroundings are
often a breeding ground for destabilizing ele-
¿i^iiîUMMÎIMMIIMMII^MIlMa.
ments, especially among the young. Law-abiding
residents live in constant fear of having their few
possessions stolen by marauding bands of delin¬
quents and socially deprived gangs. In fact, the
fear of being robbed or assaulted is felt in both
the white and non-white communities, especially
in Johannesburg (the largest city).
Economic apartheid is still perhaps the most
blatant hangover from the past. Even though
jobs arc no longer exclusively reserved for
whites, and trade unions for black workers are
now legal, a very high proportion of office
jobs and industrial jobs requiring technical
skills are still held by whites and the
overwhelming majority of unskilled, poorly paid
jobs by the blacks. With unemployment on the
increase, it is the black labour force which is most
badly hit.
The present recession is, in fact, of such con¬
cern that the Governor of the Reserve Bank,
Chris Stals, has stated that "poor economic
growth, if continued at its present performance,
wfll make the country ungovernable by 1995".
He gave three reasons for this stagnation: "polit¬
ical uncertainties, social unrest and industrial
action,"
One of the biggest obstacles to change still
lies in the distribution and ownership of land. In
spite of the abolition in 1991 of the Group Areas
Act, which dictated where people could live
depending on their ethnic origin, and of the Land
Acts (1919-1939), which reserved 87 per cent of
the country's land for whites (although they cur¬
rently make up less than 14 per cent of the popu¬
lation) there is as yet very little expectation that
change will come soon and the problem remains
grave. I saw little evidence of change, except in
the city of Johannesburg, where the centre of
town and adjoining residential districts have in
recent years, despite these laws, become mixed
areas. However, the overwhelming majority of
the black population is still confined to the
townships.
Despite the repealing of the land laws, land
formerly expropriated from the blacks by forcible
evacuation has not been returned, nor is its return
included in any new legislation, and there are stili
7 million squatters in temporary homes, mostly
without sanitation or water.
The Reverend Frank Chikane, a well-known
anti-apartheid activist, gives an example of what
happened to his own family: "My mother who
has owned land, and my father, now passed away,
have been removed twice since the 1950s. The
plot of land from which she was originally
removed is still there. It is not owned privately
by anybody: she has not been compensated for
being removed , . . and when they say that the
Land Act is going to be repealed, but is put under
the free market system, everyone else can come
and buy it, it rteans nothing to my mother. . . ."
Christopher S. Wren of the New York Times
recently gave a vivid description of a shanty town:
"In Sowcto-by-the-Sea, near Port Elizabeth, the 21

ukuhlelelek (the marginal ones) live jammed into
about 14,000 shacks built from corrugated metal,
wooden packing cases, and whatever else can be
scavenged. They overflow a squalid city without
schools, hospitals, community centres, parks,
sidewalks, or street lights. . . . Electricity,
drainage, sewage systems and paved streets do not
exist." And all this within a few kilometres of
the luxurious houses of the rich.
Another area in which there is still discrimi¬
nation IS that of pensions and Government
benefits for the disabled. These are still very
inferior for blacks. Unemployment benefits for
them hardly exist. Thus the sharp difference
between the rich and the poor, broadly speaking
between the whites and the blacks, is still very
evident.
A sense of isolation
Another impression is of South Africa's con¬
tinuing isolation from the rest of the world, both
economically, culturally and in the domain of
sport. The economic sanctions have been widely
felt, although this is often denied by the authori¬
ties. The Government has not yet, despite the
ongoing reforms, succeeded in attracting suffi¬
cient foreign capital to bolster a flagging
economy. The cultural and sport boycott has also
had a deep effect. Well-known artists have refused
to perform in South 


Africa, and are still doing
so. However, books and films which were cen¬
sored in the past are now easily available.
The boycott that until recent months
prevented South African sportsmen and women
from participating in international sports events,
notably the Olympics, and that discouraged
internationally-known competitors from coming
to South Africa, has had a devastating effect on
South African sport. This has been deeply
resented in white sporting circles. But changes are
now in progress and slowdy new sporting con¬
tacts with the outside world are taking place. The
International Olympic Committee has, for
instance, invited South Africa to the Barcelona
Olympics.
The future
I came away with the feeling that "the new South
Africa" IS still for the overwhelming majority a
hope rather than a reality. Nevertheless, in the
coming months negotiations between the
Government and the ANC and other national
movements could lead to the creation of a con¬
stituent assembly, the drafting of a new consti¬
tution based on universal adult suffrage, and even¬
tually the election of a fully democratic parlia¬
ment based on a non-racial voters' roll.
South Africa's future is thus still in the
balance. But the new freedoms gained will be
rigorously defended, and there are hopeful signs
that, if reason prevails over force, a new nation
will emerge that could rightfully and proudly
take its legitimate place among the other nations
of the world.
New Year's Eve revelry on the
streets of Hiilbrow, in central
Johannesburg.
22
