

World
KH
The great barrier reef of Belize,
the world's second largest after that
off the coast ofAustralia, has found
a guardian angel. A jury meeting at
Unesco Headquarters in March
awarded the first International
Marine Environment Prize set up
by the World Confederation of
UnderwaterActivities to Coral Cay
Conservation (CCC), a UK civic
group that has been working since
1986 with the Belize Government
on managing the country's coastal
areas and largest marine reserve.
In 1991, more than 300 volunteers
engaged in diving expeditions and
helped in computerizing all kinds of
data of value to the programme.
CCC has also provided Belize natio¬
nals with 24 fellowships a year, in a
bid to encourage the population to
look after its natural heritage.
A WAY WITH WASTE
Véronique Gnanih is undoubted¬
ly the prettiest refuse collector in
West Africa. She lives in Tohoue, not
far from Porto Novo, the historical
capital of Benin, where, draped in a
green dress with an embroidered
neckline, she takes pride in showing
people round the domestic refuse
sorting and reprocessingplant which
she set up in February 1989 with the
assistance ofEmmaus International
and the United Nations Develop¬
ment Programme (UNDP). With
diplomas in rural development and
community organization, Véronique
had the idea of doing something
about a waste tip the height ofa two-
storey building, which had been an
eyesore in the town ever since colo
nial times. She recruited a number of
jobless youngpeople, who are paid a
good wage and are given a meal and
free medical care. She has also
bought a tractor and trailer. Organic
waste is dumped in a heap and is
watered until it has completely
decomposed. The resulting compost
is then sold or spread inVéronique's
organic vegetable garden. Glass
bottles and metal scrap are also sold.
Plastic objects are stockpiled until a
use can be found for them, as are the
shells ofacatines, a type oflarge snail
which Véronique rears. This is a
prime example ofa small-scale pro¬
ject that is working perfecdy, thanks
to a renewable energy source in the
person ofVéronique herself.

At a meeting of CITES, the
Convention on International Trade
in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora, held in Kyoto
(Japan) in March, Mostafa Kamal
Tolba, the Egyptian-born biologist
who has been head of the United
Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) for the past sixteen years,
said that CITES was itself endan¬
gered by North-South divergences.
Zimbabwe, Namibia, Botswana and
Malawi are demanding the resump¬
tion of trade in ivory, which has
been banned since the Lausanne
Conference in 1989. At that time
the international community had
voiced concern about the threat¬
ened disappearance of the African
elephant. By cutting off the supply
at source, it thought it could, by the
same stroke, do awaywith demand.
Yet poaching did not stop, and the
profit that states could have de¬
rived from the sale ofelephant tusks
disappeared. "Powerful groups,
chiefly in the rich, industrialized
countries, consider that the out¬
lawing of trade in elephant products
is the answer," Mr. Tolba stated,
before adding that "There are also
thousands of millions of people
whose voices will not be heard, who
use a minute part of the planet's
resources and who receive a pathe¬
tic part of its revenues. . . . These
people cannot be refused the right
to use their natural heritage."
Prompted by an idea that came to a solitary yachts¬
man appalled by the sorry state of the high seas, Aus¬
tralia has instituted a clean-up day for beaches, rivers
and parks. On the 1991 Cleaning Up Australia Day,
more than 350,000 volunteers collected some 30,000
tons ofwaste from 4,452 locations, twice the amount of
the previous year. In all, a quarter of a million garbage
bags were distributed to military personnel, local auth¬
orities and associations ofvolunteers. All kinds ofrubbish
were collected, including bottles, cartons, syringes,
wrecked cars, rubble, industrial waste, animal car¬
casses and household refuse. Plastic, glass, paper and
aluminium were recycled. Although Australia is the
only country to have officially designated a special
clean-up Day, volunteers on the Hawaiian island of
Oahu, where Honolulu is located, gather every Saturday
morning to clean up villages and remove wrecked
vehicles from the roadsides.
Since 1 December 1989, trucks have been prohibited
from travelling by night on some ofAustria's highways,
including the main route across the Alps through the
Brenner Pass and the valley of the River Inn. This high¬
wayaccounts for 75% ofthe road traffic transiting through
the country.People living along the road had to put up
with noise pollution ofmore than 67 decibels, two deci¬
bels above the officially acceptable limit. Consequendy,
trucks weighing more than 7.5 tons have been banned
from using the road between 10 o'clock at night and 5 in
the morning, except for vehicles carrying perishable
produce and livestock. Since the prohibition went into
effect, traffic on the road has dropped by two-thirds,
while unaccompanied rail-road transport has risen by
1 1 5% and accompanied transport by 250%. The "piggy¬
back" system is an excellent substitute for road traffic, in
that it is better suited to rapid trade flows and is less
expensive over distances ofmore than 500 kilometres.
Of all the republics to emerge from the former Soviet
Union, only Russia and Turkmenistan are energy export¬
ers. Russia has abundant resources and is widely ack¬
nowledged to have 20% ofthe world's oil and 40% of its
natural gas reserves. However, the current crisis in the
country is affecting the production and transportation
of this wealth, especially since the oil and gas fields
are in isolated regions to which access is difficult.
Drilling equipment is old and poorly serviced, and the
wells have been poorly managed. Vladimir Kozlov, the
head of the International Fuels and Energy Associa¬
tion, a specialized non-governmental organization,
said at a meeting in Paris last February that he was
pinning his hopes on the development of natural gas,
which could be easily transported by pipeline.







