Gandhi
and the struggle
for non-violence
by Ramin Jahanbegloo
18
IT is impossible to discuss the subject of
tolerance today without referring to the
thought and action of Mohandas Karam-
chand Gandhi (1869-1948), known to the
world as Mahatma ("great soul"). Yet the
word tolerance appears only rarely in his
works even though his whole life proved him
to be a man of exemplary tolerance. This
paradox is an indication of the difficulty of the
concept.
According to Gandhi, to affirm one's tol¬
erance is to establish a hierarchy between
one's own position and that of others. "I do
not like the word tolerance", he wrote in a
letter to his followers in 1930 while he was
imprisoned at Yeravda Mandir, "but could not
think of a better one. Tolerance may imply a
gratuitous assumption of the inferiority of
other faiths to one's own, whereas ahimsa
[non-violence] teaches us to entertain the same
respect for the religious faiths of others as we
accord to our own, thus admitting the imper¬
fection of the latter. This admission will read¬
ily be made by a seeker of Truth, who follows
the law of love.
"If we had attained the full vision of truth,
we would no longer be mere seekers, but
would have become one with God, for Truth is
God. But being only seekers, we prosecute our
quest, and are conscious of our imperfection."
Here we touch on one of the basic prin¬
ciples of Gandhi's philosophy. We are in an
area of spiritual theory in which the very
concept of tolerance is situated, not in relation
to a given political or religious context, but in
relation to a belief in the liberty of human
conscience. Gandhi demands more than just
respect for another human being; he seeks to
encourage the quest for truth, whilst being
convinced that this quest is inseparable from
obedience to the law of love. Thus, for
Gandhi, it is impossible to evoke the concept
of tolerance without affirming the notion of
truth. This is a crucial point, but it is even
more important to understand that truth can
only be respected through the path of non¬
violence.
The terms "non-violence" and "truth" are so
closely allied as to be virtually interchangeable.
"Ahimsa and truth", wrote Gandhi, "are so
intertwined that it is practically impossible to
disentangle and separate them. They are like the

The champion of
non-violence towards
the end of his life, in the
midst of a crowd of
respectful admirers.
two sides of a coin, or rather a smooth un¬
stamped metallic disc. Who can say which side
is the obverse and which the reverse?
"Nevertheless, ahimsa is the means; Truth
is the end. Means to be means must always be
within our reach, and so ahimsa is our
supreme duty. If we take care of the means,
we are bound to reach the end sooner or later.
When once we have grasped this point, final
victory is beyond question."
THE SEED AND THE TREE
Gandhi does not seek to establish a rational
explanation of the world on the basis of the
notion of truth, or to favour a traditional line
of thought. "Truth resides in every human
heart", he declares, "and one has to search for
it there. . . . But no one has a right to coerce
others to act according to his own view of
truth." It is, therefore, impossible to separate
religious life from political life, as is shown by
the way in which Gandhi organized his
struggle both against British repression and
against the injustice done to the untouchables
by the Indian caste system. Following the
Socratic example, Gandhi bravely confronted
the spirit of tyranny and intolerance of his
contemporaries with no other weapons than
fasting and prayer. "The only tyrant I accept
is the 'still small voice' within me, And even
though I have to face the prospect of a 19

minority of one, I humbly believe I have the
courage to be in such a hopeless minority."
By acting on the basis of these principles,
the Mahatma rid himself of all political reser¬
vations. On the contrary, the standpoint he
adopted aimed to ensure the victory of the
humanitarian approach over the political
approach, which seeks to put ideological
values before the values of the community.
His unwavering concern for truth and for the
equality of all citizens led him to revolt against
tricks and lies which he judged to be ignoble
means to noble ends. "Your belief that there is
no connection between the means and the
ends is a great mistake", he wrote. "Through
that mistake even men who have been con
sidered religious have committed grievous
crimes. Your reasoning is the same as saying
that we can get a rose through planting a
noxious weed. . . . The means may be likened
to a seed, the end to a tree; and there is just the
same inviolable connection between the means
and the end as there is between the seed and
the tree."
And he continued: "I am more concerned
with preventing the brutalization of human
nature than with the prevention of the suffer¬
ings of my own people. I know that people
who voluntarily undergo a course of suffering
raise themselves and the whole of humanity;
but I also know that people who become bru¬
talized in their desperate efforts to get victory
Gandhi and members of
his staff during the years
he spent as a lawyer In
South Africa (1893-1914).
20
RAMIN JAHANBEGLOO,
Iranian philosopher, is a spe¬
cialist on Mahatma Gandhi,
about whose political thinking
he is currently writing a book.
Among his published works
are Hegel and the French
Revolution and Conversations
with Isaiah Berlin (Peter
Halban, London 1991). As a
journalist, he is a frequent
contributor to the French
journals Esprit and Etudes.

over their opponents or to exploit weaker
nations or weaker men, not only drag down
themselves but mankind also."
In other words, the "political virtue" of
non-violence (which Gandhi sees as the ulti¬
mate virtue) stems from the fact that it unites
the members of the community by stressing
the role of the individual and by underlining
the decisive effect of that catharsis, or purifica¬
tion, that we must exercise upon our bodies
and our minds. Thus our capacity to play a
part in public affairs and to judge what is just
and what is unjust is entirely dependent upon
the individual and collective practice of non¬
violence. The finest lesson we can learn from
the philosophy of Gandhi is that, for the indi¬
vidual and the community, policies that make
power the criterion of truth can only lead to
disastrous consequences.
THE WORLDWIDE
INFLUENCE OF GANDHI
Fully aware of the dangers of political power
but also of the democratic duty he had to fulfil
in India, Gandhi declared: "If I seem to take

1 . Literally, holding
on to truth. Name given by
Gandhi to the technique
of non-violent resistance as
practised by him and
under his guidance. Editor
Martin Luther King on his
return to the United States
after receiving the Nobel
Peace Prize (1964).
part in politics, it is only because politics
encircle us today like the coil of a snake from
which one cannot get out, no matter how
much one tries. I wish, therefore, to wrestle
with the snake. . . . My work will be finished,
if I succeed in carrying conviction to the
human family that every man or woman,
however weak in body, is the guardian of his
or her self-respect and liberty. This defence
avails, even though the whole world may be
against the individual résister."
The influence of Gandhi's teachings has
been felt throughout the world. Martin Luther
King's struggle for the rights of black Ameri¬
cans is a particularly notable example of it.
From the Montgomery bus boycott in 1955 to
the march on Washington in 1963, King
adopted Gandhi's non-violent techniques in
all his protest actions.
Martin Luther King described Gandhi's
influence in his book Strength to Love: "The
whole Gandhian concept of satyagraha1 was
profoundly significant for me. As I delved
deeper into the philosophy of Gandhi, my
scepticism concerning the power of love
gradually diminished,, and I came to see for
the first time that the Christian doctrine of
love, operating through the Gandhian
method of non-violence, is one of the most
potent weapons available to an oppressed
people in their struggle for freedom." He
added: "If humanity is to progress, Gandhi
is inescapable."
In 1968, the year of his death, these pro¬
phetic words of Martin Luther King were
borne out in the non-violent resistance of the
people of Czechoslovakia to the Soviet inva¬
sion. From then on, non-violence was insepa¬
rably linked to the various political and intel¬
lectual movements that for ten years bubbled
up in the Eastern countries. As Lech Walesa
declared in the 1980s, when he headed the
Polish Solidarity trade union whose strikes
brought about the downfall of the totalitarian
régime in his country: "The only way we can
oppose violence is to refuse to use it our¬
selves. . . . We have no other weapons than
truth and faith."
The people of the Philippines also adopted
the non-violent option in 1986 in their cam¬
paign of civil disobedience against dictatorial
rule. Since then, various forms of non-violent
action in Latin America, South Africa and the
Middle East have shown the topicality and the
relevance of the Gandhian heritage in the fight
for freedom and justice. O
22
