The
balancing act \
40
LIFE can often be as sordid as a floor
cloth, clingy and ragged from constant
contact with the mundane. But it does
offer wonderful moments. Like yesterday.
Taking one step forwards then two steps
back, incipient summer was behaving with
the coy timidity of a bashful bride, ready to
burst into tears at any moment. In a fit of
exasperation I decided to risk it and, grab¬
bing Tonto, my faithful bike, I headed for
the Vondelpark.
The sky was an indeterminate blue, with
a touch of violet that threatened a storm. In
the park, a sparse scattering of young people
lay on the grass, stripped to the waist, expos¬
ing themselves to the risk of colds or worse
in the fitful sunshine. After all, when you've
tortured your flesh with thousands of
stretch-and-flex contortions all winter, you
can't let the weather stop you baking and
tanning the final product.
But even narcissism was at a low ebb yes¬
terday, confined mainly to willows batting
feathery eyelashes at their, reflections in the
canals and little lakes. Beside them, the ubi¬
quitous cyclists doodled along. The faces of
Amsterdammers, usually topped by tousled
mops of curly hair, are quite distinctive.
There is a rugged, weather-beaten quality to
them that contrasts sharply with the jovial
blue eyes. As they grow older, Amsterdam¬
mers seem to stiffen into openness, into
determined good humour as they cycle to
their graves with a Greenpeace badge on one
lapel and an Amnesty sticker on the other.
The floor of the park was the sharp
drenched green of the polders, a colour that,
like long afternoons in the swimming-pool,
leaves you acutely conscious that the human
body is 92 per cent water. In the sunshine,
the reflection of heavy foliage and big trees
gave the surface of the canals the magical
green shimmer of ducks' backs.
As I cycled along, the strains of a violin
reached my ears, a curious, jazzy melody
accompanied by a drum. I rounded the bend
approaching the Film Museum to find a knot
of stationary cyclists gathered round a small
amateur band. The quiet unassuming notes
of a perfect evening raga made a dappled
melody that blended with the light and
shadow of the park. Like the others, I stayed
awhile, perched lopsidedly on Tonto, one
foot on the path, the other on the pedal,
caught in the spell of the music.
In the background rose the imposing
bulk of the Film Museum, its sunny terrace
dotted with genteel coffee-drinkers whiling
away the time at little tables. There was a
vaguely gallic air about the made-up faces
and fashionable summer outfits. But the
Dutch can never quite carry it off. The
A group of musicians in the
Vondelpark (Amsterdam).

in the
young look too squeaky clean, their clothes
too practical and their innocent complexions
reflect their milk-based diets.
Round the next bend a surprise awaited
me. The grass was littered with bicycles,
their owners reclining beside them. I had
brought a biography of Van Gogh to read
and was heading for a sunny corner near the
lake, when the slow repetitive strains of an
Arab melody caught my ear. Beyond a vig¬
orous football game, at the foot of a monu¬
ment ringed with flowers, a group of
Moroccan youths in Western clothing were
playing ukelele-like instruments and small
drums, and singing. The distant, archaic lilt
evoked haunting memories of the ramayan
groups of Trinidad. Then the tempo speeded
up as flourishes, trills and a quickened
drum-beat broke the monotony of the song.
There is a sudden flurry of activity to my
right. In a spectacular whirligig of acroba¬
tics, two Turkish youths flicker across the
NIALA MAHARAJ,
of Trinidad and Tobago, is a
journalist with a special
interest in popular culture and
cross-cultural issues.
She has worked as a tele¬
vision producer in her own
country, as a publications co¬
ordinator in Rome, and as
an editor in Hong Kong. She
has contributed to many
leading newspapers and
magazines in Europe, the
Caribbean and Asia.
Vondelpark
BY NlALA MAHARAJ
grass, their arms and legs interlooping in
perfect syncopation as their bodies describe
graceful arabesques high in the air to a smat¬
tering of hand-claps from the lounging spec¬
tators. Then four more youths join in, their
shoulder-length curly hair whipping up and
down as they spring into human pyramids
vibrant with energy. They pause for
applause, get it, and flicker down to the grass
once more as though gravity does not exist.
Another good-humoured gathering at¬
tracts my attention. At the edge of the path,
a skinny, blond youth in a garish, orange-
patterned shirt is giving haircuts. A hand¬
made cardboard sign announces the price
ten guilders. He is at work on a long-haired
Latin American when the proceedings are
interrupted by his customer's daughter with
an imperious demand for a paternal kiss.
Memory stirs again . . . Sunday mor¬
ning . . . Barbers plying their trade under
mango-trees in Trinidad. I cannot resist. I
choose a vacant spot, lower my bike to the
ground and join in the free entertainment.
The sharp thwack of ball on racquet
punctuates the droning Moroccan music. To
one side of the football game, two muscular
young women in striped T-shirts hammer
out a ferocious game of paddle tennis. I have
never seen the game played with such speed
and aggression. Nearer the lake, a couple of
blond teenagers are clumsily engaged in a
desultory game of badminton.
The South American's haircut is finished.
The plastic cape is withdrawn from his
shoulders and a brush is flicked over his
neck. A Surinamese with a bushy Afro hair¬
style is beckoned forward and the blond,
lanky barber begins to sculpture a neat shape
out of the mass of hair. Near me, a couple of 41

ff/nrMS/^
Starry night (1890), oil on
canvas, by Vincent van Gogh.
42
Europeans embrace passionately on the
grass, devouring each other with kisses.
Then, slowly, they ease off and take to
stroking each other's face hypnotically.
I force my eyes back to my book, a cheap
biography of Van Gogh, one of the coun¬
try's most glorious figures, but a distant
flame suddenly catches from the famous
sunflowers on the open page. I look up. The
Moroccans have built a fire to warm up their
drums, just as our tassa musicians in Tri¬
nidad do. The music continues with increas¬
ed vitality, and a skinny girl of Asian appea¬
rance, her dress hitched high, begins a
sensuous barefoot dance beside the path.
The spectators smile encouragingly at her.
Her somewhat ravaged face is veiled by long
hair, so I return to Van Gogh. His brother
has just managed to bribe him away from the
clutches of a poor prostitute, providing him
with the money to enable him to begin the
long pilgrimage that was to lead him from
his early studies of peasant life to his trium¬
phant discovery of colour.
Another sound makes me look up again.
It comes from a ghetto-blaster carried by a
tall, mustachioed German with a bicycle,
which he sets down before beginning to
practise intricate, virile dance-steps, between
the acrobats and the barber, who is still
intent on his work. The audience is apprecia¬
tive, but the shadow of a nearby tree has
lengthened to cover me, so I move to the
sunny edge of the lake. I become aware of

the ever-present Vondelpark juggler. I am
surprised how much he has improved during
the year that I have been watching him prac¬
tise. Now the silver-coloured batons explode
from his hands like a burst of fireworks in
the evening sunlight.
A South American drinks vendor pedals
up with two blue coolers strapped to his
bicycle. The red-headed French family
nearby buys beer. He apologizes that he has
no mineral water for me. I turn once more to
Van Gogh and his unquenchable thirst for
recognition and his developing exile. The
low throb of a guitar, and I turn round. Two
Dutch guys and a Peruvian have settled on
the grass nearby. As I look on, the Peruvian
produces a small bamboo flute and conjures
up a delicate, perfectly-controlled jazz piece.
The Dutch guitarist throws back his head
and laughs joyously and long. No mere joke
could have ignited that laugh; the warmth of
pure well-being radiates so far out from their
circle that it seems to touch all those around.
They play Latin songs and sing. Their voices
are not very good and I can barely make out
the Spanish words. The guitarist laughs again
and again.
I try not to let my envy of their easy
companionship show by returning to Van
Gogh. He has cut off. his ear and has been
abandoned by Gauguin, who complains
that Vincent's brother looks at his paint¬
ings "with the cold eyes of the Dutchman".
The Latin American vendor cycles past
again, sells a few drinks and then parks his
bicycle near the group with the guitars.
They shift to make room for him in their
circle and he begins to sing in a weak tre¬
mulous voice. I strain my ears in anticipa¬
tion of the Spanish lyrics, but the words
are English and familiar.
". . . I am just a poor boy so my story's
seldom told. I have squandered my resis¬
tance for a pocket full of mumbles, such are
mumbles, such are promises. . . ." It is an old
Simon and Garfunkèl ballad that I remember
by heart from my teenage days in the 1960s.
". . . All lies and jests; still, the man hears
what he wants to hear and disregards the
rest. ..."
A confused stirring draws attention to the
other side of the path. The Turkish acrobats
and the German dancer have joined forces,
creating a mobile human pyramid with the
broad German shoulders over the bicycle
handlebars as its base. More and more of the
Turks pile on, their locks flowing in the wind
as the bicycle wobbles down the slope until,
at the last moment, they scatter to right and
to left. The spectators chuckle; it is starting
to become like a circus. The acrobats and the
clowns are as one in the fading light.

"When I left home and my family, I was
no more than a boy," the drinks vendor
sings on, "in the company of strangers, in
the quiet of a railway station, running
scared . . . " the guitar ripples through the
interlude "Keeping low, seeking out the
poorer quarters where the ragged people go,
looking for the places only they would
know. ..."
The Dutchman raises his arm. "All to¬
gether now!" and the group joins in the
refrain, "Lai la lai . . . lai la lai, lai, lai la
lai. . . ." Those of us around begin to join in
hesitantly, but the wind is becoming chilly
and the crowd in the park is thinning out.
The drinks vendor's voice floats out
again. "Asking only workman's wages I
come looking for a job. But I get no
offers. . . ." The note goes too low and he
dissolves into a mumble. The laughing
Dutchman stops to adjust his guitar while
the flute plays on and I turn back to Van
Gogh. Now he is embracing utter loneliness
after the people of Aries have petitioned for
his eviction. His madness scares them. And
me. I know where it will lead.
I pause for respite and the guitar strums
again. "And I'm laying out my winter
clothes and wishing I was gone . . . going
home . . . where the New York city winters
aren't bleeding me, leading me-ee-ee . . .
going home. ..."
As I take up the next refrain with those
left in the park, the gooseflesh on my arm
tells me it is time to go. I put away my book
and pick up my bicycle. But the guitars rise
crescendo to the final stanza.
". . . In a clearing stands a boxer and a
fighter by his trade, and he carries the
reminder of every glove that laid him low
and cut him, till he cried out, in his anger
and his shame, T am leaving, I am leav¬
ing' . . . But the fighter still remains. ..." O 43
