Mf'uda's world by Grazia Borrinii
Reconciling
locai and global
issues in
environmental
care
28
GRAZIA BORRINI,
Italian physicist, has taught
and carried out research into
the interactions between
health, environment and
development Issues at the
University of California,
Berkeley, and at the Istituto
Superiore di Sanità in Rome.
One of the originators of the
Primary Environmental Care
(PEC) strategy, she has
recently edited a review of
case-studies In PEC ("Lessons
Learned in Community-based
Environmental Management").
I met Maria Carvalho last summer, in a squatter
settlement in Salvador da Bahia, Brazil. Maria,
who likes to be called Miuda, is forty-three years
old, illiterate, and a grandmother of eight chil¬
dren. She, her husband and four daughters (the
last one two years old) illegally occupy the land
on which they live. All her other children, old
enough to be married and away from home, live
in other illegal settlements.
Miuda was born in the countryside, where
her father owned a small farm. The whole family
worked in the fields, growing crops and tending
a few cows and goats. Life was not bad then, but
her father fell ill and the family had to sell the
land to a cattle ranching company. The money
did not last long, and Miuda, then six years old,
was taken in by a family in a nearby town. She
got lodging and food in exchange for minor
domestic work.
At age fourteen Miuda married and gave birth
to a daughter. Her husband abandoned her two
years later. When she was eighteen she met her
present companion, Antonio, and moved in with
him. With Antonio she had fourteen children,
but only nine are still alive (the others died in
infancy or childhood). In 1969 Antonio decided
to move to Salvador in search of a good job. A
construction company hired him as an unskilled
worker on a limited time contract.
A year later Miuda and the children joined
him, and the family settled in a rented flat in the
suburbs. Miuda did domestic work, took care of
the children and washed clothes to earn a small
income. Yet there was never enough money. The
family had to move several times, every time to
a cheaper and worse living arrangement. In May
1977 Antonio got seriously sick and could not
work at all. With no money to pay the rent, the
family had to move to a squatter settlement.
Miuda bought the lot on which they now live
from Mr. Bahia, a previous illegal resident who
had weeded the area and so gained some sort of
"right" over it. The lot, close to a brook at the
bottom of a hill, looked like a swamp, and Miuda
and Antonio had to fill it with earth before
building a mud home. There was some sort of
water supply (a well not far away) but no sanita¬
tion, no road, no rain drainage, no electricity and
no garbage collection. The sewers from the
housing schemes on top of the hill discharged
openly into the brook, and every time the rain
got heavy (a frequent event in the tropics) the
mud home was flooded with sewage water.
In 1983, after heavy rain, floods and constant
water infiltrations, the house of Miuda and
Antonio fell to pieces. With the support of a local
organization they joined other residents, and all
of them asked the municipality to help them
rebuild their houses. Initially, only the local
organization gave any concrete help, but a few
months later the municipality also provided some
construction material. Now Miuda's house has
brick walls (the pavement is still pressed earth),
but the infiltration persists and the water around
the house has to be drained almost every day.
Miuda still works, washing clothes for other
people; her husband gets sporadic jobs. She and
a few other illegal residents are quite active in peti¬
tioning authorities for services, but they have the
feeling that no-one listens to them. As a whole,
the community is apathetic, without any form
of organization.
Miuda believes that life in Salvador is better
than in the countryside because town people can
work and earn some money. Also, some of her
children went to school (she gave this informa¬
tion with pride). She likes to live in the settle¬
ment and will leave the area only if forced to do
so. Yet she feels insecure, even after having been

Above, a relatively well-
organized recent squatter
settlement on a hillside in
Salvador de Bahia (Brazil).
Left, garden plots have been
planted among the shacks.
a resident for thirteen years. There are frequent
rumours that the police will come, destroy the
illegal shelters and send the people away. She says
that many families tried to leave the area to find
a better place to live, but most had to come back
because of economic difficulties. Miuda feels sick



and tired, and looks much older than her age.
The story of Miuda is anything but excep¬
tional. Like her, millions of poor people around
the world bear with courage and ingenuity a daily
burden of personal misery, lack of social support
and environmental problems.
Local and global issues
You and I, and Miuda, her husband and her
friends, will all suffer from the consequences of
global environmental problems. We all are, or
will be, affected by the thinning of stratospheric
ozone, the disruption of the Earth's climate, the
depletion of non-renewable resources and the loss
of unique habitats and the genetic diversity that
goes with them. But while you and I can dedi¬
cate time and resources to discussing and trying
to solve these problems, can Miuda afford to do
so? Can she worry about the disappearance of
local plant varieties if her family must clear some
forest to set up a home in a decent place? Can
her husband be concerned about throwing used
car oil in the brook, when every day he has to
drain someone else's sewage from his home? Can
we ask them to worry about worldwide popula¬
tion growth and plan their families accordingly,
when their children are their best helpers and
friends, and their only support in old age?
Environmental advocates and policy-makers
should consider these questions before drawing
up plans for environmental protection. No
amount of education will get people to care about
environmental problems that affect us all when
no-one helps them solve the problems they face
alone. In other words, is it at all effective, let alone
efficient, to concentrate our attention on global
issues when so many local issues are left
unresolved?
To date, the main focus of environmental
concerns has been on large-scale problems such
as the hole in the ozone layer or oil spills in the
oceans. The media, environmental groups and the
public at large are highly concerned about such
issues, and those concerns have even helped to
achieve difficult international agreements in a
relatively short time. On the other hand, local
environmental problems that are directly felt by
particular communities and rooted in local con¬
texts appear less interesting and are usually
neglected or subsumed under headings like sani¬
tation, housing or agriculture, which share little
of the current glamour of environmental affairs.
It is not difficult to understand this
phenomenon. Global problems are impressive. 29

In Salvador, homeless families
burn forest to make room for
more squatter dwellings.
30
They are relatively few in number, clearly
defined, and affect, actually or potentially, human
multitudes. On the contrary, most local problems
are prosaic. There are many of them. They are
ill-defined and complicated by a variety of local
factors. Moreover, each local problem affects only
a limited number of people. Yet it affects these
people today, unequivocally and often severely.
And since there are so many local problems and
they are interconnected, their total impact on
human health, economic resources and ecolog¬
ical surival is huge.
Two basic considerations. The first is that the
problems facing Miuda and her neighbours also
concern the municipality as a whole, which faces
rising costs (for instance for health care and police
surveillance) and gathers little revenue from the
squatters. Also, the land value is affected by the
environmental degradation, and the polluted
brook (lost as a source of usable water) goes to
increase the pollution of Salvador's beaches and
sea. In fact, the economy, social life and ecology
of the whole city and region surrounding it are
in many ways related to the presence and cur¬
rent fast growth of squatter settlements. Local
environmental problems easily feed into
municipal, regional and even national problems!
The second consideration is that for Miuda
and for many other people in similar situations-
issues related to the physical and the socio¬
economic environment are not neatly stacked in
different piles but are perceived as a whole.
Solving local environmental problems means
solving basic needs problems, and vice versa. For
instance, as long as the water supply remains
illegal and sporadic, there will be fights with the
neighbours and little opportunity to improve the
hygienic habits of the children. As long as there
is an open-air sewage discharge nearby, the
squatters will not build or use latrines. Without
security of tenure and social recognition, no-one
will invest time and money to improve the family
shelters or the common areas in the settlement.
With no hygiene and poor shelters people will
easily get sick, will work less and less produc¬
tively, become poorer and have even less hope
of 'securing a piece of land for themselves.
The women in Miuda's community could
organize themselves and start some income-
generating activity, but they will not manage to
do so as long as they do not know where to leave
their children or how to take care of the finan¬
cial and legal requirements of an association.
Having neither land nor money to set up a
shelter, they will not be able to organize a self-
run kindergarten. And they all have many chil¬
dren and very little money.
Community empowerment
The only hope seems to be the empowerment of
Miuda herself and the whole squatter community.
This is a lesson learnt from innumerable past
experiences. Problems such as the ones men¬
tioned above can be solved only with the full
involvement of local people, as individuals,
groups and community organizations. I use the

term "empowerment" to indicate an increased,
active control over the factors affecting life and
well-being.
What does this mean for Miuda? It means
that if she is to have any hope of improving the
life of her family and community she should not
wait for solutions to be provided by distant
authorities, but begin with a gathering of her
neighbours to discuss common problems, iden¬
tify resources and organize possible solutions.
This process is likely to involve the creation of
ad-hoc groups or formal community organiza¬
tions to pool resources and face international
bodies. For instance, a legal Residents' Associa¬
tion in Miuda's community would have a good
chance of solving at least one of the most pressing
problems of the squatters, namely land tenure.
Primary environmental care
In light of the above considerations and from a
wealth of experience in community development
and local environmental action, some basic
requirements have been identified and grouped
as a strategy of Primary Environmental Care
(PEC). PEC is defined as a process by which local
communities, with various degrees of external
support, organize themselves and strengthen,
enrich and apply their own means and capacities
for the care of their environment while simul¬
taneously satisfying their needs.
The basic ideas behind PEC are not new, and
to many they may appear as simply good
common sense. What is new is the attempt to
lend strong support to an approach that integrates
different concerns and builds upon the under¬
standing of two key ideas: that community-based
environmental management is essential for local
as well as national and global environments and
economies; and that for such management to suc¬
ceed, environmental, social and economic objec¬
tives must be combined, and pursued with the
full involvement of the affected groups and
individuals.
Women make palm oil (left)
and attend a functional
literacy class (right). Both
activities are part of a
UNESCO educational project
for Togolese women.
Who should do what to set the PEC strategy
in motion? The peculiarity of problems and solu¬
tions characteristic of local contexts and the very
definition of community empowerment preclude
a meaningful general answer to such a question.
Yet very few local communities can succeed
without external help. As things are today,
governments are the prime partners in PEC, and
they are indispensable. They need to allow the
process to happen, and provide the legislation and
sectoral services essential to sustain it. Above all,
governments should ensure that communities
have both access to natural resources and secu¬
rity of tenure, since it is only when tenure is
secured that long-term commitments can be made
and environmental improvements emerge.
Even when political conditions are favourable,
however, most communities still need external
support for specific initiatives. They may need
access to information, technology, credit or
training in new skills and practices (e.g. methods in
agro-ecology, small business management, low-
cost housing, sanitation and disaster pre¬
paredness).
But external support is not enough. Commu¬
nity empowerment is a process that requires the
contribution of all community members and it
can only grow along with their sense of" social
identity. The community should organize, iden¬
tify its own problems and resources and try out
different initiatives to discover what is best for
the local situation. Needless to say, obstacles will
arise, such as conflicts among different groups
within the community or between the commu¬
nity and external stakeholders.
Some solutions are at handat least in terms
of awareness and capacities but in many cases
the institutional and behavioural changes needed
to put them into practice are likely to take a long
time. History teaches us that it is a long way from
ethics to ethos. And this is why "strategies" are
needed. To give visibility, legitimacy, incentive
and impulse to what needs to be done.
31
