LATIN AMERICA FREEDOM
FOR THE HAVE-NOTS
by Fernando Henrique Cardoso
IN Brazil there has long been a profound
conviction that democracy is a political
system that does not easily take root in
underdeveloped countries. And yet for long
periods in its history Brazil itself has had a
formal democratic system. In the nineteenth
century the Empire coexisted with parliament¬
ary government, and in the present century,
except for the periods between 1937 and 1945
and 1964 and 1985, there have always been
elections and a plurality of political parties. The
fact remains that people have always tended to
emphasize the problems of democracy rather
than its stability and the strength of its roots.
The noted Brazilian historian Sergio Buarque
de Holanda liked to say that democracy "is a
delicate plant, and has great difficulty growing
in the tropics".
In the so-called Third World countries,
even when a regime has had leaders chosen on
the basis of elections between representatives of
different parties, it has always been criticized
by someone, not without justification, on the
grounds of its "elitist" or "oligarchical" cha¬
racter. In such cases, fragile democratic institu¬
tions were confronted with political realities
such as the existence of systems of patronage,
lack of real freedom for society's underdogs,
and the artificiality of political parties.
These criticisms contain an element of truth.
But in the light of world events during the last
ten years, I wonder whether it is not the dicta¬
torships and authoritarian regimes rather than
the democracies that have turned out to be frag¬
ile. Dictatorships, as recent history shows, end
up being less durable than democracy, which is
increasingly becoming a universal value.
In his "Dictionary of Politics",1 Norberto
Bobbio reviews the various meanings of the
word democracy from ancient Greece to the
present day, and concludes by emphasizing the
dichotomy between democracy as an egalita¬
rian ideal and democracy as a method in
other words between democracy as a value and
democracy as a mechanism. But his comments
were made before the current great debate
about the transition to democracy in eastern
Europe. If he were writing now, he would per¬
haps comment that it is vain to think of merg¬
ing these two meanings of democracy.
Nevertheless, I think he would primarily
emphasize the key role of freedom, both in
theory and in practice. It is freedom, far more
than a definition of new rules of democracy,
that has fostered the democratization process in
eastern Europe, led to the downfall of anachro¬
nistic dictatorships in Greece, Spain and 21

22
Portugal, and encouraged the fight against
authoritarianism in Latin America. It still moti¬
vates the struggle for democratization, particu¬
larly in Asia and some of the newly industria¬
lized countries such as the Republic of Korea.
All the same, we need to analyse rather
more deeply the different processes of transi¬
tion to democracy that are taking place today. I
shall confine myself to those in Latin America,
with which I am directly acquainted, but I shall
compare them with those in eastern Europe.
Apart from the aspirations to freedom which
are common to them both, I see only differ¬
ences between them.
In Poland in 1981 I observed at first hand the
final stage of the events which led to the Gdansk
agreements between Lech Walesa and the
management of the Lenin naval shipyard. I
drove to Gdansk from Warsaw, where I was
attending a meeting of the International Sociolo¬
gical Association, in order to take a closer look at
the strike. I remember that what surprised and
even shocked me were the symbols displayed in
the streets effigies of the Pope, Polish flags
from pre-people's democracy days, and lighted
candles. Was this a return to the past?
Then I remembered the events of May 1968
in France, which took place while I was a pro¬
fessor of sociology at the University of Nan-
terre just outside Paris. On the barricades in
Paris, at demonstrations by students, workers
and others, the Internationale was always sung.
"Debout, ô damnés de la terre!" ("Arise ye
starvelings from your slumbers!") intoned
well-fed crowds led by young people waving
black anarchist flags.
The antecedents of the two movements, like
their socio-economic contexts, were different.
But they shared the same mixture of symbols,
simultaneously contemporary and anachro¬
nistic, which sought to express a message that
still lacked a vocabulary and a fixed grammar.
In each case there was a powerful reaction
against ossified structures and a tremendous
longing to turn over a page of history.
Making the transition to democracy
But the quest for greater freedom is not the
only factor in contemporary history. There are
others, including components of what I call
substantive democracy (to distinguish it from
formal democracy), which implies health, edu¬
cation and general welfare for the masses. Yet
both in eastern Europe and in Latin America,
despite their different situations, efforts to
build a democratic political system come up
against the same agonizing problem: can demo¬
cracy exist in a society paralysed by an eco¬
nomy in which penury is rife?
Before answering this crucial question, we
need to be clear about the differences between
the forms of transition to democracy found in
the two regions. In Latin America the transi-
FERNANDO HENRIQUE
CARDOSO,
of Brazil, is a former
President of the International
Sociological Association. A
Senator of the State of Sào
Paulo, he has taught at
several North American
universities and at the
University of Paris X. Among
his works published in
English are Dependency and
Development In Latin America
(with others, 1979) and
Another Development,
approaches and strategies
(1977).
tion has neither jeopardized the market eco¬
nomy nor sought to change it; indeed, the
changes that have occurred there have streng¬
thened the market. In eastern Europe the situa¬
tion is totally different: as well as acquiring
more freedom and more democratic rules,
society and the economy must also be rebuilt.
In the Latin American countries, attempts
to reform society and the economy take place
in the context of an already existing civil
society, competition between companies, and
efforts to move away from a system of patron¬
age which pervades the world of politics. Latin
American societies are much more like those of
western Europe and the United States than
those of eastern Europe where (particularly in
the ex-USSR, which experienced seventy years
of communist government), civil society has to
be recreated from scratch.
In order to move into the democratic phase,
the first item on the political agenda must be to

n mm
M loa
channel the urge for freedom into the construc¬
tion of state and non-state institutions which fit
into the Madisonian tradition of checks and
balances. In a way this is easier to achieve in
Latin America, where the state, even if authori¬
tarian, has not destroyed the market and non-
state organizations have been preserved, than it
is in eastern Europe, where the democratic
drive comes from limited sections of the intelli¬
gentsia and groups within the dominant party
"contaminated" by the new ideas. But what
really set the ball rolling was the aspiration of
the masses for freedom and consumer goods.
In Latin America, since major economic
reforms had not been introduced and the back
of the dictatorships (i.e. the military) had not
been broken, the transition boiled down to a
mammoth negotiation between the old masters
and the new and there has been no real break in
continuity. In terms of institutions, Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, Uruguay, and even Paraguay, had
to revert to democratic practices and curb the
influence of the old rulers without excluding
them altogether.
The forces working for democracy in Latin
America met resistance from within the state,
but found support in the already existing civil
society which coexisted with the dictatorship
(trade unions, universities, companies, the
media and even political parties). In eastern
Europe, on the other hand, when the party-
state broke up, civil society had to be comp¬
letely reinvented, not reinstated.
Here I should like to mention a thesis that is
relevant today, although many democrats dis¬
like it. It is based on the theory of elites of the
Moravian-born U.S. economist Joseph Schum-
peter, who believed that democracy exists
when rival groups struggle for power and com¬
pete for votes. Voting not only has to be intro¬
duced, but competition has to be organized by
elites which identify objectives and put them to
Sâo Paulo,
Brazil's biggest city.
23

the people, who make a choice. Rules made by
the majority are observed, and minorities res¬
pected. Continuity and alternation in what the
Italian sociologist and jurist Gaetano Mosca
calls the "political class" are not only guaran¬
teed but prescribed by electoral competition.
Freedom even on an empty stomach
Now in both Latin America and eastern Europe
dictatorships have wrought havoc in the sense
that they have largely destroyed elites. Recon¬
structing these elites is a necessary precondition
for the revival of democratic institutions. Learn¬
ing how to manage social groups and get them
to express their feelings and interests without
falling into blind corporatism is a long and
thankless process; but it is the essential tool for
any democratization.
This brings me to the crux of the matter: the


rising tide of popular demands. Democratiza¬
tion by definition opens the floodgates of
society. What happens then? In eastern Europe,
where totalitarianism was stronger and inequa¬
lities are less pronounced, popular demands are
for more freedom and participation, and so are
aimed mainly at the state and government. In
Latin America, where inequalities are glaring,
demands are for better jobs, better pay and
better public services.
But in both cases penury is intolerable
when it goes beyond limits set by the people
and by the capacity of productive forces to
satisfy demand. Here the debate about sub¬
stantive democracy and formal democracy
crops up again, although in different terms.
The prospects for constructing a democratic
political system in which people enjoy a full
range of freedoms are reduced where there is
no prosperity. In eastern Europe libertarian
aspirations have until now meant that demo¬
cratic values have been preserved even on an
empty stomach; but in Latin America, where
inflation and unemployment are rife, and
crises, exhaustion of public funds and a large
external debt are commonplace, the mainte¬
nance of an open and democratic society is a
tour de force.
This is the finest lesson the twentieth cen¬
tury can pass on to the next millennium. We
have discovered the fragility of dictatorships,
and also that peoples nowadays want freedom,
even on short commons. They are ready to
endure penury because they realize that lack
of freedom offers them only an ersatz pros¬
perity and robs them of the benefits of citizen¬
ship. But beyond a certain threshold the
necessary correlation between formal demo¬
cracy and substantive democracy becomes
unavoidable. Q
November 1989:
hands of East and West
Germans tearing down
barbed wire from the top of
the Berlin Wall.
1 N. Bobbio, N. Matteucci
and G. Pasquilo, Diciondrio
de política, Brasilia, Editora
Universidade, 1986.
