For a democratic
culture
Aviable democracy is inconceivable in the absence
of an authentic democratic culture. This culture
of democracy seems to me to be a space that per¬
mits the synthesis of four fundamental concepts: citizen¬
ship, tolerance, education, and the free exchange of ideas
and people.
Citizenship ? "The renewal of citizenship is not a by¬
product but on the contrary a precondition of demo¬
cracy," Vaclav Havel has written. "Citizenship is cour¬
age, love of the truth, an ever-alert conscience, a freedom
within us and a freely accepted responsibility for public
life. We can never be certain that we can fully live up to
these values."
This analysis sets the ethical dimension in the fore¬
front of citizenship. This ethic, itself fed by values which
we must one day dig deep into ourselves to rediscover,
reflects both our common humanity and notwithstand¬
ing all the diversity in concepts and in practice the
universal basis of democracy.
Tolerance? A democratic culture is based on the
understanding and acceptance of other cultures. It
expresses the will to coexist with others. How many
authoritarian systems have lodged their power in the
celebration of racial distinction and ethnic prejudice! Yet
cultural identities are hardly homogeneous. The richest
among them incorporates the seeds and fruits of the
most widely separated cultures and the most disparate
civilizations. If I were asked what it is today that creates
"the wealth of nations", I would not refer to their tech¬
nological power or their economic might. I would speak
of the capacity of their citizens whatever their origins,
the colour of their skins, the land or the language of their
ancestors to join together in support of a certain
number of ideals and principles which make it possible
for them to live together.
Tolerance does not only mean patience toward
others: it implies a knowledge of others but even more a
respect for the beauty of their cultures. Tolerance is
therefore as much an ethical as an aesthetic attitude.
Rather than dwelling on discrimination, I wish to
emphasize the role of tolerance in promoting integration.
How, for example, can we reconcile the double imper¬
ative essential to all citizenship of unity and freedom,
of membership of the community and individual liberty?
Can we, in societies that are increasingly diversified,
continue to identify democracy with majority rule if the
latter cannot guarantee the expression and adequate pro¬
tection, as part of public life, of the demands and beliefs of
all groups of citizens? Can we even conceive of demo¬
cracy if we do not believe in the need to protect minority
rights?
A truly democratic culture should deny no specific
identity, be it ethnic, religious, linguistic or cultural, any
more than it should develop at the expense of national
identity, collective solidarity and the shared hopes of all.
Such a democratic culture offers everyone the opportu¬
nity of self-identification through pluralistic and freely
assumed loyalties. Thus at the cultural level, democracy
must be what it is at the political level: a fusing of per¬
sonal will with the general interest.
Education? It is clear that a democratic culture,
insofar as it defines people as being capable of making
choices, cannot develop freely in the barren soil of igno¬
rance, any more than it can flourish in a social setting
that remains a mosaic of isolated groups, unable to com¬
municate among themselves other than by prejudice and
violence. Ignorance strengthens dictatorships and
enfeebles democracy. Education lies at the very heart of
democratic culture.
Finally, the free exchange of ideas and of people. The
free exchange of people permits them to choose personal
lifestyles and modes of expression, and gives them
greater control over their individual and collective fate.
Total freedom of information and expression is the corn¬
erstone of democratic culture, insofar as such freedom
alone can ensure the transparency that is indispensable to
the exercise of choice and responsibility.
The choice and responsibility of which I speak are
exercised not merely at the level of the community or
nation, but at all levels, ranging from the immediate envi¬
ronment all the way to the ecosystem itself. True citizen¬
ship must be learned and put to the test in the neighbour¬
hood, the family, the workplace, voluntary associations
and, of course, in the daily exercise of public freedoms at
village or municipal levels.
True citizenship is also put to the test globally, notably
in our assumption of responsibility for the environment,
its preservation or its irreversible degradation; and in the
limits which by the choices we make or fail to make
now we impose on the rights of future generations.
To learn to coexist with our environment; to learn to
coexist with other cultures these are, in my opinion, the
major challenges confronting us as the twentieth century
draws to a close. I am convinced that only an authentic
culture of democracy because it is a convivial culture
will allow us to meet these challenges with success. Q
