A new look at international law
International Law:
Achievements and Prospects,
published by UNESCO and
Martinus NijhoffPublishers (The
Netherlands) is a practical work
ofreference intended to be
accessible to students throughout
the world. Here its General
Editor, Mohammed Bedjaoui,
outlines the contents of the book
and sets it in its context.
Why publish a new manual of interna¬
tional law at thispoint in time?
First of all, no-one would deny that inter¬
national law has become highly topical.
Every time the world experiences a major
political crisis, international public opinion
makes a discovery and a profession of faith.
On the one hand, it discovers the existence
of international law, which is supposed to
govern and harmonize the relations between
states; on the other, it affirms the belief that
international law is the pure expression of
justice and peace, of liberty and equality
for every people and for all mankind.
Public opinion harbours the conviction,
vague but entrenched, that international law
must be the only refuge of unchallenged,
universal values which every human being,
whatever his or her culture, must recognize
or else risk being taken for a barbarian.
It is always difficult to admit to people
that international law is not just this recep¬
tacle of unchanging values, but also the
expression of a moment in human history, a
reflection of the evolving international order.
International Law: Achievements and
Prospects is unique because it is international,
multicultural and "polyphonic". Its purpose
was to be a forum thrown open as widely as
possible to the juridical worlds of the North,
the South, the East and the West, and a melt¬
ing pot for all the juridical sensibilities of our
time. With the help of authors of diverse ori-
AQ gins, from every continent and from widely
^_ different backgrounds, the work brings into
an interview with Mohammed Bedjaoui
focus "the main forms of civilization" and
"the principal legal systems of the world," to
borrow the terminology of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice.
Who tookpart in theproject?
Almost seventy authors were involved.
Some fifteen judges, serving or retired, of the
International Court of Justice were kind
enough to contribute, among them the cur¬
rent President of the Court, Sir Robert Jen¬
nings, and four of his predecessors.
Obviously, many teachers of international
law more than thirty of them, from both
developing and developed nations were also
involved. Ministers, diplomats and interna¬
tional civil servants also answered my appeal,
enriching the work with their knowledge and
experience.
I am proud to have brought to a conclu¬
sion a work to which authors from every
continent have contributed.
How does the book relate to previous
works ofsynthesis on international law?
It is intended to reflect a field of law and
international relations that is experiencing
exponential growth.
The justification for a work of this scope,
as compared with monographs or shorter
traditional textbooks, is that it provides the
reader, whether student or specialist, a jurist
or simply someone with an interest in inter¬
national affairs, with a comprehensive work
of reference that is both coherent and diverse.
For the time being, the work is appearing
in two editions, in French and in English,
each running to over a thousand pages.
Spanish and Chinese versions are planned,
and others will probably follow. It is an
achievement of which UNESCO can be
proud, since it responds to two imperatives
that are among the Organization's principal
responsibilities, the advancement of know¬
ledge and the creation of educational tools.
What kind of information does the book
contain?
As I have pointed out, one of the book's
aims is to give an account of the current state
of international law by drawing attention to
various representative components of cur¬
rent trends and sensibilities within it.
At the same time the manual is an educa¬
tional tool which is intended to be an intro¬
duction to the subject. Its contents were
drawn up to offer a comprehensive, though
not exhaustive, view of contemporary inter¬
national law. Here let me simply list the
titles of different sections of the work, each
one comprising an introduction and several
chapters: Subjects of International Law;
Sources of International Law; Competence
and Responsibility of States; The Law of
Friendly Relations Between States; Peaceful
Settlement of Disputes; The Law of Interna¬
tional Economic Relations; The Law of
Conflictual Relations; The Law of the Sea;
Air and Extra-Atmospheric Space; Other
Systems (Antarctica, international rivers,
lakes and canals, and the protection of the
environment); International Protection of
Human Rights and Rights of Peoples; and
Community-Oriented Rights, from deve¬
lopment to decolonization and peace.

The manual is intended to be a mixture of
law and facts, insofar as that is possible. Its
authors are eminent theorists who are also
practitioners of the subject. Their contribu¬
tions express a syncretic global view of inter¬
national law, which is an attempt to describe
the complex realities of the contemporary
world.



I had no hesitation in encouraging the
authors to cover both lex lata, the law as it is,
but also new norms which are still in the pro¬
cess of being created, which the needs of the
international community have started to out¬
line or model but which have not yet become
obligatory. It is important that trends in inter¬
national law and the stages by which interna¬
tional law evolves and changes should be
understood, notably by young readers.
This manual which expounds the basic
concepts of international law that are rele¬
vant and accepted today also looks towards
the future, without in any way dabbling in
futurology.
Could you outline the state of contempo¬
rary international law, as it is presented in
the book?
The law consists primarily of a collection
of principles and norms, and it has made con¬
siderable progress in the course of the cen¬
tury.
Before the First World War, interna
tional law was above all the law governing
relationships between the European powers.
But this "classical" law was extremely inade¬
quate. Recourse to war was not prohibited.
International law regulated the sharing out
of colonies and the modalities of coloniza¬
tion. Relations between states and their own
nationals were essentially governed by
national jurisdictions, thereby excluding
international protection of human rights.
It is in this century that the fundamental
principles of international law have been
formed and established, insofar as these
principles, while having moral or political
scope, limit sovereignty. If sovereignty is a
principle of international law, which in a
sense it predates, it nevertheless appears in
an essentially negative light when the discre¬
tionary power with which it vests each state
is inevitably destined to be limited by the
norms of international law.
So international law is built in relation to
the limitations it imposes on sovereignty.
That is the case with regard to the law rela¬
ting to the use of armed force, dominated by
Article 2, paragraph 4 of the United Nations
Charter, which sets forth the principle that
states shall refrain from the threat or use of
force in international relations. It is also true
with regard to the right of self-determination
of peoples, on which the right to decoloniza¬
tion is based; and with regard to human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
International law is also a collection of
techniques, though that is not all that it is.
These techniques have been considerably
developed, diversified and refined in this
century, and particularly in recent years, in
response to the demand created by the
increased density of international relations.
This development results not only from
the diversification of the various processes by
which law is formed (treaties, customs, codi¬
fication). It also stems from the appearance
of new normative categories, including the
imperatives of jus cogens, accepted and reco-
Celebration (1989) by David Hockney. This
English painter was one of many leading
artists from all over the world who were
invited to create a work of art to accompany
the text of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights adopted by the United Nations in
1948. The "images of freedom" the artists
produced have since been exhibited in many
countries and have also been reproduced,
with the text of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, in Mémoire de la liberté, Les
artistes imagent la liberté (Gefrart, Paris
1991, with Arts Multl and Editions Sedeóme),
a book published in a pluringual edition with
UNESCO's participation.
UNESCO IN ACTION
BOOKS
gnized by the international community as
unwaivable, and also soft law, which reflects
the importance which the contents of resolu¬
tions have in international law even when
these resolutions are not obligatory.
Techniques for settling international dif¬
ferences, like normative techniques, have
developed to an enormous extent in the twen¬
tieth century. In this respect, the establishment
of a system of international justice after the
First World War was a decisive stage in the
history of international law. Yet judicial settle¬
ment only caught on gradually in international
relations. Over the past few years, however, a
growing number of disputes have come before
the International Court ofJustice.
One of the most remarkable aspects of
the evolution of international law in recent
years has been the development of tech¬
niques that might be called executive since
they relate to the application of the law.
These techniques, which have proliferated in
a number of fields, are related to treaties or
resolutions. Their object is to exercise
control over states' execution of their obliga¬
tions, or else over their behaviour relating to
the dispositions of resolutions.
Peace-keeping operations have a place
among these executive techniques. They are
generally thought of in terms of bringing
peace to conflictual situations, but their object
is just as much to supervise the application of
Security Council resolutions ordering cease¬
fires or the withdrawal of forces, or else of
agreements by which a conflict has been
settled, as was the case in Namibia.
The increasing number of these opera¬
tions in the different world regions and the
extension of their mission are testimony of
their success.
Finally let me say that common interests,
shared convictions and perceptions of soli¬
darity have progressed in depth, even when
that process has been hidden by political dif¬
ferences and the politics of the closed door.
These shared interests form the basis of
international law and justify it as the law of
the international community, as the leaven
of a new international juridical order.
That is one of the messages that this
manual hopes to convey.
49
