Bkck Africa's open societies
by Iba Der Thiam
Painting on a wall
in Dakar depicting a
village meeting.
TOLERANCE has always held a pre¬
eminent position in the thought of many
African peoples. In West Africa, for
example, it is the fundamental principle on
which the entire social life of the Senegambian
region is built, governing the interaction be¬
tween individuals and ethnic groups as well as
international relations.
Nothing illustrates this better than the cen¬
tral place the concept of peace occupies in the
region's moral thinking. The Wolof saying,
"Ci Jaam la yeep xeej", which signifies that
peace bears innumerable promises, implies that
peace is the necessary precondition for social
stability, political equilibrium, economic pros¬
perity and moral and material progress.
Even before the experience of the slave
trade and colonial oppression, the aspiration
for peace was a deeply-felt need in a society
exposed for centuries of its long history to the
vicissitudes of wars fought in the name of
conquest or in defence of local aristocracies. It
has left its mark on the most anodyne details
of daily life. When two people meet, one says
as a greeting, "Are you at peace?" "Nothing
but peace," the other replies, as if the harmony
born of universal accord, whatever the philo¬
sophical, religious or moral starting-points or
choices of the people involved, could bring an
inner calm and sense of hope more valuable
than anything else life has to offer.
The same leitmotif of an aspiration for
peace and security reappears in the prayer
offered by each family to call down God's
blessings on its members and on all things. In
the words of one traditional Guiñean suppli¬
cation, "Let peace reign in the world! May the
pot and the calabash not fall out! Let the
beasts live in harmony! May every bad word
and unbecoming thought be rooted out and
packed off to the back of beyond, to the
depths of the virgin forest!"
As the principal element regulating rela¬
tions between people and between communi¬
ties, tolerance is the imperative that governs all
social life. In some African societies it means
refusing to mistrust other people and rejecting
both fear and preconceptions in dealing with
whatever is new, unknown, unusual or out of
the normal pattern.
31

This ivory mask
with cowrie-shell eyes is
a product of the expressive
artistic tradition of the
Lega (or Balega) people of
the Congo.
32
IBA DER THIAM,
Senegalese historian, politi¬
cian and diplomat, is involved
in a wide range of activities
both in his own country
and internationally. A former
Minister of Education of
Senegal (1983-1988) and
member of Unesco's
Executive Board (1978-1983);
he is the author of a number
of books on history and
civics, including Histoire du
mouvement syndical africain
1790-1929 (Paris, 1991),
and of many articles. He is
also co-editor of the two
volumes of Unesco's History
of Mankind: Cultural
and Scientific Development,
covering the 19th and
20th centuries.
THE HUMAN DIMENSION
Professor' Cheikh Anta Diop suggested that
in the Cayor region of Senegal the election of
the king was a traditional perquisite of what
he called the "governing council". All the
social groups that made up the nation were
represented in this institution. The aim was
not merely to make the body representative
but also to encourage collégial participation
and friendly social relations in an atmosphere
of mutual tolerance and respect.
Although the diawerigne m'boul, the
officer presiding over the council, was always
chosen from among the geer or aristocracy,
the lamane diamatil, the bataloupe ndiob and
the badie gateigne, all of whom were gover¬
nors of important provinces as well as council
members, had to come from the gmegno, the
ranks of the people of caste, while the diawe¬
rigne boule represented the house-slaves.
For traditional societies of this sort,
humankind may be one in essence but it is
nonetheless diverse in its ways of living and
thinking and in the manner in which its
constituent groups come to terms with them¬
selves and other peoples. Consequently they
made the nitt or human being their principal
frame of reference. This human essence was
seen as a generic concept, independent of time
and place, the supreme embodiment of the
divine presence on Earth. Stripped of all
moral, philosophical or political connota¬
tions, it became a sublimated ideal to which
everyone owed consideration and deference.
It is in this light that the treatment of
strangers in some African societies must be
considered. Newcomers are welcomed with
kindliness and generosity, no matter what
language they speak or what their sex, age,
religion or social or political condition may
be, for they are human beings first and fore¬
most. As such, they have a right to food and
shelter. Their person, goods and health will
be protected, and they will be given a decent
burial if they die.
In some Wolof communities, it is quite
common for the head of a family to give up
his own house and bed, or that of his wives or
children, to strangers, without giving a
thought to his own state of health. Among
the Bassari, custom dictates that the tribal
chief may even graciously put a female com¬
panion at the newcomer's disposal, in the
hope that the possible seed sown by their
relationship may revivify and strengthen the
community.

Following this logic, the differences be¬
tween peoples, far from being stressed as bar¬
riers separating humankind, are minimized to
such an extent that they finally lose much or
all of their meaning and their divisiveness,
and are blurred and blunted until they
become harmless. Integration of this sort
involves not a denial of the foreigner's iden¬
tity here I have in mind those insidious
processes of assimilation that are really more
like mutilation but a profound and freely
accepted awareness of the symbiotic comple¬
mentarity linking the individual to other
people. Unbreakable bonds are forged in this
fusing of essences.
RENEWING THE TRADITION
This was the state of mind in which Africa,
from the dawn of history, opened itself to
the outside world. From the time of Queen
Hatshepsut's expedition from her native
Egypt to the land of Punt in the years be¬
tween 1493 and 1490 BC until the nine¬
teenth-century explorers, there is no lack of
witnesses to the African spirit of tolerance
and unfailing hospitality.
It was as a result of the prevailing peace
that Habib ben Una'ida and al-Fazari, around
800 AD, were able to compile their chron¬
icles, the first to mention the existence of the
empire of Ghana; that Ibn Hawqal was free to
visit the lands south of the Sahara; that al-
Bakri, al-Idrisi, Yakut Ibn Said and al-Umari,
between the eleventh and the fourteenth cen¬
turies, could give us precious descriptions of
the kingdoms of the so-called Sudanic belt
from Senegal to the Nile; that Ibn Battuta
could visit Mali and Leo the African Tim¬
buktu. Free of dogmatism and sectarianism,
the spirit of tolerance encouraged dialogue
and the exchange of ideas.
The same phenomenon was at work on
the West African coast. Gomes Eanes
Zurara's chronicles of Guinea, and the travel
writings of Diogo Gomes, Duarte Pacheco
Pereira, Joâo de Barros and of the Venetian
La fermière en buste (1908),
oil on canvas by Picasso.
Ca'da Mosto all bear witness to the open-
mindedness of the peoples of Cayor, Baol and
Sine Saloum, whose humanity would also be
attested to by other Western visitors from the
seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries. Tol¬
erance extended to colour, language, religion
and ethnic and social origin as well as to sex
and philosophical or moral views. This
atmosphere enabled Christian missionaries to
carry out their work without risk wherever
traders had set up bases and colonizers had
raised their flags.
Despite long-held views to the contrary,
these were in effect open societies where
freedom and. justice reigned. Dare one say
that democracy and tolerance flourished there
until the slave trade and colonial conquest
and all that went with it native status, taxes,
military conscription, land seizure, forced
labour created an endemic state of violence
that corrupted social habits and ways of life
to the point at which they were no longer
recognizable.
So a precious heritage lies buried beneath
the still-smouldering ruins of colonial impe¬
rialism. Contemporary Africa must redis¬
cover it quickly, to create worlds of freedom,
peace and social harmony in which all its chil¬
dren can find fulfilment.
33
