Sur le pont de Vierzon...
by Christiane Groud
The bridge at Vierzon railway station in central France, with its echoes of the revolutionary inno¬
vations of Gustave Eiffel, the builder of the Eiffel Tower, was looked upon with a mixture ofawe
and admiration when it was opened early in tne present century, although it also had its critics. It
is an imposing structure measuring 97 metres long and 11.7 metres wide, with a 9J-metrc-high
vertical central girder. It was designed to carry a road over the railway station, so that pedestrians
walked both across and beneath it. As the years went by, it became coated with grime pom the old
steam locomotives and was relegated to being a mere functional object that people scarcely noticed
any more.
At the imaginative prompting of the cultural centre in nearby Bourges, the bridge should now
regain its rightful place as part of the recent heritage of Vierzon and its region, asa fine example of
the use ofmetal in early twentieth-century architecture.
The first step in bringing it back to life was to give it some colour. Christiane Croud, the
person responsible for this boldproject, tells the story in her own words:
A BURST OF COLOUR
THE bridge's girders, with the impression they give of dancing on air, form a
giant sculpture which people no longer seemed to notice. I thoroughly
enjoyed the challenge of trying to present this large mctalwork structure,
which resembles a giant piece of Meccano suspended from the sky whose light it
reflects, in such a way that it would be possible to see the colours from far away.
I chose yellow first, because it is the colour of the Sun, which goes back to the
very beginning.
Then I took crimson, because of its associations with blood and violence, in
memory of the Occupation which cut France in two during World War II, when
the demarcation line passed right through Vierzon. But red also stands for love,
because there was the Resistance and the striving of people to hold up their heads
in dignity again.
The colour blue I saw as representing an outstretched hand seeking the land of
hope in the skies.
Last, I chose green, the only non-primary colour. The bridge does not cross
water but straddles railway tracks, which constantly recur in our dreams of other
places and other times. From the depths of its foundations, it pays court to the
earth and the surrounding landscape.
Just daubing on the four colours at random was out of the question because the
interlocking pattern of the girders would never have allowed it. There is something
deliberate about the way thev arc dovetailed together that creates an impression
of calm and balance. The colours I chose had to stay faithful to the innermost
movements of the giant, framework.
Perhaps I should add that, all the time I was working on the design, the bridge's
innumerable parts seemed to be playing tricks on me. I had to make a large number
of sketches before I could come to terms with this testing project, whose effects
primarily stem from the fact that the colours beat in harmony with the ironwork,
The wind, Eiffel's other close accomplice, did the rest.
This facelift formed part of Vierzon's attempt to rejuvenate its image, which
had already involved redesigning the town centre and renovating the railway sta¬
tion. The bridge, which connects the area where the schools are situated to the
heart of the old town, could at the same time be said to create a bond between the
generations. It is now a more agreeable sight for its regular users, as well as for visi¬
tors and the occasional passer-by. Through the sheer impact of its colours, it seems
to stand out in relief, brightening up the landscape and putting to shame the drab¬
ness of everyday life. O
CHRISTIANE GROUD ¡s a French artist who has enlivened the French urban and industrial environ¬
ment with many murals and other designs. She is currently participating in the Cité de la Création, a
muralists' co-operative whose work was recently recognized by UNESCO when the Tony Gamier
Urban Museum in Lyons was adopted as a project within UNESCO's World Decade for Cultural Deve¬
lopment (see page 31).
