WOMEN'S ROLE IN
POST-INDUSTRIAL DEMOCRACY
by Eleanora Masini Barbieri
ACCORDING to the American sociologist
Elise Boulding, there are three areas in
which the work of women has built
what she calls a "civic society" based on mutual
respect. The first is related to children and
teaching. In almost all societies, women are res¬
ponsible for the education of children up to
their seventh year. Psychologists agree that
these are the years in which the child's world-
vision is formed.
The second is related to women's hidden
economic role. Its arena may be the kitchen or
the garden, the small production unit which
played a crucial role in agricultural societies
and has also often been, though less visibly, the
salvation of the highly-industrialized societies
of our time.
The third area has also been largely unno¬
ticed. Women are and have been what Elise
Boulding calls the "cement of society". They
have fulfilled this role in private, in family life,
and even in dynastic alliances between villages
or towns over the centuries.
Boulding has described these areas, which
belong to the "underside of history", as
"society's green. space, its visioning space, its
bonding space. It is a space where minds can
learn to grapple with complexities that are des¬
troying the overside."
Women's efforts to build a viable society of
respect and understanding also contribute to
the creation of a democratic culture. Children
learn respect, tolerance, and other principles of
democratic behaviour at a very early stage, in
their relations with other members of the
family and the community. In this context, it is
interesting to observe and compare the atti¬
tudes of families in different parts of the world:
the strong community sense of the hierarchi¬
cally organized extended family in Africa, the
profound respect with which the elder mem¬
bers of the Chinese family are regarded, and the
focus on younger family members in modern 41

ELEONORA MASINI
BARBIER),
Italian sociologist, is the
Director of the Executive
Board of the World Futures
Studies Federation and holds
the Chair of Social
Forecasting at the Gregorian
University in Rome. Among
her works published in
English is Visions of
Desirable Societies (1983).



Western society. Women play a central role in
the shaping of these attitudes through the way
they behave and the example they set. It is
because their public role has been invisible that
they have learned respect for others a respect
that encourages democratic behaviour rather
than the dominating behaviour often expected
of men. Respect does not, however, mean
accepting domination by others; it is coupled
with the demand that women be respected in
their turn.
Many examples could be cited of women's
civic spirit. Polish women contributed to the
rebuilding of Warsaw's schools after the
Second World War; Japanese women organized
support systems after Hiroshima, as did the
women of Mexico after the 1984 earthquake.
The concept of the democratic society devel¬
oped in the industrial era. Today, industrial
society appears to have reached its limits. The
natural environment has been exploited, espe¬
cially by the rich countries, in a way that cer¬
tainly cannot be called democratic. Nor have
people found happiness in material wealth, as is
clearly evident among the young people of the
wealthier countries of North America and
Europe. We have reached both external and
internal limits, to use a phrase coined by
Aurelio Peccei, the founder of the Club of
Rome. Our inner selves require answers that
are far more profound than those industrial
society has provided. In post-industrial society,
whatever form it takes, a new mentality will be
essential. We must use the many capacities of
people, and especially the specific capacities of
women, that are now untapped.
Women citizens of tomorrow
Post-industrial society will be a complex,
uncertain society, in which such tools and
methods of industrial society as specialization,
separation of tasks, hierarchical structures, and
mass production will no longer be relevant.
Notable among its features will be decentra¬
lized networks of small units, diversified activi¬
ties peformed by the same person or unit, and
rapidity of action.
The society of the future will require people
to be flexible. They will have to perform several
tasks at the same time. They will need to pos¬
sess a new sense of time. Production will be
"personalized" rather than "standardized". As
technology develops, people will have to learn
new tasks and skills during their working lives,
and in many cases to change jobs to keep pace
with technological change.
In this society women are bound to play an
ä^^^stj
increasingly important role, if only because in
almost every country they have a higher life
expectancy than men and head one-third of the
world's households. The future of many major
technological innovations, especially in bio¬
technology, will depend on whether women
accept or reject them.
Women possess many of the capacities that
will be needed in post-industrial society.
Research in various countries has shown that
they are particularly flexible and adaptable.
Since their life-cycle forces them to stop and
start work, often changing jobs, they are used
to change. They have to be versatile. In addi¬
tion to cooking, looking after the children, iron¬
ing and doing other household tasks, they
may also have a job to do at home sewing,
perhaps, in developing countries, computer
work in the industrialized world.
Women also tend to have a temporal
rhythm which is closer to real time than to
what Lewis Mumford called "clock time". This
capacity too will be increasingly important in
an overcrowded, unsynchronized society.
Women find it difficult to standardize their

Women have a strong sense of priorities. In
times of need or stress, they make choices rela¬
ting to their children and their future well-
being, rather than to short-term benefits. In
China, Canada, and in other countries with a
large migrant population, research has shown



that mothers faced with a range of choices put
their children's education first. In developing
countries, women's first priority might be
water or food for their children rather than
other economic benefits. There is also evidence
that women are less inclined to accept hierar¬
chical structures than men. This is important if,
as the American futurologist Alvin Toffler
believes, we are moving towards an increas¬
ingly egalitarian society.
Solidarity, the capacity to put first things
first, and the rejection of hierarchies are traits
that, if fostered rather than suppressed, may
lead to a more democratic society, one that
emerges from the behaviour of its citizens
rather than from structures and laws.
If one accepts that the building of a demo¬
cratic society depends more on citizens than on
laws, institutions and structures, then women
will have an essential contribution to make.
And full use has not yet been made of their
capacities.
We should be seeking to create democratic
citizens, with the school working hand in hand
with the family to foster democratic education.
production. In the society of the future, non-
standardized production will become increa¬
singly sought-after.
Untapped potential
In social life too, women seem to have capaci¬
ties which will be important for the future the
capacity to create solidarity, to establish priori¬
ties, and to reject hierarchies.
Traditionally women have sought group
solidarity. They exchange information about
their children, their old people, matters of
health and so on, as they collect water from the
village well and as they meet in the super¬
market. Whatever changes technology may
bring, women will be unlikely to give up this
exchange with each other. At moments of great
distress in time of war, revolution, natural
catastrophe, during refugee movements this
capacity has been vital. The capacity of women
to create solidarities and to understand and live
with people from different cultures and back¬
grounds can make an enormous contribution
to the building of a democratic culture.
Men and women, citizens
and constructors of a
democratic culture.
Versatility and flexibility
are two qualities which
women are often compelled
to develop by force of
circumstance.
Although much has been accomplished already,
much still remains to be done. The education
system has undoubtedly changed for the better
since the late 1960s, but in some countries there
is plenty of room for improvement.
A democratic culture emerges from the shar¬
ing of values, however differently expressed,
and from behaviour related to shared values.
Only thus can a culture be built. There can be
no democratic society without democratic citi¬
zens to construct it. Citizens rather than ideas,
structures or institutions must be the starting-
point. Û 43
