SARTRE
by Rachid Sabbaghi
B!|ETWEEN 1950 and 1980, for several thou¬
sands of intellectuals, artists, writers and
'political militants, from both the indus¬
trialized countries of the North and the develo¬
ping countries of the South, Sartre was a defini¬
tive point of reference and an intellectual
master. Today, however, painstaking denial of
this fact has become de rigueur. Under pretext
of seeking emancipation from the suffocating
embrace of a "master thinker", great exertions
are being made to bury this master of truth,
this pathfinder, beneath a heavy layer of noisy
rejection or reproachful silence. Some even go
so far as to declare that Sartre was seriously
mistaken on all the essentials.
But can the universal appeal of Sartre's
work be dismissed as no more than the result
of some hypothetical contagion of error or
blind mimesis, or by putting it down to what is
vaguely described as the "troubled times" of
the last three or four decades? Were all the
hundreds of thousands of readers men and
women, French, Egyptian, English, Japanese,
Senegalese, Indian, Russian, or whatever who
were touched and made to think by the work
of Sartre, simply wrong?
The question remains, insistent and unavoid¬
able: what was it in Sartre's work that could
rouse such enthusiasm? How was it that his
thought could stir such vast aspirations across
the world?
First of all there was the range and diversity
of the literary work. Sartre covered the entire
range of literature except poetry, producing
novels, short stories, plays, literary and artistic
criticism, essays, biography and autobiography.
For many thousands of writers, in the Third
World as in the West, he was a master and a
model in each of these fields.
Then there was his innovative up-dating of
French philosophy, which was engaged at the
time in interminable scrutiny of its divorce
from "real life". Sartre, in the words of the
philosopher Gilles Deleuze, took philosophy
out of its dusty retreat and exposed it to the
storms of the age, via politics, the arts, the
Third World, the cinema and revolution.
Finally there were Sartre's own intractable
Jean-Paul Sartre at his desk,
in 1966.
ethical concerns. Among contemporary philo¬
sophers, it was Sartre who gave the noblest
expression to the intellectual's role and presence
in the human community. Over and above what
are now termed his "errors", it was principally
his obstinate and unfailing dedication to the
question of the ethics of intellectual activities,
linked to an overwhelming passion for liberty
and served by a veritable literary genius, that
won Sartre his place as a "master of truth".
His experience of the Second World War
transformed Sartre from a bourgeois, apolitical
writer into a freedom-fighter. On his return
from captivity in 1941, he organized with some
friends a resistance network known as "Social¬
ism and Liberty". But the communists rejected
his approaches, and the group, which was com¬
posed of isolated and inexperienced intellec¬
tuals, was soon reduced to impotence. To avoid
pointless repression, Sartre dissolved the net¬
work and in 1943 rejoined the National Writers'
Committee.
He took part in the meetings presided over
by Paul Eluard, and contributed to the under¬
ground journal Les Lettres Nouvelles. This 31

32
experience provided the theme for his trilogy of
novels, Les Chemins de la Liberté (1945-49).



The protagonist, a Sartre-like figure in quest of
authentic liberty, makes many false starts
before his encounter with history in its tragic
aspect in the form of war, defeat and humilia¬
tion. The trilogy is also a presentation in fic¬
tional form of the first philosophy of Sartre,
that of L'Etre et le Néant, which appeared in
1943 and heralds subsequent development of
that philosophy. L'Etre et le Néant can truly be
called the foundation-stone of a modern philo¬
sophy of consciousness.
A PHILOSOPHY FOR TROUBLED TIMES
There was a wide gap between Sartre's phi¬
losophy of consciousness and his ultimate
engagement in the great political struggles of
his time. Yet one fundamental element of conti¬
nuity was his concern for individual liberty, the
quality that made his thought a rallying-point
worldwide. How did he reach such a wide
audience? Certainly Sartre's novels and plays
helped make his thinking accessible to people
who were not themselves philosophers. But
one can also look to the situation of the world
at the time, barely emerged from Fascist bar¬
barism, still bogged down in colonial contra¬
dictions and heading towards a Cold War that
threatened to be terrible.
In such circumstances, a tragic philosophy
of liberty could not fail to coincide with the
widespread aspiration for a .salvation that
appeared fragile and obscure. Sartre placed the
absolute liberty of the individual at the centre
of his thought. He set this liberty within the
framework of the limits of the individual
consciousness, fettered as it is. The nature of
consciousness was innately double, formed at
one and the same time by what Sartre called
facticité, or density of being, and by its nega¬
tion, transcendance.
Relations with other people are nonetheless
a constitutive dimension of consciousness, for
the negation of consciousness is inseparable
from a coming to awareness of the existence of
other consciousnesses. If Sartre, in the wake of
German phenomenology, asserts that the
world is present in consciousness, he also
affirms even more strongly throughout his
work that the Other is also present. Certainly,
in Sartre's initial thinking, relations with other
people are torn between a masochism that
turns the subject into an object for the Other,
and a sadism that does the reverse. The danger
to liberty is summed up in the famous phrase,
"Hell is other people".
In such circumstances, how can the indivi¬
dual in society escape the danger of "becoming
an object"? How can he discover and redis¬
cover his liberty? Initially, for Sartre, passivity
was the inescapable fate of every collective pro¬
ject. The individual alone offered the possibility
of activity. From 1950 onwards, the philoso¬
pher's efforts were directed at escaping this
entrapment. It was at that point that he
encountered Marxism, a crucial turning-point.
In L'Etre et le Néant, Sartre paid no heed to
Marxism. Simone de Beauvoir described their
position at the time: "Anti-capitalist but not
Marxist, we exalted the powers of pure
consciousness and liberty, yet we were also
anti-spiritualist." The defeat of Fascism, colo-'
nialism, the struggles for national liberation, the
division of the world into two blocs, the Cold
War and the rise of the protest movement in
the West, the coming of independence in the
Third World this historical situation, inten¬
sely experienced by Sartre between 1945 and
1960, drove him to confront his own thinking
with that of Marxism, which he called "the
unpassable horizon of our times".
This new stage was marked by the appear¬
ance of a fresh philosophical work, La Cri¬
tique de la raison dialectique (1960). In it Sartre
tried to understand how the multiplication of
individual consciousness, taken in their inter¬
relationship, constructed "history". The purest
group for him was the fused group. As an
example he cited the storming of the Bastille by
the insurrectionists of 1789: "It was necessary
to fight, to save Paris, to take arms wherever
they lay..." The Bastille became the group's
common interest. What constituted a group,
for Sartre, was to feel individual need in
common. It was no longer a question, as in
L'Etre et le Néant, of transcending or letting
oneself be transcended by the Other. "We" was
something other than a simple collection of
"I"s. The unity of the fused group was practical
and not ontological.
Sartre's relationship with Marxism could be
summarized in four exemplary points: to
demonstrate that the free activity of the indivi¬
dual is the only foundation of historical pro¬
gress; that the only group practice that is not
socially passive is that of the insurrectional or
fused group; that, to survive, this group must
interiorize passivity in activity, finishing by
becoming institutionalized; finally, that the
driving force is class conflict, with the ruling
classes maintaining passivity and the fused
group re-establishing the synthesizing praxis.
This great work was never finished; Sartre
only composed the first volume, Théorie des
ensembles pratiques. It nonetheless exerted a
direct influence on political and theoretical
debates about Marxism around the world.
Sartre (second from the
right) with Simone de
Beauvoir, on his right, during
an editorial meeting of the
magazine Les Temps
Modernes, at Sartre's home
in Paris, in 1978.

The anti-colonialist cause
At the same period Sartre also published Les
séquestrés d'Altona, a play that was haunted not
so much by Nazism as by torture and the Al¬
gerian war. Sartre's resistance, both theoretical
and practical, to Nazism is well known, but
much less attention has been paid to his anti-
colonialist activities, despite the publicity they
attracted at the time. By then Sartre had become
a celebrated writer and philosopher, and it was as
an intellectual as well as a militant that he
defended the people of the Third World in their
struggle for emancipation. This ethical exigency,
on which Sartre never yielded, exerted an
influence beyond the borders of France and
served as an example to other writers across the
world.
His two favoured issues of the time were
the Algerian war and the emancipation of black
people, crushed by centuries of foreign domi¬
nation and slavery. He upheld the right of the
Algerian people to independence, and main¬
tained the necessity for free men to support the
cause or else sec any stable ethic of liberty, not
to say humanism itself, founder. This position
attracted little support in Europe. Sartre spread
the message worldwide and helped bridge the
gap between young people, increasingly dis¬
oriented by the blindness and cynicism of their
elders, and an ineffective Left. Thanks to him,
the ideas of the Enlightenment and the interna¬
tionalist aims of the revolutionary movements
of the Left regained their cutting edge.
To make Europeans aware of colonial reali¬
ties, he employed as a tool of concrete informa¬
tion and theoretical reflection the revue Les
Temps modernes, which he had founded in
1945 with the philosopher Maurice Merleau-
Ponty. As early as 1952, in an interview
accorded to an Algerian newspaper, Sartre was
defending the right of the Algerian people to
Sartre at a demonstration in
favour of immigrants.
France, 1971.
RACHID SABBAGHI,
Moroccan writer and
journalist, is the author of an
essay on 20th-century French
philosophy which is shortly to
be published in Arabic.
fight for liberty by armed force if necessary.
Some years later, he subjected the continuation
of the French presence in the country and the
idea of assimilation to a radical critique. In the
worst moments of the war, disillusioned by the
Communist left, he addressed himself to the
young and publicly expressed his solidarity
with the support networks of the Algerian
National Liberation Front, while in 1961, in the
Declaration of the 121, he reaffirmed the right
to refuse submission.
By involving himself so totally in the anti-
colonial struggle, played out against the back¬
drop of the Cold War at a time when the true
nature of the "real socialism" of the Eastern



lands was gradually becoming apparent, Sartre
discovered the important role that the peoples
of the Third World had to play in the emanci¬
pation of humanity in general. If he sub¬
sequently defended nationalism in face of criti¬
cism from the Left, it was because he conceived
it as a type of particularism that must even¬
tually wind up as universalism.
By taking this stand, Sartre uncompromi¬
singly incarnated an ethically robust image of
the French and European intellectual: that of a
man who does not hide behind indifference or
self-interest, who will have no truck with
contempt, torture or war crimes, but instead
loudly proclaims certain fundamental values.
Such was the case, after Algeria won indepen¬
dence, with his commitment over the Vietnam
War, in the Russell tribunal and in the struggle
against all dictatorships as well as in his support
of the youth protest movement that led in
France to the events of May 1968. Over the
ensuing decade he became, in spite of his
advanced age, an influential figure in every
struggle for liberty.
In 1970, this tireless fighter attempted to
group together all the forces working for
freedom in society. Radicalizing his commit¬
ment, he became the editor-in-chief of far-Left
journals like La cause du peuple and Libération,
devoting time to militant politics and radical
debate that he could ill afford to spare from
pure literature. In spite of this intense political
activity and his own declining health, he none¬
theless undertook and published his great work
on Gustave Flaubert, L'Idiot de la famille
(1971-72), whose three volumes and 2,400
pages proved an extraordinary and highly
influential synthesis of existentialism, Marxism,
psychoanalysis and structuralism.
For thirty years, marked by precision in
revolt, an intractable ethical sense and just and
noble anger against indifference and baseness,
Sartre, as a militant and a writer, involved himself
body and soul in the changing fortunes of his
time. Perhaps it is this uncompromising commit¬
ment, served by an impressive writing talent, that
best explains his worldwide influence.
For some people a simple product of the
media age or a symptom of the trouble and dis¬
turbances of the epoch, for others a hero of our
time, a voice of modernity and a moral con¬
science that will long remain a model and a
beacon of hope, Sartre did more than simply
mark his generation; he invented a new image of
the master, one that was both free and fraternal. O 33
