People's Sterdim by Nadine Goräitner 1
Copyright '- Felix Licensing BV
A testament of faith in the untapped creative resources of
South Africa's excluded masses
AliOPLi'S literature as a particular mode
appropriate to the present is something most
developed countries have no call for. Their con¬
temporary literature is confidently middle-class
which is to say it may assume an educated reader
with whom the writer shares terms of reference.
The demand for a People's Literature seems to
have been answered once and for all, and the need
apparently satisfied, by the comic book, with the
people's hero as an extra-terrestrial, and by oral
folk poets the wise-cracking commentators, disc
jockeys and presenters of television and radio.
Thus the semi-literate and illiterate appear to be
uncomplainingly provided for.
But in developing countries the situation is
different. The Irish poet Seamus Heaney's "govern¬
ment of the tongue" does not have the same c<m-
stituency. In the post-ctikmial world in general,
and m South Africa specifically, the illiterate and
semi-literate now .surround the cultural convention. 35

36
They have been called up by history.
They have been called up by justice. For over
300 years, not only were they excluded from any
role in defining cultural norms; it was denied that
they had any need of these let alone anything to
contribute. If they could read, there were virtu¬
ally no common references, no givens, between
them and white writers, and few between them
and black writers, the latter already upwardly
alienated by education and the white-collar style
of life it has implied. Now, beyond the opportu¬
nities to acquire knowledge of modern science,
technology and administration, there is asserted
the masses' right to enjoy the self-realization of
literature. Here, where the responsibility of
educationists is seen as exceeded, it is the writers
themselves who are expected to take over.
The demand is for a particular fictional mode:
subjects, narrative form, vocabulary to express
ethics, mores and relationships that arise from the
daily lives of peasants and industrial labourers
where there has never been a mode stemming
from their own level of consciousness. It means
finding a format and distribution process that will
bring books arising directly out of that conscious¬
ness into the ghettoes and squatter camps where
there are no libraries, and into the farm huts
where there is no money to buy books in the
form of consumer luxuries.
It is formulated as a call for a People's
Literature.
How does People's Literature differ from
plain old social realism?
There is a basic distinction of the greatest con¬
sequence. Any writer may become a social realist
by choosing a worker as his or her protagonist
or hero. It is subject and treatment of subject
which defines social realism, not the class of the
writer.
But in South Africa, People's 


Literature is
conceived as that written by, not about, the
people. Thus it seems the responsibility for
creating it is not even that of any progressive
literary establishment.
Who are "the people"?
Virtually all blacks and so-called coloureds,
who comprise the overwhelming majority of the
population, qualify under the blunt definition of
workers as those who, if they don't get up in the
morning and go to work, won't eat: blacks don't
have unearned income. But the image of "the
people" has come to be symbolized more specif¬
ically in the features of farm workers, miners and
construction workers: the rural people and the
manpower they export under the migratory
labour system to single-sex hostels in the indus¬
trial areas.
The image is appropriate. These workers
stand, historically, at either end of that system
established by the conflation of capitalism and
racism; in between is the whole span of black
labour yoked by the white man factory
workers, street cleaners, domestic servants. The
agricultural workers cm white farms are the
lowest paid, having no statutory minimum wage;
the miners and industrial workers are the freest
on the way to economic emancipatum, having
organized themselves m powerful trade unions
which will one day end the migratory labour
system that brought them from country to town
without the right to be accompanied by their
families.
A People's Literature therefore means to
paraphrase Walter Benjamin literature con¬
ceived as the people's "ability to relate" their own
lives.
But Benjamin was speaking of the storyteller
among the people a title which in itself sets the
relater aside as si')meone who has emerged from
those with whom he shares the conditions of
li\'ing. The object of People's Literature, m the
context of which I am speaking, is to do away
with the title, to reject its 1 unction of singling-
out, with attendant connotations of a particular

gift or talent others do not have, A year or two
ago a South African literary journal featured
"Worker Poets" as a special category of poet, as
one might speak of the lyricist or symbolist. The
poems were written, in their spare time, by
people who labour with their hands. But the vali¬
dation of their status as poets was that they were
workers. The syllogism follows; writing poetry
IS not work; any workers can write poetry; there¬
fore poets are not workers.
The "worker" poet or playmaker or prose
ficticm writer does not wish to emancipate him
or herself from the condition of worker; not at
all. He is asserting not a desire to opt out of the
labour class, but his right, as a worker, to the
making of poetry, of literature his right to tran¬
scendence not as a quality that will exalt him
above the dirt of toil, but which is integral to it.
He is asserting his right to the ecstasy of creation
while doing piece-work eight h(jurs a day.
South African road-workers.
This has been a deep subconscious desire,
beyond material justice, in most workers' move¬
ments; it is present in the determination of the
liberation movements to establish a workers'
democracy in South Africa.
The "worker poets" are the balladeers of
strikes, wage disputes, the perils of industrial acci¬
dents, the violence experienced in clashes with
the police sent in by the bosses or the State to
break strikes. The balladeer is himself one of the
striking workers; he is himself miles underground
with his fellow miners when the rock-fall occurs.
It IS the experience that makes him a poet, it is
the rhetoric of union meetings and the liberation
movements' manifestos that gives him the Word.
To those of us who look for an intensely
transformed experience in reading poetry, not
experience as poetry, generalized doggerel put
together mainly out of slogans stirs little response.
But People's Literature, it can be argued, is not
for the reader who is looking for experience
intensified by the writer; it is for those whose
own experience exceeds the intensity of words.
Therefore the most banal of verbal signals will
set off identification. People's 


Literature is not
meant to enlarge the reader's understanding
beyond his familiar work, but to concentrate his
understanding on the worth and dignity of that
world, give it its rightful place in the national
consciousness as the class-alienated storyteller is
believed not to be able to do.
How IS this to be achieved?
The cover of a recent number of Cultural
Worker, the journal of the Congress of South
African Trade Unions, quotes the Angolan writer
Jorge Rebello: ". . . forge simple words/that even
children can understand/words which will enter
every house/like the wind,"
Nothing IS more difficult. Some with the
vocabulary of genius at their command have
spent a lifetime striving for the words that will
enter every house.
In the context of a People's Literature it is
either a glorious demand, based on faith in the
untapped creative resources of the masses, or a
total misunderstanding of the labour that writing
IS, to believe this achievement could come from
the spare-time occupation of anybody who has the
appropriate life experience. Handling the
unfamiliar tool of the written word, what the
"worker poet" fashions is likely to be what
Njabulo Ndebele has termed the "interaction of
the surface symbols of South African reality"
no more.
So far, drama is the literary form which best
shows positive signs of realizing the concept of
a People's Literature. Some reasons may be iden¬
tified. The worker-actor-playmakers are in total,
immediate interaction with the roles they play
in real life. There is unity of experience in the
actuality of dramatized events "set" cm the fac¬
tory floor, for the workers' plots are contem¬
porary autobiography the clashes between
themselves and the bosses, the relation between 37

38
the workers' own differing personalities and states
of awareness. Any inadequacy of dialogue is over¬
come by song and mime. Humour and the phys¬
ical individuality of performance break the bonds
of rhetoric in which the "worker poets" bind
themselves.
In a recent play, Mrs. Thatcher, represented
by a worker wearing a huge, toothy papier-mâché
blonde head, takes a coffee break with the bosses
as a metaphor for collusion between British
capitalism and South African industry. The mode
so happily hit upon is something between Grand
Guignol and Brecht an observation using refer¬
ences that might mean nothing to the players, and
of which, indeed, they prove they have no need,
having of themselves arrived at a successful means
of relating their own lives among their own
people.
For the professional writer the ultimate
problem in the creation of a People's 


Literature
is not so much, in the case of the black writer,
that he has been removed from the common lot.
It is not so much, in the case of the white writer,
that no matter how involved he or she may be
in the cause of black liberation, he or she has
never shared the general experience of living on
the dark side of the colour bar.
The problem is that generations of the most
appalling cultural deprivation inevitably have
produced in the masses a deep resentment of the
"republic of letters". In South Africa this
"republic", like all other pretensions to
democracy, has been a mockery of the name. It
has discounted the masses entirely, whether as
creators or consumers of literature. Blacks have
felt that the only way to belong, in literature,
except as other people's material, was to cease to
be one of the people. And that, in this revolu¬
tionary era, is to cease to be yourself: your black
self taking your own liberation and life in your
own hands.
The desperate determination to claim the
worth of that life in the lasting form of art is in
conflict with any acceptance that the writer does
what the worker cannot do that the practice of
writing is a craft, a trade in itself. Why be sur¬
prised? The resentment engendered by this con¬
flict has led other revolutions to send their writers
to cut cane. In capitalist societies it has jealously
led to sending writers to perform in chat shows
anything rather than have the masses recognize
that the writer labours at a vocation whose con¬
dition IS not open to the public, even if anyone
may become President. . . .
But the concept of a People's Literature not
only assumes everyone can write. It also assumes ,
everyone reads or will read. Alas, we know this
has not proved to be the case in most countries
where the majority has become literate and books
are available in all communities, through libraries.
Certainly not in the Western world. Comic-book
literacy is not book-literacy.
With desk-top publishing and modest new
forms of distribution through trade union and
A series of iinocuts by the
South African artist
Vuyiie C. Voylya. From top:
Rhythm in 3/4 time I,
Rhythm in 3/4 time II,
Rhythm in 3/4 time IV, and
In the coffin of my skin.
community organizations m South Africa's black
ghettoes, journals and books are beginning, in a
very small way, to be part of the iurmshing of
places where people gather, and as such may
begin to be used as essentials.
It is early to judge, perhaps, but 1 believe it
significant that Ravan Press, which publishes a
series of "simple" books, written in a limited
vocabulary by blacks who, if not always "worker

Rows upon rows of "bachelor
quarters" in which black
South African workers are
obliged to live cut off from
their families.
NADINE GORDIMER,
South African writer, was
awarded the 1991 Nobel prize
for literature. Her fictional
works and essays chronicle the
experience of a society torn
apart by apartheid, against
which she has always fought,
actively supporting blacl< South
African writers. She is the
author of ten novels and more
than 200 short stories, the
most recent a collection
entitled Jump (1991) and a
novel, My Son's Story (1990).
writers" in the strict sense, are at the remove only
of a rural schoolteacher from that category, found
a surprising demand for an expensive scholarly
work, far remioved from the rhetoric of political
pamphlets as from any assumed naivety 


of
"people's" fiction. This was Tom Lodge's Black
Politics in South Africa since 1945. Skotaville Pub¬
lishers had a similar experience with Mokgethi
Motlhabi's Black Resistance to Apartheid.
Of course, these are not works of the imagi¬
nation; but the effort of comprehension may stir
.something that leads to works of the imagination.
For, in Benjamin's beautiful aphorism, literature's
great offering is its "creation of a demand which
could be satisfied only later". And that is surely
a perfect definition and defence of literature's
revolutionary function. Literature calls up the
effort to formulate and analyse vague yearnings,
to resolve frustration and resentment through
grasping their causes and acting upon them at a
level of roused being the learning-by-maxim of
political education cannot reach. Here stands the
writer's real justification for his existence in the
revolutionary situation, and the claim for the
practice of literature as a category of work
demanding special aptitudes and skills.
It has to be accepted that talent is not a
right alas, no.
But every means of giving talent a chance to
discover itself, to grow within political, economic
and social structures conducive to this, is a right.
None of these structures has ever existed for the
black masses in South Africa, in a succession of
racist régimes. Writing talent has been stifled,
wasted, distorted by exile within as well as
without the country. But this talent will not be
freed to create a People's Literature, in the true
sense that literature shall embody the conscious¬
ness of the masses instead of that only of an élite,
if writing is regarded as a kind of therapy for
industrial alienation.
By law and lack of education, by lack of
libraries which are the writer's continuing
educationby lack of a corner to themselves with
a table to write at, the potential writers among
the people have been cast as miners, street
cleaners, ditch diggers. If there is to be a People's
Literature it will come about because these
writers will now do, instead, the work they are
gifted and fitted for. If there is to be a People's
Literature it will come about only if there is no
State interference, and if social conditions ensure
that cofnic book literacy, disseminated through
the long-established colonial agencies which con¬
tinue to monopolize distributitm of publications
in the entire African sub-continent, does not
become the people's literary culture, as it has in
so many parts of the world.
Only then could the contradictions oí a
"People's Literature" begin to be resolved. Only
then, when asked "Who writes?", those of us
who work to create a post-colonial, post-
apartheid culture in South Africa might be able
to answer: all who have the ability. And when
asked, "Who reads?", might be able to answer:
the people. 39
