Prophecies and
presentiments
By Fernando Ainsa
«
What Columbus found
in the New World seemed to
embody many old European myths
anddreams
THE fact that Christopher Columbus stum¬
bled by chance upon the vast continent of
America whilst en route for Cathay
(China), Cipango (Japan) and the East has
given rise to a great deal of speculation. This is
not so much because of the chance nature of his
discovery attempting to reach the East by
sailing westward was a bold venture in itself
but because it took Columbus himself several
years to realize that he had indeed discovered a
New World.
The truth of the matter is that nothing in his
training and experience as a sailor and none of
the accumulated knowledge of the cartogra¬
phers and cosmographers of his day could have
given him an inkling that the Atlantic Ocean
concealed in its grey expanses a continent
extending virtually from the Arctic to the
Antarctic. The Spaniards, and Europeans in
general, were quite unprepared for such an
incredible discovery. As Francisco López de
Gomara declared in his Historia General de las
Indias ("General History of the Indies", 1516),
"The greatest event since the creation of the
world, with the exception of the incarnation and
death of its Creator, has been the discovery of
the Indies, which is why we call them the New
World. ... It can also be called 'New' because it
differs from our own in every respect."
A SEED-BED OF IMAGERY
Finding an explanation for all these "different"
things called for a great effort of imagination
based on the accumulated knowledge of the
day. In an attempt to digest and assimilate all
these novelties, explorers, historians and chro¬
niclers turned for guidance to notions that 11

A late 18th-century Spanish
engraving depicting an
Indian from the Orinoco river.
could be found in the Western world's own
scientific and historical past.
What they discovered in the New World
seemed to them to hark back to the most dis¬
tant well-springs of human memory the
Garden of Eden of the Book of Genesis, the
Golden Age of ancient mythology, the Lost
Tribes of Israel, the rustic Arcadian paradise of
the classical era as seen through Renaissance
eyes, the Land of Cockayne and medieval
variants on the theme of the earthly paradise
fabulous countries peopled with animals and
fantastic creatures, with Amazons, giants and
headless monsters. In the New World the Old
World found its own origins and echoes of
happy times of which it had nostalgic memo¬
ries. Far from discovering a new reality, the
Western world was returning, via the West, to
its own oriental origins.
During the years that followed the
"encounter", the chroniclers and others who
accompanied the conquistadors set to work to
authenticate their own myths as seen through
the American prism. "The Spanish," wrote
Claude Lévi-Strauss, "set out less to acquire
new knowledge than to authenticate ancient
legends the prophecies of the Old Testament,
12
Graeco-Roman legends such as those of
Atlantis and the Amazons, medieval legends
such as those of the kingdom of Préster John
and the Fountain of Youth."
There was, however, much more to it than
this. More than simply a setting for the verifica¬
tion of ancient myths, once it had become
incorporated into the imaginary universe of the
West, America became, to use the Cuban poet
José Lezama Lima's happy phrase, a new
"seed-bed of imagery".
In America this surge of unbridled imagina¬
tion triggered a process of association and, at
the same time, of recognition of those real dif¬
ferences that existed. This left the chroniclers of
the day free to transpose tales of chivalry to the
American landscape whilst still turning to the
old bestiaries, fables and treatises on plants with
magical powers for the flora and fauna with
which they adorned it. Imagination forged a link
between the known and the new and unknown.
"Countless and eternal are the Americas of the
imagination", wrote the Venezuelan writer
Arturo Uslar Pietri when discussing the myth of
Eldorado.
When Bernai Díaz del Castillo arrived at
Tenochtitlán with Hernán Cortés and first
caught sight of the white edifices of the Aztec
capital rising from a flower-strewn lake, he
declared that he might have been looking upon
the wonders recounted in the chivalric romance
Amadis de Gaula. Gonzalo Fernández de
Oviedo affirmed that the Antilles, where
Columbus made landfall, were the Isles of the
Hesperides, the sanctuary of the Golden Age
and the birthplace of humankind, which the
ancient Greeks thought were located at the wes¬
tern edge of the world, a forty-day sail from the
Gorgon Isles (the Cape Verde Islands).
It was not simply the urgent need to explain
the novelties of a strange new world that
induced the transposition to it of European cos¬
mogonies. The heavy symbolic weight of pro¬
phecies and presages also turned Western eyes
towards the vast unexplored space extending
westward from the Straits of Gibraltar, the non
plus ultra of the Roman Empire marked by the
pillars of Hercules.
OTHER PEOPLES,
OTHER WORLDS
Indications of the existence of a "fourth region
of the world" in addition to the three regions
of Europe, Asia and Africa that were already
known to Antiquity have been noted some
2,000 years before the discovery of America. In
the Egypt of the Pharaohs, the "Kingdom of
the Dead" was believed to be situated in the
"Land of the Setting Sun" and there were ref¬
erences to it in the legends and travellers' tales
of medieval poets and navigators and in the
speculations of astronomers and cartographers.
Columbus himself referred to them in his Book
of Prophecies (1501) in which he declared that
he had found this famous "fourth region of the
world", this site of the earthly paradise, long
sought by the early Church Fathers.
One of the earliest allusions to lands peopled

The mythical kingdom of
Préster John, which
Renaissance geographers
identified with Ethiopia, is
shown in this detail from a
map drawn in 1563.
FERNANDO AINSA,
of Uruguay, is the author of
many novels and essays,
including Identidad cultural
de Iberoamérica en su
narrativa (1986; "The Cultural
Identity of Latin America in its
Literature"), Necesidad de la
utopía (1990; "The Necessity
of Utopia") and Historia,
utopía y ficción de la ciudad
de los Césares (1992; "The
City of the Caesars, History,
Utopia and Fiction"). He is
currently director of the
Unesco Collection of
Representative Works.
by beings "different from us" is to be found
in Plato's Phaedo. "I am convinced," Plato
wrote, "that the world is immense and that we
occupy only a small part of it. There can be no
doubt that, on the surface of the Earth, there
are many other peoples living in lands similar
to our own." In his dialogues Timaeus and
Cridas, he writes of an island [Atlantis] "larger
than Libya and Asia combined", situated
beyond the Mediterranean, and of whose exis¬
tence there had been traces since the time of
Solon. The mighty people who lived there had
continually sought to extend their sway, until
they had been defeated by Athens. Many years
after this defeat, the island of Atlantis had
disappeared, abruptly engulfed by the sea. This
was why, Plato explained, the ocean remained
impenetrable and unexplored, since the shallow
sedimentary remains of the submerged island
made navigation there impossible. In the
middle of the sixteenth century, this forgotten
myth resurfaced again in Pedro Sarmiento de
Gamboa's Historia de los Incas ("History of
the Incas"). This book propounded all kinds of
argument to prove that the empire of Peru was
the remnant of the civilization of Atlantis
which, following a catastrophic earthquake,
unrecorded until the discovery of America, had
survived in the high Andes.
Other speculations about the existence of
the American continent, whilst claiming a his¬
torical basis, were in fact of mythological
origin. In his epic Works and Days, the Greek
poet Hesiod recounts that "Zeus had estab¬
lished a divine race of heroes, whom we call
demi-gods, in a distant corner of the Earth,
where they live an untroubled, carefree exis¬
tence" on islands where "the fertile soil brings
forth a fine abundant harvest three times a
year". Other classical texts evoke the Isles of
the Blest, the Hesperides, where the trees bear
apples of gold. Sometimes these islands are
depicted as immense and continental in size.
In his Epodes, the Roman poet Horace
declared that true patriots should leave Rome,
then a prey to internal strife and civil wars.
Though the Golden Age could not be revived
in a Roman empire given over to the Iron Age,
there were other places where a pristine inno¬
cence still reigned, and it was in one of them
that the new Rome should be built. As later
essayists and philosophers were to maintain,
the lands reserved by the Creator from the
beginning of time for the "pious people" of
whom Horace spoke could be the American
continent.
A PROPHECY FULFILLED
According to Graeco-Latin tradition, the Phoe¬
nicians were the first to explore the Atlantic,
setting off from the trading-post they had
established at Gades (Cadiz). In his Bibliotheca
Histórica, a jumble of fabrication and authentic
travellers' accounts, Diodorus of Sicily refers to
the Phoenicians as the discoverers of a world
"which is said to be the dwelling-place of gods
rather than of men".
Arab historians also refer to the Phoenician
presence in the Atlantic. The geographer Al-
Idrisi describes six huge statues erected by the
merchants of Sidon and Gades at strategic
points in the Azores and the Canaries, all facing
towards some unknown destination to the west
and seeming to urge men on to further voyages
of exploration.
These prophetic legends were later repeated
about the Carthaginians, the heirs of Phoeni¬
cian civilization. The most astounding of these
legends relates that the Carthaginians had a
plan, should war come, to evacuate the inhabi¬
tants of Carthage to an island in the Atlantic
where, according to Diodorus, they would find
refuge should Carthage suffer defeat.
The Mirabilis Auscultaciones, a book of
wonders attributed to Aristotle, contains an
account of an amazing voyage made by mer¬
chants to the lands of the setting Sun. "It is said
that in the sea which stretches beyond the
Pillars of Hercules, the Carthaginians dis¬
covered an island, now deserted, where forests
and navigable rivers abound, which is rich in
fruits of all kinds and which is several days'
sailing distance from the continent." Signifi¬
cantly, similar descriptions are to be found in
many chronicles and accounts of the discovery
of the New World. Gonzalo Fernández de
Oviedo, for example, speaks of merchants who,
in their journeyings, found a rich and "very
large island never before seen and on which
nobody lived".
Montaigne also evoked the legendary land
found by the Carthaginians in his essay Des
Cannibales ("On Cannibals"), in which he gives
an allegorical account of how some Carthagi¬
nian seafarers who had ventured beyond the
Straits of Gibraltar came across an island far
from the mainland, covered in forests and
watered by great, deep rivers. They had emi- 4 m
grated to this place with their wives and children JLO

14
and, captivated by the fertility of the land, they
became so used to their new life that they
forgot their European origins, and thus redis¬
covered the happiness they had lost.
No text, however, more clearly foretells the
discovery of America than the end of the
second act of Seneca's Medea, in which the
chorus announces that: "In a number of years,
the time will come when the ocean will open its
barriers and a vast land will be discovered.
Thetis will unveil a new world and Thule will
no longer be the last outpost of dry land."
Although a purely literary work, Seneca's
play, written during the first century AD,
seems to have been one of the supports on
which medieval and Renaissance cosmogra-
phers, cartographers and navigators based their
theories. Strabo and such fifteenth-century
sages as the Toscanelli of Florence and the
German Benhaim maintained that they had
taken the prophetic words of the chorus of the
Medea into account when elaborating the geo¬
graphical aspects of their projects for sailing to
the west.
Seneca's poetic prophecy was to have impor¬
tant political consequences. Columbus died an
almost forgotten man, known merely as a sea¬
farer who had come by chance across a new
world while sailing westward. Thanks, however,
to Seneca's prophetic writing, Columbus was to
recover the credit for a discovery that history
seemed to have snatched from him. His son
Hernando wrote these words in the margin of
his copy of the Medea: "This prophecy was ful¬
filled by my father, Admiral Christopher
Columbus, in the year 1492."
Later, historians as Francisco López de
Gomara, Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo, Bar¬
tolomé de las Casas and Hernando Columbus
himself searched among the authors of the past
for those whose literary or quasi-scientific wri¬
tings foretell the existence of a "fourth region
of the world". Each of them added his word to
the chorus that gave Columbus the credit he
deserves for the events of the twelfth of
October 1492 Aristotle, Strabo, Pliny, Marco
Polo, Sir John Mandeville, Isidore of Seville
all authors that the discoverer of America had
himself carefully enumerated in his Book of
Prophecies.
These prophecies and presages have been so
long and so firmly present in the European
imagination that it may well be asked, in the
words of the Mexican essayist Alfonso Reyes,
whether America was not "a region longed for
before it was found", since "searched for in
every direction, America was both a scientific
and a poetic intuition before it became a verified
fact". The discovery of America, then, was not,
as has been claimed, a matter of chance. So many
myths and legends accompanied Columbus on
his voyage to the west that it must already have
been inscribed in the book of history, with
Columbus merely turning it into accomplished
fact. As the Mexican philosopher Leopoldo Zea
has written: "Europe discovered America
because it was necessary for her to do so." O

