INTERVIEW
talks to Judithe Bizot
Vandana Shiva is an Indian physicist and feminist militant
who works with many community action groups fighting against
environmental destruction. In this interview she examines the links
between the ecological crisis, the marginalization of women
and the dominant model of economic development.
You are a physicist who abandoned your
country's nuclear energy programme to
devote yourself to nature and to halting its
destruction. How did you reach yourpresent
position?
Ever since I was a child, love and knowledge
of nature have given me my deepest satisfac¬
tion. I was very,lucky to have been born the
daughter of a forester in India and to have
grown up in the Himalayan forest. Then I
studied physics. The real basics of nature as
defined in the reductionist scheme of things
are understood through physics, the founda¬
tion of all the sciences. I had the opportunity
to study biology and chemistry too, but real,
profound understanding of nature was sup¬
posed to be reached through physics. Then I
went into nuclear physics, where I experienced
massive disappointments. It was only when I
was doing my master's degree that I realized
how unthinking nuclear scientists were about
the question of radiation hazards. We were
taught how to create chain reactions in nuclear
material and we knew all about energy trans¬
formations, and so on, but nothing about the
interaction of radiation with living systems.
I learned about radiation impacts from my
sister, who is a doctor. When I was working
in a nuclear reactor in India she kept saying:
"Promise me you're never going to go back
there!" "But why?" I'd say and she would
reply, "but you could have babies with muta¬
tions. You don't know what's going to happen
to you."
When I was groping my way and
exploring these issues, senior physicists would
say, "You don't need to- know these things."
Again this was an exclusion and a violation
of my search for knowledge. If science means
to know, then I had no scientific training. So
I went to Canada and enrolled on a Founda¬
tions of Physics programme, where some of
the basic questions about science that were
troubling me were being asked.
I knew that if I continued studying the
foundations of quantum theory I should be
marginal to my situation and I decided that
8

I must do something to relate myself to the
Indian context. I shifted to science and tech¬
nology policy issues. In the meantime, the
Chipko movement had been created and
because this had happened where I was from,
I kept going back and doing volunteer work
and writing for them. Before I knew where
I was, ecology had become my primary
concern.
What is the Chipko movement? In your
hook Staying Alive you talk of the forest, for
instance, not as a product for the market hut
as prakitia life-givingforce. You talk ofthe
importance ofwomen in the struggle against
the massive consumption ofnatural resources.
I responded to the destruction of the forest
first because I was a child of the Himalayan
forests. They were my identity and my sense
of being. The erosion of the forests hit me very
hard. Just before I left for Canada, I wanted
to go back and visit a favourite spot of mine,
a place where the British had built lovely rest
houses from which the foresters managed the
forests. There was one I particularly loved,
near a stream in the beautiful oak forest. I
went back there, and the oak forest had
become a mere sprinkling of trees, and the
stream was no longer gushing with water.
When I talked to the people in the area I found
that the stream had disappeared because they
had cut the oak forest down to plant apple
orchards, an enterprise which had never really
been successful. (Apple trees need very fertile
soil and virgin forest is usually cut down for
this purpose.)
As for my involvement with Chipko, a
movement of Himalayan women dedicated to
the protection of the environment, I first got
to know a leading figure in the movement
named Sundarlal Batinguna, who was a great
inspiration to people like myself. But at a
second and more lasting level my involvement
was with the ordinary women who form the
bedrock of Chipko. It was their perceptions
and their beliefs that were the really rich foun¬
dations of my knowledge of ecology. They
offered me a new sensibility about relation¬
ships. Ordinary people don't theorize. They
have visions and beliefs. The germ of an idea
or insight that I have developed has always
been a phrase or an action from a person com¬
mitted to act in a concrete situation. All my
theory-building has come out of this nature-
centred and woman-centred action. The spe¬
cial relationships women have with the
environment are due to this. In my book
Staying Alive I attempted to explain why my
insights came from women who were consi¬
dered ignorant and marginal, who were not
given a platform of any kind by society.
Why is it that women sense destruction
faster and are more persevering in the struggles
against destruction? Why do they carry on
when everyone else is cynical and hopeless?
The reason is that women have a distinctive
perception of what life is, a sense of what is
really vital, which colours their view of what
is at stake in the world.
Can women lead the way in the new con¬
cern for the environment?
I think women are taking the lead today.
The important thing is that their leadership
should be taken seriously. For us in India
Chipko marked the reawakening of an eco¬
logical consciousness, in a movement
stretching from the villages of central India to
the western Ghats. This new ecological cons¬
ciousness is as old as our civilization, but what
is new is its re-emergence as a political force
in response to destruction, a force like Chipko
in which ordinary women define the issues.
It doesn't take much effort to say, let's
bring women in. The crucial issue is let's not
push women out. Because of its very specific
nature, the relationship between women and
the environment differs from one place to
another. The movements that have led me
towards my own commitments and decisions
originate in the most marginal sectors of our
society, in the so-called backward communi¬
ties and specifically among the women of
those communities.
1 hese oak trees
save and worship them,
because their roots store water,
their leaves have milk and fodder,
the breeze blows cool
over the beautiful rhododendron flower.
A song of the Chipko movement
If societies have succeeded in reproducing
themselves for centuries, they are examples of
sustainability. Today, unfortunately, these are
the societies that are labelled backward,
whereas the societies that give up too quickly
traditional ways of doing things are called
progressive. That definition, of course, is
biased. It is in countries like India that you
find groups of women who are embedded
both in nature and in sustainable cultures.
Perennial civilizations, not ones that burst into
growth and collapse, have something very spe¬
cial to offer. They enshrine the capacity to
regenerate, the capacity to heal, the capacity
to give and take, to build and create.
But I believe that women in the North are
also intimately linked to the environment.
Even in the most advanced societies women
have been left to care for children, homes and
health. A wonderful study was carried out in
Helsinki which showed that, whatever yard¬
stick you taketime, energy, workwomen
are running Finnish society and the Finnish
economy. It's wrong to say that women are

Water-bearers in Rajasthan (India).
unproductive, that they don't work. It is often
said that women who stay at home do not
work, but in fact they work harder than
anyone else.
Nature for me comprises the life-giving
forces, the life-support systems, the ecological
systems that make life possible. These things
are violated in the cities and in the country
through nuclear hazards, toxic wastes, con¬
taminated water and polluted air. We need
those life-giving sources of pure air, pure
water, pure food, no matter where we are.
Are we not in the process of amputating
something from ourselves by rapidly
diminishing our powers of regeneration?
The term "feminine principle" is basically
just an English translation of prakiti, a force
in nature and life which exists all round us,
in women and in men. To me, the rise of
modern patriarchy tended to kill the feminine
principle in all its fullness, and in particular
to annihilate it totally in man. In a sense, the
rise of the masculine mode of knowledge,
production and governance was a way of
crushing something essential to society as a
wholeto males and to females. Fortunately,
however, whereas the patriarchs considered
that they were ruling over-passive creatures
(women and nature), they could never fully
take that life away. They could distort and
stifle it but they couldn't destroy it entirely.
I can't imagine any recovery or flowering
of these creative forces of nature, of women
coming into their own, that would leave men
untouched. Men will do one of two things.
Either they will react violently because this
flowering creates a new kind of insecurity and
inadequacy. Or, hopefully, more men will
sense that they have impoverished themselves,
and the feminine principle will emerge as a
creative force which values nurture above
domination, sustaining above destruction,
rooted and experienced concrete knowledge
above abstract, irrelevant knowledge. Surely
these values are important enough for men to
recognize and support them.
Are you saying that male-dominated
knowledge should be thrown out?
Every society except contemporary indus¬
trial society has had criteria as to what it
should say "no" to. Industrial society is the
only one which believes that if you have the
power to do something you must do it. Indian
philosophy is built on the concept that "yes,
you might have the power, but it is impor¬
tant that you use your discrimination in the
exercise of that power". A society should be
able to make choices and judgements about
means, to have values as ends.
I feel that plurality of choice creates an
opportunity to decide what is needed and
desirable, and what is not, and what is good
and what is not. If that kind of opportunity
is honestly and scientifically made available to
society, with the idea of maintaining quality
of life, with participation by people, then it
will undoubtedly be taken. It should also be
recognized that scientists are as fallible as
anyone else and that science and its institutions
are more often than not prostituted to eco¬
nomic interests, since the structure of power
is so closely married to the structure of
knowledge. Many technologies are used to
serve the economic interests of the powerful,
not choices based on ecology and ethics.
Women have already made their choices on
these issues.
Does the exploration ofother planets have
a place in a world-view which is concerned
with improving the quality of life, joy,
sharing, and meeting basic needs?
It's all right to explore. What is wrong is
to justify the exploration of outer space in
terms of solving the problems of this planet.
I believe it is immoral to use people and their
needs as the reasons for outer-space
programmes, which should be seen as what
they are: the indulgence of a group of very
privileged people and countries. Everyone has
a right to explore, but to use that right as an
imperative into which everyone must fit is
another matter. It's hiding the other agendas
which go along with space programmes,
which are not simply pursued for their own
sake but for military and other ends.
What is your attitude to global, planetary
management and the question of local versus
global ecologies?
So-called "primitive" peoples have always
had a planetary cosmology, and for them the
planet has existed in every action they have
taken. The most isolated communities have
had a view not just of this planet but of how
it relates to others and of how balance must
be maintained. The planetary has always
existed in the local. Any attempt to disenfran¬
chise local communities of their planetary
consciousness is unethical.
In what specific ways do local communi¬
ties understand or use planetary knowledge?
Traditional systems of agriculture in every
society have been based on the relationships
between planets, which have provided the
basis for deciding which is the right time to
sow and which crops should be grown
together. For example, many peasants possess
a kind of scientific knowledge which enables
them to recognize certain types of insect
10

W*KV
.'
behaviour which indicate impending floods,
so that they move out in time. But all this is
a thing of the past because pesticides have
killed these living indicators. We create
systems which seem more reliable than tradi¬
tional systems but are actually more vul¬
nerable.
I see two ways in which industrial society
has been impoverished. Ethically, it is the only
society which cannot distinguish between
good and bad, which does not provide a
chance to say no, which has no restraining
criteria, values or limits to action. Secondly,
it seems to lack any realization that its systems
are increasingly based on highly vulnerable
forms of organization. There is no compre¬
hension of how these systems break down
when most needed. If my relationship to
nature provides me with knowledge and a
feeling for what's happening to the world and
what changes are coming, it helps me guide
and protect my animals, myself and others.
I have certain indicators available to me
without risk of breakdown by which I can act
in informed ways. Satellites, computer net¬
works and so on are made to replace what is
considered unreliable, but they are actually
more vulnerable.
What influence can women have? How
can they make a difference? How can they
improve their lives and their environment?
The first thing is that they should not lose
faith in the knowledge they have and that they
should trust in themselves. I also believe that
when those Himalayan streams were disap¬
pearing women knew that deforestation is
linked to desertification and stood their
ground, even though the foresters said that
forests have no link with watershed manage¬
ment. Women's instruments of resistance are
standing their ground, believing in their
knowledge, having faith in their values, not
losing confidence, not feeling inferior. The
dominating system imposes its choice on
people by transforming every multiple choice
into a tragic last possible one. Things are not
black or white. I think that in our time it is
very important to be able to turn around and
say, no matter how powerless one is, well
things could be different, could they not? I
don't think that merely increasing the number
of choices necessarily enriches people's lives.
The criteria of choice are what really count.
Merely to increase the number of choices is
to adopt a supermarket mentality of consumer
choice. It is essential to know when a choice
is not a real choice, and that is impossible
unless people have a sense of discrimination
within them. Relating to nature, being
embedded in it, provides the ethical frame¬
work for choice between different scientific
and technological options.
11
