Fiction Brazil:
by Dinapiera
di Donato
A scene from Valetudo
("Anything Goes"), a
Brazilian telenovela
produced in 1989.
1 . Tclcnovclas literally
"telenovcls" are serials, mostly
made in Brazil or Mexico, that arc
extremely popular in Latin
America and elsewhere. Editor.
IT is midday. Millions of Brazilians eating
lunch in front of their television sets are
open-mouthed. On the screen is a man they
have seen before but never in his shirtsleeves.
Looking worried, he calls them "my friends",
asks them "not to condemn too hastily" and
concludes his plea with a solemn "May God
help us!" The media unanimously agree that
this is a serious moment. The President of the
Republic has just appeared on every television
channel to defend himself before the nation
against accusations of wrong-doing made by
his own brother. Passers-by interviewed in the
street say the brother has gone haywire and
that the whole thing is like a TV serial.
Another disturbing piece of news. The
bishop of the Universal Church of the
Kingdom of God, which happens to be the
owner of the TV Record channel, has been
arrested. Can it really be true that he has been
involved in a ring supplying fake university
degrees? Viewers barely have time to recover
from this particular shock before they learn
that the thirteen-year-old claimant to the
throne of Brazil, the last descendant of the
Emperor Pedro II and Princess Isabella of Por¬
tugal, has been abducted in front of the Impe¬
rial Museum in Petropolis, a city whose name
could itself come from a science-fiction novel.
No, these are not episodes in a television
soap opera. On this typical day in May 1992, the
public wants above all to know if the motorway
linking Rio de Janeiro's airport to the confer¬
ence centre where the "Earth Summit" will
open in a few days will be finished in time a
motorway that will also make it possible to
avoid having to travel through the city's shanty-
towns. Meanwhile Silvio Abreu, the author of
the successful tclenovela' Guerra dos sexos
("The Battle of the Sexes"), is preparing the
screenplay for another serial, Deus nos acuda
("God Help Us"), in which God sends an envoy
to the Brazilian inferno to try to find someone
who can save the country. The protagonists are
named Scandalous Mary, Celestina, Minister
Gabriel. As the celebrated dramatist and televi¬
sion screenwriter Dias Gomes puts it, "Realism
here is indissociable from the fantastic".
Brazil is a country where, according to a
1984 survey, television serials are more impor¬
tant to the national economy than the motor
industry, and where the two leading TV net¬
works, Rede Globo and Mánchete, arguably
have more impact on illiterates than the mil¬
lions of reading manuals distributed by the
national literacy campaign. The first university
in Brazil was founded in 1922 so that King
Leopold of Belgium could be welcomed with
the correct protocol during a state visit, for at
the time the Brazilian élite was educated at
Coimbra or Paris. Now there are many univer¬
sities and education has been democratized, but
it is through television that most Brazilians
complete their studies of sociology, geography
and all kinds of other subjects.
This is the only explanation for the extraor¬
dinary success of Pantanal ("The Marsh"), a
serial that brought to the small screen the for¬
gotten landscapes of the Mato Grosso, the
world of the jaguar-woman Yuma Marruá and
of river spirits who speak to humans, of all the
peasants, landowners and farmers who had
long disappeared from the Brazilian city-dwel¬
lers' worldview. Pantanal piled on the special 41

effects, which are very popular in Brazilian
productions, depicting in amazing images the
metamorphoses of Yuma Marruá or the
majestic flight of wild birds. Viewers seeing
Brazil's hidden face rising up before their eyes
felt that they were returning to their roots and
learning about the environment.
Recipes
for success
The Brazilian telenovela is the product of a
favourable set of circumstances that, without
forcing it to eschew such conventions of the
serial form as fragmented plotlines, suspense,
love interest and emotional drama, prevents it
from becoming too far-fetched or from por¬
traying a world divided simplistically into
goodies and baddies, and instead encourages
humour and an interest in the ups and downs
of everyday life. It is also the fruit of team¬
work, benefiting from the combined efforts of
the country's best dramatists, authors, actors,
composer-musicians, directors and documen¬
tary film-makers. This is rarely the case in
North America, where the television serial is
regarded as a minor genre left to be semi-
improvised by B-movie directors. The limita¬
tions of the serial format are the same in Brazil
as elsewhere, but Brazilian programme-makers
have long since learned how to overcome them
and give free rein to their creativity.
When it began in the 1950s, Brazilian televi¬
sion established itself as an instrument of
national unification through its Tupi, Río,
Excelsior and Rede Globo channels. In the fol¬
lowing decade the telenovela made a break¬
through into a world of bland programmes and
pretentious drama. Telenovelas were soon
taking Brazil by storm, particularly after Excel¬
sior broadcast the serial 25-499 Isn't Answering.
After a coup d'état in 1964 established a
military dictatorship, telenovelas, unlike other
types of programme, to a large extent
although not entirely escaped censorship, and
large numbers of them were made. In a crisis-
torn society in search of an identity, the ques
tion of what it meant to be Brazilian was much
debated. While the state alternately encouraged
and banned the production of telenovelas, the
latter became influenced by Cinema Novo and
the Tropicalist movement.
Telenovelas ceased to be based on the once-
popular historical romances and tearjerking
stories of ruined aristocrats, and became closer
to the facts of contemporary life. They drew on
the talents of writers such as Guimaräes Rosa,
Jorge Amado, Aguinaldo Silva, Benedito Ruy
Barbosa, Dias Gomes, Guarnieri and Suassune,
of celebrated musician-composers including
Toquinho, Vinicius de Moraes, Gal Costa and
Roberto and Erasmo Carlos, and of leading
actors and technicians. They used the everyday
form of speech and regional dialects, and drew
inspiration from real events. Under the
influence of avant-garde theatre, new characters
appeared mendacious, corrupt and arriviste
anti-heroes, and unusual women. Endings
became more subtle and both tragedy and
comedy were staged more professionally.
Telenovelas showed what no-one dared say
out loud: that it was possible to be Brazilian
without sheltering behind a narrow form of
nationalism. The point is well illustrated by a
serial that, because of censorship problems,
took ten years to reach the screen. This was
Roque Santeiro, directed by Dias Gomes,
Aguinaldo Silva and others and set in Asa
Branca. The story, which features a microcosm
of Brazilian society, is rich in mythology,
which in the words of one of the characters,
blind Jeremy, is "more powerful than reality".
Thanks to myth, the outcasts survive and the
bold prosper like the hero, a sculptor special¬
izing in saints who ends up canonized even
though he is at best a likeable rogue. In the end,
the "baddies" (who really aren't all that bad)
triumph, while the "goodies" come to realize
that no-one really wants to know the truth, for
fear that life in this marvellous country would
become intolerable as a result.
42
Three characters from the TV
serial Direito de amar ("The
Right to Love"). Produced in
Brazil in 1987, it has also
been shown in a number of
other countries.
DINAPIERA DI DONATO
is a Venezuelan essayist who
lectures at his country's
Universidad de Oriente.
