A QUESTION OF
STANDARDS
Right, Two worlds (1991),
by the Swiss painter and
photographer Patrick Mina,
symbolizes the North and
South in turmoil.
AMIN MAALOUF,
Lebanese journalist and
writer, ¡s a former editor-in-
chief of the Paris-based
magazine Jeune Afrique.
Among his books published
in English are Samarkand
(1992), Leo the African
(1988) and (as editor) The
Crusades through Arab Eyes
(1984). His most recent
published work is Le premier
siècle après Béatrice
(Grasset, Paris, 1992).
ON a trip to Prague in early January 1990,
a few days after the fall of Ceausescu, I
saw a poster in front of the Romanian
Embassy that read: "Ceausescu, there is no
room in Europe for you!"
I was both amused and shocked. Did it mean
that there is room for dictators and despots in
other continents? It was, admittedly, only a
naive slogan invented by some demonstrator or
other. But whether or not it is formulated in so
many words, the idea exists, and I would be
inclined to say that most people believe it. Des¬
potism and disrespect for human rights are
somehow less shocking when they occur in
Asia, Africa or in the countries of the South
generally. There is a horizontal dividing line
beyond which values are different, as if some
other variety of the human race were concerned.
The end of the period of East-West confronta¬
tion has only magnified this apparent division.
In the thrill of reunion and justifiably proud
at seeing the triumph of certain values, Europe
runs the risk of forgetting the rest of the world,
which is now regarded in some quarters as
being politically unimportant and economically
beyond redemption. It is a strong possibility
that in the next fifteen years Europe will be so
preoccupied with the reconstruction of its cen¬
tral and southern regions that it will have no
time for the rest of the world, with which its
relations will be antagonistic.
Putting the "common European home" in
order must obviously come first. However,
since the European model is currently the only
credible universal model we have, it cannot be
confined to one continent. Europeanism is a
great idea, but humanism is a much greater one.
As for Eurocentrism, it is a short-sighted view
of things which is liable sooner or later to dash
today's hopes.
Does this mean that Europe must impose its
model on everyone else? Perhaps not, but it is
Europe's duty to accept certain conditions in its
relations with the rest of the world. The first of
these conditions is that the countries of the
South, which depend on the North for their
economic survival and arms supplies, should be
forced to desist from any form of despotism,
infringement of liberty, and excessive militariza¬
tion. Conditions now exist which can make it
impossible for any despotic regime to survive
and which can establish new standards of behav¬
iour throughout the world. Only a short time
ago the rivalry between the two big military and
ideological blocs meant that the attainment of
such standards was a Utopian dream. Today
despotism, torture, oppression, racism and war¬
mongering can be outlawed. There is no longer
any justification for supporting dictators on the
grounds that they provide a bulwark against
communism, or on any other such pretext.
It is true that some politicians and busi¬
nessmen may be tempted to turn a blind eye to
the behaviour of rulers who look kindly on
their interests. But the role of public opinion
that is to say of the media, intellectuals and
citizen groups is to ensure that these stan¬
dards are unfailingly observed.
In various parts of the world, only demo¬
cracy can put an end to military adventurism
and pave the way for the settlement of
conflicts. Moreover, economic development
cannot be seriously contemplated without the
rule of law. The idea that despotism is a prelude
to development has seldom been supported by
events; it has far more often delayed or trun¬
cated the process by stifling a society's vitality.
We are always being told that a new era has
begun. We were told this after the First World
War, and again after the Second. On each occa¬
sion, reorganization of the world by the victors
turned out to be a disastrous prelude to fresh
conflicts. Will our own post-war era be any dif¬
ferent? Can we prevent the failure of misguided
internationalist ideas from leading to acceptance
of the excesses of nationalism? Or prevent the
collapse of misguided egalitarianism from justi¬
fying the excesses of runaway liberalism?
Will our generation write an epilogue
worthy of this sublime and terrifying century?
And a preamble to the centuries ahead? Q 13
