36
The Guadalajara
Declaration
«
Extracts
Above, fan made of feathers
(Lima, Peru).
The Heads ofState and Government of
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Portugal, Spain, Uruguay and Venezuela,
meeting in the city of Guadalajara, Mexico, on
18 and 19 July 1991, agreed to issue the
following declaration:
We represent a vast body of nations sharing
common roots and the rich heritage of a cul¬
ture that is the product of different peoples,
beliefs and races. Five hundred years after the
first encounter between us, we are determined,
as one of the great geographical areas that
make up today's world, to project the strength
of our community into the third millennium.
We realize that the convergence we are
seeking cannot draw strength only from a
common cultural tradition but depends also on
our wealth of national origins and their plura¬
listic expression. Our community is founded
on democracy, on respect for human rights
and on fundamental freedoms. In this context,
the principles of sovereignty and non-inter¬
vention are reaffirmed and recognition is given
to each people's right to build freely, in peace,
stability and justice, its political system and its
institutions	
We recognize the immense contribution
the indigenous peoples have made to the de¬
velopment and pluralism of our societies and
we reiterate our commitment to their economic
and social well-being and our obligation to
respect their rights and cultural identities	

If the present situation persists, ideological
bipolarity may give way to a division between
the North, rich in capital and technology, and
the South, poor and without prospects. To
overcome the problem, it is necessary on the
one hand to develop effective forms of recipro¬
city and solidarity and, on the other, to ground
them in an ethical plan, guided by social justice
and freedom and offering new patterns that
will spur genuine co-operation among the
countries of the world	
Faced with world-wide ecological deterio¬
ration, closely linked to the development
models that have thus far prevailed, primarily
in the industrialized countries, we call for
action to renew multilateral co-operation. That
will be the means of stopping the ecological
deterioration and overcoming poverty. It is
imperative, through this kind of international
co-operation, to establish effective procedures
for transferring more funds and appropriate
technology to the developing countries on pre¬
ferential, non-commercial terms, bearing in
mind that the responsibility for a solution
should fall basically to those who are doing the
most damage	
In the face of poverty, war, intolerance,
famine, illness, environmental degradation and
ignorance, we propose a new culture of inter¬
national co-operation as the only path to a just
and stable world. We understand this to mean
genuine, concerted action which takes account
of the common interests and objectives of the
Ibero-American nations and which goes
beyond mere give-and-take relations	
Only an international community governed
by law can ensure peace and security for all
peoples. The United Nations will have an
essential role to play in that area a revitalized
and renewed United Nations whose attain¬
ment of the goals for which it was created
should be facilitated by the new international
situation.
The strengthening of the bases of interna¬
tional coexistence and justice in conformity
with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations is a responsibi¬
lity which must be shared by all states; it is not
the exclusive prerogative of a few. That pro¬
cess should be open to universal participation
and should uphold the interests of the interna¬
tional community as a whole. We are resolved
to make our contribution	
In order to achieve the above-mentioned



objectives, we have decided to institute a dia¬
logue among the countries of Ibero-America at
the highest level. The Heads of State and
Government, meeting in Guadalajara, Mexico,
have decided to establish the Ibero-American
Conference of Heads of State and Government
consisting of the Spanish- and Portuguese-
speaking sovereign states of America and
Europe. To that end we shall meet initially in
Spain next year, in Brazil in 1993, in Colombia
in 1994 and in Argentina in 1995. These
meetings will enable us to embark on a poli¬
tical, economic and cultural process which will
help our countries together to achieve greater
and more efficient integration in a changing
global context. O
The March of Humanity in
Latin America (1972), detail
of a mural by the Mexican
painter David Alfaro
Siqueiros.
37
