INTERVIEW
Lebanese pianist and composer
ABDEL RAHMAN EL BACHA
talks to Neda el Khazen
Abdel Rahman El Bacha won the prestigious Queen Elisabeth
of Belgium competition in 1978. Since then he has won an international reputation as one of the
most outstanding pianists of his generation, and has played with some of the world's leading
orchestras and conductors. Among his recordings are the early piano works of Prokofiev
(for which he was awarded the Grand Prix du Disque of the French Académie Charles Cros in
1983), three Bach concertos, a number of Mozart sonatas and Ravel's piano concertos.
He is currently recording all Beethoven's sonatas.
(All these records are published by Forlane, Boulogne, France).
Nowadays, all artists seek international
recognition. Is this is a sign ofa more universal
outbok, at least in the arts?
All artists need to be noticed because they
need to give something of themselves to every¬
body, without exception. I think this is the
main reason why they need worldwide recog¬
nition. They may never win unanimous praise
from the public during their own lifetime, but
the important thing for them is the feeling that
they have something to say. If other people are
slow to realize this then it's too bad above all
for them. Artists can always find consolation
in their art.
You grew up in Lebanon, a country per¬
meated by a wide variety of cultural
influences, in a family with a strong interest in
music. How didyour career as an artist begin?
It began in the most natural of ways, since I
lived and breathed music from when I was a
very small child. My father was a well-known
composer. My mother, who had an innate feel¬
ing for music, sang traditional and popular
songs without ever being able to read a single
note.
When I was about three or four, I hummed
the tunes written by my father, in which all the
vivid colouring of Lebanese folk music was
brought out by the harmonic richness of Wes¬
tern scoring and instrumentation. My father
had a piano on which he tried out his composi¬
tions. By the time I was about six, I could play
my favourite songs on it, a few tunes I had
picked up at random.
In 1967, when I was nine, I began to study
the piano seriously. As I came to discover clas¬
sical music, I developed a passion for Mozart,
Beethoven, Chopin and Schumann. At the age

of ten, I played a Bach concerto in public. I
gave my first recital in 1974 at the Assembly
Hall, the chapel of the American University of
Beirut. It was attended by the Soviet, British
and French ambassadors, who all offered me
scholarships. I opted for France, on account of
cultural affinities and also because I could go
on with my general education there. I was
accepted at the Conservatoire Supérieur de
Musique in Paris just before war broke out in
Lebanon.
M Ina country that has been wracked by long
years of war, do you think that other young
people will manage to make their careers in
music, just as you did?
I hope so. When people have to contend
with difficulties in their lives and with suffer¬
ing day in day out, music becomes a necessity,
a saving grace. Those young people will pro¬
bably enjoy fewer opportunities, but even so
there are still some piano teachers left in
Lebanon and it is still possible to find pianos,
even though there are not many skilled piano-
tuners and it can be very distressing to have to
work at the piano when you have lost a
member of your family or you are in the
middle of a bombardment. I do not think that
the war has stifled the urge to create on the
contrary. I give concerts in Lebanon regularly
and they are usually attended by large numbers
of young people who are clearly listening
intently to the music and are eager to under¬
stand and absorb it.
Music responds to a need for the absolute,
in that it cuts through the misunderstandings
that can be caused by words, in philosophical
and religious discourse, for example. Music
appeals to sensibility and intuition and speaks
straight to the heart. It is a universal language
which brings back humanity to its true calling
of spreading tolerance and love.
Sensibility and intuition are words that are
often used to describe the way you play with
great virtuosity, but without any of the flour¬
ishes or bravura passages that attract attention
to thepianist.
What I am looking for is true expressiveness.
I want to please, but only the most demanding
ear. I do not want to make a superficial impact.
You speak of virtuosity. I admit that I have a
certain fluency, but I could just as well have
put it to some other use. I want to use my
technical gifts to strive for the purest and most
rigorous form of expression. This is not to
everybody's taste and those who see art as a
diverting pastime do not necessarily appreciate
my style of playing.
And yet when you play one can always feel
yourpleasure in the music.
Consummate art to some degree entails
achieving harmony between mind and body. I
have always looked forward to sitting down at
the piano and playing. The moment I feel that I
am anywhere near saturation point, I stop, so
that my relationship with the piano and music
remains harmonious. I am happy whenever lis¬
teners experience this unity directly, through
the interpretations I offer them. Classical
music has a spiritual and aesthetic dimension
that brings me great happiness.
Do your musical tastes owe anything to the
culture in which you grew up?
Yes and no. My approach to music is never
purely intellectual, and this is doubtless due to
my origins. To reach me, music must be
melodic before all else. I grew up in Lebanon,
between East and West, and this has certainly
played a part in shaping my tastes. All the
same, I have never made a distinction between
Oriental and Western music, but rather be¬
tween music I found beautiful and music I
didn't.
Isn't beauty a relative notion, subject to
change?
Certainly. Because with time, people mature
and absorb life's vibrations differently. Things
we find beautiful at the age of fifteen may
appear different to us when we get to thirty. I
am thinking particularly of one Chopin
concerto, which I considered sublime when I
was quite young. Today, I see the charm of this
piece as being something quite different from
what I saw then. The way I look at it has
changed and so have my feelings towards it.
When I was fifteen, I wasn't very keen on
playing Beethoven's late sonatas. I was quite
incapable of grasping or even guessing at the
suffering that haunts them. Today, I feel that
if anything ought to survive forever, it is
Beethoven's last works.
What attracts you to Beethoven?
Both the man and the artist. Beethoven is an
artist whose humanist thinking is fed by his
art. His music is truly the reflection of his per¬
sonality, the product of an outstanding mind
and a profoundly generous human being. The
intellectual stature is on a par with the feeling. I
respond to the man as much as I do to the
work, and this makes me want to play and
interpret his music.
Nothing is more difficult to achieve in art
than the marvellous balance he managed to
strike between technique and sensibility, be¬
tween form and emotion. In The Prophet, the
great Lebanese writer Khalil Gibran compared
passion to a rudderless ship and reason to a
ship with a rudder but with no sails. Instinct
must be the ally of knowledge and we must
beware of being carried away by fashions
based on the worship of spontaneity, since they
will always lack an essential dimension. In this
respect, nature sets us a fine example of har¬
mony. Look at a tree and see how beautiful it
is and yet what complexity there is beneath
its' aesthetic perfection!
In recording the whole of Beethoven's
sonatas, you have embarked on a very ambi¬
tious undertaking. What prompted you to do
this?
I have already cut seven of the nine records
that are due to be issued between now and
1994. In all, it will have taken me six years, a
year and a half more than expected. What
prompted me? One day, I felt an urge to play
all these sonatas in their chronological order.
As I did so, I realized that they formed a pro¬
gression, in the course of which the tone and
the style matured. They are a reflection of the
composer's life and psychological develop¬
ment. So I wanted to play the early sonatas in
the way suggested by this pattern of develop¬
ment, gradually moving away from the
influence of his predecessors, such as Haydn,
and trimming away features that Beethoven
himself eventually discarded, so as to reveal
their essential nature. This is an enthralling
task, but a difficult one. When I come to the
end, in early 1994, 1 shall play all thirty-two
sonatas at seven recitals extending over a
period of two and a half months at the Châtelet
auditorium in Paris.
What are yourplans after that?
At the moment, I am irresistibly drawn to
three composers. Chopin, my first great passion
at the keyboard, whom I am now rediscov¬
ering by re-reading his works and his life
especially the accounts his students left of the
way he played and taught the piano. He
emerges as a rather different person from the
Chopin we usually hear. One can see that he

deliberately set out to be simple and uncompli¬
cated, shunning facile effects and seeking
purity of expression through the depth he gave
to certain details. Chopin's music was long
played unsystematically, whereas his own
playing was more disciplined.
Then there is Schumann, whose music
overwhelms me, even though certain chords
more descriptive than expressive, and too
jerky repel me a little. Even so, his music is
sincere; it comes from the soul of a poet. It is a
token of freedom, compared with the conven¬
tions of his time.
Thirdly, there is Ravel, the only French
composer of whom I am an unconditional
admirer and whose works for piano which fit
onto only three discs, incidentally I should
really like to record. What attracts me to him is
his style, his feeling for Oriental colour
through his taste for Spanish music, and his
modesty. He drew a prodigious sound quality
from the piano.
Do you consistently look for Oriental tones
in classical music?
I am captivated by music that conjures up
memories of my childhood, quite apart from
the satisfaction it gives me as a musician and
pianist. But "local" effects, whether Oriental
or Western, are not the first thing I look for.
Beethoven would not have interested me if,
instead of expressing the human soul, he had
only reflected German culture, much as I
admire that culture. But what makes music so
precious to me is that it transcends civiliza¬
tions. It is true that we are all products of a
particular civilization, which shapes our person¬
ality in ways that we don't always realize. On
the other hand, we may have a conscious wish
to reach out to all humanity and to refine the
way we express ourselves in order to embrace
the universal. If music which has an Oriental
tone strives towards that absolute, then I'm all
for it. But if Oriental colouring is the only
thing it has to offer, then it's not what I am
looking for.
Presumably the outstanding polyphonic
qualities of the piano make it the best instru¬
ment forproducing a wide variety ofsounds.
The piano is the instrument that englobes all
the others: the human voice, woodwind and
strings, the sounds of nature. It is like an
orchestra, in the sense that it can be made to
produce bass registers, harmonies and instru¬
mental tones. But the fact remains that the
piano is a percussion instrument and it is quite
a feat to make it sing. No instrument is perfect:
it is easy to play a tied legato on a violin, but it
is sometimes difficult to grasp the rhythm.
You are invited to perform all over Europe,
in Japan, the Middle East and the United
States. European classical music gets an extra¬
ordinary reception all over the world. Does
Europe offer a similar welcome to music from
otherparts of the world?
The grandeur of classical music speaks to
our innermost selves, no matter what civiliza¬
tion we belong to. For me, there have never
been any barriers separating different musical
forms and traditions. I find the same spiritua¬
lity, the same power of expression, the same
nobility of language in great Arab music as I
do in Indian instrumental improvisations,
although they may be difficult to grasp if we
have not been taught to appreciate or under¬
stand them. We need Indian music today just
as much as we need Beethoven's symphonies.
What we must do is learn to approach these dif¬
ferent musical languages and look further than
the aspects of them which bind them to a
particular culture or period and all too often
confine them to a local setting. Thanks to record¬
ings, these musical forms are now reaching new
audiences, but much remains to be done if they
are to occupy the place they deserve.
M Do you teach?
I taught in an academy of music for two
years. At the moment, I give private lessons to
advanced students. Some of my students study
pieces which I myself have played but which
they interpret differently. This kind of com¬
parison is very instructive, in that it forces me
to examine and justify my own approach to the
works in question. I have to do this if I am to
provide my students with sustenance.
But the important thing is that students
should propose something coherent, and if
they do I encourage them to persevere in their
way of thinking. Teaching obliges people to
acknowledge the existence of diversity and, in
that sense, it leads to a truly human learning
process and compels one to look afresh at one¬
self and one's art.
What are your feelings when you give a
concert and experience those marvellous but
fleeting moments that can never be exactly
repeated?
I experience through the music a moment of
intense communion with my fellow human
beings. If my programmes were designed
merely to charm and captivate the audience,
the bond would probably not be the same. The
bond is intense because the message conveyed
by the music is also intense.
The way you face the audience changes
considerably as you get older. When you are
very young, you don't get stage-fright, but by
the time you are ten or eleven, you start to feel
it, although it is still easy to motivate your¬
self you want to pass examinations and win
diplomas, and this makes you combative. You
only really start to realize the risks you are
taking after the age of twenty. It is very fright¬
ening, an awesome responsibility, to give a
concert before the public in a hall where great
musicians have performed before you. I had to
take a firm grip on myself before I realized that
stage-fright is really a kind of pride. I saw that
I had to fight that feeling by telling myself that
what people came to hear was not me but the
music and that I wanted to offer them that
music in the way that I liked it and that they
too might like it. This completely changed my
attitude to performing in public. I no longer
felt that a concert was an occasion for me to
perform acrobatics although I can do that
but a moment of pure beauty to be shared. The
conquest of pride is a task that must be faced
every day of our lives. The lessons of humility
are endless.
