JL HE history of African migration is as old as the
history of the continent. Population movement
for political, economic, religious and security rea¬
sons, as well as in response to demographic fac¬
tors, has been recorded from early times. More
recently, however, the patterns, directions and
motivations of migration have been deeply affect¬
ed by the colonial experience, which in turn in¬
fluenced economic, social, cultural, political and
demographic development.
The major streams of internal migration in¬
clude: migration from one rural area to another
(rural-rural migration), migration from a rural to
an urban area (rural-urban migration), migration
from one urban area to another (urban-urban
migration), and migration from an urban to a
rural area (urban-rural migration). In the African
context, however, the distinction between inter¬
nal migration and migration across national front¬
iers is blurred by the cultural affinities between
societies arbitrarily demarcated into separate
States. Thus the rural-rural stream is not confined
to internal migration, indeed, most inter-country
migration is of the rural-rural type.
Why people
migrate
The decision to migrate is triggered first and fore¬
most by economic considerations. People migrate
to improve their economic well-being and when
they are unable to satisfy their aspirations within
the existing opportunity structure in their local¬
ity. This does not, of course, apply to those dis¬
placed by natural disasters, such as drought or fa¬
mine, or those fleeing war or political oppression.
Internal migration takes place in large part
in response to existing imbalances and inequali¬
ties in development, employment opportunities,
income and living conditions between the regions
of a country, the dominant direction of such
movement being dictated by the location of
employment-generating projects. Thus, where
public and private investment is concentrated in
the major city, as is the case in most African coun¬
tries, the dominant migration stream will be
directed towards the capital. Where plantations,
mines and other enterprises are located in rural
areas and offer ready employment and other op¬
portunities, a substantial stream of rural-rural
migration is to be expected. This is the case, for
example, in Tanzania, Kenya and Cameroon.
The decision regarding where and when to
move is also affected by the experiences of, and
information received from, members of the fa¬
mily who have already migrated. Migrants in
Africa take advantage of the network of relatives
and friends in the towns to ease the migration

Today more Africans than ever are on the move
and relocation process. The welfare system of the
extended family supports newly-arrived migrants
and shelters them from the strains and stresses



of the urban environment. Indeed, migration in
Africa is usually a household rather than an in¬
dependent, individual decision. Migrants also tend
to maintain links with their place of origin
through periodic visits as well as by the remit¬
tances they send back to relatives left behind.
In most of Africa, the structure of employ¬
ment is such that in plantation agriculture, indus¬
try, commerce and transportation, the demand
is mostly for men. Consequently, men tend to
migrate alone, leaving their wives and families be¬
hind, at least initially.
This has shaped the perception of the sex
roles, which tends to associate women almost ex¬
clusively with the task of housekeeper and
mother and with the economic structure of the
household. There is a lack of data about the in¬
volvement of women in the migratory process
owing to the numerical preponderance of males
in the migratory streams and the "invisibility" of
women who, as wives, merely accompany (family
migration) or join migrant males (marriage migra¬
tion). However, recent studies have shown that Tuareg on the move in Niger.
** » ~~~ *

autonomous female migration directed towards
attaining economic independence through self-
employment or wage earning has intensified.
The propensity to migrate is closely correlated
to educational attainment. Migrants are general¬
ly younger and better educated than the rest of
the population in their place of origin. This
reflects, in part, the youthful age structure and
the greater access to education by the younger
generation. Migration itself is linked to the pur¬
suit of formal and informal education in the cities,
where most post-primary institutions, apprentice¬
ship opportunities and informal sector activities
are concentrated. Since most wage employment
is centralized in cities, rural youths who invest
heavily in education must of necessity invest also
in migration if their education is to pay off.
Jn countries where cities have reached a rela¬
tively advanced stage of urbanization and eco¬
nomic development, women tend to predominate
in the cityward migration stream as their educa¬
tional status improves. The expansion of the serv¬
ice sector generates extra employment opportu¬
nities for women and this, coupled with their in¬
creased participation in wage employment, means
that the migratory sex ratio now favours women,
whereas in the early stages of city growth migra¬
tion was male dominated. Few African countries
have reached this stage. The exception is West
Africa where women have for some time been
dominant in the distributive trades. At this stage
urban-to-urban migration predominates, replacing
the rural-to-urban migration characteristic of the
initial stages of urbanization.
Many migrantscraftsmen, labourers, semi¬
skilled workers and service workersnow prefer
to migrate first to a neighbouring, medium-sized
town where they are likely to have relatives and
where cultural similarities make the adjustment
to urban life easier. For many migrants such
medium-sized towns will be their final destina¬
tion; for others, the so-called "step" migrants,
they are simply a stopping place on the route to
the capital city.
One other special category of internal
migrants has yet to be mentionedthe nomads.
These are pastoralists, most of whom are illiter¬
ate, who roam with their livestock over exten¬
sive areas with little concern for national bound¬
aries. Most nomads are to be found in Chad,
Ethiopia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Kenya and
Somalia.
The effect
on the cities
It is estimated that migration accounts for more
than half the high annual growth of the urban



population in Africa. Yet the economic bases of
cities are grossly inadequate to provide jobs, de¬
cent housing, clean water, smooth traffic circu¬
lation and a clean environment for their teem¬
ing populations.
The age selectivity in cityward migration in
predominantly non-contraceptive African socie¬
ties makes the urban age structure conducive to
high fertility. The combination of a high natural
increase and accelerating in-migration means that
Schoolboys receive
agricultural training in
Zambia.
38

Africa's urban population consists predominantly
of young adults at the stage of family formation.
As a result, Africa's major cities today appear
overwhelmed by the problems of rapid growth:
traffic jams, constant power cuts, water shortages,
slum housing and squatter settlements, uncleared
refuse and deteriorating sanitation. The age struc¬
ture of the urban population is such that this
situation is likely to continue for decades.
Migration policies aimed at alleviating these
problems are normally focused on the migrants
themselves, their place of origin and their desti¬
nation area. Two broad policy typesurban-
oriented and rural-oriented strategieshave been
applied in many African countries.
Five urban-oriented strategies have been pur¬
sued: direct controls or closed city programmes to
prevent in-migration (Republic of South Africa);
urban rustication or forced return to rural areas
(Mozambique); dispersed urbanization (Nigeria);
decentralization through the promotion of
medium-sized city growth and regional develop¬
ment (Zambia, Algeria); creation of new capitals
(Nigeria, Tanzania).
A few urban renewal programmes designed
to expand the economic and social base of the
towns to accommodate the influx of migrants
have been implemented, as have policies to make
jobs labour intensive and improve the social in¬
frastructure. In countries that have experienced
high urban unemployment among young school
leavers, selective programmes to absorb the
young unemployed migrants have been tried out,
such as the establishment of special youth camps
(Somalia, Zambia) and farm settlement schemes
(Ghana, Nigeria).
Several countries have experimented with
programmes aimed at enhancing the income of
farmers, improving employment opportunities in
rural areas and arresting out-migration at the
source. Efforts to retain or redirect migrants by
creating poles of regional growth, by shifting the
capital city or through small town development
have not achieved the desired results. Countries
that have implemented rural development
programmes through plantations in rural areas
(Tanzania, Ghana, Côte d'Ivoire), or have com¬
bined provision of social infrastructures with
rural employment opportunities, have succeed¬
ed in retaining a sizable proportion of potential
out-migrants in rural areas.
The question as to who decides who moves
and where they move to raises fundamental issues
of human rights. This is especially true in the case
of forced regrouping of people into compact
villages or forced migration to areas specified by
governments. In cases such as these the specific
needs of the people involved are not adequately
taken into consideration.
Devising
successful policies
The success of internal migration policies depends
to a large extent on a number of social, political
aékJL*
.ä M
4 «
^b*
Ft
Ml»'
1
jtL * ¿g ~^m
Kè?** w'It /
T^ A**^ ma , í~ ' 'Jy
X* *
v"-
K. 1 ~* k. E
and economic factors including: the political
system itself, the extent of government commit¬
ment, the influence of private sector investment
patterns and the effectiveness of government.
In Africa, as elsewhere in developing regions, such
policies tend to succeed when they enjoy high
national priority, a considerable allocation of
resources, effective co-ordination across various
levels of government and when policies are
centrally administered at the national level. The
poor performance of internal migration policies
in general can also be attributed to limited control
by governments over private investment in the
free market economies, the high costs of projects
and conflicting, unco-ordinated policies.
Planners in Africa have come to realize that
the fundamental causes of migration lie in social
and economic structures and that, although the
trend to cityward migration appears to be irrever¬
sible, it should not be allowed to proceed without
due policy guidance. Hence the promotion or the
development of medium-sized towns and rural
development should be seen as parallel strategies
to slow down the growth of the major cities.
At the rural end, sustained efforts should be
made to stimulate the growth and expansion of
rural informal sector activities and, where feasi¬
ble, the setting up of or active support for rural
industries and craft activities so as to diversify the
rural economy, generate additional employment
opportunities and enhance the income and living
conditions of rural populations.
Guineans In Gambia set out
on a trip to Conakry.
ADERANTI ADEPOJU
is a Nigerian economist and
demographer whose research
specialities are migration,
population policy and the
relationships between
population and development. A
former dean of the University
of Lagos, he is currently
training co-ordinator of the
UNFPA's programme on
"Population, Human Resources
and Development in Africa" at
the African Institute for
Economic Development, Dakar
(Senegal). 39
