
Practical training at
a pilot school at Bunumbu,
Sierra Leone.
Unesco and
DURING the 1960s, UNESCO's activities in
the field of teacher training were mainly
concentrated on the newly independent
countries. The departure, sometimes rather pre¬
cipitate, of former colonial administrative staff
and the desire to achieve rapid national devel¬
opment and a democratic system of education,
led most of these countries to ask UNESCO for
help in elaborating their development policies.
In this context, education, in particular the
training of teachers, was seen as a priority task.
At that time UNESCO concentrated on provi¬
ding the greatest possible amount of initial train¬
ing. With a view to increasing national capacity
to meet the shortage of qualified teachers,
national pedagogical Institutes were established
in most of these countries, existing training in¬
stitutions were strengthened, on the spot train¬
ing was provided for those who were to train
the teachers, grants were awarded for study and
finishing courses, study trips and information
exchange mechanisms were organized. UNESCO
also made specialists available for those coun¬
tries that requested expert help in revising their
educational programmes and curricula.

the training ofteachers
by André Lokisso lu'Epotu
ANDRE LOKISSO LU'EPOTU,
from Zaire, is a programme
specialist at Unesco
concerned with the training of
educational personnel
teaching at the Primary level.
He is the author of a number
of articles and is at present
preparing a study on the
school and its environment.
These efforts achieved remarkable results.
However, it soon became evident that the edu¬
cation being provided did not always meet the
needs and expectations of these new societies.
From then on improvement in quality of edu¬
cation and in the capacity level of teachers
became the prime objectives. A new type of
teacher had to be trained who could teach a
number of subjects and who was not only an
expert in the transmission of basic knowledge,
but who could also act as agents of develop¬
ment. Towards the end of the 1970s, UNESCO
adopted a new approach which laid emphasis



upon self-training, alternating training (high
quality initial training completed by follow-up,
in-work training), widening of the scope of ini¬
tial training to include out-of-school and envi¬
ronmental activities (creating a direct link bet¬
ween theoretical and practical work), training
in education for specific settings (rural areas,
specific population groups) and the introduc¬
tion of new educational technologies (in parti¬
cular those relating to the media) into the
teacher training curricula.
These new strategies involved seeking and
obtaining the participation of all the social part¬
ners in the vicinity of a school (parents, com¬
munities, companies and associations of all
kinds) in the training of teachers by ensuring
improved selection of candidates for entry into
initial training.
These innovations have been tested and
assessed in a series of pilot projects. These
include: the Bunumbu Primary Teacher Train¬
ing Project, Sierra Leone; the Kakata Rural
Teacher Training Institute, Liberia; the Namu-
tamba Pilot Project, Uganda; Institutes for the
Reform of Primary Education, Yaounde and
Buea, Cameroon; the Educational Television
Programme, Côte d'Ivoire; the Kwamisi Com¬
munity School, Tanzania; the Ghandian Project
for Fundamental Education, Wardha, India; the
Community Education Centre of Comilla,
Bangladesh; and, the Rural School Groups in
Bolivia and Peru.
The World Conference on Education for
All, held at Jomtien, Thailand, in 1990, suc¬
ceeded in broadening the scope of the notion of
basic education to include action relating to
both in-school and non-formal, out-of-school
education. It strongly recommended that
teachers should be trained as generalists, so as
to be able to ensure proper linkage between in-
school and out-of-school education, and
stressed the need for ordered progression from
the initial training given to teachers to subse¬
quent on-the-job training. The Conference also
deplored the lack of coherence between
training objectives and programmes and the
teaching methods adopted.
Since the new strategies recommended by
the Conference called for priority to be given to
on-the-job training, UNESCO decided to
develop programmes aimed at strengthening the
management skills of primary school heads.
With this in mind, a reference guide relating to
training in the day-to-day management of
schools has been drawn up, tested and perfected
in collaboration with the Agency for Cultural
and Technical Co-operation, the Common¬
wealth Secretariat, the Governments of Brazil
and Portugal, the United Nations Development
Programme, UNICEF and others.
UNESCO is also developing a programme
aimed at improving the running of one-teacher
schools and multi-grade classes. In view of the
current proliferation of schools of this type and
the financial difficulties facing most Member
States, coupled with their desire to ensure
access to education for the greatest possible
number of children, UNESCO is drawing up
another training guide to help encourage and
train teachers working in particularly difficult
conditions, as well as supervisors, administra¬
tors and trainers of trainee teachers.
UNESCO also plans to establish an inventory
of teacher training institutions which will
include an evaluation of these establishments. O 43
