fair play and the (ompetitive spirit
by Michel Caillât
Y
Carl Lewis of the United
States heads for a gold
medal in the long jump at
the Los Angeles Olympics in
1984.
ES, sport is an order of chivalry, an
honour, a code of ethics and aesthetics
which recruits from all classes and all
peoples, mixing them fraternally together
throughout the entire world. . . . Yes, sport is
education, the most concrete and the truest
form of education, that of character. . . . Yes,
sport is culture, because the ephemeral gestures
it describes in time and space for nothing
except the sheer pleasure of it, as Plato says
bring into broad daylight, by dramatizing
them, the most elementary values (which are
nevertheless the most profound and all-embrac¬
ing) of the peoples and of the very race itself;
culture, finally, because it creates beauty, and
creates it above all for those who have the least
opportunity to feast thereon."
With these words, in an address delivered in
1963, UNESCO's then Director-General, René
Maheu, evoked the great themes of sporting
mythology, which associate with the word
sport the values of loyalty, purity, beauty,
morality, and fraternity, and ascribe to it a
vocation that is both aesthetic and ethical.
Theory and practice
A recent arrival in the world of business, the
notion of ethics appears to be inherent in sport,
which could be said to be essentially ethical. It
rests on a series of powerful myths: the myth
that sport has always existed (that it is non-
historical); the myth that sport and human
nature originated in very early times (man as a
sporting animal); and the myth that sport has
somehow been led astray, perverted, hijacked.
The distinction made between sport practised
for its own sake and sport exclusively geared to
success makes for all kinds of hair-splitting

A free-fall monoski
parachutist in action.
about the extent to which an ideal which was
wishful thinking in any case has been cor¬
rupted.
What do we mean by sport? A common-
sense definition might include all forms of acti¬
vity requiring some degree of physical effort,
ranging from cycling with friends to the World
Cup final. But this definition is too broad to be
useful. A stricter definition would have us see
sport as an institutionalized competitive phy¬
sical activity that is structurally and historically
linked to industrial society. As a physical pur¬
suit that is most prevalent in societies where
competition is widespread, sport is simulta¬
neously a contest governed by rules and a
system in which human bodies are ranked
according to their performance. Competitive
sports involving physical activity whose prime
feature is a systematic striving for achievement
are thus a relatively recent social phenomenon.
Sport as we know it today has not always
existed. We therefore have to ask ourselves



what values present-day sport really embodies
and whether there is not an unbridgeable gap
between the values it purports to represent and
those which it actually brings into play.
Morality
and religion
Kant said that the postulate of morality is the
existence of God. Pierre de Coubertin, the man
who revived the Olympic Games, also took the
idea of religion as a basis for moral precepts. In
A la jeunesse sportive de toutes les nations
(1927), he states: "By renovating an institution
twenty-five centuries old, we wanted you again
to become devotees of the religion of sport as
envisioned by our great forebears. In the
modern world, so full of challenging prospects
yet so beset by the perils of decline, the
Olympic movement can become a school as
much of high and pure moral principles as of
endurance and physical energy." Coubertin
was convinced that sport, like religion, was
"closely bound to morality". Like religion,
sport offers reassurance and consolation.
Widespread practice of sport would be the
foundation of far-reaching social and ethical
reform capable of shaping a new civilization.
Sport was to rid society of ills such as alcoho¬
lism, moral depravity, wrong-doing, idleness,
and wanton eroticism, and bring about har¬
mony within nations, by settling the question
of the class struggle once and for all.
What Coubertin called his philosophico-
religious doctrine has inspired the vast majority
of thinkers, journalists and writers past and
present who believe implicitly in the thera¬
peutic virtues of sport and its purported ability
to "perfect the soul by perfecting the body". In
1942, in the middle of the war, Maurice Baquet,
the theoretician of the French Communist
Party, wrote that competitive physical activity
brings us closer to "the creation of the ancient
38

In 1990, 80 European
parachutists over Niort
(France) set a new women's
world record for the largest
free-fall parachute formation.
MICHEL CAILLAT,
of France, has published
several books on sport
including L'idéologie du sport
en France (1989; "The
Ideology of Sport in France")
and Sport en miettes (1981;
"Sport in Smithereens"). He
is also the co-author of
studies on the Olympic
movement and on the world
of football.
ideal of man as beautiful, good and brave both
on and off the sportsfield". Some twelve years
later, at the other end of the French political
spectrum, the Gaullist Essai de doctrine du
sport noted that "the moral essence of sporting
activity is not unselfishness but loyalty. . . . Fair
play is the basic tenet of sport. . . . Fairness gua¬
rantees the authenticity of the values estab¬
lished on the field. It brings a human quality to
the world of sport. ... As a factor of individual
self-fulfilment and as an indispensable element
of social organization, sport contributes to
human advancement".
When people talk about sport, they always
seem to be talking about what ought to be
rather than what is. Sport has always been in
jeopardy. The hour of its birth was the hour
when the first symptoms of its sickness
appeared and the first anguished calls for a cure
were made. As long ago as 1902, Pierre de
Coubertin denounced the immorality of row¬
dyism and pleaded that sport should be allowed
to flourish in an atmosphere of disinterestedness
and chivalry. Institutionalized sport is being
undermined by money, violence, cheating,
politicization, nationalism and doping. But
those who worship sport regularly demand that
"this scandalous state of affairs should be
brought to an end and the moral code of sport
should be defended". Perhaps this is a good
moment to ask point-blank whether there is a
morality of sport.
Infringements
of human rights
From an ethical standpoint, it is impossible to
justify an action solely on the grounds of its
effectiveness. This being so, does it make sense
to talk of ethics in competitive sport? Athletes,
whatever their level, are trained for the single-
minded pursuit of victory victory over an
opposing team, victory over themselves or the
weather, or victory for their country. This gives
rise to sport's great illusion the omnipotence
of the athlete's body. Yet competitive sport
above all entails dispossession of the body,
which is dragged into the maw of the system
too soon (the problem of intensive training at
an early age tends to be overlooked), roboti-
cized by attempts to achieve maximum 39

Below, opening ceremony of
the eleventh Olympic Games,
Berlin 1936.
Below right, master and
pupil. The question of how
much training young
athletes should do is a
controversial one.
efficiency, bruised and scarred by self-inflicted
suffering, risk-taking and injury, dominated,
regimented, alienated, and turned into a com¬
modity. In this mad race for achievement, in-
strumentalized athletes will do anything to see
the colours of their country, region or village
hoisted atop the flagpole.
The moral code governing competitive
sport is one of effort, sacrifice and violence,
symbolic or otherwise. In the sporting system,
athletes are sorted and classified, singled out,
eliminated and selected. Athletes, whether they
are champions or run-of-the-mill performers,
have a kind of love-hate relationship with their
bodies. They have to go to the limits of their
capacities in order to experience intense joy in
the midst of agonizing pain. This is "asceticism
in joy" but also a form of moral indoctrination,
since it imposes values like elitism, abstinence,
submission, obedience and deprivation that are
the cement binding our society together.
To talk of an ethic of competitive sport is to
express a belief in the innate purity of sport, in
an ideal perverted by society and the use that is
made of it. It is also to refuse to see that sport
has all too often been an accomplice of human
rights abuses. In 1936, the sporting movement,
supported by political circles and the press, had
no scruples about holding the eleventh
Olympic Games in Berlin. In 1956, the Mel¬
bourne Games were inaugurated at the very
moment when Soviet tanks were "pacifying"
their fraternal state of Hungary. Twelve years
later, in Mexico City, the Olympic flame was
lit only a few days after Warsaw Pact troops
had invaded Czechoslovakia and only a few
hours after a demonstration by Mexican stu¬
dents and workers on the "Square of Three
Cultures" had been ruthlessly put down, with
forty deaths. In 1978, the World Soccer Cup
held in Argentina, where people were then
disappearing or being murdered in their thou¬
sands, took place only a few metres away from
a place where people had been tortured. Is it
acceptable for a major sporting competition to
be held in a country where there are massive
and systematic human rights violations? This
issue was raised again in 1980 by those who
wished to boycott the Moscow Olympics.
Once again, the sporting community of
players, journalists and administrators fell back
behind an inflexible and unacceptable line of
defence: sport and politics do not mix.
From the Berlin Olympics to the Moscow-
Olympics, a long list of events paint a sorry pic¬
ture of the Olympic ideal and sporting ethics.
Sport is the darling of governments, as long as it
causes no trouble. It is a world of phantasms, a
quest for the absolute, not for truth. Writing of
the moral value of the scientific outlook,
Stendhal proclaimed his enthusiasm for mathe¬
matics, in which "hypocrisy is impossible". By
subscribing to what Marcel Mauss called "an
obligatory belief of society", athletes and specta¬
tors agree to pull the wool over their own eyes
and participate in a form of hypocrisy. O
».* "1 - ' ~-v -
' ' 1 » * 1 'f
40 **'.. .
