The moral
imperative
by Karl Otto Apel
Contrary to the view
of some modern thinkers,
a universal ethic complements
and even guarantees the right
to be different
EUROPEAN universalist philosophy and
I am thinking particularly of moral phi¬
losophy and the philosophy of law has
always shown itself ultimately to be, in its poli¬
tical and economic implications, the ideological
expression of Eurocentric power. That, at any
rate, is how it appears even now to the peoples
of the Third World, who find the framework it
provides inappropriate for the expression of
their aspirations. Excluded from the debate
about themselves, strangers to European ideas
about universality, which to them smack of
colonialism, they are not permitted, for
example, to participate in the deliberations of
the World Bank or to attend the great interna¬
tional summits so as to adequately defend their
interests.
Even when their élites are accorded a
worldwide audience, they remain prisoners, at
least in economic terms, of the perspective
imposed by the interests of the wealthy coun¬
tries. This view tends to accord a priori uni¬
versal validity to the decisions of the great arbi¬
ters of international economic life, including 13

Multi-image (1991),
by the Indian artist Naresh
Singh, who wished to evoke
in this portrait of a woman
with a fathomless gaze "the
age-old serenity of ancient
civilizations".
14
those relating to the reduction or cancellation
of Third World debt.
Even if one believes that the inequalities of a
market economy based on capitalism represent
an irreversible achievement of the cultural his¬
tory of humankind and I personally do not
it in no way follows that the socio-political fac¬
tors that underlie the economic power
structure linking rich and poor countries are
naturally pre-ordained.
On the other hand, no one would dispute
that it is the rich countries of Europe and
North America, and one must also add Japan,
that are primarily responsible for the current
world ecological crisis, both directly through
their uncontrolled waste of energy and toxic
emissions and indirectly where the destruction
of tropical forests by Third World agricultura¬
lists is concerned. At a time when the threat of
nuclear conflict seems to have been largely
lifted, the world ecological crisis constitutes the
best argument for a strict, universally appli¬
cable moral code.
That said, I would like to put forward an
argument which seems to me to confirm the link
between the European intellectual tradition and

its claims to universality. It is a historical fact
that ever since the start of the conquest of the
world by Europe, the repeated and constant
condemnations of such tragic manifestations of
this imperialism as the extermination of the
Indians or the African slave trade have them¬
selves proceeded from the universalist thinking
of European philosophers. This is as true of
Latin-American "liberation" theology and phi¬
losophy as it is of "dependence theory". It
holds true to the point that in the fields of
morality or legal theory it is hard to imagine
any philosophy with universalist pretensions
that could attract consensus support around the
world starting from premises other than those
of the tradition of European thought. This
seems to confirm the universalist vocation of
Europe, even if at present it amounts to no
more than pious intentions.
For and against a universal
morality
It is a remarkable and irritating fact that all the
names that count in the world of thought
today are critical of the idea of a universal
morality, which they consider to be useless,
superfluous or even impossible. So-called
"post-modern" philosophers such as Jean-
François Lyotard or the late Michel Foucault
also consider it undesirable, on the grounds
that universalism could stifle the variety of
individual forms of life. American neo-prag-
matists such as Richard Rorty and British
neo-Aristotelians such as Alasdair Maclntyre
go further, rejecting the very possibility of a
universal morality on the grounds that all
moral values, in Rorty's view, rest on a
consensual basis contingent on a specific cul¬
tural tradition. In Germany too, the view of
the conservative, neo-Aristotelian current
represented by such writers as H. Liibbe and
Otto Marquard is that a universal morality
transcending local differences is not only
impossible but undesirable. They hold that the
desire to assess the values attached to the
conventions and institutions of each cultural
tradition would do more harm than good.
It is worth noting that accepting the accuracy 15

16
of all these critiques would implicitly confirm
the view of Third World intellectuals that uni¬
versalisai is merely Eurocentric imperialism in
another guise. So Europe's universalist mission
arouses hostility both inside and outside the
continent. Basically its critics tend to deny the
very possibility of achieving a macroethic of
universal law recognized by all the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, for example or
of a concerted approach to resolving the great
problems confronting humanity such as the
world ecological crisis.
Commenting on his great unfinished His¬
tory of Sexuality, the French thinker Michel
Foucault deplored the fact that classical Greek
morality based on "care for oneself", whose
goal was for each individual to find self-
fulfilment through a personal lifestyle, was sup¬
planted by the Christian Stoicism of Kant and
"a universal law imposed in the same way on
every reasonable being". He went on to reject



the very idea of a universal morality in the fol¬
lowing terms: "The quest for a moral formula
that would be acceptable to everyone in the
sense that everyone would have to submit to it
seems to me to be catastrophic". It is true that
shortly afterwards, when he was asked whether
human rights have a universal value, he felt
obliged, as the progressive militant he also was,
to reply in the affirmative. This internal contra¬
diction seems to me to result from the incom¬
patibility between Foucault's critique of power
and his post-Nietzschean conviction that all
discourse, including his own, is nothing other
than an act of power, the expression of a will to
power.
Currently critics of Eurocentrism look to
post-modern attacks on rationality, universa¬
lisai and the theory of consensus, and Sao
Paulo and Mexico City affirm as ardently as
Paris and the International College of Philo¬
sophy the right to plurality and to variety in
face of the ubiquitous tyranny of universal
reason. But what theoretical interest is there in
such a polarization?
If it were only a matter of demonstrating
the limits of certain types of rationality tech-
nico-instrumental, strategic or systemic-func¬
tional or establishing a distinction between
forms of reasoning centred on theory, morality
and aesthetic expression, this critique of the
homogeneity of rational expressions would be
doing no more than pushing at an open door.
But when the critique of rationality calls
into question the fundamental identity and
unity of reason in the name of difference and
plurality, it overshoots the mark and threatens
the very diversity that it aims to protect from
the reductionist tendencies of European
thought. For if this prodigious diversity really
exists and the ultimate goal of human commu¬
nication is to develop an awareness of it, does
the stress put exclusively on basic "difference"
and "otherness" not risk encouraging be¬
haviour similar to that of the first colonists who,
when confronted with beings very different
from themselves, considered them as not
human and so saw nothing wrong in massa¬
cring them or transforming them into beasts of
burden?
The consensus
ETHIC
It will be objected that that is not what the
postmodern critiques of the unity of reason
seek to demonstrate. What they try to do,
rather, is to win acceptance for the idea that the
essential differences with regard to the funda¬
mentals of morality and value judgements are
Minerve écrivant les droits
de l'homme
(1790, "Minerva Inscribing
the Rights of Man"), an
allegorical work by the
French historical painter
Jean-Baptiste Baron.

irreducible and irrational. Max Weber used to



say that humanity practised moral "poly¬
theism", and one simply had to accept the fact.
I believe that the task now facing us is not
to set the particularism and self-concern of
individual existences against universal value-
structures, but rather to seek an accommoda¬
tion between an exacting universal morality
and the values of neo-Aristotelian individua¬
lism. As Kant realized, this would imply that
the ethics of great universal principles should
take precedence over a value-system founded
on self-fulfilment. In fact such an approach
would benefit individual aspirations, for ever
since the promulgation of Roman law inspired
by Stoicism, moral and legal progress in the
field of human rights , has always brought
advances with respect to individual particular¬
ism. It is in their inability to understand this
that the postmodern philosophers who set par
ticularisms against the unity of normative
reason have failed.
The consensus ethic, on the other hand,
allows for two-way communication, and concil¬
iation between the universal norms of an exact¬
ing morality and the burgeoning demands of
self-fulfilment in all its multiple manifestations.
This exercise in conciliation must involve the
search for a rational consensus rather than inti¬
midation or manipulation, which rely for their
effect on force.
To end on a personal note, I would
conclude that even in the domain of morality,
Europe's universal vocation is both an impossi¬
bility and a goal to strive for. As for knowing
whether it will be achieved and whether
Europe will succeed in dissociating itself
sufficiently from a manifestly Eurocentric ideo¬
logy of power, only time will tell.
Karl Otto Apel is a German
philosopher who has been
Professor Emeritus at the
University of Frankfurt since
1990. A specialist in
hermeneutics, he is the
author of an important body
of work covering in particular
the philosophy of language
and communication. His 2-
volume Transformation der
Philosophie (1973) has been
translated into eight
languages.
17
