A DREAM CITY BUILT ON SALT
WORLD HERITAGE by Roy Malkin
70
Right, an engraving from Claude-Nicolas Ledoux's book L'Architecture (1804)
showing an overall view of Chaux, the ideal city Ledoux dreamed of building
around the nucleus of the royal saltworks at Arc-et-Senans.
Above, the saltworks as they are today.

DEEP in rural France, on a wide plain
beneath the foothills of a mountain
range, stands a group of massive
stone buildings arranged in a semi-circle and
surrounded by a high wall. They have vast
tiled roofs, neo-classical pillars, porticoes and
pediments which dwarf the modern village
houses around their precinct. There is some¬
thing strange and otherworldly about them,
perhaps because of their lack of context;
Who built them? What for? And why here in
the midst of fields? When one learns that
they harbour a centre for reflection on the
future, the mystery deepens, before being
resolved when one discovers that they are
actually a piece of futurology themselves: an
eighteenth-century French architect's vision,
partly realized in the twilight of the ancien
régime, of how a modern industrial society
should look and be organized.
The buildings in question are those of
the Royal Saltworks at Arc-et-Senans, a vil¬
lage not far from Besançon in the region of
Franche-Comté. They have a theatrical set¬
ting between the forest of Chaux to the west
and, to the east, the ramparts of the Jura
massif, which make a spectacular backcloth
as they rise in a series of plateaux towards
the Swiss border.
Salt is a universal necessity, and in the
days before refrigeration it was even more
necessary, to preserve perishable food, than
it is today. "Man can live without gold but
not without salt," wrote Julius Caesar, and in
ancient times this precious commodity was
actually known as "white gold". During the
ancien régime in France salt was particularly
indispensable as a source of revenue to the
crown, which held a monopoly on its distri¬
bution. A tax known as the gabelle was
levied on salt and collected by intermedia¬
ries, the Farmers-General, who each year
paid a lump sum to the king for the privilege.
The gabelle was a highly unpopular tax, and
salt became in the popular mind a hateful
symbol of royal absolutism.
Salt has been produced in the Jura ever
since the Iron Age. The town of Salins, some
twenty kilometres away from Arc-et-Senans
in a valley of the Jura foothills, had become
rich and powerful in medieval times because
of the brine that lay deep beneath its streets.
For many centuries Salins brine was evapo¬
rated into salt in vast cauldrons heated by
firewood from the surrounding hills (the
word Jura is a synonym for a wood or
forest). By the second half of the eighteenth
century, however, the saltworks of Salins
were in crisis. With the passing of the ages
the brine had become increasingly diluted,
so that more and more fuel already
scarce was needed to supply the furnaces.
In 1771 it was decided that a new royal salt¬
works was needed in the region. To design
and build it Louis XV called on a thirty-
eight-year-old architect and decorative de¬
signer, Claude-Nicolas Ledoux.
Ledoux had won a reputation as a de¬
signer of houses for members of fashionable
society, a profession he would follow until
the Revolution. He had written the article on
Architecture for the Encyclopaedia of
Diderot and D'Alembert. He built the
Pavillon de Louveciennes for Madame du
Barry, the king's favourite, and it was at her
instigation that in 1771 he was appointed by
the king Inspecteur Général des Salines de
Franche Comté. Now he had a commission
that any ambitious architect might dream of:
building an entire new industrial facility
from nothing.
Ledoux familiarized himself with the ter¬
rain of Franche-Comté, and by 1773 he had
found what seemed to be an ideal location: a
clearing in the middle of the royal forest of
Chaux between the two small villages (today
united into one) of Arc and Senans. The
forest offered a seemingly inexhaustible
supply of wood. Brine would be brought
from Salins at the rate of 135,000 litres a day
by means of a twenty-kilometre-long under¬
ground pipeline which would be made from
hollowed-out tree trunks and be guarded by
the military. Some idea of the size of the op¬
eration can be gauged from the fact that
15,000 fir trees would be felled for the pipe¬
line alone. Ledoux enthused over the site he
had chosen: "lying between two rivers, near a
forest 40,000 acres in extent, in the centre of
the continent; linked to the Mediterranean by
the Dole canal, and to the North Sea and the
port of Antwerp by the Rhine."
The plans that were drawn by Ledoux
and eventually accepted by the king made
provision for the buildings disposed in a
closed semi-circle that can still be seen today.
At the centre of the main axis was a
Director's Villa, flanked by other buildings
in which the brine would be evaporated. In
the interests of aesthetic uniformity the latter
would not have chimneys: the smoke would
be evacuated through dormer windows in
the roof. In the curve of the semi-circle were
the dwellings in which artisans carpenters,
smiths, coopers and so onand their fami¬
lies would live, some 240 people in all. There
would also be a prison, for the director of an
eighteenth-century royal saltworks in France
wielded absolute power; at Arc-et-Senans no
workman could leave his dwelling or work¬
place without being seen from the Director's
Villa. The semi-circular space enclosed by
the buildings would be used for stocking the
vast quantities of wood needed to evaporate
some 100,000 tons of brine each year.
Building work began in 1775 and four
;yt'. iií
Roy Malkin is editor
of the English-
language edition of
the Unesco Courier. 71

The villa of the
Director of the
saltworks flanked by
the salt-making
workshops.
72
WORLD HERITAGE
years later salt was being produced at Arc-
et-Senans. However, it soon became clear
that output would not live up to expecta¬
tions. It had been hoped to produce 60,000
quintals of salt annually, but production
hardly reached 35,000-45,000. There were
several reasons for this disappointing perfor¬
mance. The brine from Salins was less and
less salty, and in any case much of it seeped
out of the pipeline from leaks caused by As¬
suring of the wood and badly made joints.
Ledoux had built an immense 500-metre-
long wooden shed known as a bâtiment de
graduation, in which the brine was supposed
to evaporate naturally by exposure to wind
and Sun, thus becoming more concentrated
and requiring less fuelwood in the final
cooking process. The Jura climate proved
inimical to this system.
In 1806 the saltworks were sold to a
private company which exploited them
throughout the nineteenth century. The
hollow trunks were replaced by steel piping
and coal took the place of wood. But still the
saltworks were barely viable, and production
finally ceased in 1895. In the 1930s the buil¬
dings were bought by the local authorities,
restored and later classified as a historic
monument by the French Government.
Since 1972 they have been the Headquarters
of the Fondation Claude-Nicolas Ledoux as
a "Centre International de Réflexion sur le
Futur". In 1982 the monument was included


on UNESCO's World Heritage List.
Ledoux did not forget the Royal Salt¬
works. In fact they seem to have obsessed
him until the end of his life. During the
Revolution, when he was imprisoned for a
time and narrowly escaped the guillotine, he
dreamed of an Ideal City and drew plans for
it. The nucleus of the city, which he named
Chaux, was the saltworks he had built in
Franche-Comté years before.
Using the cubes, cylinders, pyramids,
spheres and other geometric shapes for which
he had a predilection, he set out to develop a
style of architecture to meet the needs of a
new classless society. The principles and ideas
on which the city of Chaux would be based
he set forth in a remarkable book, L'architec¬
ture considérée sous le rapport de l'art, des
mcurs, et de la législation, which he wrote
during the Revolution. "People!" he wrote in
the preface, "Unity so worthy of respect for
the importance of each individual of which
you are composed, you shall not be forgotten
in the constructions of art; at appropriate dis¬
tances from the cities, monuments rivalling
those of the palaces of the governors of the
globe will rise in your name."
Ledoux wished each building in Chaux
to be "an edifice marked by the function
accorded to it." The houses of craftsmen
would symbolize in their architecture the
trades of those who would live in them. The
cooper's house would have a hoop-like
shape; that of the woodcutter would
resemble a pile of logs. In Ledoux's draw¬
ings, the gunsmith's house looks like a group
of smoking pyramids. This would be what
Ledoux called "une architecture parlante"
whose overall effect would be that of "a kind
of visual encyclopaedia of the members of
society and of their respective duties." Some
buildings and their designs would also be
identified with moral values and contribute
to the education of the people who would
belong to the new society. There would be a
Temple of Reconciliation, an Asylum of
Happiness, a Temple of Memory.
None of Ledoux's Utopian plans for an
Ideal City ever came to fruition. Long for¬
gotten, they have fascinated many modern
architects and city planners. Perhaps for want
of a better label, the style of the nucleus of
buildings the visitor to Arc-et-Senans can still
see today has been described as "Revolutio¬
nary Architecture"although of course it
was built in the reign of Louis XVI.
And so these stone buildings, today
marooned incongruously in the middle of a
plain in Franche Comté, are both a begin¬
ning and an end, a memorial to a lost cause, a
signpost along a road that industrial society
might have taken but did not. O
