1
4 rerf (flfrf for fhe round bull
by Francois Thébaud
16
FRANÇOIS THEBAUD
is a French journalist who has
covered all the major
international football
competitions since the end of
the Second World War. He
was the founder/editor-in-
chief of the football magazine
Le Miroir du football (1959-
1977) and is a former sports
writer on the Swiss daily
paper La Tribune de
Lausanne. His biography of
the Brazilian footballer Pelé
was published in the United
States by Harper and Row in
1976.
AY 1964, the National Stadium in
Lima 320 dead; June 1968, the River
Plate Stadium in Buenos Aires 80
dead; January 1971, Ibrox Park in Glasgow
66 dead; February 1974, Cairo 48 dead;
October 1982, the Luzhniki Stadium in
Moscow 99 dead; May 1985, the Heysel Sta¬
dium in Brussels39 dead; April 1989, Hills¬
borough, Sheffield 94 dead.
The settings for all these tragedies were
football stadiums, and their victims were men,
women and children who were there to watch a
big soccer match. Since no other sport has ever
been plunged into mourning by catastrophes
on such a scale, perhaps we should ask our¬
selves whether there is not some sort of special
relationship between soccer and violence.
Soccer supporters resent this accusation
against the most popular of all sports. They
argue that violence is endemic in modern
society, where it takes the most varied forms,
from mass slaughter on the battlefield to delin
quency and crime. Soccer stadiums are not
exempt, because the people who flock to them
are also products of society.
If that is true, why is it, then, that athletics
meetings and basketball or rugby matches are
not prone to the same baleful effects of their
social environment and do not give rise to the
kind of scene that so horrified those who wit¬
nessed the Heysel disaster on television?
TOO LITTLE TOO LATE
Soccer Association Football is clearly not at
the root of the violence. Yet it seems to offer
people more opportunities to get it out of their
system, primarily because in the 166 countries
affiliated to the Fédération Internationale de
Football Association (FIFA), it is the most
popular sport in terms of the number of people
who play it, the size of its public, and the pas¬
sions it arouses.
Packing people together like sardines on the
lower-priced terraces often leads to incidents

-*.. ^ -
In April 1989 wreaths and
flowers cover the pitch at
Anfield, the stadium of
Liverpool Football Club (UK),
in memory of the club's
supporters who had died a
week before during a
crush at Hillsborough,
Sheffield, before the
F.A. Cup semi-final.
that are not always reported in the press.
However, when the people on the terraces are
fans who have come to give "their" team
unconditional support and to exhibit equally
unconditional hostility towards the opposing
side and its supporters, the resulting crush
inevitably tends to degenerate into violence.
Attempts have been made to separate the
different groups of supporters and cordon
them off in enclosures situated well away from
one another, as well as keep close watch on
them when they enter or leave the ground, but
these measures have proved inadequate, as the
Heysel tragedy showed. Club managers and
sporting federations came to realize that far-
reaching changes were needed in the design of
stadiums, which often dated from pre-war
times, and even as far back as the early years of
the century in the case of the United Kingdom.
In theory, stadiums hosting international
matches are now supposed to have only seated
accommodation, not so much for the comfort
of the spectators as for safety reasons. Further¬
more, they are fitted out with electronic sur¬
veillance devices capable of detecting the slight¬
est sign of violence and enabling the police to
take rapid action.
The amateur spirit in rugby
The vast number of people attending soccer
matches is not sufficient in itself to account for
the game's unfortunate propensity for violence.
In both Europe and Oceania, rugby matches
attract crowds of 50,000, and no serious inci¬
dent has ever been recorded. Rugby is a sport
that is just as "manly" as soccer in certain res¬
pects, but it attracts a different public and does
not trigger off the same reactions.
Rugby football crowds have not changed
since the 1950s. They come from much the
same background, continue to believe in ama¬
teur sport and do not attach undue importance
to results. They are more interested in the spirit
of the game and the standard of play. They
keep their cool when the result or the refer-
eeing are controversial, and the stands remain
models of calm and good behaviour even when
the match is being fiercely contested on the
pitch.
By contrast, European soccer crowds have
changed almost beyond recognition. Manual
workers, who formed the bulk of the spectators
on the terraces before the Second World War,
have been replaced by white collar workers,
and middle class supporters sit in the stands.
Professional soccer is also increasingly domi¬
nated by the financial pickings at stake in big
matches. Winning is the main, if not the only,
obsession of players and spectators alike. The
way in which victory is achieved and the qua¬
lity of the game itself take second place. The
print media and television are partly to blame
for this by cutting back on the amount of space
and time they give to comment and analysis of
technical skills and the fine points of the game.
This being so, why should soccer support¬
ers be interested in soccer for its own sake, in
the quality of play, tactics and skills? Why
should they not contribute to the result by
taking part in the match? Intimidating the
referee and the players of the opposing side by
threats, insults and bottle or stone-throwing is
commonly the curtain-raiser to the outbreaks
of fighting between supporters and the ensuing
panic that are the direct cause of the tragedies
we have mentioned.
Nationalism and violence
Soccer fans did not always behave like this. Not
all that long ago, they often had an opportunity
to express their pleasure and enthusiasm during
matches which left spectators with the feeling
that they had shared an enjoyable experience.
What splendid memories we still have of the
Soccer is "the most popular
sport In terms of the number
of people who play it, the
size of its public, and the
passions it arouses".
17

France vs. Australia in the
Rugby Football World Cup,
Sydney (Australia), 1987.
matches played by the Hungarian and Brazilian
teams of the 1950s, or the performances of lead¬
ing clubs like Real Madrid or Rheims in the
1960s! And what about those never-to-be-for¬
gotten F.A. Cup Finals in England when,
before the kick-off, the 100,000 spectators in
Wembley Stadium became an immense choir
singing with one voice and creating an atmos¬
phere of fellowship in which the beauty of the
game was all that mattered. Great moments like
these are all too rare nowadays.
Instead of providing an occasion for peace¬
ful confrontation between styles of play
reflecting the different geographical, historical,
economic and cultural backgrounds of the
opposing sides, international competitions have
often become head-on clashes, with no holds
barred. During the World Cup and the Inter¬
continental Cup-winners' Cup there have been
many unpleasant examples of negative attitudes
to the game which spectators have not only
failed to condemn but in some cases have even
condoned.
National anthems played before matches by
brass bands and sung by the supporters clearly
do not encourage serenity on the terraces or
fair play on the field. But those who call for an
end to these practices of another age have not
been listened to in the world republic of foot¬
ball, where voluntary submission to a common
law the law of the game ought to exclude
any form of chauvinism that leads to violence.
IS SOCCER
REALLY BLAMELESS?
After the Heysel tragedy, the culprits were ini¬
tially sought among the "hooligans", who
work off their frustrations in the tightly packed
crowds at football grounds. However, as the
enquiry proceeded, it became clear that there
was no straightforward explanation for the vio¬
lence that had taken place. Violence is a pro¬
duct of society and of its contradictions and
shortcomings, and football stadiums are not
immune to it. However, the world of Associa¬
tion Football itself is not as blameless at it
would have us believe. Managers, trainers,
players and referees, journalists and spectators
must all realize that the battle against sectarian
nationalist attitudes and in favour of sports¬
manship is first and foremost theirs. This may
not bring violence in football stadiums to an
end, but at least it may help to limit its inci¬
dence and its consequences.
18
