LStâte of transition
Framing a new constitution for a new South Africa
by GeraW Gordon end Dennis Davis J
'G
Towards Emancipation (1988).
, a iinocut by the South African
artist Sydney Seiepe.
lo back; look at the baby in his mother's
arms; . . . listen to the first words which awaken
his dormant powers of thought; and take notice
of the first struggles he has to endure. Only then
will you understand the origin of the prejudices,
habits, and passions which are to dominate his
life. The whole man is there, if one may put it
so, in the cradle,
"Something analogous happens with nations.
People always bear some marks of their origin.
Circumstances of birth and growth alfect all the
rest of their careers,
"If we could go right back to the elements
of societies and examine the very first records of
their histories, we should there find the first cause
of their prejudices, habits, dominating passions
and all that comes to be called the national
character,"
Alexis de Tocqueville's words, in his classic
Democracy in America (1835), can aid in an under¬
standing of South Africa's enormous problems
in its present hoped-for transition from a semi-
28
authoritarian State to a democracy. When Presi¬
dent de Klerk on 2 February 1990 unbanned the
African National Congress (ANC) and other
organizations of opposition to his Government's
apartheid ideology, he was releasing passions that
had been born in the preceding three centuries.
In the light of South Africa's history and the
"prejudices, habits, passions and national
character" to which de Tocqucville referred, the
country is far from being ripe for democracy.
There is hardly a common national character; the
disparity of wealth between the richest 10 per
cent and the poorest 50 per cent is one of the
highest in the world and at least half the popula¬
tion is illiterate.
What makes the situation even more difficult
is that a sovereign country like South Africa has
no big brother to lend it a helping hand in its
aim to substitute a wholesome democracy for the
apartheid régime. Rhodesia went through its tran¬
sition to independence as Zimbabwe v.'ith Lan¬
caster House to turn to. Likewise Namibia had
a big brother in the United Nations, But South
Africa has no such State or body to supervise the
processing and adoption of a new constitution.
The price of so\'erelgntv is solitude.
In cases where there is no supervising
authority, forces competing for control of the
processing and adoption of a new constitution
have two alternatives. Thev must either fight
their opponents in order to gain control f;f the
machinery of the future government or negotiate
with them to share or divide that control. Bv
agreement thev may use the existing constitu¬
tional structure. If agreement is not attainable
they have to sweep the old constitution aside.
Understandably, in this context, organiza¬
tions like the ANC are not prepared to allow the
existing South African Parliament to legislate a
new constitution into existence. If this Parliament
were allowed to do so, it would be continuing
the long legal line back to the establishment of
the Union of South Airica in 1910. There is one
reas(m why it mav be argued that the long line
mu.st be broken. An unbroken line would be legal
but It -would lack legitimacy: it would not be
based on the norms and values of a desirable
society. It IS thus contended that the question of
a new constitution must be approached in a
vacuum.
T'here is also another reason. It involves the

A march organized in Cape
Town on 1 February 1991
against the exclusion of black
South Africans from
Parliament, in centre, Walter
Sisuiu, a leading figure in the
anti-apartheid struggle.
GERALD GORDON QC,
of South Africa, is a former
leader of the Cape Bar.
President of South African PEN
and patron of the South
African League for Civil Rights,
he IS the author of a number
of legal works and of three
novéis.
DENNIS DAVIS,
of South Africa, is professor in
the School of Law of the
University of the
Witwatersrand. Director of the
Centre of Applied Legal
Studies and of the Society for
the Abolition of the Death
Penalty, he is the author of a
number of legal worl<s.
question of how far the opposition parties feel
they can trust the Nationalist Government. And
this turns on the question 


of the motivation for
the now famous unbanning on 2 February 1990
of the ANC and the other opposition bodies such
as the Pan African Congress and the Communist
Party. Critics of the Nationalist Party (NP) claim
that the true reason for the unbanning was that
political and economic pressures on the interna¬
tional front had become too severe more than
the South African Government could face any
longer. At last it realized its enormous depen¬
dence on the financial and technological resources
of the international community.
The purported aim of the present great move
towards democracy for South Africa is to be seen
against the world background of an international
cc:>mmitment to democracy after the fall of Euro¬
pean communism.
All in all, therefore, the way seemed open
for the Nationalist C}overnment to meet its old
opponents at the negotiating table. Short of
revolution and civil war which has been the
lot of man)' countries in Africa recently it
was and is the only way. And negotiation in
turn revolves around the question of power.
While all the political parties (including
organizations like the ANC which do not as yet
regard themselves as "parties") are bargaining
their way to a new South Africa and a new con¬
stitution, there has to be an interim constitution
in control of law, order and peace. The drafting
of the new constitution and its ultimate adoption
are part of the negotiations and so the various par¬
ties have to come together to decide on the
logistics of control.
The questions posed are: is the present
government to be allowed to control the transi¬
tion process.' And to continue to hold the instru¬
ments of power? Is there to be some interim set¬
up to displace the government? If so, how is it
to be constituted? By elections? Who will con¬
trol these? And what voters' roll will be used?
The existing ones which exclude the 20 million
Africans? And who is to set the timing, pace and
placing of the elections?
Apart, however, from disputes concerning
the mechanism for transition, the principal par¬
ties involved will doubtless focus their attention
on the drafting of a new constitution. 29

30
The major parties, in particular the NP and
the ANC, have published constitutional
proposals. There is a surprising measure of agree¬
ment in respect of important aspects of the con¬
stitution. Both agree on the need for an electoral
system based on proportional representation.
Both agree that the lower house in parliament
should be elected by universal suffrage. There is
consensus regarding the need to incorporate a
justiciable Bill of Rights into a new constitutitm.
After much dispute, there now seems to be little
doubt that a constitutional court will be created
to supervise the operation of the Bill of Rights.
There remain, however, important points of
difference. The ANC believes in a unitary svstem
of government with strong central powers, which
It considers necessary if the social and economic
legacies 


of apartheid are to be addressed. The NP
IS particularly keen that power should be diffused
and therefore it insists on federalism.
It also proposes a presidential troika in which
the leaders of the three largest parties would form
a collective presidency with the chair rotating
annually, and the establishment of a second house
of parliament in which each of nine regions
would elect an equal number of representatives.
Each party gaining a specified number of votes
in a region would have an equal number of seats
of that region's allocation.
In short, the ANC proposes a system of
government oí which voluntary association is the
central pillar, while the NP has based its
proposals on the principle of an imposed coali¬
tion. This constitutes the NP's concept of "par¬
ticipatory democracy" and "power sharing".
There are also fundamental disagreements
concerning the contents of the Bill of Rights. The
NP wishes to entrench the right to own private
property which can only be expropriated in
exchange for just compensation. The ANC con¬
siders that such a clause would prevent a future
government from restoring land rights to millions
of South Africans from whom they were taken
by the policy of forced removals.
The ANC has included a range of social, eco¬
nomic and environmental provisions in its Bill
of Rights. It contends that within the context of
South Africa such a measure must make provi¬
sion for the equal distribution of fundamental
social and economic goods throughout society.
The South African Law Commission, appointed
by the Minister of Justice, accuses the ANC of
Utopian thinking because of the wide range of
social and economic rights included in the latter's
document.
In conclusion, there does seem to be a sur¬
prising degree of consensus regarding the major
elements for a new constitution, particularly now
that the NP has jettisoned its insistence upon the
need to include protection of group rights. For
this reason there is some ground to hope that
agreement can be reached on the broad principles
for a new 


constitution.

