Pieces of music, music of pieces
by Leon Milo
64
LEON MILO
is an American composer and
percussionist. A graduate of
the Juilliard School of Music
(New York), he has been
working in France since 1989
after receiving grants from the
Fulbright Foundation. His
compositions have been
performed by the orchestra of
Radio France and by the Los
Angeles Philharmonic New
Music Group.
ACCORDING to contemporary scientific
theory, a "Big Bang" originating from an
infinitesimally small and dense object pro¬
jected countless atomic particles into space, and
these fragments, regrouping into an abundance of
elements and matter, make up the expanding and,
perhaps, eventually contracting universe.
In 1941, the composer Arnold Schoenberg
viewed "the Beginning" as a vision which only an
omniscient force could embrace and realize. "To
understand the nature of creation," he wrote,
"one must acknowledge that there was no light
before the Lord said: 'Let there be light. ..."
'There was Light' at once and in its ultimate per¬
fection	 Alas, human creators, if they be granted
a vision, must travel a long path between vision
and accomplishment . . . painstakingly connecting
details until they fuse into a kind of organism."
To transform a vision into an object, in this case
via musical composition, is a step-by-step opera¬
tion. Using an enormous vocabulary of symbols,
a composer communicates detailed musical
instructions to the performer while constantly
keeping in mind the desired shape of the final
work.
A vision of the "whole" does not, of course,
always appear to the artist as a flash of lightning
suddenly illuminating a landscape that needs
only to be transcribed onto canvas, paper or
audio tape. Even if a piece of music (oddly, the
word "piece" is used to describe an entire musical
composition) has been inspired by a non-musical
object or event that suggests a musical point of
departure, a "Big Bang" for example, it still
remains for the composer to organize, manipu¬
late and develop purely musical fragments into a
form which will be comprehensible to listeners.
"Object" and "fragment": are these modern
concepts? Do they have a relevance to our daily
lives that is specifically modern? Let us take the
dictionary definition of an object as "anything
that is visible or tangible and is relatively stable in
form." It may also be something that "can be
apprehended intellectually", and in this sense
could be applicable to a musical performance. A
fragment is "a part broken off or detached", some¬
thing that is by definition "incomplete" or "unfin¬
ished".
One composes music by combining sound
elements to create a musical structure: a con¬
tinuum of sounds. Listening to music, one relies
on memory to retain the succession of sounds that
identifies the composition as an entity. If a listener
is preoccupied with other matters or momen¬
tarily nods off during the performance, the con¬
tinuity is lost and he or she may wake up during
the last movement completely confused by the
sounds coming from the stage. Even if one is
awake throughout the performance, has one wit¬
nessed a "relatively stable" musical object?
By modifying the elements which make up the
object, conductors, performers and acoustic con¬
ditions all influence the outcome of the com¬
poser's vision and the reality that the listener expe¬
riences. If a musical performance were completely
stable we would not have a multitude of record¬
ings of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony. One would
suffice.
FROM STABILITY
TO
FRAGMENTATION
The composer's job is to build unity within a
composition so as to ensure that it is compre¬
hensible to the listener. This will hopefully out¬
weigh the various chance factors that occur during
performance.
Before the twentieth century, certain con¬
ventions of form developed that brought a degree
of stability and comprehensibility to musical
compositions. Before hearing the first perfor¬
mance of a piano concerto in the eighteenth cen¬
tury, an educated listener already knew many
things about it. The concerto would probably
have three movements medium fast, slow, and
fast with a solo cadenza section leading up to the
final chords, or coda. This cadenza was intended
to offer the soloist some freedom of expression,
imposing a minimum of constraints and enabling
him to show musicianship and virtuosity. As
time went by, even this "unstable" section of the
piece became more controlled, until finally the
cadenzas were entirely written out by the com¬
poser. So much "stability" and "built-in memory"
were present in music by the end of the nine¬
teenth century that composers could not find

nwiwv
their own form of self-expression within these
accepted conventions.
The stability factor had to be "rethought" to
achieve an expression that reflected the times.
Twentieth-century artists sought ways of making
their creations multi-dimensional, fluid and less
stable. The objects were broken down and the
fragments took on a new importance when
regrouped to create timbres of extreme purity
and complexity, rhythms of clarity and confu¬
sion, and musical forms that were less predictable
and conventional.
The Man from Vienna
(1990), acrylic on canvas by
Valerio Adami.
By the beginning of this century, a break with
conventions was evident in all the artistic disci¬
plines. Fragmentation was the underlying theme.
To see this in painting one need only compare the
work of Manet and Courbet with that of Picasso
and Klee, and more recently with that of artists
such as Robert Rauschenberg and Valerio Adami
(sec illustration).
In architecture, this "deconstructionist"
approach finds an echo in the work of Bernard
Tschumi, who describes his designs as "discon¬
tinuous" structures that explore concepts of

"superimposition" and "dissociation". He
describes his work in social terms, calling it "post-
humanist" architecture that disperses the "force
of social regulation".
In literature, compare the novels of Henry
James with the "stream of consciousness" writing
of James Joyce, or the poetry of Wordsworth
with the fragmented style of e.e. cummings,
which obliges the reader to reconstruct the dis¬
persed letters, words and ideas on the page. The
cubist painter Georges Braque concisely made the
point when he said: "I do not believe in things but
in relations between things."
VOYAGING
INSIDE SOUNDS
Each artist now finds his or her own underlying
system. Each work must find its own compre¬
hensible form and create its own universe. Michel
Zbar's Contacts for trombone (1973) is an example
of how the composer can "liberate" the performer.
The form of the piece is almost entirely decided by
the trombonist, following his own routes while
choosing pitches, rhythms and dynamics from
the pallets of musical fragments provided within
each stopping-off point. Visually this resembles
the screen image from the computer music pro¬
gram MAX, which allows a composer or per¬
former to enter sounds via microphone or elec¬
tronic keyboard and transform them in countless
ways when routed to various "object" boxes that



he or she controls via computer.
Tristan Murail, one of the founders of "spec¬
tral" music in France, is a composer whose
choices of basic musical materials and method of
construction draw on the laws of natural sci¬
ence. With the aid of computers and techniques
developed at the Institut de Recherche et de
Coordination Acoustique-Musique (IRCAM)
in Paris, Murail analyses the harmonic spectrum
or overtone series present when specific tones are
produced on various instruments.
Overtones are frequencies higher than the
fundamental pitch which occur whenever a note
is sounded. The presence or absence of over¬
tones and their balance in relation to the funda¬
mental determine the "timbre" or "tone colour"
of a sound. This explains why we can discern
the difference between an identical pitch played
on a flute and an oboe. In his composition Dés¬
intégrations, for seventeen instruments and elec¬
tronic tape, it is as if Murail took a magnifying
glass to view the minute details of the sounds
which make up the raw material of the piece.
The title refers to the composer's process of "voy¬
aging inside the sounds". The sounds are broken
down and fragmented to display their constituent
parts. In one part of the work, "the brilliant
clouds of high chimes are derived from the dis¬
integration of the timbres (overtones) of flute,
clarinet and muted trombone."
The contemporary German composer Karl¬
heinz Stockhausen devises specific methods of
working, new underlying principles and con¬
straints for each new composition. His pieces
have often been criticized on their first perfor¬
mance but have later come to be regarded as
accomplished works which shed light on new
techniques of construction and new modes of
comprehension.
"I build a whole tree of different generations
of inter-relating moments. ... I control how
much they have in common," Stockhausen has
written about his work Momente ( 1 96 1 ) for four
choirs and thirteen instrumentalists. "Instead of
starting with something very homogeneous and
66
A computerized image of a
sound.

then breaking the homogeneity . . . the tradi¬
tional concept of building a musical continuum
... I start with completely separate instants."
These "moments" are fragments of musical mate¬
rial, each exhibiting a unique character (melodic,
chordal or even rhythmic) and obeying a set of
rules that determines how often they appear and
how much they have in common.
In the language of the French composer Pierre
Boulez the term "object" takes on a special



meaning in relation to music. For Boulez, a piece
of musical material is not regarded as being "unfin¬
ished" or a "broken off" fragment, but rather as
a potential musical object which is the starting
point or model for a "structure". It is an entity
whose possibilities for being transformed into a
musical object depend on the way in which its
potentialities are unlocked and on its behaviour in
relation to other potential musical objects.
Let us take, for example, a chord played on the
piano in the low register comprised of five notes.
This objet unitaire or solitary object is the point
of departure. It has certain characteristics which,
when exploited and put into a context, could
define it as part of a musical form. If this five-note
W
SfcllUd_LLL,í
-$-
Q (U
I
m
m
r r'
-L
T* T
df9
O «=3
M
r
0 S 0
Above, the score of
Manda/a (1985), by the
Norwegian composer Rolf
Wallin.
Left, Zyklus ( 1 96 1 ), a work
for solo percussion by
Karlheinz Stockhausen.
-J 1 I. I J4Jra fc LOi-Q i
chord is followed by a chord of three notes in the
middle register, certain relationships begin to
become comprehensible.
A "structure" is created in which the two
objects are linked to each other and can have a rela¬
tionship with other objects and structures that
follow. As the American composer John Cage
has shown, even musically "foreign" objects such
as car horns or tin cans become musical objects
when put into a suitable context. Objects create
structures and form is created by the "struc¬
turing" of these local structures in their turn.
The terms that I have attempted to define
have become somewhat "less stable" as this
article has progressed. The fragment in
"modern" musical terms and in Boulez' defin¬
ition becomes more and more difficult to find.
The moment it becomes detached from the
larger structure it can be regarded as a new
entity, an object made up of its own unique
possibilities of transformation.
But this takes us back to the "Big Bang":
there too one fragmented object brought forth
numerous independent and interdependent
objects harmonizing with each other to create a
large object, in that case the universe. 6J
