Iñm in fait and Mon
îhe eternal
fastinatîon
of the red planet
by Francis Leary
A
18
CROSS the gulf of space, minds that are
to ours as ours are to those of the beasts
I that perish, intellects vast and cruel and
unsympathetic, regarded this earth with
envious eyes and slowly and surely drew their
plans against us."
Thus did H.G. Wells sound the apocalyptic
note in his famous novel The War of the
Worlds, published in 1898. These vast and
unsympathetic intellects were Martians, prepar¬
ing to invade and subjugate the planet Earth.
For Mars, the red planet and the god of war,
was a dying planet, much older than the Earth.
Mars was 235 million kilometres from the Sun,
as compared with Earth's 150 million kilo¬
metres; consequently, it had received much less
heat and cooled more rapidly. For Wells, life
on Mars must have developed earlier than on
Earth and the inhabitants had progressed much
further in technology.
Wells had good support from astronomers
of the time. When, 


in 1876, Giovanni Schiapa-
relli had trained his telescope on Mars, he dis¬
tinguished numerous sinuous indentations on
the planet's surface, which he called "canali",
correctly translated as "channels". And such
channels could only have been made by flow¬
ing water.
Percival Lowell of Harvard went further in
his analysis of Mars. From his observations in
the clear dry desert air of Flagstaff, Arizona,
Lowell concluded that the "canah" were in fact
Martian "canals" that had been created to tap
frozen water in the Martian ice-caps and carry
it to the equator where the climate was warm¬
est and most suitable for life. Lowell's precise
map of the "canals" convinced many that there
was indeed intelligent life on Mars, capable of
such engineering feats.
There have always been those with a spirit of
adventure, eager to extend the frontiers of discov¬
ery and knowledge. They believed in Mars as
Columbus had believed in the gold and spices of
the Indies. And as Columbus had dared the vast
mystery of the mighty ocean, intrepid souls
were not daunted by the 56 million kilometres
separating Earth from Mars. They longed to
know that man was not alone in the Universe,
that indeed in our own planetary system might
be found other intelligent beings with whom
humans could communicate.
While H.G. Wells, with some scientific

In this Illustration from a
NASA report on "Human
Exploration of the Solar
System in the Twenty-first
Century", two astronauts
explore the canyons of Mars.
background, had bothered to get a few basic
facts correct, later writers voyaged into realms
of fantasy. Edgar Rice Burroughs, creator of
Tarzan of the Apes, invented a world called
Barsoom, inhabited by five races: red, green,
white, yellow and black. The red race was the
highest and most like human beings. Into this
weird world came a chivalrous Virginian, John
Carter. He had reached Mars by sorcery from
an ancient witch found in an Arizona cave. The
witch knew an incantation, the recital of which,
with some cabalistic signs, sent Carter hurtling
though space to awake on Mars. Burroughs'
inventions had an enormous popularity. Appear¬
ing 


in 1917, A Princess of Mars was the first of a
lengthy series of Mars tales which would stir the
imagination of millions of readers.
A HALLOWE'EN VISITOR
FROM MARS
Just twenty-one years later, another Welles,
named Orson, demonstrated how Mars had
penetrated the human mind. Then twenty-
three, Welles produced for CBS a weekly radio
show, The Mercury Theater of the Air. On
Hallowe'en, 1938, Mercury featured a dramati¬
zation of The War of the Worlds.
Welles would do it in the form of a realistic
news broadcast from the scene of the action.
No one knew whether it would work; indeed,
right up to air time they were still fussing with
the script.
It worked all too well. After an initial
announcement of Mercury's dramatization, a
programme of dance music from the "Park
Plaza Hotel" in New York was offered. Nei¬
ther the dance band nor the hotel existed, but
that didn't concern the listeners. In the midst of
a tango came a special news flash.
The genius of Welles took over, for the
whole effect was in the timing. The first flash
simply announced that a great cylinder-shaped
object had fallen in New Jersey, near Princeton,
creating a huge hole in the ground. "And now
we return you to the Park Plaza and the music
of Rafe Racquelson."
A newsman rushed to the scene and began
alarming reports, which Welles picked up.
Emerging from the cylinder was a "big greyish
bulk, the size of a bear, that glistened like wet
leather." The horrifying monster had no chin
but a "peculiar V-shaped mouth that conti¬
nually trembled, dripping saliva" and "Gorgon
groups of tentacles like arms of an octopus."
Then the voice of Orson boomed in the role
of Professor Pierson of Princeton University,
informing listeners that this horrid creature
must be a visitor from Mars. Now came the
apparition of a great glittering robot, sweeping
the area with the Martian death-ray; everything
within its radius burst into flame. The action
built to a crescendo as other robots emerged
and began striding toward New York, causing
havoc and death. While Orson described the
panic in the streets, a real frenzy had erupted in
New York as thousands tried to escape the
Martians. Police sirens shrieked amid the tur¬
moil, but Orson went on relentlessly. Finally,
the CBS studio was invaded, not by a hundred-
foot Martian robot but by furious New York
police who ordered the plug pulled on the
broadcast.
During all this frantic commotion, no one
had the presence of mind to turn to another
radio station to find out if the news flashes
were real. It was the time of Munich; everyone
was on edge, expecting war at any moment. If
not the Nazis, why not the Martians?
As long ago as 1 908, Alfred Rüssel Wallace,
who shared with Darwin the honours of the
A Viking probe tests the soil
of Mars In 1976. 19

theory of evolution, had demonstrated the
inaccuracy of Lowell's concept of canals on
Mars, created by highly advanced beings. Wal¬
lace showed the mean temperature of Mars to
be well below the freezing point of water and
argued that the so-called canals must be natural
geological faults in the planet's surface. Yet
how many read Wallace as compared with the
millions fascinated by H.G. Wells, Edgar Rice
Burroughs and Ray Bradbury's Martian chro¬
nicles or with those who heard Orson's doom-
laden voice on Hallowe en.'
A HABITABLE PLANET?
It is also true that beside Wallace's flat negative
that Mars never was or could be habitable must
be weighed the views of highly regarded scien¬
tists like Carl Sagan, who hold that the deep
channels on Mars are ancient river-beds carved
out by free-flowing streams of water. Where
has all this water gone? It is probably locked up
in the polar ice and 

in permafrost underground.
Sagan has suggested that Mars, rather than
being permanently icebound, may go through
cycles in which great dust storms carrying
clouds of dust from the equator darken the
poles. More sunlight is absorbed, atmospheric
pressure rises and water is unlocked from the
ice caps. Absence of dust storms reverses the
process, which transpires over long ages.
Until 1971 and Mariner 9, the closest we
had ever got to Mars was 9,600 kilometres up
with Mariner 4. Mariner 9, however, orbited
Mars within 1,300 kilometres and took thou¬
sands of photographs, most with a resolution
to one kilometre. The photographs revealed a
Moonlike landscape of rocks and desert, with
astonishing volcanic peaks, one three times
higher than any peak on Earth.
The Mariner photos also confirmed the pre¬
sence of profound channels as well as a gigantic
canyon. Valles Marineris, 3,200 kilometres long
and 8 kilometres deep. Though the diameter of
Mars is only 6,780 kilometres, half that of
Earth, the land surface is equal to that of Earth.
Because of Mars's greater distance from the
20
A detailed map of Mars by
the American astronomer
Percival Lowell (1855-
1916). it shows what Lowell
thought to be a system of
canals built by intelligent
Martians.
Sun, the Martian year is 687 days, but the Mar¬
tian day is virtually the same as our day. Grav¬
ity is slightly more than one-third that on
Earth. A person weighing 72kg on Earth would
weigh about 27kg on Mars. The atmosphere is
only about 1 per cent as dense as Earth's and is
largely carbon with about 3 per cent of nitrogen.
Temperatures range dramatically from minus
105°C at the poles to 20°C mid-day at the
equator.
Mars would seem unsympathetic to any
kind of advanced life as we know it on Earth.
However, the success of Mariner 9 encouraged
the US National Aeronautics and Space Admi¬
nistration (NASA) to put landers on Mars to
test the soil and look for micro-organisms.
Viking 1 touched down on 20 July 1976,
exactly seven years after man had first walked
on the Moon. Viking 2 arrived forty-five days
later. The landing sites were chosen for their
relative smoothness, to avoid a crash, rather
than for any particular interest they might
have. Viking 1 was at the end of a canyon, in a
region named Chryse Planitia, while Viking 2
was 3,000 kilometres northeast in Cydonia.
The Viking probes took 50,000 photos of
Mars and analysed the soil, a mechanical arm
scooping up samples and depositing them in a
test chamber for chemical and biological
checks. No organic compounds or carbon-
based units were found. As life on Earth is
based on organisms containing carbon, this was
a disappointing result.
On the other hand, NASA had received
wonderful colour photos of the red planet,
close-ups that revealed a surface under the pink
sky not unlike that of southwest Arizona and
which might be made habitable, given the air
and water. Moreover, as Michael Collins, pilot
of the Apollo 1 1 module that orbited the Moon
while down below Neil Armstrong took his
"giant step for mankind", has pointed out, the
Vikings had explored only a very small area of
Mars. How much more might be accomplished
with a rover such as had been used on the
Moon.
The former Soviet Union had also entered
the Mars sweepstakes, but without success. In
1988, two probes, Phobos 1 and Phobos 2,
were launched from the Cosmodrome in Kaza¬
khstan, intended to orbit Mars' larger satellite,
take photos and land on Phobos. The first
probe went off course due to an error by
ground control, while the other had a failure of
communication as it orbited Phobos.
NASA's space programme has been delayed
by cost overruns and by the Challenger disaster
of February 1986 in which the Shuttle went
down in flames, with the deaths of six astro¬
nauts and one passenger. All Shuttle flights and
interplanetary explorations were postponed for
twenty-one months. However, on 25 Sep¬
tember 1992, an uncrewed probe, Mars
Observer, was launched by a Titan rocket from
Cape Canaveral for an eleven-month trip to

Almost an entire hemisphere
of Mars is pictured in this
mosaic of 102 images taken
by Viking Orbiter 1 in 1980.
Mars. Operating from a polar orbit 390 kilo¬
metres up, during one Martian year (687 days).
Observer will map the entire surface of Mars
twelve times, with low resolution images for
study of ice-caps and sand dunes and a narrow-
angle camera showing details to a resolution of
1 .4 metres. The photos may provide evidence
of some form of primitive life, existing or fossil¬
ized, and may also explain what happened to all
the water that must have flowed on Mars a few
million years ago.



In the wake of Mars Observer, Russian
Proton rockets will launch in 1994 and
1996 two joint Russo-British missions to the
planet. While the two orbiters circle Mars, two
40-kg probes, designed at the University of
Kent (UK) and built under contract with the
European Space Agency, will plunge into the
surface. Penetrating up to 6 metres, they will
search for underground ice. The second mis¬
sion will lower a French helium balloon by
parachute to hover at 1,000 metres for close-
ups and weather reports. It will also carry a
small rover to explore the Martian wastelands.
Data obtained by these probes will be sent back
to Earth by a French relay system on Mars
Observer.
In 1996 as well, a Japanese spacecraft will
orbit Mars, examining the upper atmosphere.
For the first time in history, five nations will
co-operate in a planetary investigation a fore¬
runner of a crewed Mars mission in the twenty-
first century. Such a venture should involve
engineering skills of many countries.
Ultimately, humankind may colonize the
forbidding red planet and find a new home
under its pink skies. First we must "terraform"
Mars, as Arthur C. Clarke in his science-fiction
work The Sands of Mars proposes. Terraform-
ing Mars means conditioning the planet to
support human life, that is, by warming and
greening the place. Whether this is truly pos¬
sible, no one can now say. Was it possible for
Columbus to find a vast unknown land beyond
the horizon? Few in 1492 would have taken a
bet on it.
FRANCIS LEARY
is an American writer and
journalist whose published
works include Ti~ie Golden
Longing, a study of life in
15th-century Europe, and
three novels, Ttiis Dark
Monarchy, The Swan and the
Rose, and Fire and Morning. 21
