nie safeffífe era
Over 4,000 sofe/f/fes hove been ¡üunthed sime
Spufm'k I ivenf info orbit in 1957
10
THE space age began on 4 October 1957,
when the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1 ,
the first artificial object to orbit the Earth.
This pioneering satellite did little more than
broadcast "bleep-bleep" signals, but it blazed
the trail to Earth-orbit. Since then, over 4,000
satellites have been launched. They carry out an
enormous range of tasks. Some survey the
Earth, for prospecting, weather-forecasting, or
military surveillance, others look into space
with specialized telescopes. Many satellites
transmit telephone and television signals
around the world, while a smaller number pro¬
vide precise signals for navigation. Among the
largest are the satellites that carry people: the
space stations and the craft that ferry astronauts
up to space and back.
These satellites are put into a variety of dif¬
ferent orbits, to suit their various functions.
The easiest orbit to reach is one that is closest
to the Earth, and takes the satellite more or less
around the equator in a direction from west to
east. The lower the orbit, the less energy is
required to reach it. And, when a satellite is
launched towards the east, it has the advantage
of starting off with some extra speed, due to the
Earth's west-east rotation.
LOW EARTH ORBIT
SATELLITES
Because they are so massive, crewed spacecraft
are almost always put into a "low Earth orbit"
of this kind. The American Space Shuttle flies
at an altitude of about 250 kilometres, while the
Soviet Mir space station is 100 kilometres
higher. Very massive uncrewed spacecraft
follow similar orbits. Among them is the
Hubble Space Telescope, which studies light
from the most distant objects in the universe
free from the blurring effect of the Earth's
atmosphere. Although its main mirror is unfor¬
tunately defective, the space telescope is indeed
returning pictures much sharper than any
ground-based telescope can achieve.
Although it is easy to reach low Earth orbit,
there is one serious problem. The Earth's
atmosphere does not stop abruptly at an alti¬
tude of 200 kilometres, where we loosely say
"space begins". Tenuous gases extend to much
greater altitudes, becoming more and more
rarefied with height. So the Shuttle and Mir are
by Nigel Henbest
both ploughing through the outer vestiges of
the Earth's atmosphere. In the process, they
lose orbital energy, and gradually spiral down
towards the Earth.
In the case of the Space Shuttle, this does
not really matter because it is only up for a few
days. The cosmonauts on Mir must, however,
fare boosters from time to time to counter the
orbital decay. A spectacular casualty of atmos¬
pheric drag was the American space station
Skylab. It was launched into an orbit 435 kilo¬
metres high in 1973. Despite this relatively high
"low Earth orbit", only six years later Skylab
at that time without a crew had spiralled so
near to the Earth that it burnt up in the lower
atmosphere, scattering pieces of hot debris over
Western Australia.
One type of satellite regularly dices with
death by flying very low orbits. These are on
"military reconnaissance missions": m other
words, they are spy satellites. They typically fly
in elliptical orbits with a low point 200 kilo¬
metres or less above the ground, and only last
for a few months. From this comparatively low
altitude, the film or television cameras on board
can make out details onlv a couple of metres
across: good enough to distinguish the type of
plane on an enemy airfield. Spy satellites arc
launched into orbits that go north-south,
almost over the poles of the Earth. From such a
"polar orbit", a satellite can survey the whole
of the world as it rotates below.
Polar orbits are also useful for other satel¬
lites that survey the Earth in particular, Earth
resources satellites. The pioneer in this field
was the American Landsat 1, launched in 1972.
Its cameras and infrared sensors immediately
proved their worth in monitoring crops,
forests, natural disasters (such as locust
plagues) and areas of pollution. They also let
geologists prospect in remote areas, by show¬
ing up geological structures that might contain
useful resources, such as oil, minerals or, in a
desert area, that most valuable of commodities,
water.
The continuing Landsat scries has been
joined by the French SPOT satellites, which
can see even finer details. To avoid atmospheric
drag, they orbit respectively 700 and 800 kilo¬
metres above the Earth. SPOT's advanced
cameras can show up individual houses below.

as they scan a strip 117 kilometres wide. In
twenty-six days, these narrow strips cover the
whole Earth.
Earth-observation satellites can use two
types of sensor. The simpler are passive sen¬
sors, which simply pick up radiation coming
from the Earth. Light is one of these radiations,
but more useful is infrared. Different kinds of
vegetation and rocks reflect infrared in differ¬
ent proportions, and as a result Landsat has
achieved great success in, for example, picking
out regions of diseased crops in otherwise
healthy farmland, and distinguishing rocks that
are likely to contain different kinds of minerals.
Some satellites carry active sensors. These
emit radio waves, generally at short wave¬
lengths, and study the way in which they arc
reflected by the Earth's surface. Simple radar
Above, the European
Retrievable Carrier (Eureca)
is launched on its first
mission from the hold of
the Space Shuttle Atlantis
on 2 August 1992.
Above right,
Sputnil< 1, the first artificial
Earth satellite. Launched
by the Soviet Union on
4 October 1957, it weighed
84.6kg and orbited the Earth
in just over
96 minutes.
can reveal the shape of the ground below, and
even structures hidden below desert sand. In
1978, the American sateUite Seasat used active
sensors to study the surface of the ocean: they
revealed not only waves, but also ocean cur¬
rents and ripples that revealed the direction of
the wind blowing over the oceans. The Euro¬
pean ERS 1 satellite is now following up obser¬
vations of the land and sea in unprecedented
detail, using both passive and active sensors.
Also following polar orbits are satellites
designed to survey the sky: they simply point
in the opposite direction, always away from the
Earth. These satellites look at radiation from
space that cannot penetrate the atmosphere to
reach telescopes at sea-level. Amongst the most
successful were the Infrared Astronomical
Satellite, which found half a million new stars 11

12
and galaxies in 1983, and the Cosmic Back¬
ground Explorer (COBE), which in 1992
located ripples in gases expanding from the ori¬
ginal Big Bang.
THE HIGH-FLYERS
Satellites used for navigation have to be seen
over wide areas of the Earth, so they are put
into rather high orbits. The twenty-four
Navstar satellites that make up the Global Posi¬
tioning System are in circular orbits at an alti¬
tude of 20,200 kilometres, tilted at 55 degrees to
the Earth's equator. From any place on the
Earth's surface, at any time, three or more of
the satellites are above the horizon. Using
signals from the satellites, a receiver can auto¬
matically work out its location to 30 metres or
better. This system is intended for both civilian
and military use: it has been an invaluable aid to
everyone from solitary yachtsmen to the troops
involved in the featureless deserts where the
Gulf War was fought in 1991.
In the 1960s, the Soviet Union started a pro¬
gramme of communications satellites that also
moved in large, inclined orbits. Instead of follow¬
ing circular paths, however, the Molniya
satellites pursue long thin oval orbits. At its
closest (perigee), a Molniya skims just 500 kilo¬
metres above the Earth's surface. But it then
travels out to a high point (.apogee) some 40,000
kilometres above the Soviet Union. Here, the
satellite moves so slowly that ground stations
can keep it in view for several hours.
The time that it takes for a satellite to com¬
plete one orbit depends on just one factor: its
average distance from the Earth. The more dis¬
tant the satellite, the longer its orbital period.
The Space Shuttle and Mir and everything
else in low Earth orbit have an orbital period
of 90 minutes. The Navstars and Molniyas arc
both at an average distance of 20,200 kilometres
from the Earth, and both types have an orbital
period of twelve hours.
A Soviet Soyuz spacecraft is
joined to its launcher at the
Baikonur Space Centre.
A view of Mexico City taken
in December 1989 by a
French SPOT satellite.
AN AERIAL MAST
36,000 KILOMETRES HIGH
For a satellite at a height of 35,880 kilometres,
the period is twenty-four hours. If it is follow¬
ing a circular orbit above the equator, the
satellite is moving at exactly the same rate as
the globe below is turning. As a result, the



satellite appears to hover exactly above the
same point on the equator.
The science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke
pointed out, as early as 1945, that a satellite in
this "geostationary orbit" would be in an ideal
position to relay radio signals around the
world. It is effectively on top of a mast 36,000
kilometres high, and is visible from almost half
the Earth. Clarke realized that three satellites,
at equally spaced intervals around this orbit,
could send signals from any point on Earth to
any other.
Routing of intercontinental phone calls and
television broadcasts by satellites is now rou¬
tine. In fact, there is so much demand that the
geostationary orbit contains not three but
several dozen communications satellites. These
pick up a signal from a transmitter on one
continent, amplify it, and then transmit it down
to a large receiving aerial somewhere else in the
world.
Recent years have seen another kind of
transmission from satellites in geostationary
orbit colloquially known as "satellite televi¬
sion". A direct-broadcasting satellite also
receives a signal from the ground, and sends it

m^
An Australian space tracking
station at Tidbinllla, New
South Wales.
back to Earth. In this case, however, the satel¬
lite transmits the signal at such a high power
that it can be picked up by a small "satellite
dish" connected to a television set. The trans¬
mitters on the satellite are designed so that they
cover just a limited part of the Earth's surface;
only receivers within this "footprint" can
receive the television programmes.
Also strung around this imaginary circle
high above the equator are satellites that need
to view the Earth as a whole. These include
military satellites that eavesdrop on electronic
communications in other countries and look
for spots of infrared (heat) radiation from the
launch of missiles. Half a dozen meteorology
satellites in geostationary orbit, such as the
European Meteosat, keep an eye on the weath¬
er all over the FJ,arth. The continuous global
coverage from these satellites complements the
close-up views from weather satellites in low
polar orbits, like the American Tiros series.
Geostationary satellites are too high to feel
any drag from the Earth's atmosphere, so their
orbits do not decay. This could become a
serious problem. Once a satellite has reached
the end of its active life and stops working,
because of something like an electrical fault, it
clogs up some of the limited space around the
geostationary orbit. To prevent this, satellite
controllers use a small rocket engine that
boosts an ageing satellite out of the geostatio¬
nary orbit.
Some spacecraft are sent even further from
our planet. The Apollo flights took crews as far
as the Moon: between 1969 and 1972, twelve
Apollo astronauts actually landed on the lunar
surface. Their missions took them on a figure-
of-eight path around the Earth and the Moon,
but they never left the Earth's gravitational pull
entirely.
PROBING 'DEEP SPACE'
Automatic spacecraft have travelled well
beyond the Moon, exploring what NASA calls
"deep space". Once it breaks free of the Earth's
gravity, a spacecraft is no longer a satellite of
our planet. It is usually termed a space probe.
Once away from our planet, the dominant
force is the Sun's gravity. Space probes are
effectively miniature planets, orbiting the Sun
just like the Earth or Jupiter. The main differ¬
ence IS that they follow very elongated paths
that allow them to travel from the Earth to
another planet, or in the case of the Giotto
probe in 1986 to intercept Flalley's comet.
Spacecraft have now flown past all the planets,
except Pluto, and they have even landed on
Venus and Mars. Four spacecraft are travelling
outwards at such a speed that they will even¬
tually break free of the Sun's gravity. Then, 13

The U.S. Space Shuttle
Enterprise flies piggyback on
a specially adapted carrier
aircraft before carrying out
an air drop test. The third
aircraft is an observation
plane flying nearby.
14
NIGEL HENBEST
is a British freelance science
writer and astronomy
consultant to the magazine
New Scientist Before
becoming a fuli-time science
writer he was a radio
astronomer at the Cavendish
Laboratory, Cambridge
University. Among his recent
published worlds are Tlie
Universe (Weidenfeld and
Nicolson, 1992) and The
Planets (Viking, 1992). He is
the presenter of Seeing
Stars, a monthly programme
on astronomy broadcast by
the BCC World Service.
Pioneers 10 and 11 and Voyagers 1 and 2 will
roam among the stars far beyond.
All spacecraft whether satellites or space
probes need certain basic systems. The first is
stabilization. Left to itself, a spacecraft will
naturally tumble over and over in an erratic
way. The simplest way to stabilize a spacecraft
is to make it in the shape of a cyHnder, and set
it spinning around the axis of the cylinder. Like
a spinning gyroscope, the axis will always point
in the same direction.
Most of these spinning satellites carry a
camera or communications antenna that must
point in one direction, usually towards the
Earth or even a particular ground station. To
prevent those instruments from whirling
around with the spacecraft, they are put on a
platform that is driven by a motor to rotate at
exactly the opposite rate to the spacecraft as a
whole; as a result, the "despun" platform keeps
a constant attitude in space.
More complex spacecraft generally do not
spin. They keep in the correct orientation by a
system of "three-axis stabilization", which cor¬
rects for unwanted satellite motions in various
ways.
Most satellites use a combination of small
rocket thrusters, spinning reaction wheels
within the spacecraft and large electromagnets
that push against the Earth's magnetic field.
These devices can also turn the spacecraft to
point in different directions when required as,
for example, in the case of the Hubble Space
Telescope which has to turn to look at different
objects in the universe.
Also very basic is the power supply. Almost
all spacecraft derive their power from sunhght,
converted into electricity by an array of solar
cells. In the case of spin-stabilized satellites, the
solar cells cover the surface of the cylinder.
Three-axis stabilized spacecraft usually have
the solar cells on large flat panels extending
outwards from its body: these panels are folded
and rolled up when the satellite is launched,
and opened up when it reaches orbit.
Spacecraft carrying a crew need more power,
and they often carry fuel cells. Here, oxygen and
hydrogen gases are combined in such a way that
they release the energy of the reaction as electri¬
city and the resulting water is useful, too.
Small nuclear reactors are used for spy satelhtes
carrying power-hungry radar systems. This is a
dangerous practice, as satellites of this kind have
fallen back to Earth and scattered radioactive
debris. Space probes travelling to Jupiter and
beyond also carry small nuclear reactors,
because the sunlight there is too weak to
produce enough electricity from solar cells.
Satellite designers also have to bear in mind
that it costs money to send extra weight into
space: about $20,000 for every kilogram launch¬
ed to geostationary orbit. So they must keep
a satellite's mass low by using strong but light¬
weight materials, such as carbon fibre and tita¬
nium. The design must also keep the satellite's
systems at the correct temperature, even
though one side is baked by the Sun and the
other exposed to the cold of space.
THE NEXT TEN YEARS
The pattern now established in space is Hkely to
continue for at least the next decade. Communi¬
cations satellites and direct-broadcast satellites
will continue to grow in number and in power,
while the Earth-observation programme will
mushroom during the 1990s. Satellites from the
United States, Europe, Russia and Japan will
survey our planet and its atmosphere in detail, in
an ambitious international programme called
Mission to Planet Earth. As well as measuring
the Earth's natural state, they will check how
human activities are causing the greenhouse
effect and the holes in the ozone layer, and other
types of pollution.
