F==}s
v~
The origin of numbers
The story of a great intellectual adventure
by Tony Levy
Above, detail of an ancient
Egyptian painted low-relief
depicting a table for
funerary gifts (2700 B.C.).
On it several numbers are
written in hieroglyphic
script (the hieroglyph for
1 000 appears four times,
bottom right).
IT is generally accepted that some animal species
are capable of perceiving quantitative differ¬
ences, such as a chick missing from the brood
or a more or less abundant food supply. The
human infant also shows a kind of quantitative per¬
ception in relation to familiar objects long before
it is able to speak. The development of language
and the use of words widen and refine this quan¬
titative perception, so that some cultures have
invented names for vast multiplicities such as the
stars in the sky or the sand on the seashore, and
have even attempted to quantify infinity.
D Counting and recounting
Of all the powers conferred by speech, that of
naming numbers certainly seems to be among the
oldest. After all, "numbering" means organizing
and putting in order the real world and our ideas
about it. This is apparent in the idiom of different
languages.

English eighteen 8-10
French dix-huit 10-8
German acht-zehn 8-10
Ancient Greek
Modern Greek
okto-kai-deka 8 and 10
deka-okto 10-8
Latin
Latin
decern et octo 1 0 and 8
duo-de-viginti 2 from 20
Lithuanian ashtuno-lika 8 left over (from 1 0)
Breton tri-ouch 3-6
Welsh deu-naw 2-9
Mexican
Finnish
(from K. Menninger
caxtulli-om-mey
kah-deksan-toista
1 5 and 3
2 (from) 1 0 (in the) second (ten)
Number Words and Number Symbols)
IO
- In some European languages, for example,
there is a strong similarity or even an overlapping
between words meaning "count" and words
meaning "tell": compter/raconter in French,
contare/raccontare in Italian, contar/contar in



Spanish and Portuguese, and zählen/erzählen in
German. In modern English the word tale
denotes a story, but the word teller can be used
to designate a bank cashier as well as someone
who tells a story. So it is not surprising that this
similarity is found in older Indo-European lan¬
guages. Etymologically, the Sanskrit term for
number, sankhya, denotes a way of saying
things. The Greek word logos, denoting both
reckoning and also word or speech, derives
these different meanings from the old sense of
the verb lego, to collect, choose, gather, and
hence to reckon, count, enumerate, and then to
recount or say. Similarly the Greek word
arithmos means both number in the arithmetical
sense and also adjustment or disposition. This
ambivalence later shifted to the Latin numerus
and its derivatives. The adjective numerosus
means both numerous and harmonious.
Moving away from the Indo-European
languages, we find a similar situation in two
Semitic languages, Arabic and Hebrew. In
Arabic the word for account is hisab, from the
triliteral root h.s.b. The verb "to count" is
hasaba, which with one vowel change becomes
hasiba, to imagine, believe. Likewise with
Hebrew, which from one root, s.p.r., constructs
the words for book, sepher; number, mispar;
and story, sippur.
Words and numbers
Whatever numerical facility a given language
may have developed, the names it uses for num¬
bers seem to go back to a very early period in the
history of that language and have, moreover,
remained amazingly stable through the ages.
They are reminders of human strivings since
time immemorial to bestow names on the diver-
Different ways of forming
the number 18.
sity of the real world, and occasionally they
provide us with a glimpse of the process that pre¬
ceded and underlay the naming of the various
orders of quantity.
One example, that of the number 9, illus¬
trates the interest as well as the difficulty of
historical analysis. In many Indo-European lan¬
guages the word for this number is strikingly
close to the adjective conveying the idea of new¬
ness: Latin novem/novus, French neuf/neuf,
English nine/new, German neun/neu, Sanskrit
nava/navas. Combining the disciplines of the
linguist and the historian, one is tempted to
explain the phenomenon as follows: at the dawn
of counting, the number 9 was perceived as a
"new" level after 8. The word for 8 {octo, huit,
eight, acht, ashta in the five languages cited
above) could be derived in its turn from a gram¬
matical dual of the word for 4 (quattuor, quatre,
four, vier, tchatvara). In the light of many other
linguistic and cultural phenomena it turns out
that the number 4 really does represent a new
stage in our perception of numbers. We can
easily discern one, two, three or four objects
without needing to count them, but from five
A runic calendar (Finland,
mid- 1 6th century). Runic
writing, using an alphabet
of characters known as
runes, was used by the
Germanic peoples of
northern Europe between
the 3rd and 17th centuries.

A Phoenician inscription
on gold leaf in honour of
the goddess Astarte (early
Sth century B.C.).
onwards we have to count them before we can
say how many there are.
This is an attractive hypothesis, although in
such a field it is impossible to be dogmatic. If we
pursue our linguistic investigations a little fur¬
ther, we can even find new arguments to support
it. Most Semitic languages use phonetically
related terms to denote the number 9: Akkadian
uses tishu, Hebrew tesha', Syriac tscha', Arabic
tis'un, and Ethiopian tes'u. Arabic grammar
indicates that the word tis'un is derived from the
verbal root wasa'a, "to be or become wide".
Thus it is possible that the notion of "newness"
observed in the Indo-European languages recurs
in the Semitic ones.
Ordering, combining and
counting
Any number system, however elementary, pre¬
supposes the adoption of a small number of



symbols words, pictograms or graphic signs
structured according to two principles. A prin¬
ciple of order or arrangement distinguishes the
first symbol (one) from the second (two) and if
necessary from the third (three) etc., and a prin¬
ciple of grouping or combining interrupts the
series of distinct individual symbols by intro¬
ducing a symbol of a higher order of magnitude
which is then combined with the previous
symbol to continue the system. Thus "one, two,
three. . . , ten, ten-one, ten-two. . . , ten-ten or a
hundred, a hundred and one, a hundred and
two. . ." is called a base-10 system or decimal
system.
But other bases have been or still are used:
base two (the binary system), five (quinary),
twenty (vigesimal) and sixty (sexagesimal). It
seems likely that the bases 5, 10 and 20 were
originally chosen because of their relationship to
characteristics of the human body, and traces of
this remain in some oral counting systems. In
Api, the spoken language of the New Hebrides,
the word luna denotes a hand, and also the
number 5; the number 2 is lua, and 10 is of
course lualuna literally, two hands.
The variety of the rules governing the forma¬
tion of the names of numbers is a striking instance
of human cultural and linguistic diversity. The
table on the opposite page illustrates how the
number eighteen is formed in various languages.
We must recognize, however, that little is
known about the methods of reckoning used in
very ancient times. Certainly the numbers for
which words already existed had to be repre¬
sented symbolically. In addition to verbal
numeration manual gestures were used
(counting on the fingers) or physical devices
such as an abacus, a counting frame, a sand-
table or a knotted cord. To the historian, this rep¬
resentational numeration seems in some cases to
foreshadow certain forms of written numeration.
I Counting systems, writing systems
and alphabets
The advent of writing resulted in a fantastic
growth in numerical capacity. Written counting
systems or numerations may be divided into I I

,cx A 9 Y
1000 900 90
//
1 3 2? n n
4 50 300 400 5000
Figure /. Alphabetical number
systems
1993 in Greek alphabetical
numeration (left)
5754 in Hebrew
alphabetical numeration
.(right)
two main types: additive numeration, in which
a number is produced by directly adding



together the numerical value of its component
symbols, as in Ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic
numeration and in Roman numerals, and posi¬
tional or place-value numeration, in which the
value of a symbol (units, tens, hundreds, etc.) is
determined by the position it occupies. Thus
1034 (written from the left to the right, "one-
zero-three-four") represents one (thousand)
plus zero (hundreds) plus three (tens) plus four
(units). This system, which requires the use of a
zero (a blank space or a graphic sign) appeared
historically only in four civilizations with
written languages: in Mesopotamia, in China, in
ancient India and in the Maya civilization of
central America.
Though writing first appeared in Sumer
during the fourth millennium B.C., alphabetical
scripts were doubtless invented in the middle of
the second. The best-known and most influen¬
tial script was that developed by a trading and
seafaring people, the Phoenicians, who spoke a
Semitic language. It was adopted or adapted by
other languages in the same group (Hebrew,
Aramaic and later Arabic), as well as by other
languages less closely related to Phoenician.
The Phoenician alphabet only transcribed con¬
sonants, of which there were 22. The Greeks
later added vowels to it. The Latin alphabets,
descended directly from the Greek, retain the
order of the Phoenician alphabet almost
unchanged.
Mastery of this extraordinary tool led to the
development of a number of counting systems
12
S O
0ï
»
E91
y»
' HA- o 2.
figure 2. Use of the zero in
ancient China
Multiplication of 3069 by
45 (from a 1 4th-century
Chinese mathematical
treatise).
including the ancient Hebrew system, the so-
called "learned" Greek counting system, and
the Arabic counting system known as hisab al-
jummal or hisab abjadi. These were alphabetical
additive numerations, whose principle is
extremely simple provided the user knows the
order and numerical value of the letters of the
alphabet. The first nine letters correspond to
the nine digits (1,2,3,..., 9), and the next nine
to the nine tens (10, 20, 30 . . . 90). The remaining
letters are used to denote the hundreds. Thus
alphabetical numbers are written in descending
order of numerical value of their constituent
letters, in the direction of the script (figure 1).
Since the alphabet comprises only a small
number of different signs (22 in Hebrew, 28 in
Arabic and 27 in Greek), this counting system
initially only allowed the representation of num¬
bers below 10,000. Various expedients were
available for going further, but it became diffi¬
cult to handle large numbers. Consequently
scholars, particularly astronomers, had to adopt
the far more efficient Babylonian sexagesimal
positional number system and adapt it to their
script. In principle this numeration requires 59
different symbols plus a sign for zero. These
"sexagesimal digits" would often be expressed
in alphabetical numeration, thus combining the
power of positional notation with the conve¬
nience of alphabetical notation.
LI A legacy from India
The decimal positional numeration system with
a zero, as developed in India, gradually came to
supersede other written systems and is now in
virtually universal use. It spread slowly, however,
and in a complex fashion.
China, for instance, acquired a decimal posi¬
tional system of its own quite early on, inde¬
pendently of the Indian one, but one which did
not use a zero. It may even be supposed that the
Chinese could have designed a system like the
Indian positional system on their own. But the
introduction of the zero into the Chinese posi¬
tional notation seems to have been of Indian
origin (figure 2).
Nowadays schoolchildren in the West learn
to count with "Arabic numbers": but what

tint» iiipomii iuni'0 qnaan
io quiuqu» flew ín*ymíio
vH-ÍUÍlti Ol C 0 I I H, J
exactly are they? We owe our knowledge of the
principles of Indian arithmetic to Arab scholars
of the eighth century. In about 774 A.D. an
Indian scholar passing through Baghdad made
known a Sanskrit book on astronomy which
adopted the principles of "Indian arithmetic"
{hisab al-hind), and al-Fazzari's Arabic transla¬
tion of this book represented the first stage in the
history of "Indian arithmetic" in the Muslim-
Arab empire. The Arabic word sifr, "empti¬
ness", is a translation of the Sanskrit sunya. It
was chosen in the ninth century to represent
zero. Sifr gave rise to the Latin cifra in the thir¬
teenth century, the French chiffre in the four¬
teenth century and the German Ziffer in the
fifteenth century. It is also the forebear of the
English cipher. By a parallel development sifr
gave rise to the Latin zefirum in the thirteenth
century, the Italian zefi.ro/zevero in the fifteenth,
and finally the word zero. Western terminology
is unquestionably Hindu-Arabic.
We must, however, distinguish between the
spread of knowledge about the principles of
Indian numeration and the development of the
graphic signs used for its notation. The rela¬
tionship between the written forms recorded
from India and those that appeared in the Arab
world from the ninth century onwards is not
clear. Moreover there is a difference between
eastern and western Arabic numerals. While
the principles of Indian numeration spread in
Latin in the medieval West in the twelfth century,
the figures we call "Hindu-Arabic" spread
through intermediaries that have not all been
identified, sometimes borrowing from earlier
Roman or Visigothic forms in Spain.
A system for counting on
the fingers is shown in this
illustration from a 13th-
century Spanish
manuscript.
TONY LEVY,
of France, is a research
associate at his country's
National Centre for Scientific
Research (CNRS) and teaches
the history of science at the
University of Paris Vlll-Saint
Denis. His main centre of
academic interest is the
Hebraic mathematical tradition
in the Middle Ages and its
relationship to the Arab and
Latin traditions. He is the
author of a study on the
history of the idea of infinity
entitled Figures de l'infini. Les
mathématiques au miroir des
cultures, published by Editions
du Seuil, Paris, 1987. 13
