International
Volunteer Day
by BillJackson
44
Eachyear since it was established
on the initiative of the United
Nations Volunteers Programme
(UNV) in 1985, International Volunteer
Day has been celebrated in at least
ninety countries to honour the millions
ofvolunteers all over the world who give
their time to help their fellow human
beings.
At a point when the trend in many
countries is to cut back on social ser¬
vices they once provided, international,
national and local volunteer organiza¬
tions in both the North and the South are
playing a vital role.
In one developed country Aus¬
tralia the New South Wales Volunteer
Centre describes volunteers as "the
people who deliver meals, serve at
school canteens, raise funds to buy com¬
munity equipment, run clubs, watch
neighbourhoods, fight bush fires,
operate drop-in centres and carry out a
host of other services which the com¬
munity demands but could often not
afford without the free help they pro¬
vide."
In developing countries it is some¬
times asked whether there is any real
need for international volunteers and
whether volunteering may not be an
outdated import from colonial times.
Sadly, one has only to witness the degree
ofneed and suffering in countries such
as Angola, Somalia and Bosnia to realize
how much there is for such volunteers to
do.
Some 120 countries on the long haul
to development are happy to welcome
specialists from the UN Volunteers Pro¬
gramme and other international bodies
that work side by side with local orga¬
nizations. "It is a matter of pride," said
the governor of the Punjab (Pakistan)
on International Volunteer Day 1992,
"that nearly 3,500 voluntary social wel¬
fare agencies, comprising hundreds of
Top, a UN Volunteer (at left of photo)
supervises the unloading of sacks of grain in
Afghanistan. Above, two Volunteers, one
British and one Dutch, explain the electoral
process to Cambodian villagers through an
interpreter before the elections of May
1993. With the help of almost 50,000
specially trained Cambodians, 465
Volunteers from 45 countries carried out a
programme of civic education, registered
4.7 million voters and supervised the polling
stations.

thousands of dedicated and selfless
workers all over the Punjab, are engaged
in voluntary social service and as such
supplementing government's efforts in
every conceivable field."
The past two years have brought
major changes for international orga¬
nizations that, like UNV, send volun¬
teers all over the world. The sheer scale
and frequency of famines and refugee
crises have required programmes that
had been almost exclusively devoted to
long-term development to set up spe¬
cialist humanitarian relief units.
The current trend is towards having
volunteers who serve in developing
countries concentrate on helping local
communities to manage their resources
to the best effect. Thus we can expect to
see more and more emphasis on vol¬
unteers from outside working on a peer
basis with local people in such fields as
adult literacy, youth initiatives and pop-
Above, a Volunteer from Myanmar (centre)
with her opposite number during a
vaccination drive in the Comoro Islands.
Below, in Bhutan a Ugandan Volunteer
shows students how an anemometer works.
ulation and family life education as well
as the protection of human rights and
work on the cultural aspects of devel¬
opment such as the restoration of
archaeological sites of national impor¬
tance.
Unesco Director-General Federico
Mayor and United Nations Volunteers
Programme Executive Co-ordinator
Brenda Gael McSweeney have launched
a joint appeal calling for the develop¬
ment of international volunteering.
Noting that "Volunteers are urgently
needed change-agents and peace-
builders," they call on "governments,
United Nations agencies, non-govern¬
mental organizations and decision¬
makers everywhere to take advantage
of International Volunteer Day to intro¬
duce practical measures to promote and
facilitate voluntary service. There was
never greater need, nor opportunity, to
mobilize volunteers for international
programmes of all kinds. Volunteers are
an unparalleled source of energy, action
and hope. Their efforts must be encour¬
aged in everyway possible, so that they
make the world a better place and
inspire the next generation by their
example."
BILL JACKSON,
of Ireland, is chief of the external relations division
of the United Nations Volunteers.
