IMF HWM I
by Sylvie Nerson Rousseau
8
SYLVIE NERSON ROUSSEAU
is a French psychoanalyst.
She ¡s a consultant to a
number of public health
organizations and is
engaged in the education of
doctors and social workers
concerned with seropositive
and Aids-infected
persons. She is the author
of a number of articles on
psychoanalysis and
modern life.
TO become individuals in the fullest sense,
we must accept an inescapable obligation:
to respect that which is human in our¬
selves.
We each of us accept this "price that must
be paid" in our own way, according to priori¬
ties fixed by our own imagination. For one
person the priorities will be of a legal order it
will be important for that person to feel that he
or she is a possessor of rights. For someone
else the main thing will be to feel that he or she
belongs to a group or has a task to accom¬
plish this person will see himself or herself
above all as a "social actor". Another person
may feel that the concepts of integrity and
potentiality are essential he or she will regard
himself or herself primarily as an individual.
For the psychoanalyst, one of the aims of
treatment is to induce the patient to escape
from the grip of what might be called "narcis¬
sistic manicheanism" a self-image that is
either totally good or totally bad. From the
time when we learn to speak we are obliged to
master our impulses in order to serve the ideals
of our community. Hence the ambivalence of
our condition as creatures who are not good or
bad, but good and bad, since our impulses
(unless they are sublimated) are a priori
opposed to these ideals.
At another level, that of the ethnic, religious,
social or national community, this division
between good and bad still persists, in spite of
the so-called "collapse" of ideologies, in spite of
geopolitical changes that might be expected to
modify the images peoples have of each other.
For Europe the cultural cradle of psycho¬
analysis the spectre of evil that came from the
east has changed, but there as elsewhere evil
is still perceived as something that originates in
others. Nothing seems capable of shaking
people's conviction that what is bad comes from
outside them. However, it is through encoun¬
tering within ourselves the other side of our
idealized or dethroned image that we
become capable of empathy with others.
Psychoanalysis sheds an impartial light on
the human psyche. It does not seek to judge,
only to define the unconscious mechanisms
that govern our acts and our thoughts. This
form of understanding of the human mind
gives rise to the conception of an innate
equality, since a priori it situates each indi¬
vidual in an identical position in relation to the
real, the imaginary and the symbolic a posi¬
tion that is only modified by the unique fea¬
tures of each case history. This idea of inherent
equality is a fundamental link between psy¬
choanalysis on the one hand and democratic
ethics and thought on the other. At a sec¬
ondary level, historic, social and cultural
events transform this generic equality into
equality of opportunities or rights.
No society from Japan to Africa, from
Canada to Israel, from Lebanon to the
stripling Commonwealth of Independent
States is today unaware of the unconscious
mind, which in one way or another, albeit in
some cases still only indirectly, forms an inte¬
gral part of any vision of humankind. Perhaps
it could even be said that the notion of the
unconscious as a central component of the
human mind has played a role in the criticisms
that have been levelled at certain ways of
thinking about society. In Canada, for
example, Christianity long took the fact that
psychoanalysis stressed the predominance of
sexual tendencies as a pretext for strengthening
its own prohibitions. The example of the
former USSR, another place where psycho¬
analysis did not flourish, also shows the extent
to which psychoanalysis is regarded as a hos¬
tile force by regimes whose ideology is based
on a denial of individuality and its subjective
components.
In addition to its therapeutic effects, psy¬
choanalysis encourages the emergence of funda¬
mental values such as tolerance and respect for
historical truth, since experience of it enables
those who take part to discover what makes
them unique as persons, and to realize the
uniqueness of others without feeling threatened.
If the preoccupation with good or bad
becomes obsolete, is there not a possibility or
a danger depending on one's viewpoint that
differences will no longer be sufficient to jus¬
tify inequalities within a community, that the
forces of opposition within the community will
cease to be radical and become more gradual-
istic, thereby liberating antagonisms which
need to find expression.
Certainly recognition of the unconscious as
an essential factor in determining human
behaviour cannot serve entrenched positions.
Psychoanalysis is not about truth; it is one
pathway to human subjectivity. Perhaps too in
the post-modern era, it can maintain a tension
between emotion and reason, between the sub¬
jective point of view and aspirations to absolute
objectivity.
