When less means more
by Arik Levy and Pippo Lionni
Above, a miniature robot
known as "Monsieur"
perches on a leaf.
WHEN people describe their experience of
communications technology and rapid
intercontinental travel, they often say
that we live in a shrinking world. This is an image:
the world is not really shrinking. In a more literal
sense, however, many of the instruments and
appliances we regularly use are, because of tech¬
nological advances, becoming smaller so small
in many cases that it would be no exaggeration to
say that miniaturization is one of the defining
and disconcerting features of life today.
Miniaturization is a process that gives rise to
many questions and very few answers. What is
miniaturization, exactly? At what point is some¬
thing miniaturized? Do we have some notion
that a manufactured object a camera or a tele¬
phone, say can have a "right" or optimum size?
If so, by what standards is this normal size
defined? Now that a pocket-sized electronic
device has the capacity to store the contents of a
pile of documents on an office table, what is hap¬
pening to the rules that have traditionally gov¬
erned our ideas of proportion?
What, furthermore, are the psychological and
physiological implications of miniaturization?
After all, the shape and size of the objects which
surround us inevitably influence the relation¬
ship we have with them. In this dynamic inter¬
action between objects and people, the minia¬
turization of one element in the relationship IS

16
implies more than just a reduction in size. A tele¬
vision set reduced to the size of a pack of playing
cards is no longer a piece of furniture in the same
proportion to a chair, a table or a cupboard, and
the moving image on its screen is no longer com¬
parable to the static image of a painting hanging
on a wall or a magazine cover. We can pick up a
miniature television and carry it around with us.
It becomes an extension of our bodies. It is easier
to find a place for it in our home. Our reaction to
the relative smallness of objects is important
because it suggests that there may be a limit to the
hitherto seemingly unchecked race towards
miniaturization. As things get smaller and smaller,
the fingers that manipulate them seem to be get¬
ting bigger and bigger. . . .
Miniaturized objects can be seen as "envi¬
ronment friendly" inasmuch as they are designed
to take up the least possible space and consume
the least possible energy and other resources. At
the same time they enable us to free ourselves
from the constraints of place and time: one
response to the hostile subway environment is to
retreat into the auditory isolation of a personal
stereo. Of course there may be limits to the user-
friendliness provided by miniaturization, which,
if taken too far, would literally become a reductio
ad absurdum. It would, for example, be techni¬
cally possible to produce an issue of this magazine
that would be, say, one-twentieth of its present
size, thus saving ink, paper, time, mailing and
transport costs. Unfortunately the magazine
would have become impossible to read with the
naked eye.

