
In spite of efforts
to impose
restrictions, the
international arms
trade is still
flourishing


The business of war
by Christophe Carle
Jet fighters on patrol. ARMS transfers from the industrialized
countries to the countries of the Third
World have long constituted the bulk of
the international arms trade. Although the end
of the Cold War and the Gulf-War have pro¬
foundly altered the dynamics ofthat trade, these
changes arc still too recent for us to be able to
clearly discern all the consequences. What is clear,
however, is that the principal arms producers are
facinsi a new and incrcasinelv acute dilemma: how
can the economic interests involved in the export
of military hardware be reconciled with the
requirements of non-proliferation and security?
Ever since the Iran-Iraq War and the Gulf
War, the problem of arms proliferation has been
at the forefront of international security issues.
It is a problem that encompasses the entire range
of ballistic, chemical or biological, and nuclear
weapons. These so-called non-conventional
devices arc already covered by a series of non-
proliferation measures. The question of con¬
ventional weapons, on the other hand, deserves >* 1

0 ^BENGE
31
closer consideration, the Gulf War having once
again underlined the importance of technolog¬
ical superiority in conventional weapons in the
air, on land and at sea. Yet attempts to limit the
trade in these weapons the most commonly
manufactured and sold throughout the world
are of very recent origin.
OTHER TIMES,
OTHER WARS
During the Cold War, the production of con¬
ventional weapons was stimulated by East-West
antagonism. The biggest manufacturers were
also the biggest exporters. For those countries,
providing the Third World with arms was all



part of the bipolar competition in which they
were engaged on a global scale. If one belligerent,
in any part of the world, received arms from one
of the two blocs, its adversary was practically
sure of obtaining support from the opposing
bloc. The superpowers thus competed for influ¬
ence on the periphery of their zones of direct
confrontation, a situation which also suited the
states engaged in regional confrontations.
That situation no longer exists, but the flow
of arms to the Third World has not dried up.
Tensions other than those fuelled by the former
East-West conflict still exist all over the world,
stimulating a demand for arms in certain devel¬
oping countries.
L'imprudence (1991),
acrylic on canvas by the
Zairian painter Cheik Ledy.
CHRISTOPHE CARLE,
a French specialist in
regional security questions,
is engaged in research at
France's Institute of
International Relations
(IFRI).
The Middle East is of special, though not
unique, importance in this respect. Two years
after the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq, most of the
nations in the Gulf region, conscious of the
inadequacy of their own armed forces, have
been buying arms on the international markets,
and the other countries of the region are also
restocking and reinforcing their arsenals.
ACODE
OF CONDUCT
The Gulf War did, however, inspire new
thinking and a series of political initiatives at the
highest level to try to curb the delivery of
weapons to the Middle East and avert the risk of
upsetting the balance of international security.
The example of Iraq, overarmed to a point where
it was emboldened to invade a neighbour state,
thus triggering a war in which the whole planet
was to some extent involved, speaks for itself.
Various proposals aimed at reducing the arms
trade have been drafted in recent years by a
number of Western prime ministers and heads of
state, and the European Community leaders
discussed these matters at their meeting in Maas¬
tricht in December 1991.
Following up these initiatives, two proce¬
dures have been adopted. In the first place, the
five permanent members of the United Nations
Security Council have agreed to meet periodi-

The five permanent
members of the United
Nations Security Council
have agreed to meet
periodically in order to draw
up a common "code of
conduct" bearing on the
export of conventional
weapons.
cally in order to draw up a common "code of
conduct" bearing on the export of conventional
weapons. Together, these five states accounted
for over 80 per cent of the conventional weapons
exported to the Third World over the last five
years. This readiness to consider the question
from a new angle is a first encouraging sign.
As a second measure, on 9 December 1991
the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution
relating, among other things, to "transparency
in armaments" and a "Register of Conventional
Arms", whereby the member states of the UN
are henceforth required to provide an annual
inventory of all imports and exports of arms
during the previous twelve months.
Although several meetings of the Security
Council have been held to discuss this matter, the
five permanent members have not succeeded in
arriving at a clear, agreed definition of matériel
considered as "destabilizing" a decision which
would have made it possible to ban its export
nor have they managed to agree on mutual noti¬
fication procedures about their exports. In any
case, there is little likelihood of such information
being exchanged prior to the signature of pos¬
sible export orders, and this considerably limits
the scope of the negotiations.
A FREE MARKET
IN EXPORTS
The current outlook for an agreement among the
suppliers of conventional weapons to the coun¬
tries of the South is not bright, essentially
because of the economic and commercial con¬
ditions already mentioned.1 While it is true that
the case of the Iraqi weaponry that was turned
against some of its principal suppliers in the
battles of the Gulf War has underlined one of the
risks that can result from an arms race in the
Third World, it must be said that the arms-pro¬
ducing states are still irresistibly drawn towards
export markets to compensate for shrinking
domestic demand for military hardware.
In the East, the same commercial logic as in
the West works in favour of arms exports, pre¬
sent and future. In a situation of shrinking bud¬
gets, stagnant or sluggish economies, or pressing
need for convertible currency, such exports
seem to be the only means of guaranteeing the
security of jobs in high technology sectors and
A British missile base. 33

World totals
Industrialized countries
Developing countries
of preserving the viability of the conventional
arms industries.
In short, despite their stated attitudes
towards non-proliferation, the principal arms
producers are engaged in an ever keener com¬
petition for export markets, which incidentally
means that they are willing to accord numerous
compensatory measures to purchasers, most
often in the form of transfers of technology and
licensing agreements.
Other, more ambitious states are still intent
on devising and producing their own
weaponry Taiwan, for instance, is pursuing
its project for a combat plane known as the
"Indigenous Defense Fighter" (IDF) but even
they remain dependent on inputs of foreign
technology. Moreover, certain countries of the
South that a few years ago seemed likely to
become important new arms producers have
been unable to stand up to the competition from
the countries of the industrialized North which
alone can hope to continue footing the massive
bills for designing and producing high-tech con¬
ventional weapons.



The future of the arms export business will
thus depend essentially on the policy of the
principal producers, who have declared their
intention to limit the international arms trade.
But since each export order signed is one more
incentive for escalating a spiral of free competi¬
tion, for the present one can but note the gap that
separates words and deeds.
As for the immediate future, only two factors
could help to restrain arms transfers: the lack of
financial resources among potential Third World
purchasers, and the desire of the main producers
to keep the market in the most sophisticated
weapons for themselves, at least for the time
being.
As for the new UN Register, its function at
present seems likely to be limited to recording
JT the continuation of existing trends.
1 See the article by
Jacques Fontanel on
page 20.
