Head of Ulysses, fragment
of a marble statue found in
Italy (first century B.C.)
I
34
N late afternoon I would take refuge on a bal¬
cony overlooking a very quiet little street,
closed to traffic, forgotten by passers-by.
Released from the four walls of the apartment,
isolated from the rest of the household, I cut
myself off from friends and could see, sitting on
the tiles still warm from the sun, a corner of the
summer sky taking on its fiery colours.
I had two stacks of magazines bought by my
father to keep me company. He had recently
given me permission to read them. The magazines
in the first pile dealt with theoretical, abstract
topics that had little appeal for a ten-year-old. I
leafed through them slowly, taking infinite pains
to try to penetrate some of their mysteries.
My reward came when I delightedly immersed
myself in the issues of the second magazine. They
were largely devoted to short stories written by
Arab authors or translated from various languages,
mainly European. But they also featured a won¬
derful serial unabridged (or what I thought at the
time to be unabridged) translations of the Iliad and
the Odyssey.
My family had moved to Damietta not long
before. I had spent my early childhood in a



Mahmoud
Why Ulyssesi<
northern Egyptian village not far from the coast,
where the tang of the sea could already be smelled.
My father had been appointed headmaster of a
school there. We lived in one of the village's few
stone houses, whose first floor comprised two
apartments. A young couple lived across from
ours. The husband worked on a boat that plied
between several Mediterranean ports and regularly
dropped anchor in the waters of the Nile, on the
outskirts of the village. He was away for weeks at
a time, leaving his beautiful young bride all alone.
Since she had not yet had any children, she
could spend her days more or less as she pleased.
She would give my mother a hand, looking after
my sisters and especially, I think, myself. She
told me tales that I would later find in no book
and which held me spellbound for hours on end.
She opened up for me the secret doors of ever-
changing kingdoms, where even my unbridled
imagination was soon out of breath in its vain
attempts to keep up with her.
I remember that big room in her apartment one
evening when it was pouring with rain, as it some¬
times does in the Delta. She had lit a small heater
to ward off the chill that from time to time made
me shiver. I was sitting facing her, as close as I
could, riveted to that face whose beauty turned the
heads of all the men in the village. Her eyes seemed
lit from within, while her melodious voice carried
me beyond the seas, across deserts and valleys, in
search of faraway princesses, dashing princes and
wicked characters who unrelentingly tried to
come between them. The villains would be suc¬
cessful for a while but always failed in the end.
We were separated a short time later. My
father obtained his transfer to Damietta, and we
left the village forever. I was never to see my
beloved enchantress again.

Hussein
Sitting on the tile floor of my balcony, I would
sometimes feel the little shiver of that magical
evening run through me again. As I followed
Ulysses' wanderings, our neighbour's face would
appear to me sometimes in Penelope's enigmatic
smile, sometimes in Nausicaa's disquieting glance.
For a long while I missed the warm, soft closeness
of her body. Then, imperceptibly, she drifted out
of my life, to take her place among the princesses
of legend, standing behind her shutters, lost in one
of the countless palaces into which she had led me
and to which I no longer held the keys.
Homer introduced me to more complex,
more tormented heroes, whose paths criss¬
crossed before my eyes at a pace that now
depended only on how fast I could read. I had
sometimes lapped up dozens of pages before
nightfall, when my father's voice yanked me out
of my dream world to giye me some errand to do,
or my mother, worried about my eyesight, made
me come reluctantly ipiside.
I often got lost in the overpopulated plot of the
Trojan War, but found a few reliable bearings.
There were characters to whom 1 was clearly
drawn, others whom I definitely disliked. I
detested Helen, whose culpable frivolity was the
cause of the war, and I hated Menelaus even more
for taking her back after she had betrayed him so
many times. But above all, I was won over by
Ulysses.
Why Ulysses? Why not Achilles, for example?



The affinity I instantly felt for Ulysses left me
baffled. Nothing about him resembled the hero I
would have liked to be, or at least thought I would.
What perplexed me the most were his confused
feelings, his contradictory impulses, making him
so unlike the clean-cut heroes of my early child¬
hood. I was all the more perplexed to discover the
mysterious sway he held over me, the discon¬
certing ease with which I was drawn to his side.
Penelope on the other hand fitted easily into
my familiar world. She was the legitimate heir to
those exemplary queens whom I admired for
their tenacious fidelity and incredible resistance
to every temptation. Yet it was to her husband
that I was irresistibly drawn, that moody, wise,
insatiably curious adventurer who, not satisfied
with trying to find his way home, was eager on his
homeward journey to explore other possible
dawns, unknown feelings and new temptations,
temptations to which he sometimes succumbed.
Although his myth was far more familiar in
my environment than that of Ulysses, it was not
until several years later that I came across the
Arab hero Qaïs, who was "mad with love for
Laila". According to the legend, Indian in origin
as I later learned, the young man and his beloved
were brought up together in a nomadic tribe.
Qaïs, who was an outstandingly gifted poet, very
soon began singing of Laila's beauty and of the
love he felt and would always feel for her.
Naturally, as soon as he was old enough he asked
for her hand in marriage, but, contrary to all
The head of the Sphinx of
Giza (Egypt).
35

Majnun (Qaïs) and Laila
swoon on meeting each
other again. Fifteenth-
century Persian miniature.
36
MAHMOUD HUSSEIN
is the pen name of
Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat,
respectively director
and editor-in-chief of the
Unesco Courier.
expectations, Laila's father flatly turned him
down, on the grounds that the success of the
young man's poems had damaged his daughter's
reputation. Qaïs adamantly stood up for his love
and the father stubbornly continued turning him
down, finally going beyond the point of no return
by giving Laila to another.
Qaïs nearly went out of his mind. He left his
tribe and for many years wandered alone in the
desert, avoiding human contact, and with only
animals for company, until one day he came
across his tribe. He asked about Laila and found
out that she had indeed been given to another in
marriage. Seeking out her husband, he addressed
him sharply, prying into his relationship with
Laila. The husband's embarrassed answers only
made him more desperate. Finally he sought out
Laila herself, only to discover that the young
woman had not had much trouble coming to
terms with her fate. The only thing left for the
poet to do was fade out of sight from his kinsfolk,
once and for all.
I read and reread many versions of the legend,
in prose and in verse, with and without explana¬
tory notes. I never managed to feel sympathetic
towards the two protagonists. From the outset,
I thought Qaïs was too weak, too passive, and
Laila's character did not ring true. There was
nothing glorious about their story. They lacked
the courage to take their own lives, as Romeo and
Juliet would do a few centuries later, and Qaïs,
though betrayed, did not strangle his Desdemona.
Moreover, Laila's love seemed to me suspect
from the start. It was not as strong as that of
Qaïs; she did not deserve his love. Theirs was not
a shared feeling, but a one-sided passion that
became an embarrassment.
I could never fathom the attitude of Laila's
father. What had got into the man? Qaïs was a
kinsman, a natural match for his daughter. How
had Laila's honour been stained? Poetry was a
highly-valued means of expression in Arab tribes.
Some women even confided in poets in order to
achieve a respectable celebrity status through
them. A few of them regretted it when the poets
went too far and suggested a too intimate knowl¬
edge of their persons. But Qaïs was safe from such
criticism. His poetry spoke only of love, and his
love remained desperately chaste to the end.
The story left a bitter taste in my mouth, the
feeling of a waste whose senselessness irritated me
for a long time. At one point I tried dispelling this
unease by attempting to identify myself with the
heroes, trying to see them in a historical con¬
text, however approximate. I finally gave up,
resigned to living with my unease, content to
observe the unrivalled popularity Qaïs continued
to enjoy throughout the Arab world and to listen
for endlessly repeated echoes of his heart-rending
lament in all the Egyptian love songs. I could
understand neither how nor why an entire people
that so greatly admired the manly qualities of
courage, endurance and indifference to suffering
could have identified with a hero so lacking in
those qualities, and whose life was a tale of woe
from beginning to end.
I opted for Ulysses, dissociating myself from
the general opinion of my countrymen. Were
they not inexplicably repudiating themselves,
and some of their most loudly proclaimed values,
by applauding a hero like Qaïs? As a youth I
began taking note of these interlocking acts of
betrayal, all these rifts that little by little spawned
new loyalties. Part of me, however, would always
remain an orphan.
As far back as my eyes could see, I could no
longer discern my beloved enchantress, but I
would keep on scanning the horizon. Qß
