Relative values
jy Flora Lewis
c
An illustration for The
Adventures of Baron
Miinchhausen (1786) shows
Baron de Crac reaching for
the Moon.
I AN North and South share the same
idea of progress?" This is a provoca-
' tive question which I must answer yes
and no. On one- level, everybody has the same
basic needs adequate food, shelter, health care
and a sense of dignity. The "South", in its
metaphorical meaning of the poorest societies,
is still a long way from reaching these stan¬
dards. Moving towards them would certainly be
seen as "progress" both by themselves and by
those already much better off. But even in flat
material and physical terms, the idea is not so
simple. The population explosion in global terms
is the result of a dramatic reduction in mor¬
tality rates and an increase in life expectancy.
Women aren't having more babies than a century
ago in poor societies, but a lot more babies are
reaching adulthood thanks to scientific and
technological advances, which move geomet¬
rically while economic development moves far
more slowly.
Poverty increases because there are a lot
more people, and in some cases it increases
absolutely because of the consequent strain on
resources desertification (in the Sahel, for
example), deforestation, soil erosion and so on.
The fact that more people stay alive may be
considered progress, but the fact that they live
so badly, sometimes worse than their ancestors,
cannot be. The prosperous tend to have far
fewer children, who live better. Is that progress?
Yes, they feel it is. So this idea of material
improvement is shared. IS

Yet, still in strictly material terms, above the
level of absolute misery, poverty and progress
are felt as relative conditions and inequality
measured by immediate surroundings can seem
more important. The rioters in South Central
Los Angeles last year certainly consider them¬
selves poor. They live in a city which flaunts
wealth and luxury, they watch TV which not
only urges ever more consumption but takes
them inside the homes of the well-to-do for a
vicarious taste of ease and comfort. They them¬
selves are enormously better off than many
hundreds of millions in Africa, Latin America
and Asia, but they do not make such a compar¬
ison. Why should they? They live in a society
which preaches democracy, equity and justice,
and they feel it has failed to deliver to them. Is
this progress? Perhaps, in the sense that they do
not simply accept their lot in resignation but
look for one way or another to improve it,
making their demands heard. This idea of
progress is probably also shared.
A challenge to the will of God
But even in those societies which do believe in
progress, at least as possible, if no longer
< v
inevitable, in the Victorian tenet, there is no
longer such conviction about what it really is.
Some cultures reject the whole idea as hubris, an
unworthy challenge to the will of God. There is
considerable confusion between "moderniza¬
tion" and "progress". Are they synonymous,
opposites, or simply different? All can be argued,
though the urge to modernize making use of sci¬
ence and technology, economic development,
greater autonomy, is very widespread, even
among such groups as fundamentalists who
think of restoring a golden age rather than "pro¬
gressing" toward an unknown future.
Progress suggests a certain philosophical
and moral content, as well as material improve¬
ment, and that, like beauty and justice, can be in
the eye of the beholder. The image of the ideal
society which would be the ultimate goal of
progress is not shared, not only among cul¬
tures, but not even within them. I would main¬
tain that there are and always will be arguments
because there is a permanent tension between the
consciousness of man as an individual and man
as a member of a community. Both are essential.
According to varying circumstances and per¬
ceptions, which change with time and place as
Carnovo/(l986),
mixed media on card
(I70x 130 cm), by the
Cuban painter Julio Garcia
Fortes.
K»*?-^. ^
16
i«.i

well as with cultural traditions, one or the other
need is felt to be more urgent. Sooner or later,
efforts to meet the one will lead to a feeling of
intolerable constraint on the other, forcing a
change of perceptions. This is why I reject
Francis Fukuyama's idea of an "end of history"
even in his narrow Hegelian sense. The social
versus individual dilemma is inherent in the
human condition and will never be resolved.
Therefore, I do not see how the idea of progress
can mean much more than providing human
satisfaction, which is inevitably an elusive,
evanescent state.
A sense of void
Modern industrial society ordered by democ¬
ratic government, which I assume is what is
meant by "North", has indeed gone a long way
towards satisfying certain needs, compared to
previous periods. But it also contains deep frus¬
trations and a sense of growing void, flagrantly
displayed in the drug culture. I suppose this is
what Malraux meant in saying "the twenty-first
century will be spiritual or it will not be". The
North has been unable to explain that void, and
therefore has come to doubt the reality of
progress. The "South" sees the failings and looks
for a different, more encompassing idea of
progress with greater warmth, more human
consolation and less alienation, though it hasn't
been able to explain it either.
There arc differences of emphasis, and in
this sense, no, the idea of progress is not shared.
That need not and should not be divisive or
confrontational. There is still much to commu¬
nicate and share and enrich in all ways, pro¬
viding we do not fall into the trap of blaming
"the enemy" for all that goes wrong, as we used
to blame "God's will". Nor do I think it matters
very much whether we all have the same idea of
progress. Absolute conviction, certainty about
the ultimate in human affairs, social blueprints,
provide the one approach that is sure to be
wrong, and they have been the source of a great
deal of the harm people have done to each other.
It is as well that we try out different ways of
seeking to fulfill our hopes and aspirations,
mindful that we all do have them.
Mille couleurs (1 989), a
design for a fresco by
Daoud Krouri.
FLORA LEWIS
is a distinguished American
journalist who is Senior
Columnist with The New York
Times, for which she writes a
twice-weekly column on
foreign affairs. She is the
author of several books
including Europe: Road to Unity
(Touchstone/Simon & Schuster,
1992).
17
