Sumerian sums
byjomes Ritter
The origins of a positional system of numbering
in ancient Mesopotamia
Bronze head of king
Sargon, founder of the
Akkadian dynasty
(2400-2200 B.C.).
figure I. Three ways ofcounting
The arrows point from the
lower value to the higher
value unit. The number on
top of the arrow indicates
how many of the lower
value unit make up the
higher value unit, e.g. I
small circle = 6 small
notches in System S, 10
small notches in System S,
and 18 small notches in
system G.
System S (sexagesimal
for counting discrete
objects and measuring
lengths)
System G (surface
measures)
System S (capacity
measures)
WHEN, during the last one hundred years,
scholars began to understand the written
numerical system of the ancient
Mesopotamian world in the last two millennia
before our era, they discovered that it had two
highly distinctive features. First of all the
Mesopotamians used a unique system with the
base of 60. Secondly, they differed from the other
known ancient peoples by using a system of
place notation, as we do, to express their written
numbers. All kinds of explanations for the exis¬
tence of these two strange features were put for¬
ward. Some thought they might have had some¬
thing to do with the Sumerian calendar; others
that they were due to the convenience of the
number 60, so rich in divisors; others still that they
were the result of a psychological peculiarity of
the Sumerian people. We now know, however,
that the answer lies in the genesis and develop¬
ment of writing in Mesopotamia, or more pre¬
cisely in the relation between bookkeeping and
writing the fact that the original purpose of
writing was bookkeeping and was the outcome
of a process lasting a thousand years.
Since the Mesopotamians used artefacts made
of clay, a virtually indestructible medium, to
keep their accounts, we can follow the devel¬
opment of writing in Mesopotamia (and in
6 * . 10 3 _ ^ 6 _
neighbouring Susa) at the end of the fourth and
the beginning of the third millennium. Initially
bookkeeping was done using hollow clay balls
which contained small tokens of varying sizes
and shapes and whose surfaces bore the impres¬
sions of cylinder seals. The form and size of the
tokens represent the object and/or the counting
or measuring unit employed. The seal impres¬
sions on the outside indicate the owner or con¬
tracting parties, or the controlling official.
During the next several hundred years this
system evolved. First, the tokens were impressed
on the surface of the ball before being enclosed;
next, the tokens themselves were abandoned,
and only their impression on the surface of the
now flattened ball or tablet was retained; finally,
a reed was used instead of a token to create the
surface marks.
By around 3200 B.C., a writing system had
developed that consisted of a repertory of some
30 numeric and 800 non-numeric signs, used
to designate the items counted and geographical
and official names.
I A dozen different counting systems
A large number of different ways of counting
were used in Mesopotamia during this period
(3200-2800). These systems included one for
counting discrete objects and lengths, one for
measuring surfaces, another for determining vol¬
umes of grain (subdivided into a number of dif¬
ferent subsystems for different kinds of grain!), yet
another for measurements of time. There were
probably close to a dozen of these metrological
systems. Three of them are shown in figure 1.
To express a number in any of these sys¬
tems an additive technique was used; in other
words a number sign was used as many times as
there were units represented by that sign. This
can be seen in figure 2, a text showing the
number of sheep in a flock.
But despite the wealth of systems, the reper¬
tory of numeric signs was small. In fact, all the
signs were essentially built up from only four
different marks of the reed: a large and small
circle, and a large and small notch (figure 3).
Furthermore these signs were used only in cer-

Mesopotamian clay tablet
used for bookkeeping
(c. 3000 B.C.).
Figure 2. Counting sheep
Explanation:
2x10 + 7x1=27 ewes
and
2x10 + 5x1= 25 rams,
a total of 5x10 + 2x1 =
52 sheep.
tain combinations: either separately (four signs)
or combined in the form circle + notch of the
same size or circle + circle of two different
sizes this yields seven signs in all.
These few signs were thus used differently in
different systems: the small circle is worth 10
small notches in the system used for discrete
measurements (system S), 6 small notches in that
used for measuring capacity (system S), and 1 8 in
that used for surface measurements (system G).
The "numeric signs", then, have no intrinsic
value, only that lent by the system in which they
appear. Furthermore the ratios between succes¬
sive signs their "relative values" vary from
one system to another. Thus there is no general
idea of number, only ways of counting.
For the 500 years starting around 3200 B.C.,
the range of texts produced in Mesopotamia is
very restricted. They are overwhelmingly
accounts, consisting of numbers drawn from
the various metrological systems with the addi¬
tion of signs representing the objects thus
counted, but also geographical names and offi¬
cial titles. There is also a handful of school texts,
lists of the signs and words, both numeric and
non-numeric, that the young apprentice scribe
had to master in acquiring his craft. The principal
role of scribal training was the training of a
corps of bookkeepers. The idea that writing can
be diverted from bookkeeping, and used to
record a spoken language the role of writing
which seems so natural to us was slow in
developing, taking over 500 years.
A dual evolution
Some time around 2600 B.C., the developing
city-states that constituted ancient Sumer
achieved sufficient size and wealth for writing,
hitherto found at only a few sites, to become
common all over southern Mesopotamia.
One of the reforms carried out during this
period of consolidation was that of the metro-
logical systems. The number of such systems
was reduced from a dozen to a mere handful,
one for discrete and length measures, one for
areas and one for capacity. To these three was
added a new system, to measure weight. Rather
than invent new numbers to indicate values in this
system, it was decided to use the numbers from
the system used to measure discrete objects, fol¬
lowing them with the names of the units of
weight. This system proved so practical that the
names of weight units and their relative values
were taken over into the surface metrological
system, and used there to express small areas. IS

This idea the naming of units was one
of the two major innovations of this period,
and was not restricted to the weight system and
its extensions. Even the larger units of length or
volume now began to carry names. The scribe
wrote a number-sign + "bur" for surface mea¬
surements, and a number-sign + "nindan" for
lengths. Of course once the names of units are
written, it becomes possible to see immediately
which form of measurement is being made. The
,, scribes of Mesopotamia were to make increasing
use of this new method.
The other important change in this period
relates to the writing of numbers. In the case of
areas, the sign [A] takes the place of the older [B]
(figure 4), the outer of the two concentric circles
being replaced by four crossed "cuneiform"
strokes (from Latin cuneus, "nail" or "wedge").
This is just one example of the growing
"cuneiformization" of the writing system
including number signs that is typical of this
period. To an increasing degree, the curvilinear,
incised lines of the older, semi-pictographic
form of the script, difficult to trace in clay, were
replaced by the faster and simpler method of
impression of the reed. This evolution of the
writing system, already timidly apparent during
the previous period, spread rapidly during this
Figure 4
* ©
A B
Q 0
C D
Figure 5
T ï
E F
Figure 6
TI n
61 2
period, and virtually squeezed out the older,
rounded numbers by the end of the millennium.
Speedy scribes
The period from 2350 to 2200 B.C. saw the
building of the first major empire in Mesopotamia,
that of the Akkadians, who spoke a Semitic lan¬
guage. Two of the innovations introduced by the
new centralized administration of the Akkadian
empire, which at the height of its power stretched
from the Gulf to Syria and Lebanon, also played
a crucial role in metrology and writing.
The systems of units inherited from the pre¬
vious period were rationalized and adjusted so that
simple correspondences would exist among them.
Although the complexity of the old ways of
counting was never totally banished, the ratios of
units tended to stabilize around fixed values. Fur¬
thermore the system of numbers used for mea¬
suring discrete objects now began to be widely
used for other kinds of measurements, coupled
with the use of names for different units.
At the same time the older numbers such as
[C] and [D] were replaced by [E] and [F] (figure
5). The long march of cuneiformization was
still under way. These changes, dictated by the
need for efficiency in performing the growing
number of bureaucratic tasks in the Akkadian
empire, have a double edge. Certainly it is sim¬
pler and faster to write the new cuneiform num¬
bers than the old rounded numbers, but the
speed is purchased at a price. The difference
between the small unit and the one sixty times
larger was quite small, a question of a slightly
larger "head" to the simple vertical stroke. The
Figure 7. The significant detail
1<4] 5<4I
2<9J 5 <6T 5<
i<7j 4<3I
3< 5<3
4<
2<
14 54 00
29 56 50
17 43 40
30 53 20
Figure 8. The sexagesimal system
In our decimal, positional system, we use the
nine digits I, 2, 3,....,9 plus 0; the value of a
digit in a number is determined by its position
in that number, each place representing a
power of ten. Thus, in the number 161, the
rightmost I is worth one unit, while the
leftmost I is worth one hundred and the 6 is
worth six tens, i.e.:
161 = 1 00 + 60 +1 = 1x1 00 + 6x10+1x1
x 10' + 6 x 10' + Ix 10°.
I
<= 10 = 1
16
Total: I 1/2 mana 3 1/2 gin minus 7 se silver
Column I (rightmost): 0 + 50 + 40 + 20 = 60 + 50 put down 50 and carry I
Column 2: 54 + 56 + 43 + 53 + I (carried) = 207 = 3 x 60 + 27 down 27 and carry 3
Column 3: 1 4 + 29 + 17 + 30 + 3 (carried) = 93 = 60 + 33 down 33 and carry I
Total: I 33 27 50
Since I mana = 60 gin = I 00 gin (base 60) and I le = 1/180) gin = 0;00 20 gin (base 60):
I 33 27 50 = I 33: 27 50 gin = I mana +33 gin + 83 se (rounded off, 83 se = 0; 27 40
gin) or, written more traditionally, I 1/2 mana (= I mana 30 gin) + 3 l/2g (= 3 gin 90
se ) 7 se.
In the sexagesimal, base sixty system, there
are 59 digits (zero is represented by a blank
space). Thus the number written by putting
side by side the three cuneiform digits
representing 29 56 50 can be translated into
our decimal system as:
29 x 601 + 56 x 60' + 50 x 60° = 29 x 3600 + 56 x
60 + 50 x I = 1 04400 + 3360 + 50 = 1 078 1 0
This is of course exactly the system we use for
reading time:
29 hours 56 minutes 50 seconds = 29 x 3600 +
56 x 60 + 50 = 1 078 1 0 seconds.

JAMES RITTER,
of the United States, teaches
mathematics and the history of
science at the University of
Paris VIII. His research
interests centre on the history
of the general theory of
relativity as well as "rational
practices" in ancient Egypt and
Mesopotamia. He contributed
to a work edited by Michel
Serres entitled Eléments
d'histoire des sciences
(A Basic History of Science),
Paris, 1989.
figure 9. The Mesopotamian "zero"
There are two main uses of the zero in our modern
numerical notation:
as a number, for example one can add 0 to 5 with
the result 5;
as a place-holder in a number. The number 5020
indicates that there are 5 thousands, no hundreds,
2 tens and no ones.
The Mesopotamians never created the con¬
cept of a number zero. They did need to indicate
empty places in a number, however, and for this
they used two different methods.
The first method, used from the time of the
invention of a positional notation at the end of
the third millennium to the end of the first mil¬
lennium, was to a leave a blank in the writing of a
number to indicate that there were no units ofthat
particular power of 60. For example, the number
3 22 (3 sixties and 22 ones) was written as shown
in example Y (above), while 3 00 22 (3-thousand-
six-hundreds, no sixties and 22 ones) was written
as shown in example Y (below).
Very late in the life of the Mesopotamian civi¬
lization, in the Seleucid period (from the end of the
fourth century B.C.), one finds another method,
using a written zero place-holder, especially in astro¬
nomical texts. Thus the sexagesimal number 3 00
22 was noted at this period as shown in example Z.
«n
w «n
difficulty of distinguishing between the two
numbers 61 and 2, for example (figure 6), when
hastily written and read poses a critical
problem of ambiguity. The resolution of this
problem by the Mesopotamian scribes, probably
during the Akkadian period or in that just fol¬
lowing, was precisely to turn this ambiguity to
good use by creating a positional system.
I The birth of positional notation
After the period of disruption that followed the
end of the Akkadian empire, a newly central¬
ized state was founded in Mesopotamia; the city-
state of Ur successfully established a new empire,
which we call the Third Dynasty of Ur, or Ur III.
A single text (figure 7) among more than
100,000 from this period, has left us a trace of the
technical and conceptual revolution that took
place during the Ur III and the preceding Akka¬
dian epoch. A bookkeeping text dealing with a
delivery of silver, it is quite ordinary except for
one detail: the scribe has forgotten to erase the
mathematical calculations he made in drawing it
up. The writing of these calculations shows us
that, at least by Ur III times, the full positional
system in base 60 was in place. What the scribe
has done in the first four lines is to write down
the weight of four separate deliveries of silver in
positional, sexagesimal notation. In this system,
each place represents a power of 60, with the
numbers in each running from 1 to 59 (figure 8).
The signs used for writing these 59 numbers
are created by using the first two signs of the
now totally cuneiformized system for discrete
objects: the wedge for the value of 10 and the
stroke for 1. A blank space appearing in a
number represents the Mesopotamian "zero"
(figure 9). In the final line the scribe has trans¬
lated the sum of the four entries into the tradi¬
tional system for measuring weight.
As can be seen from this example, the ambi¬
guity mentioned above between 61 and 2 is
resolved simply by accepting it. There is no
longer any difference in the writing of the signs
that make up, say, 1 1 and 61 . Both use the same
sign twice. The difference is conveyed exclu¬
sively by the spacing between them, that is, by
giving a significance to the relativeposition of the
two signs (figure 10). The positional system of
Mesopotamian mathematics was born. And this
system was sexagesimal; the Mesopotamians
had chosen a sexagesimal system from the var¬
ious systems at their disposal.
So it was neither a psychological peculiarity
of the Sumerian and Akkadian peoples, nor mys¬
tical and religious ritual, nor again complicated
mathematical criteria of divisibility which led to
the sexagesimal, positional system of
Mesopotamia. Rather, pushed by the economic
and social needs of an increasingly centralized
state operating over a period of a millennium, two
simultaneous developments the increasing
reliance on numbers drawn from a single metro¬
logical system and the progressive cuneiformiza¬
tion and consequent risk of ambiguity in the
writing of numbers interacted to form the
number system that was to be used in
Mesopotamia for the following 2,000 years. As we
have seen, it was the increasing predominance of
one particular metrological system with its par¬
ticular choice of relative values which gave birth
to a sixty-based number system, and it was the
cuneiformization of writing that was respon¬
sible for the creation of a positional notation.
Most important of all was a possibly
unlooked-for result of these two developments.
The same number-signs could be and were
used to write the numbers involved in calculations
in all the metrological systems. The new system
was not attached to any of the traditional ways of
counting; numbers had become free-floating and
the detachment of number and measure was
complete. The end of the third millennium B.C.
saw the birth of the concept of number, abstracted
from any particular unit. ÎI
