IMNTITY-
A CARD WITH
TWO FACES
by Mauro Peressini
A hard look
at the concept of
group identity
and its impact,
for better or
worse, on today's
world
T|TB^HERE are, to my mind, two ways of
looking at the current upsurge in demands
for the recognition of cultural, religious,
ethnic, racial or national identities.
On the positive side, the efforts by certain
population groups to assert their identity can be
regarded as "liberation movements", as strategies
for challenging oppression and injustice. What
these groups are doing proclaiming that they are
different, rediscovering the roots of their cul¬
ture, strengthening group solidarity or aspiring to
political self-determination may accordingly
be seen as necessary and legitimate attempts to
escape from their state of subjugation and enjoy
a certain measure of dignity.
On the down side, however, involvement in
militant action for recognition tends to make
such groups more deeply entrenched in their
attitudes and to make the cultural compartments
into which they are divided even more watertight.
The assertion of identity then starts to turn into
self-absorption and isolation, and is liable at any
time to slide into intolerance of others and
towards ideas of ethnic "cleansing" and xeno¬
phobia, racism and violence.
14
CHANGE AS A CONSTANT
OF CULTURE
The main feature of human societies and their
cultures has always been not that they have stood
still but that they have been responsive to change.
Instances of isolated societies that have remained
unaffected by historical events are exceptions, if
not indeed myths, and such societies have seldom
prospered.
Almost all societies have, in one way or
another, been caught up in history, whether
through natural phenomena (disasters or climatic
or environmental changes), migratory move¬
ments (emigration, immigration, the meeting and
intermingling of peoples, or the dissemination of
knowledge, beliefs and values), political events
(wars and annexations) or economic factors (trade
and the spread of technology), and have con¬
stantly needed to redefine and change them¬
selves, invent, generate ideas, borrow and acquire,
and devise new ways of acting and thinking.
Far from representing an unchanging set of
ways of acting and thinking or a finite body of
knowledge, beliefs, values, traditions or rules,
standards or principles, culture is a living thing, a
process involving communication and cross-fer¬
tilization. It is therefore an exaggeration to talk
about the danger of "losing" a culture and about
the need to "retrieve", "protect", "safeguard" or
"cleanse" it. Since culture is a continuing process
of change, acculturation is its mode of existence.
It is because of this constant reshaping of cul¬
ture by history that a cultural, ethnic, racial or
national group is never a uniform entity but
breaks down instead into different cultural sub-
units that are themselves continually undergoing
change, such as families and kinship groups; vil¬
lages, towns and regional groupings; social classes,
occupational groups, blue-collar and white-collar
workers, managers and bosses; generations,
young people and old; men and women; or the
mentally or physically handicapped.
Thus, although the fact of being different is at
the heart of every group's identity, on the other
hand every group contains individuals who share
many points of resemblance with people in other
groups. According to the cultural aspect on which
emphasis is placed (religion, culinary habits,
dress, language etc.), groups shift frontiers and
overlap, the limits become more blurred, and
distinctions between one's own and others' iden¬
tity become a matter of degree or of place in the
same continuum.
Governed by their own hybrid logics,1 the cul¬
tures of all groups are much more like a mobile
and open-ended assemblage of many differing

Above, Portrait of Rabelais
(1951) by Henri Matisse.
© H. Matisse Estate.
Left, Inuit dance mask
(Greenland).
parts than a uniform, stable, self-contained and
easily defined entity, especially at the present
time, as upheavals of all kinds follow fast on one
another, cultures communicate as never before,
and populations move about in millions.
A SIMPLIFYING FICTION
At a time of continual changes in ways of acting
and thinking, collective identities provide indi¬
viduals with a means of simplifying reality.
This simplification works firstly by trans¬
forming the whole set of individuals composing
the group (cultural minority, ethnic group, race or
nation) into a uniform and distinct entity, so that
the group can be represented as an obvious empir¬
ical reality. The uniformity of the group is ensured
by the selection of a limited number of features
both as being typical of the individuals forming the
group and as being more important than other fea¬
tures in terms of the definition of their identity.
Whereas an objective observer analysing a
given population would find an infinite number of
possible criteria for describing, grouping together
or distinguishing between the individuals being
observed, those militating for recognition of their
group's identity arbitrarily choose a limited
number of criteria, such as language, skin colour
or religion, so that group members recognize
themselvesprimarily in terms of the labels attached
to the group whose existence is being asserted,
"black", "white", "Arab", "Muslim", "Jewish",
"Christian", "Hindu", "French", "Italian" or
whatever.
The distinction between the group in question
and other groups is established by simplifying
the features selected. Whereas the same objective
observer could see only continuous variations
for each criterion, and would thus be prevented
from drawing clear dividing-lines between the
groups, those militating for recognition of their
identity simplify each criterion by eliminating the
variations they regard as secondary and are thus
able to speak, for example, of a national lan¬
guage, of "whites" and "blacks", or of the Islamic
or Jewish faith.
Simplification also works by transforming
groups into essences, abstractions endowed with
the capacity to remain unchanged through time.
The cultural minority, ethnic group, race or nation
concerned is thus seen as being outside of time,
while change and the effects of history are denied
or underestimated. In some cases, people actu¬
ally act as though the group had remained
unchanged and talk, for example, about the history
of the "French", the "blacks" or the "Jewish
people", as if those entities had survived for cen¬
turies without changing, as if the "French", the
"blacks" or the "Jews" of two or five or ten cen¬
turies ago were the same people as today, using the
same tools and techniques and with the same ways
of acting and flunking, the same desires, aspirations,
anxieties and pleasures.
In other instances, although the changes
wrought by history are acknowledged, the deep-
rooted identity of the group is still not questioned.
The group is seen metaphorically as an edifice
that has been collectively shaped and built up
over the centuries, or else as a living individualwho
is born and develops. It is when the concepts
enshrined in the words "patrimony" or "her¬
itage" are looked at in the context of the metaphor
of "work under construction" that they really
become meaningful: objects, knowledge, beliefs,
values and traditions all represent building-blocks
for the collective edifice which have to be carefully
stockpiled and must not be lost or destroyed. It is
likewise in the context of the metaphor of the
"individual" that the concept of the "collective
memory" can be understood: cultures, ethnic
groups or nations are credited with the faculty of
memory and are spoken of as though they were
human beings (who can be "humiliated" or
"betrayed" or "avenged"). When people are forced
to acknowledge the far-reaching changes that his¬
tory has wrought and when they admit that the
identity of the group may no longer be what it was,
the present state of the group often comes to be
seen as one of "sickness". People then start looking
back on some period in the past as having been the
time when the group possessed a now tarnished
"purity" or a now lost "authenticity". The past
although it was the present for the people living at
the time is regarded as an unchanging state, a
baseline to be turned to as one turns to a
remedy in order to rediscover and re-establish
the truth about the group, or its essence.
Cultural, ethnic, racial or national identities
are fictions that simplify social realities, and they
have practical effects, two negative aspects of
which I wish particularly to stress. WÍ9

16
Firstly, they gloss over and disparage thepre-
sent and contemporary history. Changes in ways
of acting and thinking, contacts between peo¬
ples, the patterns of exchanges and intermin-
glings of which both present and past are
formed all these are often discussed in such
negative terms as the "contamination" of cul¬
tures, the "expansion" of modern Western cul¬
ture, world-wide "uniformity" and the "disap¬
pearance" of human diversity. Some aspects of
recent history show there to be an element of
truth in these judgements, but to leave things at
that would be to run the risk of failing to see
what is being created afresh in the crucible of
the present. It could be argued, moreover, that a
disparaging attitude to the present day and con¬
temporary history is tantamount to contempt
,, for the lives, efforts, aspirations and desires of mil¬
lions of men and women who are, after all, coping
as best they can with the unstable, ill-assorted raw
materials that history has handed down to them.
Who is to say that they are on the wrong track
and that their cultures are not authentic? What
right or authority has anyone to say so?
Secondly, the way in which groups are indi¬
vidualized or personalized in the name of iden¬
tity has negative effects similar to those of the
individualism that is creating havoc in the indus¬
trialized societies of the West. It is individualism
raised to the group level. As a result, the only
legitimate principle of behaviour that such groups
recognize is the satisfaction of their own self-
interest, which lies in maximizing their economic
and political profits and in selfishly devising
schemes for development and expansion without
regard for other people.
Such group individualism ends up with all
groups fighting and competing against one
another, and leads on to the logical consequence
of all individualism, i.e. there can only be "win¬
ners" if there are also "losers" cultural minori¬
ties, ethnic groups or nations that cannot fend for
themselves, cannot have their own territories or
form their own states.
IDENTITY AS A COGNITIVE
NECESSITY
Paradoxically, however, it is precisely because
identity represents a simplifying fiction, creating
uniform groups out of disparates, drawing border
lines across a continuum and turning groups into
unchanging essences, that it is necessary and
indeed essential to the agents of social change.
Although it is a factor of division, it is also a
factor oí vision2. Like the concepts we use to put
names to things and designate ideas, identity cat¬
egories make it possible for us to understand and
grasp reality. In a constantly changing world,
they enable us to put names to ourselves and to
others, form some idea of who we are and who
other people are, and ascertain the place we
MAURO PERESSINI,
a Canadian anthropologist, is
curator and researcher at the
Canadian Centre for Studies
on Traditional Culture of the
Canadian Museum of
Civilizations (Hull, Ontario).
He is in charge of the
programme of research into
cultural groups ¡n Canada
originating from Portugal,
Spain, Italy and France. His
publications include Migration,
famille et communauté. Les
Italiens du Frioul à Montréal,
1 945-1 980 (University of
Montreal, 1990).
occupy along with other people in the world
and in society. Lastly, as a means of recognizing
the members of a particular group (x is an X
because he or she acts or thinks in such-and-
such a way), identity provides the framework
for interpreting, predicting or managing our
behaviour or that of other people (x is bound to
do this because he or she is an X).
The current upsurge in efforts to assert the
identity of various groups can, in fact, be partly
explained by the cognitivefunction performed by
identity. Naturally, many of these movements can
be explained in terms of a tangle of economic and
political factors combining the faceless logic of the
international system and the special interests of
small groups and individuals who look upon cul¬
tures, ethnic groups, races or nations only as means
to achieve other ends and to manipulate people.
That being said, people would not go along as
they do, often in large numbers, with the propo¬
sitions put to them, in spite of the sacrifices they
entail, if there were not a very strong feeling of
need for identity, a need to "take stock of things"
and know "who we are", "where we come from"
and "where we are going", that is accounted for in
turn by the increased pace of change in today's
world.
Industrialization, the breakneck pace of tech¬
nological development, the often uncontrolled
globalization of the capitalist economy and of the

Cultural transmission in
action at the Louvre
Museum in Paris.
constraints imposed by financial markets, the
glaring intrusions of communications, the media
and the products of the cultural industries all
these disrupt not only the everyday material and
economic lives of people all over the world but
also their symbolic frames of reference. Knowl¬
edge, skills, beliefs, values, traditions, rules and
standards of behaviour, moral and religious prin¬
ciples are all constantly being called into question.
Withdrawal into a world of one's own and a
search for cultural or ethnic "roots" come to be
seen as attempts to put down markers and to
stem the fast-moving tide of time and history.
Individuals need their identity because it makes
things less complicated and unsettled, so that they
can then put some order not only into their own
lives but into the world around them. In this
sense, identity also generates reality and con¬
tributes to the role performed by imagination or
religion in a world that is itself only chaos. Like
imagination or religion, identity creates order out
of chaos and shapes the world by conferring
meaning on it, which is why it can be regarded as
a source of liberation in some circumstances.
LINES OF APPROACH
Identity is thus a necessity, but its negative side-
effects must be avoided at all costs. How can
these two contradictory aspects of identity be
reconciled? I propose to confine myself to a few
lines of approach.
The first of these relates to what I would call
the mobility ofidentity. If any identity, whether
it be cultural, ethnic or national, is to function
properly in other words, if its suggested con¬
figuration is to be acknowledged as real and legit¬
imate it has to overlook or disregard the fact that
all such configurations are arbitrary and could be
drawn in many other possible ways.
This means we must bear the arbitrary nature
of identity constructs constantly in mind, not
with a view to eliminating all forms of identifi¬
cation and affiliation which would be unreal¬
istic, since identity is a cognitive necessity for
human beings but simply so as to remind our¬
selves that we each have several identities at the
same time.
The realization that we all have several iden¬
tities whereby to define ourselves has its uses.
During the recent constitutional discussions in
Canada, for instance, women from the country's
indigenous groups who wanted to hold on to
the protection they are afforded under the Cana¬
dian Charter of Rights and Freedoms opposed
attempts by the (male) community leaders to set
up an autonomous indigenous government run
on traditional lines and thus not subject to the
provisions of the Charter.
On this specific issue, the women adopted a
shifting identity strategy: first defined as "indige¬
nous", they became "women" when they stressed
the danger that the "principles of indigenous
government" represented for the autonomy and
equality of women in relation to men, then
became "Canadian citizens" when they militated
in favour of maintaining the Canadian Charter in
the event of there being an indigenous govern¬
ment.
When people realize that all identities are
arbitrary and that they can switch from one to
another to suit the circumstances, they can often
respond in a more effective and imaginative way
to pressures exerted on them from outside or
inside the group. This realization also prevents
people from becoming self-absorbed and with¬
drawing into a single identity, and hence makes it
possible for them to engage in dialogue and estab¬
lish cross-group bonds of solidarity (e.g. with
other "citizens" in one of the examples cited
above and with other "women" in another)
regardless of their cultural, racial, ethnic or
national origins.
The second line of approach would consist in
reinstating the present and contemporary his¬
tory. At a time when the "end of history" is
being predicted and tears of nostalgia are being
wept over the past, it is tempting to recall, as the
French philosopher Gilles Deleuze has done,
that "there are futures that operate in silence and
are almost imperceptible",3 and that culture is
being constantly and unexpectedly created by the 17

In Guatemala, Axi Indians
celebrate the festival of St.
Peter.
cobbling together of new ways of acting and
thinking, fresh and original combinations of ele¬
ments, and counter-cultures.
In this respect, the Third World sets an
example. There are, for example, a large number
of syncretic cults, such as "Kimbanguism" in
Congo and voodoo in Benin, Haiti, Cuba and
Brazil, in which Christian rites and modern ele¬
ments are blended with traditional values or
Christian saints are identified with pagan divini¬
ties. Similarly, the galloping urban growth that a
number of countries are undergoing gives rise, in
the Third World, not only to the kind of dehu-
manization that is seen in the main cities of the
industrialized countries but also to an upwelling
of cultural and social creativity. In the pobla¬
ciones of Santiago, thefavelas of Rio de Janeiro or
the shantytowns of Mexico City and elsewhere,
what is happening in many cases is the regener¬
ation of the social fabric through new principles
of solidarity and new forms of social participation,
such as self-managed micro-organizations, grass¬
roots economic organizations, religious com¬
munities, neighbourhood associations, young
18
people's and women's movements, environmental
groups and so on. As regards the economy too,
informal-sector activities are springing up all
over the place through a mixture of resourceful¬
ness and ingenuity, based on ideas of produc¬
tion and consumption very different from those
of the capitalist economy.4
All these examples, which have their coun¬
terparts in the most marginalized sectors of the
industrialized countries (prisons, teenage gangs
and also grassroots organizations), rather than
representing the replacement of "traditional"
cultures by a "Western-style culture", actually tes¬
tify to the emergence of a new, third way that, ill-
defined as it may be and arising under appalling
conditions, nevertheless holds out hope for the
future, indeed perhaps for the only possible
future.
Identities formulated in these terms deserve
our attention. Far from being based on
unchanging and exclusive membership rules, like
those of blood ties, parentage or mythical origin,
many of these identities are open-ended, in that
there is a continual inflow and outflow of mem¬
bers, which prevents them from taking on a self-
perpetuating existence of their own. This is true,
for example, of identities based on places of res¬
idence, like neighbourhood associations, or those
based on membership rules that are not handed
down from one generation to the next but are
defined by individuals themselves through the
institutions they create. "Citizenship" is another
form of identity which can be defined in the
course of struggles directly related to current
issues. A number of these identities also have
the advantage of being tied to the present and
being short-lived, of lasting for no longer than a
particular plan or militant action may last, which
prevents them from turning into hard and fast
identities.
Such identities, with their changing mem¬
berships and limited life-spans, give rise to com¬
munities which, vulnerable and unstable though
they may be, possess, thanks to this precious
"lightness of being", the strength to maintain an
enquiring and tolerant relationship with others
and at the same time to counter the unhealthy self-
absorption that is still so prevalent.
1. The French term "logiques métisses" was coined by
Jean-Loup Amselle in his book of the same name
published by Editions Payot, Paris, 1990.
2. This is how the French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu
put it when speaking of ethnic or regional conflicts in
"L'identité et la représentation. Eléments pour une
réflexion critique sur l'idée de région" ¡n Actes de la
recherche en sciences sociales, 1980, No. 35.
3. Gilles Deleuze and Claire Parnet, Dialogues, Edi¬
tions Flammarion, Paris, 1977.
4. See Serge Latouche, L'occidentalisation du monde,
Editions La Découverte, Paris, 1989, and Laplanète
des naufragés, Editions La Découverte, Paris, 1991.
