1
André Brink
In search ofa new language
C
10
I OULD you write a simple love story if
you wished?"
It was in the mid-1980s, in the darkest time of
the apartheid era, and the question was asked by
a woman journalist in France. She was very
serious. I, too, took it seriously. So seriously, in
fact, that in due course I wrote a whole novel
States ofEmergency to attempt an answer to her
question. I am still not sure what the answer was:
novels tend not to be unifocal. A main character
in the book, a man who tries to write a book to
find out whether he can write a book about love
while living in a society disrupted and maimed by
apartheid, abandons the writing of his book,
which tends to suggest that such an endeavour is
impossible. Yet my own novel is there which
tends to suggest the opposite.
The point is not the answer that was
attempted. The point is that such a question was
asked in a sense had to be asked at all. And
that it was so serious. There cannot, surely, be
many societies in our world in which it would be
making the kind of sense it does in South Africa.
Even before an answer was attempted the ques¬
tion itself suggested something deeply disturbing:
about writing; about the society in which it is
done; and about love.
In a way, of course, it is linked to Brecht's
familiar question about the kind of society in
which one cannot write about trees, for fear of
being silent about so many other things. "Other
things" being, primarily, politics. (Had Brecht
lived a few decades later, he might not have posed
his question: writing about trees today is one of
the most political acts imaginable. This in itself
should be reason to pause.)
The problem about this kind of reasoning
lies in its assumptions about the "nature" of trees,
and of love, and of politics.
In the traditional free democracies of the
West none of which can qualify as "truly"
democratic or free without facing some deeply
embarrassing questions politics is conceived
of as some ideological system "out there", a col¬
lection of abstractions ("capitalism", "free
market", "Marxism", "oppression", "freedom
of speech", "human rights", representative gov¬
ernment", "electoral system", "checks and bal¬
ances" . . .); and writing a political novel becomes
a form of campaigning, carrying a torch, bran¬
dishing a slogan, leaving the domain of the private
to engage in public debate or action. In South
Africa suffering under the inhuman burden of
apartheid, or taking its first hesitant steps towards
a different and still largely unmapped future
politics forms an integral part of the real and
daily experience, whether individual or collective.
And writing about it subverts the easy tradi¬
tional distinction between private and public. In
a sense the most private experience of all the act
of love between two persons becomes unset-
tlingly public in its implications when it is inserted
into the framework of the abnormal society cre¬
ated and sustained by apartheid. (And even today,
with much of the legal substructure of apartheid
being dismantled, the mentality, the mind-set,
of apartheid creating a sense of superiority in
some, and a sense of being the perpetual victims
in others remains in place.)
THE THREATENING HEART
When I wrote Looking on Darkness in the early
1970s, tracing the fatal relationship between a
"coloured" actor and a young white woman, it
became the first Afrikaans novel to be banned in
South Africa; and apart from "threatening the
security of the state" and "blasphemy" the main
reason advanced for the ban was "pornography".
Because in an abnormal society love itself could
not be allowed a normal place; and because the
love of two people forced by the distorted rea¬
soning of apartheid into two different racial "cat¬
egories" became, through its very existence, an

interrogation of an implicit attack on the
foundations of the state. There simply is no longer
any line of demarcation between "private" and
"public", between "love" and "politics".
The use of the term "pornography", with
"obscenity" as its synonym, is also significant.
Not only this manifestation of love (across the
colour bar) is regarded as repugnant, offensive and
dangerous, but love itself: in a society which
finds its whole raison d'être in separateness, love
becomes a real threat to hegemony. It is inevitably
obscene: off-scene, against-the-grain, against
everything admitted as acceptable. And to brand
it pornographic reveals more of the mentality
behind the accusation than of the experience or
its written record.
"The French realize that love is a form of
metaphysical enquiry," Lawrence Durrell said
in an interview many years ago (which I used as
an epigraph to an early novel, The Ambassador,
which was also termed pornographic by the
establishment because, this time, it revealed a
human frailty in an official representative of the
South African regime). "The English," added
Durrell, "think it has something to do with the
plumbing." Few remarks illustrate quite so effec¬
tively the distortions of the experience of love by
a system which is threatened by it on all fronts. 11

12
Which brings us back to the link between the pri¬
vate (love) and the public (politics).
In every novel I have written, in one way or
another the point of departure has been the
inescapable solitude of the individual and the
miracle of those fleeting "instants in the wind" in
which one does reach and touch another. I can
think of no other experience in which both the
tragedy and the miracle of otherness is celebrated
so profoundly as the acknowledgement of love.
And living and writing in South Africa has almost
inevitably involved me in the political dimen¬
sion of otherness expressed in, and by, apartheid.
Once again the transition from personal to public
comes natural to the writer who can use it with
its full metaphoric weight. (There is one crucial
difference between the two experiences, of course,
and this in itself is important: the solitude of the
individual cannot except in those excruciat¬
ingly beautiful and fleeting instants be either
avoided or changed: apartheid can. This very dif¬
ference, with its clear Camusian overtones, illu¬
minates both dimensions.)
A COMMON CELEBRATION
Umberto Eco has wittily and incisively demon¬
strated the dilemma of the postmodernist writer
in his remarks on the impossibility of saying to a
woman "I love you madly", knowing that
Barbara Cartland has already (over)used the
phrase which forces him to resort to irony.
One cannot be flippant about the relation
between love and politics in South Africa; yet the
situation reveals the same need for a different
kind of approach and a mistrust of realism. The
poet Willie Kgotsisile once explained that if he
wants to write a poem about the moon or about
love there is no need for him to dwell on his suf¬
fering under apartheid or in exile: if he chooses the
right words, he said, all the experience of his
whole life will go into his evocation of the moon
or his declaration of love.
What South Africa needs at the moment is,
above all, perhaps, a new language of love. It is rel¬
evant even on the practical level of exiles returning
home to find their relationships with loved
ones wives, husbands, lovers, children, par¬
ents, family, friends strained to breaking point
by the need to reorientate and redefine their lives
within a changing context. (For many, the very
agony of exile provided ironically, terribly the
framework for a relationship which now has to
be adapted to the humdrum urgent needs of
finding a job, choosing a school for the children,
settling in a new community, learning patience
after that euphoric moment of watching Nelson
Mandela leave his prison.)
This may go some way towards defining
some possibilities of a "role" for the writer
(always a notion fraught with danger!) in a
changing South Africa. Apartheid has insisted
on what keeps people apart: the differences, the
alterities, the notions of groups and cultures and
ethnicities. The writer takes as a point of depar¬
ture that which he or she has in common with
others the love, the joy, the hate, the suspicion,
the fear, the ambition, the trust, the faith, the
hope. Apartheid has inscribed inequalities into
our daily lives: the oppression of women, the
degradation of those not marked by a white skin.
The writer can devise the language to break down
these inequalities and transcend differences as a
destructive experience. This would truly have to
be a language of love, and a celebration of love: an
acknowledgement of love, not as pornographic or
obscene or untrustworthy or insidious, but as the
dangerous, profound and illuminating meeting of
self and other.
Only when this happens when love is once
again "at home" in the country, returned from the
exile apartheid has imposed on it, can South
Africa once again join the human family. ^ß
ANDRE BRINK,
South African writer. Among
his recent published works is
An Act of Terror (Minerva
Books, London, 1 992).
