INTERVIEW
JOSE CARRERAS
talks to
Serafín García
José Carreras is one of the
leading lyric tenors of our time.
His operatic repertoire
comprises some 60 roles which
he has performed all over the
world under the direction of
outstanding conductors, notably
Herbert von Karajan. He is also
a brilliant singer of lieder and
folk songs. During a career
which has been interrupted by
serious illness, he has won
many national and international
honours. The creator of a
medical research foundation
which bears his name, José
Carreras is one of today's great
servants of music.
Didyoufirst become interested in músicas
a child?
I had a rather happy childhood. There was
one very revealing moment I particularly
remember. I was only four when my family left
Barcelona where, by the way, I was born
on 5 December 1946 and emigrated to
Argentina. Times had become very hard in
Barcelona, which was still suffering from the
after-effects of the Spanish Civil War and the
Second World War. For political and financial
reasons, my parents had decided to try their
luck on the other side of the Atlantic. But
they were soon disappointed, and we came
back to Spain after a year.
But what I chiefly remember about our
expedition was the crossing. I had a great time
on the boat and, I think, amused the other
passengers with my imitations of tango singers
and dancers.
Were you just havingfun, ordoyou think
it was already a sign that you had a vocation
for music? How didyou become a singer?
Through a whole chain of circumstances, of
course, and not because of some sudden in¬
spiration. Like all other five- or six-year-old
boys in Catalonia, I dreamed of playing foot¬
ball and scoring more goals than anyone else.
I also wanted to spend as much time as possible
in the cinema. In those days there wasn't much
else to do in one's spare time. We had a season
ticket to the cinema and would sometimes sit
through two showings in succession.
I enjoyed taking off a very popular singer
called Luis Mariano. But what really encour¬
aged me most to take up singing was the film
The Great Caruso, with Mario Lanza in the
title role. The day after I saw the film I started
imitating Mario Lanza, and I noticed I was able
to reproduce almost all the arias in The Great
Caruso, which I'd never heard before, with
startling accuracy. My parents weren't exactly
great opera-lovers, but they were so impressed
they started wondering whether my love of
music was not after all a sign that I really had
a vocation. They gave me a record-player and
records of The Great Caruso and Neapolitan
songs sung by Giuseppe di Stefano. I was
absolutely thrilled.
I was eight when my father enrolled me at
the Barcelona Conservatory and took me for
the first time to a performance of Verdi's Aida
at the Teatro del Liceo in Barcelona. It was
pure magic! Attending a live performance of an
opera, with all the singers, the orchestra, the
sets, the atmosphere and all the rest, was a
decisive experience for me. Three years later,
when I was eleven, I got a chance to appear on
the stage of the great Teatro del Liceo when I
played a child in Manuel de Falla's ElRetablo
de Maese Pedro. It was a difficult part to sing
as it was written for soprano.
After this promising debut, my parents
began to take serious advice on whether or not
I should embark on a singing career. They
made such a fuss over me that the pianist and
conductor José Iturbi thought it wise to
dampen their enthusiasm a bit by pointing
out that they would have to wait until my
voice broke before coming to any decision. In
the meantime, I was encouraged to specialize
in science and began to study chemistry. But I
found it pretty hard going. All I could think of
was singing. In the end, on the occasion of
my twenty-first birthday during the 1967-
1968 academic year, I finally decided to take up

the career that was clearly closest to my heart.
Shortly afterwards I made the acquain¬
tance of someone who was to become one of
my closest friends, Montserrat Caballé. She
had great confidence in me from the very start.
She arranged for me to sing with her at the
Teatro del Liceo in 1970. It was there too that
I played Gennaro in Gaetano Donizetti's
Lucrezia Borgia. After that, I was asked to
appear at all the world's great opera-houses.
What does music mean to you?
It's first and foremost my profession, which
is in itself important to me. But above all it is
the only channel through which I can express
some of my deeper emotions. Although I'm
someone who tends to keep himself to himself,
when I sing I discover private feelings within
me which I try to communicate to the
audience.
Singing is all about communicating. That's
why technique is important. The better your
technique, the more likely you are to be able
to communicate. But that's not enough. A
singer must also be able, through technique, to
inject life and substance into music, to give it
a soul. Technique and a fine voice can never
suffice on their own.
That's why I think the "perfection" of a
recording, obtained after a lot of technical tin¬
kering, can never surpass a live performance,
for all its inevitable imperfections. As I've
often said, when you're a tenor you must start
singing in the heart, move up to the head, then
let it out through the voice. Your heart, which
wants to express a number of emotions, is the
point of departure. But it wouldn't serve much
purpose unless your head took charge and
warned you not to overdo it or, on the
contrary, to let rip a bit more. It is by that
subtly circuitous route that the voice, work¬
ing hand in hand with technique, can genuinely
express the emotions of the heart while at the
same time obeying the instructions of the
mind.
Is opera the only kind ofsingingyou like?
What do you think offlamenco, for example,
a popular art based on cante jondo, or "deep
song, " which seems outlandish to some and is
a delight to others?
When well performed, cante jondo is an
extraordinarily sensitive, sophisticated and
expressive form of singing, especially when
the emotional charge is such that the singer, just
as he seems to have given his all and is on the
point of collapse, somehow manages to
summon up enough strength to lend his final
burst of song a timbre so personal it becomes
unique.
I'm a great fan oleante jondo, and by that
I mean genuine cante jondo. What I can't stand,
however, is the watered-down version that is
so often served up to us.
Do you also appreciate other types ofmusic,
like jazz or rock?
Please don't imagine that professional clas¬
sical musicians, and especially those who work
in opera, spend all their time listening only to
Wagner or Verdi. I love classical music, I love
symphonic music, but I also love pop, rock and
other types of music it all depends on what
mood I'm in.
I like pop music when it's well performed.
And sometimes I really adore it. Take the
Beatles, for example. They first began to be
widely played when I was still in my teens.
They left a deep impression on my generation.
I still regard them as great musicians. When it's
good, their kind of music is something that I
respond to with intensity.
When it comes down to it, then, the only dis¬
tinction you make is between good music and
bad music.
Absolutely. While we're on the subject, let
me anticipate a question I'm often asked
whether operatic tenors should sing so-called
popular music or not. I think they should,
first because I like listening to that kind of
music and singing it, and then because it may
also be a way of attracting a new audience to
opera.
I was about to ask you what you think
about the charge ofelitism that is often levelled
at opera and classical music in general.
It's true they are often accused of being eli¬
tist. In the old days that kind of accusation
might have seemed justified. But times have
changed. Nowadays, classical music and opera
are appreciated by an ever-wider public from
an increasingly broad social background. That
is partly due to the performers themselves,
who are much less likely to behave like prima
donnas nowadays. But the main reason for
the change is the influence of the audiovisual
media, which have enabled hundreds of thou¬
sands of people to get to know and enjoy this
kind of music. Like any other form of artistic
expression, music needs an audience. It can
only be decoded and become accessible if it
reaches the public you can't love anything
until you know it.
How would you relate music to other añs
likepainting, sculpture and literature?
Music has one specific characteristic, which
has both advantages and drawbacks, but which
makes it livelier than many other forms of
artistic expression: it is produced instanta¬
neously. That means that in certain circum¬
stances it has an extra emotive force and a quite
extraordinary expressive power. Having said
that, I should add that I also adore literature.
Do you think that a painting, say, can in¬
spire a range of emotions, from the deepest
gloom to the wildest euphoria, as powerfully
as music?
It's not impossible. But it's literature, of
course, that comes closest to music in this res¬
pect. After all, opera is a marriage ofwords and
music.

|
^
J
7fyou were marooned on a desert island and
could take only one work by each great com¬
poserwithyou, which ones wouldyou choose?
What an agonizing choice that would be! I
would definitely take Mozart's Marriage of
Figaro and Bellini's Norma with me. I couldn't
do without Rossini's The Barber ofSeville or
Donizetti's The Elixir of Love. I'd also take
Wagner's Tristan and Isolde, Bizet's Carmen
and Puccini's La Bohême. As for Verdi, how
could one possibly choose between Rigoletto,
La Traviata and // Trovatorel
Which are yourfavourite operatic roles?
Rodolfo in La Bohême and Don José in
Carmen are two of my favourites. I also like
Nemorino in The Elixir ofLove.
Do you still ever get first-night nerves?
don't know whether what I feel is really
nerves. All I do know is that on the day of a big
premiere I start giving myself a check-up the
moment I wake up. I examine my instrument,
that is to say my voice. I try to reassure myself
that all is well, physically and psychologically,
and that my voice is responding properly to the
instructions it is getting from my brain. Why
does one have nerves like that? Perhaps
because if you're a member of the chorus, a
small mistake can go unnoticed, whereas a
single muffed note by a tenor can be of
momentous importance.
People often say that opera is going through
a crisis. Do you agree?
It seems always to have been the case but
this is a very controversial subject. I myself see
a crisis looming on the horizon because there
isn't enough young blood at the moment to
keep the complex structure of opera firmly
on its feet. This shortage of talent has attained
alarming proportions. Unless a new generation
emerges soon, opera is in danger of going into
terminal decline.
You 're a man ofgreat curiosity anda wide
range of interests. Is there another field in
which you wouldhave liked to excel?
When I was very small, as I told you, I was
mad about soccer. Like countless other Spanish
boys, I dreamt of playing centre forward for
Spain, or for Barcelona. But I think it would be
going too far to talk of frustration. If I hadn't
gone in for singing and classical music, I'd
certainly have chosen some other activity to do
with art.
Does yourprofessionalwork leaveyou time
to devote yourselfto your other activities?
I try not to perform more than two or three
times a week. I strive to reconcile my profes¬
sional life with my private life. It's not always
easy, especially now that I have a third activity
on top of all my other commitments the
foundation which bears my name, and whose
purpose is to fight leukaemia.
Whatgaveyou the idea ofsetting up theJosé
Carreras Foundation?



I got the idea of setting up the Foundation
after my personal experience of leukaemia.
As you may know, I was ill for almost a year.
During that time, the great support and encour¬
agement I got from lots of people helped me
fight and, eventually, beat the disease. It was
then that I discovered that the tenors usually
described as my rivals, Luciano Pavarotti and
Placido Domingo, were not just great singers
but also wonderful human beings. When it
was time for them to leave after paying me a
visit, one of them would say "Bon courage,
champ! " and the other "José, you've got to pull
through, otherwise there won't be anyone left
for me to match myself with." It was words
like that, and a host of others from much less
well-known people, that helped me through
the ordeal. And that's what gave me the idea
that if I ever recovered I would set up a
Foundation to help fight that terrible disease.
What has the Foundation achieved so far?
It has already become very well known,
and several distinguished people are involved
in it. Its technical committee is headed by
Professor E. Donald Thomas, who won the
Nobel Prize for medicine, and several leading
Spanish and American scientists. The
Foundation, which was set up in Barcelona in
1988, already has offices in the United States,
Switzerland and Austria. We have some very
ambitious plans and programmes. Our main
aim is to help scientific research with funding
and grants. Scientists believe that the best way
to help fight the disease is to step up research
efforts.
Where does it get its money from?
The Spanish Prime Minister Felipe
González is the Foundation's honorary pres¬
ident. His support has been very valuable.
Many public and private institutions have
taken their cue from him and given us moral
and financial support. We've also raised finance
for the Foundation in recent years by organiz¬
ing gala performances around the world in
which I have sung. Then there have been dona¬
tions from the public. When they are well
informed, people are extremely generous.
Is there anyparticular message you would
like to pass on?
suffered from leukaemia and recovered
from it. Leukaemia is a very serious disease, but
there was nothing exceptional about my re¬
covery. Scientists now say people have an increas¬
ingly good chance of recovery. But you have to
want to recover. So I'd like to say to those
suffering from the disease that, even if there's
only a chance in a million of getting better, that
chance could be yours. You have to fight, and
fight by drawing on all your inner resources.
You'll be surprised how great they are.
