reflections Traditions for Tomorrow
by Diego Gradis
ï
I RADiTiONS for Tomorrow is anon-gov¬
ernmental organization which is
active in most parts of Central and
South America, where it supports the
struggle of the descendants of the pre-
Columbian peoples to preserve their cul¬
tural identity. It was founded in 1986, and
has had an official working relationship
with Unesco since 1992.
Traditions for Tomorrow does not try to
persuade the groups with which it works to
return to their traditional ways but rather
to take their traditions into account when
building their future. The support that it is
asked to provide is always the result of a
spontaneous initiative from a local com¬
munity and is designed to increase that
community's awareness of the value of a
traditional form of cultural expression in
such fields as language, ritual, medicine,
handicrafts, dance, music or education.
Traditions for Tomorrow uses the word
culture in its widest possible sense as the
expression of a way of life. The type of
back-up the organization provides is
designed to supplement aid available from
other bodies working in the fields ofhealth
care and material welfare.
Our relations with those with whom we
work people such as the Maya peasants
of the Guatemala highlands, the Cuna fish¬
ermen who live on the San Bias Islands
off the coast ofPanama, the Aymara shep¬
herds of the shores of Lake Titicaca are
based on mutual respect. Each side makes
a contribution ofequal value. The financial
support we provide is neither more nor
less indispensable to a given project than
the expertise and motivation of our part¬
ners on the spot. A preliminary encounter
takes place in the field before any com¬
mitment is made. This is an opportunity
for us to listen, to look, and to take stock of
the situation, not an attempt to impose
or even to suggest a specific course of
action. The main goal of Traditions for
Tomorrow is to help people to realize that
cultural identity is an asset that can serve
development. How can there be any devel¬
opment if people do not assume respon¬
sibility for their own lives? Our work pro¬
vides its beneficiaries with their first
opportunity to take full charge of the
_ _ administration of a project.
* W Asenseofcommunityisoneofthemain
factors favouring the survival of minority
groups in Latin America. However, as a
result ofvarious religious, administrative,
educational and economic factors, the
cement that binds communities together
has been gradually eroded. In addition,
many forms of aid sidetrack the sense of
community and associate it with imported
modes of organization that are often ill-
adapted to the local situation. The pro¬
jects supported by Traditions for
Tomorrow seek to strengthen traditional
community structures within the frame¬
work ofactivities which have always been
associated with the community in ques¬
tion.
Three specific experiences, in Panama,
Ecuador and Chile respectively, provide a
good illustration of the organization's work
A CULTURAL CONGRESS IN THE
SAN BLAS ISLANDS
In recent decades the 40,000 Cuna Indians
who live in the San Bias archipelago off
These Afro-Ecuadorian children in
San Lorenzo (Ecuador) meet every day for
traditional dancing.
the Caribbean coast of Panama have
assimilated the Western-type structures
ofmainland Panamanian society. Because
space is limited many of the islanders have
migrated to Panama City, but these
migrants have, in spite ofbeing uprooted,
succeeded in maintaining close links with
their homeland, "Cuna Yala".
The Cuna have won an international
reputation for having preserved a large
degree of autonomy. However, frequent
contact with Panamanian society has
begun a process ofacculturation, above all
among young people, especially where
religion and spiritual life are concerned. To
halt this erosion, which they regard as a
threat to their internal cohesion and to
their eventual survival as a people, the
Cuna created in 1972 a "General Congress
of Cuna Culture" which meets for four or
five days several times a year, each time in
a different place, and is attended by all
their religious leaders, who are the
guardians of tradition. These meetings,
with their prayers, festivities, dances and
the commemoration ofCuna heroes, bring
together people from nearby islands and
create a bond between the Cuna people.
The Cuna have asked Traditions for
Tomorrow to help them to buy two motor
boats to enable representatives ofdifferent
communities to attend meetings of the
Congress. They have also asked us for help
in acquiring technical and office equip¬
ment that the young people will need to
carry out, under the auspices of the Con¬
gress, an in-depth survey on the history
and use ofmedicinal plants. The results of
the survey will be published.
IDENTITY AND SCHOOLING
For some time the Saraguro Indians of the
Tenta region of Ecuador have been
unhappy about the schooling that the
Quito-based educational system imposed
on their children. From the age of four,
their children had to leave behind in the
school cloakroom not only their tradi¬
tional clothing, but their language
(Quechua), the knowledge they had
received from their parents, and their spe¬
cific ways of thinking. What they learned
from their teachers, most of whom did

Members of a Quechua community
in the Cuzco department of Peru gather
for a meeting with
Traditions for Tomorrow.
not speak Quechua, was remote from their
way of life and pushed them to become
school dropouts.
In reaction to this, in the late 1980s the
people of Tenta used local construction
methods to build their own education
centre where they could teach a syllabus,
devised by themselves, which consists of
adapted forms of the subjects taught at
the state schools and is complemented by
initiation in manual, cultural and pro¬
ductive activities. The five teachers are
members of the community and were
chosen by it. Their teaching calls for close
collaboration with the local people. The
results obtained since 1988 have been so
satisfactory that the school has been given
official status by the government. Today
some of its pupils have finished their pri¬
mary schooling, and for the first time chil¬
dren from Tenta are going to be enrolled at
the secondary school in the nearby town.
Traditions for Tomorrow responded
favourably to a request to help the school
obtain equipment. The money has been
used to improve the building and to buy
equipment such as a loom, printing
machinery, farm and woodworking tools,
sewing machines, clothes and musical
instruments.
ANDEAN CARNIVAL
In the last fifteen years, drought, mine clo¬
sures and overcrowding in the outskirts
ofLa Paz (Bolivia), have driven the Aymara
and Quechua Indians down from the
Chilean and Bolivian altiplano to the fer¬
tile valleys of the Arica region in northern
Chile. From a way of life centred on the vil¬
lage, traditional customs and the family
unit, hundreds of families suddenly found
themselves in a state of economic depen¬
dence in a land that was not their own.
The newcomers found that Chilean society
was often difficult for them to enter. The
younger generation, which has no experi¬
ence of its Andean origins and which feels
rejected by the majority society, is giving
way to delinquency (drugs, alcohol, pros¬
titution), thereby making the gulfbetween
the two societies even wider.
During carnival week, the Indians of the
Arica region have tried in recent years to
recreate in the Azapa valley an event that
would rekindle the spirit of the Andean
tradition and reunite this exiled popula¬
tion. First spontaneously, then in a more
organized fashion, the "carnaval Andino"
("Andean carnival") of San Miguel has
gradually become for the Quechua and
Aymara a meeting point between past and
future, an annual break during which
young and old alike return to their roots
and renew the links that traditionally
bound their community together.
Since the return of democracy, those
involved with the carnival have created
an association which, with the support of
Traditions for Tomorrow, is now working to
build a headquarters where meetings and
cultural events can be held. Traditions for
Tomorrow has also assembled a stock of
costumes and traditional Andean musical
instruments for the carnival. The organi¬
zation has received official recognition
from the government ofChile for this pro¬
ject, which in 1992 was also recognized
by Unesco's World Decade for Cultural
Development.
DIEGO GRADIS is a Franco-Swiss international
lawyer who has published many articles on
Amerindian problems and environmental issues.
He is the founder-president of Traditions for
Tomorrow (France. Switzerland, U.S.A.).
II
