The transformation
of the European
landscape calls for
completely new
thinking about
disarmament



Europe after the Cold War
by Andrei Zagorski
16
ANDREI ZAGORSKI,
of Russia, is deputy director
of the Centre of International
Studies of the Moscow State
Institute of International
Relations (MGI MO).
DISARMAMENT issues remain high on the
European agenda despite and to some
extent because of the end of the Cold War.
Today decisions on reductions in both nuclear
and conventional arsenals are being taken at a
speed that could hardly have been imagined two
or three years ago.
The signing by the United States and the USSR
of the INF (Intermediate-range nuclear forces)
Treaty in 1987 paved the way for a new generation
of agreements concerning weapons in Europe.
The Treaty provided, for the first time in post-war
history, not for a limitation but for an actual reduc¬
tion in medium- and short-range weapons that
were already deployed. Since then, efforts have
ceased to be directed towards arms control, which
in practice underwrote a controlled arms race,
but towards real disarmament cuts in existing
weapons arsenals. This new approach has been
consolidated and strengthened by the dramatic
developments that have taken place in Europe
since 1 989, which have led in their turn to a series
of agreements concerning both nuclear and con¬
ventional weapons.
The START (Strategic Arms Reduction
Treaty) agreement of 1991, partially modified in
terms of its implementation in the Lisbon pro¬
tocol of May 1992 signed by Russia, the United
States, Belarus, Ukraine and Kazakhstan, provides
for cuts of around 50 per cent in strategic nuclear
weapons belonging to the United States and the
former USSR. When they met in June 1992 Pres¬
ident Boris Yeltsin and President George Bush
went even further along this path when they
made a commitment to the complete elimina¬
tion of ground-based heavy missiles as well as
deep cuts in US sea-launched strategic missiles.
The Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe
(CFE1), signed on 19 November 1990, sought to
eliminate numerical imbalances in five categories
of weapons (battle tanks, armoured combat vehi¬
cles, artillery, combat aircraft and attack heli¬
copters) available to the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) and the Warsaw Treaty
Organization (WTO) in the area stretching from
the Atlantic to the Urals, as well as to reduce their
numbers and limit their ability to carry out a sur¬
prise attack. A follow-up to this Treaty, the CFE1
A agreement, established limits for personnel
strength in the same arca. CFE1 A, which is not a
treaty but a politically binding document, was
signed by twenty-five states on 9 July 1992.
No less important than these multilateral
agreements arc deeper cuts resulting from uni¬
lateral reductions on both of the previously adver¬
sary sides East and West. They include cuts in

Left, withdrawal of Soviet
forces stationed in Hungary
(1989). Above, American
troops evacuate the military
base at Bremerhaven
(Germany) In 1990.
tactical nuclear weapons in Europe providing
for a total withdrawal of US and former Soviet
ground-launched battlefield weapons (short-
range missiles and nuclear artillery). Unilateral
cuts are also being made in the nuclear forces of
both France and the United Kingdom, although
neither country has yet participated in formal
negotiations on these issues.
However, the spectacular developments that
have taken place in the field of European disar¬
mament since the end of the Cold War have been
accompanied by a wide range of new challenges
which make the task of managing this process
quite difficult. One indication of the difficulties
facing the European disarmament process today
is the fact that hardly any of the recent disarma¬
ment agreements, including the CFE1 Treaty,
have yet entered into force, because several states
have not yet ratified them. Another problem is
that the conceptual approach to European dis¬
armament is still largely based on attitudes that
were shaped during the years of East-West con¬
frontation and have not been adapted to current
needs. The disintegration of the Warsaw Treaty
Organization and the break-up of the Soviet
Union have totally changed not only the envi¬
ronment of disarmament negotiations and the
positions of the parties to them, but the very
functions of the negotiations.
The disappearance of the Warsaw Treaty
Organization, which happened de jure in 1991
but de facto in 1990, made the Treaty on Con¬
ventional Forces in Europe virtually obsolete,
since it had emerged from negotiations that began
as a bloc-to-bloc endeavour aimed at improving
the level of stability and predictability between
NATO and WTO. This general approach was to
a great extent outdated before the negotiations
were concluded. Early in 1990, Hungary
announced that its defence needs could not be
properly dealt with in a bloc-to-bloc arrange¬
ment and insisted that its quota of armaments
should not be established within the framework
of the WTO. Other East European countries
followed suit and by the time the CFE1 talks
came to an end the major problem was no longer
the achievement of an agreement between East
and West but the achievement of mutually accept¬
able quotas within the WTO, which still for¬
mally existed. In order to provide East Euro¬
pean countries with appropriate quotas for their
national forces, the limits on armaments within
the CFE1 Treaty were raised even higher than
those initially envisaged.
The break-up of the Soviet Union meant that
new tasks had to be carried out within the CFE
framework, especially after the division of former
Soviet military assets became one of the most
controversial issues among the members of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS),
which was joined by eleven of the fifteen former
Soviet republics. The CFE1 Treaty thus became
a framework for discussions on the sharing of
Soviet military assets and for legitimizing Western
participation in these discussions. The succes¬
sors of the Soviet Union committed themselves
to respect obligations under the CFE1 Treaty
and were urged to negotiate rapidly and to reach
agreement before June 1992.
On 15 May 1992, at a CIS summit meeting in
Tashkent, an agreement on the implementation of
the CFE1 Treaty was reached, including provisions
for a share-out of the former Soviet quotas on
various categories of weapons. This agreement 17

18
All disarmament efforts in
Europe so far have been
based on the philosophy of
managing problems at the
level of East-West relations.
was then approved at a conference of the parties
to the CFE1 Treaty held in Oslo on 5 June and by
an extraordinary conference held on 10 July in
Helsinki in conjunction with the CSCE summit
meeting.
However, the issue cannot be regarded as set¬
tled since none of the CIS states except Russia had
ratified the CFE1 Treaty before the CSCE
summit as had been agreed previously. Prospects
for ratification can be regarded as high only in the
case of Belarus and are low in the case of the
Caucasian states that are engaged in military hos¬
tilities. That is why, instead of enacting the CFE1
Treaty, as was initially planned, the extraordi¬
nary conference of July 1992 only produced a
document on the "provisional application" of
the Treaty whereby all parties committed them¬
selves to "apply provisionally all of the provisions
of the Treaty, beginning on 17 July 1992" within
120 days, in the expectation that the Treaty would
be ratified within that time-frame. Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Georgia and Moldova have not yet
signed this document.
Disintegration problems at least partially sim¬
ilar to those within the former Soviet Union
might be expected to arise elsewhere, especially
in view of the division of Czechoslovakia into the
Czech Republic and Slovakia early in 1 993 .
All previous disarmament efforts in Europe so
far have been based on the philosophy of man¬
aging problems at the macro-level of East-West
relations. In formal terms this approach came to
an end in September 1992, when all fifty-two of
the CSCE countries sat down to begin new secu¬
rity negotiations in Vienna. Though this new
security forum is an important instrument for
permanent communication and discussions of
security issues, it has been launched without any
clear conception of where future efforts in this
field should be directed. It now has to work
towards agreements that will respond to the
growing number and diversity of problems at
the "micro" level.
