The Aswan
High Dam,
25 years on
by Mahmoud Abu-Zeid
andM.ß.ASaad
The Nile at Isna, near
Luxor in Upper Egypt.
FROM time immemorial life in Egypt has revolved
round Nahr an-Nil, the River Nile, the longest
river in the world and the dominating feature of
Egypt's topography. The ancient Egyptians recog¬
nized the importance of the waters of the Nile to their
economy and kept records of the river level with the aid
of nilometers gauges formed by graduated scales cut
in natural rocks or stone walls.
It was therefore quite natural that, in the push for
development in the immediate post-war years, the
Egyptians should turn once again to the Nile for solu¬
tions. Thus was born the concept of the construction
of a new dam designed to control the Nile water for the
expansion of cultivation, to iron out the impact of
both drought and floods and to provide for the gener¬
ation of hydro-electric power.
Begun in 1 959 amid a furious controversy about the
possible ecological consequences, the Aswan High
Dam (one of the largest in the world) and its associated
power station have been fully operational since 1970.
Lake Nasser, the reservoir formed upstream as a result
of the construction of the dam, is over 500 kilometres
long, with an average width of 12 kilometres. It pene¬
trates some 200 kilometres into the Sudan and covers
an area of about 6,500 square kilometres.
The balance-sheet
The dam was conceived as an ambitious, multi¬
purpose project aimed at improving irrigation and
water resource control and development, increasing cul¬
tivation, providing protection against high floods and
severe drought, and facilitating navigation, fishery
expansion and electric power generation, while mini¬
mizing harmful effects on the environment and the
country's rich cultural heritage.
What is the situation after nearly a quarter of a
century of full-scale operation? In Upper Egypt some
380,000 hectares of cultivated land have been brought
under year-round irrigation, which means that two or
three harvests can be produced annually instead of
one. Water is available for a variety of crops, even in
low-flood years, and this has resulted, for example, in
the quadrupling of the area under rice cultivation.
Drainage has improved in all cultivated areas and pro¬
ductivity has increased by from 20 to 50 per cent. Some
420,000 hectares of new land have been brought into
cultivation since completion of the High Dam, and it
is estimated that a total of over a million hectares could
eventually be reclaimed.
From the point of view of flood and drought pro¬
tection, the Dam appears to have been an unqualified
success. Human lives and cultivated lands were suc¬
cessfully protected during the high-flood years of 1964,
1967 and 1975, and sufficient water was available in both
Egypt and the Sudan during the low-flood years of
1972, 1979, 1983 and 1984.
The vast size of Lake Nasser has led to a multipli¬
cation of the fish population, which has become an
important source of protein for Egyptian consumers.
The High Dam power station is now one of the main
pillars of industrial development in Egypt. It supplies
energy to many new factories in the Nile valley and to
many farms and villages in the rural areas.
Some negative side-effects
Since completion of the Aswan High Dam water
flowing downstream from it has become silt free and
this has had a number of deleterious side-effects:
Degradation and lowering of the river bed, affecting
the stability of existing hydraulic structures across the
Nile in particular the Isna, Nag Hammadi and Asyut
barrages (although recent studies suggest that the level
of degradation may be much less than was previously
thought).
Lower water levels and seepage of irrigation water
from nearby cultivated land, leading to the collapse of
parts of the river banks.
Raising of the water table due to excessive use by
farmers of irrigation water which is now available all the
year round.
Some deterioration in water quality and increased
salinity due to long-term storage in the lake upstream
of the High Dam.
A massive increase in aquatic weeds of various types
(82 per cent of water courses, canals and drains are
now heavily infested by weeds).
This sudden weed invasion, perhaps the most serious
side-effect of the construction of the High Dam, is
ascribed to the following factors: silt-free water allows
deeper sunlight penetration, thus encouraging weed
growth; the annual floods that used to occur before
construction of the High Dam used to flush the channels
and push weeds to the Mediterranean; with two to three
crops being cultivated annually, land fertilization has
increased, causing eutrophication of drains and canals.
Health impacts
Since the construction of the High Dam a number
of plans have been drawn up for the economic devel¬
opment of the region along the shores of the reservoir.
These include the establishment of human settlements,
industrial development and tourism and recreational
projects. There is a serious risk that such schemes will
affect the water quality and the aquatic ecosystem of the
reservoir. Furthermore, deterioration in the quality of
the water of the reservoir would affect downstream
river users.
MAHMOUD ABU-ZEID AND M. B. A. SAAD
are respectively president and secretary-general of the
Centre for Water Research (Cairo). 3J
