A shared crisis j¡ Edgar Morin
The Human
Condition
(1992),
oil on canvas
(80 x 60 cm)
by the
Vietnamese
painter
Duong Dinh
Sang.
WEmust realize, and make sure others fate of a specific planet and its specific inhabi-
realize, that we all share the same tants, facing the specific problems of life, death
destiny. Unity, in this global age, and progress,
means that wc have a common destiny, of life The idea of progress, doubtless the key con-
andof death. The universal is no longer abstrae- cept of the modern Western world, became
tion, but specific, because what is at stake is the current during the eighteenth and nineteenth
Mariytft T

ye mwezongu matunda haya
matamu (Do these Fruits
Taste Good?), 1 992, acrylic
on plywood (6 1 .5 x 6 1 cm)
by the Tanzanian artist
George Lilanga di Nyama.
26
EDGAR MORIN,
French sociologist, is emeritus
director of research at the
National Centre for Scientific
Research (CNRS), Paris. His
most recent published work is
Terre-Patrie (Editions du Seuil,
Paris, 1993).
centuries and has since become universal. The
idea of progress seemed to be a veritable law
governing the way the world would evolve. It
was based on the scientific determinism that
then predominated a kind of historical law
that could be represented in various ways, that
of Auguste Comte as well as that of Karl Marx.
It seemed to have been reinforced by the idea
that biological evolution started out with single-
cell creatures and ended up with human beings,
and to be supported by developments, which
could only be beneficial, in science and in the fac¬
ulty of reason. In other words, the idea that
spread was that of progress as being necessary
and inevitable. World wars and other setbacks
seemed to be merely unfortunate accidents
caused by the death throes of reactionary and
anti-progressive forces.
Furthermore, the concept of development,
which itself became generally accepted after the
Second World War, gave rise to a kind of tech¬
nological and economic model of progress in
which economic growth emerged as, so to speak,
the only driving force needed for every form of
human progress, including opportunities for
personal fulfilment. This conception completely
obscured the havoc wreaked by growth and
technological and economic development on
cultures, in Europe to begin with, but on a much
greater scale in the rest of the world.
Progress, that is to say the future, is today in
crisis, a crisis of which there were already pre¬
monitory signs before the war but which is now
omnipresent. It affects the entire world, and
especially the developing countries, since it has
become clear that both the Western and Eastern
models of development have most often ended
in failure.
The crisis started brewing in the totalitarian
regimes of the East, whose promise of a radiant
future for mankind has crumbled in recent years,
but it has also affected the West, where no-one,
and rightly so, any longer believes in historical
or even physical determinism. The realization
has dawned that science can manipulate, enslave
and destroy as well as benefit humanity, and
certain half-baked forms of reasoning thinking
that, in the abstract, is logical but is bereft of any
empirical basis have been spread abroad, mas¬
querading as "reason".
I therefore believe that we are experiencing,
in various forms, a shared crisis of progress
whose globalization I also believe to be the
reason why people today are turning back to the
ethnic group or to religion. When the future is
lost and the present unhappy, miserable and
distressing, the past is all that is left. I feel that our
primary duty is to discard the idea of mechan¬
ical progress based exclusively on a technolog¬
ical and economic foundation.
We should realize that underlying the idea of
progress was the idea of "a better life", lived
decently and with a civilized respect for others.
The idea of progress must henceforward be
governed by this ethical imperative, thus
becoming something desirable and possible
rather than an inescapable mechanism.
In my opinion this means that we must
abandon the linear perspective according to
which there was an advanced world, a back¬
ward world and a primitive world, all of which
had to share the same conception. It must be
acknowledged that every civilization or culture
is a blend of the most diverse ingredients
superstitions, arbitrary beliefs, profound truths
and age-old wisdom and that this includes
Europe, which also has its truths, its myths and
its illusions, starting with the illusion of progress.
Rethinking the idea of progress is becoming
a priority.
