Hands that speak
volumes
by Savitry Na'ir
34
HAND gestures play a fundamental role
in Indian culture. In ancient times
using one's hands in conversation was
considered a sign of great accomplishment. One
tale describes how a king met a beautiful girl and
fell in love with her. Wanting to know whether
she was free to marry him, he interrogated her
by lifting up a closed fist with the thumb
raised the traditional gesture for "man" in
sign language. When she replied by opening
her hand, he knew the gesture meant there was
no man in her life, and that she was unattached.
The word for hand gesture in Sanskrit is
mudra, a term that also has several other mean¬
ings. It can be used to signify a seal or a signet
ring, and by extension can also denote an
impression, a stamped coin, a token or printer's
type. The link between the first sense and the
others is that mudra arc regarded as seals
between the three constituent parts of the human
personality spirit, mind and speech. Mudra
illustrate the link between the internal and
external life of man, as well as the parallels
between the human and the divine worlds. (In
Indian thought the human world is considered
a replica of its divine counterpart, and the human
body is the visible form of the divine.)
The analogy between the two worlds, human
and divine, which are constantly in communica¬
tion through different elements of which mudras
arc one, is fundamental to Indian thought. The
unseen principle of divinity can only be
approached through symbol and allegory. The
interaction between the physical and the meta¬
physical lies at the roots of Indian philosophy.
In Hindu thinking, all life is one and every
element is significant. This unity is stressed in
religion, the arts and social life. Different ways
of life, systems of philosophy, forms of artistic
expression and ways of worshipping the innu-

mcrablc avatars of the Divine all have the same
goal: a coherent, all-inclusive and ever-evolving
knowledge of the Divine. Such knowledge can
only come through individual experience, and
each seeker must find his or her own path.
God is worshipped in the form of innumer¬
able divinities, the form of worship varying
according to the characteristics of each one.
According to the Bhagavad Gita, "Man
becomes what he worships", and "Whenever a
devotee wishes, with unwavering faith, to wor¬
ship Me in a particular form, I take that form".
When worship takes the form of a ritual or a
prayer the chanting of a text or secret for¬
mula mudra serve to "seal" the power con¬
tained within the words and actions to the image
of the divinity who is being worshipped.
THE LORD OF THE DANCE
There is a close relationship between gesture
and sound. When they accompany specially
chosen mantras sacred verbal formulae or
nadas musical sounds repeated in a pre¬
scribed manner, the appropriate mudras can set
the body and the mind in a state of vibration. In
this context, mudras possess magical proper¬
ties that may be put to esoteric use, and become
a secret gestural language known only to initi¬
ates. Buddhist priests took mudras of this kind
over the land route to Nepal, Tibet, China and
Japan and by sea to Indonesia, Cambodia and
other lands. In those Asian countries where
Buddhism took root, mudras influenced the
iconography of the arts, and in particular sculp¬
ture, founding a tradition which remains alive to
this day.
For a ritual to succeed, the accompanying
mudras had to be correctly performed, so par¬
ticipants took care to execute them with preci¬
sion. This principle of exact imitation was car¬
ried over to the arts, and became a crucial factor
in Indian dance, sculpture and iconography.
Sculptures were inspired by dance poses, while
in return dancers borrowed gestures and atti¬
tudes liberally from the visual arts. Even now,
the ways in which the gods arc depicted in
Indian dance reflect their treatment in temple
sculpture.
This is particularly true of Siva Nataraja,
the Lord of the Dance, who is represented with
four arms. One hand holds a drum, symbol¬
izing creation; another fire, representing destruc¬
tion; a third is upturned, a sign of reassurance;
and the fourth is open and pointing down, to
indicate protection. In contemporary choreo¬
graphy, the god is often represented with other
of his attributes, among them a deer, a trident, a
skull, a third eye, a crescent moon or the River
Ganges. He may be shown with a decoration of
snakes, with sacred ash on his forehead, with a
Examples of Indian
symbolic hand gestures or
mudras.
Clockwise from left:
a lion's head;
the head of a deer;
a hook;
a clasp;
the swan's wings;
the bee.
35

A scene from a
performance of the
Romoyana epic in Java
(Indonesia).
dwarf demon underfoot or else riding on a bull.
Mudras suggesting any of these attributes can,
depending on their context, be references to
Nataraja.
In Hindu thought dance was created by
God, but was codified and transmitted to
humans by a sage called Bharata, author of the
Natya Sastra, a treatise which dates from
between the years 3 B.C. and 5 A.D. This text
has remained ever since the principal sourcebook
for all the dramatic arts. A wide range of move¬
ments for each part of the human body is enu¬
merated and explained in the book. Later texts
further expanded the list, creating a vast reper¬
tory oí mudras that remains the basis of all the
different styles of dance practised to this day.
There arc currently seven classical styles of
dance, as well as innumerable semi-classical and
popular ones. Each developed in a different
region, and reflects local particularities. They are,
respectively, Bharata Natyam, from Tamil Nadu;
Kathakali, from Kerala; Mohini Attain, also
36
Signs and signals
A gesture is any action that sends a visual signal to an onlooker. To become a gesture,
an act has to be seen by someone else and has to communicate some piece of
information to them. It can do this either because the gesturer deliberately sets out
to send a signal as when he waves his hand or it can do it only incidentally as
when he sneezes. The hand-wave is a Primary Gesture, because it has no other
existence or function. It is a piece of communication from start to finish. The sneeze,
by contrast, is a secondary, or Incidental Gesture. Its primary function is mechanical
and is concerned with the sneezer's personal breathing problem. In its secondary
role, however, it cannot help but transmit a message to his companions, warning
them that he may have caught a cold.
Most people tend to limit their use of the term "gesture" to the primary
form the hand-wave type but this misses an important point. What matters
with gesturing is not what signals we think we are sending out, but what signals are
being received. The observers of our acts will make no distinction between our
intentional Primary Gestures and our unintentional, incidental ones. In some ways,
our Incidental Gestures are the more illuminating of the two, if only for the very
fact that we do not think of them as gestures, and therefore do not censor and
manipulate them so strictly.
DESMOND MORRIS
Manwatching, Jonathan Cape, London, 1 977
Text Copyright © 1 977 by Desmond Morris
from Kerala; Kuchipudi, from Andhra Pradesh;
Odissi, from Orissa; Kathak, from northern
India; and Manipuri, from Manipur.
Each of these styles has two distinct ele¬
ments, one purely rhythmic and the other nar¬
rative or expressive. In dance sequences of the
first type, mudras are simply decorative, com¬
plementing the dancer's movements. The feet
mark the beat, and for each step there is a cor¬
responding gesture. The accompaniment is
instrumental and rhythmic.
Narrative sequences accompany mystical
poems or texts sung by the musician, and here
the mudras serve to illustrate the lyrics. The
dancer's agile hands may evoke birdflight, rivers
flowing down mountainsides, confrontations
of gods and demons, seasons changing, lovers
coming together or separating. In such cases, the
performer has the opportunity to demonstrate
her capacity as an actor or storyteller, miming
with vivid gestures and expression all the dif¬
ferent characters in the stories, which are often
drawn from the great Hindu epics, the Ramayana
or Mahabharata, or else from hymns, myths or
legends.
Though grace of expression, beauty of move¬
ment and dynamic power are all evident in
Indian dance, they are not the heart of the matter.
The essence of the art lies in its vivid perception
of the religious meaning of life.
IMAGES EVOKED BY GESTURE
It is impossible to understand narrative dance
without acquiring familiarity with the language
of mudras from a recognized master, who serves
as the representative of the oral tradition. It is up
to the master to choose a disciple who will in her
turn assure the continuity of that tradition. The
master becomes a second parent to the pupil,
who in return is expected to show absolute
fidelity to the tradition as well as complete obe¬
dience to the teacher. This student-teacher rela¬
tionship is basic to the transmission of the tra¬
ditions of Indian dance.
Once a dancer has mastered the technique,
her fingers become veritable antennae with
which to communicate with the spectators.
Through gesture alone, without the aid of either
decor or accessories, she can call up vivid images,
portraying in turn, say, a dangerous animal, a
pretty girl with big eyes, an exotic garden and the
playing of musical instruments. But to make
the evocations come alive, each mudra must be
accompanied by the right facial expressions.
The eyes arc particularly important, for:
Where the hand goes, the eye must go,
Where the eyes go, the mind goes,
Where the mind, there the expression,
Where there is expression, there is joy.
The mudras used in dance arc divided into
two categories: single- and double-handed ges¬
tures. There are twenty-eight of the former,
ranging from patakd, "the flag", for which forty-
two different uses arc listed, to chandrakala,
"the crescent moon", with only two listed uses.
Pataka is described as follows: "When the hand
is open, with the fingers straight and the thumb

An actor captured in mid-
movement during the
performance of a kabuki
play. This form of Japanese
theatre ¡s a blend of music,
dance, mime and dialogue.
folded at the side, this gesture is called pataka by
the people conversant with dance gestures. With
the flag mudra we can designate forty-two
images. Some of these are: me, you, everyone,
night, river, moonlight, a horse, grace, entering
a street, ocean, forest, to sweep. . . ."
In combining mudras in the course of a nar¬
rative performance, a dancer may first interpret
a phrase of the text literally, and then, when the
singer repeats it, use her imagination to elaborate
the theme. Take a typical refrain such as "What
has happened to your heart? it seems as heavy
as stone". The first time the words arc sung,
the performer will simply illustrate the words
"heart", "heavy" and "stone". When the words
arc repeated, however, she may choose to elab¬
orate the story, showing how gentle and loving
the hero once was, and how his heart was poi¬
soned by another woman. In this example, the
surface meaning of the story is obvious enough.
The dancer's skill will lie in bringing out its
hidden, symbolic significance, which involves
humankind's mystic yearning for the divine.
It is the focus on divinity that gives Indian
dance its unique harmony, which is achieved
through discipline and concentration. Symbols
arc vehicles that carry one along a spiritual
journey that began thousands of years ago and
still continues as India's dancers trace fleeting
gestures mudras with untiring hands.
SAVITRY NAIR,
of India, teaches dancing and
singing. She has written a
study of Marionettes and their
role in Asian society, published
in Pondicherry in 1979.
37
