'Z
Asking the right
questions
by Dileep Padgaonkar
31
DILEEP PADGAONKAR
is the Editor of The Times of
India. He was formerly head of
UNESCO's Office of Public
H
Information.
AVE we become obsolete? We failed to
foresee the chaos, anarchy and violence
that have been wreaking havoc in many
parts of the world during the last few years. We
were not prepared, mentally and emotionally,
for the implosion of the Soviet Union, the upsurge
of ethnic, nationalist and religious hatreds in
Europe, Africa and Asia, the sight of people too
emaciated or terrorized to express a single
coherent thought or voice a single coherent
sentiment.
We do not know what questions to ask. The
grandiose interrogations that world views, holistic
approaches and ideologies prompted until only
the other day now invite ridicule, scorn and,
what is worse, apathy and indifference. Our
vocation is to connect individuals and events,
events and trends, trends and processes, signs
and fantasies. We are not able to do so. And it is
this inability which provokes us more and more
to speak about the uncontrollable forces now
taking hold of our minds in terms which are
either apocalyptic or embarrasingly autobio¬
graphical. No longer can we echo Malraux:

"There is more truth in the
ink of scholars than in the
blood of martyrs",
mixed media on canvas
(89x116 cm) by the
Moroccan painter Hamid.
Qu'importe ce qui n'importe qu'à moi? (What
does anything matter that matters to me alone?)
This sense of our own obsolescence must



lead us, inevitably, to question the assumptions we
made, the logic we followed and the goals we set
for ourselves during our intellectual itinerary.
These are admittedly large questions which can
at best yield tentative, vague and extremely gen
eralized answers. But we can no longer avoid
them. Whether we were conservatives, liberals or
Marxists, our notion of progress tended to be
linear and measurable. Progress meant "marching
ahead" on the strength of capital, technology,
management, marketing and, depending on where
we placed ourselves on the ideological spectrum,
on the distribution of incomes and assets and
the creation of cultural artefacts and services.
We assumed that material wellbeing, civic
order and cultural give-and-take were goals
shared by humanity everywhere and that the
obstacles in the way of reaching these goals were
class interest, mercantile aggrandisement or the
never-satiated appetite for influence and power of
certain nations or groups of nations. This is why
our moral categories were biased in favour of
individual freedoms and egalitarianism. This is
why we reposed our faith in reason and ratio¬
nality. This is why we assumed that economic
advancement, social justice, higher standards of
education, culture and health, equality before
the law and such other elements of a democratic
order would forever banish the demons of prej-
' udice, hate and bigotry.
Messianic creeds and millenarian
fantasies
We were wrong. In retrospect we made no
allowance for several factors which have now come
to play a pivotal role in shaping the destiny of
individuals, communities and nations. We did not
pay enough attention for instance to the fact that
in two crucial areas of our life the economy and
information the centres of decision-making
would no longer be local or national bureaucracies
but more and more transnational oligarchies of
bankers, speculators and myth-makers in the
media. In these two areas the sovereignty enjoyed
by national governments is being eroded day by
day in the name of the free market, the interde¬
pendence of economics, the free flow of ideas and
images.
Nor did we adequately appreciate the extent to
which rising expectations for a better life mea¬
sured almost entirely in terms of higher levels of
consumption would inevitably engender frus¬
tration, which in turn would lead to the atomiza-
tion of individuals, the destabilization of societies
and the progressive entropy of institutions whose
role is to protect life and property, dispense justice,
temper greed and avarice. When individuals, soci¬
eties and the various bodies of governance are
thus rendered rudderless, messianic creeds and
millenarian fantasies step in to promise a socially
stable, spiritually sound and materially prosperous
future. In the period after the end of the Second
World War these creeds and fantasies, which derive
their sustenance from references to a glorious 33

34
past, a past free of ethnic, racial, linguistic and
religious "impurities", were fringe phenomena.
Now in the North and South alike they threaten
to come centre-stage. They frown on reason, sus¬
pect objectivity, decry tolerance, despise the sec¬
ular outlook and debunk modernity.
Make no mistake about it. To people who
are afraid of chaos and deprivation, this appeal to
return to "fundamentals" of religious faith has a
powerful emotional and moral appeal which is all
the stronger because the rational and secular dis¬
course has proved again and again to be a case of
hopes unfulfilled, a case of double-speak and
double-think, of hypocrisy and arrogance. That
those who advocate a return to "fundamentals"
and to various "cleansing" operations have no
* morally viable alternatives to offer is another
story altogether. But few are willing to even con¬
sider listening to such a story right now.
Lost certainties
The India I come from is no longer the India of
Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru. This
was the India in which I was born and where I
grew up. When these two men held India in thrall
every Indian had an enticing challenge to shoulder:
to gradually minimize the importance of, if not
altogether shed, the "givens" of his birth his
religion, his caste, his linguistic and provincial
affinities the better to assume his larger identity
as a citizen of a vast multi-religious and multi-cul¬
tural nation. This, in turn, would enable him to be
at peace with himself and with the world at large.
Our articles of faith were democracy, secu -
larism, democratic socialism, non-alignment. Wc
took pride in the fact that we were an old civi¬
lization but a young nation; that our people were
poor and largely illiterate but yet held in their
hands the power to make and unmake govern¬
ments; that our press was free; that though our
country was partitioned on religious lines in 1947
wc refused to tread the path of theocracy; that
Hinduism, which owed its genius to its eclectic
and pluralistic nature, would ensure that our
democracy would avoid the pitfalls of majori-
tarianism; that our system would steer clear of the
excesses of capitalism and communism alike, and
that we would build a modern India on the foun¬
dations of a civilization which has given mankind
some of its shrewdest philosophical insights and
some of its most sublime aesthetic experiences.
Today, money power and muscle power have
often replaced arguments about electoral pro¬
grammes. Corruption is all-pervasive. People have
little faith in the fairness and efficiency of the
administration and the courts. Our secularism
too has come under a cloud because religion is
being blatantly exploited for electoral gain. The
minorities are being told to reject all reform on the
Panic (1 987),
gouache on paper
(57 x 82 cm)
by the Tunisian painter
Gouider Triki.
ground that it would endanger their identity. The
majority is being persuaded that the "appease¬
ment" of the minorities has gone far enough. The
secularists are clearly on the defensive.
The collapse of the Soviet Union has if any¬
thing precipitated the fall of the two remaining pil¬
lars of Nehruvian India: socialism and non-align¬
ment. Interdependence in the economic sphere has
led purely and simply to obeying the dictates of
international financial institutions and the transna-
tionals regardless of the costs to social justice and
to sovereign decision-making. As for non-align¬
ment, there is no-one left to be non-aligned against.
The emerging world order is nothing if not "prag¬
matic", that is, one where the currency of power
is economic clout, military (preferably atomic)
might and political and social "order".

Unwilling to participate in the media carni¬
vals, unable to succumb to the seductions of
the marketeers, profoundly sceptical of funda¬
mentalisms, reduced to the role of a helpless
spectator of nations losing their sovereignty
and of societies redefining their identities on
the aggressive agenda of separateness, the intel¬
lectual appears to have reached two debilitating
conclusions. First, that the North-South
dichotomy is not a geographical or even civi-
lizational expression, but that it is very much
present in the minds of individuals everywhere.
Second, that for the present at least this
dichotomy cannot be overcome because, in the
truest sense, it is rooted in the quest for power
at one end and in the quest for self-fulfilment at
the other. The discourse of the International
Monetary Fund and the Pentagon, and of their
surrogates elsewhere in the world, shapes the
former quest while the discourse of the cler¬
gyman shapes the latter. Nations may come
together or fall apart but in both cases people are
called upon to worship at the altar of Mammon
and to converse with the Almighty, either
directly, if possible, or through His intermedi¬
aries on earth if necessary.
Striking a balance
The cashier, the communicator, the clergyman
rule the roost: none of them has any use for elab¬
orate conceptual systems, logic or the reason of
the sort dear to the Enlightenment philosophers.
The cashier, communicator and clergyman enter¬
tain no doubt; their sole concern is how best to
market their certainties. The certainty of the
cashier is ever more cash; that of the communi¬
cator, ever more slick messages; that of the cler¬
gyman, ever greater simplification of the ago¬
nies that torment the soul. In plain words, the
intellectual, to be effective, cannot be content to
discredit cash, subvert the slick message and
expose the chilling banalities of fundamentalist
speech, but must propose solutions which do
not emanate either from a cockily self-confident
ideology or from its counterfeit, religiosity.
This is of course easier said than done.
Perhaps a beginning can be made if intellec¬
tuals learn to strike a balance between the imper¬
atives of economic progress brought about by sci¬
ence and technology and efficient management of
men and resources, concern for human rights, the
protection of the environment, and affirmation of
cultural identity without aggressivity or apologia.
Perhaps a constant preoccupation with the spir¬
itual and moral yearnings of individuals every¬
where is required. Emphasizing one of these
imperatives at the expense of the others may well
be the reason why the world appears to have
gone out of gear.
