The devalued image
by Sonia Younan

Below, in an artificial-
reality demonstration, the
operative makes lights
come on in the windows of
skyscrapers by pointing to
them on the screen.
IN times gone by, images were drawn, engraved
or painted on a physical support, in an enclosed
space which took on meaning from the pro¬
jection onto it of the latent physical attributes of
the subject depicted. The way in which this space
was organized had its roots in a physical,
Dionysiac quality which situated it in time and
thereby linked it to music, to what Nietzsche
called that "total dance whose rhythm stirs the
whole body." In The Birth ofTragedy, the German
philosopher described all the plastic arts as aspiring
to the condition of music, which is pure sym¬
bolism and is independent of either image or con¬
cept. The plastic arts are merely the projection of
what he called "sparks of imagery", the draping of
the Apollonian veil of beauty around the subject.
The Dionysiac principle is one of communion
and fusion with the whole universe. The artist
must triumph over subjectivity, find deliverance
from the self, and become the vector of cosmic
energies. It is through this process of "unserving"
that the wisdom of art is attained.
The whole of a picture bears the imprint of the
body and its mystery. In Leonardo's magnifi¬
cent draperies, the body is suggested by inden¬
tations, its very absence enabling it to orchestrate
even more effectively the Apollonian display of
draperies and highlights. What is shown is less
significant than what is left in shadow. The lines
take on meaning only insofar as they condense
the temporal nature of the painter's gesture,
because they exist as music before being pro¬
jected into the spatial dimension. In a corre¬
sponding fashion, the movement of the viewer's
eye as it "browses on the canvas" unlocks many
meanings. In his Theory ofModern Art, the Swiss
painter Paul Klee stresses the idea of the work of
art as genesis and describes the trajectory of cre¬
ation in this way: "The first movement in us,
the active, operative movement, directed towards
the work of art, and then the transmission to
others, to the viewers, of the movement con¬
tained in the picture." A snapshot appears to us
less truthful than a painting precisely because it

22
is cut off from this two-way process that takes
place over a period of time.
THE AESTHETICS
OF BANALITY
What has happened? Apollo has lost touch with
Dionysus. Space has become dissociated from the
body whence meaning could emerge. Machines
have taken over from the eye of the beholder.
Disconnected from the ways in which subjects are
perceived, images are no longer defined in relation
to reality but in relation to one another.



In hyperrealism, painting has found a high-
definition style of its own. In the words of one
hyperrealist painter, "photography is not the last
word in realism" nor is reality itself, one might
add, as the hauntingly accurate detail in this form
of painting confirms. Richard Estes' paintings,
worked up from dozens of different photographs,
recreate urban landscapes caught in the inter¬
play of multiple reflections and frames. They
show us what the human eye could never see,
such as an image reflected in a shop window and
an object inside the window both rendered with
the same degree of definition. Hyperrealism,
with its sharp focus and flattened perspective,
presents a smooth, uniform painted surface that
calls for no effort of the imagination. The frontal,
rectilinear gaze of the camera lens has taken the
place of the eye, with its curving field of vision and
its aura of possibilities. By interposing between
spectator and subject a series of technological
intermediaries, it destroys the original status of the
subject, which becomes the mere adjunct of a
piece of viewing apparatus. Is it fortuitous that the
painter's signature is often reversed, one more

A scene from Nick's Movie
(1 979- 1 980), the film Wim
Wenders made with the
American director
Nicholas Ray near the end
of Ray's life.
reflection among others? The painters of the
Renaissance endeavoured to recreate a humane
vision of the world, portrayed in depth, where
light emerged from shade, a vision in which
necessity had its place, a fragile conquest snatched
from the jaws of a universally prevalent contin¬
gency. Driven by an obsessive desire for trans¬
parency, hyperrealism teaches us that there is
nothing below the surface, in short that there is
nothing to sec.
When perception is dissociated from imagi¬
nation, we are left with banality, tautology, liter¬
alism. The psychoanalyst Sami Ali describes
banality as "the end of projection", "the disap¬
pearance of all emotive assocations", the absence
of an inside/outside polarity. "It is a 'reality' that
is both immediate and final," he claims, "cut off
from the historical process of which it is the cul
mination and no longer bearing in itself any trace
of the labour of negation". When temporality is
eclipsed by an absolute positivity, and imagina¬
tion the faculty of saying no is taken away, wc
are left in a situation where everything is
reversible, where copies outrank originals, the vir¬
tual is indistinguishable from the actual, and
reality is no more than a special effect.
A SURFEIT OF IMAGES
An intricate web of relationships has been woven
between the different types of image produced by
painting, photography, the cinema, video and
computer graphics. This rivalry and this mutual
fascination are illustrated in the films of the
German director Wim Wenders, for example in
the relationship between Jonathan and Ripley
in The American Friend. Jonathan, a picture
framer, lives in a workshop filled with the smells
and materials of his craft and in the ambit of the
painterly culture, based on the act of seeing. In
one scene he is the only person at an auction
who spots subtle differences of shades of blue that
reveal some of the works to be fakes. He is the
embodiment of the Apollonian ideal of the Beau¬
tiful, that of the circumscribed, the sober outline,
the frame. With Ripley, the American friend of the
title, we arc taken into the realm of the immate¬
rial, an unchecked flow of symbols, of specula¬
tion. A parallel is suggested between money, the
generalized form of commodities, and images, the
generalized forms of reality. Ripley is defined
only through external symbolism, through the
objects that surround him. At one point he takes
Polaroid photographs of himself lying on a pool
table; eventually the proliferating images cover his
whole body. The death of the original is con¬
summated in the triumph of the copies. Else¬
where we see him taping himself and later playing
back the recording, as though his self-awareness
can only be sustained by means of the fragile
traces recorded by a machine. Ripley, a post¬
modern character, finally draws Jonathan into
his own ambit, that of the sublime reduced to the
level of the quantitative. The turning-point of
the film is marked by a shot ofJonathan smashing
a picture frame in his workshop. The smashing of
the frame symbolizes the relentless onward rush
towards the limitless, the sea, death	
Restoring to images their innocence	 In his
book The Act ofSeeing, Wim Wenders discovers
in seeing the possibility of latent truth that is
"obscured by words, by past events, by opinion."
This return to true perception, unencumbered by
judgements and opinions, is close to the idea,
advocated by phenomenology, of getting back to
things in themselves. It means learning to see
things with the eyes of childhood again. This
possibility tends, however, to disappear as the
number of images we arc exposed to increases.
High-definition systems allow images to be
reproduced ad infinitum without any loss of
clarity and with unlimited possibilities for manip¬
ulation. Digitized and insubstantial, the high-
definition image does not deteriorate like a film 23

Grand Luncheonette (1969),
a painting by the American
artist Richard Estes.
24
SONIA YOUNAN
is an Egyptian philosophy
teacher, painter and art critic.
She has published many articles
and has made a short film, Elle
comme Lens (1979).
negative. It makes the concept of "originality"
entirely meaningless, and the special effects to
which it is subjected leave no trace.
Wim Wenders wants to make the cinema a
focal point of resistance to this loss of meaning.
"The cinema," he writes, "must represent, for
each image, a last bastion of this sense of the
image." The transition from a pictorial culture to
the "era of technical reproduction", to repro¬
ductions of works of art, to photography, the
cinema and finally the electronic image, has been
responsible for an increase in the quantity of
images that constitutes "one of the most serious
sicknesses of our civilization".
The cinema has a memory of its own, its own
highly-developed language. To quote Wenders
"cinematographic language is a powerful
medium that leaves its imprint on everything it
produces". Video is easier to handle and more
spontaneous but lacks this "capacity for taking
shape". Its language is basic: instead of con¬
structing a diachronic development it breaks time
down into a succession of instants, and it aban¬
dons the cinematic pan shot in favour of the
close-up. The relationship between film and
video is the same as that between an original and
a copy. The proliferation of video images is indeed
a disease, a malignant tumour that thrives to the
detriment of organic growth. In Nick's Movie,
Wenders shot the cancer-stricken Nicholas Ray
in video because video seemed to him like a
cancer within the film itself. Hence, in order to
check the progress of a disease that the French
sociologist Jean Baudrillard has called "the con¬
tamination of things by the virus of images", and
their "unlimited pullulation", the video image
must be reinserted into the cinematic framework,
marked with its imprint, filled out with the
organic quality, the meaning and the memory
that it presently lacks.
ABSORBED BY THE 'BLOTTING
PAPER' OF THE SCREEN
In his critique of Wagner, Nietzsche poured scorn
on the signs of a modernity that sought to attain



the infinite grandeur of the sublime but only
succeeded in achieving the ultimate in triviality,
that of sound reduced to its component parts,
bereft of all organic linkage. The decline from the
sublime to the quantitative is paralleled by the
way in which the new technology of the image
absorbs us so that image and viewer become one
and actually causes our perception to regress by
eliminating the distance that is an integral part of
our way of seeing.
" Wc used to stand in front of the image, now
we are inside the visual environment." In Vie et
mort de l'image, une histoire du regard en Occi¬
dent, Régis Debray stresses the the importance of
the clement of distance in visual perception.
"Seeing," he writes, "means standing back from
the thing seen, distancing oneself, cutting oneself
off." The perception of sound is more archaic; lis¬
tener and sound become one. In the world of
the audiovisual media, seeing undergoes annex¬
ation by listening, "visual noise" is superimposed

upon audio noise. "The visual environment has
virtually become a sound environment." Wc are
caught up in a process of absorption, in what
the French critic Paul Virilio has called the "blot¬
ting paper" effect of the screen.
The omnipresence of images and the speed
with which they are transmitted relieve us of the
necessity to imagine an elsewhere, to project our
thoughts through time and space. Everything is
here and now; everything comes to us without
our having to go anywhere. The cult of live
transmission, immediacy and the close-up con¬
spire to make us believe we are in direct contact
with events; but as Marshall McLuhan has taught
us, the medium is the message, events are indis¬
sociable from the trace they leave, and the only
present is the presence of the image. Removed



from the opaque order of visible culture, the
image has been subjugated by the strategy of
communication and promoted for its own sake,
regardless of any meaningful content.
To prevent the imagination from crumpling
under the impact of high-speed transmission and
to restore to images their lost innocence, we need
to disconnect image from sound which is no
longer recorded on separate tracks as in the cinema.
We must halt the flow of images, and resist the
seductive power of immediacy. If we do, perhaps
we shall witness the return of what Wenders calls
the truth potential. It takes time for meaning to
come across. In Proust's great novel A la recherche
du temps perdu, the taste of a small cake a
madeleine brings back buried memories from the
past, a past relived as the present. Images only
take on meaning again when they arc related to our
own mental images, integrated into our own time¬
frame, vibrating in sympathy with our bodies,
the storehouse of our memories the body, what
Nietzsche called our "great reason".
THE MYSTERY
OF APPEARANCES
In Michelangelo Antonioni's film Blow-up, the
plot revolves around a photograph taken in a
London park. When the photo is developed it
reveals a dead body that Thomas, the photogra¬
pher, had not noticed when he took it. The eye of
the camera captures something that remained
invisible to the naked eye. But Thomas then
decides to blow the image up bigger and bigger,
and again the mystery eludes us. By dint of
zooming in closer and closer we are left with the
meaningless mosaic of the grain of the film, as
meaningless as the grain of Albcrtine's skin is to
the narrator in Proust's novel. The pervasive use
of close-ups and the zoom lens drags us down
into what Baudrillard calls the "blank obscenity"
of a transparent universe. "Where docs this crazy
idea come from," he asks, "the idea of being able
to reveal the secret, to expose the naked sub¬
stance, to touch the ultimate obscenity? The idea
itself is Utopian there is no reality, there never
has been; the power to allure lies in realizing this
and preserving the mystery."
In order to rediscover the allure of appear
ances, to guard against "blank obscenity", the
mystery of the body needs to be reinvented. In
The Draughtsman's Contract, by Peter Green-
away, the English film director and painter, the
architectural drawings of a country house play a
part in the plot, like Leonardo's draperies, giving
depth to the cinematographic image. They cannot
be deciphered as a poster can; they yield up the
memory of past events in minute doses. The
murder clues are revealed through a subtle inter¬
play of appearances and disappearances. The
time-frame of the film and the logic of its plot are
organized around the drawings, and the true
mystery is the one played out in the arrange¬
ment of lines, values and chiaroscuro. Works of
art, as the German philosopher Martin Heidegger
says, always hold themselves "in reserve". The
painter meets his death perhaps because he dis¬
covered the murderer but more certainly because
he was unable to preserve the mystery of appear¬
ances, the innocence of images.
DIGITAL FEVER
In the beginning was the digit; the Word became
software and dwelt among us, to adapt the
French writer René Bergers phrase. Video, com¬
puter graphics, holograms the new visual tech¬
nologies detach themselves from the familiar
forms of our perception and hitch themselves to
Joan of Aragon, by Raphaël
and his studio.
25

digits. Computer-generated images usher in the
age of simulation, where virtual reality prevails
over reality itself.
The relationship between art and these tech¬
nologies is a problematical one. Whereas the
artist's approach sidesteps conceptualizations,
digging below the specificities of the real world
to capture the totality of experience, digital
imaging does the opposite, making the specific a
fall-out from the idea of the universal. The artist
becomes a computer operator, and the transcen¬
dency of the work of art implodes somewhere in
the networks. As Michel Jaffrenou has pointed
out, "the proliferation of networks, that spider's
web that is being spun around the whole world,
that fluidity that is seeping into all communica¬
tion, means that works created on screens can be
fed into circuits, circulate through them and
return almost immediately to the sender, trans¬
formed, interpreted and ready to go out again."
Moving and having their being in an intangible
environment, absorbed into the networks, manip¬
ulated in the course of interactive communication,
produced in real time, images arc turning their
backs on human beings and looking at one
another.
26
THE WISDOM OF LOVE VERSUS
THE WISDOM OF THE IMAGE
Other people reveal themselves to us above all
through the expression in their eyes. This does not
add any new significance to the image perceived
by the senses; indeed, it emerges only if and when
that image is destroyed. The endless fascination
of the Mona Lisa reminds us how a gaze can
convey the mystery of another person we are so
captivated by her gaze that we cannot look at her.
The painting itself fades away, disappears, leaving
behind the pure presence of another being. Who
remembers the colour of the Mona Lisa's eyes?
Another person's gaze is unbearable. The
narrator of A la recherche du temps perdu not
only keeps Albertine prisoner but can only tol¬
erate her when she is asleep, because, as he says,
at such times her "personality no longer slipped
away all the time, as it did when we were talking,
through the channels of unacknowledged
thoughts and looks. At such times, she seemed to
have called back all that part of herself that was
outside; she had taken refuge, enclosed and sim¬
plified, within her body." The eyes are the channel
through which the personality escapes and
through which it must return. "Those closed
eyelids," Proust tells us, "laid on her face that per¬
fect continuity unbroken by the eyes."
The proliferation of images is the sign of a civ¬
ilization that has forgotten how to see, that erases
all forms of otherness, a culture "with closed eye¬
lids". Our response to the lure of an act of seeing
that kept a distance between pcrceiver and per¬
ceived, to a love directed towards "the mystery of
the Other", to the transcendency of an art that pre¬
served the aura of original works, is to rush head¬
long into the banal strategies of the image.
m »,:*< -

