Ibe political solution
'Politics is by
definition the
antidote to naked
violence'
by Sami Hair
T
Above, Policemen of the
World (1375), a bronze
sculpture (11 x 50 cm) by
the Vietnamese artist Diem
Phung Thi.
I wo responses need to be kept under
control in the face of violence: fear and
moral revulsion. But this is extremely dif¬
ficult, because fear and moral revulsion are
healthy reactions to an outbreak of violence.
Healthy, but unfortunately unequal to the act
of violence itself; they are reactions to the
effects of the act, not actions affecting the
conditions that allow violence to occur.
Fear and moral revulsion are generated by
different feelings. Fear accompanies aware¬
ness of danger to the human body, to its phys¬
ical integrity. Moral revulsion arises from the
feeling that, since the notion of good is the
foundation of the social order, violence,
which is the embodiment of evil, must under¬
mine that foundation. In the first case, the
response is legitimate (this is the instinct of
self-preservation identified by Spinoza and
Freud) but irrational, for it cannot be propor¬
tionate to the extent of the act of violence. In
the second case, the reaction is not legitimate
(because it presupposes that the act of vio¬
lence is alien to the social order) but rational,
because it is based on an awareness that vio¬
lence destroys that order. But the two reac¬
tions lead to the same result: they answer vio-
jle Thviolence. Ihis is the opposite tothelence with
what is desired.
So another, more realistic attitude to the
problem of violence is required. Its starting
point is the familiar notion that human beings,
when left to themselves, will set in motion the
bellum omnium contra omnes, or "war of all
against all". The realistic approach, as opposed
to the moralistic one, takes for granted that
violence is central to human life, the social
order and human relationships. The problem is
how to control, eradicate or transcend it.
To transcend human violence is, in a sense,
to transcend humanity itself. But there is no
need to seek the principle of that transcendence.
It is not the kind of magic formula that pro¬
phets discover as a result of revelation (though
it has to be said that all religions are based on
this precept), nor is it a personal decision that
individuals are free to impose on themselves.
There is no need to look for a solution because,
paradoxically, it already exists. It resides in the
fact that any human being is also a social being,
or a "political animal", to use Aristotle's term.
In other words, the solution already resides in
the imperative necessity of the social order. The
social order requires individual human beings 41

42
to transcend themselves, because it has struc¬
tured them into a community, into an organized
society. The historical form taken by that orga¬
nization, at least in the tradition of volatile
societies in both East and West, has been the
state.
A STATE MONOPOLY
The state is the starting point of society. It
may well also be its end product but only
those who, like Hegel, claim to be the mouth¬
piece of absolute knowledge can be absolutely
certain of that. Experimental research has
shown beyond doubt that the violence of indi¬
viduals is incompatible with the state and that
the state cannot effectively perform its role as
guarantor of the social order unless it dispos¬
sesses individuals of their violence, or unless,
in Max Weber's phrase, it holds a legitimate
monopoly of violence.
The way in which this monopoly is created
is neither abstract nor straightforward. In each
case, specific historical conditions, power
struggles, conflicts and the clash of vested
interests combine to produce a certain type of
state or form of domination. Their degree of
legitimacy depends on the relationship that
SAMI NAIR is a French
philosopher who is Professor
of Political Sciences at the
University of Lausanne
(Switzerland). Among his
published works are
Machiavel et Marx (1984),
Le Caire, la Victorieuse
(1986) and Le regard des
vainqueurs (1992).
unites them or sets them against human
society and the individual within that society. I
shall therefore not examine here the historical
question of the formation of the state. I shall
examine the problem of the transcendence of
human violence from a purely theoretical
standpoint, which of course has repercussions
on one's day-to-day outlook on violence.
Paradoxically, the transcendence of indivi¬
dual violence in the state comprises both the
abolition and the maintenance of violence.
Abolition, because through the exercise of the
general will violence becomes a norm, en¬
shrined in the legal system. No state, however
dictatorial it may be, can afford to ignore the
will of the community. History is of course lit¬
tered with examples of states whose sole legiti¬
macy has depended on their possession of arms,
but even in such cases there is constant refer¬
ence to the community and to its will. This is
what always gives legitimacy to the prohibition
of individual violence (which in turn becomes
necessary in the face of oppression). Rousseau
and Kant had opposing views on this matter.
Rousseau held that if the social contract is not
respected, and since it is based on the principle
of the general will, then the individual is

"No state, however
dictatorial it may be, can
afford to ignore the will of
the community". Above, a
crowd demonstrates in
Santiago de Chile on 7
October 1988 after General
Pinochet had been defeated
in the referendum he had
organized.
entitled to opt out of it and rebel, whereas Kant
urged the individual to submit to the moral law,
which he held to be superior to the general will.
And that moral law stipulated an absolute
rejection of violence.
Let us be quite clear about this: the usual
form taken by the transcendence of violence is
the transformation of violence, its inversion
into a legal norm. But violence is also, by the
same process, maintained, in the form of the
coercion exercised on those who oppose the
established community, whether they be
internal opponents who wish to use violence
to question the prevailing order, or external
opponents (other states), which strive by force
to impose their violence on the state.
And so there is an eminently complemen¬
tary relationship between the abolition and the
maintenance of violence; but violence has a
different form in each case. It would be a big
mistake ever to assume that violence has disap¬
peared, or should disappear, from the state,
and that the era of the "perfect citizen" has
dawned. In fact violence never disappears from
life. Its emergence is a sign, a symptom, a har¬
binger. But of what?
Of a deregulation of the social order. The
more an organized system is perverted by vio¬
lence, the more its capacity to integrate the
community is weakened. In this respect,
recourse to violence is an attack on the social
order rather than a justification of it. It always
reveals .the weak points in the system. This
point is valid both for individual and for group
violence. The French social scientist Emile
Durkheim showed how the normative order is
called into question by the act of suicide,
which is the most radical form violence can
take since it is directed against the self. Need¬
less to say, if violence heralds a weakening of
the social order, the latter cannot be rescued by
the power of the state alone. For as it weakens,
the state can and often does lose its legitimacy.
To that extent, an outbreak of violence is a
straw in the wind, an invitation to the social
order to turn inwards and take stock of itself,
to find out what has made violence possible.
POLITICAL COMMUNICATION
The state cannot put an end to violence either
by decree or by force of arms. The latter
course soon leads to bloodshed, and people
will imagine the blood to be that of their near¬
est and dearest. Such situations can be resolved
only through discussion, in the sense of com¬
munication between individual wills. This
form of communication is what politics is all
about. Politics is by definition the antidote to
naked violence. When Clausewitz said that
war is the continuation of politics by other
means, he did not imply that politics is the
continuation of war by other means. He was
simply saying that war is limited by politics,
and vice versa. In other words, that between
violence and discussion, and between force
and consensus, there is no continuity, but a
break. Politics is incompatible with force: it is
the realm of shared decision-making through
collective communication.
Here too, starry-eyed optimism should be
avoided, first because debate can be manipu¬
lated (how many demagogues has the world
seen since the time of Cleisthenes of Athens!),
Vivre, a terra-cotta group
(60 x 35 cm) by the French
artist René Lamoureux.
43

and secondly because in Western civilization,
which probably now gives priority to the
image over the printed word, people are tend¬
ing to become passive consumers of powerful
images to the detriment of their role as citizens.
The view that politics is the antidote to vio¬
lence has far-reaching implications. It implies
first of all that politics is the only way to
contain outbreaks of violence within the social
order. When violence begins to break free
from and destroy the social order, it becomes a
counter-society. On careful examination, this
can be seen to be the case of all movements of
those who are rejected or relegated to the side¬
lines of the social order. Fundamentalism in
Islamic society, for example, has all the charac¬
teristics of a politically antisystemic move-
' ment. However, the function of politics is to
integrate, not to exclude, to institutionalize
conflicts, not stifle them.
This brings me to the second consequence
of my argument: if politics is to be effective
and that should be its sole aim it must inter¬
face with actual reality, with the empirical
generality of divergences, contradictions,
interests and conflicts, as well as the infinite
range of passions that underlie them. In other
words, politics must be democratic.
But democracy in this context should not be
taken to mean simply the exercise of freedom.
For freedom is also more often than is usually
imagined a source of violence. It should be
regarded as that which encourages the equality
of all citizens equality here being taken to
mean, at least in democratic systems, satisfying
the minimum aspirations of each person.
Only democratic politics can get to the
roots of violence. It alone can decipher its
codes and reveal its underlying causes, because
it alone can extend the legal rights enjoyed by
men and women. And what is violence if not a
desperate appeal for such an extension?
The seal of the
Commonwealth, the
Cromwellian regime
established in England in
1649 after the temporary
overthrow of the monarchy.
Commentary
by
Federico
Mayor
This article is one ofa
series in which the
Director-General of
Unesco sets out his
thinking on matters of
current concern
