IHJLi
THE UNESCO COURIER - APRIL 1993
by France Bequette
The International Conference on
Nutrition, the first "world nutrition
summit", was held in Romefrom 5 to 11
December 1992. The six-day meeting of
official representatives from over 160
countries, including several ministers of
health and agriculture, wasjointlyspon¬
sored by the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the
World Health Organization (WHO) and
was also attended by around 160 inter¬
national and non-governmental organi¬
zations. It ended with the adoption ofa
WorldDeclaration and a Plan ofAction to
eradicate hunger and malnutrition.
ORLD hunger is a scandal that
cannot be tolerated. There is
enough food in the world for
everyone; the problem is one
of inequitable access. In developing
countries, some 20 per cent of the
population about 780 million
people still do not get enough food
to meet their basic daily needs for
nutritional well-being. About 190
million children under five years of
age suffer from protein-energy mal¬
nutrition and more than two billion
people suffer from micronutrient
deficiencies that can lead to blind¬
ness, mental retardation and even
death.
Agriculture should be able to meet
everybody's food needs but, whereas
the civilizations of the past were
mainly rural and families raised and
grew at least enough for their own
consumption, the millions ofpeople
who throng the world's megacities
today are cut off from the land. In his
book Earth in the Balance, U.S. Vice-
President AI Gore writes: "The his¬
tory of agriculture is intertwined
with the history ofhumankind. Each
increase in the size of human I
*r*
Dossier
25 CAN THE WORLD
FEED ITSELF
WITHOUT
CHEMICALS?
by France Bequette
28 World
Voices from the past
30 BIRD CALL
25

Dossier
Treating fruit
trees with
insecticide
(France).
settlements was accompanied by
further sophistication in the co¬
operative effort to produce, store
and distribute ever-larger quanti¬
ties of food. New technologies, like
the plough and the irrigation ditch,
led to new abundance but also new
problems, like soil erosion and the
buildup of salt in the soil."
New technologies can turn out to
be disastrous, as Al Gore points out:
"The high yield methods frequently
used in the American Midwest
loosen and over time pulverize the
soil to the point that large amounts
of topsoil wash away with each rain,
a process that leads inevitably to a
sharp reduction in the ability of
future generations to grow similar
quantities of food from the same
land."
Moreover, as the number ofpeople
working the land is constantly dwin¬
dling, farming has to become inten¬
sive, producing as much as possible
to feed a steadily growing popula¬
tion while remaining cost-effective.
By the end of the century, the
world's population will have reached
over 6 billion and could level off at
around 1 1 and a half billion in 2 100,
only 13 per cent of whom will be
living in the "rich" countries. This
means farming more land or increas¬
ing yields. At present, according to a
publication by the International
Group of National Associations of
Manufacturers of Agrochemical
Products (GIFAP), 97 per cent of the
world's output of agricultural pro¬
duce is grown on 3 per cent of the
land. Over the next 50 years, we will
have to produce as much food as has
been produced since the first human
beings appeared on Earth, making it
essential to maintain high produc¬
tivity in the rich countries and to
develop a productive agriculture in
the rest of the world.
Pesticides:for and against
According to Professor Adolf
Weber, of the University of Kiel,
Germany, "increased food produc¬
tion relies on the steady flow and
uptake of scientific and technolog¬
ical advances. These can bring more
land into production and increase
the productivity ofagricultural land.
Land improvement methods,
power, machinery, irrigation, seeds,
fertilizers and crop protection prod¬
ucts all play a part. It is generally
26
cheaper to intensify production
rather than extend the land area
under cultivation."
The aim of agrochemistry is to
protect crops and promote soil fer¬
tility. Here, we shall consider only
pesticides. Plants are said to be
threatened by over 15,000 species
ofharmful fungi, over 10,000 species
of harmful insects and over 2,000
species of weeds, not to mention
viruses, bacteria, rodents, and so on.
For each type of enemy, there is a
class ofproducts, ofwhich the main
three are insecticides, herbicides (or
weed-killers) and fungicides; other
categories include slug killers, roden-
ticides, and so on.
Philippe Desbrosses, an environ¬
mentalist working with the
Commission of the European
Communities and the European
Parliament, has pointed out that
world sales of pesticides have long
been regarded as indispensable to
progress in crop protection.
Proponents of "biological" farming
would strongly disagree with the
need for pesticides, holding that
nature needs no help in defending
itself against predators. Green Fields,
Grey Future, a report published by
Greenpeace in 1992, revealed that
EEC member states, taken together,
are the largest users ofpesticides in
the world, with a consumption of
over 314 million tonnes in 1991.
When a farmer sees mildew or
Colorado beetles attacking his
potato or tomato field, and ifhe can
afford it, it is tempting for him to
resort to crop protection products. A
few judicious applications will guar¬
antee a good harvest, but what about
the impact on health and the envi¬
ronment?
Public opinion in the industrial¬
ized countries is becoming increas¬
ingly alarmed about the systematic
use of pesticides, which is seen as
increasing the risk of cancer. In 1989,
a pesticide called Alar, used to treat
apples, was cited in the United States
as presenting a health hazard for

Spraying weed¬
killer from a
helicopter (New
Zealand).
children and set off a major scare.
However, according to Professor
Maurice Tubiana, an internationally
known cancer specialist, "if the fre¬
quent presence in food offertilizers,
herbicides, insecticides, and so on,
had any noticeable carcinogenic
effect, an increase in the incidence of
stomach cancer should have been
observed, since the stomach is the
first of the viscera to be exposed to
risks from food. The rapid and reg¬
ular decline of stomach cancer in
Western countries shows that this
is not the case." Nevertheless,
according to data compiled by the
World Health Organization, about
50,000 people die every year, and
500,000 are poisoned, as a result of
pesticides, through their inhalation
or ingestion or through skin contact.
The developing countries, where
substances thathave been banned in
developed countries are still on the
market, are particularly affected
because, while certain products are
identified as potentially lethal, either
they are not clearly labelled, or users
are illiterate and cannot read the
instructions, do not wear protective
clothing, are not able to shower, or
have no medical care available in
the event ofaccidents.
Alternatives to chemical
control
Manufacturers point out that, just
as for medicaments, every such
product has to obtain clearance from
the public authorities before it can
be sold. According to a statement
from one group ofmanufacturers, in
France this requires "a total ofeight
to ten years of experimentation,
research and studies . . . costing from
600 to 700 million francs." It goes on
to say that "Toxicological testing is
done on animals, microorganisms,
game, aquatic fauna, birds, bees, the
soil and flora ... in order to assess as
accurately as possible the likely
effects on humans and on the envi¬
ronment." It adds that "the risk factor
is never zero, whether the substance
absorbed is kitchen salt, aspirin or
the residue ofa product used to pro¬
tect plants." A brochure published by
the Swiss Federal Office for the
Environment, Forests and the
Countryside about new legislation
on the use ofproducts to treat plants
explains: "The law . . . applies to all
substances which, even ifabsorbed
in relatively small quantities, can be
dangerous to life or health through
a chemical or chemical-physical
action, and which consequently
must be handled with particular
care". It adds that "almost all treat¬
ment products are toxic!"
In 1948, the Swiss chemist Paul
Müller was awarded the Nobel Prize
for Physiology and Medicine for
having discovered the insecticidal
properties ofDDT, a miracle product
that would help check famine and
diseases such as malaria. A
Canadian government publication,
The State ofCanada's Environment
(1991), indicates that within a dozen
years proof of the harmful effects
and residual persistence of DDT
began to build up. In the early 1970s,
when its dangerous nature had been
clearly and irrefutably established, it
was partially or completely banned
in many countries, including
Canada, but it is still available in
developing countries.
Pictographs
showing items
of protective
clothing to be
worn when
handling
chemical
products.
From top down:
goggles, gloves,
face mask.
This example calls for several
observations. It can take a while to
determine the real toxicity of a sub¬
stance and years to have it banned.
Once it finds its way into the son, it is
sometimes still found there decades
after itwas used. It can also be found
in surface waters. According to some
specialists, 432 parasite insects were
resistant to insecticides in 1980, as
compared with 7 in 1937.
Can the world be fed without the
use of chemical products? China,
which cannot afford to buy them,
feeds nearly fourteen people from
every hectare of farmland, while
France feeds only two. Referring to
the most comprehensive study ever
done on the subject, carried out in
1991 by Cornell University, AI Gore
writes: "... farmers who used natural
alternatives to chemical control of
pests (such as integrated pest man¬
agement and crop rotation) could
abandon many pesticides and her¬
bicides without reducing yields at
all and without significant increases
in the price of food. And according to
the study, in the case of those pesti¬
cides for which no substitute has yet
been identified, the volume ofchem¬
icals used could, in most cases, safely
be cut in half."
To allaypublic apprehensions, the
main requirement is that environ¬
mentalists and industrialists should
agree to get together and talk.
FRANCE BEQUETTE
is a Franco-Americanjournalist
specializing in environmental
questions. Since 1985 she has been
associated with the WANAD-Unesco
training programmeforAfrican
news-agencyjournalists. n -j

World
ENVIRONMENTALISTS AND INDUSTRY JOIN
FORCES TO PROTECT THE ALPS
Alp Action, an organization chaired by Prince Sadruddin
Aga Khan, has undertaken a number of conservation
projects in the Alps in conjunction with various cor¬
porate partners. With backing from a chocolate man¬
ufacturer, a scheme has been launched to plant some
200,000 trees in the high Alps, and another Alp Action
partner, a leading construction company, is helping to
restore traditional Alpine chalets. The bearded vulture
(Gypaetus barbatus), a magnificent bird with a three-
metre wingspan, is being reintroduced into the French
Alps, and endangered butterfly species are to be pro¬
vided with sanctuaries in Switzerland, thanks, respec¬
tively, to a holding company and a cosmetics firm.
28
PAPER RECYCLING-
A BIG MISTAKE?
According to Sten Nilsson, leader
of the Forest Resources Project at
the International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis in Vienna,
recycling vast amounts of paper
could do more harm than good to
the environment. Recycling paper
has obvious environmental and
economic benefits it limits the
growth of landfills, and making new
paper from waste paper requires
less energy than using new wood
fibres. Professor Nilsson notes, how¬
ever, that "ifwe were to recycle alloi
our paper products the net effect
would be to increase air pollution
and consumption of fossil fuels."
The resultant increase in airborne
emissions of carbon dioxide, sul¬
phur dioxide and nitrogen oxides
would be disastrous for many of
Europe's forests proving once
more that, where the environment
is concerned, there are no quick
fixes. H
LARVAE AND FUNGI WITH A
WEAKNESS FOR NARCOTICS
According to a 1990 United Nations
report, the illicit production and
consumption of drugs are still
increasing at a rapid rate, repre¬
senting a major problem. Is there
any environmentally-friendly way
of eliminating the coca shrub, the
opium poppy and the cannabis
plant? The caterpillars of certain
lepidopterous insects eat coca
leaves and thus constitute a valu¬
able weapon. Certain fungi attack
plants from which narcotics are
derived. More than 40 species are
found on cannabis and coca plants,
and more than 30 on the opium
poppy. Several of these could turn
out to be effective biological control
agents and could be used in eradi¬
cation programmes.
THE ARCTIC-A NUCLEAR
DUMP?
An international conference on envi¬
ronmental problems in the Arctic
was held in Arkhangelsk in October
1992. Participants learned that in
1955 the Soviets had established an
atomic test site on the island of
Novaya Zemlya, between the Barents
Sea and the Kara Sea, and carried
out tests there, first atmospheric then
underground, until 1990. Novaya
Zemlya and its coastal waters have
also become a dumping-ground for
11,000 containers of nuclear waste
and at least 20 nuclear reactors of
various origins, with more to come as
a result of disarmament. This is
causing alarm in Norway as well as
among the local population. The
International Atomic EnergyAgency
has recommended that a strictly
controlled storage facility and repro¬
cessing plant be set up there, but
nobody knows who will foot the bill.
CULTIVATING RED CORAL
Unlike reef-building warm-water coral, which requires substantial amounts
ofsunlight, red coral (Corallium rubrum), the kind used in jewellery, grows
in the shade of caves. Because of its market value it is in danger of over-
exploitation, especially where it grows in shallow water. This, along with its
total disappearance from some areas, has led the General Fisheries Council
for the Mediterranean to approve an interesting new method for culti¬
vating it. Four eight-tonne concrete "caves" were built, then sunk in a
marine reserve offshore from the Monaco Océanographie Institute. Coral
colonies and branches were then transplanted on to artificial substrata fixed
to the walls. The coral has stood up well to the move and has grown 15 mm
in two years, a very rapid growth rate for the species. If the success of this
experiment is confirmed, the same method could be employed in the
areas where the coral has disappeared.

THE GREENING
OF NEW CALEDONIA'S MINES
Each year four million tonnes of nickel are extracted in
the French territory ofNew Caledonia, making the island
the world's third largest producer. The local authorities,
in association with ORSTOM, the French research and
overseas development agency, have launched a research
programme with a view to rehabilitating former mining
sites. The sites are bare and inhospitable, with little
water, few fertilizing elements, and too much magnesium
and nickel. Only species native to the island are capable
of adapting to these conditions. In accordance with an
agreement between ORSTOM, the International
Cooperation Centre of Agricultural Research for
Development (CIRAD), and the South Province of New
Caledonia, about twenty endogenous species ofherba¬
ceous and ligneous plants have been selected to restore
a protective cover ofdiverse vegetation, toning in with the
landscape. By avoiding the introduction ofalien species,
a move which has been responsible for destructive plant
invasions on other Pacific islands, the plan sets an
example of respect for the local environment.
BATTLING BACTERIA
TAKE ON MOSQUITOES
Dirty, stagnant water is a happy hunting ground for
Culex quinquefasciatus mosquitoes, which are a serious
problem in Cameroon. A project supported and partially
financed by the Tropical Disease Research Programme
of the World Health Organization has enabled ento¬
mologists to try out new countermeasures in Yaounde
and Maroua. Instead of using chemical insecticides,
which are harmful to the environment and to which
insects develop resistance, they use Bacillus sphericus
bacteria, which kill the mosquito larvae when they
ingest them. This technique produces excellent results
and is both totally harmless and relatively inexpensive.
CLEAN WATER
FOR BELO HORIZONTE
Brazil is launching a water pollution control plan in
the state ofMinas Gerais with the help of a $145-million
loan from the World Bank. The loan will cover some of
the costs of drainage and flood prevention, sewage col¬
lection and treatment infrastructure, and facilities for
collecting and disposing of industrial solid waste.
Metropolitan Belo Horizonte is plagued by uncon¬
trolled industrialization, and suffers from inadequate
urban and sanitation infrastructures, resulting in the
pollution of rivers and reservoirs.

Voicesfrom thepast
ID CALL
In Aristophanes'famous playThe Birds (414 B.C.), two
Athenians go to live among the birds andfound an ideal city.
A blend oflyricism, wit and dreams ofuniversal brotherhood,
The Birds showsAristophanes at the height ofhis powers as a
master ofword-play.
30
M The story on this
page appears in an
anthology entitled
Compagnons du
Soleil ("Companions
ofthe Sun") co-
published (in French)
by Unesco, Editions
La Découverte (Paris)
and the Fondation
pour le progrès de
l'Homme. The
anthology has been
prepared under the
general editorship of
theAfrican historian
Joseph Ki-Zerbo, in
collaboration with
Marie-Josephe Beaud.
Epo popo popo popo, popo popo poi!
Ió. ió, itó, itó, itó, itó!
Come along, come along, birds of my own feather,
Birds who live in the farmers' well-sown fields,
Eaters of seed and of barley, myriad flocks
Of a hundred species, fluttering quickly,
Uttering gentle calls,
Twittering together on the furrowed soil
In a pleased voice, tió, tió, tió!
Birds who live in gardens, or in the mountains,
Birds who feed on the wild olive
And the fruit of the arbutus,
Quickly fly to my call, triotó, triotó totobrix.
Birds of the watery places,
Snapping up the sharp-mouthed midges
Along the ditches in the marshland,
Birds of the swamp and the fenland
And the pleasant meadow of Marathon;
Bird of the stripy wing, godwit, godwit, godwit!
And all the tribes that flywith the halcyon
Over the waves of the sea, come along, come along!
Come here to be informed
Of a revolution, hi! all long-necked birds, you too
Come along!
Come and meet a shrewd old fellow,
Full ofwisdom, new in outlook,
Enterprising. Come along now,
Come along now, join the meeting!
Toro toro toro torotix!
Kikkabau! Kikkabau!
Toro toro toro toro lililix!
Aristophanes (c. 445-c. 386 B.C.)
Greek comic dramatist
Translated by David Barrett and Alan H. Sommerstein.
Penguin Classics, 1979
