Russia: the revenge of subjectivity
by Aleksandr Mikhalevuh
36
PSYCHOANALYTICAL literature was circulated
in Czarist Russia from 1907 onwards by
Russian doctors who had been trained in
Switzerland, Germany or Austria and had then
gone on to practise analysis in their own country.
These followers of modified forms of Freudianism
strongly opposed the view that the causes of
mental illness are constitutional, and were hostile
to the pessimistic and lazy attitude which led to
confining its victims in asylums. From their expe¬
rience as practitioners in local communities, they
came to believe that there was little point in
working on dreams, associations of ideas and
sexual and infantile phantasms in an autocratic
society that did not allow its subjects any
autonomy. Nevertheless, the Czarist censors did
nothing to prevent the publication of the review
Psikhoterapiya, the formation of a medical circle
whose meetings were known as the "little
Fridays", or the translation of the works of Freud
and his disciples.
The Russian Freudians, who were comfortably
established in their country's scientific and pro¬
fessional institutions, were reluctant to relate indi¬
viduals to their psycho-sexual background, to the
effects of childhood traumas, or to the conflict trig¬
gered off by the remoteness and coincidence of
past and present in their experience. They turned
instead to psychotherapeutic techniques con¬
sisting of a mixture of psychoanalysis (to shed
light on the meaning of the symptoms), and of sug¬
gestion (to reeducate patients and help them to
readapt).
The influence of the "nervism" school formed
by I. M. Scchenov and later developed by I. P.
Pavlov and V. M. Bekhterev prompted the Russian
Freudians to look for a physiological basis for the
psychological mechanisms and processes described
by psychoanalysis. This reductionist approach
tended to make them somewhat distrustful of
introspection, to raise the brain reflex to the status
of a key concept in scientific psychology and to
play down the insights of mentally disturbed
people into their own condition.
However, this voluntarist view of the indi¬
vidual as a programmed entity was qualified by
clinical practitioners such as Drs. Drosnès,
Ossipov, Vyrubov and Pevnitzky, who acknowl¬
edged the validity of Freud's discoveries con¬
cerning the sexual causes of neuroses. This was
tantamount to discovering that the individual
had a "psychic reality" which was shaped by the
pleasure principle and was impervious to the
illusions of voluntarist teaching. At the same

A factory workshop
(1930). Detail from a work
by the Russian painter
V. Rozhdestvensky.
*
ÉHMB
time, Freud's disciples applied psychoanalysis
to literanjre and political events, and rediscovered,
in the wake of Dostoyevsky and Tolstoy, the
pathological motivations underlying certain forms
of terrorist and revolutionary action.
THE BOLSHEVIK-STALINIST PHASE
The new regime that emerged from the October
revolution tolerated the existence of a Soviet
Association of Psychoanalysis (1922-1931) and
a Governmental Institute of Psychoanalysis
(1922-1925). Intellectuals living in the big cities
and Communist youth organizations realized
that Freud could become a useful adjunct to
Marx and could justify the sexual freedom
favoured by Lenin in a bid to break down the tra¬
ditional hidebound bourgeois family. Trotsky
regarded the works of Freud and Adler as tools
that could be used to create a new kind of human
being and to provide decisive arguments against
the theses of idealism. Medical doctors who were
advocates of psychoanalysis, such as A. Zalkind,
set out to construct a new form of teaching prac¬
tice based on the concept of sublimation: since
human beings possess a single form of bio-psy¬
chic energy, it should be managed in such a way
as to derive the maximum benefit from eroti¬
cism for collective purposes, and also perhaps
to bring about the end of "sexual imprisonment".
Although it did not share these extraordinary
views, the Soviet Association of Psychoanalysis,
a club of university teachers and middle-ranking
Communist Party officials favourable to
Freudianism, worked on possible ways and means
of taking prophylactic sociological action. The
educationalist Vera Schmidt founded the
"International Solidarity" hostel in Moscow in
1922 to experiment with an original approach to
the education of the two- to five-year-old children
in her charge. The systematic and collective
analysis of the counter-transference of educa¬
tionalists on children went hand-in-hand with
the use of teaching methods designed to encourage
the development of a sense of reality, cleanliness
and personal autonomy, and endeavoured to min¬
imize the repression of the children's sexual drive
and the guilt feelings it aroused. However, this
non-authoritarian exercise in education was dis¬
continued in 1925. Moreover, after the political
eclipse of Trotsky and the end of the New
Economic Policy (N.E.P.), blind faith was placed
in state planning as a means of consolidating and
"curing" the human personality.
Even before the Soviet psychoanalytical move¬
ment was banned by Stalin, it was already falling
apart. Psychoanalysis was condemned as being too
long and expensive a process and as imprisoning
patients within themselves. In the early 1930s the
rejection of all forms of psychotherapy heralded
this development, which stifled individual aspi¬
rations in the name of industrial efficiency.
Naturally, references to infantile sexuality and to
phantasms were especially forbidden, since the
psychology of the self had been put to death.
In spite of the reign of terror, researchers made
a case for recognizing the specific character of
Ivan Pavlov,
the great Russian
physiologist, in
1926.
Vladimir Bekhterev
(1857-1927),
Russian
psychiatrist and
psychologist.
The neurologist
F. Bassin, who
encouraged a
revival of
psychology in the
Soviet Union in the
1960s.
certain individual psychological processes and
the existence of an unconscious mind. Novelists
such as Yevgeny Zamyatin in We and Yury
Karlovich Olesha in Envy were outspoken enough
to claim that the Revolution had given birth to a
gulag-like soup kitchen, into which the irruption
of sexuality would perhaps thwart the then current
process of robotization.
Freudianism was forced underground. It was
later to serve as a model for the revenge taken by
the individual after the Stalinist era.
THE POST-STALIN THAW
In 1958, during the Khrushchev thaw, the neu¬
rologist F Bassin tried to encourage a revival of
Soviet psychology and to bring discussions on the 37

"Identification with the
Supreme Guide crushed the
family father figure." A giant
portrait of Lenin on the
façade of a Moscow
apartment block (1988).
38
unconscious into line with current thinking. A
conference held in Moscow in 1 962 gave official
status to this attempt to rediscover the subjective
by means of a less ideologically-oriented critique
of psychoanalysis.
During the cyclical phases of freeze and thaw
which marked the evolution of Soviet society
significant advances were being made in urban
growth, the development of higher education,
the relative accessibility of information, and
exchanges with the West. In 1968, a paper by
Bassin on the Problem of the Unconscious
attempted, with a measure of official support,
to impose a theory of personality which took
account of unconscious processes and defence
mechanisms such as projection, rationalization,
sublimation and repression. However, the new
individual forged by Soviet psychology was a
subject that was fully developed, balanced and
capable of modifying his or her behaviour in
order to adapt to the demands of reality. Persistent
psychological conflicts, neuroses, and the ravages
caused by desire were only marginal occurrences
typifying a (pathological) minority of the popu¬
lation. This conception of the individual, which
minimized the roles of sexuality and conflict,
was upheld until 1969, when a Congress on the
problem of the unconscious was held in Tbilisi.
From the 1970s onwards, the Soviet social sci¬
ences stressed the fact that the qualitative devel¬
opment of the economy and adaptation to the
third industrial revolution that was then begin¬
ning to take shape called for a relatively heteroge¬
neous pattern of society and a degree of individual
autonomy. This represented the revenge of the
personality against the mechanical reductionism
which had regarded individuals as strictly social and
biological entities. Under cover of social psy¬
chology and of the scientific study of collective
interactions, the dominant value became one of
restricted pluralism.
PSYCHOANALYSIS UNDER PERESTROIKA
From 1985 onwards, a number of Soviet scholars
called for the rehabilitation of psychoanalysis, the
creation of a scientific sexology, and the publi¬
cation of the works of Freud. The unofficial prac¬
tice of psychoanalysis, which until then had only
been tolerated, crept back in again through the co¬
operative system. In 1989, the psychiatrist and
endocrinologist Aron Belkin re-established the
Russian Association of Psychoanalysis in
Moscow. Some ten years before, Belkin had pub¬
lished a work entitled "The Individual and
Socialization", in which he denounced the harm
done by the totalitarian system under Stalin'. In
particular, he stressed that identification with the
Supreme Guide had crushed the family father
. figure, forced the individual to regard as diabol¬
ical any alternative that was rejected by an
authority vested with quasi-sacred power, and
eventually caused the death of thought and the
blunting of all moral sense. Brief outbursts of
aggression had provided the only outlet for the-
desire for freedom. In "The Soviet fdipus"
(1983), the literary critic E. Kogan attacked what
he called "the obsessive identification with the
father who had disappeared, the feeling of shame
towards the father who had been deported or
eliminated as an enemy of the people, and the soli¬
tude and wanderings of the son".
Novelists such as Voinovich and Zinoviev
have described people of this kind as products of
the kickback generation, a world which saw the

triumph of servility and selfishness, envy and
resentment. Trainee analysts constantly encounter
patients who demand a quick cure, stubbornly
refuse to accept their personal autonomy and
cannot grasp the liberating value of making pay¬
ment in exchange for the sessions they received.
This painful emergence of the individual, in
parallel with the restoration of psychology and
syncretic forms of psychoanalysis, is taking place
against a background of social pathology
involving alcoholism, an alarming rate of child
mortality and flagrant criminal activity. Brutal
attempts to introduce economic reform are
making life difficult for the artistic and scientific
intelligentsia which paved the way for the revenge
of subjectivity on the totalitarian model.
One thing is certain. This ambiguous process
of social and cultural differentiation has certainly
been encouraged by the distant memory of
Russian Freudianism and the curiosity that psy¬
choanalysis inspires today in a highly educated
society.
"This painful emergence of
the individual. . .", long
stifled by totalitarianism.
ALEKSANDR MIKHALEVICH,
a doctor in psychoanalysis,
has published many articles
on the history of
Freudianism in Russo-Soviet
culture, notably in the
journal of the International
Psychoanalytical
Association. He contributed
to La Psychanalyse en Union
Soviétique, a study on
psychoanalysis in the Soviet
Union (L'Harmattan, Pans,
1992).
39
