The Seville Statement
Peace is possible. War is not a biological
necessity but a social invention, and
peace must be invented to replace it. This
is the message ofthe Seville Statement,
which was drawn up in 1986 by an
international team ofspecialists
(biologists, psychologists, ethologists,
geneticists and others) on the initiative of
the Spanish National Commission for
Unesco as part of the International Year
ofPeace sponsored by the United
Nations. The Statement has been
endorsed by many organizations of
scientists around the world, and in 1989
was adopted by Unesco, which is
disseminating it worldwide in theform of
a brochure published in English, French,
Spanish and Arabic. The Statement
attracted considerable attention at the
second World Congress on Violence and
Human Coexistence which was held at
Montreal (Canada) in July 1992.
Salient passagesfrom the Statement are
published below.
INTRODUCTION
We, the undersigned scholars from around the
world and from relevant sciences, have met and
arrived at the following Statement on Violence.
In it, we challenge a number of alleged biolo¬
gical findings that have been used, even by some in
our disciplines, to justifyviolence and war. Because
the alleged findings have contributed to an atmos¬
phere ofpessimism in our time, we submit that the
open, considered rejection ofthese mis-statements
can contribute significantly to the International
Year ofPeace.
We state our position in the form of five pro¬
positions. We are aware that there are many other
issues about violence and war that could be fruit¬
fully addressed from the standpoint of our disci¬
plines, but we restrict ourselves here to what we
consider a most important first step.
FIRST PROPOSITION
It is scientifically incorrect to say that we have
inherited a tendency to make war from our animal
40 ancestors. Although fighting occurs widely
throughout animal species, only a few cases of
destructive intra-species fighting between orga¬
nized groups have ever been reported among natu¬
rally living species, and none of these involve the
use of tools designed to be weapons. Normal pre¬
datory feeding upon other species cannot be
equated with intra-species violence. Warfare is a
peculiarlyhuman phenomenon and does not occur
in other animals.
The fact that warfare has changed so radically
over time indicates that it is a product ofculture. Its
biological connection is primarily through lan¬
guage which makes possible the co-ordination of
groups, the transmission of technology, and the
use of tools. War is biologically possible, but it is not
inevitable, as evidenced by its variation in occur¬
rence and nature over time and space. There are
cultures which have not engaged in war for centu¬
ries, and there are cultures which have engaged
in war frequently at some times and not at others.
SECOND PROPOSITION
It is scientifically incorrect to say that war or any
otherviolent behaviour is genetically programmed
into our human nature. While genes are involved
at all levels of nervous system function, they pro¬
vide a developmental potential that can be actua¬
lized only in conjunction with the ecological and
social environment. While individuals vary in their
predispositions to be affected by their experience,
it is the interaction between their genetic endow¬
ment and conditions of nurturance that deter¬
mines their personalities. Except for rare patholo¬
gies, the genes do not produce individuals
necessarily predisposed to violence. Neither do
they determine the opposite. While genes are co-
involved in establishing our behavioural capacities,
they do not by themselves specify the outcome.
THIRD PROPOSITION
It is scientifically inconect to say that in the course
ofhuman evolution there has been a selection for
aggressive behaviour more than for other kinds of
behaviour. In all well-studied species, status within
the group is achieved by the ability to co-operate
and to fulfil social functions relevant to the struc¬
ture of that group. "Dominance" involves social
bondings and affiliations; it is not simply a matter
of the possession and use of superior physical
power, although it does involve aggressive behav¬
iours. Where genetic selection for aggressive behav¬
iour has been artificially instituted in animals, it
has rapidly succeeded in producing hyper-aggres¬
sive individuals; this indicates that aggression was
not maximally selected under natural conditions.
When such experimentally-created hyper-aggres¬
sive animals are present in a social group, they
either disrupt its social structure or are driven out.
Violence is neither in our evolutionary legacy nor
in our genes.
FOURTH PROPOSITION
It is scientifically inconect to say that humans have
a "violent brain". While we do have the neural appa¬
ratus to act violently, it is not automatically activated
by internal or external stimuli. Like those of higher
primates and unlike those of other animals, our
higher neural processes filter such stimuli before
they can be acted upon. How we act is shaped by
how we have been conditioned and socialized.
There is nothing in our neurophysiology that com¬
pels us to react violently.
FIFTH PROPOSITION
It is scientifically incorrect to say that war is caused
by "instinct" or any single motivation. The emer¬
gence ofmodern warfare has been a journey from
the primacy of emotional and motivational fac¬
tors, sometimes called "instincts", to the primacy of
cognitive factors. Modern war involves institu¬
tional use ofpersonal characteristics such as obe¬
dience, suggestibility, and idealism, social skills
such as language, and rational considerations such
as cost-calculation, planning, and information
processing. The technology of modern war has
exaggerated traits associated with violence both in
the training ofcombatants and in the preparation
of support for war in the general population. As a
result of this exaggeration, such traits are often
mistaken to be the causes rather than the conse¬
quences of the process.
CONCLUSION
We conclude that biology does not condemn
humanity to war, and that humanity can be freed
from the bondage of biological pessimism and
empowered with confidence to undertake the
transformative tasks needed in this International
Year of Peace and in the years to come. Although
these tasks are mainly institutional and collective,
they also rest upon the consciousness of indivi¬
dual participants for whom pessimism and opti¬
mism are crucial factors. lust as "wars begin in the
minds of men", peace also begins in our minds.
The same species which invented war is capable of
inventing peace. The responsibility lies with each
of us.
