THE UNESCO COURIER - MARCH 1993
Dossier
23 THE RIGHT
TO CLEAN AIR
by France Bequette
26 World
Voices from the past
28 STORY
OF THE SANDS
A spruce
affected by
acid rain in the
Vosges regton
of France. 23

Dossier
m
JiI
m m,
A researcher at
Cornell
University (USA)
holds up sick
vine-leaves to
demonstrate the
toxicity of the
ozone that can
accumulate in
the atmosphere
as a result of
pollution. In his
other hand he
holds healthy
leaves from
stock cultivated
in an ozone-free
chamber.
and nitrogen oxides from coal-fired
power plants and metal foundries,
as well as from vehicles and heating
systems.
The wind carries these particles
over long distances. While the
Parthenon sculptures were bound
to be victims because they are
located in the heart of a city where
air pollution is rampant, today even
a seeming natural paradise like the
Baikal region is affected, graphically
demonstrating that our planet is
indeed a village. The effects of
burning coal with a high sulphur
content are not limited to the
immediate vicinity in which the coal
is burned. Once the smoke-borne
pollutants are in the air, they are
beyond human control and travel
wherever the wind takes them.
Floyd Elder, a Canadian expert
on acid rain, notes that the British
chemist Robert Angus Smith coined
the term more than a century ago.
Although the technology at Smith's
disposal was rudimentary by today's
standards, he demonstrated as early
as 1872 that smoke and steam con¬
tain substances that cause impor¬
tant changes in the chemical com¬
position of rain. He noted that these
changes could be detected not only
in the immediate area around the
point of emission but also "in the
fields, at a great distance from the
source." He also discovered some
of the harmful effects of acid rain,
such as the discolouring of fabrics,
the corrosion of metal surfaces, the
deterioration of building materials
and the withering ofplants.
Although the term "acid rain" is
evocative, it is often inappropriate:
"acid deposits" is more accurate.
Drifting air pollutants are deposited
not only by rainfall but also by snow,
clouds and fog (so-called "wet"
deposits), as well as by gases and
dust ("dry deposits") during the dry
season. Even normal rain is mildly
acidic, with a pH that varies
between 5.6 and 5.0. (Distilled water
has a pH of 7, which is considered
neutral. Substances with a pH over
7, such as limewater and ammonia,
24
are alkaline. Those such as wine and
lemon juice with a pH under 7 are
acidic.)
Development fallout
Despite the early warning given by
Robert Smith, industrial countries
only began to take acid deposits
seriously in the 1950s. In 1953,
the Canadian Government launched
a programme to study and monitor
the water in the lakes ofNova Scotia,
where acidity was increasing at
an alarming rate. In the 1960s,
Scandinavian countries reported
that fish populations were declining
and that some lakes had even
become completely sterile. Trout
don't like swimming in vinegar.
In lapan pollution was at its worst
afterWorld War II. Between 1946 and
1954, the need to rebuild the country,
feed the population and keep facto¬
ries working called for the use of fer¬
tilizers and pesticides, the extrac¬
tion of raw materials, the burning of
fossil fuels, and a dam construction
programme. lapan's number one pri¬
ority was to achieve a high level of
development. Pollution would be
attended to later.
Four tragic accidents, however,
caused the lapanese authorities to
take public-health and safety mea¬
sures. Two of the accidents at
Minamata and Niigata respectively
involved mercury poisoning; the
third was linked to cadmium and
the fourth to sulphur dioxide. The
last case occurred at a time when
coal and hydroelectric power were
beginning to be superseded by
petroleum and petrochemicals. A
huge industrial complex was built
at Yokkaichi, south ofTokyo. When it
went into production, local people
began to complain of unpleasant
odours, irritating fumes, and soot-
marks on their laundry. There was a
significant rise in the incidence of

asthma, and the phrase "Yokkaichi
asthma" was coined. In 1967, studies
identified sulphur dioxide released
from the smokestacks as the prin¬
cipal culprit. The victims took the
six companies involved to court and
won their case, gaining compensa¬
tion and focusing public attention
on the dangers of air pollution. In
the same year, the Idemitsu Kosan
refinery invested some ten billion
yen in a desulphurizing facility, the
first ofits kind in the world, designed
to remove sulphur from heavy oil
before it was burned, and the Tokyo
city authorities established a sulphur
dioxide monitoring station in front of
the former town hall. The public was
alerted whenever the readings
reached levels considered dangerous
to health this happened sixteen
times in 1968 alone.
The lapanese government
responded energetically. It set up
an Environment Agency and drew
up a strict regulatory system mod¬
eled on the Clean Air Act adopted
in the United States in 1970. How¬
ever, a recent assessment by the
agency points to the inadequacy of
all such controls. The higher the
level of a nation's development, the
more industries, vehicles, and
heating appliances it possesses and
the more pollution it produces.
Is this inevitable? In the United
States, the CleanAirAct was amended
and strengthened in 1990. The atmos¬
phere today contains 23 billion kg of
suspended particulates of lead, sul-
A gargoyle
disfigured by
sulphur
emissions on the
Canadian
Parliament
Building in
Ottawa.
phur dioxide, carbon monoxide,
nitrogen oxide and other substances,
which means that every man,
woman and child inhales 112 kg of
particles a year. Economic incen¬
tives should make it possible to
reduce the figure by two thirds by
the year 2005. The U.S. Environ¬
mental Protection Agency counts
among its undisputed successes a
substantial reduction in the level of
toxic lead emissions since lead was
banned from automobile fuel.
Canada is concerned about the
winds blowing in from regions of
heavy industry across the border in
the United States. But foundries in
the mining district ofcentral Ontario
are also implicated. In the mid-
1980s, eastern Canada alone was
responsible for the emission of 4.6
million tonnes of sulphur dioxide.
Meteorological conditions only
make things worse. Heavy winter
snowfall traps acids for months. The
spring thaw frees a stream of acid
into rivers and lakes at the time when
aquatic fauna are reproducing,
causing sterility and embryo mal¬
formation. The forest is also affected;
maples and birch trees in eastern
Canada are dying.
In 1990, the United States pledged
to reduce sulphur dioxide emissions
by half. Canada is doing the same.
But modern society has a growing
demand for energy and industrial
goods. Individuals, companies and
communities must take stock of the
situation and work together to find
new and different consumption
patterns.
FRANCE BEQUETTE
is a Franco-American journalist
specializing in environmental
questions. Since 1985 she has been
associated with the WANAD- Unesco
training programmeforAfrican
news-agency journalists. 25

World
AIR POLLUTION
IN CHINA
According to the World Bank, heavy industry, tradi¬
tionally a major source of pollution, still accounts for
nearly half of China's industrial output. This situation
is seriously jeopardizing the progress that has been
made in environmental protection. The Environmental
and Economic Policy Research Centre set up under the
aegis of the National Environmental Protection Agency
faces an uphill job in trying to reduce air pollution.
Average particulate-suspension levels measured in
China's big cities can be as many as five times the 60-to-
90-microgram-per-cubic-metre levels considered
acceptable by the World Health Organization. The
figure for the city ofXian averages 520, for Beijing 358,
and for Shanghai 251.
INFORMATION PLEASE!
The Unesco Courierwill be happy to publish informa¬
tion from readers about projects to protect the envi¬
ronment, however modest or localized. If you know of
an initiative of this kind, please write and tell us all
about it its aims, methods and results.
TRACKING INSECTS BY SATELLITE
In the countries of Africa's Sahel
region, it is vitally important to
keep watch for invasions of crickets
that can devastate the area's
meagre crops. The Paris-based
Centre for International Coopera¬
tion in Agricultural Research for
Development claims that remote
detection via Landsat, Météosat,
NOAA and SPOT satellites can
provide a monitoring system that
may be highly effective, although
the data must be subsequently
corroborated on the ground. In
1991 a 300-square-kilometre area
in the north of Niger was moni¬
tored. It took 80 hours of helicopter
flights, 30 hours of plane flights,
and 6,000 km of track covered to
provide 800 aerial photographs
and 300 field surveys. These data
were then compared with the
images provided by the satellites.
Once the invaders have been
located, of course, they still have to
be eliminated.
26
CROCODILES
IN THE BATHTUB
There is never a dull moment at the
Blohms'. For the past 40 years, they
have been doing their best to pro¬
tect one of the five most endangered
large reptile species in Venezuela,
the Orinoco crocodile (Crocodylus
intermedius), and their efforts have
included letting sick specimens use
the family bathroom to recuperate.
Hunting of this species coveted for
its skin and even for its teeth, which
according to local folklore have
medicinal properties, reduced a
population that numbered several
million at the beginning of the cen¬
tury to some 2,000 animals. Cecilia
and Tomas Blohm now breed
Orinoco crocodiles in concrete
tanks on their 2,500-hectare ranch
located in the state of Guarico. In
1992 they released 200 crocodiles
into the wild. If their enterprise suc¬
ceeds, it might be possible to raise
the crocodiles on a sustainable
basis, so providing a source ofpro¬
tein for the local people as well as
helping to save one of the world's
twelve most threatened animal
species from extinction.
CARDBOARD COFFINS
It can be argued that it is wasteful to fell trees in order
to manufacture coffins that may only be used for a
matter of hours. In view of the increasingly widespread
practice of cremation, Alexander Haas of Switzerland
has invented the "Peace Box", a cardboard coffin made
from materials that are 60-per-cent recycled. Even if this
ecologically-minded initiative has yet to catch on in a
big way, it certainly counts as an honourable attempt to
use materials "from the cradle to the grave".

CANADA RATIFIES THE WORLD CONVENTION
ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY
Canada, which on 4 December ratified the Convention on Biological
Diversity signed at the Rio Earth Summit in June 1993, is one of the world's
biggest countries. The home of some 70,000 known animal species, it
comprises a host ofdistinct habitats. But a great many of these ecosystems
are imperilled. Little tallgrass land is left, while 103 animal species or sub¬
species are listed as threatened or in danger of extinction, and 20 are
extinct. Canada's Green Plan has established a national wildlife strategy
designed to protect endangered species and their habitats. A federal policy
on the conservation of wetlands adopted in March 1992 defined new
wildlife reserves and bird sanctuaries. By the year 2000, the government
should have established as many national parks as there are natural regions
(39 in all), covering 12 per cent of the country's surface area.
GREEN
GASOLINE
POLLUTION AND THE STOCK
EXCHANGE
As of this year, "clean" firms will be
selling "pollution permits" on the
Chicago stock exchange. This novel
system authorizes buying and
selling of the right to emit specific
amounts of sulphur dioxide, one of
the main sources of acid rain. A
company that has not used up its
maximum emission quota will be
allowed to sell the remainder to
others, for the highest bid or for a
fixed price. The United States
Environmental Protection Agency
(USERA) has declared its approval of
an initiative that will enable bene¬
ficiaries to avoid having to pay fines
or suspend operations.
With the development of biomass fuels derived from
sugar cane or rape seed, green is in fashion, even for
automotive fuels. Yet Pierre Delacroix, energy specialist
with the nongovernmental organization France Nature
Environnement, warns that neither the ethanol-gaso-
line mix used in Brazil nor diester, a fuel for diesel
engines currently being studied in Europe, are risk-
free. Ethanol by-products may be toxic, while diester
contains nitrogen oxide and carcinogenic aldehydes,
both hazards to health. Furthermore, as these fuels are
based on agricultural crops, production would be likely
to call for massive doses of fertilizers and pesticides,
without the restrictions on their use applied to food
crops. In trying to limit carbon dioxide emissions from
conventional fuels, might we not create new sources of
pollution?

Voicesfrom thepast
m
1 OF T
Dervish stories are medieval allegorical tales used by the dervishes
in Middle-Eastern Muslim orders to illustrate their mystical teachings.
This one still forms part of the region's oral tradition and is told
in several languages.
28
The story on this
page appears in an
anthology entitled
Compagnons du
Soleil ("Companions
of the Sun") co-
published (in French)
by Unesco, Editions
La Découverte (Paris)
and the Fondation
pour le progrès de
l'Homme. The
anthology has been
prepared under the
general editorship of
the African historian
Joseph Ki-Zerbo, in
collaboration with
Marie-Josephe Beaud.
river which rose in the distant moun¬
tains flowed through many lands before
it finally reached the desert sands. It
tried to overcome this new obstacle just
as it had surmounted all others in its
-path, but it noticed that as it flowed
through the sand, its waters disappeared.
It was sure that its destiny was to cross the
desert, but how? Then a hidden voice, a voice
from the desert, murmured: "The wind
crosses the desert. The river can do the same."
The river replied that when it rushed at the
sand it was soaked up, whereas the wind
could fly across the desert.
"Ifyou leap forward in your usual way, you
will not get across. You will only disappear, or
become a swamp. You must let the wind carry
you to your destination."
The river asked how that could be, and the
voice answered, "Let the wind absorb you."
The river found the idea unacceptable. It
had never before been absorbed. It did not
want to lose its individuality: once it had
given it up, how could it be sure to get it back?
"The wind takes care ofthat," said the sand.
"It absorbs the water, carries it over the desert,
then lets it fall. The water falls in the form of
rain and becomes a river anew."
"How do I know this is true?"
"That is how it is. And ifyou don't believe it,
you will never become anything but a marsh¬
land, and even that could take many years.
And that is certainly not the same thing as a
river!"
"But couldn't I remain the river I am today?"
"No matter what happens, you cannot
remain the same," murmured the voice. "The
essential part of you is carried off to form a
river anew. Even today, you have that name
because you do not know what part ofyou is
the essential part."
These words stirred distant recollections for
the river. It could vaguely remember a time
when the wind had carried it, or part of it at
least. It also remembered but was this really
a memory? that this was what it was meant
to do, even if there was no real need.
So the river evaporated into the welcoming
arms ofthe wind. And gently, effortlessly, the
wind raised it up and carried it off, letting it fall
gently in droplets when they reached a moun-
taintop many leagues away. And because it
had doubted, the river remembered and
absorbed all the more acutely the details of
the experience. "Yes, I now know my true
identity," said the river to itself.
The river was beginning to learn. But
the sands murmured: "We know because
we see this happen day after day and because
we sands stretch out from the river to the
mountain."
This is why they say that the ways that allow
the River of Life to pursue its journey are
written in the sand.
