Climate
changes
Iesulting from
\uman activity
él have serious
implications for
te distribution
the worlds
water



Qimate of uncertainty
by Igor A. Shiklomanov
bove, the Perito
Moreno glacier
(Argentina).
SOME scientists already foresaw in the nine¬
teenth century that the progress of civi¬
lization and the growth of industry and
energy consumption that went with it might
soon affect the world's climate.
It was only in the 1980s, however, that an
unprecedented warming of the atmosphere was
observed. Average temperatures rose from year
to year to reach the highest point since records
began to be kept in 1850. It became increasingly
difficult to put this phenomenon down to mere
climatic variations. Even the most sceptical cli-
matologists began to concede that global warming
was a reality, and public opinion has generally
grown used to that idea.
Many countries have set up national research
programmes or joined in programmes co-ordi¬
nated by various international bodies including
UNESCO to look into climatic changes brought
about by human activities. A round-up of the
findings of this research, prepared by a group of
specialists drawn from various countries, was
approved by the second World Climate Con¬
ference, held in Geneva in November 1990.
This research shows that, if present rates of
population growth and industrial development
are maintained, the air temperature is likely to
increase by 2 or 3 °C in the next twenty to thirty
years. The warming effect would be greatest, as
much as 5 or 6 °C, in the cold and temperate
zones, and less marked in the tropical and sub¬
tropical zones.
The possible effect of these temperature
increases on the hydrosphere that part of the
Earth covered by water and ice is a matter for
serious concern, since the hydrosphere is partic¬
ularly sensitive to climatic changes, to which it
reacts immediately. Any alteration to the hydro-
logical cycle has a direct impact on economic
development and on the environment in many
parts of the world, causing an upheaval in the con¬
ditions in which the local populations live.
In the higher latitudes, the Arctic and
Antarctic in particular, there will be an increas¬
ingly rapid melting of the snow and ice, in which
enormous quantities over twenty-four million
cubic kilometres of fresh water have been stored
up over hundreds and thousands of years. This
will cause a gradual rise in the levels of the oceans,
which could amount to a metre within the next 19

century and much more thereafter, with obvi¬
ously disastrous consequences for low-lying
coastal regions such as the Netherlands or
. Bangladesh, as well as for such major conurba¬
tions as London or St. Petersburg.
As the air temperature goes up, evaporation
from both land surfaces and water surfaces will
increase too. The atmosphere will become more
humid, the processes of the hydrological cycle
will speed up and rainfall may increase. In short,
this change in the climate will profoundly disturb
all the workings of the system whereby the waters
of the Earth and of the seas are held in balance.
SHRINKING RIVERS
Rivers provide almost 90 per cent of the world's
supplies of fresh water. Hydraulic engineering
projects aimed at regulating their flow have con¬
siderably affected the volume of water they carry,
a large part of which (over 4,000 cubic kilometres
a year) is now drawn off for industry, urban
water supplies and, in especially large quanti¬
ties, irrigation. The creation of large artificial
lakes and reservoirs, often as big as natural lakes,
upsets normal streamflow and evaporation pat¬
terns over vast areas. Increased water consump¬
tion is also tightening the pressure on water
resources. In certain densely populated regions,
rivers have "lost" from 20 to 30 per cent of their
normal flow and some, like the Amu-Darya and
Syr-Darya in the former Soviet Union, as much
as 90 per cent.
The effects of rising temperatures on river
discharge are likely to be very serious, especially
in the arid zones. Annual discharges in such
regions will plummet, even if the air temperature
rises by only 1 or 2 °C and rainfall drops by no
more than 10 per cent.
Variations in precipitation have an even more
decisive impact than temperature increases as
such. If the latter were accompanied by even a
From its source in the
mountains of central Asia,
the Amu Darya flows
through the deserts of the
Turan Lowlands towards
its mouth on the southern
shore of the Aral Sea. Its
discharge has sharply
diminished in recent years.
Water pollution in the
Kowloon district of Hong
Kong.
SO
^^ . IjH '^ J
-- *ri
r . "" "^^^^^^
%-- . Jük*¿< ^"^*J
rvJ^g-- ^ r^*^^; - -^
> , ;
Iß
ferÊÊ2É
m
*^d- -*,-« ^tf
slight reduction in rainfall in the arid and semi-
arid regions which comprise 30 per cent of the
land-mass in Europe, 60 per cent in Asia and
vast areas of Africa and Australia, the world's
water problems would become much worse. The
change would affect not only annual flows but
also seasonal flows, especially in the temperate
zones, where the springtime peak discharge is
of great importance.
A temperature rise of 2 °C, leading to more
rapid melting of snow because of warm spells in
winter, would increase the discharge of the great
rivers of Russia and Ukraine the Volga, Dnieper
and Don by 50 to 100 per cent in winter, but
would decrease it by 25 to 30 per cent in the
spring. Similar conclusions have been reached
for Scandinavian countries (Finland, Norway
and Sweden), and for certain river basins in
Poland, Belgium and the mountain regions of
the United States. In all these areas, and over
much of the northern hemisphere as a whole,
seasonal and annual river discharge would be
particularly affected by air temperature changes.
These scenarios are of little relevance for the
warm and arid zones or for the tropics, where
forecasts sometimes contradict one another.
Palaeoclimatological data tend to suggest that
there would be only slight increases in air tern-

peratures, accompanied by sizeable increases in
rainfall, but these optimistic conclusions are chal¬
lenged by other climate predictions, based on
global climate modelling, which on the contrary
envisage sharp rises in air temperatures and only
slight rises in rainfall.
DANGEROUS
FLUCTUATIONS
Research into the effects of global warming on the
hydrological cycle also shows another factor of
major importance possible modifications in the
maximum and minimum flow levels of streams
and rivers. On the basis of empirical data and the¬
oretical calculations foreseeing a twofold increase
in the proportion of carbon dioxide in the com¬
position of the atmosphere, it has been demon¬
strated that, in New Zealand for example, the
rainy seasons will become wetter and the dry sea¬
sons drier and longer, resulting in increased vari¬
ations in seasonal streamflow. According to the
same calculations, the maximum values for rain¬
fall and streamflow in Australia will rise and the
minimum values fall, summer and winter alike.
River levels are likely to rise significantly in the
north-west of the United States, north-eastern
Canada, the north and west of Great Britain and
the northern part of western Europe. The widest
fluctuations will probably occur in Japan and
California.
This alternation between extremes higher
river levels and more frequent droughts is
fraught with economic and ecological risks, espe¬
cially for urbanized areas and agricultural regions,
and could make it necessary to rethink the dis¬
tribution of irrigated farmland and to relocate
most of the water-consuming industries. The
warm and arid areas of the world could well run
into serious water-supply problems that in places
could degenerate into conflict.
To deal with all these problems, the authori¬
ties in some regions may have to revert to the
mammoth hydraulic engineering schemes that
were popular in the 1960s and 1970s: the building
of enormous reservoirs, river diversions, the
redistribution of water resources and increased
exploitation of fossil aquifers.
It is obviously no longer possible to close
our eyes to the potential consequences of man-
made climatic changes and variations in water
resources, consequences that call for extensive
research, especially if precise, detailed forecasts are
to be established for each part of the world an
extremely complicated task that requires close
collaboration by scientists the world over, in the
interests of all humanity.
IGOR A. SHIKLOMANOV
is a Russian geographer who is
a corresponding member of
his country's Academy of
Natural Sciences, vice-
chairman of its national
committee for the
International Hydrological
Programme (IHP) and director
of the state hydrological
institute in St. Petersburg. He
is the author of more than 140
scientific papers on the
problems of hydrology and
water resources. 31
