Psychoanalysis in Quebec
by Monique Panauio
40
THE problem of identity runs through the
history of Quebec from the earliest colonial
times up to the present day, when one of the
main issues involved in the integration of Quebec
into the Canadian constitution is the recogni¬
tion of its status as a distinctive society. How
was Quebec's identity forged, and how can psy¬
choanalysis contribute to an understanding of
its unique history and play its role in the emer¬
gence of the individual?
CATHOLIC AND FRENCH
In the seventeenth century the first colonists of
this French outpost whose mission was to spread
civilization and the Gospel were themselves for
the most part poor and ignorant. They had to sur¬
vive as best they could in an apparently bound¬
less land plunged in interminable winter. France's
hopes of its colony on the banks of the St.
Lawrence were soon disappointed. There was
no gold and there were no diamonds. All that was-
left was morality. The Catholic congregations
that then proliferated in Europe founded com¬
munities in New France, where they could pursue
their mission in complete freedom.
Over the ensuing centuries, Quebec was, for
better or for worse, to remain Catholic and
French. Conquest by the English in 1760; the
failure of the republican uprising of 1837, which
saw the increasingly influential French-Canadian

The deportation of the
Acadians by the English in
1755 as depicted in an
unsigned painting from
Louisiana (USA)
MONIQUE PANACCIO,
Canadian psychologist and
psychoanalyst, is a lecturer
in the department of
psychology at the University
of Quebec (Montreal). She is
co-founder of Cirque
psychanalytique, a
psychoanalytical study and
training workshop. The
author of several articles on
madness, clinics and
institutions, she contributed
to The Montreal Massacre
(Gynergy Books, 1991) and
La folie comme de raison
(VLB, 1984). She is also the
author of a fictional work,
Sous le signe du monstre
(VLB, 1991).
clergy make common cause with the English to
protect their divinely-sanctioned powers; even the
union of Upper and Lower Canada in a single
province whose official language was English
all of these failed to put an end to French culture
in America.
Until the Quiet Revolution of the 1960s,
political and economic power was in the hands of
English-speakers, while French-speakers domi¬
nated social and religious life. The Church estab¬
lished a monopoly over moral suffering. The
religious communities took care of the mentally
ill, and as private corporations received in return
a daily per-capita sum from the state. It was thus
in the Church's interest to maximize the number
of inmates and economize on their care. Vast
asylums were constructed, self-contained com¬
munities that had the legal status of municipali¬
ties and Catholic parishes. It was in this field
that a conflict of values took place between
French-speaking Catholics and English-speaking
Protestants. The former had a privileged status in
charitable work through their hold over health¬
care institutions; the latter pressed their claims in
the name of progress. In education, two parallel
systems were also set up.
In the mid-nineteenth century, when Freud's
birth in the Moravian town of Freiberg fore¬
shadowed a fundamental break in the continuum
of human thought, Quebec's French-speakers
were developing a national mystique under the eye
of the Catholic Church, which saw itself as the
guarantor of its people's survival.
In the 1930s and 1940s, the clerical elite based
its temporal power on anti-semitism, anti-
Bolshevism and xenophobia. The religious com¬
munities joined forces with the state to promote
traditional rural values in face of industrialization,
urbanization and social change. Yet it was from
within their ranks that the "plague", as Freud
himself once described psychoanalysis, began to
spread. The first journal to address the subject was
La Revue Dominicaine ("The Dominican
Review"), when it published extracts from a doc¬
toral thesis on The Bases ofFreudianism. It was
the Dominicans too who in 1942 founded the
Institute of Psychology at the University of
Montreal, which included in its syllabus "the



psychological system of Freud".
The religious establishment of the time saw in
psychoanalysis a new argument in favour of its
cause. If Freudianism teaches that human beings
are ruled by impulses that are beyond them, then
this is all the more reason why they should turn to
A pen-and-ink sketch
dating from 1859
shows the first
convent of Ursuline
nuns in Quebec, built
in 1641-42.
Jj'rjt Convent of
tíxe Ursutint JJunJ,
huitt in 1641-42.,
on the -site u)fiicf\
tkey j-titt occupy it\ the. City of Quebec, In the
:,y¿ijrour\a u the nouse of vfime.ée. h'Pe.ttrit.
7rom an oté paint i r\q wfiicf, Jfiou/s tf\t îortst tf\£r\
yfvrrounèinq the, buii-àinqx. 41

God. But a new generation was coming to the
fore in Quebec, one whose members were no
longer prepared to put up with economic stagna¬
tion, with the introversion and the sense of shame
they had inherited from their forebears, with
their situation as a submissive colonized people.
TROUBLED TIMES
AND TROUBLED MINDS
The Quiet Revolution of the 1960s transformed



Quebec almost overnight. In less than a decade
the state's role was enlarged, a clergy-dominated
society began to turn away from agriculture,
new institutions appeared, and education and
social welfare became priority issues. The reli¬
gious communities could no longer meet the
new requirements of an industrializing society.
The welfare state was born, bringing with it free
social services, education and medicine. This was
also the golden age of psychiatry in Quebec. The
health service was rebuilt on fresh ideological
foundations. The suffering were no longer
entrusted to charitable institutions; they became
patients in need of care and rehabilitation.
The effects of the challenge to the old values
were spectacular. Traditional morality was shat¬
tered, people deserted the churches, marriage went
out of fashion and demands for a national identity
went hand in hand with calls for sexual freedom.
Low self-esteem was replaced by unrealistically
high self-regard. French Canadians no longer saw
themselves either as Canadians a name which
tended to be associated instead with their English-
speaking conquerors nor as French, a word
recalling colonial links to the motherland. Instead
they became Québécois, people of Quebec, and
promoted joual, the Quebec dialect, as their own
language. Quebec welcomed immigrants and
opened itself to the world. The time was ripe for
artistic and literary creativity and for new ideas of
every kind. Relations with France, which had
Posters from the 1992
constitutional referendum
campaign.
42
grown somewhat chilly because of the French lay
tradition, now became warmer. Young Québécois
went to France to study and returned home to start
work. The group known as Interprétation, and the
humanities journal of the same name, had their
origin in this collaboration between France and
Quebec.
Many people were disturbed by the rapid
pace of social change. In the 1970s and 1980s
they were normally offered free, medicine-based
psychiatric treatment. Psychoanalysis was not
unknown in the hospitals, but less and less use
was made of it, until it was finally confined to the
private sector and marginalized. It would not be
accurate to say that psychoanalysis was pushed
out of the great debates of the day, for that would
imply a degree of recognition it had never in fact
enjoyed. Little was heard of it except for occa¬
sional articles in journals like Interprétation
(which folded after twenty-four issues had been
published). Françoise Dolto sometimes made
the cover of popular magazines, but that was
imported news. Even the universities, which had
shown a new openness in the 1970s, came increas-

ingly to follow the American model and empha¬
size experimental research.
THE PSYCHOANALYTICAL APPROACH
Psychoanalysis remains marginal to the great ques¬
tions of the day because its concerns transcend cur¬
rent nationalist viewpoints: the approach of those
who seek "an immense bilingual nation stretching
from ocean to ocean" and are concerned about the



fragmentation of Canada; the views of those sup¬
porters of the sovereignty of Quebec who dream
of a "people of giants" enjoying cultural and eco¬
nomic autonomy in a free, pluralistic society; and
the attitude of the Amerindians who seek self-
government.
The psychoanalytical approach, whose func¬
tion is to unveil the unconscious forces at work
in the mind of the individual undergoing analysis,
is disconcerting for the nationalistic mindset. Yet
it is only by seeing themselves as a people or a
nation and then by identifying with this image
they have made of themselves that Quebec's
French-speakers have hitherto been able to ensure
their cultural survival in a largely English-
Missionaries and their
charges in Canada around
the year 1910.
speaking America. Until that survival is more
certain, it is unlikely that psychoanalysis and its
concerns will emerge from the restricted circles
to which they are presently confined.
Quebec's history has been built on disconti¬
nuity and forgetting. First came the break with the
continent of Europe, then with France, then with
England and then with the Catholic tradition not
to mention the separation inevitably involved in
emigration which, now as in the past, is part of the
experience of much of Quebec's population. And
an clement of forgetting inevitably accompanies
these discontinuities. Car numbcrplates in Quebec
bear the motto/c me souviens ("I remember"), but
if you ask people exactly what it is they are sup¬
posed to be remembering, very few of them know.
Psychoanalysis could no doubt find a role
for itself in social, legal, educational and health
institutions by helping people to reclaim their his¬
tory and origins and, what is more, by offering
society as a whole a way of thought that would
allow it to approach politics in a different way,
without recourse to illusions, and to put discon¬
tinuity behind it. 43
