The glass and concrete environment of modern cities sets up
barriers between inside and outside, cutting people off from
each other and from themselves.
Developed in France, this
"audiosphere" is used to
simulate street noise. New
sounds can be added to
study the effect they would
have on the urban
soundscape.



Sound barriers
by R.Murray Schäfer
IN the Tunisian restaurant in Montreal, the
proprietor and his wife share a carafe of wine
fitted with a spout from which they pour
the wine directly into their mouths by raising
and tipping it, in exactly the way the old wineskin
would have worked. The sensation of drinking is
entirely different when the liquid is squirted into
the mouth rather than sipped out of a glass or
sucked through a straw, and so arc the accompa¬
nying sounds, on this occasion a bright burbling
as the air seeks to replace the liquid through the
twisted thin spout. Nothing touches the mouth
but the liquid. It is probably the purest way to
drink, yet it has been replaced by the glass as
individual proprietorship has replaced tribal
sharing. The glass, replacing more tuneful recep¬
tacles, is raised and chimed at the beginning of the
meal, partly in compensation for mute con¬
sumption, an exercise denied its successor the
plastic cup.
The soundscape of every society is condi¬
tioned by the predominant materials from which
it is constructed. Thus we may speak of bamboo,
wood, metal, glass or plastic cultures, meaning
that these materials produce a repertoire of sounds
of specific resonance when touched by active T I

agents. Europe was a stone culture and to a large
extent still is, particularly in its smaller, less-
touched communities. North America was orig¬
inally a wood culture, passing, like modern
Europe, to cement and glass during the twentieth
century.
The glazed window was an invention of great
importance for the soundscape, framing external
events in an unnatural, phantom-like "silence".
The diminution of sound transmission, while
not immediate and occurring only gradually with
the thickening of glazing, not only created the
notion of a "here" and a "there" or a "beyond",
but also introduced a fission of the senses. Today
one can look at one's environment, while hearing
another, with a durable film separating the two.
Plate glass shattered the sensorium, replacing it
with contradictory visual and aural impressions.
In a study of fairy talcs, Marie-Louise von
Franz points out that glass "cuts you off, as far as
your animal activity is concerned. . . . People
very often say. 'It feels as if there were a glass wall
. . . between me and my surroundings.' That
means: T see perfectly well what is going on, I
can talk to people, but the animal and feeling
contact, the warmth contact is cut off by a glass
wall	 '"' The world of sounds and textures, the
palpitating, kinetic world, is zoned out; we still
watch it move, but from our (generally seated)
position indoors our physical contact with it has
ceased. The physical world is "there"; the world
of reflection and speculation is "here".
When the space within is totally insulated it
craves reorchestration: this is the era of back¬
ground music and of the radio, a form of interior
decoration, designed or absent-mindedly intro¬
duced to re-energize the space and render it more
sensorially complete. Now the interior and exte¬
rior can become totally contradictory. The world
seen through the window is like the world of a
movie set with the radio as soundtrack. I recall
travelling in the dome car of a train passing
through the Rocky Mountains with schmaltzy
music on the public address system and thinking:
this is a travelogue movie about the Rocky Moun¬
tains we are not here at all.
When the division between "here" and
"there" is complete, the glass wall will become as
impenetrable as the stone wall. Even thieves will
respect it. Shattered glass is a trauma everyone is
anxious to avoid. "He shall rule them with a rod
of iron: as the vessels of a potter shall they be
broken to shivers" is a potent acoustic image in
the Bible {Revelation 2:27). A keynote of the
Middle-Eastern soundscape under normal cir¬
cumstances, crockery became a violent signal
when broken. For us the same is true of glass. And
yet one cannot help feeling that the mind-body
split of the Western world will only be healed
when some of the glass in which we have sheathed
our lives is shattered, allowing us again to inhabit
a world in which all the senses interact instead of
being ranked in opposition.
ACOUSTIC TRADEMARKS
AND SYMBOLIC
SOUNDS
It is unnatural for our senses to be forcibly choked
off, and when they are, they often reopen with a
vengeance. One could study the suppression of
the different senses in terms of the great culture
revolutions in history. Right now we are being
overwhelmed by the audio-visual media, which
exclude other sensory stimulations. A measure of
their inadequacy: everyone feels the compulsion
to eat while watching movies.



Little by little the whole world is becoming
mediatized, that is to say, it is driven by sound
objects designed to manipulate or persuade. In
this way it is different from the natural world we
have left behind in which sounds stimulated us
but rarely tried to control our behaviour. Think
about this: there is scarcely a sound in modern life
that has not been manufactured and is not owned
by someone. The music we listen to is copy¬
right-protected and licensed. Carhorns are the
S
'ï?;
SM
SJ
W'
^ " I
The one and the
many. A lone
boatman on Lake
Dal in India (left) and
a Brazilian crowd
(right).
£
3cte
-.

property of car drivers and often blowing them
is the only conversation drivers make as they
pass through the city streets.
Almost all the noises of the modern city
police sirens, jet noise, construction noise are
designed to fortify some special-interest group.
Thus, many sounds have become symbols for
social classes. A ghetto blaster says: "I'm talking,
you listen! " A portable telephone (silent in cars,
audible in restaurants or on trains) says: "I'm a
very successful person. I'm important." The
ubiquitous cash registers of shops and restau¬
rants proclaim: "Listen to how much business we
do here!" An alarm-bell system screams: "Hands
off!" Even the owner of a growling dog on a
leash is silently saying: "Meet my friend. He pro¬
tects me."
Much of this sound is pugilistic. Is this
inevitable? Is it the result of overcrowding in the
modern world or a means of dividing the rich
from the poor, the winners from the losers?
Poverty is quiet. It is affluence that has become
noisy. With the acquisition of more and newer
gadgets with impressive acoustic trademarks,
successful groups stencil their identities into the
contemporary soundscape and attempt to influ¬
ence social behaviour to their own advantage.
THE VOICE
OF THE CROWD
The only means available to the poor or disen¬
franchised to make their presence known is the
noting crowd. Certainly crowds arc a feature of
modern life and will undoubtedly become
increasingly significant in the decades to come.
Elias Canetti analyses the crowd question in his
book Crowds and Power, and emphasizes the
importance of touching in dense assemblies of
people. "It is only in a crowd," he writes, "that
man can become free of his fear of being touched.
This is the only situation in which the fear changes
into its opposite. The crowd he needs is the dense
crowd, in which body is pressed to body; a
R.MURRAY SCHÄFER,
Canadian composer and
author, is the founder and
director of the World
Soundscape Project in
Vancouver. A former professor
of Communication Studies at
Simon Fraser University
(Canada), he Is the author of
many published works
including The New Soundscape
(1969), The Tuning of the World
(1977) and The Thinking Ear
(1986).

Skyscrapers in Denver
(U.S.A.).
crowd, too, whose physical constitution is also
dense, or compact, so that he no longer notices
who it is that presses against him."
Touch and sound arc intimately connected. In
the lower frequencies tactility and sounding meet
as the pedal tone breaks into a vibrating pulse.
This intimacy encourages the densely-packed
crowd to invoke sound as its most potent
weapon. In every other way it is vulnerable to
penetration and disunification by better-armed
opponents who seek to neutralize it. The crowd
remains outside the towers of glass in which the
elite have imprisoned themselves. It is primarily
with its voice that it defends itself and seeks to
remain invincible. The crowd roars, the crowd
chants, the crowd screams you don't count the
voices; there is only one voice. If it contains
within it individuals who have not entirely sur¬
rendered to its purpose by the encouragement of
touching, sound will reinforce the dedication of
the wavering. There is a passage in St. Augustine's
Confessions in which the fate of a man who had
forsworn gladiatorial shows is sealed after he
had re-entered the maelstrom of a crowd. "If
only he could have stopped his ears!" cries St.
Augustine despairingly.
There are many ways of characterizing a
crowd by its purpose, its credo or its numbers.
This is what the explainers, the media men and the
politicians try to do. But vocally the crowd is
beyond all understanding. How many nuances
are detectable in its bawling? Joy . . . anger . . .
exasperation . . . derision . . . rudimentary emo¬
tions, at times chaotic but more often unified
rhythmically in the repetition of slogans, for
unless the crowd speaks with rhythmic incisive-
ness it can be fractured, set upon itself internally
and be routed.
By the early twentieth century, urban noise
had increased to a point where it began to affect
writers in a similar way, and among the first were
the Futurists, led by F.T. Marinetti. "Through a
disjointed, feverish and posturing language
Marinetti was able to capture something of the
mood of a human crowd in motion	 " This is
Istvan Anhalt commenting on Marinetti's rhetoric
in a book in which he shows parallel develop¬
ments in twentieth-century music. Marinetti's
prose is "the text of a poster, a proclamation, or
a series of headlines. It is a throbbing, aggressive,
insistent language, brooking no dissent, dis¬
missing the need for reflection, intolerant and
destructive."1 In his Futurist Manifesto Marinetti
had proclaimed: "We will sing of great crowds
excited by work, by pleasure and by riot; wc
will sing of the multicoloured, polyphonic tides
of revolution in the modern capitals."3
The influence of these crowd-choirs is con-
44

spicuous in much contemporary music, first of all
in the bloated orchestras of Berg and Schoenberg,
then later in the statistical organization of
Xenakis' works, as well as in the cluster and
aggregate effects of Ligeti and the "mob" vocal
outbursts of Lutoslawski and other members of
the Polish school. Crowd power is everywhere
present in rock music, which could not exist
without it. "No-one goes to a rock concert unless
they're stoned or stupid," a teenager tells me,
and yet almost everyone has been there. And the
music ricochets from car radios and ghetto
blasters, through the streets, over the back yard
fences, and dribbles out of the Walkman of the
passenger next to you on the bus, where no-one
speaks. It is almost as if music is hacmorrhaging
all around us, exploding out of its containers;
and suddenly you realize that music is the glue of
the modern multiracial, multilinguistic city,
holding it together more effectively than any
political or social system, and you allow yourself
to hope that it will continue to do so, fearing the
consequences if it fails. We know that there are
more violent forms of intolerance than the
tyranny of the loudspeaker.
RITUALS OF TRANQUILLITY
When modern humanity gave up life in the
country for life in the city, when it deserted open
spaces for the dense packing of the metropolis,
when the alarm clock replaced the sunrise and fac¬
tory noise obliterated wind, rain and the birds,
when the drowsiness of natural life was surren¬
dered to the mad dash to get ahead, the frictions
of increased human contact, the hell of other
people, as Sartre put it, replaced the great gco-
botanic garden that had been the scene of past
existence and the quiet life it promoted. Has it
been extinguished from memory or can a new
ecological awareness help to recover it?
What we seem to need are rituals of tran¬
quillity in which large assemblies of people could
feel the serenity of a shared experience without
the desire to proclaim their emotions in destruc¬
tive or disfiguring action. In this sense we might
again study the model of the Western concert
audience to determine whether it might have
wider or evolving significance. When wc think
about it, how astonishing is the concert audi¬
ence, quietly sitting before the music, scarcely
breathing, engulfed by the mysterious vibrations
in the air about them. I suppose every piece of
music longs to be worshipped in silence, but few
achieve such a distinction, and some achieve it
only by the authority of habit rather than the
privilege of beauty. I have often wondered
whether the ritual of the concert could not be
transposed to other environments and trans¬
formed into a collective contemplation of a bird
dawn chorus, a summer solstice or an Earth Day
celebration.
If the future of the planet is destined to embrace
increasing numbers of people, it is absolutely vital
that wc discover means of taming the noises that
arc threatening to tear us to pieces. Noise pollution
is a world-wide problem but its solution docs not
lie in increased legislation and enforced prohibi¬
tion. It rests with a regaining of the still centre, a
discovery that there is a time for everyone to
speak and a time for each of us to listen. This is the
"great open secret" of the natural soundscape
where all sounds have their place but none
attempts to dominate or smother all others into
submission. There arc simply no sounds in nature
that are a threat to our hearing. As reports of an
alarming increase in deafness accumulate from
some of the most developed nations of the world,
we realize that humanity is the exclusive architect
of sounds that kill. Either we will voluntarily
reduce the sound sewage now threatening whole
populations or we will all become deaf. In either
case the world will be quieter.
Mourners from among
Indonesia's Toradja people
carry drink to a funeral in
bamboo poles.
1. Marie-Louise Von Franz,
Individuation in Fairy Tales,
(Boston and London, 1990).
2. Alternative Voices
(Toronto, 1984).
3. FT. Marinetti: Selected
Writings, cd. R.W. Flint
(London, 1972). 45
