WHAT IS
A
MINORITY?
by Deirdre Meintel
Applied to society,
the concept of a
minority is not
necessarily
numerical. Social
and historical
factors shape a
group's
consciousness of
minority status
10
IN the West, the issue of minorities goes back
to the late eighteenth and early nineteenth
century, when the new or changing political
boundaries of European nation-states subjected
certain ethnic groups to the domination of other
ethnic or national groups. Probably the most
influential definition of the concept of "minority"
is that first proposed in 1945 by the sociologist
Louis Wirth, who wrote: "We may define a
minority as a group of people who, because of
their physical or cultural characteristics, are sin¬
gled out from the others in the society in which
they live for differential and unequal treatment
and who therefore regard themselves as objects of
collective discrimination."
By Wirth's definition, the existence of a
minority implies that a corresponding majority
group enjoys higher status and greater privileges;
those holding minority status are excluded from
full participation and are treated as, and consider
themselves to be, "a people apart". To summarize,
members of a minority group are "identifiably
different", that is, characterized by observable
traits that distinguish them from others in the
same society; subject to differential treatment
from others; and conscious of the discrimina¬
tion they experience as members of the group.
The anthropologists Charles Wagley and
Marvin Harris have proposed several modifica¬
tions to Wirth's definition. Minority status, in
their view, is inherited according to the descent
rules of a society, in such a way that an indi¬
vidual is assigned to the minority group even
when he or she does not manifest the minority's
visible traits. For example, in the American racial
system, having any known African-American
ancestry has usually been sufficient to place an
individual in the "Black" or "Negro" category.
Minority status is thus something one is "born
into", rather than something acquired later in
life. Wagley and Harris also consider that minori¬
ties are generally endogamous, since they are
normally prohibited from marrying into the
dominant group. Such prohibitions have the
effect of maintaining the boundaries between
majority and minority, and by extension perpet¬
uating the privileges of the majority. Note that
what is at issue is not sexual contact between the
two groups but rather descent and inheritance.
Endogamy (marrying within one's own group)
ensures that majority status is passed only to the
legitimate children of majority members and so
remains inaccessible to anyone not of that group.
While Wagley and Harris' formulation would
apply well to many situations of majority-
minority relations, it is far from universal in
application. For one thing, their criterion of
"endogamy" requires some qualification in the
light of later research. While it is true that
endogamy of the elite, privileged group serves to
maintain its boundaries, minorities often marry
into other minorities. In fact "intermarriage"
between ethnic groups in the contemporary
United States often concerns partners of dif¬
ferent minority groups. More importantly, recent
years have seen the emergence of many groups
that see themselves as minorities and organize
themselves as such but do not meet the criterion
of inherited status or endogamy. We shall return
later to the issue of whether, for example, women
or homosexuals can properly be considered
minorities.

More recent writers have given greater
emphasis than did Wirth to the political domi¬
nation exercised by the majority group. It is the
greater access to and control of resources access
to health care, jobs, food, education, wealth that
allows one group to control the life chances of
another. Put another way, it is the greater polit¬
ical power of the majority that allows it to dis¬
criminate against the minority, to treat its mem¬
bers in detrimental ways that may range from
stereotyping to extermination.
Left, a decorated house-
front in Chicago (United
States).
ii)i;\nii\i{imv
Wirth's criterion of "identifiability" also requires
some clarification. It is all too easy for the dom-
A Yawalpiti Indian in the
Xingu National Park
(Brazil). Today the entire
Yawalpiti community
numbers 300 persons.
inant group to attribute a minority's inferior
status to its unique characteristics rather than to
its structural position. This is the process known
as "blaming the victim". This may be done, not
only in regard to what are conventionally seen as
racial groupings, but also in regard to religious
minorities, homosexuals and others. Other
writers have drawn attention to modern forms of
racism whereby "culture" is invoked in so essen-
tialist a fashion (see below) as to constitute a
"second nature". Immigrants, for example, may
be discriminated against on the grounds of their
culture. In such instances, the norms, values,
beliefs and practices attributed to them are seen
as the basis of their essential difference from and
inferiority to majority members. II

The homeless.
11
DEIRDRE MEINTEL
is a Canadian anthropologist
who teaches at the University
of Montreal. She has carried
out research in the Cape
Verde islands, among Cape-
Verdean Americans in New
England and among immigrant
groups in Montreal. In recent
years her research has focused
on social Identity and on family
relationships in migrant
groups.
The quality of "identifiability" is an espe¬
cially pertinent issue at present, given that in
North America, at least, one hears much of "vis¬
ible minorities" in public discourse. The differ¬
ences thought to be "visible" are in reality those
considered socially significant. Thus a North
African may be highly visible in Paris, yet less so
in Montreal or New York.
In other words, identifiably "different" char¬
acteristics do not so much explain power differ¬
entials as legitimize them and facilitate their exer¬
cise. Furthermore, identifiability is not always
supplied by the minority itself. Jews, for example,
were required to wear a yellow star in Nazi Ger¬
many precisely because their supposed "differ¬
ence" from the rest of the population might oth¬
erwise have remained invisible, giving the lie,
one might add, to the grotesque representations
ofJews to be found in the Nazi-controlled press
and cinema. In other cases, as we shall see, making



oneself identifiable as a minority group member
is part of developing minority consciousness.
"NEW" MINORITIES
This brings us to the question of what might be
called "new" minorities. Recent years have seen
increased political consciousness among, and in
some cases mobilization of, other types of groups
who see themselves as minorities that have been
subject to discrimination. Women, for example,
would seem to fit Wirth's definition of a minority
quite well: they are visibly different, subject to dis¬
crimination of various sorts and in recent decades
have been conscious of being discriminated
against because of being women. Yet it was only
in the 1970s that sociologists began to see
women's status as separate from that of the men
to whom they were attached and the position of
women as an issue for the study of social hier¬
archy and stratification. Indeed, women's dif
ferential access to wealth, prestige, health care
and in some societies even food, all go to show
that, as Rosalind Dworkin put it in the title of an
article on women as a minority group, "Numbers
do not a minority make".
Homosexuals are another such "new
minority", insofar as they have developed a group
awareness of suffering differential treatment
because of their sexual orientation. In this case,
identifiability is of special concern. Many gays and
lesbians associate raised consciousness of social
injustice toward homosexuals with "coming out",
that is, making their sexual orientation public. In
the United States, "outing", or making public
the homosexuality of individuals in public life, is
a strategy favoured by some gays, though it has
been more often threatened than actually put
into practice.
Another social category that might be seen as
a minority, at least in some cases, is the elderly.
Age-based discrimination in hiring, forced retire¬
ment and other issues of common concern have
mobilized group consciousness in North America
and Western Europe, where modern capitalism
has been associated with devalued status for older
persons. Examples of political mobilization
include the "Grey Panther" organization in the
United States; in Italy, old-age pensioners have
been known to organize political demonstra¬
tions in recent years. The deaf offer yet another

Deaf-and-dumb actors
rehearse a show.
Below, Jews wear the
yellow star during the
Second World War.
example of a social category that is currently in the
process of mobilizing as a minority.
There are many contemporary instances of
highly diverse categories of disadvantaged people
being treated as homogeneous groupings char¬
acterized by inferior moral characteristics. Etienne
Balibar, for instance, holds that the category
"immigration" (or "immigrants") now functions
as a substitute for the notion of race. In Canada
one often hears generalizations whereby refugees
are presented as particularly undesirable immi
grants, as "queue jumpers", perpetrators of "wel¬
fare frauds" and so on. Several years ago, a nation¬
wide television broadcast in the United States
showed through brief interviews with passers-by
that "the homeless" are often perceived as a
homogeneous grouping, one composed of moral
undesirables who are themselves to blame for
their circumstances. If such stereotyping were



to go on for many years, it is quite possible that
these social categories too might develop minority
group consciousness.
MINORITY CONSCIOUSNESS
The above examples make it clear that minority
formation is a social and historical process. One
of the key elements in it is the development of
consciousness among those concerned that they
are subject to a common discrimination as mem¬
bers of a given category. Thus what might appear
as simple social aggregates in one historical period
become politically conscious minorities in
another.
As mentioned earlier, the stereotypes applied
to minorities are generally "essentialist" in char¬
acter; that is, they refer to differences supposed to
be either biological or cultural, but in any case pri¬
mordial, fundamental and little amenable to
change. At the same time, minority group mem¬
bers may themselves adopt an "essentialist" dis¬
course whereby their characteristics are seen as
intrinsically different from those of the majority;
certain manifestations of négritude, on the one
hand, and feminism, on the other, might be viewed
in this light. In a context of persecution or dis¬
crimination, it is likely that minority members
themselves will be led to experience whatever
defines them as "different" as the key element, per¬
haps the only pertinent one, in their social identity.
However, it is our belief that minority con¬
sciousness does not necessarily lead to a narrow
concern with one set of issues, and with one
aspect of social identity, but rather can become the
basis of wider solidarities with other groupings
who have experienced similar treatment. In the
case of ethnic minorities, such solidarities may
take the form of transethnic affiliations between
groups on the basis of cultural similarities, shared
minority status and/or common experiences of
discrimination. In the words of Albert Memmi,
"The oppressed all resemble each other; the Col¬
onized, the Jew, the Poor, the Woman. . . . The
same suffering often calls forth the same reac¬
tions." It is not popular in our times to assert such
solidarities, yet in a historical period marked by
ever-increasing minority consciousness, expressed
on ever more narrow bases of affiliation, to the
point of becoming a kind of collective individu¬
alism, such solidarities may be our best hope for
creating human community. 13
