«ff
THE UNESCO COURIER MAY 19 93
.
Dossier
23 NATURE UNDER
THREAT
by France Bequette
26 World
Voices from the past
28 THE MIRACLES
OF LOVE
4r!
Dossier
Ml UM Ulii!¡E <
m
< ¡frIJU
by France Bequette
In June 1992, the authorities in
Kigali (Rwanda) seized a young
Eastern lowland gorilla (Gorilla
gorillagraueri) and a young chim¬
panzee (Pan troglodytes) from a
foreigner passing through the
country. He had purchased them for
$1,000 and $500 respectively. It
turned out that the same man had
been arrested two years before when
in possession of five baby chim¬
panzees.
Authorities in Buenos Aires
(Argentina) confiscated a number
of birds a dealer was holding ille¬
gally: three golden conures (Aratinga
guarouba), two blue-and-yellow
macaws (Ara ararauna), one yellow-
crested cockatoo (Cacatúa sul-
phurea), two black lories (Loriusgar-
rulus), one Alexandrine parakeet
(Psittacula eupatria), and two minas
(Gracula religiosa). The dealer spent
three days in prison.
In mid-May 1992, a European
arriving in Paris from Madagascar
was arrested after customs officers
found in his baggage 14 lemurs
(Hapalemur), 46 radiata turtles
(Geochelonia radiata), and 7 boa
constrictors (Acrantophis madagas-
cariensis). The animals were sent
back to the country they had come
from and the traveller is currently
facing charges.
Also in May 1992, 8 elephant tusks,
each measuring 22 to 30 centime¬
tres long and weighing about 12.5
kilos, were seized at Cochin airport in
the state of Kerala (India). They had
been taken from baby male ele¬
phants. The smuggler is now facing
trial. In the same month, a man was
arrested in Shanghai (China), while
attempting to sell the skin of a giant
panda (Ailuropoda melanoleuca) for
$30,000. He has been sentenced to 12
years in jail.
In July 1992, a European dug up 85
specimens of the native giant rat¬
tlesnake plantain orchid (Goodyera
oblongifolia) in Marquette, Michigan
(U.S.A.), with the aim ofselling them
in Europe. He was fined $3,525. I
11

Dossier
NAM UNDER WM
24
Volumes of cases like these could
be quoted, all of them bearing wit¬
ness to the violence done to wildlife
on a scale that has brought some
species to the brink ofextinction. In
response to this threat, a Conven¬
tion on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna
and Flora (CITES) was signed in
Washington on 3 March 1973. The
Convention came into force on 1 July
' 1 975, and so far it has been ratified by
118 states. The CITES Secretariat,
based in Lausanne (Switzerland) is
attached to the United Nations Envi¬
ronment Programme and is financed
by the Parties to the Convention.
Endangered species are listed in
three Appendixes to the Convention,
in order of the degree of protection
they are afforded. Appendix I pro¬
hibits all international trade in ele¬
phants, giant pandas and coela-
canths, for instance. Appendix II
authorizes a controlled international
trade in members of the cat family,
crocodiles, corals, and orchids.
Appendix III restricts international
trade in some species from certain
countries, such as hippopotamuses
from Ghana, or black bears from
Canada.
Extreme cruelty
Wild fauna and flora face two
major threats: the destruction of
their habitat and unrestricted com¬
mercial exploitation. CITES provides
signatory states with the legal means
to repress a traffic that is motivated
by the lure of profit and often
involves acts of revolting cruelty. To
take one example, park rangers often
come across the bloody corpses of
elephants with their tusks ripped
out. Baby elephants are slaughtered
for their "milk teeth", which weigh
scarcely a kilo, compared with the
average 12.6-kiIo weight of an adult
tusk.
Specialists agree that elephants
are an endangered species, but views
differ as to the size of the surviving
population. There were a reported
two million elephants in Africa in
the 1970s. Today the figures vary
between 350,000 and one million,
depending on the sources, with
about 100,000 killed each year.
There are several reasons for the
iW
decline of the African elephant (Lox-
odonta africana). One is the use of
firearms, which are much deadlier
than traditional hunting methods.
Others include the change in vege¬
tation and the drying up of many
watering holes as a result of the
periods of drought that have struck
the southern Sahel over the past
twenty years. Deforestation and
desertification have destroyed many
habitats. Demographic pressure
and the extension of farmland have
altered the elephants' migration
patterns.
When people are forced to com¬
pete with wild animals in order to
survive, a real problem of priorities
arises. In Burkina Faso, for instance,
villagers complain that elephants
empty their water holes and trample
their crops. Similar conflicts exist in
southern Cameroon, where ele¬
phants eat the manioc and bananas
that the Pygmies grow in small plots
on the edge of the forest.
It is all too easy for people in
Western countries who are quite
happy to shoot the wild boar that
wreak havoc in their fields to insist on
protection for animals that cause
them no harm. Yet solutions to the
dilemma do exist. One is to pay
compensation to those who suffer
loss. This is what happens in Burkina
Faso, although the budget for the
purpose is quite inadequate. Another
solution could be to protect the ele¬
phants by confining them to
reserves, although the feasibility of
this is questionable.
Nazinga is a ranch in Burkina Faso
near the border with Ghana. It con¬
sists of 94,000 hectares of wooded,
swampy ground inhabited by
warthogs, large herbivores and ele-
A rhinoceros in phants. Between 1984 and 1989, the
the Amboseli elephantpopulationrosefrom216to
reserve (Kenya). nearly 500. According to Olivier Jean,
Hunted for their a veterinarian at the Rural Develop-
homs, ment Institute in Ouagadougou,
rhinoceroses are every year the animals destroy 20 per
now an cent of all trees under 40 centime-
endangered tres in diameter in their search for
species, with a food, an activity on which, according
estimated to the Worldwide Fund for Nature,
worldwide they spend 18 to 20 hours a day.
population of For the local people, who are
only 11,000. among the poorest in the world with
a per capita income of less than $140
a year, the ranch is a tempting
prospect. Hunters by tradition, they
regard the roan antelope as fair
game. An elephant tusk, which can
fetch as much as $175 per kilo, rep¬
resents a fortune. A distinction
should be made between killing ani¬
mals for food and poaching on an
industrial scale. Some poachers

_
operate in commandos, spotting ele¬
phant herds from helicopters and
slaughtering them with automatic
weapons. The rangers, outnumbered
and armed only with old rifles, are
powerless to stop them.
When the elephant was trans¬
ferred from Appendix II to Appendix
I of the Washington Convention in
1989, it was hoped that it would
become impossible for poachers to
sell their booty. Not so. Although the
trade in elephants, dead or alive, has
theoretically been banned, customs
officials regularly seize shipments of
ivory, as well as the horns ofrhinoc¬
eros another endangered species
hides, and live animals as well. The
World Conservation Union, an inter¬
governmental agency with its head¬
quarters in Switzerland, keeps
updated lists of endangered species
together with registers of protected
sites around the world. It also mon¬
itors States Parties' compliance with
the terms of CITES.
Poaching and smuggling
Traffic, which was founded in 1976
by the World Conservation Union
and is based in Cambridge (United
Kingdom), is another vigilant
watchdog. The cases reported in its
bulletin, also named "Traffic", show
that regulation of a formerly free
trade has led to the development of
bizarre forms of smuggling. Among
the examples cited are suitcases full
ofparrots with their beaks and wings
bound by tape; five baby pythons
hidden in a pair of socks; parakeets
and birds' eggs sewn into the lining
of articles of clothing. Freight ship¬
ments have also produced a crop of
surprises, such as the consignment
of Bibles which, on examination,
proved to have been hollowed out
and to contain young rattlesnakes.
Last year, a case of wild birds con¬
taining jabirus and crowned cranes
arrived in the Netherlands by air
from Tanzania via Moscow. The case
had been transported upside down
and six of the nineteen birds were
dead.
In Swaziland, the rhinoceros's fate
is hardly more enviable. Only 13
white rhinos and 6 black rhinos are
left, but they are still attracting
poachers. The reason is the belief,
widely held in the Orient, that pow¬
dered rhinoceros horn has aphro¬
disiac properties. Bears and giant
pandas are killed for their gall blad¬
ders, which feature in the Chinese
pharmacopeia. Juju markets in Africa
display gorilla skulls, the skins ofbig
cats, lion penises and dried birds, all
sold as ingredients for potions or as
good luck charms.
The problem is a complex one.
What steps can be taken when tra¬
dition clashes with the idea of pro¬
tecting living species? How can
people be made to respect the 2,500
animal and 35,000 plant species
included in the Washington Con¬
vention when, for example, a scarlet
macaw (Ara macao), which is on the
endangered list, can be bought for
$100 in South America and sold for
$6,000 on the U.S. market? Political
determination by states, an uncom¬
promising commitment on the part
ofairline companies, special training
for customs officials, and exemplary
punishments for smugglers could at
least reduce such attacks on the
planet's biological diversity.
FRANCE BEQUETTE
is a Franco-American journalist
specializing in environmental
questions. Since 1985 she has been
associated with the WANAD-Unesco
training programmeforAfrican
news-agencyjournalists.
m
1 1,000 Rhinos
(1992), a
sculpture by the
American artist
Jude
Burkhauser, is a
cry of alarm
against the
threat of
extinction
hanging over
many animal
and plant
species. The
detail opposite
shows the horns,
which are
moulded out of
plaster and
painted in red
ochre.
IS

World
SAYING
THE INDIAN TIGER
The operation launched in 1973 to
save the tigers of India is helping to
keep up the numbers of this endan¬
gered species. At the latest count
there were 4,334 animals in 1989,
up from 4,005 in 1984, living in 18
reserves covering an area of 28,017
square kilometres. This is one of the
biggest successes scored by the
World Wide Fund for Nature
(WWF), a nongovernmental orga¬
nization with 4 million members
and 28 national branches, which
has carried out 5,000 programmes
and invested some $250 million in
nature conservation.
A FRIEND IN NEED
In Burkina Faso, a priest and five
laymen travel through the bush,
giving farmers advice after carefully
listening to what the elders of the
community have to say. Marin Ter¬
rible, a member of the White Fathers
missionary society, is a former nat¬
ural science teacher who arrived in
Burkina Faso in 1973, at a time of
famine following a year of drought.
He carried out a botanical survey of
the country's ligneous vegetation,
and drew a map of it. He also com¬
pared Landsat satellite images with
aerial photographs taken in the
1950s. His findings were alarming
but the situation did not seem irre¬
versible. Now when Father Terrible
and his team are invited to a village,
they take with them strips of cloth
which are wound around two poles
and are painted with familiar scenes
that provide a basis for discussion.
The team also produces an illus¬
trated almanac full ofsensible advice
drawing on traditional knowledge.
Typical entries include how to make
a pulley system for a well, how to
build small earth embankments to
collect rainwater, and how to
frighten away locust swarms. Father
Terrible was invited to the Earth
Summit in Rio, but unfortunately he
fell seriously ill and was unable to
attend.
A 'SLEEVE-PUMP'
FOR A SAFE WATER SUPPLY
Although Colombia has plentiful supplies of ground¬
water safe for drinking, one-third of the rural popula¬
tion draws its water from unprotected rivers, streams
and wells. With the help of a $500,000 grant from the
United Nations Development Programme and active
government support, 40,000 people living in small com¬
munities across the country have now been provided
with safe water. A nongovernmental organization, the
Las Gaviotas Centre, has been working for over 20 years
on low-cost technologies such as the so-called "sleeve-
pump", which can draw water up from a depth of 1 to 40
metres and requires little physical effort to manipu¬
late. Pipes made of recycled plastic are used to run the
water to homes, a rare luxury in this extremely poor
region.
26
FERTILIZER
FROM WASTE
Marta de Oliveira Prado teaches in
a government school on the out¬
skirts ofPelotas, an industrial town
in the south of Brazil that is badly
affected by pollution. In a letter to
the Courier, she explains that thé
children in her class live in such
extreme poverty that they often
have to go out to work at the age of
four or five. Some families survive
on what they can scavenge from
waste dumps, and this gave Marta
de Oliveira the idea of teaching her
pupils how to make organic fertil¬
izer from garbage (see photo left).

A WORLD OF WASTE
Sustainable development links
quality of life for everyone with the
quality of the environment we
share. The waste generated by ram¬
pant consumption in the industri¬
alized countries is harmful to the
developing countries. One person in
the North consumes from 14 to 1 15
times more paper, from 6 to 52
times more meat, and from 10 to
35 times more energy than a person
in a developing country. So much
plastic flotsam now litters the
oceans that nearly 2 million
seabirds and 100,000 marine mam¬
mals perish each year by choking
or by becoming entangled in it.
&=¿2
PROS AND CONS
OF ECO-TOURISM
'MY PLANET IS MIY BUSINESS'
The Asian and Pacific region, under the
pressure of a rapidly growing population,
has turned to eco-tourism as a way of
boosting foreign earnings. Unfortunately, it
is paying a high price. Nepal, for instance,
whose high peaks attract growing numbers
ofmountaineers, has been inundated with
rubbish. Every year, thousands ofvisitors go
mountain climbing or trekking in Sagar¬
matha National Park at the foot of Mount
Everest, leaving behind metal cans, plastic
debris and other types of waste, and
burning large quantities of firewood, which
is desperately scarce in the region. There
appears to be no ready answer to this
problem.
"My planet is my business" is the
motto of the Ushua'ia Foundation,
which was established on 15
December 1990 by French televi¬
sion director and presenter Nicolas
Hulot, under the sponsorship of the
Fondation de France and with
backing from the French power
utility Electricité de France, the
chemical firm Rhône-Poulenc, and
the city of Paris. The Foundation
states that its purpose "is to change
our attitude to nature by making it
better informed, more sympathetic,
and more respectful." It organizes
"Discovery Missions" in France and
elsewhere in the world for groups of
young people and adults selected
on grounds of motivation. The aim
of the Missions is to study the major
ecosystems and the phenomena
that govern them, with the help of
scientific experts. Twice a year, the
Foundation provides financial sup¬
port for environmental projects that
wish to publicize their findings.
Applications should include a 15-
line summary description of the
project and relevant details about
those engaged in it. Applicants
should also specify whether they
are seeking a financial grant (in
which case a detailed budget should
be submitted), a sponsorship
arrangement or scientific coun¬
selling. Please write to:
Fondation Ushua'ia,
32 Avenue Charles de Gaulle,
F-92200 Neuilly-sur-Seine,
France (Phone 33 1 46 41 03 03;
Fax 33 14641 0042).
VETIVER GRASS,
A CHECK AGAINST EROSION
When planted in rows, vétiver grass forms a thick hedge
and weaves a dense web of roots that can bind the soil
as deep as three metres beneath the surface. It adapts
to a wide variety ofclimates and environments, and has
been known and used for centuries in China and India.
It can withstand fire and overgrazing, is resistant to
most diseases, repels snakes and rodents, and is vul¬
nerable only to cold. It slows down rainwater runoff
and hence stops the vegetation cover from being
washed away, thereby preserving soil fertility and pro¬
ductivity. There is also a financial advantage: while the
construction of anti-erosion barriers costs an average
of $500 per hectare, planting vétiver grass costs less
than $30 per hectare. The World Bank has already con¬
tributed $500,000 to vétiver grass projects.

=. Voicesfrom thepast
m
The French Romantic historian Jules Michelet (1 798-1874) was the author ofa
monumental body ofwork in which he acclaimed the heroism ofpeoplesfighting
for theirfreedom. He was also a passionate lover ofnature. In L'Insecte (1857), the
man who spoke outfor the proletariat also made the casefor the humblest
members ofthe animal kingdom.
The extract on this
page appears in an
anthology entitled
Compagnons du
Soleil (''Companions
of the Sun") co-
published (in French)
by Uufsco, Editions
La Découverte (Paris)
and the Fondation
pour le progrès de
l'Homme. The
anthology was
prepared under the
general editorship of
the African historian
Joseph Ki-Zerbo, in
collaboration with
Marie-Josèphe Beaud.
I ove has wings. Mythology is absolutely right.
The fact can be demonstrated literally,
without metaphor. For a brief moment
nature displays a restless urge to fly to the
beloved. Each creature transcends itself, all
rise towards the light, all go hunting on the wings
of desire. Alluring colours further bespeak the
inner fire. All are on display, all aim to please.
The butterfly seems to look at you with the great
eyes ofvelvet that adorn its wings. BeeÜes of every
kind, like mobile stones, astonish you with their
fiery glitter, the energy that burns within them.
And then, from the deepest shadows, naked and
unveiled, the flame of love explodes in scintil¬
lating stars.
Strange transfigurations take place at that
moment. From behind the humblest masks, in
violent contrast, the most splendid characers
emerge.
An obscure marsh grub, inert, surviving on cun¬
ning, becomes a brilliant amazon, the elegant
winged warrior we call the dragonfly (Libellula).
The only creature of its kind to express the com¬
plete freedom to be found in flight, it is to the
insects what the swallow is to the birds. Who has
not watched its thousand varied movements, as it
turns and turns about over meadow or stream in
the endless circles it describes with its blue-green
wings? What seems at first sight a random flight is
in fact not random at all; it is a hunt, an elegant and
rapid extermination of thousands of insects. What
looks like a game is really the fierce absorption of
a brilliant warrior-being seeking nourishment for
its time of love.
Don't think these riches are just the gifts of
golden climes, that the brilliant ball-gowns these
creatures don to love and die are no more than
some passing reflection of the Sun, the all-pow¬
erful decorator whose rays coppered the enam¬
elling, the jewels we admire on their wings.
Another Sun entirely, one that shines for all the
Earth, even to the chilly pole, plays a bigger part,
and that is love. It exalts the inner life in them,
brings out all their power and, on the appointed
day, makes the final bloom burst forth. The
sparkling colours that delight us are the creatures'
energy made visible, articulate and eloquent. They
are the pride of an entire life which, having
reached its summit, stretches out in triumph,
wishing to spread and bestow itself. They are the
transmission of desire, the imperious prayer, the
urgent appeal to the beloved.
In pallid, temperate climes, you will still find
these brilliant liveries you might have imagined
tropical in their hue. Who has not seen the can-
tharis burst forth beneath our dull and indeci¬
sive skies? Even in the gloomiest wastes where
summer is only a moment long, love as if to
spite the Sun and the bare and barren land .
raises beings of sumptuous splendour, opulent
in their adornment and their dress. Abruptly,
wretched Siberia sees princes and great lords
parade among the insect race. The harsh Russian
climate does not prevent enormous carabids, piti¬
less hunters, prouder than Ivan the Terrible, from
decorating themselves in green morocco, black,
violet or dark blue pinpointed with jet. Some,
usurping the colours of the robes of emperors
and of tsars, even strut about in purple bordered
with Byzantine gold.
