The mathsticks of early China
by Du Shi-ran
The ancient Chinese devised an original
system of calculating using counting rods
Schoolchildren learn to use
the abacus in Nanking
(China).
18
THE origins of numeration in China go back
into the dim and distant past and since, as
in many other countries, no-one knows
precisely how it began, all sorts of legends and
myths sprang up. An ancient book called Shi
Ben ("The Book on Ancestries") tells how the
legendary Yellow Emperor, regarded as the first
emperor in China's history, ordered his sub¬
jects Xi He to observe the sun, Chang Yi to
observe the moon . . . and Li Shou to invent
arithmetic. The story of Li Shou became widely
known, and people imagined that he discov¬
ered the concept of numbers by himself.
But to credit the concept of numbers to one
man obviously does not accord with the his¬
torical facts; such a complex concept could not
have been worked out single-handed, even by a
genius. It is obvious that numbers gradually
evolved throughout the long history of
humanity in response to practical requirements.
Certain features in the evolution of Chinese
numeration can be inferred from legends and
myths, but more important clues can be drawn,
and more accurate deductions can be made,
from archaeological evidence.
Archaeologists discovered that some earth¬
enware from the 7,000-year-old Yangshao Cul¬
ture (excavated in Henan and Shanxi Provinces)
bore specially inscribed signs and marks. Most
of the marks were vertical lines, while others
were Z-shaped. These vertical lines are believed
to be the very earliest forms of numeration in
ancient China.
After tens of thousands of years of primitive
civilization, a society with a class structure
evolved in China. This was the slave society of
the Shang dynasty (circa sixteenth to eleventh
centuries B.C.). It is clear from archaeological
evidence that this culture was fairly well devel¬
oped, producing bronze weapons, household
utensils and sacrificial vessels. Around the four¬
teenth century B.C., the Shang Dynasty moved

Detail of bronze bell
showing inscriptions,
Western Zhou period
(8th century B.C.).
DU SHI-RAN,
of China, is a professor at the
Institute of the History of
Natural Science of the
Academia Sinlca. Since 1 99 1 he
has been teaching at Bukkyo
University, Kyoto, Japan. His
main publications are The
History ofAncient Chinese
Mathematics ( 1 986, Clarendon
Press, Oxford) and A Draft
History of Chinese Science and
Technology (2 volumes, 1982,
Science Press, Beijing).
its capital to the neighbourhood of the present-
day Xiaotun, near Anyang in Henan province.
Culture and the economy took a further step
forward, and a form of calendar appeared.
I The oracle bone script
In the course of the present century, a large col¬
lection of plastrons the ventral part of tor-
toiseshells and animal bones inscribed with
characters have been excavated in the same area.
Research has shown that the nobles of the Shang
period worshipped the spirits of their ances
tors. In their prayers they put questions to these
spirits, inscribing the questions, the answers,
and sometimes the subsequent verifications on
the plastrons and on animal bones. The charac¬
ters used in the inscriptions are generally known
as "oracle bone script," and this is the earliest
form of Chinese writing so far discovered,
although isolated symbols have been found on
Yangshao pottery.
Among the 5,000 characters used by the
Shang people on the excavated oracle bones are
the earliest known Chinese numerals. The oracle 19

bones recorded how many prisoners were taken
in war or how many of the enemy were killed,
how many birds and animals the hunters caught
and how many domestic animals were sacri¬
ficed to the spirits. Days were also numbered.
Here are some examples:
"On the eighth day, namely the day of
Xinhai, two thousand six hundred and fifty-six
men were killed while crossing spears."
"Captured ten and six men."
"Ten dogs and five dogs."
"Ten cattle and five."
"Deer fifty and six."
"Five hundred four tens and seven days."
The largest number inscribed on the oracle
bones is 30,000 and the smallest is one. Units,
tens, hundreds, thousands and ten thousands
.. each have a specific character to represent them
(figure 1).
Ancient inscriptions on bronze have also
been found, in what is known as "bell vessel
script" or "bronze script," and research shows
that most of them date from the Zhou period
(around the eleventh century to 221 B.C.). The
numerals were written in a similar way to those
on the oracle bones. In the bronze script, how¬
ever, compound words are written quite dif¬
ferently from the oracle bone script. The modern
Chinese jo«, meaning "and" is used to separate
units, tens, hundreds and thousands. The
number 659, for instance, is written as 600 and
50 and 9.
In the Han Dynasty (206 B.C. to 220 A.D.)
the character used for separation in recording
(large) numbers was dropped and compound
numerals also disappeared. The shape of char¬
acter then used is almost exactly the same as in
present-day Chinese.
To show how the characters have evolved,
figure 2 compares the characters for one to ten
in oracle bone script, in bronze script, in the Han
Dynasty script, in present-day Chinese charac¬
ters and in modern Western (or Hindu-Arabic)
numerals.
M Counting rods
So far we have discussed decimal notation, but
in ancient China calculations did not directly
involve the manipulation of numerals. The
device used for calculations by the ancient Chi¬
nese was the counting rod.
The counting rods were small bamboo sticks
known as chou which Chinese mathematicians
arranged into different configurations to repre¬
sent numbers before performing calculations
with them. This was known as "chou suan"
(calculating with chou).
In August 1971, more than thirty rods dating
back to the time of Emperor Xuan Di (73-49
B.C.) of the Western Han Dynasty were found
in Qianyang County in Shanxi Province. Their
M. w length and width conform to the descriptions in
Oracle bone script:
= x n, A + X % 1
Modern Chinese: Z- ¿- C9 jl * -t /\ iL -l-
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
100 1 000 10 000
0© * *
s
4*
u Ui UJJ 2 ir -f >'(
-+ Z.-V V3~\- ¿+ *+ -t+
20 30 40 50 60 70 80
H B W ¥ fe* tf &
-'S" JLíT ES "g" Aï A"5" /VS" tes
200 300 400 500 600 800 900
É k * * V y
--Î- -H.-Í- E9"f- JL+ Af .=-#
2000 3000 4000 5000 8000 30 000
figure /. Two ways of writing
numbers
the History of the Han Dynasty, with the dif¬
ference that the Shanxi rods are made of bone.
A bundle of rods was unearthed in 1975 in Han
tomb No. 168 at Fenghuangshan in Jiangling,
Hubei Province. These are made of bamboo,
but are a little longer than the Shanxi rods. They
date from the reign of the Emperor Wen Di
(179-157 B.C.). In 1978, a quantity of earthen¬
ware with rod signs, dating from the Warring
States period (473-221 B.C.) of Eastern Zhou,
was found in Dengfeng County, Henan
province.
No reliable evidence has yet been found to
determine when counting rods began to be used,
but it is plausible that people were quite familiar
with this technique by no later than the Warring
States period. Texts relating to that period which
have survived to the present day use the
ideograms "chou" and "suan".
To represent numbers, counting rods could
be used either vertically or horizontally, as
shown in figure 3.
The rods are arranged in accordance with a
decimal place-value system, like the present
Western system. For units the vertical form is
used, for tens the horizontal form, for hundreds
the vertical form, for thousands the horizontal
form, and so on. A blank space is used for zero.
A number could thus be represented by
digits arranged in vertical and horizontal forms
alternately, working from right to left in the
usual order of units, tens, hundreds, thousands,
ten thousands, etc. This method of recording
numbers is explained in "Master Sun's Mathe¬
matical Manual" {Sunzi Suanjing, circa fifth
century A.D.) and in Xiahou Yang's "Mathe¬
matical Manual" {Xiahou Yang Suanjing, circa
eighth century A.D.). Master Sun says:

Clay statuette of a
horseman, Han period
(late 3rd century A.D.).
Oracle bone:
	
_
= Z n, a T )C =\ 1
Bronze: = = = , 8 1. X fr t H A i
Han: = ' = <n> X 9* Í A- h t
Modern Chinese: ""
J"" va JL * -t A iL +
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
"Units arc vertical, tens are horizontal,
Hundreds stand, thousands lie down;
Thus thousands and tens look the same,
Ten thousands and hundreds look alike".
Xiahou Yang's "Mathematical Manual" says:
"Units stand vertical, tens are horizontal,
Hundreds stand, thousands lie down.
Thousands and tens look the same,
Ten thousands and hundreds look alike.
Once bigger than six,
Five is on top;
Six does not accumulate,
Five does not stand alone".
The last four lines mean that for digits equal
to or greater than six, the units from one to four
are used and a single counting rod standing for
five rods is placed on top of them. This is just the
same as in the Chinese abacus, where each bead
above the crossbar stands for five beads below.
The digit six is not represented by piling up
counting rods. "Five does not stand alone"
means that the digit five must not itself follow
the method described above, in which one
counting rod is used to represent five. This is to
avoid confusion with the representation of the
tens, thousands and so forth.
Written language in ancient China was
arranged in columns reading from top to bottom
and right to left, but when using counting rods
to record numbers, the characters were arranged



from left to right as in the present way of
recording numbers in both East and West.
The decimal place-value method of recording
numbers appeared in China at some point
during the Spring and Autumn period (770-476
B.C.) or the Warring States period (475-221
B.C.). From then on, various arithmetical oper¬
ations could thus be performed easily and con¬
veniently.
Figure 3
vertical:
horizontal:
Figure 2
I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1 II III llll mu T TT rrr im
	 = ==
= m J_ X 4 ¿
21
