activity
A SOURCE OF
INSPIRATION
by Sue Williams
In Canada, the traditional ecological
knowledge of the Indian populations is
being collected and documented as part of
the quest for sustainable development
models. In Indonesia, efforts are underway
to develop a style of tourism that high¬
lights the country's outstanding cultural
heritage without damaging it. Meanwhile,
in Africa a "Culture Train" is in the plan¬
ning, linking Nairobi to the Cape, to pro¬
mote the performing arts in the southern
part of the continent. Although these are
but three of a range of projects being
undertaken by Unesco's Culture Sector,
they well illustrate the direction being
taken for the 1994-1995 biennium, which
also marks the mid-point of the World
Decade for Cultural Development: to take
culture out of its "ghetto" and recognize the
role it plays in virtually all areas ofhuman
society.
"The objective of the Decade is to incor¬
porate culture into all domains of activity,
ranging from the economy to health and
the environment," says Unesco's Assistant
Director-General for Culture, Henri Lopes,
"and, in doing so, to encourage the active
participation ofpopulations in the devel¬
opment process."
One of the main vehicles for this will be
the World Commission on Culture and
Development, established at the end of
1992 and presided over by former UN Sec¬
retary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar.
Essentially, the Commission's task is to
formulate policies and practices that,
according to Mr. Pérez de Cuéllar, "will
lead to a more human, sustainable and
unifying form of development."
The move in this direction has also led
to a new emphasis on the intangible cul¬
tural heritage traditions, skills and lan¬
guages that in many places are dying out
but constitute a vital part of a people's cul¬
tural identity. "This is not only a way of
preserving a people's memory and knowl¬
edge," says Doudou Diene, who is in
charge of intercultural projects. "Tradi¬
tional crafts and forms of artistic expres¬
sion have always been shaped by outside
influences. Culture and cultural identity
are the result of constant movement, inter¬
action and exchange. This is a particularly
important message today, when the
defence ofcultural identity has become a
source of conflict."
Centres to study cultural identities and
foster intercultural co-operation are cur¬
rently being planned for the Mediter¬
ranean basin, southeast Europe, central
Asia and southern Africa.
RAPID RESPONSE TEAM
The second major pole ofaction in the
cultural domain for 1994-1995 is the
preservation of the world's sites, monu¬
ments and cultural property. Here, a major
reinforcement effort is underway to
encourage more Member States to accede
to the World Heritage Convention. The
World Heritage Centre, established in 1992
to "promote and mobilize", is also refo-
cusing its efforts to better ensure the pro¬
tection of the 378 sites on the World Her¬
itage List. "The mere listing of properties
is not sufficient" says the Centre's director,
Bernd von Droste. "We need more effective
site management. This means systematic
monitoring, which in turn means better
information and documentation on sites,
especially the fifteen now on the World
Heritage in Danger List." It has also been
decided to set up a team ofspecialists who
can move quickly into emergency situa¬
tions, such as natural disasters, and launch
safeguarding operations a sort of rapid
response team for the world's natural and
cultural treasures.
Given the surge in illicit art trafficking,
especially in eastern Europe, the coming
biennium will see the strengthening of the
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting
and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export
and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural
Property. "Many ofUnesco's new Member
States are not even aware ofhow the Con¬
vention works or how they can use it," says
Lyndel Prott, head of Unesco's Interna¬
tional Standards Section. "To correct this
situation, we are planning a series of sem¬
inars in West Africa, South America and
central Asia, not only to inform but also to
provoke some action and stem the tide of
smuggling from these regions."
Despite the belt tightening that has
marked the past fewyears, this biennium
will see the budget allocated to the Culture
Sector increased to $41.7 million. This
reflects the priority given to this area at a
time when, stresses Federico Mayor, "ten¬
sions and conflicts have a growing ten¬
dency to be cultural in origin [and] a gen¬
uine intercultural dialogue is becoming
an urgent necessity." 49
