H
Miguel de Unamuno on thefuture
4t
In 1933, the International Institute
ofIntellectual Co-operation
organized a series oftalles in Madrid
in which Miguel de Unamuno gave
his views on thefuture ofculture.
Professor ofGreek and later rector
ofSalamanca university,
philosopher, poet, playwright and a
lifelong opponent ofbigotry and
dogmatism, Unamuno was one of
the most influential Spanish
thinkers ofhis time. Wien he gave
the talks (betiveen 3 and 7May) he
was 68years old.
I must admit that after over forty years
as a teacher, I have reached the stage
where I don't know what culture is.
What I do know is that I find it rather bur¬
densome. Instead of making a series of
formal observations, I am going to treat
you to an outpouring ofpersonal impres¬
sions. I'm feeling a little tired and so, I
think, is most ofcivilized humanity at this
moment. What we need is not so much
peace as rest, because there is such a thing
as peace without rest and a dreadful thing
it is!
In economic terms, everyone knows
that there is a disparity between produc¬
tion and consumption. We have con¬
sumed for the sake of production rather
than produced for the sake of consump¬
tion, and the same thing can be said of
intellectual and spiritual life. Most people
cannot keep up with today's intellectual
output. People are thinking too fast. That
is a very serious matter. Pindar said that
Tantalus had been punished for not being
able to digest happiness and joy. Perhaps
many people suffer today because they
cannot digest truths and, even more
serious, cannot digest the truth. It is very
unpleasant to be incapable of digesting
happiness swallowing it is something
different. But it is even more serious not to
be able to digest and swallow the truth.
In this very place I met one of my
friends, a highly cultivated, well-read man
who has travelled widely but never writes
anything. When asked, "Why don't you
produce anything?" he answers, "I pro¬
duce consumption."
Of course, in consuming culture we
produce it as well. It is perhaps more dif¬
ficult to consume than to produce. It is
more difficult to listen than to speak, more
difficult to read than to write, far more dif¬
ficult. Most of the writers I know, unfortu¬
nately, cannot read. Digestion is very dif¬
ficult.
The question of the future of culture, its
goal and purpose, which will be, perhaps,
to achieve the spiritual unity ofhumanity,
has not been raised. Speaking for myself,
I never achieve my own unity. I always
carry within me a people fighting a civil
war. One of the things that makes me suffer
the most, when I am engaged in a discus¬
sion with another person, is to see that
person defend himself when he is unfa¬
miliar with the grounds for his argument
and I know them better than he does. At
present most people, here at any rate, are
living in anguish. But I do not want to talk
about current affairs because they are
above or below what we are dealing with
here.
Of course, the cultural point ofview in
my opinion is a matter of religion. I am
going to make a digression. In the past
Miguel de Unamuno y Jugo ( 1 864- 1 936).
people said, "Long live Christ the King"
to show that they were monarchists. The
other day I was talking aboutVelasquez, to
whom I dedicated a poem. His painting of
Christ says something, it tells you quite
clearly, "My republic is not of this world, it
is of another world."
Yes, education is a national issue, but it
is also a danger. When I look at all these
books about how to teach I have the
impression that children are being used as
fodder for testing, that the aim is not to
educate them but to bring them up as if
they were frogs or guinea pigs for psy¬
chologists. This is dreadful. Poor young
people! What they have to go through
because of these books! They are trained
like performing animals!
"Is teaching an unnatural function?"
Socrates was not a teacher, but a
vagabond. He wandered the streets of
Athens talking to everyone. That's what
culture is. Here in Spain there is a deep-
rooted popular culture forged by tradition
in what is the true people's university of
Spain, the cafés. This culture is more uni¬
versal than the other one. The other one is
international rather than universal, which
is not the same thing. What is most uni¬
versal is what is most individual, and the
people in our cafés and countryside are
profoundly individual.
I believe that to defend the universal
you have to stand up for the individual. Mr.
Severi has talked about the national char¬
acter that all the sciences have. Science is
naturally a language because even math¬
ematical formulas are written in Spanish,
French, English and German. Always. I
also believe that the mind makes language
and that words are what make us. Even
philosophy makes language. Hegel is the
German language. Cartesianism is the
French language speaking, scholasticism
is thinking in dead Latin. In Spain there is
also a kind of fluid philosophy. It is not
systematic. It is in the language of the
people. In Spain there have never, or
almost never, been philosophical systems.
That does not mean that there have never
been philosophers.
In the foreword to the Baedeker guide to
Spain it says that we Spaniards are touchy

ofculture
and easily offended. There's more to it
than that! In Spain, when we have the army
we are anti-militarist. When there was the
clergy, there was anti-clericalism. I have no
doubt that our children and grandchil¬
dren will be anti-teacher. People talk about
tyranny. Well that is a form of tyranny. I am
a teacher but I naturally resisted falling
into a professional rut because, instead
of working and having my students work
on other people's poems, I have a weak¬
ness I write poetry myself. It is myweak¬
ness to be a direct producer. A kind of civil
war goes on inside me. Anyone who
studies literature always ends up hating
what he studies, always. I've seen it
happen. Whenever people talk about indi¬
viduals or personalities I am accused of
being an individualist because I am an
anarchist. To me individuality is a kind of
container and personality is the content.
It is possible to have a strong individu¬
alitywithout much ofa personality. I know
people in Spain with a very strong indi¬
viduality, but they are almost all the same.
Their minds are skin and bone. They are
like crayfish and lobster. They have bones
on the outside and and flesh on the inside.
But there are other minds, even here on the
peninsula, who are more like octopuses
and invertebrates. Some of them have very
hard shells. They are very strong on the
outside. But there are also people who are
soft and swallow the lobster or crayfish
whole with its shell, digesting it without
chewing.
There is a nationalist international. This
is one of the most dangerous things in
existence, because it is not universal!
The most universal is the most indi¬
vidual. All my life I have fought to defend
my own individuality and I thought that in
doing so I was also standing up for the
freedom and the individuality of my
country, Spain, which I bear inside myself.
At times I have said, with the modesty so
typical of me [laughter], that not only am
I a son of Spain, I am one of its fathers as
well! Spain is also my mother, but it's my
daughter too. Sometimes one needs soli¬
tude. Here we are together and I shall look
back on this talk with pleasure. I have rec¬
ognized people, but I shall go back home
to see if I can still recognize myself. Let
me tell you a little anecdote. One day I
was in Barcelona, where I went to see the
director of the asylum, who is a friend of
mine.
He said to me, "One of my inmates
knows you're here. He wants to meet you".
I was introduced to the madman. He
was calm; he was perfectly all right.
"Mr. Unamuno?" he asked.
"The very same!"
"The real one? Not the one who lives on
paper and in the press?"
"Yes."
But afterwards I had second thoughts
and wondered if I was the real one. I won¬
dered if I was the person I knew or the one
other people knew, myself or the historic
man, who is not made of flesh and blood.
In Spain we've managed to turn a fic¬
tional character, Don Quixote, into a
national hero. Did he exist? He does exist.
We must be wary of education, and
especially of national education, of the
clerisy of the state. I, who am an educa¬
tional functionary, an administrator,
humble though I maybe as an adminis¬
trator, of course [laughter] I see the
danger ofwanting to train young people in
one way or another. What can be done
about it? We cannot let them teach them¬
selves. And yet they would do the job very
well if they were left to themselves. I repeat,
the danger of teaching is the fatigue I men¬
tioned earlier, and the fatigue is partly a
result of that. People's minds are over¬
loaded. Poor children! I have known chil¬
dren who were very clever until the age of
seven. After that their intelligence stopped
developing	
Let's get back to what I was saying about
the danger of fatigue. It stems from a cer¬
tain kind of education, from teaching.
There are two things I cannot stand: ped¬
agogy and sociology. The former must be
replaced by art and the latter by history.
Another time I shall have an opportu¬
nity to return to some of these ideas in
greater detail. For the moment we are here
to get to know each other. The Greek oracle
said, "Know thyself". Why? What I say is,
"Know others, not yourself". I do not think
anyone can know his or her self, fortu¬
nately. We are here to see each other and
get to know each other, to feel a certain
Text selected and presented
by Edgardo Canton
human warmth, to experience something
more than ideas, perhaps to see our dif¬
ferent ways of approaching life. Ifyou for¬
eigners leave here knowing a little more
about our Spain, this old Spain where
people, including myself, believe a renewal
is under way, we should thank you. I am
Spanish, and profoundly so. You are in a
country which, I think, has a great culture,
a profound culture. Those who cannot read
or write may be even more cultured than
the rest. They have long centuries in their
souls, not only thought and faith. Faith is
very difficult to define. Of course, if it is
defined it ceases to be faith. A god who is
defined is no longer a god. Faith is neces¬
sary. Faith in what? I don't know.
In the Basque country where I was born
there was a bigoted old woman who often
went to mass. Because of my interest in
these matters I once asked her:
"Tell me, madame, what do you believe
comes after death?"
"After death?" she replied. "I haven't
had time to think about that kind ofthing".
Please excuse me for rambling on; I do
believe these ideas can shed some light
on the subject. At the same time I think this
is a subject on which not too much light
should be shed. Too much light is not a
good thing. You solve one problem and
twenty or thirty new ones appear in its
place. You have to work. This quotation
from an old Italian poet comes to mind:
"Meglio optando obliar senza indagarlo
questo enorme misterde ¡'Universo" We
are better off trying to forget the great mys¬
tery of the universe. The trouble is that I
cannot resign myself to forgetting this
great mystery. To get back to culture: I
repeat that at the age of seventy and after
forty years of teaching I have reached the
point where I do not know what it is. I
hope my own people, your peoples, may
have a few years not only of peace, but of
rest, rest during which they will be able
to sleep and digest truths and the truth.
Perhaps that is the hardest lesson in the life
of the world. Tr ¡S
