THE UNESCO COURIER FEBRUARY 1993
Dossier
25 A budding romance
between industry and
the environment?
by France Bequette
26 World
30 Voices from the past
Heaven-King
pretends to be dead
25

World
The brazil-nut tree (Bertholletia excelsa) needs a
regular support group to produce the delicious nuts
that are exported around the world. A species of bee
capable of covering 20 km in an hour is in charge of
pollination. If the trees are not themselves in flower,
the bees feed instead on a species of orchid that
grows on them. In charge of cracking the nuts, which
would otherwise be too hard to permit germination,
is a squirrel-like rodent called the agouti. If any link
in this chain were to go missing, the others would
also disappear and that would be bad news for
Brazil.
26
11
The World Congress for Education
and Communication on Environ¬
ment and Development (ECO-ED)
was held in Toronto, Canada, from
16 to 21 October 1992. Its purpose
was to share the messages of the
Earth Summit in Rio with a large
public of people working in educa¬
tion and communication. The
Congress, which was sponsored by
Unesco and the International
Chamber of Commerce in co-op¬
eration with the United Nations
Environment Programme, was
hosted by the North American
Association for Environmental
Education, the Council of Outdoor
Educators of Ontario, the Unesco
Canada Man and the Biosphere
Environmental Education Aware¬
ness and Training Network and the
Ontario Association for Geographic
and Environmental Education.
More than 3,000 people from 84
different countries attended its
sessions. Related events included a
Curricula and Resources Fair pre¬
senting an international showcase
of resource materials for environ¬
ment and development education.
A catalogue is available, both in
print and in computer disc form,
from ECO-ED, Suite 803, 25 George
St., Toronto M5A4L8, Canada.
111!
You will definitely not find Elevage et potentialités pas¬
torales sahéliennes ("Livestock Production and Potential
in the Sahel") in the paperback department ofyour local
bookshop. This 180-page atlas, published by the Centre
technique de coopération agricole et rurale, an inter¬
national agency created by the Lomé Convention to
spread scientific information in the countries ofAfrica,
the Caribbean and the Pacific, and based in Ede-
Wageningen (The Netherlands), measures 81 cm by 66
cm the size of a coffee-table. Although the popula¬
tion of the Sahel countries is only 25 million just 6 per
cent of the total population of Africa their livestock
represents 14 per cent of the continent's total animal
count. The atlas depicts the background and environ¬
ment in which livestock rearing takes place, covering
soil analysis, water resources, and localized informa¬
tion on animal nutrition and veterinary services. This
magnificently illustrated work, which is divided by
country into six sections, each of which can be bought
separately, is only available in French.
Some developing countries are mindful of the environ¬
ment, and one that is doing something about it is India.
According to the magazine India Today, Bombay's mul¬
titudinous fleet of taxis will gradually convert to use
compressed natural gas. So far, 2,000 have been equipped
to do so, and halfof the remaining 28,500 will be fitted out
by June 1993. The move is expected to produce two
advantages: a reduction in air pollution and a 20-per-cent
saving on passenger fares, given that a kg of natural gas
costs only half as much as a litre of petrol.
Shortly after the Second World
Climate Conference, held in
Geneva in 1990, the World Meteo¬
rological Organization inter¬
viewed several world leaders and
published the interviews in a
book called Climate Change. In it,
Begum Khaleda Zia, the Prime
Minister of Bangladesh, pointed
out that on average the monsoon
floods 20 per cent of her country
every other year and 37 per cent
once every ten years. Records
were broken in 1987 and again in
1988, when floods respectively
covered 40 per cent and 60 per
cent of the country. With the
population doubling every 30
years and food needs constantly
growing, social and economic
development has top priority. In
this context, putting money aside
exclusively for environmental
protection is currently out of the
question.

THE FITE
T
Kalimantan is the Indonesian part
of the island of Borneo. The area
contains immense sources of
wealth, including petroleum, gas,
coal, gold, diamonds and hard¬
wood. Studies have turned up
3,000 different species of trees in
the eastern part of Kalimantan's
primary forest alone. About 30
million cubic metres of wood are
lumbered each year, representing
60 per cent of Indonesia's output
of marketable timber. The surface
area which is cleared or farmed
each year is of the order of
900,000 hectares, while only be¬
tween 90,000 and 250,000 hectares
are reforested. No one knows if a
forest can recover its original
balance under these circum¬
stances, but it is hard to pass
judgement on a country that has to
devote 40 per cent of its income to
servicing debt.
In the Lao People's Democratic
Republic, the energy situation has
undergone a spectacular change
over the past ten years. Electricity
has been taking over from the burn¬
ing of wood, and now accounts
for 50 per cent ofhousehold energy
consumption in Vientiane, almost
as much as in Bangkok or Manila.
Two out of three families cook with
electricity, and ownership of inex¬
pensive electrical appliances has
mushroomed. One problem is that
surging demand for electricity for
domestic use is sapping Lao PDR's
ability to trade electricity, the
country's leading export, for much-
needed foreign exchange. An energy
sector management assistance pro¬
gramme, partly sponsored by the
World Bank, in co-operation with
the national utility, Electricité du
Laos, seeking to encourage the
population to adopt more rational
consumption patterns while obtain¬
ing maximum energy efficiency
from the imported appliances.
A canal linking the Rhine, at Bam¬
berg, to the Danube, at Kelheim,
was inaugurated last September,
thereby opening an unbroken
waterway from Rotterdam in the
Netherlands to the Rumanian port
of Constanza on the Black Sea.
The entire route covers 3,500 kilo¬
metres and links 13 countries.
Supporters call it the engineering
achievement of the century, while
its detractors have described it as
the most ridiculous project since
the Tower of Babel. In particular,
the canal link was opposed by
German environmentalists seek¬
ing to protect the wildlife of the
Altmiihl Valley in southeastern
Germany, between Bamberg and
Kelheim. The canal provides a thor¬
oughfare for trains of large-capac¬
ity barges, a form of transport that
is three times less expensive than
rail and six times cheaper than
road haulage. Environmentalists
might also acknowledge that it is
safer than either alternative and
causes less pollution.
1 CLEANUP
Ships unload 58 million tonnes of
ballast water and sediments in
Australian ports each year. In the
past, much of it was drawn from
other harbours, but since February
1990 ships that have loaded ballast
water in any port have been
required, by order of the Minister
for Resources, to replace it with
water from the high seas. The
reason is that micro-organisms
from the open sea are not likely to
adapt to the sea-water found in
ports, which for the most part has a
much lower salt content. The pre¬
vious practice of transferring bal¬
last water from one port to another,
however, carried the risk of intro¬
ducing into local environments
foreign organisms such as fish, algae
or toxic micro-organisms that could
contaminate shellfish intended for
human consumption. Australia is
one of the first countries in the
world to adopt such measures to
protect its marine environment. 27

Dossier
l
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 25
and business organizations in 123
countries. It also speaks for the
world of business at the United
Nations and in specialized govern¬
ment agencies. Its Business Charter
for Sustainable Development, launch¬
ed in April 1991, sets forth 16
principles for environmental man¬
agement. The object is for every busi¬
ness to put environmental protec¬
tion among its highest corporate
priorities by improving its environ¬
mental policies and performance,
training employees, advising cus¬
tomers, assessing the environ¬
mental impacts of its activities,
developing emergency plans,
contributing to the transfer ofenvi¬
ronmentally sound technology, and
fostering openness and dialogue
with its Board of Directors, its
employees and with the public.
At first glance, the Charter may
seem somewhat vague. Article 5, for
instance, reads: "Prior assessment:
To assess environmental impacts
before starting a new activity or pro¬
ject and before decommissioning
a facility or leaving a site." Jan-Olaf
Willums, Executive Director of the
ICC, explains: "Our purpose is not to
impose directives, but to set forth
principles that should raise busi¬
ness leaders' awareness and lead to
voluntary initiatives. We also wish to
show through specific examples
that it is possible to respect the
Charter without any loss, and even
profit from it. In addition, we want
to provide tools for the achievement
ofsustainable development, which
is indispensable."
Will the Charter contribute to the
transfer of technology that the devel¬
oping countries are hoping for?
"That is one of its goals," says
Willums. "We would like industrial
co-operation to increase, not only
from North to South and West to East
but also from East and South to
South and vice versa. We are not only
addressing industrialists, but govern¬
ments too. We are not asking them to
change their rules. We are merely
suggesting some improvements."
Any manufactured product is a
source of pollution. Even so, busi¬
ness initiatives to reduce it, however
small, can have tangible and bene¬
ficial effects. In From Ideas toAction,
published by the ICC in 1992,
Willums and Ulrich Golüke report
the example of the German firm
Mercedes Benz, a company which
supports the Charter. A car body
can be considered as a mass of raw
material that can be recycled at
some future date. The metal can be
28
Diapers
disposable or
washable?
used again. Plastic is specially
marked during production so that it
can be easily identified for recy¬
cling. In the past wire cable was dis¬
tributed through the car in seg¬
ments (there might be up to 50
pieces in a door), making it hard to
recover. Merce'des Benz has de¬
signed the electrical layout so that
the entire length of cable, which
may be as long as 3 km and weigh
up to 50 kg in some top-end models,
can be pulled out in one piece.
Robert Bosch, another German
manufacturer, has developed a
"super" electronic control chip which
transfers all the driver's instructions to
the vehicle through a single cable,
with a second cable sufficing for the
entire electrical system. This cable-
efficient design decreases the weight
of the vehicle considerably, thus
saving fuel and reducing pollution.
Eastman Kodak also supports the
Charter. Concerns about single-use
throwaway cameras led company
engineers to redesign them so as to
be recyclable. Kodak pays photo
developers for each used camera
returned for recycling. By December
1991 over three million cameras had
been returned for recycling in the
United States, Canada, Europe and
Japan, thus diverting 250,000 kg of
waste from disposal facilities. The
firm recycles or reuses all of the
parts, sometimes as many as six
times, to manufacture "new" dis¬
posable cameras.
DIAPER WARS
Despite these encouraging examples,
Carlo Pesso, a consultant with the
Organization for Economic Co-oper¬
ation and Development (OECD),
remains cautious. He notes that pol¬
lution is usually invisible to the
naked eye and that scientific ana¬
lysis is the sole key for ascertaining
the state of the environment.
Products must be scrutinized "from
the cradle to the grave", that is
throughout their entire life-cycle of
production, distribution, use and
disposal. A document published by

On this car,
parts that can be
recycled are
shown in green.
OECD in 1991 entitled Ecological
Labelling in OECD Countries notes
that "comparing and assessing dif¬
ferent types of environmental
degradation is extremely difficult
to do in a satisfactory manner. . . .
How to compare a product which is
durable but difficult to dispose of to
a product which has a shorter life
but which breaks down less harm¬
fully after disposal?"
In fact, this is precisely the kind of
comparison which is being made
by countries that have adopted
ecological labelling. In Canada, for
example, there has been a veritable
duel between disposable and
washable diapers. Each year, 1.7
billion disposable diapers end up in
landfills, representing a total mass
of about 250,000 tonnes of solid
waste. In Canada, the manufacture of
disposable diapers consumes
approximately 65,500 tonnes ofpulp,
8,800 tonnes of plastic and 9,800
tonnes of packing material a year.
On the other hand, less than 1 0 kg of
cotton is needed to produce all the
reusable diapers required by a baby,
but washing them requires large
quantities of water, detergent and
energy.
Canada's Environmental Choice
programme studied the problem in
depth. "Some people are concerned
that exclusive use of reusable cotton
diapers would increase cotton pro¬
duction and therefore the use of
pesticides," it reported. However, it
came to the conclusion that "even if
all disposable diapers were replaced
by 100% cotton diapers, the impact
on the cotton industry would be
minimal." (A pity for the countries
of the South that have problems sel¬
ling their cotton, one might add.)
The Canadian EcoLogo was finally
attributed to cloth diapers pro¬
vided they are able to endure a
minimum of 75 uses.
Jan-OlufWillums would like "eco-
products" everywhere to be subject
to the same standards. As Executive
Director of the World Industry
Council for Environment, an orga¬
nization founded at.the beginning
of 1993 which aims to become a
forum of co-operation for sustain¬
able development, he will surely
bear in mind this analysis from the
Brundtland Report: "We have
become accustomed to a sharp
increase in economic interdepen¬
dence among nations. We are now
forced to accustom ourselves to an
accelerating ecological interdepen¬
dence among nations. Ecology and
economy are becoming ever more
interwoven locally, regionally,
nationally, and globally into a
seamless net of causes and effects."
FRANCE BEQUETTE
is a Franco-American journalist
specializing in environmental
questions. Since 1985 she has been
associated with the WANAD-Unesco
training programmeforAfrican
news-agencyjournalists.

Voicesfrom thepast
4mmop
(ill TO I FIUIU jj
A Vietnamese tale of the Muong people
The story on this
page appears in an
anthology entitled
Compagnons du
Soleil C'Companions
of the Sun") co-
published (in French)
by Unesco, Editions
de la Découverte
(Paris) and the
Fondation pour le
progrès de l'Homme.
The anthology was
prepared under the
general editorship of
the African historian
Joseph Ki-Zerbo, in
collaboration with
Marie-Josephe Beaud.
They say that once upon a time, when Heaven and
Earth still touched, men and animals could come
and go as they wished on Earth as in Heaven.
Man was more intelligent than the other animals.
One moment he would clear the land, the next plant
one variety of tree, then another. And everywhere he
worked hard to have enough food to eat. Animals,
on the other hand, had no feeding places of their
own, and they devastated plantations and harvests.
Man made all sorts of traps, nooses, pitfalls, crossbows
and slings so that he could kill the animals that caused
such damage.
All the animals, both furred and feathered, hated
man, but did not know how to take revenge on him.
So after taking counsel together they decided to go and
see Heaven-King and try to bring man to book. . . .
Heaven-King listened to them, then summoned man
so he could pass judgement. Man came. Heaven-
King asked him:
"Why are you nasty to the animals?"
When he heard the question, man guessed that the
animals had gone to complain to Heaven-King. He
immediately answered:
"I beg Your Majesty to listen to me. It's the animals
that are nasty. When we cultivate our fields and gar¬
dens, hedgehogs and boars come and destroy them;
when we plant maize and beans, crows and turtle¬
doves come and dig up the seeds; when we raise pigs,
dogs, buffaloes and cattle, tigers and panthers catch
them and eat them. We men are always on the alert.
Even when we eat or walk, ants and bees come and
sting us."
Heaven-King was in a terrible quandary. He could
not decide which partywas right or what ruling to give.
So he decided to send man away. A little later, he
worked out a stratagem that would test the loyalty of
both man and the animals. He had a coffin made and
lay down inside it. But the coffin had a little hole in it,
so he could see what was going on outside without
anyone knowing. He sent a messenger to announce
. . . that Heaven-King was dead, and that all living
creatures ofall species, wherever they lived, near or far,
should come and mourn the passing of the Heaven-
King. . . .
When they heard the news that Heaven-King had
died, all the species, from dogs and foxes and birds to
tigers and panthers, came to mourn his passing	
Only the human species was incapable of moving
fast. By the time all the animals had arrived, man was '
still walking.
On the way, he met a yellow tortoise that was trying
in vain to clamber over a tree-trunk which had fallen
across its path	When it saw man coming, the tor¬
toise said:
"Help me get over this tree-trunk, and I'll tell you
something very interesting	"
Man helped the tortoise, which said:
"Once we arrive, we shall have to be on our best
behaviour. Heaven-King is pretending to be dead
but it's only a way of testing the world."
When he got to Heaven-King's abode, man saw that
all the animal species . . . were squabbling, while at the
same time gorging themselves very noisily. . . . The
man and the tortoise, who were in the know, were
the only ones not to scramble for food. Theywaited to
be served. As for Heaven-King's death, some wept
and others did not. Those belonging to the human
species unanimously agreed to sit by themselves and
mourn together. Some of them, who were embar¬
rassed about mourning without being able to produce
any tears, moistened their eyes with saliva. But as
they had been chewing betel, their saliva was red. So
their noses and faces became red too. After savouring
this spectacle, Heaven-King raised the lid ofhis coffin
and said:
"The moment I was dead, all the animals I now see
before me started foraging and eating to their heart's
content. If I had really been dead, just imagine the
pillaging theywould have done! Only the human spe¬
cies, when mourning, weeps tears of blood. What
cheek of the other species to come and complain
that humans are horrible!"
. . . Heaven-King then passed judgement: he ruled
in man's favour. The animals' retribution consisted of
man being entitled and empowered to eat all animal
species.
Heaven-King declared:
"Henceforth, man, with thy face to the ground thou
shalt eat everything, and with thy face turned
heavenwards, thou shalt eat everything."
On hearing that, the tortoise asked:
"What about me?"
"He will eat everything!" the Heaven-King declared.
The Muong, however, do not eat tortoise flesh. This
is because they are grateful for being told that Heaven-
King was pretending to be dead	 H
