Miniaturized consumer products such as
microcomputers and digitally-controlled portable
telephones are becoming familiar features of
everyday life. In Japan a minute robot named
"Monsieur" has been developed using wristwatch
technology. It is driven by an ultra-small, super-
energy-efficient motor with an extremely compact
quartz crystal oscillator that enables the micro-
robot to make precise, shock-resistant movements
over an extended period. "Monsieur" has many
potential applications in industry and medicine.
Imagine a microrobot being injected into your
body and sent crawling around it to carry out a
check-up and if necessary perform repairs.
Not all objects seem destined to be shrunk.
Furniture, clothes and cooking appliances, for
example, will no doubt undergo fundamental
changes in the years to come, but though they
may become minimal, it is doubtful whether
they will become much smaller.
ARIK LEVY,
of Israel, works internationally as a freelance designer. He is
an assistant with a unit of the Ecole Nationale Supérieure
de Création Industrielle in Paris.
PIPPO LIONNI,
of the United States, is co-director of the Paris design
agency "Integral Concept" and a unit director at the Ecole
Nationale Supérieure de Création Industrielle in Paris.
Micro-Mega
by Yves Beauvois and Alexandra Poulain
PARADOXICAL though it may appear, in an
age when the characteristic modern trend
is towards the gigantic, there is also a trend
towards the very small, from Japanese bonsai
trees to computer chips. Are they unconnected,
or are they two different facets of the same mod¬
ernizing impulse?
Those who discuss modernity in the present
tense must necessarily include themselves in the
subject under discussion, for modernity can only
be defined in relation to a given moment in time.
That moment is thereby defined, either implicitly
or explicitly, as a break in the time continuum of
a civilization or culture, and no break can be
more noticeable or indeed spectacular than one
that startles the eye by disproportionately
enlarging familiar features of the beholder's envi¬
ronment. This tendency to make things appear
new by enlarging them finds expression in the
familiar myth of the Tower of Babel, in which the

challenge of monumentality translates the desire
to transcend the limits of the human. The urge to
build ever bigger would indeed seem to satisfy
modern man's need to leave some lasting monu¬
ment so as to outlive the vagaries of time.
In the nineteenth century this attitude became
more systematic and widespread than ever before.
The engineering feats of the Industrial Revolution
paved the way for an ever-increasing number of
colossal construction projects: this was the age of
stations built like cathedrals, department stores
resembling temples, and factories disguised as
castles. The context of daily life was radically
altered as urbanization progressed. Cities came to
express the all-conquering power of attraction of
modernity.
Then space began to grow scarce under the
pressure of such overweening ambition. Satura¬
tion-point loomed. To survive, modern man
invented a new, equal and opposite approach, a
steady reduction in the size of objects that were
regarded as taking up too much space. "Small is
beautiful" could be the motto of twentieth-cen¬
tury technology, for miniaturization has been
an overriding concern in the development of
electronics, information technology, office and
household automation and telecommunications.
Gigantism and miniaturization are two coex¬
isting aspects of the same desire to control space
with the aid of increasingly complex technologies.
By using intelligence in this way, modernity
shows itself to be a manifestation ofpower. In the
all-out search for efficiency, the attraction exer¬
cised both by the very large and the very small has
pushed aside concern for harmony and its corol¬
lary, wisdom. Modernity calls for the inordinate.
In some respects this attitude could well be a
new form of hubris, the concept of impious
flouting of the natural order that the ancient
Greeks used to describe the condition of bar¬
barity. Perhaps it is no coincidence that the mas¬
sive and the miniature come together in the
atomic bomb, whose vast destructive power is
matched by its small size.
Our contemporaries may be barbarians, but
they are Titans too, constantly courting danger by
daring to shake established norms to their foun¬
dations.
Left above, the Arche de la
Défense in Paris.
Below, a microchip in the
eye of a needle.
YVES BEAUVOIS
teaches history at the Institut
d'Études Politiques in Paris. He
is the author of a study on
Franco-Polish relations during
the "phoney war", Les Relations
franco-polonaises pendant la
"Drôle de Guerre" (Paris, 1989).
ALEXANDRA POULAIN
teaches English at the
University of Caen (France).
m
hbW> J
*4a^
I
I J
