Amos Oz talks to
Edgar Reichmann
Amos Oz, who was born in
Jerusalem in 1939, is widely
acknowledged to be one of the
most gifted Israeli writers working
today. His novels and collections of
short fiction, which have been
translated into many languages,
include Elsewhere, Perhaps (1966),
My Michael (1968), Touch the Water,
Touch the Wind (1973) and
The Hill of Evil Counsel (1976). His
In the Land of Israel (1983) is a
book of reportage based on
interviews with Israelis from
different backgrounds. A committed
writer, Amos Oz has always worked
for a rapprochement between
Israelis and Palestinians. His latest
novel, Fima, has just been published
by Chatto & Windus, London.
EDGAR REICHMANN
is a novelist and literary critic.
You write in Hebrew, which is not a
widely read language. How do you explain
the fact that your work has an interna¬
tional readership f
My books have been translated into
twenty-six languages, including Japanese
and Catalan. I speak only Hebrew, which
is my mother tongue, and English. I've
always wondered what a reader on another
continent, steeped in a culture so different
from my own, might feel on reading my
books. I think reading a book in translation
is like making love to someone through a
window or playing a violin sonata on the
piano. However good the translation,
something is always lost. Granted, every¬
thing hinges on the translator's generosity
and intelligence. A translator should not
slavishly follow the syntax of the original
text but focus on the meaning and the
melody of words and transpose as well as
possible their music and scansion.
My parents, who were born in Russia,
spoke Russian and Polish to each other,
read German, English and French, which
opened the doors of Western culture to
them, and probably dreamed in Yiddish,
since they were Jewish. But when between
the wars they came and settled in what
was then the British mandate of Palestine,
they adopted Hebrew and decided to speak
to me only in Hebrew, if only to prevent
me, someone who was so drawn to the
"elsewhere" that had brought them so
much disappointment, from being tempted
to leave the country.
My father studied comparative litera¬
ture. It's because of him that I started to
read the great writers, the ones who ask the
fundamental questions that are asked by
men and women all over the world.
The concept of universalism may seem
vague and sometimes irrelevant. One might
well ask how an Australian or an Argentine
reader can have the same centres of interest
as an Egyptian or Pakistani reader, for
example. How can one find the secret way
from the particular to the universal? Great
Russian writers like Dostoyevsky or
Chekhov, Israeli ones like Agnon or
Brenner, and central European writers such
as Musil and Mann have managed to tran¬
scend historical and cultural differences
and religious and political commitments.
Your works are peopled by nostalgic,
uprooted characters at grips withpainful
inner conflicts and in search of an "else¬
where" that is hard, if not impossible, to
find. Are thesepersonal dramas metaphor-

ical expressions of those rocking your
country?
Authors from the world's trouble spots
are often suspected of using metaphor to
express their political commitments. To me,
political reality is a metaphor for personal or
family conflicts. The issue that preoccupies
me most is the durability of the family, the
most fantastic, the most mysterious and the
oldest of our social institutions. Man and
woman have not always been monogamous,
far from it! Their love never lasts forever,
whether it is carnal, based on pure affection
or has the form of a loving friendship. And
yet the family has survived throughout his¬
tory, indestructible in spite of many social
upheavals. Why? I have tried to answer this
question in all my novels.
As far as the links between novels and
politics arc concerned, I am amazed by
the importance some European readers
have attached in the last half-century to
"deciphering" all forms of literature in
terms of current events. If Melville had
written Moby Dick today, commentators
would sec Ahab as some kind of dictator
who wanted to destroy individual freedom
as embodied by the mythical whale. In the
West there is too much of a tendency to
read politics into writing that has nothing
to do with current events. Even in coun¬
tries and regions where the situation is
particularly tense, family life goes on, with
its joys and sorrows, births, unresolved
conflicts, divorces and reconciliations.
Although violent death is common in this
world that has gone astray, spring follows
winter and the trees blossom anew.
Some ofyour characters are fanatics,
lam thinking ofthefundamentalistMichel
Sommo and the intellectual Alex Gideon
in Black Box. What do you think of
fanaticismf
I am a son of Jerusalem, which is the
womb and home of all the monotheistic
religions, a city where the devout live side
by side with unbelievers and where very
different communities live a few streets
away from each other. And so I've seen
fanaticism erupt in all its horror. I have
also seen fanaticism elsewhere, in other
forms and in other guises. I think fanati¬
cism is the supreme fascination that death
exerts on some people, an urge that com¬
pels them to give it and receive it.
The true fanatic is not content to sac¬
rifice his own life. He must destroy his
opponent first. He does not exist as a pri¬
vate individual; he is always representing
something, ready to sacrifice his family as
well as himself for a cause that must come
first. But it is not the "cause" that triggers
the fanatic's murderous deeds, but fanati¬
cism itself, which is a kind of disease.
"Great causes" come and go, but fanaticism
remains.
Think of the incredible changes that
have happened in what used to be the
countries of the communist bloc. We see
the dyed-in-the-wool communists of yes¬
terday become today's ultra-nationalists,
former anti-clerical militants impose strict
religious observance and vice versa. A few
decades before, in central and eastern
Europe, we saw former Nazis turn into
communist torturers. And they were not
only driven by opportunism. No matter
which ideology they were defending, they
showed the same enthusiasm and loyalty.
They were true fanatics, driven as much by
temperament as by choice.

I believe thatpeace and human happiness are more important than the
tragic options of the heroes ofAntiquity.
Alex Gideon, the hero of Black Box, is a
specialist in the human sciences who is doing
research into fanaticism at an American uni¬
versity institute. Like a researcher contam¬
inated by the virus he is trying to isolate
and fight in the laboratory, Gideon becomes
infected, in his relationship with his ex-wife,
with the virus he is working on. He becomes
self-absorbed, spiteful and vindictive.
In Knowing a Woman an Israeli secret
agent decides to retire after his wife mys¬
teriously dies and asks himselfpainful
questions about the meaning ofhis life. Is
this the work ofa moralist or an opportu¬
nity to say something about the human
condition?
In this novel I turned my attention to the
riddle in our fellow man, an enigma that is
not always where one might think it is. It
seems as if nothing is going on. I took the
spy out of the spy novel setting. My hero,
a secretive man and a loner, explores his
own past and that of his dead wife and
their daughter, an epileptic. Is he respon¬
sible for his wife's disappearance, his
daughter's affliction and the death of a col¬
league who took his place on a mission?
These questions are not answered, of
course. Death and loneliness are the main
characters in this book, which is a journey
of initiation towards self-knowledge. But
the ethical dimension is still there in the
form of theological questions about the
nature of good and evil, for example. Does
the Dostoyevskian framework of Crime
and Punishment still work? In real detec¬
tive novels the reader always ends up
finding out who the murderer and victim
are. In this one, the reader may be invited
to look into himself or herself.
These issues crop up again in Fima,
where the main character, whosepersonal
andsocial aspirations have been thwarted,
seeks refuge in the "thirdstate", the area in
which man comes face to face with eter¬
nity. Is this due to despair?
I conceived this book as a sort of theo¬
logical comedy. My character Fima is a
real schlemiel, the comic hero of Yiddish
folklore whose head is always in the clouds
and to whom the most incredible things
happen because he mixes up dreams and
reality. When Fima's father dies, bringing
to an end a long pdipal conflict, he takes
refuge in this third state. Like most people
who live in Jerusalem, Fima is also a kind
of minor prophet with his eyes on the stars,
in search of some mysterious revelation.
He is trying to find an improbable har¬
mony in which all the dissonances of real
life would melt into symphonic chords.
He would like to reconcile the irreconcil¬
able. Narcissistic, like so many intellec¬
tuals, he would like to be loved by every
woman and would like all women to love
each other through him. For Fima, the
third state is the place where there are no
more decisions to be made. He flees to a
distant, heavenly Jerusalem. He is a good
man who, alas, cannot manage to do any¬
thing good.
To him Jerusalem is burdened with a
guilt that he makes his own. Like Christ, he
takes on all the sins of the world. He feels
personally responsible for the intifada.
Like some of Chekhov's characters, he is
full of good intentions. If he can't manage
to translate them into deeds, it's because
circumstances are stronger than he is.
Your love forJerusalem is a recurrent
feature ofyour work. Areyou forJerusalem
what Svevo was for Trieste or Joyce for
Dublin?
I grew up in Jerusalem in a working-
class environment where each individual,
no matter how humble, was transformed
into a prophet or political scientist. Our
grocer rebutted Marx with arguments
taken from Hegel, and around the end of
the Second World War the milkman
wanted to put forward a detailed plan to
change the direction of British policy in
Palestine, which was then under the man¬
date. Later, my dentist, who came from
Russia and was a bit of a mythomaniac,
claimed to have known Stalin personally.
We kept open house and our neigh¬
bours came to talk to my parents about
Sartre and communism, America and our
chances of living in peace with our neigh¬
bours. Everyone argued in favour of his or
her positions and I, little more than a child,
thought they were all right, like Fima. I was
often driven to despair by the tragedies
caused by the fanaticism that repeatedly
caused bloodshed in our city. I was Fima,
but I was also the little guy with the
bicycle, the hero of my children's book
who rides through the city with his heart
full of bitterness and hope. "When you
can't cry any more, then laugh," my grand¬
mother used to tell me. That's why I have
faith in humour. When I was a child there
was one particular joke that I loved it
baffled me every time I heard it. Two men
arguing about which of them owns a piece
of goods ask a rabbi to say which of them
is the rightful owner. The rabbi listens to
the first man and then gives judgment in his
favour. Then he listens to the second man
and comes down on his side too. Back
home he tells the story to his wife, who
says, "How on earth could you have
decided that both of them were right?"
"Well, I guess you're right, too," he replies.
I think this story is still valid today.

Jerusalem has taught me about the
unfathomable depths of relativism, the
tragic dimensions of the human comedy
but also the comic aspects of that tragedy.
I have never seen a fanatic with a sense of
humour, and I have never seen anyone
with a sense of humour turn into a fanatic.
As a peace-loving Israeli novelist, the
highest reward I aspire to is the Nobel
Prize for medicine. I'll get it the day I
manage to put a sense of humour into cap¬
sules and administer it to people all over the
world so as to immunize them against
fanaticism. The elevator to the third state
will always be humour.
For decades you have been not only a
novelist but apeace activist as well. What
do you think of the latest developments?
With the mutual recognition of the
Israeli government and the PLO, and the
conclusion of the accords on the autonomy
of Gaza and Jericho, the illusion of a
"Greater Israel" has finally evaporated,
and so has the dream of those who wanted
to send the Jews back to their countries of
origin. However, in this historic autumn of
1 993 we have not yet reached the end of the
road. Let's say that today we are at the
"end of the beginning" together. Jew and
Arab, who are living on the same land, are
leaving behind them the memory of endless
suffering. After this beginning, punctu¬
ated by so many wars and so much suf¬
fering, we can see the first glimmer of hope.
But while the lucid, level-headed posi¬
tions of the Israeli and Arab peacemakers
are now inspiring the talks between the
Israeli government and PLO leaders, the
time for rejoicing has not yet come because
we are still steeped in mistrust and fear.
Waging war is difficult, but building peace
is just as arduous in a different way. Once
the foundations for understanding between
our two peoples are laid, mentalities must
change and peace must be made to reign in
these streets where the cries of extremists
can still be heard. It's possible. It has
already been done. The wars between
France and England went on for centuries,
not to mention the slaughter between the
Germans and the French. Today these peo¬
ples get along so well with each other that
they're building the European Community
together.
The mirage of total justice brings blind¬
ness, grief and death. I believe that peace
and human happiness are more important
than the tragic options of the heroes of
Antiquity. After turning our backs on fan¬
tasies that could never be achieved, we
have finally succeeded in talking to each
other face to face around the same table.
After all, the art of negotiation and com¬
promise is one of the great qualities of the
people of our region. Isn't it better to use
this art than to make war?
Today, at a time when the peace process
is under way, something paradoxical
between Israelis and Palestinians is
emerging the mistrust that stems from
love. Mistrust is the culmination of the
long struggle that has pitted our two peo¬
ples against one another because they both
love this blood- and tear-soaked land. Sev¬
eral decades of bitterness and frustration
have only made them more impatient and
heightened the temptation to say no. And
so we must make a tremendous effort to
clarify things in order to sow the seeds of
mutual acceptance and sharing in the minds
of everyone. The hostility that arises
between adversaries during the struggle
can be transformed into mutual respect
insofar as experience has taught them more
about each other and as long as the out¬
come safeguards the dignity of all.
