The inner adventure
by Olivier Mm
14
Near right,
Charles Darwin as
represented in a detail from
a fresco entitled Man,
Master of the Universe
(1934) by the Mexican
muralist Diego Rivera.
Far right, Der Wahnsinn
("Mental Illness"), a pen-
and-ink sketch that in 1913
was reproduced in the
review Imago, founded by
Freud.
OLIVIER MARC
is a French psychoanalyst.
He is the author of
Psychology of the House
(Thames and Hudson,
London, 1977), L'enfant qui
se fait naître (with Varenka
Marc; Buchet-Chastel, Paris,
1981) and Premiers dessins
d'enfants les tracés de la
mémoire (Nathan, Paris,
1992).
HOW far is science a product of the collec¬
tive expectation of its time? To what
extent does it foreshadow and express
the quintessence of a given moment of his¬
tory? Freud certainly was a man of his time.
He invented the human science that his epoch,
which had been convulsed by the Industrial
Revolution, was waiting for. He even antici¬
pated a need that had yet to make itself felt
the need to return human beings to the centre
of history and to the centre of their own selves
at a time when they were being made to feel
increasingly bewildered and irrelevant by the
technology they had created.
THE BIRTH OF PSYCHOANALYSIS
The concept of the unconscious was already in
the air at the time when Freud created psycho¬
analysis. But he was the man who brilliantly
exploited the idea, which until then had made
little headway beyond a closed circle of avant-
garde intellectuals and enthusiasts. Generally
speaking, the human sciences were then held in
low esteem. They aroused suspicions and
awakened old fears, justifiably, since they dealt
two massive blows to the self-image of the
generation that matured around the turn of the
century. The first blow fell in 1871 when
Charles Darwin published The Descent of
Man. Man was the species that had conquered
the world, that had produced Copernicus and
Galileo and the great minds of the Enlighten¬
ment, not to mention the many eminent scien¬
tists who appeared on the scene in the nine¬
teenth century. How could he be descended
from monkeys? It came as little consolation to
learn soon afterwards that the great apes were
not so much our fathers as our cousins.
Freud himself delivered the second blow
when he drew attention to the fact that homo
sapiens sapiens (man doubly-wise) had an
unconscious, and so could not even be consid¬
ered to possess self-mastery. Despite the resis¬
tance the idea aroused, Freud soon attracted
disciples. Carl Gustav Jung, Karl Abraham,
Ernest Jones, Sandor Ferenczi, Melanie Klein
and Otto Rank all joined his circle.
Freud launched humanity on a journey of
inner exploration that matched the contempo¬
rary discovery of the external world. At the
start of the new century, explorers were probing
virgin forests and frozen wastes, climbing the
highest summits and plumbing the depths of
the ocean. Edouard Branly was pioneering

techniques of long-distance communication;
Louis Blériot was embarking on the conquest
of the skies; Henry Ford was industrializing the
manufacture of automobiles.
Although psychoanalysis was at first
restricted to a small intellectual elite, it soon
started to affect a widening circle of people.
The first psychoanalytical society was founded
in Vienna, and the second in St. Petersburg, in
1906. Like other forms of associative activity,
the new discipline soon developed internal
conflicts, the first being that between Freud
and Jung, who in 1913 introduced new con¬
cepts derived from his studies of different cul¬
tures and from his clinical experience of psy¬
chosis. Jung's most important innovations
Das Wort
("The Word", oil on
cardboard, 1933), by the
Russian painter Alexey von
Jawlensky.
were the idea of the collective unconscious as
the common ground of humanity reflected in
every individual, and the notion of archetypes
giving rise to shared symbolic images.
The rise of Nazism and the Second World
War shifted the focus of psychoanalysis to
London and the English school. D.W. Winni-
cott, a paediatrician as well as an analyst, was
reputedly consulted by no less than 60,000
mothers and children in the course of a medical
career that ended only with his death. His
lengthy clinical experience with children
enabled him to bring fresh insights to a branch
of psychoanalysis that had already been firmly
established by Anna Freud and Melanie Klein.
More recently, Wilfred R. Bion, H. F. Searles, 15

16
1. Carl Gustav Jung
(1875-1961), Swiss
psychologist, was initially a
disciple of Freud's, although
their paths later diverged.
2. Anna Freud (1895-1982),
Freud's daughter, was a
specialist in the
psychoanalysis of children.
3. Jacques Lacan
(1901-1981) brought a
fresh approach to Freudian
theory in France.
4. Françoise Dolto
(1909-1988), French child
psychiatrist.
H. A. Rosenfeld and others have extended the
scope of psychoanalysis, which had been
employed by Freud only for the treatment of
neurosis, to that of psychosis also.
In France the psychoanalytical world has
been divided by repeated schisms, the most
important of which was brought about by
Jacques Lacan. But a particularly influential
figure there in recent years has undoubtedly
been Françoise Dolto, a psychoanalyst of chil¬
dren. It is by no means fortuitous that she
should have become a public figure, since it
had become high time to realize that the future
of society rests on the health of its young.
In less than a century, psychoanalysis has
had to contend with the racist and totalitarian
ideology of Nazism, as well as with Marxism-
Leninism, the most influential collectivist phi¬
losophy of all time. It was rejected by both, for
neither was prepared to permit the individual
to escape the net of its communal aims. Liberal
society, on the other hand, has proved rela¬
tively fertile ground, turning psychoanalysis
into an almost commonplace consumer
product. At one time in the United States,
almost everyone consulted a "shrink" at some
point in their lives. But that raised a problem:
how was a science devoted to the individual's
search for him- or herself, for what Jung called
individuation, to accommodate the demands
of the growing number of men, women and
children ready for its services?
PSYCHOANALYSIS
AND SOCIETY
Today, psychoanalysis plays three principal
social roles. It performs a clinical role that is
indispensable if it is both to meet the growing
needs of individuals and to maintain the exper¬
imental tradition needed to improve our
understanding of the human mind. It has a cul¬
tural function. Itself influenced from its early
days by ethnology and mythology, it has in
turn enriched all the human sciences, from
philosophy, psychology and the study of
teaching methods to ethnology, anthropology
and sociology.
Finally, it has an exploratory side. It too
must continually refer to the other sciences so
as not to become imprisoned in a theoretical
framework that would soon become arid and
ossified if it were not constantly put to the
test. The most innovatory currents in psycho¬
analysis today draw on animal ethology,
embryology and physics, whose laws can be
verified at every level of the organization of
matter, however complex this may be in the
case of the human mind.
Psychoanalysis is concerned with the indi¬
vidual and nothing else. It thereby respects the
principle of liberty and distances itself both
from certain psychiatric methods that have
been used in totalitarian countries to neutralize
freedom of thought and from such neurolog¬
ical procedures as electric shock treatment and
other therapeutic systems and the manipula¬
tory situations to which they have given rise.
From a psychoanalytical perspective, the
great threat to society today lies at the very
moment of birth. Reinforced by the power that
intensive care techniques now give them, doc¬
tors in general and obstetricians in particular
are in danger of forgetting that a new-born
baby has no real existence without its mother,
since it cannot achieve the status of an indepen¬
dent human being on its own, and that frequent
separation at too early an age can cause it more
harm even than physical infirmity.
Psychoanalysis has now acquired a body of
experimental knowledge that makes it possible
to define the periods and rhythms necessary for
the healthy development of the individual in the
first years of life. Animals know how to respect
the gestation periods that are indispensable to
the survival of their young. Guided by instinct,
mother animals know how to maintain the
rhythms proper to their species and to protect
their babies from the dangers around them.
Human mothers, however, face the threat of
losing their instincts and their protective
maternal role unless they are given support.
The modern world expects babies to per¬
form substantially beyond their capacities,
both physically and mentally. From the
moment of birth onwards, they are too often
treated like objects rather than beings with
special needs, and are forced to undergo
repeated trials by separation that they cannot
survive without damage to their health. The
number of cases of infant psychosis is
increasing, and so is the incidence of autism.
Men and women are social beings and,
paradoxical though it may seem, the process of
socialization has its roots in successfully coping
with separation. The most important task
facing psychoanalysis today is to show, by
warning and instruction, how the process of
separation, set in motion at birth and continued
first through weaning and then adolescence,
can best be weathered through respecting chil¬
dren's essential needs. Only by respecting the
needs of its children can modern society attain
the degree of civilization to which it aspires.
