HOW tO Say T by lime Amaáo lévy-Metisi
We must learn
to say T
in the first
person in a
profound
sense.
Kierkegaard
The Quest (acrylic, 1990)
by the French artist Sylvie
Sémavoine.
* In From the History ofan
Infantile Neurosis (1918).
THE neurotic's confusion with respect to
relationships has been neatly summed up
by Jacques Lacan and Françoise Dolto in
these two phrases: "Who is speaking to
whom?" and "At the start of an analysis, it is
not the neurotic who is speaking, and he is not
speaking to the analyst." The situation could be
described as one of multiple neurosis. Neu¬
rotics are a channel and a blocked channel at
that for fantasies which are initially not so
much of their own making as socio-culturally
determined. Their self is made up of various ill-
coordinated vectors built in to the conflicts that
eventually led them to enter analysis. Neuroses
never occur in the singular. There is, rather, a
nexus of intertwining patterns in which various
individualities can be discerned. These individ¬
ualities may be artificially linked or separated.
The significance of each intersects with that of
all the others without really shedding light on
them; indeed, through an infinite process of
interpénétration they may sometimes even
conceal one another. In such cases the neurotic
material may be likened to a riddle. Freud him¬
self compared dreams to riddles; and before
him the Talmud had stated that a dream not
interpreted is a letter left unread.
THE EMERGENCE OF THE SELF
The neurotic message is a coalition of different
elements. Patients, unaware of this multi¬
plicity, cannot separate the parts. Eugène
Minkowski cites a schizophrenic who was in
the habit of referring to himself in the third
person, but he was an extreme case. Ordinary
neurotics conjugate verbs correctly. They
learned language in the usual way, with "me",
then "I", being used to. replace the first name
very early on. On the face of it at least, neu¬
rotics are grammatically normal.
However, their individuality is disguised by
the masks of their desire to be someone else.
During a model course of treatment, the self
will travel back to earlier states of mind and
rediscover the moment when its future devel¬
opment was set, perhaps even precisely enough
to put a date to it. Sometimes, as in the case of
the Wolf Man described by Freud, ::" the
symptom relates to an incident that occurred in
the individual's prehistory, before the develop¬
ment of memory. The patient's individuality
will only emerge after his or her history has
been pieced together and he or she has accepted
that history. The patient will then no longer use
the word "I" in a stereotyped sense, as though
it referred to someone else. Instead, uttering it
will incorporate an acceptance of his or her
stages of development, even including their
ambivalence.
But there is no straightforward fairy-tale
happy end, with people getting married and
having lots of children. The degree of success
or failure achieved by psychoanalytical treat¬
ment can vary widely. The term "post-analyt¬
ical Parkinson's disease" has been coined to
describe the renewed tension that some
patients experience once they have emerged
(or think they have emerged) from their mul¬
tiple neuroses. They look singularly strange in
their new clothes. Perhaps they were right to
fear this fresh apparel, like Diderot lamenting
the loss of his old dressing gown, or like
Kierkegaard trying to establish what Repeti¬
tion may be, somewhere between memory and
hope: "Hope is a brand-new piece of clothing,
stiff and uncomfortable; but as one has never
worn it before one does not know if it will fit,
or suit one." Kierkegaard felt that people only
really feel at ease with repetition, "a garment
that never wears out", ancf is "neither too tight
nor too loose."
The pitfall awaiting those emerging from a
more or less successful course of psychoanalyt¬
ical treatment and the results always fall into 17

The Mask (coloured pencil
on paper, 1991) by the
French artist Denise
Fernandez Grundman.
18
ELIANE AMADO
LÉVY-VALENSI,
of Israel, is the author of
many works on philosophy
and psychoanalysis over
300 articles and 16 books,
including La névrose plurielle
(Aubier, Paris, 1992).
the category of "more or less" is to believe
that their individuality has been made to
emerge, cleansed of its previous phantasms like
a well-scoured saucepan. The emergence of
individuality is not an illusion, but it may
become one if it is treated as a kind of object,
encysted within its defining parameters and
alienated on the threshold of liberation.
Anyone who uses the word "emergence"
should not concentrate on what has "emerged"
but try to restore to the resultant mental states
the momentum that brought them to the sur¬
face. Karl Jaspers said that everything hinged
on the "sum of time" understood in the fullness
of its three terms: past, present and future.
THE CULTURAL CONTEXT
But while the emergence of individuality can
be grasped within the prism of psychoanalysis,
it also owes a great deal to ethics, religion, the
economy and social and political integration.
Psychoanalysis must not be reductive, not
become the exclusive dogma it has so often
been accused of being. No one theme should
be stressed above the others when all are
involved in the emergence. The individuality
that emerges entails even demands a multi-
disciplinary approach, which is constantly
shifting and can at best only be (no pun
intended) approached rather than arrived at
with any degree of finality. The psychoanalyt¬
ical process differs qualitatively and quantita¬
tively in each individual case-history.
That is very obvious in Israel, where an
immigrant from Ethiopia cannot be analysed
in the same way as an elderly patient of
Russian origin. In France too, a psychoanalyst
cannot use the same language to young
workers that he or she would use with stu¬
dents (as I discovered in one of my most mem¬
orable professional encounters). In each case
individuality takes a very different path towards
its own reality. I remember being very struck, at
a psychoanalytical symposium on reality, by the
evanescent, elusive quality of reality. My feeling
is that reality is not a state that can be described,
or a series of states that can be recorded, so
much as something that, to borrow a Hebrew
saying as old as Genesis itself, is always in the
making. In this sense, the emergence of individ¬
uality is an action plan, a project, the taking in
hand of a story whose aim is the winning of its
own freedom, which alone can redeem it. It is a
time that has to be set in motion once more.
"The wind is rising, we must try to live,"
wrote Valéry in Le Cimetière Marin. But such
an attempt implies the mobilization of all the
agencies that make us up. Viktor Frankl, who
accepted Freud's discoveries in their entirety,
rightly added other dimensions to them in his
book The Unconscious God: psychotherapy
and theology in which he superimposed on the
repressed instinctual impulses of Freudian
theory the repressed impulses of the spiritual,
which are equally necessary to the emergence
and fulfilment of the individual. The relative
importance of one or other form of repression
will vary in different cases at different stages of
treatment to create an infinite number of com¬
binations, with every possible form of stop
and start along the way.
Perhaps the world of politics provides an
example of these stops ana starts. The message
lies in receptiveness to other people, always
granted that receptiveness is not unconditional.
Ultimately, relating is the important thing.
RELATIONS
WITH OTHERS
It would be impossible to reach a conclusive
approach (we must be wary of talking about
conclusions) without looking again at the "I"

which is constructed in childhood, and which
needs to be conjugated in the first person "in a
profound sense". If one did no more than say
"I", the result would be the emergence of a nar¬
cissistic, even autistic, individuality. The dia¬
logues of the deaf that ensue are striking evi¬
dence of this on the cultural level. In fact the



emergence has no meaning except in terms of
relationships with others. To say "I" to oneself
in a profound sense entails bringing together all
the persons involved: the "He", even when
absent, the "We" of latent solidarity and, most
fundamentally, the "Thou" which reveals me to
myself.
Perhaps Martin Buber's book I and Thou is
relevant here. The world, Buber writes, is not a
divine game, but a divine destiny. Pure rela¬
tionships generate absolute. dependency and
the fulfilment of a freedom which, by bringing
together creator and created, provides a foun¬
dation for humankind's creativity by associ¬
ating it indissolubly with love. Buber locates
human relationships the I and the Thou in
the transcendence of all that pertains to them.
He is even prepared to state that we have
always known we needed God, but that "God
needs you to give your life its meaning specifi¬
cally through your agency."
Conditioned as we are by all the factors that
make up a culture, or alienated by some of
them and by all the wrong choices and repres¬
sions they entail, we can see that psycho¬
analysis is an astonishing key with which to
open sealed doors. But there are a hundred
other doors to the magic palace that shelters the
newly-emerged, or new-born, individual iden¬
tity. Those who think they have arrived after
going through the first door are mistaken.
Multiplicity (charcoal on
paper, 1932) by the French
artist and writer Francis
Picabia (1879-1953).
19
