A neiv vievr of the ooan
by Ian S. Robinson
Satetthe (KeanogropAy is aiding a new
dimension fo studies 


of the g/oba/ env/ronmenf
andtlimale
Wêx'
F.^v
34
ALTHOUGH it occupies more than 70 per
cent of the world's surface, the ocean is
the least explored part of Planet Earth.
The recent development of Earth-orbiting
satellites to observe the sea surface has pro¬
vided oceanographers with a powerful tool for
gaining a new view of the ocean.
Satellite oceanography began in earnest in
1978 when three satellites Tiros, Nimbus 7
and Seasat were launched, each with instru¬
ments suitable for ocean monitoring. The first
two were primarily meteorological satellites,
but Seasat was dedicated to marine remote sens¬
ing and carried all-weather microwave sensors.
Previously restricted to observations from
buoys and ships, oceanographers now have the
additional ability of monitoring the sea surface
from above. As a result some fascinating new
features of the sea have been revealed. More
significantly, marine scientists can now make
suitable measurements to understand how the
ocean affects the global environment and climate.
THE SATELLITE PLUS FACTOR
There are three ways in which data from satel¬
lites provide what more conventional observa¬
tional methods cannot:
(i) They provide global information (data-sets)
from a single sensor repeated over several
years. To monitor changes in the world ocean
by other means would require an unacceptably
large array of in situ instruments,
(ii) They provide an instantaneous, synoptic
view across a wide area of the sea surface.
Because the sea is ceaselessly changing, stan¬
dard ship surveying methods fail to reveal the
true instantaneous distribution of ocean
variables (such as temperature),
(iii) There are some types of measurements,
such as surface roughness patterns, which
cannot at present be made by methods other
than remote sensing.
Four basic properties of the sea can be mea¬
sured in this way: surface roughness, slope
(typically a few centimetres per 100 kilo
metres), temperature and colour. The first three
all relate to the surface itself, whilst the colour
detected is that of the upper few metres.
Since 1978 the techniques of satellite ocean¬
ography have steadily improved until now
they play an important part in océanographie
programmes. Oceanographers have developed
techniques by means of which more useful
océanographie variables can be derived from
the four basic primary measurements.
A fundamental aspect of remote sensing is to
infer subsurface conditions from the effect they
have on the electromagnetic radiation leaving
or reflected from the sea surface. To do so
requires an understanding of physical processes
occurring in the upper ocean.
For example, ocean colour measured from
satellites is not directly very useful, but some of
the factors that affect the colour are important.
Chlorophyll associated with phytoplankton in
the water affects the green/blue ratio. Thus by a
combination of theoretical insights and care¬
fully planned calibration experiments it has
been possible to derive procedures for interpret¬
ing ocean colour in terms of chlorophyll in the
top few metres of the sea. Similarly, but with
less confidence, colour can be related to the
suspended sediment load in the water, and in
shallow water it can be related to sea depth.
THE ALL-IMPORTANT SENSORS
Several different types of sensor are used to
monitor the ocean from space, employing elec¬
tromagnetic radiation in the visible, thermal
infrared and microwave parts of the spectrum
to transmit information about the sea to the
satellite.
Some of the sensors carried by océan¬
ographie satellites are passive radiometers
which detect the natural emission of radiation
from the sea, or reflected sunlight. Others are
active devices radars which emit their own
microwave radiation.
A synthetic aperture radar (SAR), for
example, generates an image whose brightness
mi
^^^i^B
*¡';:'íVaS
m
Seasat A, an ocean-scanning
satellite that can provide
information for weather
forecasts, chart ice fields,
measure ocean currents and
tides, and detect and
measure waves.

corresponds to the amount of microwave
energy reflected back from the sea surface. This
is controlled entirely by the sea surface condi¬
tions; its roughness, orientation, electrical pro¬
perties and motion. The microwaves cannot
penetrate more than a few millimetres below
the surface, and yet radar images can reveal in
great detail the patterns of features such as
internal waves or even the sea bed topography
at depths 


of many metres.
The altimeter is another exciting radar in¬
strument which can measure the height of the
sea surface, and hence its slope, to an accuracy
of a few centimetres. This means that through
altimetry the variability of ocean currents can
be detected on a global basis and that the
magnitude of ocean eddies can be measured
across wide expanses of inhospitable sea such as
the Southern Ocean.
Height is measured by timing the pulse on
its journey from the satellite to the sea and back.
If the shape of the returned pulse is examined,
the roughness of the sea can be deduced. The
altimeter is therefore an all-weather monitor of
significant wave height, a parameter of consid¬
erable importance to navigation.
The scatterometer is a radar which views
wider expanses of sea. The average strength of
the microwaves scattered back from the surface
to an oblique-viewing radar is a measure of sea
roughness caused by wind. Consequently the
sensor can measure surface winds across wide
sea areas untouched by weather ships or ships
of passage. Weather forecasts can be improved
by incorporating such data into weather-pre¬
dicting models. This and other radars can also
be used to detect the edge of the polar ice
sheets, and their seasonal variation.
Despite problems caused by cloud cover,
sensors which measure the infrared radiation
emitted by the sea can yield images of the sea
surface temperature (SST). Oceanographers use
this data in many ways, for example, to
monitor turbulent eddies in the ocean or fronts
between water masses of different tempera¬
tures. In shallow seas the temperature can
reveal plumes of river outflows, or distinctive
coastal zones of water which do not seem to
disperse offshore and may serve as a marker for
the locations of schools of fish.
Thus satellites are capable of monitoring sur¬
face winds, ocean waves, sea surface tempera¬
ture, ocean primary production (such as 35

phytoplankton) and the extent 


of the polar ice
sheets. This they can do not just once, not only
near-instantaneously, but repeatedly over
several years and potentially over several
decades. This type of information is a vital
component of the knowledge required by those
seeking to understand and predict global cli¬
mate change.
The ocean is an integral part of the global
heat engine which drives the weather. Satellites
combined with ship and buoy measurements
promise improved ways of estimating the flux
of heat, water and momentum between the
atmosphere and the ocean. They make feasible
the initiation of global programmes to evaluate
the contribution of the oceans to the climate
system of the world, such as the World Ocean
Circulation Experiment.
SATELLITES BRING
HIGH HOPES
Assuming the data from these programmes are
made available, they will benefit marine scien¬
tists in all parts of the world. In regional and
local seas, remote sensing provides a unique
approach to monitoring the environment for
the management of living resources, fishing,
navigation and coastal erosion. It will become
relatively inexpensive to develop local and
regional programmes for purposes such as fore
casting sea conditions, monitoring pollution or
performing bathymétrie surveys.
Every maritime nation will thus have access
to valuable information needed for manage¬
ment of that part of the ocean that comprises its
Exclusive Economic Zone and need no longer
be hindered by shortages of expensive research
vessels and instrumentation. These will still be
needed, but the value of limited marine
research facilities can be multiplied by the addi¬
tion of satellite data.
Furthermore, marine scientists working in
hitherto isolated areas will be enabled to make
their own unique contribution to the "big
science" programmes of climate change, since
the nature of remote sensing is to provide the
wide-scale perspective which can integrate local
process studies into a global framework.
This optimistic scenario, in which remote
sensing fosters international collaboration in
marine science, will only be possible if ocean¬
ographers have the training in Space Ocean¬
ography necessary for them to process, analyse,
integrate and apply the colossal output of
marine data now beginning to flow from satel¬
lites. With this in mind, UNESCO has developed
a computer-based learning package on analysis
of marine image data, designed for students of
marine and environmental science and manage¬
ment (see opposite page).
36
