ThevalkySOftheNiger byJeanDevisse
Flowing some 4,200 kilometres
through a drainage basin which
covers over a million square kilome¬
tres and whose ramifications extend into
at least nine countries, the Niger is Africa's
third longest river. Although some of the
cultures that developed in this vast region
are as old as those of the Nile valley they
are undeservedlylittle-known. In recent
years, however, they have begun to be
studied scientifically, and archaeological
excavations have brought to light new infor¬
mation that has enabled scholars to recon
struct part of the rich past that slumbers
here in the earth ofAfrica.
The Africans of the Niger basin, like
people in many other parts of the world,
wanted to make sure their ancestors'
remains were respected. Like the tombs of
the Etruscans, the kurgans of Ukraine, the
mastabas ofEgypt and the vast cemeteries
ofNapata in the Sudan, these burial places
faithfully conserve the memory of the past.
The remains ofhouses of unbaked earth
that were built hundreds and in some cases
thousands of years ago also contain keys
40
that can help to unlock the past. Large
quantities of pottery, ceramics and metal
objects will provide eloquent testimony, as
long as they are treated carefully and sci¬
entifically.
Archaeological and historical research
is a late-comer to this part of the world.
Much has been achieved in the last twenty
years, but an enormous amount of work
still needs to be done. In addition to
funding, such research requires above all
boundless patience and respect on the part
of scholars. It is imperative that archaeo¬
logical investigation should not be jeopar¬
dized by wanton violation of the ancient
tombs and that the stratigraphy of village
and urban ruins should not be destroyed by
profit-seekers hunting for trophies or arte¬
facts to sell on the market.
This does not mean clamping down on
the trade in works of art by pitting
researchers against dealers, but trying to
make people understand, recognize and
respect the priorities of research. What is at
stake is the opportunity to discover intact
precious evidence of the Niger basin's past.
In the last three years, a team of French
andAfrican researchers has been preparing
a major travelling exhibition to present this
immensely rich heritage which is over 5,000
years old. The exhibition can be seen in
Paris, its first port of call, from October 1 993
until lanuary 1994.
It is divided into ten "sequences", the
themes ofwhich are described below. First of
all there is a brief visual introduction,
including maps and chronological tables, to
the countries concerned, and an explana¬
tion of the approach adopted by the orga¬
nizers. Then visitors are taken along the
course of the river, from its sources to its
delta.
1 - The valleys ofthe upper Niger were
the cradle of a great power that flourished
between the thirteenth and seventeenth cen¬
turies that ofMali and an areawhere kola,
gold and rice were produced in ancient times.
2 - Iron, which played a vital part in the
growth and hierarchical development of
societies in the Niger basin, appeared as
early as the second half of the last millen¬
nium of the pre-Christian era in Nigeria
and perhaps a thousand years earlier in
Large figure of a horseman
(between 3rd and 1 0th
centuries) originating from
Bura (Niger).

Ténéré. It was produced and worked almost
everywhere by the beginning of the Chris¬
tian era.
3 - The inland delta is a vast area to
which floods bring an annual increment of
silt. lust as ancient Egypt was described as
"a gift of the Nile", this vast inundation is a
"gift of the Niger", but it did not give rise to
a centralizing power such as that which
developed in Egypt as early as the fifth mil¬
lennium B.C. On the contrary, the high
waters isolated groups of people who took
refuge on small islands known as togué. The
remains of an ancient settlement, lenné
leño, have been found and partially exca¬
vated on some of the most remarkable togué
near the city of lenné in Mali. Between eight
and nine centuries older than the existing
city, lenné leño has been included on
Unesco's World Heritage List. The delta has
been inhabited for at least 5,000 years, and
only a fraction of the vestiges of its past
have yet been unearthed. It is the area most
threatened by looting.
4 - It has often been thought and
written that Sudanese architecture, as dis¬
played in many mosques old and new, did
not appear until the fourteenth century.
However, its roots go back much further.
5 - Gold, which was produced, traded
and minted into coins "in the north", was
considered locally to be less precious than
copper.
6 - Northwards, beyond the ridge of
Wagadu (the ancient empire ofGhana), lay
the trade routes of Mauritania; to the west
was the basin of the Senegal River. Major
discoveries from Kumbi Saleh, the capital of
Wagadu, are presented, as well as a model
of the splendid mosque (10th-15th cen¬
turies).
7 - Some seven or eight thousand years
ago, a huge network of rivers flowed down
from the north to the left bank of the Niger
Bronze statuette of a
horseman (between
ISthand 18th
centuries) from the
ancient kingdom of
Benin (Nigeria).
between the Tropic ofCancer and the Niger
Bend. Today it no longer exists, but traces of
human activity have survived in what are
now dry valleys. One extraordinary example
is a tomb at Iwelen (Niger), which dates
from the middle of the eighth century A.D.
8 - Perhaps the most unexpected and
spectacular of the ten sequences is that
devoted tofunerary practices. It features var¬
ious forms of inhumation in earthenware
jars (Mali, Burkina Faso), funerary steles,
mass graves (Tellern du Mali) and a remark¬
able "village of the dead" unearthed in Niger.
9 - The coppersequence follows those
devoted to gold and iron. The quality and
complexity of copper-working techniques
as well as the ramifications of the copper
market are illustrated.
10 - Exceptional coverage is given to
the valleys ofthe lowerNigeria Nigeria, the
cradle of Nok art (remarkable both for its
Head of an
anthropomorphic
terra-cotta figure from
Jemaa (Nigeria).
JEAN DEVISSE,
of France, is professor
emeritus of African history
at the University of Paris I
and rapporteur of the
International Scientific
Committee for the
publication of Unesco's
General History ofAfrica.
He is commissioner-
general of the exhibition
on the Niger basin
described in the present
article.
longevity it was produced for more than a
thousand years and for its diversity) and
the sophisticated art of Ife and Benin. Also
displayed are treasures discovered during
excavations near Igbo Ukwu, which are
quite different from anything previously
discovered.
The exhibition ends in a music room
where visitors can admire the landscapes,
art and current activities of the Niger basin
while listening to African music.
The exhibition is co-organized by
Burkina Faso, France, Guinea, Mali, Mauri¬
tania, Niger and Nigeria, with an impor¬
tant contribution from the Netherlands. It
will travel from Paris to other cities begin¬
ning with Leiden (the Netherlands) and
probably Philadelphia (United States) in
spring and summer 1994. It will then be
shown in Bamako (Mali) from October to
December 1994, Ouagadougou (Burkina
Faso) from lanuary to March 1995, Lagos
(Nigeria) from April to June 1995, Niamey
(Niger) from July to September 1995, Nouak¬
chott (Mauritania) from October to
December 1995 and Conakry (Guinea) from
January to March 1996.
A richly illustrated book describes each
sequence of the exhibition and sets it in its
context, presents the findings of the past
twenty years of research, and outlines the
new directions being taken by current inves¬
tigations. The exhibition is to be presented
in condensed form on panels that will be
sent to each of the co-organizing countries,
so that it can reach schoolchildren and rural
populations far from the capitals where it
will be displayed.
In Paris the exhibition (entitled Vallées du
Niger) can be seen from 14 October 1993 to 10
January 1994 at the Musée National des Arts
d'Afrique et d'Océanie (National Museum of
African and Oceanic Arts), 293 Avenue
Daumesnil, 75012 (tel: 44 74 84 80). 41
