The shadow of oppression
by Tariq Banuri
Camp Followers (1926),
oil on canvas
(81 x 95.5 cm), by the
Mexican painter
José Clemente Orozco.
IF the world were a single country, it would
be a "third world" country. Reduced to
scale, the aggregate economic, social and
environmental characteristics of the whole world
are the same as those of a typical third world
country. The inequality of wealth, consump¬
tion and power, the diversity of cultures, reli¬
gions and languages and the degree and nature
of conflicts over these differences, the diversity
of genes and species and the rates at which they
are being extinguished where can one find
these today but in the South?
But the parallel runs deeper than levels of
inequality, diversity or violence. There is what
may be called an absence of a collective com¬
munity. Just as there is no such thing as a global
community, in southern societies there is no
such thing as a national community. Think about
a reduction in global consumption levels to
accommodate the environmental crisis, and ask M. ¡S

The Motor ( 1 9 1 8), oil on
canvas (135 x 118 cm) by
Fernand Léger.
whether there can be a general agreement over
whose consumption ought to be sacrificed.
Should the poor die to enable the rich to live in
the style they have been accustomed to, or
should the rich give up centuries of progress
and revert to what they might view as a sub¬
human form of consumption in order to let the
poor survive? It is relatively easy to answer this
question within the national boundaries of
northern societies, but very difficult to do so at
the global level.
Thus the question "can the North and South
share the same idea of progress?" can be refor¬
mulated more simply as "can the population of
a southern country share the same idea of
progress or have any idea of progress at all?"
In other words, instead of looking for a con¬
sensus between the North and the South, let us
begin by looking at how the basis for consensus
in the South differs from that in the North.
A concept that continues to possess deep res¬
onance is colonialism. It is possible to portray the
conflict over progress as one between two con¬
trasting attitudes towards colonialism. This con¬
flict squares off the (unconscious) champions or
24
legitimizers of colonialism against its critics. Half
a century after the supposed demise of colonial
rule, these two strands have not moved towards
a synthesis. On the contrary, one can sense
already the distant rumblings of a revival of colo¬
nialism, first within the South itself, and later
across the globe. There is a grave danger that
from the standpoint of history the second half of
the twentieth century will appear as but a brief
interruption in the long march of colonial rule.
One can be somewhat polemical here. It
seems that while the discussion of progress solely
in terms of outcomes is legitimate in the North
(presumably because there is a consensus over
institutions and processes, the so-called end of his¬
tory), this is not possible in the South, where
there is a continuing history of powerlessness
and injustice. If this is so, then the overall objec¬
tive of progress (growth, conservation) may be
less important in the South than the mechanism
through which the objective is to be achieved. It
may make sense in the North to formulate theo¬
ries of salvation (which, in the words of Ashis
Nandy, "do not save, but only justify action in the
present"), but understanding in the South cannot
begin without a theory of oppression.
In other words, the legitimacy of the idea of
"progress " in large parts of the southern popu¬
lation would depend on our ability to formulate
it, to use Nandy's words again, in terms of "the



expansion of the awareness of oppression". In
general, neither the North nor the elites of the
South have defined progress in this manner.
This was most evident in the discussions of
the United Nations Conference on Environ¬
ment and Development (UNCED), which was
itself a major attempt to define a shared idea of
progress in the face of impending catastrophe.
The North viewed itself as Noah building an
Ark to defend us from the deluge; the South
saw itself as Jesus being sacrificed on the cross
for the sins of humanity. The North sought to
focus on technology and organization, the South
on politics and injustice. The story of UNCED
is meaningless to one who sees only the shaping
of a piece of wood but not whether it will bear
the weight of Noah or of Jesus. E3
"*" sssa
TARIQ BANURI
is a Pakistani writer and journalist.
