An appeal for non-violence
In one part of the world the school year is beginning. In others it is already underway. But sadly,
for millions of children the school year docs not exist. It is this that I have in mind when I call upon
all those who arc responsible, in one way or another, for shaping young minds.
The role of educators, which has always been important for society and its development, is today
fundamental. The future evolution of the human community depends to a great extent on them and
their work with the young all over the world. Will the human community sink deeper into violence,
which is the expression of racism, xenophobia, intolerance, fanaticism and hate, and which in turn
engenders more violence? Or will it realize the danger of turning these tendencies into everyday
facts of life and react by taking advantage of every opportunity tor building a culture of peace,
including the important opportunity offered by children?
Children, young people in general, are the first victims of violence. Victims in the literal sense
because their bodies and hearts are hurt by the consequences of blind conflicts; victims in the fig¬
urative sense because their only entertainment is to be found in the violence universally pre¬
sented on screens of all kinds.
Many young people are vaguely aware of the destructive consequences of aggressive behaviour.
Many admire, if we know how to present them, the great world figures of non-violence and peace
Gandhi and Martin Luther King, to name but two. Manv (all in my opinion) are naturall v inclined
to be generous and open, and to share with others who are suffering or who are different if we explain
to them that suffering or that difference.
It would be irresponsible not to seize upon this awareness of danger, this capacity to identify
with heroes, this natural generosity. It would be irresponsible not to move quickly, for events are
providing us each week with a host of bad examples. Yes to difference, yes to firmness and perse¬
verance. No to violence. Yes to the force of reason. No to the reason of force.
That is why I invite all those in charge of educating and taking care of children parents, teachers,
youth leaders, those who design leisure activities for young people, organizers of youth movements
and activities to emphasize in their work the values of dialogue, sharing, respect for others and
solidarity in order to build in the minds of tomorrow's citizens the solid foundations of a culture
of peace.
Federico Mayor
Director-General of UNESCO
Paris, 8 September 1993
19
