BOOKS OF THE WORLD
A voyage through
European
literature
by Edgar Reichmann
Lettres
eennes
HISTOIRE DE LA LITTERATURE EUROPEENNE
The recent publication of a 1 ,025 -page
illustrated Histoire de la littérature
européenne ("History of European
Literature") is an event that marks the con¬
clusion of an ambitious enterprise. The
editors and contributors faced a threefold
challenge to avoid becoming the pris¬
oners of a reductive Eurocentrism and
neglecting to take account ofwhat Europe
has inherited from other parts of the world;
to prevent their work from becoming a
vast catalogue in which European litera¬
ture is compartmentalized into linguistic
and national traditions; and to identify,
on the threshold of the third millennium,
and after the failure of the great ideolo¬
gies that have marked our century, any
new trends that may be developing to fill
the void these ideologies have left behind.
A MANY-FACETED LITERATURE
The History is the work of a team of 150
university teachers from all over Europe. It
shows that, while Europe has many dif¬
ferent literary traditions, there is never¬
theless a single European literature. The
editors, literary historians Annick Benoit-
Dusausoy and Guy Fontaine, describe the
contacts between Europe and the rest of
the world that encouraged the circulation
ofpeople and ideas and the movements of
peoples over the centuries. They rightly
remind us thatAsia and the Mediterranean
coast ofAfrica, the cradles of our civiliza¬
tion, have, together with the early Greek
myths, left an indelible imprint on Euro¬
pean literature past and present.
Via Spain, Arab poets influenced the
troubadours of Provence, while Asia
bequeathed to Europe a spirit of oriental
refinement. In the inter-war years Africa
south of the Sahara contributed to the dis¬
covery by European avant-gardes ofa new
view of reality. India and China, the Malay
archipelago and Oceania, mysterious
islands and deserts of fire and ice, all exer¬
cised their fascination on writers as varied
as Kipling, Rimbaud, Malraux, Daniel
Defoe, Jules Verne and the Polish-born
English novelist Joseph Conrad. More
recently such important figures as the
Q
J
¡V
B
C
Cj
H
Senegalese Leopold Sédar Senghor, the
West Indian René Depestre, Trinidad-born
VS. Naipaul, the South African André
Brink, Alejo Carpentier ofCuba, Tahar Ben
Jalloun from North Africa, Argentina's Jorge
Luis Borges and Isaac Bashevis Singer, an
American of Jewish extraction, have all
helped renew the European heritage
without turning their back on their own
traditions. By its very conception, the work
avoids the trap of isolationism.
A WORK OF CULTURAL SYNTHESIS
The authors also deserve praise for having
produced both a reference book and an
exercise in cultural synthesis. Authors and
their works are not listed alphabetically
according to their geographical affilia¬
tions. Instead the reader can trace the
Histoire de la littérature européenne
("History of European Literature"), edited
by Annick Benoit-Dusausoy and Guy
Fontaine, published by Hachette-Éducation,
Paris, 1,025 pp., complete with index and
bibliography.
development and mutual influence of the
Graeco-Latin, Judaeo-Christian, Byzan¬
tine and Nordic minds as expressed in lit¬
erature, up to the philosophy of the
Enlightenment and the collapse of the
ideologies that have stained our century
with blood. While exploring the principal
literary genres and trends, the reader
covers a vertiginous range of thought and
creativity.
The scholars who have told this fasci¬
nating story also set themselves the 79

B00K5 OF THE WORLD
80
daunting task of relating important Euro¬
pean authors to other cultures, in some
cases geographically and chronologically
remote.
While Swift, Rabelais, Molière, Racine,
Cervantes, Chekhov, Proust and Kafka are
known all over the world, authors writing
in less widely-used languages are much
less familiar. It is true that good transla¬
tions of the Albanian Ismail Kadaré, the
Portuguese poet Fernando Pessoa and the
Czech novelist Milan Kundera have made
these authors well-known, and the essayist
E.M. Cioran and the dramatist Eugène
Ionesco, Romanians who have longwritten
in French, are equally celebrated. But the
fine Greek poet Constantine Cavafy, the
Polish 'novelist Tadeusz Konwicki, who
draws his inspiration from his Lithuanian
ancestors, or the late Danilo Kis, a Mon¬
tenegrin Jew who wrote in Serbian and
described metaphorically the similarity
of all forms of totalitarianism, are little-
read by speakers of the world's main lan¬
guages. The extraordinary diversity of
these literatures still remains largely unrec¬
ognized, as are their points ofconvergence
amid the infinite reflections of a unique,
multi-faceted reality. The authors of this
splendid work have brilliantly recon¬
structed the harmonious links between
different literatures as revealed in unex¬
pected and hidden convergences.
UNVEILING NEW TRENDS
What of the future ofEuropean literature?
The debate about post-modernism
opened in France by Jean-François
Lyotard's work La Condition post-mod-
erne ("The Post-Modem Condition", 1979)
is still continuing in the universities. But
the avant-garde and the nouveau roman
have run out of steam, socialist realism is
long dead, and those works that expressed
opposition to dictatorial regimes have lost
their raison d'être with the collapse of the
dictatorships, which has also put paid to
the old "official" literatures. Meanwhile,
the freedom suddenly accorded authors of
the former Eastern bloc to write what they
want has left them shell-shocked.
In the West narrative seems to be
coming back into vogue, and with it a
renewal of the attractions of classic story¬
telling, blending realism, magical realism,
folk- tale and myth. Historical novels and
works that dramatize real-life events are
both making something of a comeback.
Meanwhile, poetry refuses to fit into any
fixed category and goes its own way. Poets
cannot breathe when confronted by
tyrants' rules and regulations; they can
only flourish when they can get to grips
with words in an atmosphere of creative
freedom. However, it remains to be seen
which of today's movements and trends
posterity will remember.
