Unesco
and the human genome
UNESCO is taking part in the ambitious interna- excluded from the latest advances in science and tech-
tional Human Genome Project, within the limits nology. As a result, it is preyed upon by unscrupulous
of its resources and in keeping with its intellec- enterprises, which set a tremendous price on the trickle
tual vocation. Through the meetings it organizes or of high technology they provide. There is also a danger
assists, the workshops it runs and the training courses that the poor countries will be left out of the ethical
it helps to finance, it is pursuing a threefold aim under debate that is going on in the developed countries,
this project: that of encouraging collaboration and Should they be victims of this twofold discrimination?
international co-ordination, promoting the participa- The answer to this question is no. UNESCO will do all
tion of Third World countries, and stimulating debate it can to see that they are invited to every event where
on the project's many implications, notably in the sharing, exchange and debate go on.
sphere of ethics. Bearing in mind the manifold social and moral impli-
One of the tasks entrusted to UNESCO by the inter- cations of the uses to which findings in genetics and in
national community after the Second World War was to the biomedical sciences as a whole can be put, we have
contribute to the production, dissemination and exchange entered into fruitful collaboration in the bioethical
of knowledge. This role of intellectual co-operation has sphere with fellow members of the United Nations
been confirmed and reasserted on many occasions, and system and other international organizations, associa-
againquiterecently.lt would seem that in the turmoil left tions and research institutes in order to clarify and
behind by the collapse of our accustomed geopolitical, map out a complex and rapidly expanding field,
ideological and philosophical systems, the nations are I have decided to carry out broad consultations on
seeking mental landmarks which can only be identified bioethics among scientists (specialists in the life sci-
through continual intellectual dialogue. enees and the social and human sciences), jurists and
UNESCO is the only institution of the United Nations philosophers from very varied cultural backgrounds. An
system to include science as such among its fields of international bioethics committee may, I hope, even-
competence. This being so, it is responsible for con- tually emerge, and its many duties would certainly
tributing to the worldwide dissemination of major dis- include the preparation of an international convention
coveries and innovations in the contemporary biolog- on the human genome,
ical and medical sciences. The task will be an arduous one, since satisfactory
But in this sphere we come up against a fundamental answers must first be found to a number of questions,
inequality in the division of wealth and resources For example, should an attempt be made to find lowest
between North and South. Only a handful of indus- common denominators and to build on that basis, or
trialized countries have the necessary scientific poten- should some first principles be laid down from the
tial to make the breakthroughs from which the entire start, as the foundation for universal rules? How should
human race could benefit. At the present time the coun- the relativity of ethical values a reflection of the diver-
tries of the South are mere spectators of forms of sity of cultural representations, beliefs and laws be
progress which could, however, relieve them of suffering dealt with ?
which was previously thought to be an inevitable part The stakes involved in genetic mapping are immense,
of their condition. For the first time the human being as such forms part
Lacking the wherewithal, the Third World is of the heritage to be saved. 47
