The more generation
by Reginald Fraser Amonoo
THE aims of industry and commerce in
today's world are to create more wealth
and a wealthier population. Improved
means of production have brought about over¬
production and fierce international competi¬
tion. While the mechanization of agriculture,
mass production on factory assembly lines,
robotization and computerization have
increased productivity, they have also saturated
markets with surplus products. Europe, floun¬
dering in its milk lake, has to sell off its goods at
cut price, whilst the United States and Japan
are producing too much steel and turning out
too many cars. Even the computer industry,
following a period of expansion, is marking
time. The social costs of overproduction
reduced profits, business failures, factory clo¬
sures, unemployment, whole sectors of the
»8 M

Right, an advertising
billboard in Lagos
(Nigeria).
Below, a computer
assembly line in Germany.
economy in disarray, whole regions turned into
disaster areas are considerable. The Third
World too is affected, as overproduction results
in a disastrous fall in world commodity prices.
The need to find buyers for these super¬
abundant goods accounts for one of the major
phenomena of modern times, the power of
advertising, now an industry in its own right,
buttressed by the growth of the mass media
television, film, video and home teletext termi¬
nals as well as press advertisements and bill¬
boards. The media dangle before consumers the
prospect of an escape from prosaic reality, a dif
ferent, compensatory view of life. The stars of
Hollywood and show business, who with their
extravagant life-styles have taken the place of the
kings and conquering heroes of times gone by,
entice an adoring public with glimpses of a
world of dreams and fantasy, where every pas¬
sion can be satisfied. There is also an infatuation
with the extraordinary, which explains the pop¬
ularity of sports champions, whose feats provide
copy for specialized publications and the record-
books and who cash in on their achievements by
featuring in advertisements.
In a context of overproduction, any means, 29

REGINALD FRASER
AMONOO,
of Ghana, ¡s a visiting professor
at the University of Zimbabwe.
A specialist in French 17th-
century theatre and language
problems in Africa, he is the
author of many articles and a
study on Language and
Nationhood: Reflections on
Language Situations, with
particular reference to Ghana
(Ghana Academy of Arts and
Sciences, Accra, 1989).
A young motorcyclist in a
village in Niger.
legal or otherwise, must be used to attract poten¬
tial clients. Anything goes: unfair competition,
industrial fraud, infringement of patents, indus¬
trial espionage or whatever. Advertising goes
all out to whet the consumer's appetite, even
resorting to deceit. Every product is presented
as the best, the most competitively priced, the
most efficient. All kinds of hype are used.
Advertisers will stop at nothing to get their
message across, including the exploitation of
feminine charms. If customers are short of ready
cash, they are offered easy terms, at least to start
with. They may even be offered a car they can
drive away without having to put any money
down, with a free tankful of petrol thrown in.
THE LURE
OF
EASY MONEY
Are the developing countries affected by this
phenomenon? I believe they are. There is, for
example, nothing new about young Africans'
infatuation with imported goods after all, trade
with the early European explorers was based on
Africans' taste for luxury goods from abroad.
The remarkable thing is the way in which this
infatuation has spread to broad sectors of the
African population since the Second World War.
Several factors have been at work here. In
Ghana, for instance, as air travel became more
common in the 1940s and 1950s, the fact of
having visited England, London in particular, or
having studied in Europe conferred special status
30
on the happy few, in the eyes of the vast majority
of their compatriots who had never left the
country. They were known as the been-to, and
with their higher social standing they set the
fashion, especially among the young.
To a certain extent, a desire for higher social
status and material prosperity also motivated the
struggle for political emancipation. What could
once only be gained through education and
this was hard to come by could now be
obtained through success in politics, whatever
one's educational level. A new kind of politician,
brought to power by a succession of coups
d'état, appeared on the scene, replacing one
privileged class by another.
Lastly, the lure of easy money and an affluent
life-style has attracted many young Africans
into occasional dealing in imported luxury
goods. These small traders who travel back¬
wards and forwards between West Africa on
the one hand and Europe and the United States
on the other make no appreciable contribution
to their countries' economies.
A variety of small-scale drug traffickers
follow the same route there is now an under¬
ground market for drugs in Africa. The risks are
enormous but the profits to be made are very
tempting. The consumers are obviously after
bigger kicks than they can get from more
innocuous stimulants; in other words they too
are out for more. Drug abuse is not necessarily
a modern phenomenon, but its spread is some¬
thing new. The incidents that have occurred in
some universities and even some secondary
schools, as well as among some of the soldiers
involved in military coups, show that drug-
taking is starting to spread among the young.
THE HIGH LIFE
In many ways, therefore, a growing number of
Africans, traders, traffickers, adventurers
internationalized Africans, so to speak have an
attitude towards the consumer society that
scarcely differs from that prevalent in the United
States or Europe. The taste for luxuries, for
consumer goods for the high life, in short
evident in the countries of the North has its
counterpart in the countries of the South, with
this difference, that its consequences, given the
deprivation that afflicts most of our fellow-
countrymen, are much worse. The spread, in
some cases the prevalence, of this constant
seeking after more is one of the hallmarks of
modern times.
