BOOK
by Edgar Reichmann
Central Asia-from earliest
times to the present
Bukhara and Samarkand, the Khyber Pass
and the Pamir mountains, Sinkiang and
the Gobi desert, the Amu Darya and the
Syr Darya these evocative place-names
bring to the mind's eye the vast geo¬
graphical and cultural region in the heart
ofAsia that has long been a source of fas¬
cination for people in other parts of the
world, especially in the West. Many works
of ancient and modern literature testify
to the influence and achievements of cen¬
tral Asian civilizations. The Cimmerians
appear in Homer's Odyssey, and the Greek
historian Herodotus described the way of
life of the Scythians in the fifth century
B.C. Since then travellers and writers from
Marco Polo to Rudyard Kipling and Dino
Buzzati {The Tartar Steppe) have portrayed
this region where fantasy and reality are
never far apart, and poets such as Hâfiz
and Omar Khayyam have brought it to life
in verses of lyrical splendour.
Our knowledge ofcentral Asia has been
extended by the recent publication of two
important books, one a detailed work of
historical scholarship that is nevertheless
accessible to the general reader, the other
specifically aimed at a very wide audience.
Both books share the merit of shedding
light on the region's major contribution
to the history of civilizations.
The historical work is the outcome of a
far-reaching project to study the civiliza¬
tions of central Asia that was launched at
Unesco's nineteenth General Conference,
held in Nairobi in 1976. It is the first
volume in what will be a six-part Histoiy of
Civlizations ofCentralAsia that will study
the peoples ofcentral Asia from the earliest
times to the present day through archae¬
ology, history, language and spiritual life.
The second book is an anthropological
atlas covering the regions extending from

S OF THE WORLD
central Asia to the Middle East and the
Caucasus. It draws attention to the com¬
plexity of the situations today facing many
ancient ethnic communities welded
together by language, customs, religion
and history. Its authors have devoted par¬
ticular attention to the lesser-known peo¬
ples, those of Iranian, Turkish or Caucasian
origin.
Little-hnown treasures
The first volume of the Unesco series is
subtitled "The dawn of civilization: ear¬
liest times to 700 B.C." and takes us from
palaeolithic times to the Iron Age. What are
the frontiers of central Asia? As defined in
the Unesco History, they encompass the
ancient civilizations ofAfghanistan, north¬
eastern Iran, Pakistan, northern India,
Mongolia, western China and the central
Asian republics of the former U.S.S.R.
These pages bring to our attention many
little-known ancient objects and remains:
the superb neolithic sites ofKashmir, finely
crafted ornaments discovered in Mon¬
golia, exquisite bronzes from Iran and
Afghanistan, and extraordinary female fig¬
urines dating from the fourth millennium
that have been unearthed near the
Caspian Sea. The volume also explains the
origin of the Indo-Iranian languages and
their irresistible journey westwards in the
course of thousands of years, as well as
the subtle phonetic changes which led to
the development of certain languages
spoken in Europe.
What strikes the reader most during this
extraordinary journey from the earliest
Stone Age vestiges through Scythian crafts¬
manship in precious metals to the remark¬
able accomplishments of urban planning
in the Indus valley civilization is the pres¬
ence of a spiritual dimension which is
common to the peoples ofcentral Asia and
transcends their extraordinary diversity of
expression. Attracted both by conquest
and by sedentarization, these pastoral and
nomadic peoples, who tamed the horse as
an instrument of conquest but also dis¬
covered the benefits of agriculture, all
shared the same admiration for authen¬
ticity and beauty. The study of archaeo¬
logical remains proves that the cultural
interactions of these peoples and those of
China, the Fertile Crescent and eastern
Europe go back to very ancient times.
A historical fresco
lean and André Sellier's Atlas des peuples
d'Orient is more concerned with current
events. It presents a vast fresco of current
upheavals in the areas between the shores
of the Mediterranean and the confines of
China and Russia. Many conflicts in cen¬
tral Asia, old and new, intensified after the
collapse of the U.S.S.R. What choice will
these peoples make between the secular
History of civilizations of
Central Asia. Volume I. The
dawn of civilization: earliest
times to 700 B.C.
Editors A.H. Dani and V.M.
Masson. Unesco Publishing,
Paris, 1992.
ISBN 92-3-102719-0.
200 francs
Atlas des peuples d'Orient.
Moyen-Orient, Caucase, Asie
Centrale,
by Jean and André Sellier.
La Découverte publishers,
Paris, 1993.
ISBN 2-707 1-2222-X.
295 francs.
concept of the nation-state based on the
Western model, that of now-vanished
multinational empires (Ottoman, Persian,
Russo-Soviet), and the clerical state (emi¬
rate, Islamic republic)? Within each form
ofgovernment, what place will there be for
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities?
Will these minorities simply have to rely on
the spirit of tolerance shown by majorities
or will they enjoy the legal rights which
are their due? The outspoken and infor¬
mative texts which accompany the hun¬
dred coloured maps in the Atlas ask ques¬
tions rather than suggest solutions, but it
is certainly more worthwhile to ask hard
questions than to give answers tainted
with ambiguity. 47
