Luísq Futoronsky
Doublepoñrait with a glass ofwine
Li
20
OVE, indecipherable love. Every generation
has tried to give it a local habitation and a
Iname but it has escaped unscathed and
entire, like children and like mystery. Some have
seen a little of its light and darkness. Heroes,
saints and poets throughout history and the
world over have endeavoured to express it and
perished in the flames. I tried encamping in the
wilderness of words with my language's most
authoritative dictionary, that of the Spanish Royal
Academy, finding good grazing there for expres¬
sions both commonplace and outlandish, my
own and other people's.
In my odyssey I learned only that everyone
has something to say on the subject and that
anything goes, from feelings, real or imagined, to
the passion that draws one sex to the other, by
way of caresses and not forgetting the chubby,
naked, winged babe with the quiverful of arrows.
I shipwrecked on passion and came upon suf¬
fering, turmoil and disorder, encountered rapture
and discovered ecstasy, sin and delirium, mystical
union with God, swooning and trance-like states.
I saw eyes rolling heavenwards and levitating
female saints, and I caught a whiff of stylites
perched on top of their columns, like storks only
much less graceful and good-humoured.
The expressions used to describe amorous
rapture reinforce one another. It is a comet that
draws along in its ancient orbit all the possible and
impossible forms of love. Thus, the language of
the people, a sure source of wisdom, has it that
when we reach sexual climax, however briefly, in
and with one another, we are transported to the
seventh heaven, to the highest heaven, as if six
were not enough and as if to speak of love it
were necessary to invoke the number seven,
which is in all cultures the peerless, most perfect
of numbers. No wonder that the verb to love is,
in our grammars, the model, the verbal para¬
digm, the word among words. It is only in love's
presence and under its sway that we glimpse
Jerusalem, the heavenly city, through a rent in the
LUISA FUTORANSKY
is an Argentine poet and novelist. Her most recent work is
a short novel, Urracas (Buenos Aires, 1 992).
veil; but to my knowledge no-one who has
glimpsed the innermost recesses of heaven or
earth or hell has ever returned to tell the tale. If
Lazarus could not, why should we demand it of
lovers, anchorites or artists?
And yet the latter have given us an answer, in
their own ways and as best they could. Sometimes
words, despite the vastness of their domain, are
inadequate to the task, and then other voices
must be borrowed, other wise men followed to
reach journey's end. The rarest of rare birds is he
who has succeeded in expressing love in its
entirety, deploying sounds and silences to encom¬
pass heaven, hell and earth and tame the senses.
The only one to so succeed, I believe, was is
Mozart. How strange, though, that his greatest
success should be Don Giovanni, in which he tells
the tragic story of one who is incapable of giving,
disabled in love, afflicted by an unquenchable
thirst.
Others, like Marc Chagall in his Doublepor¬



trait with a glass of wine dated, significantly,
1917/1918 have managed to capture through
ephemeral images the most perfect of human
desires, that for requited, equal, unstinted,
unending love. Chagall painted this masterpiece
while the world was engaged in perpetrating the
assorted atrocities that accompany all wars. Yet
again, Europe was plunged in bloody internecine
struggles, this time dragging the world into the
terrible conflict known as the Great War.
But Bela, the beautiful bride, is dressed in
white, between her impatiently swelling breasts
nestles a brooch embossed with hope, and she
steps forward defiantly. The city's domes and its
mean, dark dwellings are left behind, and the
dreary landscape dons its finest colours as she
passes by. One gloved hand conceals her wedding
ring and the other holds a fan of green leaves and
garnet-red flowers. Her body is slim and graceful
but her step is resolute. A slit in the skirt of her
dress reveals a well-turned leg, sheathed in a long
stocking of a provocative violet colour. Her shoes
are comfortable, suitable for the long road of life.
She no longer wears the veil of maidenhood. The
vessel has slipped its moorings, the daydreams fade
and the thick mists lift, the inexpressible bonds
between reality and heart's desire are tightened.
<

Double portrait with a glass of wine
(191 7-19 1 8),
by Marc Chagall, oil on canvas.
Her hair is worn in a style that is slightly ahead
of its time the age of the Charleston has not yet
come. The composition, the present and the
future, are centred on the single eye, liquid and full
of emotion and confidence.
Slippered and astride her shoulders, the young
groom also advances towards the observer, car¬
ried away with joy, drunk on love. He is dressed
in green, with a red coat green the colour of idle
dreams, red the colour of anger, of spilt blood, but
also, among the Chinese, the colour of happiness.
The glass is half-supped: the lovers have
already drunk a toast. Now they will smash it to
the ground, committing to the earth the sharp
splinters of their sorrows. The lovers have been
caught at the very moment, the decisive moment,
when the soul is in touch with the ineffable. An
angel hovers protectively over them, floating on
a cloud of green, the bridegroom's colour, with
robe and wings of the same violet as the bride's
stocking.
The bride turns a deaf ear to all words, to the
dread Stygian ferryman who takes only one pas¬
senger at a time and to the deadly song of the
sirens; she is borne along by the inexplicable
force that works miracles. She shows that one of
the deepest, most secret of our recurrent dreams
is not impossible: she flies without burning her
wings, she glides lightly over the water like a
goddess and walks unharmed on the burning
coals of the past.
Requited love, the one and only moment
when separateness is overcome, and the two who
are now one become three, resolving, perhaps, the
abiding mystery of the Trinity. Those who have
tasted that moment have already forgotten it.
Epilogue: And so Bela and Chagall set off
into the wide world to seek their fortune, to con¬
quer Paris. And, as the story goes, they married,
had lots of children and lived happily ever after.
Marc filled the world with lovers, flying cows and
fiddlers on roofs, at other times depicting
mourners and graveyards somehow unjust,
like all graveyards.
Now, at the turn of the millennium, floun¬
dering in the same iniquitous, fratricidal con¬
flicts, when lovers no longer have a New World
to discover and there is no hiding-place for them
in cities where we look, powerless, upon the
scourges they are prey to, we would do well to
find some place for Bela, her young husband,
their children and the angel, a place where we can
all raise the half-supped glass and drink a toast: to
the bride, to life. 9ß 21
