Culture and
new-found freedoms
WHAT is culture? For the nineteenth-century
English poet and critic Matthew Arnold, culture
was "acquainting ourselves with the best that has
been known and said in the world, and thus with the his¬
tory of the human spirit". This traditional viewpoint tends
to identify culture with the past and to link it primarily
with fine arts and literature; a cultured person is one whose
mind has been improved, and preferably enriched, by the
"humanities". In the twentieth century, another, much
broader, meaning which takes a more anthropological
approach has been grafted on to this first definition. At the
World Conference on Cultural Policies held in Mexico City
ten years ago, the international community took note of
this broader definition and affirmed that culture could be
regarded as "the whole complex of distinctive spiritual,
material, intellectual and emotional features that charac¬
terize a society or social group", and that "it includes not
only the arts and letters but also modes of life, the funda¬
mental rights of the human being, value systems, traditions,
and beliefs".
In this sense, culture no longer refers simply to know¬
ledge of the arts; it also covers language, thought, innova¬
tion, creativity, and critical skills. Naturally it includes the
material heritage of a society, but it also extends to the
shared symbolic, spiritual or ethical heritage in which indi¬
viduals find their identity in the present. It is the thread that
links the past, present and future of a society, and the back¬
drop for individual creativity. Culture is therefore both a
source of major political, economic and social problems and
a key factor in solving them.
THE KEY TO DEVELOPMENT
Before the decolonization process which began after the
Second World War, development theories rarely left much
room for consideration of the socio-cultural context
within which development might take place. Economics
was reality, culture was something else. Economics was
tangible, culture was intangible and the idea that culture
could make an input to development strategies would have
been considered far-fetched indeed. Development then
was seen as taking place in a cultural vacuum or an inert
human environment.
Then the shortcomings and failures of this approach
began to emerge. The evidence is incontrovertible: focusing
on the one-dimensional abstraction of homo economicus
not only neglects the enormous depth and breadth of our
real nature as human beings but is a failure even in its own
terms, since economic growth is significantly dependent on
the cultural variable of creativity and adaptability.
Culture, long regarded by policy-makers as something
of an ornament or even a luxury, has accordingly begun to
find its proper place in the political agenda of the interna¬
tional community. Debates on general policy invariably
refer to the multifarious ways in which culture exercises a
key influence in the contemporary world. Many examples
come to mind. Inter-ethnic relations, whether in times of
strife or of peaceful coexistence, are clearly rooted essen¬
tially in culture. The worldwide movement towards greater
democracy and freedom is at once universal and culture-
specific, differing in its form from continent to continent
and society to society.
THE CHALLENGE OF DIVERSITY
The new flowering of freedom which the world has seen
in the last few years has strengthened the role of culture.
Not long ago the Berlin Wall was still standing and Vaclav
Havel was still a political prisoner in the country of which
he was to become President. Nelson Mandela was also a
prisoner, and President de Klerk had yet to set in train
with him the process that we all devoutly hope will even¬
tually lead to a united and democratic South Africa. The
terrible threat of a nuclear war between the two super¬
powers was omnipresent.
This new-found freedom has unleashed enormous
potential both for good and for evil. And nowhere more
so than between neighbouring peoples of different religions
or ethnicity. Old scores and rivalries, simmering for so long,
are now being settled. At the same time, new problems are
appearing. Are we willing to take up the challenge of living
by choice in pluralistic societies? Are we willing to accept,
and even to welcome, those of different colour, different
religion, different language, and different culture and not
just in the country next door, but even in the house next
door? We touch here on the most problematic aspect of cul¬
tural identity how to ensure that diversity rhymes with
dialogue, that difference is perceived not as a threat but as a
potential source of enrichment.
In this world to whose imbalances, injustices and absur¬
dities I am constantly drawing attention, as the North con¬
tinues to consume more than it needs while the South is still
trying desperately to obtain the basic necessities, only one
resource is shared equally and what a wonderful one it is:
the resource of culture and of human wisdom and under¬
standing. It is this wealth and diversity of cultures and of
understanding that UNESCO, guided by the universal ideals
set forth in its Constitution, is determined to make better
known and place at the service of human development. In
order to do this, UNESCO needs the help of everyone, at all
levels of civil society. It has already done much to promote
dialogue, but we still have a long way to go to persuade
world leaders that although culture is at the root of many
conflicts, it offers the only possibility of reconciliation. 45
