BOOKS OF THE WORLD
by Calum Wise
PAROLES DEVOILEES.
An anthology of contemporary Turkish
short stories by women writers.
Edited by Nedim Giirsel.
278 pp. Arcantère/UNESCO Publishing.
Unesco Collection of Representative
Works. (In French).
'Women's writing is a specific form of
writing," claims Nedim Giirsel in her fore¬
word to this anthology although no-one,
in Turkish or any other language, has ever
been able to define exactly what it is. One
is on much firmer ground if one asserts
that there is a specific Turkish women's
literature (that is, one written by women).
This book is a proofof it. The authors of the
stories in Paroles dévoilées ("Unveiled
Words") are outside the currents ofmilitant
feminism and a modern, theoretical
approach to literature. Rather, their work
provides an intimate, introspective
glimpse of family life. They remain rooted
in Turkish soil (like Yasar Kemal's Mehmed)
and in contemporary Turkish life, yet their
world has affinities with those ofKatherine
Mansfield and Virginia Woolf.
There have been Turkishwomenwriters
who were militant socialists and repub¬
lican activists, but the sixteen authors
selected here by Nedim Giirsel are not
among them. All but one were born
between 1925 and 1957, making them the
heirs and beneficiaries of Mustafa Kemal
Ataturk's Republic, which was founded in
1923. As if to give this first generation of
women writers a certain amount of sym¬
bolic significance, the collection opens with
a short story by Halide Edip Adivar, an early
twentieth-century "ideological" novelist.
The harsh yet sensitive tone of these short
stories, often narrated in the first person,
introduces the reader to an objective fic¬
tional world where the events of everyday
life upstage political and national ones.
MEMORIA DE AMERICA EN
LA POESÍA. ANTOLOGÍA
1492-1992.
Poems selected by Fernando Ainsa and
Edgar Montiel.
3 1 3 pp. Unesco Publishing.
Unesco Collection of Representative
Works. (In Spanish).
Last year, Unesco organized a series of
events to mark the "Fifth Centenary of the
Encounter between Two Worlds", com-
_ _ memorating the European discovery of
^O America. The Unesco Courier devoted its
*"+* i-i.nn
May issue, entitled "Rediscovering 1492",
to the subject. The articles described var¬
ious aspects of the encounter as well as
its intellectual, cultural and artistic reper¬
cussions, which have radically changed
our view of the world. One of the authors
concluded by suggesting that we should
"begin preparing now for the fifth cente¬
nary of... 1992."
Two other contributors to that issue
of the Courier, Fernando Ainsa and Edgar
Montiel, were probably thinking of both
present and future generations when they
put together this anthology of Spanish-
and Portuguese-language verse by ninety-
seven poets spanning nearly five centuries.
The volume contains works by interna¬
tionally-known figures who have been
translated into many languages, such as
Asturias, Borges, García Lorca, Lope de
Vega, Camôes, Neruda and Paz, as well as
poems by writers whose reputation is
mainly confined to their own countries. A
number ofanonymous Guaraní, Quechua
and Náhuatl works are also included.
Clearly there is a logic in this selection. It
seeks to engage readers' emotions as well
as their intellects by presenting a broad
spectrum of talents and sensibilities
focused on a central theme: America, the
source of one of the great myths of the
modern Western world that of the land of
plenty.*
AN ELUSIVE EAGLE SOARS
An anthology of modern Albanian
poetry.
Texts selected, translated and
presented by Robert Elsie.
213 pp. Forest Books/UNESCO. Unesco
Collection of Representative Works.
Albanian is currently spoken by some six
million people in the Balkans. The lan¬
guage is actually divided into two dialects,
with Gheg in use to the north and Tosk to
the south of the Shkumbin River, along
whose course ran the Roman Via Egnatia,
an extension of the Appian Way. The lit¬
erary language, which has become stan¬
dard throughout Albania as well as in
Kosovo and Macedonia, is a mixture of
both dialects, although approximately 80
per cent of it is based on Tosk. The earliest *
vernacular texts date back to the Counter-
Reformation, and the oldest known
Albanian poem was written in 1592.
Modern Albanian poetry came into exis¬
tence during the 1930s, when Lasgush
Poradeci and Migjeni broke with the tra¬
dition of romantic nationalism that had
dominated the genre until then. As Robert
Elsie points out in his introduction, "the
twentieth century arrived late in Albania."
The break with socialist realism was
another turning point. The new departure
sparked a lively literary debate pitting tra¬
ditionalist and innovative currents the
latter led by Ismail Kadare against each
other. This anthology recounts the difficult
birth and stormy history of modern
Albanian poetry with a representative selec¬
tion of verse written by poets within and
outside the country. It includes a helpful
introduction as well as an extensive bibli¬
ography of works published in five lan¬
guages. Mimoza Ahmeti (born 1963), is the
youngest poet whose work appears in the
collection. She wrote, "It would be awful/
Waking up the same every morning/But it
would be even worse/Seeing the end of the
day/With morning eyes".
* See The Discovery ofGuiana, by Sir Walter Raleigh,
who was a buccaneer in the service of Queen Eliz¬
abeth I of England, as well as an explorer. His
account was largely responsible for the spread and
success of this myth in Europe. This year, UNESCO
and Editions Retz (Paris) are publishing the first
unabridged French translation of Raleigh's work
under the title El Dorado.
