PASSOVER IN
SARAJEVO
by Léon Davico
Sarajevo: 7 April this year.
The place: the old synagogue, miracu¬
lously still standing, although its windows
are shattered.
The time: 12:30 p.m.
The weather is fine. There is relatively
little shooting. The little street, usually
empty, is full of onlookers, policemen and
armed soldiers. Everyone is waiting for
President Izetbegovic.
Inside the synagogue there is an unusual
bustle of activity. PesachPassoveris
being celebrated for the 500th time since the
first Sephardic Jews arrived here in search
of a quiet spot where they could take refuge
from the Inquisition.
Quieter spots than this could be imag-
40 ined.
At the same moment, a few blocks
away, at the Academy of Sciences, a sym¬
posium on the damage suffered by the city
during a year's shelling is about to open.
For some reason, there is no shelling
today. There is the usual machine-gun and
automatic rifle fire, but people hardly notice
it any more.
A hundred-odd townspeople, Jews and
non-Jews, are packed into the little room on
the left of the main entrance. The table has
been carefully laid by the women and girls.
In front of each guest is an egg, dark brown
from being boiled for hours with onion
peelings. Where have they managed to find
the onions? And the eggs?
"Eggs were cheaper at the market yes¬
terday. Two dollars each," the secretary
tells me. "We shall read the Haggadah, the
Passover service there is a famous copy
printed in Sarajevo, but it is well protected
and we shan't touch it."
The President arrives, sombre and
thoughtful. He has just refused to send
General Halilovic to a meeting with the
Serb and Croat generals chaired by Gen¬
erals Wahlgren and Morillon at Sarajevo
airport. Fighting continues at Srebenica,
and until there is a cease-fire around this
town in eastern Bosnia, he does not wish to
negotiate.
Surrounded by bodyguards, he enters
the synagogue, followed by members of the
government. Two minutes later the Rei ul
Ulema, the religious leader of all the Muslims
of former Yugoslavia, arrives, at almost the
same moment as the Catholic archbishop,
Monsignor Puljic, and the former leader of
the Orthodox community, whose replace¬
ment has not yet reached Sarajevo because of
the war. They take their places around the
table and listen to Ivica Ceresnjes, presi¬
dent of the city's Jewish community. They
know each other well; their communities
have lived together for five centuries.

Fifty years ago, between 1941 and 1945,
the harmony was interrupted. Tens of thou¬
sands of Bosnians were killed during a ter¬
rible war. Nine-tenths of the Jewish popu¬
lation were annihilated, and the rest hid in
the homes of their Muslim, Serb and Croat
friends. Then, with the return of peace, the
survivors came back to Sarajevo to take up
again the life of their community, shattered
by foreign aggression.
Aware of their unique situation, the
Jews of Sarajevo have always been
extremely cosmopolitan. One marriage in
three was a mixed marriage. When misfor¬
tune again struck the people of this
Olympic city on 7 April last year, the
Jewish community numbered 5,000 1,000
Jews and 4,000 Muslims, Serbs and Croats,
wives and husbands, cousins, uncles and
aunts, or simply friends affiliated to the
community. About a thousand children
and old people have left the city to escape
death, but the other 4,000 have remained
and form one of the world's most tightly-
knit groups. They are now virtually insep¬
arable. Each day they come to the syna¬
gogue for a meal, one after the other.
Opposite, in the pharmacy which belongs
to the community, medicines from abroad
are dispensed to the people of Sarajevo free
of charge. All they have to do is show a
medical prescription.
His prayer shawl over his shoulders,
Ceresnjes speaks of tolerance, friendship
and peace. People listen gravely, making
no attempt to hide their tears. Outside,
close by, death lies in wait, ethnic cleansing
is going on, a sermon of hate, not love, is
being preached. The guests eat their eggs
two dollars is a small investment for a
friendly meal and unleavened bread, as
the matzo wafers have somehow got lost
between New York and the little street in
Sarajevo. Speaker follows speaker; each
one talks of peace, but seemingly without
great conviction. They want peace but don't
quite know how to achieve it or whether it
can be achieved. They want the madness to
stop and multi-ethnic families to be able to
continue their lives without fear. No one
talks of happiness. That will have to wait.
Meanwhile, a candle is lit. The flame is
small but it has vast significance. It is the
flame of tolerance, the flame of survival.
The ceremony is over. People shake
hands, embrace. They go back to the cellars.
Take care at the intersections even if there
is no shelling, there are always the snipers.
Where there are trees there is danger, so
move quickly. If they were not dangerous
places, people would have chopped the
trees down long ago for firewood. But now
spring is here and perhaps there will be no
need for wood and fire.
The little flame burns on, a last flame of
hope that soon this nightmare will be over
and these Jews and Muslims, Serbs and
Croats of Sarajevo will be able to live a
new life together.
Will they be given this last chance?
LEON DAVICO,
a Belgrade-born French journalist, is Paris
correspondent of the independent political
weekly Vreme (Belgrade). Director of Unesco's
Office of Public Information from 1 976 to 1 980
and from 1987 to 1989, he worked in the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees between 1 980 and 1 987. He is currently
engaged in humanitarian activities In the former
Yugoslavia. 41
