Architects of disorder
by Fernando and Diego Montes
R
ECENTLY-BUILT public housing estates
cannot by any stretch of the imagination be
I regarded as examples of haphazard design.
On the contrary, they suffer from an excessive
enthusiasm for order on the part of their planners.
The order that reigns in them is so oppressive and
simplified that it distracts attention from the
shape of the buildings. It is the expression of an
earthbound conceptual art that pays too little
attention to the estate-dweller's desire for a gen¬
uine urban environment.
This discrepancy has always existed and has
never been resolved. Art is not, in this case, ahead
of its time but off on a side-track strewn with his¬
tory's bright but mistaken ideas, ideas that should
perhaps have been looked into cautiously before
large-scale building operations began. As it is, the
frustration of estate-dwellers, provided with a
roof over their heads but deprived of an urban
environment, is one of the discontents of modern
times.
The situation varies little from one country to
another. The rows of dreary blocks lining the
broad, empty avenues of the Moscow suburbs are
variations on a town-planning theme that recurs
in Barcelona, Santiago, Milan, Essen and the Paris
working-class suburb of La Courncuvc. With a
few allowances for climatic differences, the pic¬
ture is the same everywhere: long, narrow hori¬
zontal slabs, the same back and front, or "high-
rises", multistorey flats reaching up into the
power lines rather than into the clouds.
The only thing not in order about these end¬
less vistas, these repetitious excrescences that
bear so little resemblance to real buildings, these
unfinished but already run-down blocks, was
the decision to build them in the first place. Ever
since, it has been one long tale of false reasoning,
miscalculation and mistaken designations imme¬
diately shown up for what they are: "green
spaces" can never take the place of natural
greenery, and the "amenities" provided scarcely
qualify as public buildings.
IMPROVISED
ARCHITECTURE
Let us now look at the favelas, cases, villas-mis¬
erias, barriadas and other shantytowns that have
mushroomed around nearly all major agglomer¬
ations, from Lima to Lagos and from Cairo to
Mexico City. These indescribable encrustations
arc archetypes of a modern urban and architec¬
tural phenomenon. Once peripheral, like the ring
of shacks that used to occupy the "zone" just out¬
side the former fortifications of Paris, this type of
habitat has become commonplace, perhaps even
the commonest type it would, incidentally, be
interesting to compare the area covered, respec¬
tively, by shantytowns and by conventional types
of habitat in a Third World conurbation.
Slums, run-down or derelict dwellings the
traditional answers to the demand for urban
housing arc no longer sufficient to accommo¬
date the masses of people moving in from rural
areas that can no longer feed them. The drift
from the land is not an organized movement of
population; it just happens. The cities, the first
places the migrants from the countryside head for,
have done nothing to cater for the newcomers,
perhaps because there was nothing they could do.
It took Paris fifteen hundred years to reach a
population of a million. How long will it take to
reach ten million? As for Mexico City, it is
heading for a population of twenty million.
Apartment blocks on the
outskirts of a French city.

11 II H
I liiiiniimiii
t..
V
V*>w
v:
A city is a cumbersome structure and its
growth is hard to control. An overnight deci¬
sion to triple its area and population, extend its
highways and its water-supply and sewage sys¬
tems, or increase the capacity of its public trans¬
port and schools, would set a technically and
physically impossible task.
Shantytowns are therefore improvised struc¬
tures, created out of anything that comes to hand
and by definition haphazard. It goes without
saying that planners and architects have had
nothing to do with them, nor do they meet
normal town-planning standards. But which of
these, strictly laid-out housing estates or hig¬
gledy-piggledy shantytowns, are the more rep¬
resentative of the spirit of modern architecture?
In the late 1960s, John Turner, a British-
born architect who teaches at the Massachu¬
setts Institute of Technology, emerged as a pas¬
sionate advocate of the architectural merits of
shantytowns. His message, relayed through the
world's leading schools of architecture and
avant-garde publications, is that there is much to
be learned from this architecture without archi¬
tects, an architecture dictated by need and
urgency, which he sees as being richly imagina¬
tive. This form of self-built housing is extremely
well adapted to the requirements of the inhab¬
itants, who do not receive welfare handouts but
are the protagonists in a tragedy they are obliged
to act out in order to survive.
At the other extreme, large-scale housing
projects planned, built and managed by a cen¬
tralized institution are the outcome of a ruthless
rationalization of social needs. The context of
their construction and of the decision-making
processes on which they depend is more often
than not a bureaucratic one, even in the most
free-market-oriented countries.
Turner's point of departure is the idea that, in
FERNANDO MONTES
is a Chilean architect who has
taught architecture in a
number of universities and
schools of South and North
America.
DIEGO MONTES
¡s a French student of
architecture and the theatre
who is currently preparing a
production of Albert Camus'
play Caligula.

the conditions of extreme deprivation that prevail
in shantytowns, the mode of production takes
precedence over technical or aesthetic consider¬
ations. Basically, he believes that architecture, as
usually practised, is cither a luxury reserved for
developed societies or an art that is out of place
outside a stable social context: it requires, if not
order, at least a certain degree of methodical orga¬
nization. The new urban society of the shanty¬
towns, however, is a prime example of a social
body in the throes of change.
Do shantytowns open new horizons or do
they point up the need to rethink the hierarchies,
values and methods of architecture?
As a good dialectician of social progress,
Turner plays on the inseparability of the two
possibilities. According to him, it should be pos¬
sible to reconcile modern architecture with dis¬
order and foresight with spontaneity and achieve
a kind of hybrid form, something like jazz or
the music of Stravinsky or Gershwin, a mixture
of improvisation and highly complex orchestra¬
tion. But Turner has so far failed to carry opinion
with him, and modern architecture has still to find
its philosopher's stone.
A FRUITFUL ECLECTICISM



Fifty years earlier, Picasso, with his usual per¬
spicacity, had also put his finger on this dilemma.
In the middle of his cubist period, he said that,
after Van Gogh, everything had become possible
(disorder), but that what had been gained in
freedom had been lost in self-confidence.
History does not move forward in a straight
line but follows a strange kind of trajectory,
swinging one way then back again, leaping for¬
ward, stopping and accelerating. The innocent
observer might think that it never points the way
clearly, that it is constantly correcting its course
and changing tack.
The twentieth century, which got off to a
flying start in architecture only to finish in low
gear, has seen the pendulum swing time and
again and has had its share of skids and knocks
as well, but it may well have made an original
contribution to the history of art in that it has
been a time of greater eclecticism and diversity
than ever before. This characteristic feature of
the times is perhaps linked with the development
of the communication media and data-storage
facilities, which enables the particular and the
universal to coexist in the spirit of the global vil¬
lage, combining the parochial with the planet-
wide.
For centuries, the memory of humanity was
oral, written or pictorial. As its storage capacity
was very limited, its contents had constantly to be
weeded out. Thanks to chemical and electronic
devices, the storage capacity has increased immea¬
surably. Wc no longer need to discard whatever
is out of date or offbeat to make room for main¬
stream ideas. The two can exist side by side, just
below the surface of our memories, waiting for
the moment to rc-emerge. That moment may
come quite soon: the wheel of history, we are
told, is turning faster and faster. An Indonesian shantytown.
