/
»calaííng
consumption is
threatening to
outpace water
supply
Running
dry
by Sandra Postel
FOR decades, water has been wasted, mis¬
managed and overused and the conse¬
quences are beginning to hit home.
Water scarcity typically conjures up visions of
drought, the temporary dry spells that nature
inflicts from time to time. But while droughts cap¬
ture headlines and grab our attention, the far
greater threat posed by our escalating water con¬
sumption goes largely unnoticed.
Signs of water stress abound. Water tables are
falling, lakes are shrinking and wetlands are dis¬
appearing. Despite the disastrous experience of the
years 1955 to 1985, engineers propose "solving"
water problems by building ever more mammoth
dams and river diversion schemes, with exorbitant
price tags and damaging environmental effects.
Around Beijing, New Delhi, Phoenix and other
water-short cities, competition is brewing between
city-dwellers and farmers who lay claim to the
same limited supply. In the Middle East, water
scarcity stirs up disputes and tensions that threaten
to spill over into armed conflict. 19

20
SANDRA POSTEL,
of the United States, Is vice-
president for research at the
Worldwatch Institute in
Washington D.C., a non-profit
research organization created
to study and focus attention
on world problems. She Is the
author of several Worldwatch
papers, notably on global
water Issues.
In each major area of water use agriculture,
industry and cities demand has increased
rapidly, and because of improved living stan¬
dards world water demand has been growing
faster than population: at 800 cubic metres a year,
per capita use today is nearly 50 per cent higher
than it was in 1950. Global water use has more
than tripled in the same period, and now stands
at an estimated 4,340 cubic kilometres per year.
But we actually rely on a far larger share since
water bodies dilute pollution, generate electricity
and support fisheries and wildlife.
Worldwide per capita water supplies, which
drop as population grows, are a third lower now
than in 1970. In an increasing number of coun¬
tries, population has surpassed the level that can
be sustained comfortably with the water available.
Hydrologists designate water-stressed countries
as those with annual supplies of 1,000-2,000 cubic
metres per person. When the figure drops below
1,000 cubic metres, nations are considered water-
scarce that is, lack of water becomes a severe
constraint on food production, economic devel¬
opment and protection of natural systems.
Today, discounting water flowing in from
neighbouring countries, twenty-six countries,
collectively home to 232 million people, fall into
the water-scarce category. As many of them have
very high population growth rates, their water
problems are deepening fast. Africa has the largest
number of water-scarce countries, but the Middle
East is the most concentrated region of scarcity
in the world, and tensions over water rights there
could ignite during this decade.
Other parts of the world have not been spared.
Symptoms of water stress exist, not just in the
water-scarce countries, but in parts of water-
wealthy ones as well. When groundwater is used

Left, Mono Lake in
California.
Below, crocodiles in a
reserve in Thailand.
Saudi Arabia, for example, now mines fossil
groundwater to meet 75 per cent of its water needs,
and that dependence is growing as a result of gov¬
ernment efforts to encourage large-scale wheat
production in the desert. Though the country
imports barley and other food crops, it became self-
sufficient in wheat in 1 984, and has since joined the
ranks of the world's top wheat exporters. In early
1992, King Fahd authorized payments totalling
$2.1 billion for 1991's record four-million-tonne
wheat crop, which was worth only one fourth as
much at the world market price.
Groundwater depletion in Saudi Arabia has
been averaging about 5.2 billion cubic metres a
year, and that rate is projected to increase by
nearly half during the 1990s. At this rate the
supply would be exhausted in fifty-two years. At
the faster extraction rates projected for 2000-
2010, it would dry up much sooner, and even
before that happens the groundwater will likely
become too salty to use without expensive treat¬
ment. Thus, little of Saudi Arabia's grain can be
considered a reliable portion of the long-term
food supply either for Saudis or for those coun¬
tries receiving its exports.
Other places dependent on fossil ground¬
water include Libya and the northwestern corner
of Texas, where the amount of water in that state's
portion of the Ogallala aquifer the largest in the
world has already been diminished by a fourth.
In Beijing, water tables have been dropping 1-2
metres a year, and a third of the wells have report¬
edly gone dry. Groundwater pumping in Mexico
City exceeds recharge by 50-80 per cent, which
has led to falling groundwater levels, aquifer
faster than nature replenishes it, water tables fall
and eventually the underground supply becomes
too expensive to keep tapping and too salty to use.
Overuse of groundwater is now endemic in parts
of China, India, Mexico, Thailand, the western
United States, North Africa and the Middle East.
FOSSIL
GROUNDWATER
DEPLETION
Some of the most troubling cases of unsustainable
groundwater use involve "fossil" aquifers, under¬
ground reservoirs that hold water hundreds or
thousands of years old and that receive little
replenishment from rainfall today. Like oil
reserves, these aquifers are essentially nonre¬
newable. Farms and cities that depend on this
water will eventually face the problem of what to
do when the wells run dry.

Irrigated land in Kenya.
compaction, and land subsidence that has caused
the famous Metropolitan Cathedral to slump.
As demands continue to rise and water supply
projects get more difficult to build, water budgets
are becoming badly imbalanced in many regions.
From southern California to Israel, from northern
China to parts of India, shortages are becoming
chronic and rationing a way of life. In China,
for instance, planners project that Beijing's total
water demand in 2000 could outstrip available
supplies by 70 per cent. Israel's annual water use
already exceeds its renewable supply by some
300 million cubic metres, or 15 per cent. With the
projected influx of new immigrants in the coming
decade, its yearly water deficit will worsen gready.
DAMAGE TO THE AQUATIC
ENVIRONMENT
Shrinking groundwater reserves, falling water
tables and projected demands that far exceed
available supplies are clear signals of water stress,
but perhaps the most worrying sign of trouble
comes from examining the health of aquatic envi¬
ronments. The damming, diverting and polluting
of watercourses have wreaked havoc on the
world's wetlands, deltas, lakes and riverine habi¬
tats. Of all imperilled biological species, aquatic
fauna is undoubtedly at greatest risk.
The shrinking Aral Sea is but the most dra¬
matic in a long list of natural areas destroyed,
degraded or at grave risk from human use and
abuse of water a list that includes California's
Mono Lake, south Florida's Everglades, Spain's
Donaña wetlands and Sudan's Sudd swamps,
places that are home to astounding numbers and
varieties of bird and wildlife species.
All these species are at risk from the degrada¬
tion of the environment. In North America alone,
the American Fisheries Society lists 364 species of
fish as endangered, threatened or of special con¬
cern. An estimated one-third of the continent's fish,
two-thirds of its crayfish and nearly three-quarters
of its mussels are now "rare or imperilled".
A distressing conflict has emerged over two of
water's roles: as a commodity, and as a key life-
support for all species. This duality calls out for
a fresh approach, one that pays greater respect to
the vital functions of this precious element.
22
