Seventy years of
violence and fear
have left the former
USSR in a disastrous
situation
A looming avalanche
by Andrei Huikin
Above, Screaming Man
(1987), a painting by the
Mexican artist Juan
Esperanza.
16
THERE is a science-fiction story in which
an inventor succeeds in reviving sounds
that have long since died away. If we
could do that in real life, I fear that the sound
which would stand out above all others would
be the scream of human suffering, and that it
would reverberate endlessly throughout the
world. True, wild animals kill. But they do so
speedily and because they need to eat, and not
because they want to torture their victims.
Human beings behave differently.
The history of the world bristles with
examples of tyrannical and brutal acts com¬
mitted by the strong against the weak, by
crowds against isolated individuals, by the
armed against the defenceless. Even today, as
the second millennium draws to a close, and
even in the most prosperous and civilized coun¬
tries, there are still manifestations of violence of
all kinds, which are often unspeakably cruel
and are, unfortunately, increasingly common.
Now our "country" as we still call the
ex-Soviet Union out of habit could hardly be
described as a wealthy nation. And on the evi¬
dence of what is going on in the trouble spots
of our shattered empire, one may perhaps be
forgiven for wondering bitterly whether it can
still be described as a civilized country,
however considerable its past cultural achieve¬
ments, many fragments of which are still in
evidence today.
How and why do nations with a cultural

heritage as rich as ours relapse into barbarity
and become so chillingly indifferent to the suf¬
ferings of others? Unfortunately ours is not
the first case of this kind in history nor, I sus¬
pect, will it be the last. The development of a
great culture is always a slow and gradual pro¬
cess, whereas regression to brutality is swift. It
happens with all the suddenness of an ava¬
lanche, to use our current buzz word.
But the term avalanche may be misleading
if it is interpreted to mean what is more
usually called an "outbreak of violence", or if
it is seen as just the result of a regrettable act or
climate of opinion. In the mountains it is per¬
fectly possible to trigger off a devastating ava¬
lanche just by coughing; but that is no reason
to recommend cough mixture as the only way
to prevent avalanches.
Violence has broken out in our so-called
"zones of interethnic conflict". I say "so-
called" because there is a steadily increasing
body of evidence that ethnic differences alone,
like many other kinds of difference in areas
such as race, religion, class, gender, age and
taste, do not in themselves cause conflicts. Such
differences can trigger off disputes, hatred and
bloodshed only when they are combined with
certain individual or collective forces such as
greed, hunger for power, stupidity or unscru-
pulousness on the part of individuals or groups.
Economic difficulties, impoverishment and
other serious problems have all been cited to jus¬
tify the ferocity that is now raging. But why,
when whole villages of Ukrainian peasants were
starving to death in the early 1930s, did they not
hate the Russians, even though the famine in the
Queuing in a St. Petersburg
suburb.
Ukraine was a direct result of Kremlin policy
(whose architect, it is true, was a Georgian)?
Besides, the first bloody interethnic clashes
that swept the country took place well before
the present "avalanche" of pauperization, at a
time when we were still living in the kind of
poverty we were used to. It is of course easy to
incite the poor to behave irresponsibly and feel
hatred for others. But it would be a mistake, I
believe, to regard poverty as the root cause of
such behaviour. Poverty simply helps to create
a situation that provocateurs can exploit.
THE STREET IN ARMS
It would be equally unfair to pin the blame
for interethnic clashes as violent as those we
have experienced solely on ambitious politi¬
cians, intriguing mafias or scheming clans. An
accumulation of snow, rocks and mud cannot
turn into an avalanche until it has attained a
critical mass and acquired all the physical cha¬
racteristics that will enable it to start moving.
A people is never putty in the hands of history.
Moscow News recently published a photo¬
graph taken in Dushanbe, in Tajikistan, which
showed a group of armed civilians frisking
their fellow citizens, who were docilely stand¬
ing there with their hands up (see photo page
18). The caption read: "While politicians carve
up power, a third force is taking shape: the
street in arms."
Violence is nothing new for humanity,
especially for our country. But to understand the
nature of the violence now sweeping through
the republics of the ex-Soviet Union a violence
which, alas, has probably not yet peaked, hence
its very real threat to world civilization we
must be clear in our minds about what we mean
by "the street in arms". What is at issue is the
use of weapons on a massive scale, participation
in politics by large sections of the population as
part of a spontaneous phenomenon which is
prompted by widespread discontent and is out
of government control. But that is not all.
It is also, and perhaps above all, a specific
qualitative state at once social, moral and psy¬
chological of our people, which has lost many
of its finest qualities and whose behaviour is
gradually deteriorating to the point at which it
displays the familiar characteristics of the mob.
The mob, as we all know, is never the sum total
of the moral, psychological and intellectual
qualities of the individuals who comprise it.
Almost all the regions of our country are
now suffering from the consequences of the
Bolsheviks' criminal "policy of nationalities".
Extremely brutal repression of entire ethnic
groups and anti-Semitic campaigns disguised 17

18
as a struggle against "cosmopolitanism" were
part of the strategic logic of that policy. But,
contrary to that logic, the peoples of this
country lived on the whole in harmony with
one another until very recently at least
without any manifestation of hysterical hatred.
The most ruthless cases of repression of ethnic
groups were depersonalized administrative
acts. Several Caucasian peoples and the Cri¬
mean Tartars were deported beyond the Urals
with cold-blooded cruelty. The operative word
is cold-blooded. It goes without saying that no
one dared protest or come to the aid of those
peoples. If an order to shoot them on the spot
had been issued, they would have been shot.
On the whole, those who carried out cri¬
minal orders and those who were on the receiv¬
ing end did not hate each other personally. If
the orders had been countermanded, most of
those whose task it was to carry them out
would probably have been delighted. What
happens nowadays is very different: hordes of
normally peace-loving, hard-working peasants
storm into their neighbours' devastated vil¬
lages and their prisons not just to destroy and
loot, but to give free rein to their hatred by
brutalizing and humiliating.
During the darkest hours of the Stalinist
terror, the regime often used the people to per¬
petrate crimes. But then the people was an in¬
strument, not the author. Today the situation
has radically changed. While itself still the
target of violence, the people not the whole
people (though that is little consolation) is
increasingly instigating acts of violence as a
benevolent executioner.

This is what is meant by the expression
"the street in arms."
But how did this sorry state of affairs come
about? Must we accept that only a reign of
terror by dictatorial regimes can cause a people
to behave in a friendly and tolerant manner
towards other nations, religions and tradi¬
tions? After obtaining a degree of freedom, a
more liberal regime, and a chance at last to
for itself, is it really possible that this
people can regress to a state of savagery or at
the very least be willing to act as a docile in¬
strument for bloodthirsty rogues?
The reader will doubtless expect that such
an odious interpretation of events should, as
usual, be dismissed out of hand. But I'm afraid
I cannot oblige. Recent events in our society
have already cost us dearly and, alas, seem set
Above, the French
cartoonist Pancho's
contribution to an anthology
of drawings on the theme of
freedom. The book was
published in 1990 to mark
the thirtieth anniversary of
the foundation of Amnesty
International.
Left, "The street in arms":
a group of armed civilians
search their fellow citizens
for weapons in Dushanbe,
Tajikistan.
to prove even more disastrous. It would be sad
indeed if we failed to draw the necessary
conclusions from them, however unpalatable
they may be.
Any normal person regards the notion of a
people as sacred. Its capacity for moral regen¬
eration is enormous, but not unlimited. It
would be naive to assume that the effects of
seventy years of systematic attempts to stifle
the nation's healthy moral and intellectual
forces have been negligible, or that they have
been corrected by a few years of waffle about
universal human values and the virtues of
democracy.
At a time when our country is poised to
enter the civilized world of modern demo¬
cracy, ninety per cent of its people are vegetat¬
ing below the poverty line (today it would be
more accurate to describe them as destitute). A
similar percentage of the population have lost
social status and lapsed into the state of a
lumpen proletariat. Not only workers and
peasants, but the intelligentsia, shopkeepers,
army officers and politicians have lost their
class awareness, social structures, spirit of soli¬
darity, self-respect, sense of honour and even
basic professional skills. As for the new class 19

20
of business people, it is unfortunately still only
embryonic. One of the effects of a growing
lumpen proletariat has been that the mecha¬
nisms of public opinion no longer function
normally, and that moral standards and sets of
values have been lost.
"The worst thing is that people get used to
killing each other," said Nursultan Nazarbayev,
President of Kazakhstan, in a recent interview.
Murder and even collective killings have
become commonplace. Between news about
spring sowing and a report on the latest
fashions, radio and television journalists trot out
the daily death toll without batting an eyelid.
"That's where your perestroika and your
democracy have got us!" the diehards chant
gleefully. But they forget, or pretend to forget,
that for over seventy years the notion of loving
one's neighbour was steadily erased from the
hearts and minds of our people. Everything in
the system worked to that end, from social and
state institutions to the army, the secret police,
party ideology, education, the propaganda
system and the arts.
In comparison with the noble ideals we
were told to aim for, human life was presented
as something insignificant, a mere trifle. The
murder of one's neighbour or the death of this
or that individual in the name of those "lofty
aims" used to be glorified as an act of heroism.
That official attitude prompted people, once
they had been "freed from prejudice", to take
an active part in a multifarious enterprise of
humiliation, violence and extermination. At
least fifty million people ended up in gulags.
One person out of three in the Soviet Union
was either a victim or an executioner. And only
recently more than a million youngsters learnt
the rudiments of their trade, so to speak, on
the bloodstained battlefields of Afghanistan.
But our collective experience of this phe¬
nomenon is even more comprehensive than I
have just suggested. Several generations of men
and women lived, from the cradle to the grave,
in a society where absolutely everything, from
the structure of power and the economy, cul¬
ture, ideology, religion and education, was
founded on coercion, violence, fear and the res¬
triction of freedom. Sadly, the self-destructive



avalanche is now ready to move; looming high
above us, its mighty mass has begun to quake.
From time to time a fragment or two comes
crashing down. With such a peril in the offing,
extreme caution is called for. For who can say
what gunshot or cough may suddenly trigger
the avalanche, which, if it happens, will leave in
its wake a terrible trail of destruction?
La Déchirure,
a watercolour by
the American artist
Alice van Buren.
ANDREI ALEKSANDROVICH
NUIKIN
is a Russian journalist who
writes regularly for his
country's leading
newspapers and magazines,
notably Moscow News and
Novy Mir.
