A Tutsi dancer
(Rwanda).



Meaningful gestures
by Edouard Gasarabwe-Laroche
RWANDANS regard the human body as a
whole. They believe that every gesture
is part of a complex system of expres¬
sion that draws on the resources of language,
memory, tradition, the senses and intuition.
Gestures are always full of meaning, and if
Rwandans often strike rather statuesque atti¬
tudes when they gesticulate they know exactly
what they are doing.
They look on their environment as a land
scape which is alive with forces and symbols.
Against this eloquent backdrop, they repeat again
and again gestures that have remained unchanged
since the time of Gihanga the Inventor, the myth¬
ical figure who is said to have taught them the "cor¬
rect gestures" they should use in daily life, in rit¬
uals and in the practice of trades and crafts.
Gihanga is also thought to have shown them the
"correct shape", a combination of beauty and
efficiency, for drums, tools and weapons. 31

32
From earliest childhood, the young
Rwandan learns and gradually memorizes "cor¬
rect gestures", taking traditional behaviour as a
model.
Anyone who wants to understand the
meaning of these gestures must know about the
axes and planes of reference that correspond to
the architecture of the human body. Rwandans
believe that the vital centre of the body, situated
deep in the entrails, at the height of the navel, is
the intersection point of three axes: the vertical
axis, the left-right horizontal axis, and the front-
back horizontal axis.
The vertical axis coincides with the axis of the
World. It plunges downwards beneath the
ground, whence lethal forces rise, and reaches
upwards towards Heaven, whence life-giving
forces descend. This is the axis of life and death.
People all over the world have noted that
muscular strength and manual dexterity are
much more highly developed on the right-hand
side of the body than on the left, and modern
anatomical and physiological studies have dis¬
covered and analysed the biological causes of this
phenomenon. The right-left horizontal axis is
that of strength and weakness.



Observation of the gestures used by Rwan¬
dans shows that vision plays a decisive role in the
conception of the front-back horizontal axis.
A belief that evil creatures fear the human gaze
and only attack from behind or under cover of
darkness led to the custom whereby a symbolic
"backward-looking eye" is opened by making
a tonsure at the back of a baby's head.
ROOM TO MOVE
Taken in pairs, these horizontal and vertical
axes define a volume of space in which there are
three planes by reference to which body move¬
ments can be defined.
The vertical and lateral right-left axes
describe the so-called "frontal plane", in which
the body is silhouetted face on and occupies a
large area. On this plane, the only possible
movements arc those to right or left, leaps into
the air, and a lateral rotation of the body around
its "vital centre".
The gestures accomplished in this plane are
of little account in technical or social terms. In
traditional choreography, the participants are
grouped on each side of the principal dancer
familiarly referred to as the "navel" and move
successively to the right and to the left, vio¬
lently stamping the ground and tinkling bells
that are attached to their ankles, as if to crush the
deadly forces lurking underfoot. Reaching
upwards and jumping into the air, they appeal
for the heaven-sent blessings of life, strength, joy
and victory.
The vertical and front-back axes delimit a
plane that divides the body into two symmetrical
parts, a left-hand part and a right-hand part.
This is the median plane, against which the
body's silhouette, projected in profile, occupies
less space. The spinal column never moves out
of this plane. It cannot sway to right or left,
but can only curve forwards or backwards.
Arms and legs may be bent. Feet and hands
may be joined. The dancer can adopt a leaning
position, drop into a crouch or roll into a ball
all attitudes of concentration or protection. He
may also move forwards in the direction of
advance, flight or attack. The median plane is
that in which tools and weapons arc manipu¬
lated, in which individuals come into their own
as active agents.
The front-back and right-left axes define a
transversal plane which divides the body at
navel height and extends parallel to the earth's
surface. Here, the area of projection of the
body's silhouette is very small. The transversal
plane cuts through all the successive frontiers of
the world, which is organized in concentric cir-

cles, with the individual's dwelling-place as the
centre. This is predominantly the plane in which
social relations and communication with nature
take place.
EXPLORING SPACE AND TIME
The body is only alive insofar as it is quickened
by biological rhythms and explores space and
time by means of rhythmic gestures.
For the duration of several moons, attached
to its mother's back, a baby remains in close
physical contact with her and continues to feel
the rhythms with which it became familiar
during its gestation: the music of her respiration,
her heartbeat and her speech, the swaying of
her body as she walks and performs domestic
tasks, the calming language of lullabies.
Later, and indeed at every age, rhythm will
punctuate all the Rwandan's activities, at work
and at play. "Technical" rhythms transform raw
materials into goods or tools, while the rhythms
of song and dance and musical instruments have
a power which is exclusively symbolic. This
rhythmic aura envelops and transfigures
everyday life in Rwanda.
A lake in the Rwanda
highlands.
EDOUARD
GASARABWE-LAROCHE
is a French anthropologist who
has published many studies of
the culture of Rwanda and two
collections of traditional tales:
Soirees au pays des mille collines
(L'Harmattan, Paris, 1988) and
Kibiribiri L'Oiseau de pluie
(L'Harmattan, 1991).
