A story too far?
By removing
violence from its
context, the media
risk turning it into a
spectator sport
by Oaniel Herman!
Intervision (1955), oil on
canvas by Victor Brauner
and Roberto Matta.
WHENEVER the question of violence
comes up, the media tend to be
attacked on two grounds, one poli¬
tical, the other sociological. The political com¬
munity takes a very close interest in violence,
knowing as it does that violence and power are
directly linked. The stakes are so high that
politicians not only use direct coercion and
violence to govern, but have come to realize
that in a media-dominated society they also
need to look after their public image. Journal¬
ists are directly implicated in what might be
called the media strategy of political leaders
because it is through them that governments
get their message across.
The second reason for suspicion of the
media has more to do with society at large.
The media are made out to be the main vehicle
for the spread of violence and, because of their
amplifying effect, are thought to be respon¬
sible for an exaggerated perception of violence
on the part of the public. The growing feeling
of insecurity in cities may partly be the result
of violence itself, but it arises above all, or so
we are told, from the image of violence put
across by television. The image of violence that
is proposed perhaps "imposed" would be a
better word by the media influences behav¬
iour and encourages acts of violence, particu¬
larly by young people. According to this
thesis, the cult of force and the admiration of
brutality which are increasingly common
today have largely been spawned by the media.
The media, then, come in for wholesale cri¬
ticism from politicians, and are often used by
them as a scapegoat. For the sake of clarity, let
me start by making a distinction between two
situations relating to the representation of
31

Press photographers focus
on a demonstrator during a
farmers' day of action in
Paris in October 1992.
32
DANIEL HERMANT
is director of the Institut
Français de Polémologie in
Paris and of the journal
Cultures et Conflits. He has
published many articles on
political violence, conflict
situations and terrorism.
violence: the media's relationship with govern¬
ment, and the media's attitude to terrorism.
The first set of criticisms focuses on the
nature of the links between journalists and
government. Journalists operate within a media
strategy which, like any other strategy, can be
analysed in terms of effectiveness, resources and
goals. They are cogs in the machinery of govern¬
ment. Government can use their activities as an
extension of its own, and thus bolster its ability
to put pressure on the population. In authorita¬
rian countries, the role of the media is to put out
the officiai news that is the monopoly of the
authorities. In other countries, including the
democracies, they are often skilfully influenced,
not to say manipulated, by governments.
When the problem is examined in greater
detail, it becomes clear that news manipulation
is a well-established and versatile technique
which can range from mere omission to disin¬
formation and pure invention. Let us take an
extreme case, that of war. Over the last decade,
armed forces everywhere have developed com¬
munications strategies that have taken into
account the effect on public opinion, disastrous
from the point of view of the military, of the
American government's laissez-faire attitude
towards the media during the Viet Nam War.
Typical examples of such new strategies include
the strict control of journalists' reports filed
during the Falklands War, the absence of on-
the-spot reporters during the US expedition to
Grenada, and the mustering of a team of jour¬
nalists by the American military command
during Operation Desert Storm. In such situa¬
tions, cutting the media down to size has
become standard procedure.
The second criticism is connivance with ter¬
rorists, of which the media have often been
accused. Take the spectacular hijackings of air¬
craft that took place in the 1980s, especially that
of a TWA Boeing in 1985. Three American
television channels, ABC, CBS and NBC,
fought tooth and nail to get the most specta
cular pictures. They baulked at nothing, hand¬
ing out bribes and making deals with the mili¬
tias that called the tune in Beirut. The weekly
Newsweek even nicknamed ABC the "Amal
Broadcasting Corporation".
In France, when there was a controversy
over whether or not a girl pupil should be
allowed to wear an Islamic headscarf at school,
or when Ayatollah Khomeini's fatwa against
the writer Salman Rushdie triggered off
demonstrations, some journalists whipped up
public interest by broadcasting comments
from people who spoke only for themselves,
but whose impassioned declarations had an
effect on audience ratings because they
involved viewers emotionally. The fact is that
neither ideological sympathies nor constraints
enter into media connivance with terrorist
groups, which is guided purely and simply by
such considerations as ratings and sales.
Now let's look at an extreme case. When the
French journalist Jean-Paul Kauffmann and a
crew from the television channel Antenne 2
were kidnapped in Beirut, they were trans¬
formed, whether they liked it or not, from hos¬
tages into de facto protagonists of terrorism.
For almost three years, Antenne 2 opened its
main 8 p.m. newscast by displaying a list of all
the Beirut hostages and the number of days
they had spent in captivity. L'Evénement du
Jeudi, the weekly Kauffmann worked for, orga¬
nized campaigns to mobilize public opinion,
and its editor-in-chief made several trips to
Beirut to negotiate Kauffmann's release. The
media, which normally act only as a mouth¬
piece, an instrument for the transmission of
messages, here grabbed all the parts: it played
both the victim, the political protagonist (since
it tried to solve the problem), and the observer
reporting on the distress of the victim and his
family as well as on various attempts to get him
released in other words it commented on its
own activities.
DANGEROUS LIAISONS
Where the relationship between government
and the media is concerned, the point at issue is
not the exaggeration of violence but distortion
or censorship. Governments have always tried
to control the news media. What is more, it is
not regarded as shocking when they succeed,
for a certain form of violence is vested in the
state. Many think it normal, especially at times
of crisis, for government to control communi¬
cations, and therefore journalists.
What is open to criticism is the wider
application of that policy to every kind of
situation and every type of news, an approach
typical of countries under a dictatorial regime.
Fortunately, there are structural limitations to
this approach. News, like power, can rarely be
monopolized in a democracy, and the relation¬
ship between the authorities and the media can
be likened to a propaganda war between poli¬
tical forces, with journalists often managing to
maintain their independence. In the case of

authoritarian states, the plurality of news
sources is provided from outside.
The second problem the relationship be¬
tween terrorism and the media originates in a
more complex set of factors. Two kinds of inter¬
ests are involved, one political, the other com¬
mercial, which require the parties concerned to
co-operate rather than to seek to dominate. This
co-operation is based on the expectation of gain.
However, the interests of terrorists and the
interests of the media are not pursued at the
same pace or in the same way. So connivance
between them is possible only in the heat of the
moment. It is shortlived and hinges on the pos¬
sibility of getting a scoop. In 1979, in order to
secure a brief interview with one of the hostages
in the American embassy in Tehran, ABC tele¬
vision agreed to broadcast a twenty-five-minute
anti-American harangue. President Jimmy
Carter appeared on other channels, ostenta¬
tiously switching off ABC.
President Carter's symbolic gesture, which
highlighted the conflict between the two inter¬
ests, is a good illustration of the limitations of
the connivance that is possible between the
media and terrorism. The blatant opposition of
the political impact of ABC's scoop to the poli¬
tical position of the American government
robbed the device and those who used it of legi¬
timacy. ABC was vigorously attacked in the
American press for overstepping the mark.
Eventually, if tardily, the media rediscovered the
basic rules of journalistic practice.
In the final category under examination
that in which the journalist is a victim of vio¬
lence the distance between the message and
the messenger is blurred and even abolished.
Such a situation makes it difficult, if not
impossible, to distinguish between ends and
means, and thereby precludes any analysis in
terms of strategy or responsibility. This
explains why the notion of human rights has
come back into prominence in such cases.
In the difficult context of the relationship
between the media and violence, criticism of
journalists is justifiable in the first two cases.
Whether journalists are bought by govern¬
ment, or are happy to accept its prerogatives of
their own free will, or simply respond to their
concern as professionals to increase ratings and
earn money, they know what is at stake and
should assume their responsibilities. When
they oppose government, they can resist pres¬
sure by pleading the right to inform and the
freedom of the press. It would be dishonest of
them to put forward the same argument when
they yield to the siren voices of the scoop.
Some have tried to apply that interpreta¬
tion to the case of terrorism. They argue that
the enduring media interest in the hostage
issue is the equivalent of the scoops obtained
during the hijacking of aircraft. The media
have even been accused of keeping the news
value of the Beirut hostages at an artificially
high level which amounts to accusing them
once again of exaggerating violence. But mat¬
ters are not as simple as that. In this case it is
not possible to point to the interest factor
which had earlier played an important role:
surely viewers grew weary of the way atten¬
tion was focused on the hostages over such a
long period of time? In order to interpret this
type of relationship between violence and tele¬
vision a different approach is needed.
Up to this point, I have concentrated on the
people involved, and tried to gauge the effects
of their action on violence considered as a poli¬
tical or media resource. Now I should like to
broaden my analysis and take into account the
functioning of the media, which has its own
logic and creates effects that have nothing to do
with what journalists specifically intend.
The media constitute a self-contained world
whose function is to transmit pictures or news.
This world is not completely cut off from real¬
ity, since reality provides it with raw material.
But the key issue is the process whereby reality
is apprehended and then transferred to that self-
contained world. The only reality then becomes
that of the media, not that of the world, which is
simply chopped up and reused. A story achieves
its media existence and thus its "truth" when it
is picked up by several papers, radio stations
and television channels. The world of news-
gathering is largely self-referential. A story is
given wide coverage only if it has been assessed
according to the values of the system, and not
according to its source. Before being received,
news needs, so to speak, to be "formatted", to
use computer terminology. This approach is
encapsulated in the expression "making news".
INFORMATION OR SPECTACLE?
This process has several perverse effects. The
first of these is that violence loses its meaning.
In real life, violence is rational in the sense that
it serves a specific short-term purpose. In the
media in general, on the other hand, violence
has come increasingly to be treated as suffi¬
cient unto itself: the image is the thing that
matters and the accompanying commentary is
Algiers, 1985. An incident
during a hijacking.

a pointless embellishment. Violence presented
to individual viewers in this way enables them
to identify with what they see, just as they do
with fiction. This transition to a different level,
one of sensibility and spectacle, goes hand in
hand with the kind of trivialization of violent
images that inevitably results from following the
news non-stop. We get more and more images
from television, and less and less explanation of
them. They no longer have any definite mean¬
ing. They float in a media continuum.
In this continuum and this is another per¬
verse result of the system violence is removed
from the context which produced it, which gives
it meaning and which forms part of a story, a
social situation. Violence here becomes part of a
game or show, and like a game or a spectacle,
fascinates but does not create anything. The
spectacle of violence is a dead end. However
often it is repeated, it remains meaningless.
When the former President, and former actor,
Ronald Reagan said, after viewing the film
Rambo, that now he knew what he had to do,
there began to be some confusion in people's
minds about the difference between fictional
and actual violence.
This confusion has now become widespread,
with the advent of improved technology which
makes live television a fact of everyday life.
Many, for example, will remember the captain of
the TWA Boeing mentioned earlier being threat¬
ened with a pistol, which was in fact just a piece
of theatre, or the celebrated hoax of the Timi-
soara mass grave. The Gulf War, or rather its fic¬
tionalized media version, which was regarded
by Western public opinion as a gigantic war
game in which the enemy was no longer even
present, was highly symptomatic of that rela¬
tionship between violence and television.
Criticisms of the media treatment of violence
are, then, based on a number of misunderstand¬
ings. To begin with, the relationship between the
media and violence does not obey a single
schema. It may be analysed either in terms of the
people involved or in terms of the way the
media system functions. In the first case, the role
of journalists in the distortion or censorship of
acts of violence should be examined on a case-
by-case basis. Journalists belong to a social
group whose interests, ulterior motives and
honesty may vary. A hasty assessment of their
role is bound to lead to oversimplification.
When the way in which the media function
is analysed, however, a distinction must be made
between the media's role as purveyor of spec¬
tacle and its role as a provider of information.
Spectacle does not exaggerate violence; it simply
garbles its meaning, disconnects it from its poli¬
tical or social context, and removes it from the
real world. Information, on the other hand,
strives to put violence back into the context that
engendered it, to look at it in perspective and to
explain it.
Spectacle encourages viewers to remain pas¬
sive, while information spurs them to adopt a
more critical, judgemental stance. The whole
point of discussing the relationship between
violence and television is less to meditate on the
contagious effect that television images of vio¬
lence may or may not have than to encourage
information as opposed to media hype.
34
Music, violence,
and the quest for
harmony
A US Army General gives a
press conference in a hotel
in Riyadh, the capital of
Saudi Arabia, during the
Gulf War (1991).
