by Nicolas Michaux
One major subject left off the agenda of
the Rio Summit on Environment and
Development was the extremely sensitive
issue of population. However the topic is
set to come storming back. Another big
world conference is to be held in Cairo in
1994 specifically on this question which
presents such a serious challenge to our
future.
Unesco starts off better prepared for it
perhaps than other international institu¬
tions since it is the only organization in the
United Nations system with a social sci¬
ence sector.
Over the next two years, studies that
have already been begun on international
migrations will be continued and others
including studies designed to improve
birth control policies will be launched. In
particular, fertility rates will be examined
in regions such as sub-Saharan Africa and
^O the Caribbean.
FAMILY AND EDUCATION
1994 will also be the International Year
of the Family (an important meeting is
scheduled to be held in Malta) during
which Unesco will offer states technical
assistance for drawing up family policies
following on from the studies that have
been carried out for several years with this
in mind. Unesco is particularly concerned
to develop studies on the family and edu¬
cation. In 1995 it will contribute to the
United Nations Year for Tolerance and to
the World Summit for Social Development.
It will also pursue a variety of other activ¬
ities ranging from youth to questions of
ethics in research on the human genome.
In all these fields, as one of the officials
responsible for the sector, Souleyman
Baldé, points out, "Unesco does not do,
but gets things done". In other words, in
close co-operation with non-govern¬
mental organizations, states, networks of
researchers and other bodies, it promotes
studies on topics which it considers crucial
and helps specialists to compare their
findings and to make the results known.
In response to the appeal for peace
launched by the Secretary- General of the
United Nations, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali,
and to the requests of countries that are
struggling to emerge from war, Unesco is
also working for the consolidation ofpeace
and democracy. This involves a series of
activities including helping demobilized
soldiers to return to civilian life, the prepa¬
ration ofelections, and providing an intro¬
duction to parliamentary life and the con¬
cept of the public good in countries that
in some cases have no real experience of
democracy.
But the main objective of the Social Sci¬
ence Sector is "to give structural solidity to
its programme", in the words ofAli Kazan-
cigil, who is in charge ofUnesco's activities
to promote the international development
of social and human sciences, by estab¬
lishing international research programmes
on some of the major topics of the day.
However astonishing it may seem when it
is universally recognized that the major
challenges ofour time are global and inter¬
disciplinary by nature, specialists in the
human sciences and the research they
carry out are, according to him, "remark¬
ably isolated". The bipolarization of the
world was a great obstacle to joint research
under the auspices of an international
organization such as Unesco.
UPGRADING RESEARCH
The programme to foster social science
research and its applications, the title of
which is MOST (the Management of Social
Transformations) is to have an Intergovern¬
mental Council of thirty-three members
elected by Unesco's General Conference, half
ofwhom will be replaced every two years. It
is also to have a Scientific Committee ofnine
members, who will work to expand research
in the developing countries.
One of the principal underlying ideas
of the programme is that of bringing
researchers in the human sciences back
into the decision-making process. "All too
often they not only have no links with
other sectors or other countries, but have
no concern for the practical implications
of their research either. Decision-makers
too often complain that the only docu¬
ments they have are incomprehensible,"
says Kazancigil, who pleads for an
"upgrading of research".
A French researcher, Francis Godard, a
leader ofan interdisciplinary research pro¬
gramme on cities being carried out under
the auspices of the French National Centre
for Scientific Research (CNRS), stresses the
vital importance of this question ("it is in
cities that the future of human relations is
being decided") and the extent to which
the scientific community needs interna¬
tional programmes: "There is very little
contact between researchers," says Godard,
"and this leads to considerable wastage."
MOST is not only an English word. It
also means "bridge" in Russian.
