Encouraging diversity
THE major challenge that faces us today is how to The international community also has a duty to foster
manage and promote diversity as a positive force, the spirit of solidarity and an ethic of responsibility on
so that the recently released energies of ethnic, lin- the part of those in a position to help the most fragile and
guistic and spiritual solidarity serve as catalysts for vulnerable nations. This means that the recipients of
creativity rather than destruction, for concord rather technical expertise and resources from outside must be
than division. If the fading away of the Cold War has watchful and determined from the outset to maintain the
brought an era of ideological conflict to an end, the co-operation process on an equal footing,
hatreds it generated have already given way to ethnic At a time when the entire United Nations system is
antagonisms deeply rooted in memory. This has hap- returning to the roots of its mandate for the construc-
pened in Europe. It is happening in Africa. It is begin- tion of peace and when all countries, both industrial-
ning to happen in Asia. ized and developing, are turning once again to it as the
Humanity seems to be entering or, more precisely, irreplaceable forum in which to map out new interna-
to be re-entering an extremely dangerous era of tional approaches, we need vision and perseverance
ethnic and racial tension. Since the hostility of one more than ever before.
tribe towards another is among the most instinctive We have no choice but to promote a genuine world
human reactions, these resurgent forces need to be partnership for development, for the overrriding global
more vigorously combated than ever before. threat to the security and well-being of our planet is the
We must harness all our energies to promoting a cul- growing gulf between North and South. It is our duty to
ture of peace among and between human communities promote development as an endogenous, sustainable,
at all levels a culture of mutual respect and tolerance, a internationally equitable process centred on human
culture of public liberty, a culture of ethnic coexistence beings as individuals.
that fosters pluralistic and open societies within which We have a long way to go. A profound change in
human rights, fundamental freedoms and democracy behaviour and attitudes is required on the part of all. This
can flourish. The example of Yugoslavia is a grim requires first of all a spirit of solidarity that is inspired by
reminder of what can happen when long-suppressed the sense of a moral imperative to respect each other, to
yearnings are not recognized in time. share and work together, to promote the primacy of the
Maintaining cultural diversity requires us to work human person and basic human rights. This truly excep-
together to strengthen newly gained freedoms and tional time in history also calls for exceptional solutions,
openness while protecting each people against the pit- The world as we have known it since the end of the
falls of hastily transferred alien models. The achieve- Second World War is being radically reshaped. Great
ment of such a balance is important, whatever the tasks imagination, innovation and creativity are required,
nations must shoulder, whether in the context of man- International partnerships and interaction are an
aging the transition to a market economy, raising the important ingredient for creativity in problem-solving
citizens' standard of living, modernizing society a quality not possessed only by artists, poets and inven-
without destroying the ancestral values upon which it tors. This creativity means being adaptable, curious,
rests, or protecting cultural identity in the face of the flexible. It requires a willingness to frame bold questions
homogenizing forces of modern technological civiliza- instead of depending on traditional answers. It means an
tion. The aim must be to contribute to the pluralism of open mind, an open heart, and a sensitive awareness of
the entire planet as well as to the persistence of plural the need to encourage fresh definitions, reconcile old
societies in each nation-state. opposites, and help draw new mental maps for a chang-
The challenge is likewise to develop self-reliance and ing world. Ultimately it will be honest introspection,
reinforce endogenous resources, both material and openness to oneself, that will lead to compassion for the
human, with a view to increasing the number of trained experience of others, and it will be compassion that will
cadres, to reducing the often large discrepancies in lead us to a future in which the pursuit of individual
resources between one country and another, to learning freedom will be balanced with a recognition of the need
how to work together in a spirit of healthy competition, to provide for the common good,
and to developing the ability to function in the interna- The only way to meet these challenges is to follow
tional arena. the peaceful path of empathy and tolerance.
