Hindu-Arab roots ofmedieval
Europe M by Anóré Moró
A written numeration system
transmitted to the West from India
via the Arab world
34
ANDRE ALLARD,
of Belgium, is research director
at his country's National Fund
for Scientific Research
(F.N.R.S.) and a professor at
the University of Louvain. He is
the author of many works on
ancient and medieval science.
A T the beginning of Molière 's last play, Le
t\ Malade Imaginaire (1673), the hypochon -
M ldriac Argan uses a counting-frame an
abacus to reckon up the cost of the remedies
prescribed by his apothecary. He eventually
arrives at a total cost of "three and sixty pounds,
four sous, six deniers."
This method of counting, which dates back
to Antiquity, was quite common in Molière's
time. Though written numeration had been
known in the Latin West for several centuries,
and paper was in general use, the abacus with
counters was still often used in the seventeenth
and even in the eighteenth centuries. Leibniz
used one, and Voltaire's famous correspondent
Frederick II of Prussia took it as the pretext for
a quatrain:
"Courtesans are counters
Whose value depends on their place :
In favour, millions,
Noughts in disgrace."
The counting-frames still used in the Far
East and parts of Eastern Europe (the Chinese
xuanban, the Japanese soroban and the Russian
schoty) are linear abaci based on the same prin¬
ciple as those of ancient Greece and Rome.
How did counting devices of this kind come
to be superseded in the West by figures?
Counters, fingers and Indian
numerals
During the early Middle Ages (from the fifth cen¬
tury, which saw the fall of the Roman Empire, to
the ninth) Western writers' scientific knowledge
was limited to a speculative arithmetic based
mainly on the Introduction to Arithmetic by the
second-century neo-Pythagorean Nicomachus
of Gerasa, and a practical method of calculation
using counters, not written figures. These coun¬
ters were remotely descended, via the calculi of the
Romans, from the pebbles used by the Greeks of
Pythagoras's time to represent numbers.
For a long time the only rival to the counter
system was reckoning on one's fingers, as described
in the seventh century by the Venerable Bede in his
brief treatise De Temporibus ("On Times"):
"When you say one, bend the little finger of
your left hand and dig it into the middle of your
palm. When you say two, do likewise with the
bent second finger from the little one	 When
you say five, likewise straighten the second
finger from the little one. . . . When you say
ten times a hundred thousand, clasp both hands
with the fingers interlocked	"
This method of using the hands for counting
remained current for a very long time. A detailed
description of it (figure 1) can be found as late
as 1494 in one of the most important mathe¬
matical works of the modern era, Summa de
Arithmetica by Luca Pacioli (Luca di Borgo)
which was published at Venice in that year.

Portrait of the Italian
mathematician Luca
Pacioli(c.l44S-c.l5IO), by
Jacopo de' Barbari.
figure /. Numbering by band
Illustration showing a
method of using the hands
for counting taken from
Luca Pacioli's Summa de
Arithmetica, Geometría,
Proport/on/ e
Proport/ona/ità (1494), a
compendium of
mathematical knowledge.
Gerbert of Aurillac, who in 1003 became
Pope as Sylvester II, seems to have been one of
the first persons to propagate the use of Hindu-
Arabic numerals in Europe. He did so by bor¬
rowing from the Arabs of Spain the use of an
advanced type of abacus with twenty-seven
columns, on which counters made of horn could
be moved. The counters were usually marked
with the first nine numerals.
I From Baghdad to Toledo
In the early ninth century the Abbasid Caliph al-
Ma'mun founded at Baghdad an academy called
the House of Wisdom, which promoted cul¬
tural exchange with India, in particular transla¬
tions of manuscripts collected by his envoys.
The mathematician al-Khwarizmi, in addition to
his famous Kitab al jabr wa'l-muqabala, the
basic text of Arabic algebra, also wrote a "Book
of Addition and Subtraction" and a "Book of
Indian Arithmetic".
The latter work gave rise to two traditions.
One, exclusively Arabic and of the highest quality,
reached its peak in the ninth and tenth centuries.
The other, equally important, developed later. In
twelfth- and thirteenth-century Europe, and espe¬
cially at Toledo, translators and compilers of
Arabic books in Latin played a key role in the
development of mathematics in the West, com¬
parable to that played by the Baghdad scholars and
translators in the Islamic world.
Under the influence of the new mathematical
treatises they wrote towards the middle of the
twelfth century, reckoning by abacus, cither with
counters or in the sand (in which figures could
easily be written and erased), and on the fingers
gradually gave way to a system based on Indian
and Arabic methods. This was "algorism", a
word derived from al-Khwarizmi's name.
Based on the nine digits (figurae in Latin) and
the zero (sometimes called cifra in the Latin
texts, from the Arabic sifr, "emptiness", but
more often called circulus, "little circle"), algo¬
rism made it possible to perform traditional
operations on whole numbers (addition, sub¬
traction, duplication, multiplication, division 35

1 2th century
"Toledan" numbers
"Indian" numbers
Astronomical tables
13th century
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0
\ 3 3 S- 4 G ? S 7 0 / T
A, P r 7* fl V <r r
i, ï ¥ 9- °l ¿ 7 « ¿ û / f
Manuscript, Staatsbibliothek, Munich
123 4 56 7 89 0
1 P 3 JU/^ 4 £ V /7 S ? -^
i P >» /* ^ V 7 9 ?
Manuscr/pf, Biblioteca Apostólica, Vatican
15th century
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0
i X 3 4- r ¿ 7 S ; o
Book printed byJohann Widmann, Leipzig, 1489
This table shows how the
writing of numerals in the
West evolved from the two
series of figures originating
from the eastern and
western parts of the Arab
world (12th to 15th
centuries). The
manuscripts conserved in
Munich (12th century) and
in the Vatican (13th
century) show how the two
different forms continued
to exist side by side. The
numerals in Widmann's
book (late 1 5th century)
represent the culmination
of a process of evolution
that is still not fully
understood.
figure 2.
Turning the numbers 2 and
3 in their eastern Arabic
written form through
ninety degrees to the left
gives a fairly convincing
approximation to the
western Arabic forms and
shows how they may have
evolved into the forms
familiar to us today.
V
\>
and extraction of roots) faster and more reliably.
Contrary to a view widely held during the
Middle Ages and the Renaissance, numerals of
Indian origin brought to the West by the Arabs
owed nothing to the late Roman mathemati¬
cian of the sixth century, Boethius.
In the late thirteenth century most of these
treatises were eclipsed by the impressive "Book of
the Abacus" by the Pisan mathematician Leonardo
Fibonacci (Leonardo of Pisa). Contrary to what
its title might suggest, this work marked a final
break with the abacus tradition. Even more influ¬
ential were two highly successful works,
Alexandre de Villedieu's "Song on Algorism" and
Sacrobosco's "The Common Algorism".
For a long time Hindu-Arabic numerals were
written in Western manuscripts in a wide variety
of ways. From the outset translators were faced
with two series of figures, one from the eastern part
of the Arab world, the other from the western
Arab world. The latter seems to have developed as
a result of two factors the discovery of the prin¬
ciples of Indian arithmetic and the ways in which
the abacus was then used. This difference can
only be seen in a few Latin manuscripts (table at
top of page). In most cases Western copyists tran
scribed forms that were increasingly remote from
their originals. Obliged to write from left to right
(to which the Arabic shapes did not lend them¬
selves), they gave the figures only a symbolic
value and soon distorted their forms. This palaeo-
graphical evolution continued until the Renais¬
sance, and may have reflected Visigothic influ¬
ence. It is particularly striking in the cases of the
numbers 2 and 3 (figure 2).
I The triumph of algorism
By the tenth century if not before, the ease with
which calculations could be done with Indian
numerals led the Arabs to improve the technique.
Some methods spread in other ways than through
textbooks of arithmetic. Probably on one of his
many journeys, Leonardo of Pisa became familiar
with the Arabic method of calculating called
"houses", and used it to devise his own "checker¬
board" method a set of squares with all the
numerals written in them, on which diagonals
were drawn. This became very widespread.
At the dawn of the Renaissance a wood
engraving that was to become famous was made
at Freiburg-im-Breisgau. It showed the "Philo¬
sophical pearl" {Margarita Philosophica). On the
left a money-changer representing Boethius is
operating with Hindu-Arabic numerals and
looking cynically at one of his colleagues, who
with a shamefaced expression is working with
an abacus and counters according to the
Pythagorean tradition. Behind them, Dame Arith¬
metic shows clearly where her own preferences lie:
her dress is actually spangled with figures.
There could be no better illustration of the
triumph of figures in the medieval West, even
though the latter all too rarely acknowledged its
indebtedness to the Indian and Arabic civiliza¬
tions which bequeathed it, among other legacies,
this remarkable tool.
