WORLD OF BOOKS
An das of
world literature
Itwould be hard to imagine a more appro¬
priate work with which to launch this
column than Le Grand Atlas des Littéra¬
tures (The Great Atlas of World Literature)
published in Paris by Encyclopaedia
Universalis in 1990. The Atlas is a reference
book which also stimulates the reader to ask
fundamental questions about the nature of
literature.
What is literature? Is it simply a collection
of signs, as Roland Barthes maintains in Degré
zéro de l'écriture (Writing Degree Zero), signs
which bear no relation to ideas, language or
style but exist to define the isolation of a ritual
language? Or is it a mirror held up to history,
offering a wide range of ways of making sense
of an ever-changing, multifarious and
inescapable reality? Whether regarded as form
or essence, the fruit of mental activity for its
own sake, of political commitment or even of
political servitude, fiction in the form of epic
or drama, poetry or prose has long been the
subject of debate between the partisans of a
disembodied, incantatory "pure beauty", and
those who opt for a "useful" literature devoted
to political and moral education.
Of course, so-called "committed" litera¬
ture often ends up as little more than militant
pamphleteering, thus renouncing the essen¬
tial function of all art, which is to present
the world through the artist's unique, trans¬
forming vision. It is nevertheless true that
literature, perhaps more than all the other
arts, has always had a special relationship
with history, from the great Asian and
Mediterranean epics, the northern sagas and
the folktales of Africa, to Shakespeare and the
contemporary novel.
A THEMATIC APPROACH
The distinguishing feature of the 436-page
Atlas is its thematic approach, which intro¬
duces the reader to major works of the imag-
50 ¡nation from many countries, whilst at the
same time bringing him or her into the vital,
never-ending debate that revolves around the
same, oft-repeated questions: How was lit¬
erature born? How can it be defined? What
purpose does it serve?
This monumental tome offers stimulating
reflections on literary forms, structures and
genres and their links with the real world
and with philosophical and religious thought.
With the Atlas we journey through Africa,
India, southeast Asia, Japan and China, dis¬
covering en route the links that have been
forged in many parts of the world from the
earliest times down to the present between the
theatrical traditions of Europe and the East,
between poems, talcs and myths, between
abstract thought and signs.
Literature, the creation of a mind engaged
in a process of self-discovery which draws on
the imaginary and the real, cannot exist
without a material support the stone and
clay tablets of Mesopotamia, the volumen
or roll of papyrus (which began to be used
around the time of the appearance of writing
in ancient Egypt), and the codex, the form
taken by the book from the times of ancient
Rome and China until the glorious days of
the European Renaissance saw the birth of
modern printing.
The codex, which appeared in the Roman
empire during the first century of the
Christian era, consisted of sheets of manu-
f ê S
Littératures
script folded in two and grouped into a sec¬
tion called a gathering. The gatherings could
then be sewn together into a book. Codices
were used for sacred and profane subjects, for
story-telling and for purposes of adminis¬
tration. Most texts recorded on them were
later erased. Although the invention of
printing, which took over from the written
manuscript in Europe around the middle of
the fifteenth century, is still commonly attrib¬
uted to Johannes Gensfleisch, better known
as Gutenberg, the Atlas reminds us that
xylography (printing using engraved wooden
blocks) was known in China more than six
centuries before. By the ninth century the
new technique had reached Japan and Korea,
countries which were then subject to Chinese
cultural influence.
A MUSEUM
OF THE WRITTEN WORD
The Atlas also gives a full account of the
written word, from Sanskrit script and Asian
pictograms to medieval calligraphy and
modern printing, and of that verbal sorcerer,
the writer, whether Egyptian scribe or Hindu
pandit, avant-garde poet or exile in search of
a new homeland or new forms of expression,
Other themes treated in the Atlas include
the relationship between reading matter and
the reading public, the commerce in literature
and the literature of commerce, the devel¬
opment of libraries those temples of the
book and the eventful history of publishing
from the earliest days of printing to the mega-
publishers of today. Meanwhile, Gutenberg,
bright central star of his galaxy, looks mis¬
chievously down at McLuhan and the flood
of images that threatened to displace his
invention, the modern book.
An inexhaustible treasure-house of facts
and stimulating ideas, the Grand Atlas des
Littératures draws on the work of major
authorities in linguistics, sociology, palaeo¬
graphy and anthropology. It is also, through
the outstanding quality of its illustrations
maps and photographs, drawings, reproduc¬
tions of paintings and early printed manu¬
scripts a museum of literature and the world
of the imagination.
EDGAR REICHMANN
Writer and iritii
