How far is
the integration
of Europe's
immigrant workers
really possible?
GUESTS, IMMIGRANTS,
MINORITIES
by Riva Kastoryano
Turkish immigrants play
chess in Rome (1990). I
I ^1 HE modern nation-state, which is based on
a universalist ideology, invented the con¬
cept of citizenship so as to include all
people, irrespective of the communities to which
they belong, as individuals with equal rights. But
the cultural, linguistic and religious diversity of
modern societies has persisted, to the point where
the notion of minorities has re-emerged.
The term minority refers to a community
which organizes itself around an identity that
is different from that of society as a whole,
which expresses that difference publicly and
demands to be recognized for what it is. Such
minorities may be religious, national or ethnic.
National minorities demand recognition of a
territory of their own within the nation-state.
Regional minorities put forward certain spe
cific claims arising out of their geographical
location.
Ethnic minorities are more difficult to define
precisely, since they encompass the twin con¬
cepts of cultural community and social class. In
the United States, for example, in spite of the
cultural diversity on which the nation is based,
people disadvantaged not only by their ethnic,
racial, national or religious origin, but also by
social class, are designated as minorities. .
In Europe, the large-scale immigration that
has taken place since the 1960s has created sim¬
ilar situations. Yet in contrast to the practice in the
United States, immigrant populations in Europe
are not defined as minorities, but as immigrés
("immigrants") in France and as Gastarbeiter
("guest workers") in Germany and Switzerland. 33

An anti-racist
demonstration in Paris
(1990).
34
RIVA KASTORYANO,
of France, is currently carrying
out research at the Centre for
International Studies and
Research, Paris, on the
expression of identities and
community action among
migrants in Europe. Among
her publications are Etre turc
en France: Réflexions sur familles
et communauté (L'Harmattan
publishers, Paris, 1986) and
"Integration and expression of
collective identities of migrants
in France and Germany", a
study which appeared in the
Journal of Ethnic Studies
(1992).
Behind these differences in terminology, which
reflect the influence of national thinking on the
subject, a convergence between European immi¬
gration and integration policies can be seen.
Immigration in Europe grew out of efforts to
promote economic reconstruction after years of
war and stagnation. Some states, such as Ger¬
many, signed bilateral agreements with coun¬
tries of the Mediterranean basin. Others, such as
France, the United Kingdom and the Nether¬
lands, opened their doors to the peoples of their
former colonies. Some, such as Germany, laid
down a specific policy on immigration. Others,
such as France and the United Kingdom, implic¬
itly acknowledged that foreign workers were
there to stay for some time. The immigrant
workers themselves saw their situation as an
opportunity to move up the social ladder back in
their home countries. This economically-driven
immigration movement was thus seen by both
sides as a temporary expedient.
Today the fact that the immigrants and their
families have settled permanently is paralleled
by forms of integration that vary from group to
group and from country to country. The ways in
which immigrant communities set about orga
nizing themselves are strongly influenced by the
historical, economic, cultural and political links
between their countries of origin and the host
countries. Even so, a common pattern of activity
can be discerned. In every country, immigrants
mobilize in a bid to achieve equal rights to jobs
and housing; they fight discrimination; they react
against racism; and they seek to obtain some
form of political representation that will bring
them respect and recognition.
SHAKE» LOYALTIES
Demands for a say in political matters are voiced
through a variety of associations. Since the 1 980s,
almost every European nation has seen the rapid
spread of associations of this type catering specif¬
ically for the children of immigrants. The net¬
works they form, which are based on shared
national and religious loyalties, become chan¬
nels for a mutual aid system providing, among
other things, basic legal information on such
matters as entry and residence rights and for¬
malities, employment and housing.
In France, for example, once an immigrant
worker has settled in the country and so has legal

status, the associations promote his or her inte¬
gration into society through language and lit¬
eracy courses for adults and education and
training programmes for the young. They also
organize debates, concerts and other types of
performance to increase public awareness of the
group's indigenous culture and to make people
more responsive to their particular situation.
These associations depend for their survival
largely on government grants to the main sectors
involved in the integration process, such as
employment, housing and community life. In
its support for socio-cultural activities, the gov¬
ernment encourages community events such as
the celebration of national holidays. Govern¬
ments regard the right granted to foreigners, as a
legally recognized category, to form associations
as being primarily aimed at encouraging civic
equality. However, some researchers see this sup¬
port as a deliberate policy to perpetuate the
minority status of immigrants, since in their view
the authorities are intent on controlling the types
of organization created, on steering the immigrant
population in a given direction, and, if neces¬
sary, mobilizing it for that purpose.
Through the associations, the immigrants'
A poster from the time of the French Revolution
(1792).
sense of identity is strengthened and they are all the
more eager to win recognition for their distinctive
features. They also establish new ties in which
economic, social and political interests go hand in
hand with the desire to assert their identity, a
desire that prompts them to negotiate with the
authorities and the machinery of the state. Even in
a political context in which citizenship is seen as
the only path to integration, this approach is two-
edged, insofar as it establishes a defacto minority
status.
In the debate on immigration in France, the
term "minority" is never used, since the French
state has traditionally regarded itself as universalist
and secular. In Germany the word has a very
different connotation. The idea of the German
nation, founded on a community of culture, lan¬
guage and even blood, rules out all cultural dif¬
ferences. Since, by their very nature, they cannot
belong to a nation defined in these terms, the
Gastarbeiter also referred to as Ausländer ("for¬
eigners") or as ausländische Mitbürger ("foreign
fellow-citizens") claim minority status and
demand a policy on minorities that will secure
their political recognition.
The Netherlands is the only European country
that expressly refers to "minorities", although
they are still not defined as a legal category. Minori¬
ties have been officially described as "caravan-
dwellers and legal residents such as Indians, Suri¬
namese, Gypsies, refugees and migrants". In order
to create conditions conducive to their emanci¬
pation, the formation of groups on a national or
religious basis is encouraged. These are assured of
playing an active part in social and political life as
pressure groups.
In the United Kingdom, according to John
Rex, the immigrant communities are not simply
ethnic groups seeking to preserve their cultural
identity and negotiate their status as minorities
with society as a whole. They are more ambitious
in that they seek to work in conjunction with the
nation's institutions in order to win the support
of majority opinion.
The prospect of a united Europe reopens the
whole issue of the integration strategies of the var¬
ious countries. Fresh scope for negotiation,
extending further than the framework of the
nation-state, is emerging for all national and reli¬
gious communities. In years to come, minority
status will have to be based on a multicultural
conception of citizenship. In a society that has
raised the banner of multiculturalism on the insti¬
tutional, national, regional and even religious
levels, the assertion of minority identity will
come to seem the only real course of action. 35
