TTf g P V I g W
HUBERT REEVES
talks to
Baligat EInadi and Adel Rifaat
Montreal-born astrophysicist Hubert
Reeves Is Director of Research at
the French National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS). An
accomplished popularizer of
science, he has made astronomy
accessible to a wide non-specialist
readership through a number of
best-selling books, including Atoms
of Silence (IVIIT Press, 1984) and
The Hour of Delight: Cosmic
Evolution, Order and Complexity
(W.H. Freeman and Company,
1991), and two Illustrated books.
Poussières d'Etoiles (1984) and
Compagnons de Voyage (1992, in
collaboration with Jelica
Obrenovitch), both published by
Editions du Seuil, Paris. In this
exclusive interview, he discusses
current knowledge of the universe
and gives his views on a number of
urgent world problems.
It is rare for a scientist also to be a popu¬
larizer of science. In your case, you are even
a poet as well
I realized quite early on that there was
something about astronomy that a lot of
people found interesting. In my case, it all
began with my own children. When we were
staying in holiday villages, we would get
together and naturally we would all talk
about the things we knew. In the evenings, as
we sat outside beneath the beautiful cloud¬
less sky, I would talk about the stars. As I
went on from the stars to the planets, and
from the birth »of the universe to life on
Earth, it was inevitable that I would try to
share with my listeners my sense of wonder
at the adventure of the cosmos.
To my great surprise, I found that more
and more people were willing to listen to my
way of explaining things, which combined
scientific language and touches of poetry.
This encouraged me to write my first book.
Atoms of Silence, which very nearly turned
out to be my last, since the pubHshers I sent
the manuscript to did not have the same
reaction as my audience of holiday-makers.
Altogether, some thirty-odd publishers
rephed, in so many words, that nobody was
interested in the problems of astronomy.
In the end, the French publishing house
Le Seuil agreed to take the risk of publishing
it. They had 3,000 copies printed, but gave
me to understand that they did not really
expect them all to be sold. In the event, sales
of Atoms of Silence have just topped 500,000
copies. This was a revelation to me as well as
my pubhshers. It showed that a vast pubhc
was interested in these questions and wanted
information about them which was rigor¬
ously scientific without lacking the freshness
and directness of a poetic approach.
Isn't something more than poetry in¬
volved in this mass phenomenon^ Isn't it
something to do with the mystery of cre¬
ation, in short with the religious sense?
Yes, I think it is. Nowadays, people want
to know much more than how things work.
Knowledge alone is not enough. More and
more people are wondering about the ulti¬
mate meaning of the universe.
All through the nineteenth century and
until the middle of the twentieth, there was a
tendency for people to put their trust in
science as a panacea. During the Second
World War, and especially with the threat of a
nuclear holocaust, people began to have
doubts, to live in a climate of insecurity and
feel anxious about the future. Science had
been instrumental in solving many serious
problems, but it had created others, and some
of the uses of scientific progress had given
rise to terrible threats. This meant that science
in itself was not exclusively beneficial, that its
development and applications needed to be
carefully monitored. Other beacons would be
needed to help us find our bearings, although
of course we should not lose sight of the sign¬
posts provided by scientific knowledge. To
my mind this is why there is such tremen¬
dous interest in astronomy, which seems to
come closest to the origins of the great mys¬
tery of existence, to those areas where physics
seems almost to merge into metaphysics.

what you say is very true. A few years
ago a friend of ours was extremely upset
because he had read somewhere that the Big
Bang theory had been called into question.
By being deprived of the certainty of the Big
Bang, he felt he had been robbed of an ex¬
tremely reassuring idea a discovery that
reconciled science 


with Genesis.
That's the kind of thing people sometimes
feel, although I would not go quite so far
myself.
The question you ask is how far the evo¬
lution of the universe is due to necessity and
how far to chance.
That's right. Until the nineteenth century,
roughly speaking, physics was extremely
deterministic in its approach: everything
fitted together, the same causes always pro¬
duced the same effects, and evolution was
governed by implacable laws. Then, from
Darwin onwards, the element of chance
came gatecrashing into scientific thinking,
and concepts like adaptation, mutation and
the survival of the fittest introduced a
random dimension. This opened up a tre¬
mendous debate.
Nowadays, we tend to think that neces¬
sity and chance are indissociable. The laws of
physics, for example, cannot be contravened,
but they apply in a given field of determina¬
tion. Outside that field, they cease to apply.
At the same time, events are taking place in
the universe, in other words there are new
and unpredictable occurrences that can be
explained by an unprecedented combination
of factors. I prefer to use the word "play"
rather than "chance" to describe what hap¬
pens. The way in which the laws are meshed
together is such that there is bound to be
some margin of play. To put it differendy,
without playing on words, the random ele¬
ment is necessary in nature. This was
demonstrated a long time ago in quantum
physics, with Heisenberg's uncertainty prin¬
ciple, and it has just been demonstrated again
on a broader scale with deterministic chaos
theories.
Let's take a simple example. At the pre¬
sent time, there are five billion human beings
on Earth, all subject to the same physical
laws, and yet all different from one another.
The fact that we each have our own persona-
Hty, history and destiny clearly shows that
the laws of nature, no matter how constrict¬
ing they may be, allow ample scope for
play, for the unpredictable, in short for
freedom.
Another example is that of snow crys¬
tals. When we look at them under the micro¬
scope, we see that they are all six-pointed.
This is the law: if they do not have six
points, they are not snow crystals. But when
we look at them more closely we see that
although they all have six points, they are
different. Magnificent books have been pro¬
duced containing nothing but pictures of
snow crystals, which are so beautiful precisely
because they have an identical structure but
an infinitely modulated pattern. When it
comes to people, just as in the case of snow
crystals or butterflies, nature is concerned
with two things: on the one hand, it orga¬
nizes things, lays down laws and establishes
order; on the other, it breaks the deadly
monotony of order by introducing flaws and
leaving room for uncertainty and indetermi¬
nacy, in other words diversity.
Do you mean that evolution could have
taken a different course from the one it hasf
Yes, but only up to a point. This possibi¬
lity exists within the margin of uncertainty.
However, the element of necessity dictates
some of the broad directions taken by evolu¬
tion. If you take a galaxy, for instance, there
is an evolutionary line that leads to the for¬
mation of stars. This is the extent to which
determinism is involved. However, it is
impossible to predict the birth of the specific
and unique star that we know as the Sun.
The Sun might well not have existed. This is
where the random element comes in.
In the same way, the Earth, with all its
very specific features, might well have not
come into being at all. However, given that it
does exist and given all the conditions
involved in its creation, it would perhaps
have been possible to predict the appearance
of life on it, but certainly not to predict that
there would be some forms of life rather
than others, that there would be elephants,
for example, rather than kangaroos. Again,
given the existence of the human species, it
would have been possible to predict or at
least to hope that humans would continue
to exist until now. But nobody could have
predicted that the three of us would be born
and that we would be sitting here together
today.
It is true that nobody could have made
such a prediction. But isn't this because our
system of knowledge, our technical equip¬
ment, and our ability to master all the rele¬
vant data are inadequate? Or is this some¬
thing that is objectively impossible, a sort of
built-in resistance of reality because reality
includes the unpredictable?
Reality includes the unpredictable and
random element. This is at the very heart of
chaos theories.
Is this an extension of the uncertainty
principle?
The uncertainty principle deals with the
infinitely small. Indeed, after this principle
had come to light and had been accepted by
the scientific community, it was long
thought to apply only on the scale of the
atom. On a larger scale there was no prob¬
lem: we had cast-iron laws. And then, all of
a sudden, it was realized that even the orbits
of planets could be chaotic under certain

conditions. For example, one of Jupiter's
satellites follows so strange an orbit that
nobody can predict what its direction will be
to within three days. This may sound amaz¬
ing to you, but it is a fact. You may have
every conceivable kind of data on its past
trajectory and a whole array of computers to
help you, but you cannot predict, here and
now, what its trajectory will be in three days'
time. It is not that our instruments are inade¬
quate for the purpose. It is because, in a
manner of speaking, the satelhte itself does
not know.
So chaos theory has put an end to sim¬
plistic determinism, which dominated both
scientific and philosophical thinking for cen¬
turies. By the same token, the theory has
given a solid boost to the idea of freedom. In
the past, people said you may think you have
a choice, but it's really only an optical illu¬
sion, everything is decided beforehand. Now
it's different, and even physics demonstrates
the contrary. We can now cast out all our
doubts and cry "Long live freedom!"
Now that you have reassured us about the
element of freedom we enjoy, let's get back
to the pattern which, somewhere between
necessity and chaos, defines the actual logic
of evolution, the pattern you call the
pyramid ofcomplexity.
I use the image of the pyramid by analogy
with that of written language. The logic of
written language is pyramid-like: it uses
several letters to form a word, several words
to form a sentence, several sentences to form
a paragraph, several paragraphs to form a
chapter, and several chapters to form a book.
It proceeds from the most elementary to the
most complex, from the most numerous to
the least numerous.
Evolution proceeds in the same way. It
creates a particle and then takes several par¬
ticles to make an atomic nucleus and so on
an atom, a molecule, a star, a planet, a cell, an
organism. The Big Bang could be said to be
the primeval explosion that produced the let¬
ters of the cosmic alphabet. From that point
onwards, we can date each stage of the
pyramid of complexity over the past fifteen
billion years.
There has been a great deal of debate
recently about the last fifteen billion years.
Perhaps it would be more interesting to ask
you about the next fifteen billion years. Or,
more seriously, at this point in time, what
can wepredict will happen?
There are two main opposing arguments.
We know that since the universe was created
it has been tending to cool down, and hence
to thin out and expand. The galaxies are
moving farther and farther apart. This is
going to continue for quite some time to
come, say for another forty billion years.
Everybody is agreed on this. Where opi¬
nions differ is on what is liable to happen
after that. Will the universe go on cooling
down and rarefying, or will it start heating
up again, 


with the galaxies coming closer
together again? In order to resolve this awe¬
some question, we need a mass of facts that
have not so far been very clearly established.
For the moment, however, there is a body of
evidence that suggests that the temperature
of the universe will continue to fall. But this
evidence is inconclusive. It is equally pos¬
sible to maintain the contrary.
What about the theory of thermal equili¬
brium?
Well, it had a considerable influence on
scientific thinking in the first half of this cen¬
tury, but fortunately it has now been super¬
seded. The theory arose out of discoveries
made in thermodynamics. It can be summa¬
rized by imagining what happens when you
put an ice cube in a glass 'of whisky. After a
short while, the ice melts and the whisky
gets cooler When you started, you had two
different temperatures, but at the end you
have only one, because the two temperatures
have come into balance. This was considered
a law of nature and it was applied to cosmic
evolution. Broadly speaking, what people
said was that at the beginning there were hot
bodies stars and cold bodies planets.
The conclusion they came to was that, with
the course of time, the temperature differen--
rials would diminish and would then cancel
each other out. However, when everything is
at the same temperature, nothing can
happen. This is what was called thermal
death. At the end of the last century, it was
predicted that the universe was inescapably
moving towards thermal equilibrium, and
hence to its death.
You can imagine the reactions that this
belief triggered off, even outside scientific
circles. William James said, in so many words,
that there was no longer any need to be
concerned about the future and to try and
improve things, since in the end there was
only nothingness. Lévi-Strauss took up the
same idea and even stressed the fact that the

more we laboured and exerted ourselves, the
greater the disorder and ultimately the
entropy. In other words, we were bound to
hasten thermal death through our own efforts.
Has anyone found an antidote to thermal
death?
Yes. On the scale of galaxies and stars, the
tendency towards thermal equilibrium has
not been borne out. In fact, the opposite has
been observed: over the past fifteen bilHon
years, evolution has been accompanied by an
increase in temperature differentials. Right at
the beginning, in the very first moments of
the Big Bang, the temperature of the uni¬
verse was constant. Then temperature differ¬
entials gradually started to occur. Had there
been any likelihood of thermal death, it
would have been in the past, not in the
future!
How do you account for such a mistake?
People were unaware of the importance of
gravity. The effect of the force of gravity is
not to reduce temperature differentials but
rather to increase them. In your glass of
whisky, the force of gravity is minute and
can be disregarded. But it is a quite different
matter on the scale of galaxies. As you can
see, that changes everything. From the philo¬
sophical standpoint, for example, it allows
people to take a hopeful view of things and
have a vision of the future in which effort is
meaningful and the struggle for a better
world is fully justified.
Where does natural evolution fit into this
vision of the future? Will the pyramid of
complexity suddenly stop growing? If not, is
the human species, in turn, going to make
way, in two or three million years' time, for
something more complex and sophisticated?
This is an assumption that obviously
cannot be ruled out a priori The pace of
change is constantly speeding up. The first
cells emerged four billion years ago and the
first living organisms 500 million years ago.
The human brain is less than two million
years old. Since then, it has tripled in size. In
the space of two million years, it has grown
from 500 to l,400g. You ask where do we go
from here. Things can continue to evolve.
but we don't know towards what. We are
completely in the dark.
As the brain continues to develop, is it
conceivable that human beings may become
nothing but walking brains in the next two
million years?
You have to remember that the brain
needs a body to perform all sorts of vital
functions. But this is an area where the wild¬
est flights of fancy are possible.
Let's leave the distant future to our dis¬
tant offspring and ask instead whether the
planet will still be inhabitable, aplace where
human beings can live, in a hundred or two
hundred years ' time?
There are a number of immediate threats
and the world is starting to become aware of
them. The UNESCO Courier has this year
published a large number of articles on the
problems of the environment, population
pressures, and so on.
Do you share the view of some scientists
that the continual growth of the world's
population is the greatest threat ofall?
It is a great danger. But I would not say
that it is the great danger. Let me explain.
The greatest threat comes from the amount
of carbon dioxide discharged into the atmos¬
phere, but the main culprit is not the popula¬
tion of the Third World, although it is the
largest in terms of numbers, but the popula¬
tion of a number of the most affluent and
industrialized countries. Some 10 per cent of
humanity is responsible for more than 80 per
cent of the carbon dioxide emitted into the
atmosphere. The main danger lies not so
much in numbers as in social and political
factors, in the very unequal distribution of
wealth in the world.
How would a more balanced distribution
ofwealth reduce the carbon dioxide hazard?
There are now five billion of us on Earth.
In the year 2050, the figure will have risen to
twelve billion, or perhaps even fifteen bil¬
lion. The question is whether we can provide
those fifteen billion people 


with a decent
standard of living that is also compatible
with the ecological balance, in other words
with the health of the planet. This decent
standard of living will obviously be much
higher than that of the Third World at pre¬
sent, but it is also bound to be lower than
that which the richest countries now enjoy.
We in the North will have to stop wasting so
much energy and get accustomed to being
more frugal.
Let's suppose that wealth has been equi¬
tably redistributed. People will have found
grounds for solidarity and justice and
become reconciled with one another. Yet will
they necessarily have laid the foundations of
a pact reconciling humankind with the bio¬
sphere? Such a pact will certainly not come
about automatically. A fairer distribution of
wealth is a necessary but not a sufficient
condition for that. A tremendous worldwide
mobilization of skills, talents and energies
will be needed, and many of the resources of
science and technology will have to be called
on. Compared with this exercise, the
resources that were mobilized to build the
atom bomb in the 1940s or to put a man on
the Moon in the 1960s were no more than a
drop in the ocean. This is the major problem
that humankind will have to face in the next
century. And that is why it is so urgent to
resolve the political, economic and ethnic,
conflicts that are still tearing humanity apart,
to cease squandering the forces and consum¬
ing the energy that it so badly needs to
commit to the general struggle for survival.

ixnoRim m m
You look upon it as a struggle for sur¬
vival?
What will happen if we in the industrial
countries continue, as we are doing now, to
generate heat for our industries, our cars, our
household amenities and so on? We shall
discharge more and more carbon dioxide
into the atmosphere. That gas will continue
to raise the Earth's temperature until it
reaches the critical threshold, beyond which
it will no longer be possible for life to repro¬
duce. I really am talking about a struggle for
survival.
Do you think that international bodies
should be strengthened to cope 


with this
situation?
We shall certainly need international deci¬
sion-making bodies with more clout than
today. Some means or other will have to be
found to ensure that the overriding interests
of humanity are expressed and heeded, and
eventually given precedence over selfishness.
Failing that, the problems we are talking
about will not be solved. People are, to some
extent, coming to be aware of the need for
this. But we also have to avoid the dangers of
a sort of world government or power
without any checks and balances, which
could very soon turn out to be overmighty.
A balance has to be struck somewhere, but
unfortunately I have no idea how.
What a pity. There is one last question
that takes us far, far away from our Earth-
bound problems. To go back to the pyramid
of complexity, we have seen that the exis¬
tence ofprimary particles eventually led to
the development of the human brain. This is
what happened on Earth, a planet that fulfils
a number of specific conditions and is
situated at a certain distance from the Sun. Is
it not possible that this particular configura¬
tion, which has enabled life and sub¬
sequently human consciousness to emerge,
may also have occurred somewhere else? Is it
not plausible that there have been or are
other civilizations in the billions of other
existing galaxies?
The first answer is that we don't know.
We have not picked up any messages. We
have no proof. But that does not stop us spec¬
ulating. And it is true that there are several
reasons to believe that many extra-terrestrial
civihzations do indeed exist.
The main reason is that there is a good
chance of the conditions responsible for the
emergence of life and the human species on
Earth being reproduced or having been
reproduced long ago somewhere else. The
conditions required are a planet and a bio¬
sphere where the temperature is neither too
high nor too low, so that water exists in its
liquid state. There is a general feeling that
water in its liquid state is essential. If the
temperature is too high, water evaporates, as
on Venus and Mercury, and if it is too low,
water freezes, as on Mars. Only the Earth is
situated at the right distance from the Sun,
and therefore has a range of temperatures
that enables water to exist in both liquid and
gaseous states. That is apparently what is
needed for life to develop. Now there is
nothing particularly exceptional about that.
Of the 100 billion stars in our galaxy
alone not to speak of other galaxies there
must be two billion or so that are similar to
the Sun. If they are orbited by planets and
there is no reason to believe they are not
there must surely be millions, or even hun¬
dreds of millions of planets, where conditions
are like those on Earth. We can conclude that
there may be a large number perhaps even a
very large number of inhabited planets, on
which life may have currendy reached very
different stages. The more recent planets may
have reached the point where they have
something akin to the blue-green algae that
lived in our primal ocean or to the dinosaurs
that walked the Earth some 200 million years
ago. Planets older than our own may have
reached a more highly developed stage than
ours. Here again, one can give free rein to
one's poetic imagination.
