INTERVIEW
James D. Watson
talks to
Serafín García Ibáñez
The American geneticist and biochemist
James Dewey Watson is one of the pioneers of research
into molecular biology. Keenly interested in
crystallography, his investigation of ribonucleic acid led
him to tackle the mystery of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid),
whose double helix structure he unraveled, with Francis
Crick, in 1953. For this major scientific discovery of the
twentieth century James Watson, Francis Crick
and Maurice Wilkins were awarded the 1962 Nobel Prize
for Physiology or Medicine. In this interview with the
Unesco Courier, James Watson reveals his hopes and
fears for the future of research, and talks of the
complex and important question of bioethics. His
published works include Molecular Biology of the Gene
(1965), and The Double Helix (1968).
serafIn garcía ibáñez
is ;i journalist with
U'.e sco's Office of Public Information.
The DNA discovery was one ofthe cru¬
cial scientific breakthroughs of the post¬
war years, and it also made you and your
colleague Francis Crick famous world¬
wide. . . .
DNA, the molecule, made me famous. I
didn't make the molecule famous. It's the
most important molecule of all in the sense
that it carries our genetic instructions. The
fact that the answer was so simple partly
explains why we became so famous but
that was because the molecule was simple,
not because we had found a simple way of
interpreting it to people outside. So we
became famous because DNA had such a
likeable structure.
What led you into biology in the first
place?
I went into biology because I was inter¬
ested in what life was. Where did we come
from? Initially I was very excited by what
I had learned about Charles Darwin and
the theory of evolution, that we weren't
created as it was stated in the Bible and
there was no Ark or anything like that.
Instead there were several billion years of
evolution. But how did the whole thing
start? What was really the basis of the con¬
tinuity between one organism and another?
Why do some animals grow up to be cats
and some grow up to be human beings?
And the answer turned out to lie in our
genes. It's instructions which are carried in
our genes which make us a human being or
a bacterium or a monkey. And so if the
real uniqueness of a living form lies in the
set of instructions that is the genes, I
wanted to know what the gene was.
Initially I had thought I was going to be
a naturalist, with particular interest in
birds I had grown up on the south side of
Chicago not too far from the steel mills, so
my aim was not to live in a city but to
escape into nature and to study nature.
But then I got interested in what the gene
was, so I didn't go outside, I stayed inside,
in my little laboratory, at least to start with.
What was the immediate significance of
the discovery of DNA? What prospects
did it open up?
Its significance was that, since it was the'
genetic molecule, it was the most important
of all molecules inside cells. If you're asking
what did we plan to do with it, initially we
didn't know. We had to find out how it
worked. Many, many thousands of people
are now involved in that search. When we

found the structure, there were only a few
people interested in DNA. Now there are
hundreds of thousands.
Picasso once said, "I do not seek, Ifind".
Is that a statementyou could apply to your
own career? In other words, is scientific dis¬
covery in your experience the result of
carefulplanning, or does it have more to do
with luck?
I think in most cases it's a product of
both. You generally don't find gold unless
you're looking for it. You have to have an
objective. Whether you then reach it partly
depends on how many other people are
out there trying to prospect for gold.
Luckily, when we were there, almost no-
one else was prospecting. In fact there were
only three groups in the world trying to
find the gold that DNA turned out to be.
And we found it first.
I'd like to ask a question about the tech¬
nical background to discovery. Research
nowadays has extraordinary means at its
disposal laboratories, powerful com¬
puters, and so on. As a result, only a handful
of countries those that can afford these
tools are in a position to make scientific
discoveries. Does that fact alarm you? Is
there any way ofbalancing out the way in
which the fruits ofdiscovery are shared?
Depending on how expensive the
research is, it's going to be limited to those
people who can afford it. You cannot
imagine countries in central Africa having
the means to build super-colliders in the
form that they exist, say, at CERN, the
European Organization for Nuclear
Research. It takes a great deal of wealth to
do that.
On the other hand, I think it's very
important that the knowledge that comes
from discovery should be spread. In the old
days we used to say the most important
thing for UNESCO to do was to give books
out to people, so they could read and find
out what was up. Now of course there are
other forms of media; information goes
out on television and the radio and of
course on computers.
A free society the best societies
have a rapid flow of information. I think
that's probably the most important thing
that even those who don't have the best
teachers and are not in the best universities
can still get at the facts.
I was very privileged with my educa¬
tion. I went to one of the best universities
in the world, I had a very good teacher, so
I was told what was important, and if I
hadn't gone to that school, the name
Watson would not be well known. Today
I think it's possible to make high-quality
education much more widely available
through, particularly, TV and cable or satel¬
lite. There's really no reason why, in the
future, people in relatively primitive envi¬
ronments shouldn't be exposed to the very
best teaching, if people have the interest to
make it so. So if I had to say the most
important thing UNESCO could do now, I
think it would be getting information out to
people, providing them with information.

You can't make them read and you can't
make them listen, but you can give them
that possibility.
In my own case, my family lived close
to a public library and my father used to
walk to the library with me once a week
when I was young. We got books out. The
knowledge was available. I didn't come
from a wealthy family, but there was a
library. It was the library that first opened
your eyes to worlds beyond your own
limited one.
Most people are born without great
aspirations, and they don't think they can
do great things. You've got to let them see
that there are still great things to be done,
and they can be done by many people. It's
not only privileged people who can do
things. In fact, I'm surprised how often
the people on top make mistakes, even
though they have all the advantages. So
it's opportunity that matters. I think you
really have to provide the opportunity of
a high-quality education. Other people
might point out you have to give people
health, because if they're sick they can't
learn. So let's say that health and education
are the most important things to give
people in underdeveloped regions.
The human genomeproject is seeking to
decode our genetic heritage, our genetic
book. Can you tell us about this greatpro¬
ject? What stage has it reached?
We've just started. But we have the tech¬
nical means to finish the project within
the next fifteen to twenty-five years. You
have to know when to say you're finished:
when you've got 90 per cent of the infor¬
mation, or 95 per cent or 98. It's slightly
arbitrary. We're never going to get 100 per
cent, because there's just so much infor
mation there. But we're going to know
most of it.
Finding a few new ways to reduce the
costs of the project would certainly help.
Even so, there's a realistic chance of fin¬
ishing it for the cost of three trips of the
Space Shuttle. I think if people were asked,
do you want the human genome or do you
want three trips from the Space Shuttle,
almost everyone would say that they'd
rather have the human genome. But we've
got the Space Shuttle!
You 'd agree that the human genome is a
bigproject in every way. It's "big science"
like, in thepast, nuclearpower. . . .
But it's not big science in the way that
the super-colliders are in the world of
physics. The super-collider in Texas might
take half the money for physics in the
United States. That's a lot. But the human
genome project would probably never take
more than two per cent of the money for
biomedical research. It doesn't have that
all-or-nothing element. There are many
physicists who feel, "Well, if we build this
machine, I'm out of a job because I'm not
part of that machine." But we're not going
to put any people out of work.
Despite appearances, the project really
isn't that big. It's really a sort of bubble, a
bubble on the surface. But I think it's prob¬
ably the most important bubble that exists
in biomedical research now, because it is so
important to the understanding of dis¬
eases.
Do you think that some scientists con¬
ceal, even ifonly for a little while, some of
their knowledge?
Oh, I think people are always going to
conceal, and I don't think you should get
too upset about it. If someone is
prospecting for gold and thinks he sees a
little bit of it, he wants to be sure before he
gets a thousand people in the same stream.
I think the question is how fast the infor¬
mation is released. You need fast publica¬
tion, and you have to have a fairly honest
system whereby the people who make the
discoveries get the credit for them.
Having competition is good. I would
hate to have only one team out there trying
to find the gene that, say, predisposes many
women to breast cancer. I'd rather have
quite a few, Each wants to make the dis¬
covery, not only because it's important sci¬
entifically but, well, if they make the dis¬
covery maybe they can develop a
diagnostic test. Then they might become
not only scientifically famous but might
also make some money, might be able to
buy a better car. That's a regular human
emotion, and I don't think we should try
and change it.
I think what you need to have are rules
by which those who make discoveries get
rewarded. We tend to find it's a pretty
good rule that people will exchange
information quite freely except when they
feel they're very close to a discovery. As
long as they think the discovery is probably
not going to be made tomorrow, then
they'll say "This is what I think". If they
think it's going to be made the next day,
they're not going to tell someone a fact
that would let them make it first. I think
that's just a fact of life. Otherwise, it would
be like playing tennis and not wanting to
win.
As to the general question, do we on
the whole exchange information fairly fast,
the answer is "Yes". And the chief reason
why is that it's much more fun to get

James Watson and Francis Crick (seated in
foreground) and other Nobel prizewinners at
Unesco's Paris Headquarters, where they
took part in a symposium entitled "From the
double helix to the human genome: 40 years
of molecular genetics" (21-23 April 1993).
someone excited about what you're doing.
If you just keep everything to yourself,
it's like having a very fine painting and not
showing it to anyone. You get pleasure in
being able to show nice things to other
people. And of course, I got a lot of plea¬
sure from being able to tell people about
the double helix.
What is your opinion on thepatenting of
discoveries in human genetics?
I think it's pretty much the custom that
if you find something useful say, you've
discovered a gene that people didn't know
about yet which would let you make an
important drug then that's going to be
patented. It's happened already. It fits in
with the way industry operates in the
world. If you make a discovery, you're
rewarded.
The controversy was not about
whether you could patent something
important. It was that you could patent
something before you understood what it
did. I strongly opposed the decision of the
National Institutes of Health to patent
DNA irrespective of whether the patenter
understood what it did or not. I had diffi¬
culties with the director of NIH and I was
asked to give up my job, because I thought
that the government's policy was irre¬
sponsible, to industry as well as to
everyone. It was just silly. Everyone I knew
agreed with me, so it wasn't as if there was
much controversy in the scientific world.
In fact there was no controversy we all
thought it was stupid. But it was done.
/s there any reason to feel afraid of the
uses to which genetics coidd beput?
Yes, there certainly is. I think we have to
develop laws so that genetic knowledge is
confidential. I wouldn't want anyone
having the right to look at my DNA. And
no-one should have to show their DNA
before they're employed.
There are going to be difficult situa¬
tions. If you know there's a genetic disease
in your family, do you have an obligation
to tell someone you might marry? That
problem already exists; people have kept
quiet when there was "madness" in the
family. You're going to have cases where
ethical behaviour would compel you to
reveal these things.
On the other hand, at the level of
employers I think we're going to have to
have laws. Just like with medical records.
I don't think someone's medical record
should be in the public domain. It gets
very difficult now that we're asking politi¬
cians to show their medical records. I think
that's a bad idea, and similarly I don't think
you should demand that political candi¬
dates have a genetic examination. And I
think it would be pretty dangerous if you
were expected to have a genetic examina¬
tion when you were married. I think we're
going to learn from experience, but my
own personal prejudice is that we should
only reveal when it's absolutely necessary.
What ethical code, whatprecautions or
laws could ensure that knowledge of the
human genome is used in a human way?
I don't think laws per se can do this. I
think you've also got to look to cultural
traditions. I mean, is it a failure of law that
is responsible for what's happening in
Bosnia now? It's what children learn in
their families, what they learn in their
schools, what examples they get from their
political leaders, that count.
All knowledge in some form or other
can have bad consequences. Personally I'm
against too many laws, because I think
they can be used to restrict activities. On
the other hand, I think it's pretty clear that
people are going to be very afraid of this
genetic information, and will possibly try
and stop the information being gathered
unless they feel they're protected against
real misuse of this knowledge.
When I became director at the National
Institutes of Health, I made an arbitrary
decision that we'd spend three per cent of
the available money on ethics. By the time
I left we were spending five per cent. I
think if I was still there the figure would be
going up, because this really is a very com¬
plicated issue.
Are there any otherpassions in your life
besides biology?
As I run an institution, I like to build
architecturally distinguished buildings. I
have a touch of megalomania. I like to
make the world more beautiful.
