Investing in peace
by Jacques Fontanel
Profitable yet non¬
productive, the
arms industry is
still a key sector
in the world
economy. Will it
be possible to
convert to
development the
resources freed
I© by
THE United Nations has sought to pro¬
mote disarmament ever since its founda¬
tion and has demonstrated that there is a
close link between disarmament and economic
and social development. A comprehensive UN
report on this relationship, issued in 1982, found
that more publicity should be given to military
spending, that it would be useful to convert
some of the resources freed by disarmament to
meet economic and social needs in developing
countries, and that consideration should be
given to establishing an "international disar¬
mament fund for development." However, the
report was not unanimously accepted, and a
special session of the UN General Assembly in
June 1982 merely confirmed the absence of any
real hope of progress. In fact, the subject
dropped out of the picture during the 1980s.
The political and economic upheavals that
have taken place in Eastern Europe, the disar¬
mament agreements that have been reached
(which, though limited in scope, are quite spe¬
cific in respect of intermediate-range missiles)
and the world economic crisis have, however, all
helped to bring the idea of disarmament for
development back into the limelight. On the
other hand, the first flush of optimism about the
expected results of disarmament has now faded
somewhat. Three questions arise:
"~ Does armament put a brake on develop¬
ment?
i*" Are the effects of disarmament on national
economies entirely beneficial?
'* Can disarmament easily be combined with

transfers of resources from the developed coun¬
tries to the developing ones?
A BRAKE ON DEVELOPMENT?
Economists regard military expenditure as non¬
productive spending, yet it amounts to nearly
$1,000 billion (or 5 per cent of the world's gross
national product), more than 50 million people
are employed in military activities, and research
and development in the arms industry employ
the skills of more than 20 per cent of the planet's
scientists and engineers.
The influence of military spending on eco¬
nomic growth has been the subject of many
studies, in some cases contradictory. Three prin¬
cipal ideas emerge from such studies:
*" Military spending has a powerful effect on
the shape of modern economies. According to
Marxist economists, market economies need
the growth of military expenditure in order to
combat the tendency of profit margins to decline.
J.K. Galbraith believes that the military budget
neutralizes part of the surplus of products that
results from an ever greater excess of supply
Left, Let us beat swords
into ploughshares (1959), a
bronze sculpture by Evgeniy
Vuchetich at UN
Headquarters in New York.
Right, a Soviet tank bought
by a British firm for
recycling into girders and
agricultural tools. It is one
of thousands that have been
scrapped as a result of
arms reduction agreements.
JACQUES FONTANEL,
of France, is director of
European studies and
professor at the Faculty of
Economic Sciences of the
Pierre Mendès-France
University in Grenoble. He
has written many articles on
the economic problems
connected with
disarmament.
21

In the short run a slowdown
in the arms race often has
unfavourable economic
effects, but in the long run
disarmament encourages
development
over demand demand that is reduced by the
limitation of purchasing power. Free-market
economists challenge this idea and consider that
the market economy ought eventually to result
in both disarmament and development.
*" Military expenditure has a negative effect
on economic growth. According to Seymour
Melman, the militarization of the economy
undermines the strength of market economies by
encouraging inflationary tensions and reducing
the role of efficient units of production.
According to Michael Ward, while military
spending may have positive short-term effects on
growth in some countries such as India, the
United States or Brazil, these effects are less
important than those produced by other forms
of public expenditure. It is undeniable that,
compared with other public spending, military
expenditure does least to create jobs and to
stimulate economic activity.
*" Military spending slows down investment, so
that long-term economic development is threat¬
ened as well as short-term growth. A study by
Emile Benoit in 1978 suggesting that such-
spending encourages economic and social
progress in developing countries has been
strongly criticized for both its form and its con¬
tent.
The fact remains that such general analyses
are only valid on a world scale. In some coun¬
tries, arms production can have beneficial effects
on the economy: arms industries create jobs
while reducing imports, exports improve the
balance of trade, and military technology has a
positive spin-off in the civilian sector of pro¬
duction. Moreover, military strength protects
states against the ambitions of their neighbours
and provides the means for political domina¬
tion the same means deployed by the great
powers in trade and monetary negotiations to
22

the detriment of countries that are less well pro¬
tected.
THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS
OF DISARMAMENT
Disarmament is usually presented as being con¬
ducive to economic and social development. The
cost of an aircraft carrier is, for instance, often
compared with the number of schools and hos¬
pitals that could be built instead. A surplus of
armaments invariably provokes crisis situations.
Negotiated disarmament has nevertheless
to take into account the economic and statcgic
imperatives of international security. There are
several forms of disarmament, ranging from
cutbacks in military spending to the destruction
of arms stockpiles or the scrapping of specific
weapons, and they naturally have different eco¬
nomic consequences.
In general it may be said that while in the
short run a slowdown in the arms race often has
unfavourable economic effects, in the long run
disarmament encourages development.
Three practical observations show that "peace
dividends" are meagre in the short term:
*" Disarmament docs not necessarily in all cases
bring about an immediate reduction in military
spending. The destruction of arms stockpiles and
the verification of accords involve additional costs.
The destruction of arms stockpiles guaran¬
tees neither the limitation of strategic capabili¬
ties nor the reduction of military expenditure. It
generally leads countries to devise new weapons
that are much more sophisticated and costly
than those dealt with under the accords.
A cutback in military expenditure does not
necessarily result in an immediate improvement
in a country's economic situation. Even if the
actual expenditure can easily be switched to
other purposes, the factories, staff and equip¬
ment previously devoted to defence arc not so
easily converted. To be viable, the conversion of
existing materials and equipment will require
new investment, the development of new activ¬
ities and a search for new outlets in already
highly competitive civilian sectors.
LONG-TERM
PRODUCTIVITY
Disarmament must be general. While in the
short term it may have adverse economic effects
on the arms industries of exporting countries, in
the long term its economic consequences ought
to be positive if the economic downturn
resulting from reduced domestic arms procure¬
ment does not become irreversible. If the reduc¬
tion in military expenditure is well managed, it
would even be likely to produce benefits for M. ¡S

We don't agree (1993), oil
on canvas by the
Portuguese painter
Baptistantunes.
civilian research and development, for produc¬
tivity and for confidence in international trading
relations.
Indeed, the economic advantages to be
expected from lasting disarmament can in the
long run prove very substantial. Econometric
models highlight the positive effects, notably
if some at least of the resources thus released are
trasnferrcd to the countries of the Third World.
Considering the unproductive nature of military
spending, it is undeniable that, once the initial
problems of conversion have been overcome, the
new state of peace will have a positive impact on
worldwide economic development.
ROADS TO SUCCESS
Two fundamental conditions must be fulfilled if
disarmament for development is to succeed:
firstly, some of the resources saved by cutbacks
in arms production must be transferred to the
countries of the Third World; secondly, it is
essential to eliminate the basic causes that impel
states to enter into armed conflict.
For countries that have no arms industry of
24
their own, the effects of a reduction in military
spending arc beneficial in the short term, since
the resources hitherto spent on arms purchases
can be more usefully employed, but only if the
savings thus effected are not hijacked by social
groups intent on diverting them to other non¬
productive uses such as the export of capital or
the import of luxury goods. In other words, a
transfer of resources is economically worth¬
while only if they are channelled into highly
productive activity.
Such transfers may, moreover, sometimes
have a negative effect by aggravating inflationary
tensions. International aid too can have adverse
effects if it encourages poor countries to run
down their own industries and gradually become
more economically dependent, a situation con¬
ducive to pauperization. Furthermore, aid that
is not disinterested can misdirect development:
transfers of resources are often primarily influ¬
enced, as concerns the rich countries, by con¬
siderations other than the economic develop¬
ment needs of the beneficiary countries.
TOWARDS LASTING
DISARMAMENT
Disarmament calls for a series of decisions
relating in particular to the international eco¬
nomic order, the nature of development, the
direction taken by technological progress, and
the distribution of economic resources.
Although such matters only rarely figure on
the agenda of arms limitation negotiations, the
economic development of nations plays a role of
fundamental importance to international secu¬
rity. It is involved on at least three counts:
Firstly, in a world where there is scarcity
but there are no international conflicts, mili¬
tary expenditure is a form of waste. The recent
experience of the USSR shows that overspending
on the military gradually erodes the efficiency of
the economic system and in the end reduces a
nation's defence potential.
' Secondly, any disarmament dissociated from
the reasons that underlie the arms race could in



the end prove particularly dangerous for peace or
for democratic political systems. Since the great
powers can, directly or indirectly, take advantage
of their dominant position, any profound change
in the strategic balance of forces is liable to trans¬
form the international economic map too.
Finally, when human dignity is threatened, it
often happens that nations prefer warfare to inac¬
tion. International security cannot be lastingly
maintained within a framework of power politics
or of excessive economic and social inequalities.
Nor is peace in all cases necessarily preferable
to conflict, particularly when that peace is based
on tyranny, slavery or exploitation, and on dis¬
regard for human rights but in such cases can
it really be called peace?
