For 30 years
UNESCO has
played a
leading part
in the
development
)f international
lydrology
44
ANDRAS SZOLLOSI-NAGY
is the Secretary of the
International Hydrological
Programme and the Director
of the Division of Water
Sciences of Unesco.



The role of Unesco
by Andras Szollosi-Nagy
CIVILIZATIONS have always been strongly
dependent on water. By now it should be
clear to everyone that the converse is also
true: vital water resources depend upon civiliza¬
tion or more precisely the "civilized" use of a
finite and vulnerable resource. This two-way
feedback underlines the strong need for co-oper¬
ation. Well co-ordinated international collabo¬
ration is essential if we are to understand the
processes occurring in the water cycle, to assess
surface and groundwater resources, and to adopt
an attitude that maintains the quality and quan¬
tity of water resources for generations to come.
Recognition of these needs led to the launching
by UNESCO of the International Hydrological
Decade (IHD) in 1964, the first truly international
scientific and educational effort in hydrology
ever made.
One result of IHD was that hydrological
maps containing hitherto unavailable baseline
information were drawn up, particularly for
water-short developing countries in Africa, the
Arab States, Latin America and Asia. This work
was made possible through the establishment of
internationally accepted mapping techniques.
IHD also developed regional water balances
which later served as basic references for cali¬
brating global-scale models. Hundreds of hydrol¬
ogists from all over the world took part in this
painstaking work. Techniques for assessing the
environmental impacts of water projects were
also developed.
One of the most important results of IHD
was the setting up of training courses for post¬
graduates and technicians in hydrology and water
resources. Every year some 500 participants, the
overwhelming majority of whom come from
developing countries, complete courses designed
and taught under UNESCO's auspices.
But there was still much to be done, particu¬
larly in the application of scientific progress to the
solution of practical problems. It was recognized
that economic and social activities tend to aggra
vate difficulties arising from natural fluctuations
in the hydrological regime, and that human
impact on water resources increases with the
spread of urbanization and population growth. In
1974, UNESCO therefore decided to launch a
long-term International Hydrological Programme
(IHP) with the aim of finding solutions to the
problems of countries with different geographical
and climatic conditions and at different levels of
technological and economic development. The
Programme is founded upon a network of

National Committees (some 141 to date) and also
on a strong partnership with the non-govern¬
mental scientific organizations. Over the years
very close co-operation has been developed with
the World Meteorological Organization.
In the early years of the IHP (1975-1980),
studies were carried out on hydrological para¬
meters for water projects, hydrological aspects of
droughts, changes in the hydrological regime
due to human activities, hydrological problems
related to energy development, the dispersion
of pollutants in aquatic media, socio-economic
aspects of urban hydrology, aquifer contamina¬
tion and protection, and land subsidence due to
groundwater abstraction.
A later phase of the IHP, which ran from
1984 to 1989, improved scientific knowledge of
hydrological processes and parameters for water
projects and led to a better understanding of
human influence on the hydrological cycle,
including the environmental impact of water
projects. The development of education and
training, public information and scientific infor¬
mation systems gained new momentum.
Recognition of the dangers of a possible cli¬
mate change on the distribution of water
resources in space and time as well as the need for
sustainable development set the theme for the
current phase of the IHP (1990-1995).
One of the least understood aspects of global
change is the land phase of the hydrological
cycle. In order to understand this phase, studies
of the processes whereby water is transported
through the atmosphere-vegetation-soil system
must be carried out on different scales. Together
with the International Geosphere-Biosphere
Programme, the IHP is currently trying to solve
this problem.
We must come to appreciate more fully that
our rapidly changing and increasingly vulner¬
able environment will only be protected if it is the
focus of outstanding legal, organizational and
scientific efforts. Without doubt, the need for
hydrological science as a base for integrated water
management will increase in importance. The
International Hydrological Programme is seeking
to satisfy this need, with the over-riding goal of
helping nations to help themselves.
The strips in this screen
serve to trap moisture
from clouds and mist. The
technique, developed in
the Andes, is now also
used in India and the Gulf
region.
