Rock 'n' Revolt
Above, Rap fever. ROCK, a musical and social phenomenon of
unprecedented scope and intensity, raises
in acute form the question of the relation¬
ship between music and violence. Its history
has been fraught with violence. Jim Morrison,
leader of The Doors, apostle of sex, alcohol and
LSD, died young, of a heart attack in his
bathtub in Paris. Stars Jimi Hendrix and Janis
Joplin both died of drug overdoses. Acid rock
has become synonymous with punks and
English football riots. The fans of Metallica and
Guns and Roses have burned cars, and during a
recent concert in Montreal they wrecked a sta¬
dium and injured twelve people. The Sex Pis¬
tols proclaimed in their song "Anarchy in the
UK": "I wanna destroy passers-by, for I wanna
be anarchy". John Phillips, a member of The
Mamas and The Papas, was reported by musi¬
cologist David Tame as claiming that any rock
group can whip a crowd into a hysterical
frenzy by carefully controlling a sequence of
by isabelle leymarie
rhythms. In 1967 he went ahead and did just
that in Phoenix. When Hell's Angels roughed
up spectators during a Rolling Stones concert
in California, rocker Mick Jagger remarked
that "Something like this happens every time I
play that song".
Although physically less conspicuous, vio¬
lence is also expressed in the lyrics of urban
music such as rap (a recent hit by star rapper
Ice T is entitled "Cop Killer") and free jazz
("We are not angry young men, we are
enraged!" proclaimed saxophonist Archie
Shepp in the late 1960s). Here, violence is palp¬
able in lyrics, song titles, public statements by
musicians, and in the music itself: the mega-
volumes, "fuzz" effects and distortions of
rock, the hammer beats of rap, the shrieking
saxophones and cascading notes of jazz, and
the amplified bass of reggae. Violence is also
associated with other types of music. In
Stanley Kubrick's film A Clockwork Orange, 35

An ¡mage from Stanley
Kubrick's bleak and violent
film A Clockwork Orange
(1971).
36
the hero, Alex, driven crazy by the sounds of
Beethoven, jumps out of a window. In Cuba
during the 1920s and 1930s, concerts by rival
bands playing the popular music known as son
degenerated into brawls which had to be
broken up by the police.
Violence, in more controlled forms, is pre¬
sent in many musical traditions, old and new:
in the wailing of women in the funeral lamen¬
tations of Macedonia; in certain Senegalese
songs whose lyrics pour out a stream of bitter
invective against new wives brought into a
household; in the drumbeats of African griot
storytellers which once stimulated the ardour
of warriors and today perform a similar role
for the participants in traditional wrestling
matches. It is found in martial music, in hunt¬
ing calls, and in filmed thrillers where it plays a
crucial role in setting the mood.
Violence is also present in classical music
such as Handel's "Saul", Beethoven's Eroica
Symphony, in operas generally, such as those of
Verdi, who once said that he sought to express
"passions above all else" and almost all of
whose heroines die tragic deaths, in Mahler's
Fourth Symphony, in Berlioz's Symphonie Fan¬
tastique, with its dramatic Dies irae, and in Stra¬
vinsky's The Rite of Spring, in which a virgin,
sacrificed to the gods, dances herself to death (a
riot broke out during the first performance).
One could continue the list indefinitely.
AN EXTRAORDINARY POWER
Is it possible, asks musicologist Gilbert Rouget
in his book on music and trance, that music
may be endowed with a magical power capable
of whipping people into the state of madness
which the ancient Greeks called "mania"? Or
does it have no objective reality? Rouget cites
Timotheus of Miletus, who lived in the fourth
century BC and once said that music "was
capable of tempting Alexander away from a
banquet to take up arms, and then of luring
him back again to his guests with a lilting har-
mony". Rouget also quotes Boethius, who
claimed that the Dorian mode inspired virtue,
whereas the Phrygian mode aroused passion
and violence, and refers to Aristotle's theory of
the ethos of modes, which was similar to that
of Boethius. He concludes that music can
induce a trance in some cases and calm in
others, and that it "derives its power from its
integration into a given set of representations".
It is true that in order to grasp the symbol¬
ism in a particular type of music it is essential

to be familiar with the set of representations
into which it is integrated and the context in
which it is performed. In the West, for
example, the major modes evoke elation and
rejoicing and the minor modes inspire melan¬
choly, while in the East other modes such as
Arab maqam and Indian ragas evoke totally
different emotional moods. Similarly, drums
and trumpets are regarded as martial instru¬
ments and flutes are associated with pastoral.
All this is bound up with mental associations
that are to a large extent culturally determined.
Leibniz spoke of the "anxiety-causing
effect" of dissonance, and yet today disso¬
nances, which have become commonplace in
contemporary music, have lost much of their
disquieting character (even Chopin's
mazurkas, when first performed, were criti¬
cized for their "dissonance"). Verdi's use of
double basses to introduce the final scene of
Othello, Berlioz's use of percussion instru¬
ments in the Symphonie Fantastique, and
Alfred Hitchcock's use of violins to heighten
dramatic tension, are all illustrations of the
way in which musical choices are both per¬
sonal and culturally determined.
And yet music, when considered as a group
of organized sounds and hence as a purely
acoustic phenomenon, is also known to pro¬
duce certain physiological and psychological
effects which have been scientifically docu¬
mented. Certain rhythms and sound frequen¬
cies, for example, can accelerate or slow down
the human metabolic rate and even induce
hypnosis. John Diamond, a specialist in behav¬
ioural physiology, has shown how the relative
strength of certain muscles, a function which is
easily measurable, varies according to the type
of music to which people are listening. Ani¬
mals and plants are also known to react physi¬
cally to music. According to studies carried
out in India, Russia and the United States,
plants seem to hate "heavy metal" rock music
and twist themselves as far away as possible
from the offending loudspeaker, while they
adore classical violin and will grow even more
lushly to the sounds of disco.
Noise engenders violence; it can even drive
people to suicide. Some artificial noises, espe¬
cially those which emanate from continuous-
frequency engines, have been found to have a
pathological effect on the body's cellular struc¬
ture, and can sometimes cause cancer, while
natural sounds, like those of waves, the war¬
bling of birds and certain types of classical or
African music, can create a sense of well-being
and even a healing effect by harmonizing with
our biorhythms.
In recent years, the practice of music ther¬
apy has enjoyed considerable popularity.
Members of the Research Group in Pediatric
Anaesthesiology at the Hospital for Sick Chil¬
dren in Paris and doctors in many American
hospitals have used carefully selected types of
music to reduce their patients' dependency on
tranquillizers. In The Burmese Harp (1956), a
fine film by the Japanese director Kon Ichi-
Mick Jagger, a
computerized print by the
French artist Leo Scalpel.
kawa, a soldier-musician saps his comrades'
will to fight whenever he plays and sings.
Study of the relationship between music
and violence also raises the question of the
political aspect of music. In many parts of the
world, musicians such as the bards of Nepal,
the griots or the musicians of Ethiopia are per¬
ceived as pariahs or as socially inferior, and are
believed to lead dissolute lives and be addicted
to drugs and alcohol. Music has often been
used as an instrument of domination. In some
African societies, mirliton reed pipes and other
instruments provide a musical accompaniment
during the ritual parading of masks, which
women and children must not see and which
perpetuate male dominance.
The French writer Jacques Attali has
observed that in Western societies the upper
classes have always encouraged artistic cre¬
ation, but only in order to maintain the estab¬
lished order and legitimize their own authority.
In the 1950s, the Dominican dictator Rafael
Trujillo y Molina encouraged the practice of
the merengue, a dance closely related to the
samba, but gave orders that the musicians
should sing his praises and exiled those who
37

French troops on parade.
38
ISABELLE LEYMARIE
is a Franco-American pianist,
dancer and musicologist who
has recently published Salsa
and Migration, a study which
appeared in an anthology of
writing on Puerto Rico
entitled The Commuter
Nation (University of Puerto
Rico, 1992). Her book La
salsa et le Latin jazz will be
published later this year in
the "Que sais-je?" series
(PUF, Paris). She is currently
working on studies of the
black music of Latin America
and the Antilles and of the
musical geography of
Havana in the 1950s.
opposed him. In many countries, music has
become a form of propaganda or been appro¬
priated by the Church, and judgements about
music have been an endorsement of manipula¬
tion and intolerance.
Authoritarian colonial regimes arbitrarily
associated drums with violence and debauch¬
ery, and long banned black music. The "New
Age" writer Corinne Hélène claims that jazz
and juvenile delinquency go hand in hand. But
this baseless claim is fraught with prejudice,
for how can the beautiful and expressive phras¬
ing of a Sarah Vaughan or an Ella Fitzgerald
be associated with juvenile delinquency?
Why should jazz as a whole be connected with
this social problem when most young jazz
musicians are now graduates of music conser¬
vatories and universities and the overwhelming
majority of jazz fans are intellectuals? How
indeed, when music, for many deprived black
and Hispanic adolescents of America's urban
ghettos, far from leading to delinquency, is
often a lifeline?
In the United States, moral-majority pres¬
sure groups have stigmatized some rock
records as "obscene", in the hope of getting
them withdrawn from the market, but they
also tried to ban the Robert Mapplethorpe
photo exhibition and other artistic events
which did not correspond with their ideals.
On the other hand, some kinds of music such
as "muzak", which supposedly increase
consumer sales and induce people in restau¬
rants to eat more but are actually a form of
audio-brainwashing and noise pollution, are
broadcast all day long in shopping centres and
other public areas.
Jacques Attali has also remarked that
"show business, the star system and the hit
parade are signs of deep-rooted institutional
and cultural colonization". In this context
music, through a sometimes violent protest
against official art and the mechanization of
society, becomes a means of fighting authority.
"Music exists," adds Jacques Attali, "to help us
hear the sound of change. It forces us to invent
new categories, to come up with a new
momentum capable of rejuvenating a view of
society that has become ossified, trapped,
moribund." This is partly true of rock and its
rebellious anti-establishment stance, and of
jazz, rap and reggae all musical forms which
proclaim their black identity and have rejected
old models along with the hypocrisy and inhu¬
manity of materialism. In certain ritualized set¬
tings, notably during festivals, subversive
songs are often used to express grievances
against the establishment.
A YEARNING FOR HARMONY
Does music engender violence or does it
express violence? And if it does express vio¬
lence, does it, by sublimating violent impulses
and dissipating tensions, play a cathartic role
and "soothe the savage breast"? Music, for
Attali, is the "audible tape of society's vibra¬
tions and signs." It is undeniably deeply
rooted in the collective psychology: rock, rap,
free jazz and reggae all express the violence of
the cultures which have bred them. But people
and their environment are inseparable: the
pent-up violence in the individual affects
society and vice versa. While music reflects the
collective gestalt of a society, its particular
form of expression also reflects the emotions
of the musician.
In China, Egypt, India and ancient Greece,
music was believed to possess a certain ethical-
value and the power to uplift or debase the
soul. In ancient China, the imperial govern¬
ment existed in harmony with the twelve
celestial tones, and during the Confucian Chin
dynasty, certain "virtuous" songs and musical
instruments were reputed to temper the harsh¬
ness of the regime. Classical music is also
imbued with spirituality: Mozart's Don Gio¬
vanni brings down divine vengeance upon
himself by assassinating a nobleman and burns
in hell for it. Liszt aspired to compose

War drums in Papua New
Guinea.
inspirational works, and although Wagner's
"Tetralogy" (the four-opera Ring cycle)
expresses both the fall of humanity cut adrift
from the gods and the distress of the artist
faced with the world's misfortunes, Wagner
had a deeply moral view of art.
The French sociologist Jean Duvignaud has
written that art expresses "nostalgia for a lost
form of communication in the shape of a for¬
bidden dream that is continually revived by
the irrepressible desire of the human emotional
impulse". He goes on to say that a successful
work of art "rebuilds behind the self a unity
which pieces together the shards of a divided
humanity". Now that idealism has been demo¬
lished and the philosophy of music has
become a thing of the past, while the media
(which tend to put the visual image before the
musical message) bombard us with vulgar and
iconoclastic music, it is more than ever incum¬
bent on musicians and artists in general to
adopt an ethical position. The most influential
creators of the twentieth century, notably the
film-makers whose art is one of our era's most
powerful forms of expression artists such as
Kurosawa, Ozu and Satyajit Ray have been
passionate humanists.
Musical eurhythmies presupposes both
inner and outer harmony, peace with oneself
and with the universe. Violence, in its latent
form, is an intrinsic part of human nature and
of the universe generally. But when violence is
unleashed and expressed, often in a paroxysm,
in music or other art forms, it is a symptom
either of social unrest or of inner imbalance or
torment, emotional deprivation and arrested
development.
And just as the wind can rise from a gentle
breeze to a raging hurricane, so music can
enchant or destroy us. It is for musicians to
create works which enrich life, which contrib¬
ute to the harmony of humanity, without com¬
promising the quality of their art (some forms
of therapeutic music, such as "New Age"
music, do not really have any aesthetic value).
However, when music achieves perfection,
it allows us to catch a glimpse of the divine; it
becomes, according to a Buddhist belief, the
most refined art, the path to enlightenment.
According to the Taoist sage, Zhuangzi,
"Music allows man to remain pure, simple,
sincere and in this way to rediscover his primi¬
tive emotions". (A few centuries later, Wagner
would also use music to explore primitive
forms of expression.) The great violinist
Yehudi Menuhin once observed that "music
creates order out of chaos". Nietzsche's humor¬
ous conclusion was that "Without music, life
would be a mistake".
A scene from The Music
Room (1958), a film by the
Indian director Satyajit Ray. 39
