ÀHf
Freud and Freudianism
by Imques Hassoun
10
Above, a postcard dating
from 1908 shows Vienna's
Opera House and the
Ringstrasse, symbols of the
ambitious urban planning
and the liberal culture that
distinguished the city in the
19th century.
Opposite page, Portrait of
Emilie Flöge, a 1902 work
by the Austrian master of
Art Nouveau, Gustav Klimt.
IF, at the end of the last century, the Czarist
empire seemed like a prison camp for ethnic
groups, the Austro-Hungarian empire, like
the Ottoman empire, was more of a patchwork
quilt. In it Ruthenians, Bukovinians, Magyars,
Slovenes, northern Italians, Jews, Germans,
Galicians, Czechs, Slovaks and Poles together
lived out the last decades of an institution that
remained splendid, if only in appearance. The
area that history was to christen Mitteleuropa
was to be the birthplace of the works of Musil
and Mach, of the Austrian Marxists, of Mahler
and Klimt, Schnitzler and Zweig, Arnold
Schönberg, Hugo van Hofmannsthal and Sig¬
mund Freud all of them destined in varying
degrees to influence the history of ideas in the
twentieth century.
Overshadowed by Stalinism in the east,
their works destroyed by the Nazi regime in
the north, and accused of superficiality, of chal¬
lenging obvious facts and institutionalized con¬
ventions, sometimes even of sensualist obscu¬
rantism, these authors would be (at least for a
time) rejected much as the idea of the individual
was rejected the latter being central to a cul
ture in which subversion and ridicule played a
bigger part than rebellion or destruction.
What now seems remarkable is that this
society, imbued as it was with religious and
social prejudices which many people (such as
Mahler), adopted, sometimes (like Otto
Weininger) to the point of lunacy should have
managed to produce work of this kind. The
work was surely the product of contacts that
were not so much haphazard as the result of
tensions inherent in that society. Each ethnic
group seems to have contained tensions of its
own that condemned it to follow where they
led but also to encounter the other groups at a
crossroads that was the birthplace of an extra¬
ordinary culture.
In such circumstances the idea of the indi¬
vidual was bound to come to the fore: indeed,
individualism was to modulate the notion of
an egalitarian cohabitation of ethnic groups (in
which some were evidently more equal than
others). But if we may regard individualism as
the keystone of the Mitteleuropa culture, it
was a stone which, far from affording a fixed
and stable base, seems to have been balanced

on one corner, allowing it to move about and
rotate, and in so doing to give exceptional
coherence and quality to the whole structure.
So this culture (whose death-knell was
sounded by the Anschluss of 1938) could not
claim to emanate exclusively from any one of
its components, and no one of them could
claim exclusive paternity of it. It was in the
context of this conjunction that Freud gradu¬
ally built up his theory of psychoanalysis.
FREUD'S FIRST CASE
The question that faced Freud at the outset was
one that runs throughout Viennese literature
and at the same time presented medicine with
an insoluble problem, namely that of the hys¬
terical person and his or her isolation. All
things considered, it should come as no sur¬
prise that "Anna O." (Freud's first case) was
actually the celebrated Bertha Pappenheim, one
of the earliest German welfare workers, a
woman who devoted her life to rescuing Jewish
prostitutes abducted from their east European
families to stock the brothels of the Ottoman


Empire. Anna O. was an example of a socially
uprooted woman experiencing the shock of
new-found freedom a shock aggravated by
symptoms in whose presence medicine had to
confess its impotence. The state of mind of
hysterical patients is akin to the situation of
individualism under the stress of modernity, in
which individuals oscillate between the depths
of isolation and involvement in society.
Perhaps it was significant that Ernst Mach,
one of Freud's contemporaries, should have
said that the subject is "the ephemeral resultant
of the interrelationship between complexes of
sensations", "made permanent by memory and
habit", but continually changed by experience.
This is not the transcendental subject of Kant
or the concept of the self once so dear to psy¬
chologists, teachers and ideologists of good
manners. It is also significant that. another con¬
temporary, Arthur Schnitzler, a keen admirer of
Freud, should have raised the question of hys¬
terical personalities throughout his writings.
For evidence we need go no further than
Schnitzler's Fräulein Else in which, during a
long inner monologue played out on the
shadowy borders of subjectivity, Else wastes
away and dies through her inability to under¬
stand and come to terms with reality.
To go further than the medical and psycho¬
logical thinking of his time, Freud had to take
seriously the individuality of the patients who
came to him for psychoanalysis. He refused to
see the self as a stable, predictable force capable
of being moulded by teaching, and wrote that
there are some professions that always fail in
their aims, such as teaching, tutoring, parenting
and of course psychoanalysis, thereby indi¬
cating that the person at the receiving end will
always elude the good intentions which these
figures of authority seek to develop with
respect to the Self. 11

Scenes from a 1992 Paris
production of Fräulein Else,
a play by the Viennese
author Arthur Schnitzler
(1862-1931).
12
JACQUES HASSOUN,
an Egyptian-born French
psychoanalyst, is a founder
member of the Paris Cercle
Freudien and a member of
the Société des Gens de
Lettres de France. Among
his recent publications are
Les passions intraitables
(Aubier, Paris, 1989), Non-
lieu de la mémoire la
cassure d'Auschwitz (with M.
Nathan-Murat and A.
Radzynski; Bibliophane,
Paris, 1990) and L'histoire à
la lettre (Mentha, Paris,
1991).
Picking his way through the pitfalls of
transference, Freud was to turn his attention to
the unconscious desires of subjects under the
stress of their fantasies and wishes and the ups
and downs of childhoods subjected to the
mechanisms of repression.
BEYOND THE FATHER
Three main stages can be discerned in Freud's
universalization of the concepts revealed by his
experience as an analyst.
The first is represented by the studies of
hysteria and the science of dreams. Freud
started from what his patients told him about
their questioning, their slips of the tongue,
their abortive acts and the difficulties they
experienced in living their lives. Starting from
the study of these puzzles, which he regarded
as coded hieroglyphs for desires, Freud sought
to fit all these odd case-histories into the gen¬
eral theory he wished to develop.
The second stage is the one in which Freud,
in On Narcissism: an Introduction, Mourning
and Melancholia and Beyond the Pleasure Prin¬
ciple (as also in Group Psychology and the
Analysis of the Ego and The Psychopathology of
Everyday Life), raised the question of the sub¬
ject and his or her "destiny". For him this des¬
tiny was nothing more than a transformation of
the child's parental figures. At the time when a
child's image is created, when it arouses fascina¬
tion and later when subjectivization occurs,
when the child escapes the meshes of maternal
desire, the most basic element of its personality
is laid down, and that is an unconscious aware¬
ness of death. This idea had been put forward
by philosophers of classical Greece, and had
been used and abused by the Romantics it
illustrates how Greek mythology and German
Romanticism both form part of the genealogy
of psychoanalysis. But Freud sought to go fur¬
ther. The idea he proposed was that erotic
instincts are intermingled with the death
instinct via what he called "repetition-compul¬
sion" a term he used to describe what he
believed to be an innate tendency to revert to
earlier conditions.
The death instinct is supposedly a human
attribute: and hence it operates in the subject
not as the opposite of life, nor as a destructive
impulse, but precisely as a repetition-compul¬
sion. In this perspective, neurotic illness may
be a manifestation of what tends to counter the
workings of this instinct. The subject, trapped
in repetitive mechanisms, always tends to
return to the beaten track, being unable to
innovate, as Freud put it::", for fear of coming
up against the proposition that "It seems as
though the essence of success was to have got
further than one's father, and as though to excel
one's father was still something forbidden".
One particular form of neurotic activity is a
tendency to repeat in order to transmit, which
overlooks the fact that transmission always pre¬
supposes an element of loss. After all, transmit¬
ting means that people put to work what they

Sigmund Freud
(1978), a silkscreen print
by the French artist
Jean de Gaspary.
have inherited and what they have to pass on to
succeeding generations in the certainty that it
will be modified a fact that proves that there
is something alive at work that goes beyond a
mere pious tendency towards tautological
reproduction. Wanting to receive a cultural
legacy intact so as to transmit it completely
unchanged is surely the problem that afflicts
people under the tyrannical sway of idealiza¬
tion. Is this not what religion requires of us,
and what political authority demands?
At all events, this is what Freud maintains,
and it can be stated as follows: the focal point of
psychoanalytical enquiry is the singularity of the
individual mind. His theoretical propositions
consequently represent in their entirety a break
with a totalistic conception of the collective.



The third and last stage in Freud's develop¬
ment is the one spelled out in Moses and
Monotheism. By this time the father had
become for Freud the product of conjectures
and hypotheses. It is impossible to divorce his
tendency to think in terms of symbols from
the situation of actual and emotional exile in
which Freud found himself during the years of
the Nazi pestilence, and which one could also
compare to what the subject experiences in
psychoanalysis: inner exile, separation, divi¬
sion in short, all the things we ascribe to the
process known as individuation.
* In "A Disturbance of
Memory on the Acropolis"
(letter to Romain Rolland,
1936). 13
