The new-born baby enjoys an extraordinary moment of union
with its mother* Ail iater spiritual experience may spring from
the memory ofthat primal state
The baby and the saint
by Varenka Marc
ie
VARENKA MARC
is a French child psychoanalyst
working mainly in the field of
autism.
AT the beginning of its life outside the
womb, a baby exists in what I would call
a "state of being". It is its heart, its
breathing; it is merged with its mother. From this
initial state it derives a basic sense of security and
experiences what may be described as a spiritual
condition which enables its mind to live, free from
all thought, feeling and imagination. If, much
later, during its adult life, its balance is threatened,
then it calls on this basic sense of security.
The English paediatrician and psychoanalyst
D.W. Winnicott, who was consulted by more
than 60,000 mothers and babies during his long
career, showed how far the baby "is" its mother
and how vital it is for the baby that its mother is
also it. As a result of "empathy", a kind of
healthy "madness" that the mother experiences
around the third month before the birth and
that continues until several weeks after it, the
mother is under the illusion that she and her
new-born child arc one and the same. The
empathy is expressed physiologically by an.
increase in the level of progesterone in the bodv.
The baby delivers the mother from this condi¬
tion when it passes from a state of absolute
dependence to one of relative dependence.
The state of empathy is so profound that
when a mother loses her baby before the baby
has liberated her from it, she remains a pris¬
oner of it and is only able to mourn her lost
child when another child has taken its place
within her body.

Bonding through looking.
BODY CONTACT
BETWEEN MOTHER AND CHILD
In this state in which the baby is its mother, and vice
versa, they form a single being and at this stage no
thoughts, feelings or images come between them.
"The fundamental relationship . . . , is the mother-
child dyad at the beginning of existence," wrote
he Indian psychoanalyst Sudhir Kakar, echoing
Winnicott.
When I think of the child's spiritual dimen¬
sion, I am thinking of this original (or unitary)
state in which it is its mother and, through her, the
entire universe. This is the archaic state that is
rediscovered and transcended by the mystic,
whose asceticism consists of "leading the spirit
into the heart" by prayer. In his book Der Zen-
wcg ("The Way of Zen"), Eugene Herrigcl writes
about the state of "satori" (illumination) as fol¬
lows: "Perhaps this mode of contemplation is
the reconstitution of a form of spontaneous child¬
hood behaviour. In a conversation I once had
with him, the Zen master Taiscn Dcshimaru drew
a parallel between the state of 'satori' and certain
very early childhood experiences in which, he
said, in a state of rapt concentration characterized
by astonishing subjectivity and power, one sees,
one lives, one holds and is held at the same time.
Isn't that how little children play?"
The French psychiatrist and paediatrician
Françoise Dolto believed that "The sophisti¬
cated way of life in Western societies is too
unnatural and leads to brutal disruptions in the
mother-baby dyad, and these disruptions cause
suffering. For it has been impossible for a real
and healthy separation to take place."
Two-thirds of children in industrialized soci¬
eties no longer have a family life. They are social¬
ized in creches or with child-minders from when



they are two months old. The separation brings
suffering and makes it impossible for them to
achieve a healthy social life. The increase in the
number of suicides among young people, drug
addiction and delinquency may to a large extent
be due to these premature separations which
take place before sufficient time has elapsed for
attachment to develop. "This is one of the causes
of psychosis in children today," Françoise Dolto
wrote. "Each child has a genetic capital which
enables it, or not, as the case may be, to endure
separations which have not been prepared for or
mediatized by speech or by rhythmic gestures
such as breast feeding, rocking or carrying."
Breast feeding extends into the world outside
the womb a liquid bond with the inside of the
mother's body, a bond close to that the baby had
with its placenta inside the uterus. Rhythmic
rocking to and fro is a continuation of the move¬
ments that the child experienced before it was
born. As for the baby's pressure against its
mother's body, it reminds the child of the reas¬
suring pressure of the uterus (that perfect con¬
tainer lost at birth), and enables it to rediscover
the rhythms of its mother's breathing and heart¬
beat. This rhythmic continuity ensures "conti¬
nuity of being".
I I

The metrics of the world
Nature is a symphony; everything in it is
cadence and measure: and one might almost
say that God made the world in verse.
VICTOR HUGO
Tos de pierres ( 185 1-1853)
Françoise Dolto believed that early child¬
hood disturbances today are the result of a lack
of the structuring provided by body-to-body
contact with the mother. "In the past, a child
found the rhythm of this pulsatory existence
whenever it wanted to. When it was carried and
breast-fed by its mother, the vibrations of its
mother's voice reached as far as its stomach. If a
mother talks to her baby while breast-feeding it,
the vibrations of her voice are carried by the
warm liquid current which enters the baby and
deposits within its body a linguistic inscription
of love. . . ." Surely this sense of bonding is
being lost today because of disruptions in the
continuity of corporal rhythms.
RHYTHM AND PRAYER
Contemplatives use rhythm to induce bonding.
For some years I worked with a number of Chris¬
tian contemplative communities (Carmelites,
Benedictines, Dominicans, Poor Clares and Fran¬
ciscans) for whom the important moments in
the contemplative life came during the communal
practice of sung prayers. Singing is important
in these orders not so much because of the con¬
tent of the texts as because of the rhythmic
sharing of the chant.
This rhythmic chanting, which requires the
participants to breathe in unison, reminded me
in some ways making allowances for the dif¬
ferent degrees of intensity of the physical com¬
mitment of the zikr (or dhikr), the prayers of
the Sufi mystics of Afghanistan which I have also
witnessed. During these prayer sessions, the
body is shaken by the rhythm and its accelera¬
tion until the person loses consciousness. The
combined rhythm of heartbeats and breathing
banish thought and only the spirit at the centre
of the heart is left. During the ritual dancing of '
the whirling dervishes in Istanbul and Konya the
dancers mime the movement of the planet
through their gyrations and thus identify them¬
selves with the cosmos through rhythm.
In all these ascetic practices, the purpose and
effect of rhythm are to lead the mind back to the
heart and, I think, thus to rediscover an original
state in which one "is", like a new-born baby, the
heart and breathing closest to what Winnicott
called the "true self" which, he wrote, "comes
from the aliveness of the body tissues and the
working of body-functions, including the heart's
action and breathing." The new-born baby
becomes incarnate through the heart and breathing,
whereas the mystic, through a deliberate act of
supreme incarnation, returns to the primal unity.
Psychoanalysts such as Wilfred Bion, D.W.
Winnicott, Marion Milncr and Françoise Dolto
who have explored the origin of the formation of
the psyche are undoubtedly familiar with mystical
states. In their writings we find the "oceanic
spheres" in which the baby finds itself, the per-
12
A mother belonging to
Thailand's Mon people
carries her baby on her
back.

mcability of thought and the comprehension of
the newborn baby's state of mind. Perhaps this
primal "occanism", this unitary place, is where
Jungian archetypes arc formed the pre-images
that make possible the emergence of forms and
the birth of the imagination.
All babies boys or girls arc female until
the third month of their growth in utero and the
male sex emerges from the single female sex
after ten to twelve weeks of foetal life. Conse¬
quently, any being is initially feminine. "The
female element," writes Sudhir Kakar, "is that
which establishes the simplest and most fun¬
damental experience, that of being."
As someone who works with mothers and
their babies and with autistic young people, I
wanted to meet the Malangs (Sufi mystics) of
Afghanistan. I felt that an encounter with them
might teach me more about the origins of the for¬
mation of psychism. I thought the Sufi holy men
were akin to the holy men of the Russian
Orthodox church, inhabited continually by the
prayer of the heart. I met a Malang on the great
northern plain on the road to Samarkand, not far
from Kunduz and the border with Uzbekistan. As
he chanted interminably, he rocked backwards
and forwards, seemingly oblivious to the world,
while answering questions about practical and
spiritual matters put to him by villagers, passing
nomads, and even Afghan dignitaries who had
come to consult him for political reasons.
All these mystics seem to be in a state of
oneness in which the difference between I and
thou is transcended and in which one person for
an instant becomes another. This is very similar
to the state shared by the new-born baby and
its mother! It is the Oneness that the ninth-
century Muslim mystic Hallaj expressed in these
words:
Thy image is in my eye
Thy invocation in my mouth
Thy dwelling in my heart
Where then canst Thou be absent?
From these observations which locate the
origin of all spiritual experience in babyhood,
a state whose traces we bear, as if forgotten,
deep within ourselves, we may conclude that
such experience belongs potentially to all, that
it is neither unreal nor magical nor mysterious,
and that it binds us all to each other and to the
universe.
But I should hasten to add that, if human
affairs are to prosper, it would be better not to
confuse the baby's state of being with the
mystic's state of being. The French theologian
Olivier Clement has encapsulated the similarity
and the difference in these words: "Children
sleep as saints pray."
Young Kalou Rimpotche
has been enthroned as the
reincarnation of a Tibetan
spiritual leader of the same
name who died in 1989.
Above, he gives his blessing
to a monk in a monastery
near Darjeeling (India).
13
