T E R V I E W



ANDRÉ BRINK
talks to
Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat
André Brink, one of South Africa's leading novelists,
has resisted apartheid through his writing since the
1960s. Long banned within South Africa but translated
into many languages, his novels have brought him an
international reputation. They include: Looking on
Darkness (1974); A Dry White Season (1979); A Chain of
Voices (1982); The Wall of the Plague (1984); States of
Emergency (1988); and An Act of Terror (1991).
In this interview he talks about his life and convictions
and reveals some of his ideas about the future of his
country and of his work.
Given your background, what ledyou to
turn against apartheid?
I grew up in a very conservative
Afrikaner family. My father was a magis¬
trate, one of those grey eminences who
are the powers behind the throne in South
Africa because they implement the offi¬
cial policies. In his case it was done with a
real sense of justice; most of the others
were bigots. I know, because throughout
my childhood and adolescence I was sur¬
rounded by such people, the pillars of an
evil ideology. The opportunity never arose
for me to question apartheid because I
didn't have anything to compare it with. I
needed to see my country in perspective,
and that only happened when I was living
in Paris, between 1959 and 1961, at the
time of the Sharpeville massacre.
Sharpeville was the shock that forced me to
see what was happening in my country,
with the clarity that distance can provide.
At the same time I made another dis¬
covery. For the first time, I had the oppor
tunity to meet black people on equal terms.
The only black people I had met in South
Africa had been workers or domestic ser¬
vants. I'd never even imagined that there
could be black lawyers, teachers or stu¬
dents! And suddenly there I was in Paris
surrounded by black students some of
whom in fact knew more about literature
than I did after studying it for seven years.
It was a cultural shock, a very pleasant
shock, what's more, a discovery that
opened up entirely new horizons for me. It
was a voyage of discovery into unknown
territory.
There were obstacles and threats in store
when you went back to South Africa. How
didyou begin to detach yourselffrom your
background?
When I got back to South Africa, I had
no idea at first what to do about my new
discoveries. For almost ten years, Albert
Camus and the literary and philosophical
ideas I'd encountered in Paris were the
main influence on my writing. In a way I
used them to avoid exploring my own
roots roots of which I was a little
ashamed, to be honest. I wanted to focus
my attention on Europe, which for me
was the peak of civilization.
So during that time my writing was
existentialist in style and mood. It was
only when I went to live in Paris a second
time that I realized that I needed to go fur¬
ther and accept my African origins. Today
the best thing about being a South African
writer is to have two sets of roots, one lot
European, the other African.
When I returned to South Africa in
1961, 1 was appointed to a post as lecturer
at an English-language university with a
more liberal tradition than the very con¬
servative Afrikaner university where I had
myself studied. The atmosphere at this
university helped me to gain self-confi¬
dence. I met a number of blacks there, stu¬
dents and professional people. Slowly I
became aware of the situation of black
people in South Africa. But I still didn't
really know what to do about it.
In 1967 1 decided to leave the country.
I had just got divorced, and I had no more
social or family reasons to stay there. I
had made friends in Paris, writers and

painters, and at that time I thought of Paris
as paradise. I took a year's leave, which
could be extended if necessary, and
returned to Paris with the secret intention
of staying there for good.
How did you get on with your family
between these two trips?
Relations were very difficult to begin
with. My father sensed that I was cutting
loose, and we talked things over. Our rela¬
tionship was very ambiguous. On the one
hand we had very strong family feelings,
but as far as politics was concerned, a gulf
had opened up between us. We had several
fierce arguments before we realized that we
had no common ground, politically
, speaking. So we took a calm, rational deci¬
sion not to talk about politics any more.
What really triggered your change of
heart?
I think it was the ideas of Albert Camus.
I was in Paris at the time of the Algerian
war and all the problems it caused in
France, the time when Camus was writing
about the pieds noirs, the French settlers in
Algeria. I'd started reading Camus before
I went to France, and he died a few months
after I arrived there. For me his death was
a shock that gave an extraordinary signif¬
icance to his work.
Were you influenced by Sartre?
Not much. I read Sartre before I read
Camus. Intellectually, I admired Sartre
very much. But Camus bowled me over,
emotionally and morally. Sartre affected
me intellectually, but that was all.
As you describe it, your relationship
with Europe at that time was almost as
strong as your relationship with South
Africa. Was that true of many of your
fellow-countrymen ?
No, only a few of them. I found that
there were five or six other young
Afrikaner writers who like myself were
interested in novels and the theatre and
who had also lived in Europe, especially
Paris. We hadn't met in Paris, but we got in
touch after returning to South Africa. What
we experienced was something akin to that
"bliss to be alive" the English Romantics
had talked about. We were aware of doing
something that had never been done before
in Afrikaans, where the narrative tradition
had always reflected a very conservative
nationalism and the usual subjects of lit¬
erature were the lives of poor whites,
drought, agricultural problems. We had
had enough of that.
We were condemned by the authorities
for writing European-style novels. Ser¬
mons were preached against us in the
churches. Our books were accused of
moral, sexual and religious subversion by
the Directorate of Publications. They were
even publicly burned. But we didn't suffer
any political persecution, because we all
hesitated to take the final step into politics.
But while the authorities condemned us,
we got an enthusiastic reception from the
younger generation, the students, who
were as fed up with the older type of liter¬
ature as we were.
Altogether, though, it was a disturbing
time. It wasn't easy to live with the distress
of being rejected by our parents' genera¬
tion. We had grown up as part of a tradition
of blind obedience to previous genera¬
tions, accepting without discussion what
had been said in the past.
M How far did this conflict go ?
At that time it was while I was writing
my novel The Ambassador I went so far
as to criticize religion, which for Afrikaners
is the cornerstone of morality. I became an
atheist, rejecting both religion and con¬
ventional morality lock, stock and barrel.
My parents took this very hard and I was
severely criticized. But because there were
other writers around who shared my ideas
and because we had the support of the
younger generation, I didn't feel ostra¬
cized. Usually, when the authorities turned
against someone, it was disastrous. The
victims were crushed. Some turned to
drink and became alcoholics. But we had
the support of the younger generation, we
didn't care what the authorities said. And
since they didn't want to alienate an entire
generation, they were afraid to go too far.
They didn't really know what to do with
us.
M But at that stage you had still not ques¬
tioned the idea of racial inequality.
No, not really. Sometimes I would dare
to drop a phrase into an article or a book to
the effect that "We're all equal" or "Things
have got to change", but I'd not really
thought it through. My critical faculties
focused mainly on matters of religion, sex
and morality. I think I was afraid to ques¬
tion the foundations of the regime. That
was another reason for leaving South
Africa.
The most decisive year of my life was
1968. 1 was in Paris during the events of
May, which raised the whole question of

the responsibility of the individual towards
society and made me ask myself what I as
a writer wanted to do in my own society.
I realized that it would be too easy to stay
on in Paris and enjoy a pleasant life with
my friends, criticizing what was happening
over 10,000 kilometres away in South
Africa. I had to make a commitment, open
up a dialogue with my own society. I had
to do what the Paris students were trying
to do, which was to change society.
I suddenly realized that my African
roots were my most precious possession. I
wanted to go back, and I knew that it
wouldn't be easy. In late 1968 some South
African politicians and journalists came
to see me in Paris, and they warned me
that if I stayed there much longer, it would
be impossible for me to return. The author¬
ities knew about everything I had written
that year in Paris. Some of my articles had
even been published in South Africa, where
they had attracted fierce criticism.
So you were still being published in
South Africa, in spite of all the restric¬
tions. Was itpossible at that timefor white
people to live freely in South Africa,
tainted though it was by racism?
I think I benefited from the fact that I
was an Afrikaner. It was as though every¬
thing had to be kept in the family, that
allowances could be made for difficult chil¬
dren. And maybe too because I had never
openly challenged government policy. But
I knew at the end of 1968 that if I went
back, my writing would in future be polit¬
ically committed, and that I would really
have to step out of line. I knew that there
were dangers ahead, but I had made up
my mind. It had become very important
for me to go back, to write on the spot
and to accept full responsibility for my
work.
It was a decision that required a lot of
reflection. But once I had taken it I never,
even in the darkest days of the 1970s, had
any doubt that it was the right one.
Why didyou take that decision? Was it
because you felt that, as a writer, you were
getting cut offfrom your source of inspi¬
ration, from the daily life of the land and
itspeople?
Very much so. In deciding to go back, I
wanted to use all the South African mate¬
rial I could, but above all I wanted to find
out new things. For the first time in my life,
I was fascinated by Africa. I wanted to
explore the land, its history, its geography,
the people. . . . For the first time I was
seeing it as my own country, and I wanted
to learn all I could about it.
I had no sooner got back than I found
myself in trouble with the authorities over
some university lectures I gave. The first
novel I published after my return was
Looking on Darkness, which was also the
Left and opposite page: two scenes from A
Dry White Season (1989), a film by Euzhan
Palcy based on the novel by André Brink.
first book in which I openly criticized the
country's political system. I questioned
the laws on racial segregation and the ban
on marriage between blacks and whites.
It was the first novel in Afrikaans to be
banned. Until then only English-language
writers had been banned. It was an extra¬
ordinary thing for a member of the
Afrikaner family to provoke such a reac¬
tion. From then on, however, Afrikaner
writers were banned more and more often.
The Afrikaner literary establishment was
dumbfounded, and raised its voice against
the authorities for the first time. The silent
consensus that had always existed within
the community you weren't supposed
to mix politics and literature, culture was
something apart suddenly dissolved.
With my work banned, I suddenly
found that I had lost my audience, because
I only wrote in Afrikaans. So I decided to
push things further by translating the novel
into English, so it could reach a public
outside South Africa. I was furious with the
authorities for annexing Afrikaner art, cul¬
ture and history to the ideology of
apartheid. I wanted to show that Afrikaner
culture was bigger than that, that it had to
break free from apartheid, that when
apartheid finally disappeared Afrikaner
language and culture would continue.
From that time on I wrote separate
Afrikaans and English versions of my
novels; in A Chain of Voices I used the
languages alternately. Nowadays my read¬
ership in South Africa is half Afrikaner
and half English-speaking.
Didyou have a long-termplan in mind
when you returned to South Africa, or did
you simply criticize the existing state of
things?
In those days there was no grassroots
movement for an Afrikaner who wanted to
become politically involved, as there was
later, in the 1980s. The A.N.C. was a
banned organization at that time. You felt
very much on your own when you wanted

to do something. I wanted to play a part in
smashing the inhuman apartheid system. I
had some vague idea of replacing it with a
democratically-elected government in
which blacks and whites would be citi¬
zens on an equal footing, with a black-
majority government. I knew where I
wanted to go, but I didn't know how to get
there.
You must have had increasing contact
with the black community?
Yes. It caused me a lot of problems, but
I also made some wonderful discoveries.
After Looking on Darkness was banned,
more and more black people heard about
me and came to me for help. So I became
increasingly involved in their everyday
lives. In human terms it was a unique expe¬
rience, and it opened up a new world for
me. Some of the people who came to see
me became very close friends. Through
them I began to get a clearer idea of the
black experience. But I'd never be so pre¬
sumptuous as to say that I know what it's
like to be black in South Africa.
1/nA Chain of Voices, you identify with
the character ofa black slave. That was an
audacious thing to do, wasn't it?
Yes. I had shared so many close and vio¬
lent experiences with black people that I
wanted to put myself in their place and
imagine what they really felt. It was a chal¬
lenge to me as a writer.
My increasingly close relations with
black people, and the growing militancy of
the books and articles I published in the
1970s, attracted the attention of the police.
I and my family were put under permanent
surveillance. We were followed wherever
we went, even outside the country. It was
hard to take, but I had to accept it since I
didn't want to leave the country. My house
was searched several times, and my notes,
my manuscripts and my mail were confis¬
cated. They even took my typewriters, just
to make things difficult for me.
I don't know why the authorities never
went further than that. Perhaps it was
because my books had been translated
worldwide. After the riots that shook the
country in 1976, the government was
extremely isolated on the world stage. It
had a growing need for aid from the
Western powers, especially the United
Kingdom and the United States. It prob¬
ably didn't want to take direct action
against me. The authorities knew that even
governments as conservative as those of
Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan
would not accept overt repression of South
African intellectuals.
In the late 1970s I began to meet
A.N.C. representatives in various places:
London, Ireland, Australia. That was
another discovery for me, because although
I fully supported the black cause, I still
thought of the A.N.C. as a terrorist orga¬
nization. Making contact with it seemed
almost like treason. I've spent all my life
crossing frontiers, and this was a very dif¬
ficult one to cross. Yet when I did cross it,
I met remarkable people, warm and rich in
experience, people who have taught me
most of the things I know.
During the 1 980s I deliberately set out
to try to explain the policies of the A.N.C.
in my articles and essays. The astonishing
thing was that I was still allowed to publish
these pieces in the newspapers. Some
people within the Establishment must have
been starting to think it was time to take a
look at these problems, to find out about
the A.N.C, the people on the other side.
There wasn't any real understanding yet,
but there was a curiosity, a desire to know.
Perhaps the people who were in power
thought that I was so cut off from the
Afrikaner community that no-one would
be interested in what I said. Then I began
to explain why the A.N.C. espoused vio¬
lence. That led to all kinds of reactions in
the press. A chorus of voices called for me
to be put in prison.
Which members of the AN. C. had the
biggestpersonal influence on you?
I've never met Nelson Mandela, but he
has made a big impression on me from a
distance. Someone who spent a long time
as a prisoner on Robben Island once told
me that Mandela recommended my books
to his fellow-detainees. That was the ulti¬
mate accolade from my point of view.
Obviously, he was one of my heroes.
Among the people who had a big effect
on me were Johnny Makatini, an A.N.C.
representative I met in Paris, Thabo Mbeki,
Barbara Masekela, Kader Asmal, Mac
Maharaj, Essop Pahad, Steve Tswctc. Then
there was the poet Wally Serote to whom
I am indebted for the title of A Dry White
Season. They made a particularly strong
impression on me, personally, culturally
and politically, because each of them had

suffered violence either in prison or in the
guerrilla war, yet they remained very cul¬
tivated people with radiant personalities.
The result of my encounters with them
was my book An Act of Terror, which was
an attempt to explore the act of violenceper
se. Are there situations that can only be
changed through violence? Writing the
book, which took me nearly eight years,
was a journey of initiation for me. At first
I thought I knew what I wanted to say,
but everything changed as I was writing it,
largely because of one of the characters, a
young woman who appeared halfway
through the book and imposed her point of
view on me. She simply wouldn't listen to
what I was trying to explain to her. She
rejected violence completely, and I couldn't
find any easy answer to her arguments.
M For obvious reasons, the black majority
in South Africa has no experience ofgov¬
ernment. Are you afraid that there might
be some anti-democratic backsliding of
the kind that has happened in other coun¬
tries after becoming independent?
No. I'm extremely confident about this.
The A.N.C. has eighty years' history
behind it, an eighty-year tradition of non-
racism. All South Africa's communities
black, white, coloureds are represented in
it. They've had plenty of experience of
political, as well as cultural and educa¬
tional, organization. As far as the future is
concerned, I am reassured by the move¬
ment's experience and its history of toler¬
ance. I know one must be realistic and rec¬
ognize that there is a younger generation of
blacks who have grown up with violence in
the streets and whose first reaction will be
to use violence to solve whatever prob¬
lems may arise. But I also believe that the
extreme violence South Africa has experi¬
enced in the past few years has led more
and more of these young people to under¬
stand and accept the need for dialogue,
reason and compromise.
Andyet the world today seems beset by
separatist, exclusionist tendencies that are
the opposite ofthe democratic integration
you favour.
I think that, particularly in the East
European countries, this tendency for
IZ*^*-* \«?
wf[ l^!\ 7M
pM
fe^üH
countries to split up is a reaction against
enforced assimilation. In South Africa, the
situation is quite different and the reac¬
tion is against enforced segregation. As
things stand today we are at a difficult and
dangerous stage, but I hope it will not be
long before people everywhere understand
the need for interdependence, accepting
not only the differences between peoples
and cultures but also the need to coexist
and find common solutions. That's why
South Africa is a testing-ground. It is a
country with the human potential to
achieve this kind of solution and set an
example for other countries. But there is
also the possibility that everything may
go up in smoke.
Personally, I take heart from the
example of Namibia, which had the same
ethnic mixture and which experienced the
same political and racial tensions. When it
achieved independence, the different fac¬
tions found they could still live together
and that independence wasn't the end of
the world. You must understand too the
deep ties that bind Afrikaners to their land.
They can't conceive of leaving South
Africa. More and more of them arc real¬
izing that the only way to stay where they
are is to come to terms with the black
majority.
Do you believe in the unifying prin¬
ciple of citizenship or in the principle
of difference with guarantees for each
community?
Both are necessary. We need to respect
differences of identity, while also finding
the common denominators that link
everyone so as to promote a South African
identity. Some people have suggested fed¬
eralism, but that risks perpetuating existing
divisions. We need to combine the two
principles.
Last year 1992 was a sombre year
which showed up the divisions within
South African society. But now all the South
African communities are seeking common
ground. I think there's a chance of reaching
a solution that won't necessarily be a
panacea for all ills but that will be a step for¬
ward. It might take the form of a transitional
government	 We'll find a way.
Finally, do you think the changing situ¬
ation in South Africa will affect the style
and subject-matter ofyour writing?
Like every writer of my generation, I
have been deeply marked by apartheid. Of
course that doesn't mean that I needed
apartheid to be able to write! With its dis¬
mantling which threatens to be a long-
drawn-out process because, sadly, apartheid
won't be easily forgotten I'm starting to
feel a new sense of freedom about the sub¬
jects I want to explore. Part of that freedom
may take the form of filling in gaps in our
history, scouting territory that was over¬
looked or forbidden during the years of
apartheid. There won't be any further need
for fiction writers like myself to be overtly
political and to explain the A.N.C.'s policies,
because now the A.N.C. can do that for
itself. So I'll be able to concentrate more
fully on the experiences of individuals,
which have in fact always interested me
more than the political or ideological side of
things. As for my style, I already tried my
hand at writing what one might call an
"entertainment" in 1985, with Adamastor.
In On the Contrary, which will be pub¬
lished in English shortly, I have made my-
first attempt to correct the historical record
and fill in a gap, and I think there's rather
more humour in it than in my earlier writ¬
ings. In forthcoming novels I shall be trying
to get more and more of an imaginative
grasp on reality, to invent history.
