Towards education
for all
NEXT November, the Heads of State or Government of
nine large countries will meet in New Delhi in India
to give a new impetus to their efforts to achieve edu¬
cation for all. There is an obvious and powerful logic in this
initiative. The nine countries Bangladesh, Brazil, China,
Egypt, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Nigeria and Pakistan
collectively account for nearly three-quarters of the world's
adult illiterates and a sizeable share of the world's out-of-
school children. Thus there can be no significant overall
progress in education unless there is progress in these coun¬
tries. They are, so to speak, the key to the solution of the prob¬
lems of illiteracy and lack of education. If Education for All
progresses in these countries, it progresses for the world as
a whole. If it lags in these nations, or even in certain of them,
world statistics will reflect this failure. These countries, there¬
fore, have a special responsibility to the world community
a responsibility, I should add, of which their governments and
peoples are keenly aware.
These nine nations are facing enormous challenges which
are linked among other things to their size, cultural diversity
and disparities in wealth. But they are, at the same time,
nations with vast potential, nations which excel in countless
areas, traditional and technological alike. Not only do they
have problems; they have, in differing degrees, the means to
cope with them. They are thus seen by their neighbours not
only as examples, but also as nations which are capable of
extending a helping hand, and in many cases they are already
doing so. They are fully capable of serving as regional and
world laboratories and resources in the quest to bring edu¬
cation to all the world's citizens. The dynamism and the
weight of the expertise they possess, not just their sheer size,
give high promise and potential to this initiative.
Several of these countries are the cradles of great civiliza¬
tions. They invented writing systems and used them to record
many of the most momentous and meaningful chapters in the
human adventure. Their progress is thus of the highest sym¬
bolic value. At a moment when our faith in the human voca¬
tion is being sorely tried, when our optimism is daily challenged
by the follies and tragedies that beset us, how splendid it
would be to see these nations where civilization was born
lead the world into a new era of hope and enlightenment.
A UNIVERSAL
MOVEMENT
UNESCO attaches the highest importance to the initiative of
these large countries and will lend it all possible support. But
the Education for All movement is not limited to any one
group of countries. It is a worldwide undertaking in which
all nations, the richest as well as the poorest, have a right and
duty to participate. At the World Conference on Education
for All, held at Jomtien (Thailand) in March 1990, the devel¬
oping countries pledged to concentrate and accelerate their
efforts to achieve this goal, while the industrialized countries
undertook to lend considerably increased support to such
efforts. Initially, it was the sponsoring agencies UNICEF,
the United Nations Development Programme, the World
Bank and UNESCO that mobilized themselves and made
education for all their priority. But there is now clear evidence
that bilateral agencies are joining actively in this initiative and
providing new resources. Thus it is with great pleasure and
satisfaction that I can report to you that the alliance forged in
Jomtien three years ago has become a worldwide movement
in which a growing number of countries and organizations
are actively engaged.
This progress must, of course, be taken as an incentive and
not as a reason for complacency. In an age of slogans, it is
important to remind ourselves constantly that "education for
all" is a message with a real and urgent meaning and a goal that
is within our reach, if we firmly resolve to achieve it. But let
there be no doubt that the outcome is still very much in
question. Nothing will be more decisive in determining it than
the progress made in these nine large countries. If they suc¬
ceed in transforming education for all from a slogan to a
reality, I am certain that rapid progress will follow elsewhere
and that the world will enter the twenty-first century prepared
for a new age of enlightenment. 4J
