From Sarajevo
On the occasion of International Press Freedom Day
the Director-General of Unesco launches an appeal for peace
Mjet us make this week a historic turning point from a culture ofwar to a culture of peace!
In South Africa, under the clear-sighted leadership of Nelson Mandela and Frederik de
Klerk, elections have been held and apartheid is over. The Middle East, thanks to the farsighted¬
ness of Yasser Arafat, Shimon Peres and Itzhak Rabin, is ending the first stage of a new departure
towards peaceful coexistence and neighbourliness.
In this one week the spirit of understanding and mutual respect has come to two of the most
long-standing and most difficult problems of coexistence. The same thing has happened in El Sal¬
vador and Mozambique. I therefore solemnly appeal to all the parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(knowing full well how recent and deep the wounds are) to halt the fighting and sit down at the
table of dialogue and conciliation. You can make this week a historic occasion for peace. In par¬
ticular I appeal to the Serbian leaders to stop now and take part in peace talks.
From Sarajevo, on the occasion of International Press Freedom Day, I solemnly appeal to all
those engaged in conflict, especially fratricidal conflict, to cease hostilities and embark on a dia¬
logue for peace. Peace in justice, equity and freedom.
In Rwanda, Angola and Afghanistan, please realize that everything can be discussed, a solu¬
tion can be found to every problem, except death! Let there be no more dying for causes that
deserve so richly to be lived for!
Today is a great day for hope, and we thank all those who have been at the inception of the
processes that are coming to fruition, all those who have been able to overcome their hatred and
desire for vengeance and have agreed to turn a page towards the future.
Today from Sarajevo a new song of life and freedom goes forth to the whole world. May the
force of reason prevail over the reason of force!
We have not been able to share our past or live in harmony. But we still have intact a
common treasure, our future. And this week can be a crucial turning point from war to peace
everywhere. From Sarajevo I also appeal to people all over the world to contribute to the recon¬
struction of this country and to the restoration of its multicultural symbols: the library, the
Mostar bridge, the churches and places ofworship of every religion, schools of every kind.
We can no longer just sit back and gape in wide-eyed wonder. The time for active solidarity
has now begun. Your contribution, whatever the amount, will show that we, especially in Europe,
are no longer passive. And that the momentum of love between peoples is the strongest force.
Today is a day of hope. There are examples to follow. Great events to celebrate. On behalf of
the United Nations agency mandated to build peace in the minds of men, I ask you to make a gift
to all the world's children and young people: lay down your weapons and use your free hands to
build a new world based on love.
Federico Mayor
Sarajevo, 3 May 1994
