Interview with Aleksandar Petrovic
the gypsies
Aleksandar Petrovic is a leading figure in Yugoslav cinema. His film / Even Met Happy Gypsies
won the Palme d'Or at the 1967 Cannes Film Festival.
D Why do you like Gypsies? How did you
get to know them in the first place?
As far back as I can remember, I've
always felt compassion for those little
raggamuffins you see in the street and those
young mothers with babies in their laps
and hands outstretched.



Today in Serbia there is unprecedented
privation. Some 30 per cent of Serbs are on
the edge of starvation. Because of shortages
of medical supplies, mental patients are
even being tied up in psychiatric hospi¬
tals, where they die of hunger.
And the Gypsies in Serbia are worse off
than everyone else. I have never seen so
many four- and five-year-old Gypsy chil-
My Lord, if you reincarnate me again after my death,
Let me be a Gypsy
Let me choose one of the ways
The way of joy that will make me a happy man
Or the way of death and a new encounter with you.
Aleksandar Petrovic
dren out on the street before. You see ten-
year-olds at crossroads, offering to wash
your car windows for a coin or two, always
ready to laugh and joke. In summer they go
barefoot, and they're not much better shod
in winter.
Because they are exposed to life's harsh
realities from infancy, they are far more
mature and quick-witted than children from
more privileged backgrounds. They soon
learn the ins and outs of the black market,
which is growing by leaps and bounds with
the economic chaos that Serbia is now in.
They sell anything: car fuel, old clothes,
toilet paper, cigarettes imported from
Romania. Now that it has replaced Trieste
as the source of supply, Romania has
become the poor man's El Dorado.
When I look into the great dark eyes of
these children of the wind and poverty, I
feel that I'm looking into the mystery of
their origins. No one knows where Gyp¬
sies come from, but they arc a people in
their own right. Their eternal sense of
freedom and music attracted me to them
and inspired me to make my film / Even
Met Happy Gypsies.

Q What is the film's original title?
The title in Serbo-Croat was The Feather
Collectors, which is more evocative for us



since we're used to seeing Gypsies on our
roads carrying enormous bundles of goose
feathers that they sell in the villages.
Unlike the Gypsies of Bosnia and
Croatia, most Serbian Gypsies are seden¬
tary except those in the east near the
Romanian and Bulgarian borders, where
you can still meet nomads such as the last
bear-leaders from Pozarevac. In the spring
the whole family clambers into an old cart
drawn by a nag and does the rounds of
weddings and village fêtes.
O You say they are sedentary. Where do
they live?
Gypsy dwellings arc usually found on
the edges of small towns and villages. In
Belgrade they live in certain central neigh¬
bourhoods and like their forebears work
for the city on road maintenance. They
seem to lead a more human existence in
towns and villages than in cities, plying
their traditional trades and occupations as
collectors of scrap metal, goose-down mer¬
chants and more rarely these days as
blacksmiths or small traders. The interiors
of their little houses are simply white¬
washed whereas we Serbs like to decorate
our walls. The façades, on the other hand,
are painted in vivid colours and imaginative
designs. Their little houses look as if they
might be part of a fairy tale, but what with
alcohol, poverty and sometimes, unfortu¬
nately, petty crime, there is nothing
romantic about the life they lead.
The crime rate in Serbia today is rising by
leaps and bounds. And although the Gypsies
comprise only 2 per cent of the Serb popu¬
lation, one of four offenders is a Gypsy. Yet
the Gypsies are better accepted by the Serbs
than they are in many other places.
NOBODY THINKS OF HIM AS A
GYPSY ANY MORE, NOT EVEN
HIS OWN FAMILY
The ties of friendship between Serbs and
Gypsies are so strong that a Gypsy singer
appearing on Belgrade television recently
said jokingly, "You Serbs should put up a
monument to the Gypsies because we're
the only ones left who still love you!"
He was referring of course to this
awful, dirty war that is ravaging parts of the
former Yugoslavia.
Serbian goodwill towards the Gypsies
does nothing to improve the Gypsies' con¬
dition, because the word Gypsy also des¬
ignates someone who belongs to a certain
social level the lowest.
Whenever, through sheer grit, one of
them becomes a doctor or lawyer, no one
Scene from / Even Met Happy Gypsies (1967) 39

The Gypsies did not arrive in the Balkans at the same time as the
Turks. They are already mentioned in Serb manuscripts of the
eleventh century, and the Turks did not occupy southeastern
Europe until 300 years later. About half a million Gypsies live in
the former Yugoslavia. But Gypsies do not declare themselves as
such at census time. They assume instead the nationality of
the people among whom they live. a.p.
thinks of him as a Gypsy any more, not
even his own family!
D How much of a barrier is the Gypsy
language?
For Gypsies the language problem is par¬
ticularly acute because on the one hand their
language has no alphabet and on the other
they express themselves poorly in their
adopted language. Some non-Gypsies go so
far as to claim Gypsies are incapable of
learning other languages, which is obviously
nonsense! First of all they speak their own
tongue although it has diversified into so
many different dialects that sometimes Gyp¬
sies from different parts of the world find it
very hard to understand each other. In fact,
all Gypsies are bilingual since they also use
the language of their host country.
D Do they get normal schooling?
In Serbian, Macedonian, Slovenian and
other schools, Gypsy children are taught in
a language that is not their own. So they are
already at a disadvantage in relation to the
other children. Moreover their mother
tongue is not a written language, but it is
the language they use at home. And some¬
times too, their teachers have a racist attitude
towards them.
PALM-READERS WHO CAN
RECREATE THE WORLD
Not long ago a sociologist tried to show, in
an article that appeared in Belgrade, that
Gypsy children are intellectually inferior
and that in a normal class they hold the
others back. He proposed that special classes
and programmes be adapted to Gypsy chil¬
dren's "intelligence levels". That's the kind
of nonsense you still hear about Gypsies!
It might be a good idea to give Gypsy
children special lessons, but without sepa¬
rating them from their class, so that they
can improve their skills in the national lan¬
guage. Otherwise how can they possibly
emerge from poverty?
How much is known about their cul¬
ture?
40

Two scenes from / Even Met Happy
Gypsies (1967).
Gypsy mythology, which has been trans¬
mitted orally down the centuries, is sym¬
bolically very rich, and their poetry is unreal,
or rather surreal, woven from dreams.
Although there is no written history of
the Gypsy language (or rather languages)
and without written traces the life and his¬
tory of a people are shrouded in obscu¬
rity the oral tradition has kept alive in the
Gypsy mind the most dramatic episodes
of their past.
In Serbia there are whole families of



Gypsy musicians. One of the best known
are the Lakatoshes, one branch of which
lives in Hungary, the other in Serbia. I met
Mikhaflo Lakatosh in a remote village in
northern Serbia. He was singing one of his
songs, Djelem Djelem, which, after being
sung in my film, has become the Gypsy
national anthem. "I wandered endless by¬
ways/I even met happy Gypsies/Oh the
Gypsies, oh what men	"
In Gypsy language the word Rom also
means "man". All non-Gypsies are called
Gadjos, or "foreigners".
ETERNAL OUTSIDERS
If the true measure of humanity is the
amount of freedom that people manage to
win for themselves in this life, then Gypsies
are truly men Rom.
Like everyone else, Gypsies are fond of
money. But they'll never sacrifice an imme¬
diate pleasure a moment of intensity for
a few gold coins. Their attachment to
freedom is not a rational choice, it is part of
the natural order of things. They feel it in
their bones. It brings radiance to their
sombre lives of mingled joy and pain.
The euphoria generated by a sense of
boundless freedom can lead to atrocious
crimes. The Gypsy hero of my film, who
refuses to think about the consequences of
his acts, is a character out of Dostoyevsky.
He doesn't think about the consequences
before committing his crime. For example,
he doesn't say to himself, "I must not kill,
because if I do I'll go to prison for ten
years." He goes through with his mur¬
derous act, knowing full well that he is
bringing about his own ruin. A little later
in the film he is watching television with his
family when he suddenly kisses his chil¬
dren, takes his hat and leaves. And that's
that. He has moved into another world.
Compared with the fleeting sense of
power, by which he crosses over to "the
other side" of social morality, his personal
interest counts for little. He is ready to sac¬
rifice his life for absolute freedom, through
which he can affirm his personality.
Europe was recently horrified by mur¬
ders committed by two Gypsies who, while
under the influence of drugs, massacred an
entire family in northern Italy. One was
tried and found guilty, but the other chose
to kill himself. The police surrounded his
parents' house, and he agreed to surrender
but only after having a coffee and a cigarette
in the courtyard. When he had finished his
cigarette, he shot himself through the heart.
He had set off on a road without end, sig¬
nifying by his act the mysterious link that
exists between crime and freedom.
Less attached to their personal interests
than others, perhaps less "rational" because
they scorn to consider the long-term conse¬
quences of their acts, Gypsies seem to me
more sensitive than others to the world's
beauty and its suffering and more susceptible
to unhappiness, for they are more vulnerable
to the call of evil if that's what it has to be
called that we have in each of us.
ALEKSANDAR PETROVIC is a French film-maker of
Serbian origin. In addition to / Even Met Happy
Gypsies, he has directed The Master and Margaret
(1972), which won the CIDALC prize at the Venice Film
Festival, and Group Portrait with Lady (1977). His
latest film, Migrations, has not yet been released but
was shown at the Festival des étonnants voyageurs at
Saint-Malö (France) in May 1993.
41
