c/V tfo «;i
A PLACE OF TRIALS
by Mahin Tajadod
16
THE Persian mystic tradition compares the
spiritual quest to the crossing of desert
valleys. Sufism enumerates seven of these
valleys: quest, love, knowledge, detachment,
unity, amazement and annihilation. The path is
perilous. Asceticism to purify the soul; the dis¬
avowal of carnal passions; the renunciation of
earthly desires all these thorns wait on the
mystic's path.
Gold, the possession of goods that flatter
the eye and the heart and stir envy and desire
all the world's vanities appear as mirages in the
path of the thirsty voyager.
Every caravan needs a guide to cross the
desert; no-one would be so foolish as to ven¬
ture across the sandy wastes without someone to
lead them. Similarly, the Iranian mystic tradi¬
tion requires seekers after truth to seek the help
of pirs, masters who can show them the way.
No disciple would risk setting out on the path of
devotion without the help of an initiator to
instruct him and pass on the necessary knowl-

In Persian literature the desert is peopled by mystics, visionaries,
mythical beings and travellers who have lost their way
* - -, * -
Above: the Simurgh, a
mythological bird, and
Zala, the human it
adopted, as shown in a
1 5th-century illustration
from the Shah-nameh
("The Book of Kings").
Right: a dervish pictured in
a detail from a 1 6th-
century illustrated version
of the Shah-nameh.
edge. Like a caravan-leader who holds a camel by
the reins to steer the beast and its rider through
dangerous passages, the spiritual master takes
in hand the chain of the proselyte's instruction.
Attâr, the great twelfth-century Persian poet,
describes in The Conference ofthe Birds a journey
these creatures make when they decide one day
to set off in search of their king. Guided by the
hoopoe, a bird rich in mythological associations
that was Solomon's companion and that knows
how to avoid mirages and espy waterholes from
afar, they set off for the mountain called Qâf,
home of the Simurgh, ruler of the birds. Many of
the travellers cannot stand the heat, the hunger
and thirst and, fearing the unknown, prefer to
return to pleasanter lands. Others have the
courage to endure the journey and its perils. For
want of food, water and shade many die en route.
Only thirty birds in Persian, si-murgh reach
their goal, flying over Qâf and meeting the object
of their quest in a mystic communion.
"And so those thirty birds contemplated the
face of Simurgh in the reflection of their own
faces	 They saw that it was truly the Simurgh,
and if they turned their regard on themselves,
they saw that they were the Simurgh too. Finally,
looking one way then the other, they realized
that they and the Simurgh were in reality one."
Ogres and fairies
In Persian legends and poetic epics, the desert is
also the land of ogres, génies and fairies. In his
Incantation of the Simurgh, the twelfth-cen¬
tury Iranian philosopher Suhravardi explains
how to avoid the ogres known as douâl-pa that
leaped onto travellers' shoulders and would not
come down until they had strangled them with
their legs. "As the traveller passes, the douâl-pa
suddenly throws out its legs and grips him
around the throat, so hindering his progress
that he can no longer find the Water of Life.
But I have heard it said that a man can be deliv¬
ered if he goes aboard Noah's Ark and takes in
his hand the staff of Moses."
The génies known as djinn also inhabit the
desert: they can be recognized by the clogs they
wear, and they are less dangerous than ogres or
demons. Peris, fairylike creatures who are the
personification of beauty and grace, only appear
after nightfall. The story goes that Nasir ad-
Din Shah, who ruled Persia from 1 848 to 1896,
used to dress carefully every evening, then set off
on his favourite horse to the desert to meet the
most beautiful of these fairies.
Whether the flesh is forgotten or the mind
becomes doubly sensitive to its prickings,
whether the spirit grows drowsy or gains in
lucidity, the desert is first and foremost a mirror
in which one can see the world and maybe also
glimpse the face of God. The only certainty is
that sooner or later you will see yourself. H
MAH1N TAJADOD,
of Iran, is the author of several plays inspired by Persian
mythology and epics. With Jean-Claude Carrière and Nahal
Tajadod, she has translated into French 100 poems by the
Persian poet Mowlânâ (Rumi) which were published under
the title of Le livre de Chams de Tabriz (Connaissance de
rOrient/Gallimard, Paris, 1993).
17
