
The German botanist and traveller Georg August Schweinfurth (1836-1925) explored the reaches of the
upper Nile and was the first European to discover the Uele River in what is now Zaire.


hen the Momhuttu women
cried hosannaby Georg Schweinfurth
"IVlombuttu Woman" (above)
and "Details of the palace of
Moonza, king of the IVlombuttu"
(right). Two illustrations from
the French edition of
Schweinfurth's Heart of Africa
(1875).
SI
fl My relationship with the natives became closer
I with each passing day. There was always a con¬
siderable crowd around my dwelling, avidly watching my
slightest gesture. The well-born even had chairs brought
for them.
At first these visitors amused me.
I greeted them with welcoming gestures, combing
my hair and shaving in conspectu omnium.2
Moreover the astonishment was mutual. Each
instant brought me a new surprise. I spent a good deal
of the day sketching and taking notes.
Interesting though they may have been, these visits
soon became tiresome. The day after my arrival I had to
have a barrier of thorns put up around my tent. But that
didn't stop them. I threw water on the nuisances, I
exploded powder and fire-crackers. To no effect. My door
was guarded by soldiers, but no sooner was I outside it
than the crowd gathered round. The women were par¬
ticularly exasperating. They would follow in my foot¬
steps, preventing me from collecting plants and crushing
the few flowers I had taken the trouble to pick. I came
to despair. As I walked along streams and through val¬
leys there were a hundred In my wake. With each farm
and hamlet the avalanche swelled.
At other times I was in better temper and joked with
them. I had learned a few words of their language.
When I spoke one of these words, they repeated it
happily in chorus like an echo. "Hosanna", one of the
words I knew, meant "It isn't". One day, in the midst of
a group of women, I shouted it out in a stentorian
voice. "Hosanna!" they replied, and for the next quarter
of an hour, they repeated the same word with me and
continued this strange concert.
These Mombutu women, so cheeky when they are
in a group, tend to be shy when they are on their own.
I wanted to observe the details of their daily lives, but
whenever they saw me coming they would scamper into
their dwellings and shut the door in my face.
1. Now known as "Mangbetus", one of the peoples of Zaire.
2. In full view of everyone.
Extracts from Heart of Africa. Three Years' Travels and Adventures
in the Unexplored Regions of Central Africa from 1868 to 1871
(1873).
