I he Beijing underground
turningplanet'
Australian writer
David Harris set
out to search for Li-
jien, a mysterious
city built in China
by Romans 1,300
years before Marco
Polo reached
Cathay. . . .
by David Harris
Beijing. There are sixty-two people
waiting at the stop for bus 375. As it
comes around the corner, I see the bus is already
full. I join the crowd that runs beside the double
doors, and when the bus stops I struggle up
against the flood of people pouring out. The
doors hiss shut, the bus lurches forward and I
grab a hand-rail.
"Hello." I twist around to see a young Chi¬
nese woman smiling at me. She asks, "What do
you think of China?"
"It teaches you to stand like a banana." All
those who smile know English. "What is your
name?"
"Wang Fei. I want to go to a university in the
West." She takes an envelope from the pocket of
her jacket. It is a long list of rules for overseas
study. Wang Fei's face becomes suddenly fright¬
ened as she asks, "What does it cost for an air fare
to America, or Australia?"
How precious and fragile is hope. I feel
guilty when I whisper, "More than a thousand
dollars."
Wang Fei turns her face aside. "Thank you,"
she says. We stand quietly, staring out of the
window at the four lanes of traffic, the crowded
markets, and the steel skeletons of high-rise
hotels.
The bus reaches Xishimen terminus. Wang
Fei shakes my hand and is soon lost among the
thousands of people. I walk towards the under¬
ground railway station.
The footpath is blocked by a boy, tied up
with ropes and lying on the concrete. He is per¬
haps ten years old. Naked to the waist he lies on
his side, knees tucked up. The ropes cut into his
arms that are bound tightly to his body. An old
man stands by the boy's head. He rattles a tin that
he holds out to the onlookers. When enough
coins have been dropped into the tin, the boy
begins to struggle. He kicks out his legs, gasps for
breath and cries out in pain. Then the ropes burst
apart and he leaps to his feet, triumphant.
The crowd sighs and applauds. His street
performance shows the power of Qi Gong, a
belief that we have an energy to control things
and even to heal the body. This is the China
that launches satellites, splits the atom and has
just opened its first Kentucky Fried Chicken
restaurant. One of the most popular pro¬
grammes on Chinese television is the Qi Gong
show. Like Western magicians, or faith healers, 33


"We have a pleasant time learning
words of each other's language.
Other Chinese visit us to sit on the


bunk and meet a stranger from the
West. Mr. Shui searches rapidly
from page to page in his book,
looks up words in the dictionary
and suddenly says, his eyes
gleaming with pride and happiness,
'We belong to one turning planet.'"
the Qi Gong experts delight millions by making
a watch pass through the sides of a drinking glass,
reading minds, or curing a person who has fits.
In the underground train I sit beside a Chi¬
nese woman dressed in high-fashion clothes,
with a beautiful lace collar. "My name is Fan Li
Su." She teases her crimped hair with her fin¬
gertips. "I work with an international finance
company. The hours are hard. Often we finish
after midnight. But the pay is good. My boss lets
me come to work late some days. Flexible time."
Fan Li Su is confident, with the relaxed way
of somebody who knows she has a good meal
waiting at home.
"You see, I belong to an elite in Beijing. The
common people call us nobles. We are unmar¬
ried, independent, well-educated, have travelled
to America, and earn ten times the salary of a
university professor. My boyfriend has a Toyota
car, and I have a maid at my apartment.
"In China," says Fan Li Su, pushing her hair
back with both hands, "We have much about the
sun and the moon. Male and female. Light and
darkness. China is changing. I will be the bright
sun.
A fast-food restaurant in
Beijing.
I leave the underground train and walk to the
34
Australian Embassy. There I will meet officials
who help me plan my search for the Lost City
of Rome. Far out to the north-west, where the
Great Wall crumbles into mounds of dust, may
be the ancient ruins that have brought me across
the world. Tomorrow I will catch the night train
from Beijing to Lanzhou, the Golden City of the
Silk Road.
Stranded in a train
The train is stranded. In hard sleeper carriage
number five I sit on a bottom bunk, a blanket
wrapped around my shoulders. My breath
steams in the air. Through the window I see a
leafless plane tree standing in the snow. Across
a wide flat land, scattered trees lose themselves
in low clouds. It is twenty hours since we
stopped here at a nameless railway siding in
central China, south of the Yellow River.
Opposite me, on the other bottom bunk,
sits a policeman, Mr. Zhou, with his wife and
their little boy, Jian Jun. Mr. Zhou hands me a
stick of purple sugar cane. I tear the husk off
with my teeth and munch the yellow pulp. We
grin at each other and gnaw the fibres.
With the help of a dictionary we learn that he
has hot noodles and beef for breakfast. I eat
toasted bread. The Zhou family lives in a three-
room apartment on the fourth floor of a concrete
high rise. They have a bedroom, a living room,
a shared kitchen and a laundry. Outside there is
no playground forJian Jun. No pets are allowed,
except goldfish or birds in cages. Jian Jun likes
playing with snails, and watching the Mickey
Mouse cartoons on television.
This is China the people. Although we are
stuck under a gloomy sky, there are no com¬
plaints, no demands for special privileges. People
chat, enjoy food, take out shopping to examine
their new shoes or new dress. Children are cud¬
dled; old people helped to the toilet outside on
the platform.
"Hello. Allow me to introduce myself." A shy
soldier stands near my bunk. He carries a BBC
book on how to speak English. He says, "My
name is Mr. Shui. I am pleased to meet you."
We have a pleasant time learning words of
each other's language. Other Chinese visit us to
sit on the bunk and meet a stranger from the
West. Mr. Shui searches rapidly from page to
page in his book, looks up words in the dictio¬
nary and suddenly says, his eyes gleaming with
pride and happiness, "We belong to one turning
planet."
Later, I go outside to walk for a while along
the platform. A man comes to me and holds
out a basket. Partly buried in straw are porcelain
horses. A voice behind me says, "Five yuan.
Tang Dynasty." It is a middle-aged man in a

suit. He hands me his business card, one side in
Chinese, the other in English. Professor Li
Deren, a specialist in making maps.
Maybe he will know something about the
location of my lost city. He asks, "Will you
have dinner with me in the buffet car?"
I follow him through his carriage soft
sleeper car 22. Soft sleepers arc for officials, for¬
eigners and wealthy Chinese. They have a wash¬
room beside the toilet. The buffet car is full of
cigarette smoke. Wc sit at a table by the window
and drink a can of Changlcsc lemonade. "It is
expensive," says Professor Li, "because we add
an education tax to luxury goods."
Hao Wen from Widow Town
Wc talk about his work. "There is a new age in
the world," Professor Li says. "The information
revolution. Now our computers design not just
a river canal, but the best ways to look after the
people and the environment. There is so much
to do. All day at university is very busy with
teaching, guests, research. When I come home at
night, I put on my overcoat, wrap blankets
around my legs and work on the ten pages I
must write each day of a textbook."
Then we begin to talk about the accuracy of
maps. While we discuss Li-jien, a young man
walks into the buffet car and looks at the empty
scat beside me. He sits and begins to talk with
Professor Li, who translates for me. Hao Wen is
the sales manager of a factory making fashion¬
able Western clothes for women. Professor Li
explains, "Hao Wen is from Widow Town. It has
a sad history. Husbands go abroad to make their
family fortune. Some see their wives only once
or twice in a lifetime."
"Will Hao Wen be a widow-maker?"
"Already he has bought two houses with
air-conditioning. One day he will choose a suit¬
able wife." Professor Li is proud of the young
man. "Hao Wen is the new China. He only
went to high school, but he owns a car. He pays
for his brother to be educated at university to
become a modern manager. That way, his chil¬
dren and mine can develop more factories."
"How large is your factory?" I ask Hao
Wen.
He smiles. "It is not all in one place. My
father sends sewing machines through Hong
Kong. I put these small machines in farms where
the families sew the clothes to the latest overseas
designs. Young women always want new fash¬
ions, so I have 700 machines working. My fac¬
tory is just a shed where I store the clothes
before selling them to big department stores.
Already I export to more than thirty countries,"
he grins. "Even Australia."
Whistles blow and the train jolts. I return to
A sleeping car in a Chinese
train.
35

A train wends its way through
arid terrain near the city of
Jiayuguan in Gansu province at
the western end of the Great
Wall.
36
DAVID HARRIS
is an Australian historian and
writer who in 1989 discovered
ruins of the lost Roman city of
Li-jien, in China's Gansu
province, near the Gobi Desert.
The full story of his search for
Li-jien is told in his Black Horse
Odyssey: Search for the Lost
City of Rome in China (Wakefield
Press, Kent Town, South
Australia, 1991).
my bunk before the doors are locked that keep
apart the soft and hard sleeper carriages. Soon I
will sleep while the train takes me deeper into the
heart of China, and closer to the ancient city that
lies in wait for me out in the desert.
The invisible city
The desert reminds me of outback Australia.
Heat shimmers from the ground, making distant
mountains float and break apart in the mirage.
Beside me, in the Lanzhou University Toyota
Crown car, sits Mr. Zhang Hulaguang. He is a
blanket-maker, power-house technician and
nuclear physicist who has come with me as a
friend and interpreter.
On the horizon glimmer the eternal snows of
the Qilian Mountains. Where the mountains dis¬
appear over the curve of the earth is the area where
the city of Rome looked down on the Silk Road.
Mr. Zhang looks at the barren, stony soil.
"One drop of water is as precious as a drop of
oil. Some farmers go into the mountains and
carry out snow to water their crops." He sighs.
"Only 2,000 years ago this was good land. Now
it is desert. What has made the temperature rise
by 4 degrees in that time? It is the same right
across to the Caspian Sea. Perhaps we have cut
down too many trees. Now our children must
plant and care for the new trees we grow."
Ahead is the town of Yongchang. I sit for¬
ward eagerly. The documents in my bag show
Li-jien just south of this place. Yongchang is a
town of narrow streets, mud and pebble walls,
a market with the body of a pig hanging from a
hook, and in the centre of town a huge gate
with high arches to pass through and a green
roof on top with eaves like big curved wings.
Mr. Zhang takes me to the government head¬
quarters. I wait outside while he talks to officials.
High above, two jet fighter planes swoop and
roar in mock battle. Mr. Zhang returns with
two men.
Before long our shyness is lost as we talk
excitedly about Li-jien. We wave our arms about,
interrupt, dispute dates, swallow twigs and leaves
with our tea, and Mr. Zhang translates brilliantly
as we charge over old battle grounds and run
backwards and forwards through centuries.
"Come on," says Cultural Secretary Zhang
Yu. "We think we know where Li-jien is. Why
don't we go and look now?"
It is a race against the setting sun. We all
cram into the Toyota and speed out of town
and along a narrow dirt track. We drive straight
for the mountains as though all the devils of
hell are chasing us.
"Here," says Cultural Secretary Zhang Yu.
The car bounces along a dry river bed and stops
beside a village. I run up the river bank and see
mud brick walls of the village, a girl standing
among her cattle, smoke from kitchens, yellow
hay piled on roofs, television antennas. There is
no sign of Roman ruins.
I take photographs in many directions, aware
that my eye has seen something that escapes
my recognition.
"Li-jien is beneath this village," says the
Cultural Secretary.
With a thrill of excitement and anticipation
I know that what I failed to recognize today will
reveal itself in its own time. But now the sun is
setting, and we must return to Yongchang for an
official banquet.
I am happy. Li-jien is so close. I look out at
the beauty of the desert in the last soft light of the
day. The search for Li-jien has just begun. White
ice gleams on the roofs of Yongchang. The stars
of Orion, the Hunter, glow in the darkening
sky. In early Spring I will be back.
