For Chinese immigrants in Australia, overcoming cultural differences
can be ¡ust as nerve-wracking as learning a new language
38

OF GIFTS AND GAFFEj
byjia Tian "
A Chinese woman who has lived in Aus¬
tralia for more than twenty years recendy
told me the following storj'. Shortly after
she arrived in the country, already speaking
fluent English, she had a birthday and an Aus¬
tralian friend invited her over for dinner to cel¬
ebrate. When she turned up at the house, she was
presented with a gift wrapped in beautiful paper.
She thanked her friend profusely and put the
parcel away. Puzzled by her response, the Aus¬
tralian asked, "Don't you want to open it?"
The Chinese woman replied, "Oh, no, no! I
don't want to open it now! Certainly not!" It
was not unül much later that she realized that she
had unwittingly made a "cultural mistake".
While it is generally considered common cour¬
tesy in Chinese culture not to open gifts imme¬
diately in front of the giver, Anglo-Australian
culture takes the opposite point of view.
It is often said that one of the biggest chal¬
lenges for people who have emigrated to a new
country is learning a new language, and it is
true that many Asian immigrants to Australia
find it difficult to learn English. However, even
when they speak the language excellently, they
can still find themselves making social blunders
because of their lack of knowledge of different
cultural values and customs.
Language and ritual
Immigrants may encounter a variety of diffi¬
culties if they are not aware of these cultural dif¬
ferences. When two people brought up in the
Chinese culture meet in the street, they often ask:
"Where are you going?" {nishang narqua?") or
"Have you had your meal?" {"ni chi fan le
ma?'). Greetings such as these may be regarded
by people from English-speaking backgrounds
as intrusive, irritating and rather odd, because
respect for an individual's privacy is a widely-
accepted cultural concept in most English-
speaking countries.
Typical ways of greeting people in Australia
include "How are you?" and "How are you
doing?". Although phrased as questions
showing concern for the addressee's well-being,
they are actually not meant to be taken literally.
Left, street scene in Broome,
Western Australia.
Kight, welcome to Sydney's
Chinatown.
They are examples of the ritual phrases of
greeting which are a salient feature of most lan¬
guages. In general, speakers would expect a
ritual answer such as "Fine" or "Not bad", even
though the addressee may not actually feel well.
Many Chinese immigrants find it hard to
understand why their Anglo-Australian friends
and colleagues expect them to give a positive
reply to such questions instead of a truthful
one. Some have asked me, "If they don't really
want to know how I feel, then why ask me all
these questions? It's pure hypocrisy!" It may
take years before they realize that they are
making assumptions based on Chinese cultural
norms and codes of behaviour.
Sometimes an Anglo-Australian might greet
someone by saying: "Hello! You're looking
smart today!" Here the speaker may not be
referring to the addressee's dress sense but be
asking a tactful question such as: "Would you
please tell me whom you are going to see/where
you are going?" To which the response might be:
"Oh, I have to see my boss today" or "We're
having a party tonight."
In many Asian cultures, when friends or
acquaintances run into each other in the street,
they stop and exchange greetings, which are

followed by short or lengthy conversations,
depending on the closeness of their friendship.
It is considered rude to simply say "Hello",
and keep walking. Even if one 


of the parties
has urgent business, he or she is still expected to
stop and answer questions politely.
In Australia, however, where people are
more casual, it is quite acceptable for someone
to say, "Sorr)', mate, I have to hurry" or simply
"Hello!" and keep on walking. Chinese immi¬
grants who do not understand Australian casu-
alness and informality interpret such behaviour
as abrupt and unfriendly.
Eat! Eatl Eatl
Chinese immigrants often feel confused on social
occasions. The following scenario is typical. A
Chinese immigrant couple invite their Aus¬
tralian friends to dinner at their home. When the
Australian guests arrive, their host and hostess
point to the sofa and say, "Please! Mn and Mrs.
Smith. Sit! Sit! Sit!" Somewhat startled, the
Australian guests sit down without saying any¬
thing. After a few drinks, the guests are asked to
take their places at the dinner table. The hostess
brings food to the table and the host, pointing at
the food with his chopsticks, urges his guests
with great enthusiasm, "Please! Mr. and Mrs.
Smith. Eat! Eat! Eat!"
The guests, knowing little about Chinese
culture, appear ill at ease. The hosts, on the
other hand, repeat, "Please! Don't just sit there!
Eat! Eat! Eat!" Now the Australian guests look
even more uneasy, thinking to themselves that
their hosts' manners are rather odd. In the mean¬
time, the hosts are increasingly bewildered by
their guests' reticence. They do not realize that
they have just made a "cultural mistake".
Whereas in Australia, hosts often show their
hospitality by using phrases such as "Would you
like to sit down?" or "Please make yourself at
home", their Chinese equivalents say, "Zuo! Zuo!
Zuo!" and " Chi! Chi! Chi!" which literally means,
"Sit! Sit! Sit!" and "Eat! Eat! Eat!" The repetition
of the words "sit" and "eat" is an attempt to create
an informal, hospitable atmosphere.
What the immigrant host and hostess failed
to understand was that "Sit! Sit! Sit!" and "Eat!
Eat! Eat!" are imperatives that in English are
usually reserved for commands for young chil¬
dren and pet dogs. Because they transplanted
their original cultural scripts to the Australian
setting, they achieved the opposite of what they
had hoped for: they made their guests nervous
and uncomfortable.
N.lever say no
In many Asian cultures, gift-giving involves
reciprocity and mutual obligations. In the Chi¬
nese culture, for example, when someone is
given a gift, he or she is expected to give some¬
thing back of equal value. To do otherwise is a
breach of etiquette.
This give-and-take is an important aspect
of Chinese culture. It promotes friendship, cre¬
ates harmony and strengthens bonds among
family members, relatives, friends and col¬
leagues. Yet in the Anglo-Australian culture,
gift-giving is seen merely as a way of saying
thank-you or showing appreciation. Often the
recipient is under no obligation to give a present
in return. Instead, he or she might offer to do
something useful for the giver such as helping
them move house or looking after their pets
while they are on holiday. Because of these dif¬
ferences, many Chinese immigrants feel hurt
when their Anglo-Australian colleagues or
friends accept gifts with a mere thank-you .
'¡>< : . ':>!*:
Above, students at the
University of Sydney.
Left, in Sydney,
Australians of Chinese and
non-Chinese origin
perform a Chinese dragon
dance during the
celebration of Chun ¡ie, the
Spring Festival.

Declining and accepting invitations also
cause problems. In the Chinese culture, people
usually abide by the principle of reciprocity
when they receive a dinner invitation. In other
words, they are expected to return the hospi¬
tality soon afterwards. Under normal circum¬
stances, those invited try to attend the dinner, but
if they have other commitments or do not like
the host, they decline the invitation with an
excuse. The excuses are often "white lies", but
the host accepts them because he or she under¬
stands that they are a way of turning down an
invitation in a diplomatic, indirect and most
important of all, culturally acceptable way.
This is perhaps the area in which many Chi¬
nese immigrants in Australia experience the
greatest "culture shock". An important con¬
cept in the Chinese culture is "saving face" {gei
mian zi), which may be translated, depending on
the circumstances, as preserving someone's pride
or ego, respecting the dignity of others, not
hurting somebody's feelings or not putting
another person in an embarrassing position.
When declining an invitation, people from the
Chinese culture try their best to "save face" for
the other party by not using the word "no",
which is considered offensive.
Because 


of this, some Chinese immigrants
feel deeply offended by Australians who decline
invitadons in a straightforward way: "Sorry mate,
I can't come tonight. I have to fix my lawn-
mower." Such a reply is often interpreted by
Chinese immigrants as unpleasant or downright
rude. The misunderstandings here are not really
caused by the words but by the casual manner of
Anglo-Australians, which differs considerably
from the greater formality of the Chinese.
Language is a reflection of culture. It is just
as important for migrants to learn to under¬
stand a new culture as it is to master a new lan¬
guage. At present, the resources of language
teaching for migrants tend to be too narrowly
focused. Only when the dynamic relationship
between language and culture is fully under¬
stood can a language be learned properly and
used appropriately.
JIA TIAN
is an Australian journalist who
has published many essays,
reviews and features on the
arts, theatre and films in
various Chinese- and English-
language newspapers,
magazines and journals. She Is
currently preparing a study on
Asian immigrants in Australia
at the Australian National
University. 41
