Behind the veil of fundamentalism
by Mahmoud Hussein
For the moment the splits in Islamic societies are
encouraging a return to the reassuring
certainties of the fundamentalist message. How
long will it last?
clinging to them. Unfortunately, Islamicism is a
movement whose motivations are more political
than strictly religious.
Forcing dialogue
If the Islamicists are closed to dialogue, is it
possible for intellectuals to force open this
armour-plated door? Should one give up and
adopt an attitude of powerlessness, rejection
and lassitude? The supporters of totalitarianism
do not like moderates; they despise those who
attempt to create links and bring together diver¬
gent points of view. The killing of intellectuals
in Algeria shows this clearly.
Existing political systems bear a heavy
responsibility in the development of protest
movements of Islamicist origin. Are wc going to
remain silent, withdraw into our ivory towers
and look on without reacting? The intellectual's
role is to seek and find new ways of bringing
about the triumph of intelligence and the
advance of the ideas of progress and freedom.
We must use our imagination and go beyond the
situation in which we simply acknowledge that
violence has become a disturbing feature of
everyday life.
It is impossible to appreciate the real
danger of fundamentalism if it is reduced,
as it often is, to its excesses, to the manifestations
of a blind and criminal terrorism, which is only
its extreme outcome. This political nebula is
actually divided into many tendencies, some of
which, although they may be less barbaric, are
not necessarily reassuring. For this reason it is
important to grasp the inner logic of funda¬
mentalism, especially those aspects of it that
may seem attractive. For fundamentalism has a
message, part of which responds in the modern
world to unsatisfied expectations.
The fundamentalists, although themselves
divided into more and less radical wings, find the
climate particularly favourable to their develop¬
ment in countries where the powers-that-be
appear to most people to be iniquitous and to be
leading to the accelerated dissolution of links of
social and cultural cohesion as a result of an
uncontrolled opening up towards the world
market and a dualization of society. In this context,
some people adopt Western interests and ways of
life whilst others feel excluded from them.
Thus the very identity of these countries is at
stake. And it is questions like "What has become
of us?" and "Where are we going?" that enable
fundamentalists to articulate a global and radical
approach. Their discourse is a political one. It
would like to think of itself as submissive to
God but not to the order of things. It is anti-
Western and anti-modernistic, but it would like
to think of itself, paradoxically, as anti-archaic.
It rejects the fatalism of the traditional broth¬
erhoods just as it rejects the conformism of the
religious authorities associated with power. 25

The absence of a precise message consisting
of clear and evaluated objectives does not
weaken this discourse the religious content
fills the vacuum. The function of this content is
not to provide a programme but an incanta¬
tion; its purpose is not to resolve but to exorcise.



It is not primarily aimed at reason but at blind
faith. At a time when no one knows precisely
what form the future may take, the strength of
fundamentalism lies in its ability to promise
radical change without having to specify its out¬
lines since God is claimed as its guarantor.
The emergence of the modern individual
In this context, what are the current prospects
for those who preach secular and republican
ideals? Some have immersed themselves in the
study of the sacred texts in the search for quo¬
tations, metaphors and arguments to support the
democratic ideas they put forward. They are
fighting from a position of weakness on their
opponents' own ground, ideologically and psy¬
chologically trapped.
As for those who openly defend some¬
times even at the risk of their lives a vision
clearly based on values such as the separation of
the temporal and the spiritual, equality of status
for all religions away from the political sphere,
the freedom of the governed to choose those
who will govern them, they are, quite obvi¬
ously, in the minority. Not only because they are
out of place in a climate of general religiosity but
also because they are only making professions of
faith that do not yet lead to precise and credible
proposals for changes in society.
But what today is the weakness of the
upholders of a democratic future should in the
long run become their strength.
The dual upheaval undergone by Islamic
societies their forced entry into a market which
26
is becoming global in ways and at a pace which
are ruthlessly disrupting internal balances and
hierarchies, and the advent of the autonomous
individual into the political life of these societies
in place of the traditional notables and feudal
chiefs is tending to increase the fragility of
the national fabric, the psychic instability of
individuals and the unpredictability of events.
But fragility, instability and unpredictability are
signs of the maturing of a new situation, of the
transition of societies to a higher stage of com¬
plexity, "plasticity" and ultimately creativity. The
opening of these societies towards the world
market however unjust and cruel the condi¬
tions in which it occurs brings with it the ferment
of knowledge, information and innovation, which
will be assets in the changes to come. And the
continuing increase in the number of individuals
responsible for their conscience and their destiny,
however harrowing their daily lives may be, nev¬
ertheless raises questions, doubts, desire for change
and self-improvement which are all necessary
seeds for future rebirths.
The currents that bear these potentialities
for openness and change are the only ones that
can take up, in the long run, the dual challenge

of globalization and individualization. This
challenge presupposes an increasing adaptability
of individuals and groups to dislocation, dis¬
continuity and the irregular pace of computer
civilization.
The fundamentalist option and the democ¬
ratic option are two possibilities stemming from
one and the same reality: the advent of a modern
individual, accountable for his thoughts and
actions, and now subject to a dual temptation
accepting the gamble of freedom, with all its
solitude and risks, or seeking refuge in reas¬
suring certainties and solidarities, eclipsing both
his free will and his fear of the future.
Hopes for democracy in the South perhaps
hinge on this: the current globalization is taking
place under conditions that challenge some of
the fundamental facts of democracy in the North
itself. We are all increasingly dependent on each
other in facing our fundamentalisms and in cre¬
ating together a setting for our freedoms.
MAHMOUD HUSSEIN,
French political scientist and writer. Most recent published
work: Versant Sud de la liberté: essai sur l'émergence de
l'individu dans le tiers monde (1989; "The Southern Slope of
Liberty: an essay on the emergence of the individual in the
Third World").
Women demonstrate against
fundamentalism in Algiers on
22 March 1994 .
Opposite page, a
demonstration in support of the
Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) in
Algiers, 1991.

