by Innocent Futcha
In the France ofLouis XIVslaves
were legally regarded as chattels but were
also considered to have souls



I The Code Noir (Black Code) was one
I of the first attempts in the history of
slavery to codify a hitherto unregulated prac¬
tice. Published as an edict by Louis XIV in
March 1685, it included some sixty articles
aimed at regulating the way black slaves
lived and died in French possessions in
the West Indies and the Indian Ocean. In
1724, the same legislation was extended to
cover Louisiana.
The provisions of the Code Noir had
three aims: to Christianize slaves, to specify
the prohibitions imposed on them and the
punishments applicable to them, and to
define the conditions of their emancipation.
Described in these oversimplified terms, the
Code Noir might seem to have been designed
to facilitate the transition of blacks from
slavery to freedom via Catholicism.
APPARENT LENIENCY
Because it advocated the baptism of slaves and
stated the conditions under which they could
be emancipated, the Code Noir apparently
recognized blacks as belonging, to some extent,
to humankind. Some of its provisions granted
them explicit rights. They could, for example,
lodge a complaint against their masters if they
were not fed and clothed according to the law
(Article 26). Although they were required to
wed according to the rites of the Catholic
Church, a spouse could not be imposed on
them (Article 11), and if slaves were seized or
sold it was forbidden to separate husband,
wife and children (Article 47). Masters were
required to support disabled and sick slaves
(Article 27), and could emancipate slaves in
their service without the consent of their par¬
ents from the age of 20 (Article 55).
Taken separately, some articles of the
Code Noir were undeniably an improve¬
ment on the kind of practices endured by
slaves in other parts of the world until the
nineteenth century. However, it has to be
recognized that in its overall effect "the Code
Noir is the most monstrous legal text pro¬
duced in modern times"1. This might seem to
be a rather harsh judgment were it not for the
startling paradoxes that mar the spirit and
letter of that legislation.
The fact that the Code Noir emphasized
the need to Christianize slaves, a subject to
which thirteen articles are devoted, might
suggest that it at least recognizes them as
having their own soul and personality. Yet it
also proclaims: "We declare slaves to be
moveable property" (Article 44), and "Wc
declare that slaves may not possess anything
which docs not belong to their master . . .
people unfit to possess or contract in their
own right" (Article 28). This tendency to
see slaves as objects, which clearly under¬
lies the spirit of the Code Noir, is spelled
out in the two articles referred to, which
refuse to recognize them as human beings.
The nature of the slave changes, depending
on circumstances. While he is regarded as
"moveable property" in Article 44, he
becomes "immoveable property" in Article 48,
which sees him as an integral part of the "sugar
works, indigo factories and dwellings" where
he works. The legislator does exactly what
he likes with the slave, since he has first made
sure that the slave has no civil existence. Article
30, for example, states that the testimony of
slaves is null and void, and therefore cannot
count as evidence, while Article 31 stresses that
slaves may not take out proceedings before
cither a civil or a criminal court.
A CASE OF CATCH-22
What is the point of passing legislation on
individuals who are patently not regarded
as subjects of law? Yet Article 26, mentioned
above, allows slaves the right to lodge a com-
"I am a man: nothing human is alien to me": this
aphorism by Terence, the Latin poet of the 2nd
century A.D. and himself an emancipated slave,
was the caption to this 1791 engraving depicting
the supposedly more humane version of slavery
created by the Code Noir. The engraving was
produced by Louis Joseph Masquelier, from an
allegory painted by Jean-Michel Moreau.
plaint against their masters if the latter do not
reed them as laid down by the law. This is a
case of Catch-22: slaves are subject to the
law, yet their legal existence is denied by the
very same text which entitles them to seek
justice.
More generally, the Code Noir constantly
affirms one thing as well as its opposite, espe¬
cially where slaves' interests are concerned.
For slaves are above all regarded as prop¬
erty which can be disposed of by their owner
as he sees fit. Eleven articles regulate the
exchange of that property between buyers
and sellers, debtors and creditors.
The major part of the Code Noir is
devoted to the rules which should be imposed
on slaves to keep them under the control of
their masters. Every aspect of their relationship
is taken into account. Among other things, a
slave is not permitted to drink spirits, carry
arms, assault his master, hold meetings or
above all abscond. The first time he tries to run
away the slave loses an ear. If he tries again, he
is hamstrung. And if he is brave enough to try
yet again, he is beheaded. Even activities in the
Code Noir relating to the emancipation of
slaves comprise provisions which restrict their
liberties.
In this respect Article 58 is typical. It urges
emancipated slaves "topay especial respect to
their former masters, their widows and their
children; thus any disrespect they may show
towards them shall be punished more harshly
than if it had been shown towards another
person". The imposition of such conditions on
emancipated slaves was tantamount to
demanding that they behave submissively
towards whites in general, all of them actual or
potential owners of slaves. The distinction
between master and slave was compounded by
the henceforth insuperable divide between
black and white which at another time and
in another country came to be known as
apartheid. The enabling texts of the Code
Noir even went so far as to regulate the dress
of emancipated slaves in order to perpetuate
their differences from their former masters.
All in all, the Code Noir did not do much
to help slaves on their way to freedom. In it,
emancipation was seen as the transition from
one form of domination to another. But then
it could hardly have been otherwise in a
world where the economic interests of the
dominant class were more powerful than
any humanitarian considerations.
1 . Lluis Sala-Molins, Le Code Noir ou le calvaire
de Canaan, Paris, PUF, 1987.
INNOCENT FUTCHA, of Cameroon, teaches in the
department of African literature in the Faculty of
Arts, Letters and Human Sciences of the University
of Yaoundé-ll. His main field of interest is South
African literature.
19
