BOOKS OF THE WORLD
ONE GIRL'S WAR
48
Alata and Mimmy confide in each other nearly
every day. In the secrecy of their little bedroom
that looks out on the hills ofSarajevo, a room full of
books, records and all those little treasures they
never like to be parted fromincluding one or
two cuddly toys to remind them they are still chil¬
drentell each other about the ordinary hap¬
penings of their daily life. Or, to be precise, Zlata
talks while Mimmy "listens".
The story begins in September 1991 . Zlata Fil-
ipovic is eleven. The holidays are over and it's back
to the old routine ofschool, music lessons, friends'
birthday parties, outings to the cinema, pancakes
at granny's house, skiing trips, satellite television,
and the still unfulfilled dream of getting Michael
Jackson to send his autograph. Zlata has an old
desk diary where she notes down anything that
takes her fancy during the day. Sometimes she
sticks in an amusing picture or adds a drawing,
and her sentences are frequently punctuated by
exclamations sometimes in English of "Super!",
"YO, BABY, YO!", "Tralalalala!", "I AM HAPPY",
"Yoopee" and the like. Mimmy has not yet been
given a name: she is a silent confidante, just an
ordinary diary, occasionally rewarded with a "ciao"
or a "night-night".
One day Zlata finds daddy in uniform and
mummy in tears. She is shattered to learn that her
father, a lawyer, has been ordered to report to his
police reservist unit. It's something they have to
adjust to, it's only for a while anyway, but a nagging
doubtcombined with fearcreeps into their
family life. Zlata knows nothing and cares nothing
about politics, but she begins to wonder about
what is happening in Slovenia and then in Croatia:
will Bosnia-Herzegovina be next? She is worried for
her parents' friend who lives in Dubrovnik, and
she shares their anxiety when the telephone lines
are cut	
After a month's silence, from 4 February to 5
March 1992, Zlata's entries start again: "My God!
There's been trouble in Sarajevo. On Sunday (1
March), a small group ofarmed civilians (according
to the TV) killed one of the guests at a wedding
and wounded a priest. On Monday (2 March) , there
were barricades all over town. There must have
been a thousand of them! We ran out ofbread." At
this point the nightmare begins. There are no more
"Yoopees" but "I'm frightened of WAR!", "MUR¬
DERERS!", "I'm sad Mimmy", "It's HORRIFIC, "I
NEED PEACE!". Spring, summer and autumn go by
andanewyear, 1993, begins. "The war's still going
on, you know". But sometimes the electricity comes
back on and it is possible to heat the apartment, to
cook and watch television, and sometimes there is
water as well, so things are all right: "It doesn't take
much to make people in Sarajevo happy."
Tuesday, 2 June 1993: "First water and elec¬
tricity and now gas. We are on the verge ofsuicide.
It's a DISASTER. Mimmy, I can't stand it any more.
I'm fed up of everything. I'm tired to death of all
these b... . I apologize for swearing, but I can't stand
it any more. I've really had enough. I feel more and
more like killing myself if those cretins up there
or down here don't kill me first. I've had all I can
take. I WANT TO SCREAM, TO SMASH EVERY
THING, TO KILL SOMEONE. I'm only human, I
can only take so much. I'm suffering terribly! I
SHALL BE IN A BETTER MOOD NEXT TIME."
Despite the increasingly frequent bouts ofdespair,
the will to live finally gets the better of the distress.
"I am still alive and healthy, my parents are alive and
healthy. ... So here we go, ON WE GO. But who
knows for how much longer?" A presentiment of
dread seeps insidiously into Zlata's life: "I have a
feeling that there will be nothing left here, not a
living soul."
After more than a year of bombardments, of
cold, hunger and sickness, of friends who have left
and friends who have died, nothing is as it was
before. The kitchen is the only room still in use.
Zlata's bedroom is an ideal target for the gunners
hiding up in the hills, and the room where they
keep the piano is just as dangerous. At night they
spread mattresses on the floor to stay out ofthe way
ofbullets flying in through the windows. They sleep
in the kitchen because it's freezing everywhere
else. Water is a precious commodity when it has to
be fetched from the standpipe or collected when it
rains; they drink it a mouthful at a time and wash
in a few drops, all in the kitchen. Then there is the
cellar: how can they ever forget the long hours
spent crouching there in the dark and cold, with the
infernal din of the bombardments in their ears?
When they do emerge, it is into a scene of total
destruction. Day by day, as the city is gradually
wiped out, the children ofSarajevo see their child¬
hood disappearing. The old post office, the mater¬
nity home, the Olympic village ... the age ofinno¬
cence goes up in smoke.
Life goes on, but interspersed with deaths, and
funerals take the place of festivities. People go on
falling in love, marrying and remembering one
another's birthdays, but neither the celebrations nor
the presents are like they used to be: people give
"German" cabbagesGerman because they were
bought with marks on the black market or "great
big kisses" because they have nothing else to give.
Zlata is a big girl now. The war is ruthless. Pedi¬
gree dogs are abandoned to become strays, bird¬
cages are emptied of their occupants, trees are
burned to ashes, and children grow up before their
time. Zlata now has other wonies and otherwishes:
to go to school a little more often, to get a little
more than a hundred grams of bread a day, not to
suffer the same fate as Anne Frank. Her entries are
different: "Tuesday, 21 September 1993: Dear
Mimmy, the historic match WAR vs PEACE has
been postponed. That means PEACE has lost
again." Mimmy has grown up too.
Word gradually got about that Zlata was
keeping a diary, and it was passed around in Sara¬
jevo before leaving towna press photographer,
Alexandra, one day took a copy to Paris. It is being
published all over the world, so that people can
hear, in seventeen different languages, its fear¬
some message: "War has taken hold ofus and will
not let us go". J.S.
Zlata's Diary: a child's life in Sarajevo'^ being
published in English by Viking Penguin/Penguin
Books. The passages quoted here were translated
from the French edition, LeJournal de Zlata,
published by Robert Laffont-Fixot, Paris.
