té l\tt "1
4
COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR
Education, key to the future
ft IO two years ago, Cairo
^ yesterday, Copenhagen and
mW , Beijing next year this extremely
mM important series of United
K^^J Nations conferences"" reflects a
A growing awareness that the chal-
^L lenges facing our world arc
universal. These meetings are
^L stages on the long road to
the management of our global
W interdependence.
^mM B jj^ They can be seen as part of a
jpj^J trend that is leading to a signifi
cant shift in thinking about
development. Economism, one of the most persistent of this cen¬
tury's reductionisms, is in retreat. Development is increasingly rec¬
ognized as a process encompassing all aspects of human exis¬
tence and as a right due to all human beings in their diversity.
A NEW APPROACH
The regulation of population growth is undoubtedly one of the
most urgent challenges facing us. But it is only one factor in a com¬
plex equation that can spell the difference between greater pros¬
perity for all in a more equitable world, or increased poverty, envi¬
ronmental degradation and social and political tensions of all
kinds. Population policies must therefore form part of an inte¬
grated sustainable human development strategy that includes
protection of the environment, the promotion of economic well-
being and the furthering of social progress, notably through
enhancement of the status of women.
To be effective, such a strategy must be radical, in the sense of
going to the root of our problems. I believe that this means, first
and foremost, investing in education that is to say in knowledge
and knowledge creation, in individual awareness and respon¬
siveness. All the available evidence suggests that there are enormous
dividends to be reaped from investing in education. Experience in
many countries has shown that it is the key not only to eco¬
nomic growth but also to political development and social
progress.
Nationally and internationally, we continue to invest in a
shortsighted way. Our investments are still geared to past threats
or to dealing with the symptoms of problems. Wc are largely
unprepared or unwilling to address current challenges of a non-
military nature that constitute actual or potential threats to human
security. Every day we confirm our perverse preference to pay the
heavy human and financial costs of peace-keeping and relief oper¬
ations rather than make relatively modest investments in the
social sphere. We ignore, at our peril, the need to tackle our prob¬
lems at source.
Everywhere, in all social and cultural contexts, increased edu¬
cation for girls and women means lower fertility rates, as well as
reduced mortality and morbidity levels. This shows that women's
reproductive choices depend on a process of empowerment,
which can only come from improved educational provision,
training for economic self-reliance and the enhancement of
women's legal and social status.
Special efforts need to be made to reach the large section of the
female population that has so far proved unreachable the 29 per
cent of girls worldwide not enrolled at primary school, the 65 per
cent of the world's 900 million illiterates who arc women. This will
call for a whole range of innovative learning and teaching methods,
including interactive and distance education, and for learning
facilities to be made permanently available to people of all ages,
without formal academic requirements.
The family is the basic unit of society and the reflection of local
cultural and religious patterns. The search for endogenous solu¬
tions to development problems must respect the fundamental
role of the family in social life. In particular, the control of fertility
should not be based on coercion or technocratic prescription. Nor
should it involve the imposition of external models or dogmatic
interferences. The only sustainable basis for fertility control is the
informed choices of empowered men and women, fully con¬
scious of their human rights and dignity.
A LIBERATING FORCE
It was for this reason that UNESCO joined with the United
Nations Population Fund in organizing the first International
Congress on Population Education and Development, which
was held in Istanbul in April 1993. The Congress recognized that
population problems should not be viewed in isolation from
overall development issues and recommended that "to ade¬
quately prepare the younger generations to meet the challenges
of the twenty-first century, population education programmes
should be extended to the various levels of the education system
. . . and be developed as an integrated dimension of educational
curricula."
Education is more than the provision of education and instruc¬
tion. It is the awakening of human creative potential; it is the
building of endogenous capacities; it is forging attitudes of toler¬
ance and understanding; it is providing individuals with the ability
to master their own destiny. For too long the lives of too many
people have been dependent on powers exercised by others, on
others' visions, on ignorance, on oppression. Education is liber¬
ation. It is the main gateway to peace, equity and justice. Those
who hold the key to this gateway teachers, parents and partic¬
ularly mothers have a crucial responsibility: the world we leave
to our children will depend on the children we leave to our world.
* UN Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,
1992; International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo,
1994; World Conference for Social Development, Copenhagen, 1995;
World Conference on Women: Action for Equality, Development and
Peace, Beijing, 1995.
35
