COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR
The challenge ofculturalpluralism
i believe that the coming cen¬
tury will give increased
prominence to culture. On the
world map, the imprint of cul¬
ture is proving more perma¬
nent than the overprint of pol¬
itics. Culture is emerging as a
major factor in relations within
and between nations, and in
intercommunal living. In these
circumstances, we find our¬
selves confronted by an increas¬
ingly urgent question: what can and should be done to promote
genuine cultural pluralism locally and in the world at large?
The very concept of culture is notoriously difficult to
define a liquid in an age of solids, as it has been described.
However, we might not go far wrong if we were to describe it
as everything we create and preserve as a group or in a wider
context as a species. Such a definition has the advantage of
encompassing culture both in its restricted sense of the arts and
in its broader anthropological sense of a "whole way of life,
material, intellectual and spiritual". It makes the link between
artistic creation and the creativity of everyday life. It also
explains the characteristic diversity of cultures, since creativity
and diversity are synonymous. It points, finally, to the essen¬
tial problem posed by cultural difference, which relates to the
permanent tension between creation and preservation at the
heart of culture itself. Our behaviour is largely shaped by the
interplay of these contending forces within a given cultural
character.
Language, one of the main vehicles of culture, highlights the
problem inherent in cultural diversity. Languages do more
than map a given reality according to different codes. They
determine to some extent the way in which we view that
reality. The implications of such linguistic factors for our rela¬
tionships with each other and our environment are far-reaching
indeed. Linguistic diversity must be seen as an essential resource,
and its preservation assumes the same importance as the pro¬
tection of bio-diversity in general.
Yet language differences as the Tower of Babel myth
underlines can also give rise to cultural misunderstanding and
even conflict. The reason for this may well be as George
Steiner has argued that there is an inherent duality in our use
of language: it serves as a means of communication but also of
affirming our separateness. The continuous creation of private
sub-languages within language slang and jargon would
support this view. Language is to this extent a form of "shared
secrecy" as well as "shared expression".
What is true of language is true of culture. Our world
needs a diversity of cultural viewpoints, characterized by atti¬
tudes of openness and responsiveness rather than mistrust
and rejection. One of the most urgent tasks at the present
time in a world of ever closer cultural contacts is to
encourage recognition of the rights of others and to help those
whose cultural rights have been disregarded to maintain and
develop their identity. This is the challenge of cultural pluralism.
The achievement of such pluralism requires that a sense of
cultural difference be complemented by a recognition of wider
cultural affinities. The great masterworks of cultureand of
nature are of inestimable value since they are perceived
instinctively by most people as part of a common human her¬
itage. Unesco has embodied this concept of a common heritage
in its World Heritage Convention, under which over 400 cul¬
tural and natural sites in 95 countries have been inscribed on
the World Heritage List in recognition of their outstanding uni¬
versal value. The notion of universality enshrined in the world
heritage is a paradigm for the promotion of cultural pluralism.
A SHARED HERITAGE
The shared heritage transcends, of course, the sites and mon¬
uments that constitute the wonders of the modern world.
Our varied cultures have to a greater extent than is generally
realized a common history and have been mutually enriched
by their contacts down the ages. To promote awareness of
these links UNESCO is engaged in a series of major projects on
the historical interchanges between cultures and is supporting
the creation of networks of cultural institutions in different
world regions to promote intercultural exchanges.
To talk of cultural pluralism in today's world is to be con¬
stantly reminded of how far removed we are from our goal.
The reality in many parts of the globe is all too often one of cul¬
tural confrontation and conflict. The causes of such antago¬
nism are obviously inseparable to some degree from prob¬
lems such as poverty, overpopulation, environmental
degradation and global asymmetries of all kinds. However,
some tensions are inherent in cultural contacts themselves.
UNESCO is currently engaged in studying potential causes of
cultural conflict and is exploring in its Culture of Peace pro¬
gramme how cultural initiatives can be employed in confused
post-conflict situations.
I believe that action of this kind is inherently worthwhile
because of the catalytic effect it can have. Dropping a pebble in
a pond is a small gesture that can spread ripples far and wide.
We must never tire of making the gesture that helps to promote
cultural pluralism and the values of democracy, tolerance, jus¬
tice and peace that it implies.
33
