Ryo Ogawa
explains why a
Japanese can feel
at ease among
Africans



he Fulbe and the
Samurai code by Ryo Ogawa
»
RYO OGAWA
is a Japanese ethnologist who
worked until 1993 at the Osaka
Museum of Ethnology and now
teaches at Kyoto Seika
University. Since 1975 he has
carried out research on the
Fulbe of Senegal, about whom
he has written several studies
including (in Japanese) Life in
the Sahel Ethnographical Study
of a Fulbe Society in Senegal
(Japan Broadcasting Office
Publishers, 1987) and (in
English) "Bodilessness" and
Incongruity: Body Image and its
Social Dynamics among the
Fulbe of Senegal (1990).
When I was doing research among the
Fulbe of Dyolof, in Senegal, I had a
faithful assistant called Awdi, an evocative name
meaning "seed kept for the next sowing". He
was ten years my junior. The day of my depar¬
ture, instead of seeing me off from the village like
the other Fulbe, he hid himself away and did not
bid me farewell. It was his way of not showing
how sad he was.
As a Japanese taught at a very early age not
to show any emotions, I was always touched by
the way my Fulbe friends concealed their joys
and sorrows. It was the result of a code of behav¬
iour they call pulaagu.
Dignity, courage, patience and discernment
all form part oípulaagu. For me, its essential fea¬
ture is the notion of self-control. In Japan, too,
it is thought shameful to make an exhibition of
oneself or give in to physical needs, in accor¬
dance with the bushido tradition venerated by
the samurai of old.
It is true of hunger, for example.
I very rarely heard a Pullo* say, "I'm
hungry." To say so would be to betraypulaagu,
to demean oneself. I never saw children of four
or five complain when a meal was slow in
coming. If they went to market with their
mothers, they would not eat anything until they
got back home. At the beginning of my stay, I
myself was sharply criticized for wanting to
watch a sheep that had been killed in my honour
being cut up. My curiosity went beyond the
bounds ofpulaagu.
Yetpulaagu, devised by an African people of
herdsmen, and bushido, devised by Japanese
rice-growers, have the same function, which is
to train fighters who are capable of resisting
adversity and want to surpass themselves while
retaining their self-control.
We differ in so many ways that I am
delighted by such affinities. The brisk, almost
violent dances of Africans contrast with our

Right, Ryo Ogawa with his Fulbe
friends.
Above, a young Pullo girl
photographed by the author.
Below, Fulbe women returning from
the well.
slow, undulating movements. Their eloquence
contrasts with our terseness there are few great
Japanese orators.
How can I explain why I always feel at ease
with Africans? Perhaps it has something to do
with our shared attitude to nature. The Japanese,
like the Africans, are careful to maintain har¬
monious links with nature, which is seen as the
manifestation of a many-faced deity. African
animism and Japanese Shintoism are closely
related.
Black Africans' dignity in their daily lives and
their mystical links with nature are such that
whenever I return to Africa I come into contact
again with the real Japan.
* Singular of Fulbe. 23
