Only
biotechnology
can make it
possible to
produce enough
food to keep
pace with the
world's swelling
population
FROM THE GREEN REVOLUTION
TO THE GENE REVOLUTION
jf Indra K, Vasil and Luis Herrera-Estrella
T~| HE rapidly-growing world popula¬
tion and increasing demand for more
and better food are certain to pose
serious threats to social, political, economic
and environmental stability early in the twenty-
first century. Without a decline in the current
rates of growth, today's population of nearly
5.5 billion is projected to nearly double to 10.7
billion by the year 2030. Almost all of this
growth will occur in the already overpopu-
lated and impoverished countries of Africa,
Asia and Latin America, which will be home to
nine out of every ten human beings.
In this near future, additional land for
growing food as well as for meeting all the
other needs of the expanding population will
have to be derived from the destruction of the
already dwindling and endangered but pre¬
cious protected natural areas. Undoubtedly,
these changes will place unprecedented strain
not only on the global, social, political and
economic infrastructure, but will also cause
further deterioration of the fragile environ¬
ment of our already fully occupied planet. It is
doubtful that world food production, which is
barely adequate to meet today's needs, can
keep pace with current rates of population
growth. Indeed, in the past few years crop
32

Ina U.S. Department of
Agriculture plant genetics
laboratory at Beltsville
(Maryland) fluorescent
bands of DNA are
photographed under
ultraviolet light.
Left, growing improved
wheat varieties in India.
yields have generally levelled off or have actu¬
ally declined in many of the developing coun¬
tries.
What can be done to reverse or at least fore¬
stall these dangerous and suicidal trends? First
and foremost it is necessary to bring down the
rate of population growth to a sustainable level.
In the interim, food production must be dra¬
matically increased. Scientists expect that plant
improvement through the use of biotechnology
will be an important part of this process.
Plants in the human diet
Ninety-eight per cent of global food produc¬
tion is land-based. Of the total human diet, 92
per cent is derived from plants, with no more
than thirty plant species accounting for most of
the calories and protein intake. Cereal grains
like wheat, rice and maize alone provide more
than 53 per cent of the world food supply.
Historically, major technological advances
in agriculture have been a driving force for
economic growth, political stability and social
and cultural development. In recent history,
the most dramatic results of agricultural
improvement were those of the Green Revo¬
lution, which was based on the introduction
and adoption of high yielding and otherwise
improved varieties of wheat and rice devel¬
oped at the international agricultural centres in
Mexico and the Philippines, in close co-oper
ation with national agricultural programmes.
The introduction of these varieties, partic¬
ularly in Mexico, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh
and China, in the mid-to-late 1960s helped not
only to save millions from starvation and death
but also to prevent widespread social and polit¬
ical unrest.
It was in recognition of this that the Nobel
Peace Prize was awarded to Norman Borlaug,
the American agronomist who developed vari¬
eties of "miracle" wheat in Mexico and played
a seminal role in the introduction of such vari¬
eties in the developing countries of Asia and
Latin America.
The benefits of the Green Revolution con¬
tinue to be felt in the developing world. During
the 1980s, agricultural production in China
rose at an annual rate of 8 per cent, making it
the largest producer of food in the world. In the
developing countries as a whole, wheat and
rice production increased by about 75 per cent
in the fifteen years between 1965 and 1980.
From 1950 to 1980, wheat production increased
four-fold in Mexico, while rice production
doubled in Indonesia. Similarly, wheat pro¬
duction in India increased three-fold in less
than twenty years, from 1965 to 1983. The
introduction of similar improved agricultural
practices combined with high quality seed on
a limited scale in parts of Africa, under the
leadership of Norman Borlaug, has increased
33

INDRA K.VASIL, of the
United States, is a Professor of
Plant Cell and Molecular
Biology at the University of
Florida, United States, where
his laboratory is noted for
research on the biotechnology
and molecular improvement of
cereal crops. Chairman of
UNESCO's Biotechnology
Action Council, he is author or
co-author of more than 325
research publications and
editor or co-editor of 18
books.
LUIS HERRERA-ESTRELLA,
of Mexico, is Head of the
Department of Plant Genetic
Engineering at the Centre for
Research and Advanced
'Studies, National Polytechnic,
Irapuato, Mexico. He received
UNESCO's JavedHusain
Award for Young Scientists for
his work on the genetic
transformation of Latin
American crops, particularly
for resistance to plant
pathogens.
Delow, cassava plants
produced by cloning at the
Institute of Tropical
Agriculture, Ibadan
(Nigeria).
Below right, a tiny peach
plant produced in the
laboratory by cloning.
the yields of maize, sorghum and millet by 300
to 400 per cent.
Plant improvement: a slow process
The process of plant improvement is painfully
slow, however, and is generally limited to the
discovery of useful genes in wild germ plasm
and their introduction into commercial varieties
during many years of breeding and selection.
The process is also restricted to recombina¬
tion of genes within the same or similar species
because of biological limits to hybridization
between unrelated species.
It is highly doubtful that conventional plant
breeding alone can help produce the vast quan¬
tities of food that will be needed to feed the bil¬



lions more people that are expected to inhabit
the earth during the next few decades. It is in
this context that biotechnology has attracted
great attention, for it provides an excellent
opportunity to supplement and complement
plant breeding by providing mechanisms for
the introduction of agronomically useful genes
into crop species by overcoming all barriers to
gene transfer between species.
In addition, it has already been demon¬
strated that crop species can be engineered to
make them resistant to certain insects and
viruses, as well as to compete successfully
against weeds. Introduction of such technolo¬
gies on a wide scale could immediately increase
the amount of available food by more than
one-third, by saving from destruction food
that is lost to pests, pathogens and weeds. This
would give us the needed time to integrate
biotechnology into the traditional methods of
plant breeding to improve the quantity and
quality of food produced by plants.
If carefully planned, co-ordinated and
implemented, plant biotechnologies could have
such a profound impact on world food pro¬
duction as to bring about a Gene Revolution in
the twenty-first century. It is vitally impor¬
tant, however, that the practice and benefits
of plant biotechnology should not be limited to
North America, Western Europe and Japan,
where much of the current activity is concen¬
trated, but be systematically introduced into the
poor and developing countries where the needs
are urgent and compelling.
Simple, inexpensive procedures
Plant biotechnology has two important com¬
ponents, one based on the use of tissue culture
methods, and the other involving a combina¬
tion of cellular and molecular biology. Each
offers powerful methods for plant production
and improvement. Many of the procedures
involved are simple and can be practised
without substantial investment in facilities and
infrastructure for the rapid mass production
and multiplication of plants.
One of these technologies is clonal propa¬
gation or meristem culture, the process that
occurs when shoot buds of plants are isolated
and placed in culture in the presence of plant
hormones so that many new shoot buds form.
Such buds can be separated from each other and
induced to form roots and complete plants.
Rapid, large scale and economical clonal mul¬
tiplication is of particular value for many forest
and fruit trees, plantation crops, endangered
species and medicinal plants.
As a rule, one shoot bud placed in a culture
can be made to produce more than a million
plants in one year. The rate of multiplication
can be further improved and the costs sub¬
stantially reduced by automation of much
of the process. It is significant that all the plants
produced from the initial shoot bud are iden¬
tical to each other as well as the source material.
This is of paramount importance where a
selected and valuable variety is being multi¬
plied and no genetic variation is desired.
34

I he southern delta of
Viet Nam is home to many
varieties of valuable wild
rice. However, the wild
plants (at left in photo) are
often considered as weeds
by farmers and are being
replaced by new varieties.
Www
The well-established and reliable methods
of clonal propagation are simple and do not
require elaborate and expensive laboratory
facilities. They can be easily and profitably
practised as a small-scale industry at the village
level, not only to provide quality material for
plantings but also as a source of employment
and earnings. This technology is potentially
most useful for reforestation of vast areas in
Asia, Africa, Latin America and Eastern
Europe.
Global reforestation using this method can
greatly reduce the damaging effects of pollution
and acid rain, the dangers of the greenhouse
effect, soil erosion and flooding, while pre¬
serving precious natural sources of energy and
providing a natural habitat for endangered
flora and fauna.
Another important use of meristem cul¬
ture is the elimination of viruses, which cause
more than 50 per cent yield loss in many crops,
especially those which are propagated vegeta-
tively, such as potato, sugarcane, cassava and
banana. Cells at the extreme tip of a shoot are
generally devoid of virus particles. Plants
obtained from the culture of very small shoot
buds are, therefore, free of viruses, and provide
maximum yields of quality material. This tech¬
nology is well established and can be practised
on a large or small scale as necessary.
The most powerful and useful methods of
biotechnology are those that involve genetic
transformation, the transfer of genes, at the
level of DNA, from one species to another.
Two main strategies have been used for this
purpose. The first and most commonly used
method is based on a natural system offered by
the soil-borne micro-organism, Agrobacterium
tumefaciens (crown gall bacterium); the second
uses the direct physical delivery of DNA from
one organism to another.
The crown gall bacterium contains a circular
piece of DNA, called the Ti (tumour inducing)
plasmid. During normal infection of a plant
by the bacterium, a part of the plasmid called
T-DNA (transfer DNA) is transferred to the
host plant cell and becomes permanently inte¬
grated into its nuclear DNA. The T-DNA con¬
tains left and right border sequences which are
necessary for its transfer to the plant cell. In
between are genes that control the synthesis of
certain plant growth regulators that cause the
crown gall disease.
rxice seeds are sterilized
before being sent to the
International Rice
Research Institute at Los
Baños (Philippines).
35

36
For directed plant transformation, the Ti-



plasmid is disarmed by removing the genes
responsible for tumour induction and replacing
them with genes of interest. The useful genes
are then transferred by the bacterium to the
host plant cell during an infection process that
does not result in the crown gall disease.
Because of its simplicity and ease of use, this
method has been used extensively since the
production of the first transgenic plants (plants
in which foreign genes have been transferred by
genetic transformation) in 1983.
Unfortunately, for a variety of reasons that
are still not clearly understood, the cereal grains
such as wheat, rice and maize are not amenable
to transformation by Agrobacterium. Fortu¬
nately, several methods of direct DNA delivery
, have been developed to produce transgenic
cereals.
Currently, the molecular genetic improve¬
ment of plants is not limited so much by tech¬
niques for DNA transfer as by the relatively
low number of agronomically useful genes that
have been identified, characterized and cloned
at the molecular level. The best characterized



and therefore mos't widely used are the genes
that confer resistance to insect pests, to viruses
and to broad spectrum herbicides. Such genes
have been successfully transferred to crops like
wheat, rice, maize, soybean, cotton, oil seed
rape and tomato. The transgenic crops are
therefore protected from the enormous yield
losses they would otherwise suffer as a result of
pest and pathogen infestation, and competi¬
tion with weeds for life-giving nutrients and
water.
Major efforts initiated during the past few
years to map the genomes of some important
crop plants are expected to provide valuable
information about the location and identity
of other important genes those that confer
resistance to environmental stresses such as
temperature, drought and salinity and those
that control yield.
Saving plants from extinction
Thousands of wild plant varieties, which are
valuable sources of useful genes, have either
been lost forever or face imminent extinction as
a result of the increasing destruction of natural
forests for agricultural and urban use. Con¬
servation of these irreplaceable resources for
future generations and for the maintenance of
biodiversity has thus become a global concern.
In recognition of this, the Consultative Group
on International Agricultural Research, which
is responsible for the network of international
agricultural centres around the world, has taken
a step in the right direction by establishing the
International Plant Genetic Resources Institute,
with the mandate to conserve plant genetic
resources.
