'language death in SIBERIA
- by Vladimir Belikov
"yf*e world's longuage. today face e*c^V,n.
WHILE cultural change in many parts of
the world is usually spontaneous, in
Russia it has been the direct result of
decisions made by the Communist Party.
Shortly after the communist revolution, a policy
of "cultural engineering" was announced, with
the aim of developing different national cul¬
tures, languages and traditions in order to build
a new type of culture that would be "national in
its form and communist in its content".
Some of the early achievements of this policy
were actually very impressive. A tiny village in
the Poltava district ofUkraine, populated mainly
by Swedes, used Swedish as the official lan¬
guage of the local administration; the first (and
perhaps the only) school primer in the Gypsy
language was published; the state financed peri¬
odicals in the native languages of small com¬
munities of Estonian and Latvian immigrants in
Siberia. Indeed, for a time, "the blossoming of
national cultures", became a common phrase
in official communist propaganda.
{cultural assimilation
Unfortunately, by the mid-1930s the blossoms
had begun to fade. The authorities had discov¬
ered that their policy did not accelerate the
development of communism and sometimes
even hindered it. Although it was never publicly
announced, a policy of cultural assimilation for
minority groups began to be encouraged.
In many parts of the country, especially
those traditionally influenced by the Russian
Orthodox Church, the cultural differences
between rural people of different ethnic origins
were not great, and the ethnic identities of var¬
ious minority groups were not very pronounced.
In these regions, acculturation was a slow but
steady process, and as the years went by lin¬
guistic and cultural boundaries disappeared.
For example, Russians had lived for cen-
J\ team of reindeer in the
Kamchatka peninsula.

turies among the Komi, a Finno-Ugric people
who formed the majority of the local population
on the banks of the lower Pechora river in the
north of European Russia. Over time, the
number of Russians living in the area grew and
so did the influence of their language, until
Russian came to be used 


in the school system
and all the local Komi became bilingual.
Many years ago, I met a Komi fisherman
who told me a story which ended with a quite
extraordinary sentence. Although the speaker
didn't realize it, all the roots and auxiliary words
he used were Russian, though the grammar was
still Komi. It went something like this: Takeoff-
tim ring-ie and ñndout-tim that duck-js spend-
winter-íowíí France-;)'«. (In this anghcization
the Komi suffixes have been left as they were
used by my informant.)
I have not been in this part of Russia for
twenty-five years and do not know for sure
whether this dialect is still in use, but even if it
is, it has been so strongly influenced by Russian
that it is no longer an effective tool for main¬
taining Komi culture. This linguistic mixture
has no chance of competing with Russian even
as a basic means of communication, especially
since thousands of newcomers came to the
region in the 1970s to work in the oilfields and
many of the Komi fisherman became industrial
workers.
This story illustrates a typical process of lin¬
guistic change within the acculturation process.
However, it is not the only possible result of
cross-cultural contact. If two ethnic groups
come into sudden contact and a marked gap
exists between them, it is very likely that one of
the cultures will die quickly, especially if it is gen¬
erally perceived to have less prestige than the
other. Deculturation may have tragic conse¬
quences for the weaker ethnic group. It usu¬
ally leads to widespread distress within the com¬
munity, high crime rates, mass alcoholism,
declining life expectancy. A culturally unique
human group may even become extinct. This
threat now hangs over many small ethnic
minorities that are scattered in the depths of
the Siberian taiga forests and Arctic tundra of the
Far North. 13

¡he threat of cultural extinction
In the late sixteenth and the seventeenth centuries,
the Russians took over the area known as Siberia
^vithout much fighting. They did not e\'en consider
the area to be foreign territorj'. For centuries
Russia had no eastem border and Russian pioneers
simply moved further and further eastward. Most
of them settled permanently on a narrow strip of
land 


in southern Siberia, where cultivation was
possible, and the few who settled further north
often lost their Russian language.
The local societies were highly stable until
the 1930s, when the importance of the timber
and mineral resources in the Far North was
realized. They had no special educational insti¬
tutions, but from early childhood girls learned
female skills from their mothers, and young
boys learned male roles from their fathers and
older brothers. The authority of grandparents
was undisputed and any serious problem
curing the sick, locating hidden things, sending
a dead soul to the upper world was solved
with the help of a shaman. (The word shaman
comes from theTungus language.)
The situation began to change in 1924 with
the formation of the Committee for Assisting
the Peoples ofthe Far North. This committee led
to the creation of administrative offices to help
different ethnic groups change their ways from
traditional to communist "in one step, during
the life of one generation".
The first Russian teachers came to remote
Siberian areas in the late 1920s. At that time, text¬
books for primary schools were written in at
least thirteen of the languages of the North, but
their content was the same: biographies of Lenin
and Stalin, the crimes of the predatory czarist
regime, the deeds of the heroes of the revolu¬
tion, the achievements of industrialization and
collectivization.
The books for Siberian minorities also had a
section dealing with local affairs. The essence of
it was that old people lack any true knowledge,
all their habits are wrong, traditional culture is
a silly jumble of ignorance and prejudices, and
shamans are servants of the counter-revolution
who deceive people to achieve their ignoble
goals and stop the development of communism.
Komnata
ausikci
tatusikci
jlUMKCl. JatuMKcl.
gagBini.
digasikci
guasikci
ÍDlgaMKCl. ITtlOAiHCl.
îa »,

Right, a Komi story-teller.
Left, illustrations from a
primer in the Udihe
language showing boarding
school life. The book was
burned by the authorities
in 1938.



In those days, no-one even considered
whether or not communist concepts made sense
for traditional societies of hunters and gatherers.
It was assumed that collectivization and indus¬
trialization would form the economic foundation
of their new cultures, and traditional land tenure
and social organization were declared reactionary.
Thus people were deprived of their lands and
rivers, the very foundations of their life.
An enemy ofthe people
while traditional cultures were ruined, native
languages were sometimes still used, especially
in schools for a time. However, in 1938,
Eugene Schneider, the author and translator of
the first books in the Udihe language, was
denounced as "an enemy ofthe people", arrested
and shot. One of my informants remembers
how KGB agents came to his village, gathered all
the books from families and the school library
and took them into a courtyard, where they
were set on fire. The bonfire burned through the
night and in the morning my informant, who
was a young boy at the time, managed to steal a
half-burnt favourite book of folklore. The
written language of Udihe was banned.
For many other languages, misfortune
arrived soon afterwards as a result of a new
policy whereby children were sent away from
their families to study in boarding schools. At
first, the boarding schools were intended for
children from semi-nomadic groups in which
families were scattered across large stretches of
territory because they were shepherding Arctic 35

»'à -r f r .7 r
î;-;.».».t
V r* H ^ BB^ _:_T« ï » ff a
:5 ! ! »
R
	 It
hEït
A camp of Komi reindeer
farmers in the tundra
(above left).
/\ residential quarter in
Syktyvkar, capital of the
Komi Republic (above
right).
VLADIMIR BELIKOV
is the senior research fellow of
the Pacific Department at the
Institute of Oriental Studies of
the Russian Academy of
Sciences. Since 1989 he has
been working on a series of
textbool<s on the ethnic
language of the Udihe minority
of the Russian Far East
reindeer or hunting wild animals. But soon the
boarding schools were established even in large
villages and children were only allowed to spend
time with their relatives on Sundays.
Gradually, the only language of instruction
became Russian. Sometimes children were for¬
bidden to speak their mother tongue in the school
building. Parents did not protest, and even if
they had protested it might not have made much
difference because their children considered them
archaic because ties between the generations had
been broken. Even folk-tales, which were central
to traditional cultures, were lost.
Meanwhile, Russians became more numerous
in the remote parts of Siberia, and more influen¬
tial in local administration. Neither they nor the
Russian communist elite paid any attention to the
traditions and real needs of the people. Then, in
1957, the death sentence was imposed on many
Siberian languages by a Communist Party reso¬
lution, "On the Measures for Further Economic
and Cultural Development of the Peoples of the
North."
f\n irreversible process
A key measure within the resolution called for
combining the settlements of ethnic minorities
and transferring them, which meant closing
schools, shops and medical posts in small, old vil¬
lages and forcibly relocating Siberian minorities.
With this measure, people were deprived of their
traditional hunting and fishing grounds and scat¬
tered among large numbers of newcomers. As a
result, even those groups that used to have offi¬
cial territorial autonomy became small minorities
in the new settlements. The history of the ethnic
composition of the Chukchi Autonomous
Region serves as an example. Between 1926 and
1989, the total population of the region increased
elevenfold, from 15 thousand to 164 thousand. In
the same period, the Chukchi component sank
from 79 per cent to 2.4 per cent, while the per¬
centage of Russian and other newcomers rose
from 2 per cent to 95.3 per cent.
These days, the degree of knowledge of an
ethnic language depends on general ethno-
ecology in the region in which it is used; the
written status of ethnic languages isn't changing
very much. Extreme examples of this are pro¬
vided by the modern position of two Siberian
languages, Oroks and Nganasan, neither of
which have been used in schools or in print.
The homeland of the Oroks people lies on
the mainland opposite the island of Sakhalin. It
was heavily invaded by Russians in the 1930s,
when railroads, new towns and seaports were
built. In the new surroundings there was no
place for traditional culture and no reason for
young people to acquire any language except
Russian. As a result, by 1989 only 15 per cent of
the Oroks people had any knowledge of their
ethnic language at all.
On the other hand, the Nganasans, who
wander with their reindeer on the Taymyr penin¬
sula, managed until recently to preserve many of
their traditional habits and cultures. Their land is
characterized by an extremely severe Arctic cli¬
mate and has attracted hardly any immigrants.
Even the system of boarding schools didn't affect
them until the 1960s. The 1989 survey found
that 90 per cent of the population still had some
knowledge of their language.
In recent years, perestroika has prompted the
renewal of ethnic nationalism among many
groups in the former U.S.S.R., but not among
Siberian minorities. In the last few decades, tal¬
ented Siberian youths have been drawn to Russian
culture and left their villages. Some of them have
good jobs in the cities while others have come
back to the Far North as teachers and physi¬
cians. But they have lost their ethnic identity.
Efforts to revive local languages and cul¬



tures in Siberia are now doomed to failure.
People are ashamed to speak their ethnic lan¬
guages or to distinguish themselves from Rus¬
sians. Many consider Russians the best mar¬
riage partners. "Our children will be more
beautiful," they explain, "and more happy."
