COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR
What happened to development?
"We can help a tree to grow by tending its roots, not bypulling on its branches "
THE cause of the serious prob¬
lems confronting so many
of the countries of Eastern
Europe today is not freedom,
but rather the burden of
oppression which they had to
bear for so long. Similarly, eco¬
nomic circumstances or the
hand of fate are not responsible
for keeping those countries that
have long been described as
"developing" on the poverty
line. The fault lies in our atti¬
tudes, the attitudes of all of us on either side of the divide sep¬
arating the haves from the have-nots, and in our views on how
development aid should be dispensed and received.
At the receiving end, people may look upon aid as a kind of
miraculous gift that will turn pumpkins into glass coaches
and make deserts blossom. To wait for such miracles to happen
is to wait indefinitely, like waiting for Godot. The answer to the
many problems the developing countries are facing does not lie
beyond their borders or beyond their reach. It lies deep within
themselves and in their political determination to re-order
their national priorities from top to bottom, put down the
foundations of democracy in knowledge and citizenship, and
see to it that development becomes everybody's business, the
fruit of their creative talents and endeavours in both the sweat
of their toil and the cool of their moments of rest.
COLLECTIVE SCHIZOPHRENIA
When it comes to development aid, we have to speak out and
make it perfectly clear that the approach adopted hitherto, in
which economic growth was regarded as the be-all and end-all,
has turned out to be wrong-headed. It is true that growth is the
driving force behind progress, but it is by no means synony¬
mous with development. We have to completely change course
if the intolerable and all-pervasive imbalances existing in the
world, the chasm between rich and poor across the globe and
in individual countries alike, the collective schizophrenia from
which we are suffering, are not to spell the demise of the
human species.
I am weighing my words: the fact is that poverty and
famine, like war, are killers. Every day that comes, they stifle all
hope and dignity in thousands of human beings and claim
thousands of lives, especially of children. Combating poverty
is an economic, social, political and ethical imperative a "pol-
ethical" imperative.
Today, more than ever before, development is humanity's
common goal. The destiny we share comes from our economic
interdependence, the ever-tighter interweaving of the human
fabric as a result of the rapid strides being made by communi
cations, and the planet-wide nature of such afflictions as drug
addiction, Aids, pollution, terrorism and poverty, which are no
respecters of national borders. No country is immune from the
heavy toll they take and, as a result, a new perception is growing
of what human security could and should be. It is this that is
giving rise to a new approach to development.
It is true that it has taken us several decades to grasp the
complexity of this process, whose social, cultural and indeed
spiritual features we cannot go on blithely ignoring. Whenever
we cleared one hurdle and made some headway, we thought we
had found the password. The ideal form of development was
described in such terms as endogenous, self-directed or all-
inclusive, and, later, as sustainable. We have now grasped the
main point, which is that development must first of all make
it possible to spark off the full potential of the human beings
who are both the prime movers in the process and its ulti¬
mate beneficiaries. Sustainable human development is the only
acceptable definition of our common goal.
A LIVING ORGANISM
World Bank Vice-President Ismail Serageldin once described the
sort of development for which we are all striving as being like
"a tree we can help to grow by tending its roots, not by pulling
on its branches". This is an image that has the merit of giving
us an immediate insight into three ideas. The first of these is that
development is a complex process, with its upsteam and down¬
stream factors and the causal links between them, and with
knock-on effects that have yet to be gauged. The second idea
is bound up with the first, inasmuch as development is an all-
encompassing process, none of whose features can be left out
of the reckoning. As a result, the approach to it has to be both
interdisciplinary and intersectoral. The third idea is funda¬
mental, since development is a process that is by definition
dynamic, like a living organism towards which we have to
adopt the highest standards and show respect, especially since
we are dealing with people.
When it comes to environmental issues and to social justice
or population growth, the change in direction will mean that
there will have to be a far-reaching rethinking of attitudes
and of the systems used for redistributing wealth and modes of
production and consumption the world over.
Since this is bound to be a long-drawn-out task, there is all
the more reason to embark on it without a moment's delay.
Changes as radical as these will require everybody young
and old, men and women, rich and poor, people from North and
South alike to play their part. This is yet another reason
why such a worldwide transformation should start here and
now in the places where you and I live, in our homes, our
neighbourhoods, our villages and towns. It is at the municipal
and local levels that the answers calculated to save the world will
be worked out and put to the test.
29
