R
Arnold Toynbee
The way to coexistence
In 1935, as the dictators were
tightening theirgrip on Europe, the
International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation organized
a conference in London on the theme
ofcollective security. One ofthe
participants was the English
historianArnold Toynbee (1889-
1975), author ofthe vast and
controversialA Study of History
(1934-1961), which seeks to elucidate
the laws governing the birth and
evolution ofcivilizations. Inface of
the dangers presented by the rise of
authoritarian nationalism, he
proposed as a route to peaceful
coexistence the creation ofa new
world order established by mutual
consent on supra-national
foundations.
44
Oim Rapporteur, Maurice Bourquin,
has explained the fundamental dif¬
ference between the notion of indi¬
vidual securityand that ofcollective security
in the following words:
"Nations have always sought to obtain
security, that is, to protect themselves
against external aggression. How have they
gone about it? In the first place, they have
tried to organize and to increase their own
forces; the natural, instinctive reaction,
under the circumstances, is to rely upon
oneself.
"The principal form that this reaction
takes is clearly the policy ofnational arma¬
ments. Then, by a logical consequence,
this policy of armaments gives rise to a
policy of alliances.
"There is already, in this policy of
alliances, a sort of collaboration; but this
collaboration is scarcely different in spirit
from the purely individualistic method.
What is it that distinguishes the collective
solution from this formula? The aim here
is not the special security of a few states,
Arnold Toynbee in 1975.
but the security ofall. A collective organi¬
zation of security is not directed against
one particular aggression, but against war
considered as a common danger. The
organization ofa system ofcollective secu¬
rity is a new experience which separates us
from tradition. Are there profound rea¬
sons for trying to induce the states to take
this path? Do this conception and this
system lie within the domain of practical
possibilities? Or have we here a Utopia,
an idea which is perhaps seductive but
which is unattainable?"
One very obvious difference between
the two notions lies in the fact that indi¬
vidual security is a considerably older
notion than collective security. As our Rap¬
porteur pointed out, collective security is
a very recent idea. Really it is only in our
own life-time that collective security has
begun to be seriously studied as a practical
possibility.
The idea of individual security is older.
I would like to say in passing that it is not
a very old idea. It hardly goes back more
than four hundred years, and four hun¬
dred years is a short period even in the
history of our Western World. The notion
of individual security would have been
quite antipathetic and alien to our
medieval forefathers, who would have
regarded it as a frankly immoral and anti-
Christian idea, in which I believe they
would have been right. At the moment I
will simply point out that this idea of indi¬
vidual security has held the field for about
four centuries.
Then, rather abruptly, in our genera¬
tion we find ourselves being compelled
to consider, and reconsider, and come
back to this new idea of collective security.

The question one asks oneself then is, why,
when individual security has apparently
more or less worked for a period of four
hundred years, we should suddenly find
that it no longer suffices.
I think the answer is that, while absolute
local sovereignty has been the theory of
our international life for four centuries, it
has by no means been the practice till
quite recently. During the greater part of
the modern age, the Western world has
been partíy insufficiently equipped, and
partly too wise and too much under the
influence of an older and a better tradition
to carry out the principle of local sover¬
eignty and the allied principle of indi¬
vidual security to their extreme logical
conclusion. It is only in our generation
that we have seen the absolute totalitarian
state a local totalitarian state emerge
from the theoretical handbooks of the
jurist or poliücal philosopher and become
a living reality in the actual world.
That is why the present situation is so
serious, because a development towards
absolute local sovereignty, which has been
implicit in our history for four centuries,
has in our generation suddenly become a
reality.
I hold it is controversial, but I throw it
dovm for discussion that this principle is
essentially imworkable, and that as soon as
the principle is really put into effect as it
is being put into effect in our generation
we are bound to seek a remedy for it. If
absolute local sovereignty and a complete
application of the principle of individual
security had been in actual operation
during the whole of the modern age, dis¬
aster would have overtaken us long ago.
Then let me make a further point from
that, that when once you have a world
consisting of sixty or seventy local states,
which are putting into practice complete
local sovereignty, then such a condition
of internatíonal affairs is by its very nature
transitory. One can prophesy with assur¬
ance that, a hundred years from now, or
fifty years from now, if states continue to
try to be absolute in their local sovereignty,
there will not be sixty or seventy separate
sovereign states in the world; there will be
far fewer of them perhaps only one!
Often in life, I think, one finds oneself in
a situation something like this: that one
can see that there is a certain goal ahead of
one which is inevitable, which one is
bound to travel to; and I think in our inter¬
national life the inevitable goal now ahead
ofus is the abolition ofabsolute local sov¬
ereignty but often in such a situation
one still has a choice of the roads by which
one may approach the single inevitable
goal; and, of course, it makes the whole dif¬
ference, very often, which ofthe roads we
choose. The single goal maybe inevitable;
the alternative roads offer us a choice; and
it is desperately important to make the
better choice rather than the worse choice
betweeen the alternative ways of reaching
the single goal which we must ultimately
arrive at.
If our goal is the disappearance of local
sovereignty and I think that, in a worid
armed with the powers of technique and
organization which we possess, it is hardly
a controversial thing to say that communi¬
ties armed with those powers cannot exist
side by side in the same world, for long,
without disaster overwhelming us all, if
they claim absolute local sovereignty if,
then, absolute local sovereignty is doomed
to disappear, is bound to disappear, what
are the two alternative roads by which we
may approach its disappearance?
I think that, as always, there are roughly
two ways. One of them is evolutionary a
way by agreement and forethought and
non-violence. That is the road ofcollective
security. If one wishes to solve this problem
of reaching some kind ofworld order in a
peaceful way, then collective security is
the road. It is because we rightly feel the
immense importance of travelling by that
road and not by the other that we are
brought back again and again to this insis¬
tent question of collective security now.
If we can achieve collective security, the
abolition of sovereignty will be qualified
and relative.
We must face the fact that collective
security means a diminution of local sov¬
ereignty, but along this road the diminu¬
tion will be gradual. The present local
states of the world will fit themselves by
voluntary agreement into a world order
in which they will each retain their local
culture, their traditional life, their local
administrative autonomy. If local sover¬
eignty is got rid of in that way, the process
Text selected and presented
by Edgardo Canton
will hardly be felt as a loss or a sacrifice.
So I would make an appeal to those pre¬
sent who stand for the view that nationality
and the local national life is the supreme
good. I would say to them that the people
who hold that view a view from which I
personally dissent ought, more than any
of us, to be eager to achieve collective
security, because collective security is the
way in which the necessary sacrifice of
local sovereignty will be exacted from us in
tlie least possible measure.
But if we fail to achieve collective secu¬
rity, there remains only the alternative
road, which is a very ancient road and a
very familiar one, and that is the road of
violence and conquest. These immensely
arrogant and highly armed totalitarian
states will in that case grind against each
other like icebergs in a stormy sea
clashing and grinding against each other
till they break each other to pieces and
the inevitable world order will come about
in an ancient and a most destructive form,
a form which will produce a totalitarian
world-state, the kind of super-state that
none of us desires to see, a world-state
produced by force and resulting in the
complete destruction of local life and local
autonomy.
If that does occur, perhaps there may be
one victorious survivor. I do not think that
the fate of the victorious surviving state will
be appreciably happier or more pros¬
perous than that ofthe other states which
it has destroyed. But if there is a survivor,
I feel very certain it will not be my own
country. I do not think it will be any Euro¬
pean country. It may not even be any
country ofEuropean origin. We might have
great surprises, in a forcible unification of
the world, in the matter ofthe actual state
or community which achieved the task in
the end. 45
