THE U.N. GOES TO SCHOOL
T
i he Northeast International Magnet
School in Montclair, New Jersey
(U .SA.) , is a publicly funded school
with approximately 375 boys and girls aged
from four to eleven. About one-third of
the students come from forty different
countries, and altogether the children
speak twenty-seven different languages.
Northeast is one of a number of
"magnet schools" that were created several
years ago in order to encourage racial inte¬
gration. About one-third of the students at
Northeast are ofAfrican origin, reflecting
the fact that roughly one-fourth of the
population of Montclair itself are Ameri¬
cans ofAfrican origin. Each magnet school
focuses on one study area, international
affairs in the case of Northeast. Others
focus on the performing arts, science and
other special fields.
"With the population we had," says
Marty Miller, a teacher at the school, "and
with a principal who had the perspicacity
to see that we are very similar to the United
Nations in that we have children from all
over who really need to live with and
m O understand each other, it was not diffi-
>itt
cult to turn the school into a mini-United
Nations."
Children in each home room, the place
where the day's first class is held, invented
the name of a country, made a flag for it
and chose traits by which their country
should be known to the others. Thus one
home room is called "Afreemerica", while
others are called "Nigypt", "Angel Land"
and "Happlandia". The kindergarten chil¬
dren called their countries "Kinderfolk"
and "Kinderlund".
Each child who enters the school is
given a passport which is stamped as he or
she moves through the various grades.
When they leave school, students are
allowed to keep the passport as a souvenir.
The student body elected a Secretary-
General, eight-year-old Maya Berry, who is
in second grade. Her deputy is Under Sec¬
retary-General Brian Conroy, a fifth-grade
student.
A central part of the exercise is the
meeting of the Security Council, to which
all "nations" send ambassadors. The Secu¬
rity Council takes up complaints which
are brought to it for discipline.
Marty Miller tells of one complaint
that was brought to the effect that one
country was making too much noise for
by Sally Swing Shelley
An American school whose
pupils are drawn from many
countries has modelled itself
on the United Nations
the others to study. The children voted in
the Council to send an ambassador to ask
for the noise to stop, and to say that if it did
not then sanctions would be imposed in
this case the children in the offending
home room would not be allowed out to
play in the yard for a week. The offending
nation complied.
Marty Miller believes that one aspect of
the school particularly helps racial har¬
mony. "The children are all equal," she
says, "whether they are eleven or twelve
years old in the fifth grade, or seven or
eight years old in the second grade. The
little ones look after the big ones and the
big ones look after the little ones. It is
clearly understood that nobody has any
more power than anyone else. We have a
committee of peers that our Social and
Human Rights Council developed to help
boys and girls who have difficulty getting
along with others and say or do hurtful
things. The Council drafted a resolution
that was adopted by the General Assembly.
According to this resolution, if a citizen of
one country has a problem, the children
will counsel the child who caused it as
well as the victim (because they feel the
victim also needs to understand why
another child might have behaved in an
unacceptable way), thereby helping to
promote tolerance." M
. ._
SALLY SWING SHELLEY,
of the United States, ¡s a former information officer
in Unesco's liaison office with the United Nations in
New York. She is currently UN correspondent with
the German radio and television network Deutsche
Weile.
