48
LISTENING
A trained pianist
and actress,
Catherine
Français has
worked with
children for many
years and has
studied Tai-Chi
and other
oriental
I disciplines. She
teaches
musicians and
actors to look
further than
the written
word or musical score in order to
discover their own rhythms and, through
these, freedom of expression and their own
inner selves. The voice is the key element in
this type of training.
C You are specifically interested in the fun¬
damental role played by music and the human
voice in all religions.
very old sacred traditions, man is regarded as the
temple of the divine. At the same time, mantras,
prayers, sacred sounds, poems and chants have a
physical function: they facilitate the movement of the
diaphragm, and through their resonance and rhythm
awaken the harmonics of the body. The body, especially
the voice, is designed as a musical instrument. We
could, for instance, make an analogy with the violin. The
violin has different shapes, with curves that are
rounded, or more or less angular. If the "sound post",
the piece of wood that connects the back of the violin
to its front and maintains the correct distance between
them, is moved, the shape of the curves is modified
and the sound of the instrument changes, since the
vibratory phenomenon is a balance between form,
contained in the material, and the intangible which cir¬
culates inside the instrument.
The same is true of the human body: the
diaphragm which stretches and amplifies the
breathing through its constant spring-like motion,
corresponds in a way to the sound post of the violin.
It's the diaphragm that helps the body maintain its
proportions.
I* Since the inner world and the outer world
are inseparable, physical and mental changes
can bring about changes in the voice. Con¬
versely, a more judicious use of the voice should
help to restore harmony between the self and
the outer world when it has been disturbed.
in the Ancient World doctors used the voice and
sound in general to restore corporal harmony, and



Seeking the inner voice
Catherine Françaix talks to Isabelle Leymarie
incantatory magic would balance natural forces
through the power of sound. Working on the voice can
sometimes remove certain physiological or psycho¬
logical blocks. It restores tone to the organs, and,
since the voice is our essential tool of communication
with plants, animals, man and the gods, it encourages
receptivity to the outside world.
!i What steps can one take to improve one's
voice?
of all it is useful to bear in mind that the
voice is both subtle and adaptable. It is constantly
changing, at every stage in life and even over longer
periods of time. For instance, listening to voice
recordings of the 1920s and 1930s, one is struck by
the difference in colour between those voices and
those of today.
Training the voice means improving one's
breathing, sometimes by working on the form through
physical exercise, and sometimes by working on the
content, or internal energy (the Chinese chi, the
Japanese ki, and the Indian prana) and the channels
by which it circulates. One basic exercise consists in
warming up the diaphragm so as to be able to hear
the fullness, the elasticity of sound. Another consists
in awakening the face muscles. When we grow up, we
stop using some of our face muscles and lose some
of our expressiveness as a result. The remarkable
actors of commedia deli'arte who create "masks" by
using different face muscles also manage to produce
the right colour of voice to match the emotional res¬
onance of the mask. The basic mask is the "neutral"
one, where the face is relaxed and welcomes,
receives, imbues itself with sensations. In vibratory
terms, this corresponds to the position of non-
oscillation between two emissions of sound.
It is also necessary to discover the body's points
of equilibrium (without which the body establishes
compensatory mechanisms), its centre of gravity. This
awareness of the centre of gravity, on which certain Ori¬
ental disciplines lay great emphasis, provides a plea¬
surable feeling of stretching. Voice production is linked
to both the balance and the suppleness of the body.
The word "tone" comes from the Greek "tonos", which
means "tone", "tonus", "tonic", "ligament", "musical
mode" and "tone of voice". It is also necessary to
master the motor impulses which produce sound.
This implies harmony between gesture and thought. In
days gone by, everything to do with the intellect was
explained with the aid of metaphors and all that had to
do with the imagination or the divine with the aid of
mathematics and geometry.
', I After this necessary physical preparation,
should one work on elocution?
by seeking the right rhythm. In all languages,
the consonant represents the medium while the
vowel signifies the breath. It is the vowel that signi¬
fies the transition from one phoneme to another,
prolonging the impulse of the consonant. To carry out
this transition smoothly, without loss of balance,
one has to find a point of support. The sacred lan¬
guages, notably Hebrew, were conscious of this
notion of balance of speech. If the scansion is mis¬
placed, if we do not accentuate enough, we cannot
get our breath back. This involuntary apnoea brings
with it a break in rhythm and distorts the relationship
with the person to whom we are talking. Here again,
it is the elasticity of the diaphragm that allows you to
control the flow of breath.
¡u Is the lack of genuine communication
between human beings, which seems to be
exacerbated by the modern world, linked to the
loss of this rhythm and balance of speech?
art, certainly. It has been noted that in many lan¬
guages, except in regional speech which has remained
highly colourful, there is a loss of expressiveness, due
both to lack of time and to a fear of human relation¬
ships. We adults no longer live in the words we utter,
the body no longer takes part, while children on the
other hand, in a spontaneous way, physically live
out what they say. If we do not take the time either
to speak correctly or to listen to others, the breath no
longer circulates. We suffocate and we smother
those with whom we speak. This communication
problem also brings about a flattening of the melodic
curve of the language and an impoverishment of the
vocabulary.
\ In order to use one's voice correctly is it
necessary to know how to listen?
And listening can be purposeful or
receptive. In the second case, one allows oneself to
be bathed by the resonance, the emotional climate
evoked by the sound, thereby gaining access to
one's inner world. "Sentiré" in Italian means both to
listen and to hear. Polyphonic singing, in which one
hears one's own voice and the voice of others without
losing one's self, is a marvellous way of developing
the ability to listen and of learning to establish dia¬
logue. Bringing together East and West, it does away
with the need for long journeys in quest of exotic
teachings, because it helps us find what we are
seeking within ourselves.
ISABELLE LEYMARIE, a Franco-American musicologist,
is the author of La Salsa et le Latin Jazz (PUF, Paris,
1993). She is currently working on a study of black
music in Latin America and the Caribbean.
