The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 marked the end
of a conception of history that had prevailed in Europe
for two centuries« How should the link between past,
present and future be defined from now on?

AN END AND A BEGINNING
by François Harto;
Afew months before the fall of the Berlin
wall an American historian named
Francis Fukuyama published an essay
entitled "The End of History?", which attracted
widespread media attention.1 Communism was
collapsing, and only democracy now remained
as the "final form of all human government".
History, in the sense of "a simple, coherent evo¬
lutionary process", had come to an end.
In the long story of the world the end of his¬
tory has been proclaimed cheerfully, anxiously
or resignedly more than once. To my mind,
however, the keynote of 1989 was something
different unpredictability: the unpredictability
ofwhat happened in that year, the growing unpre¬
dictability of the future it heralded, the unpre¬
dictability, even, of the past that it brought to an
end. The recent past was primarily affected, but
the remoter past has also become opaque and in
a sense unpredictable. This is where the historian
comes in.
History clearly needs rewriting in the former
Eastern bloc countries (the very expression used
to designate these countries smacks of uncer¬
tainty, as though they can only be described in
terms of something they have ceased to be and it
is not yet possible to say what they are). It is
equally clear that this will be a difficult task and
will involve more than just making corrections,
replacing inaccuracy with accuracy. There is also
a risk that new distortions will take the place of
old ones (the new ones perhaps mere revivals of
older historical myths). The articles in this issue
of the UNESCO Courier, with their varied
approaches, give some idea of the extent of the
task and of what is at stake.
It would be quite wrong to regard this essen¬
tial rewriting as the business of the "East" and
no one else. The changes in the East are affecting
the West and will continue to do so. We are all
in the same boat. We always have been. Despite
the antagonism between the two camps, some of
their basic presuppositions were the same. Both
shared a similar relationship with time and a
/\ joyful crowd on the Berlin Wall,
1 1 November 1 989.

"The triumphal car of the
Republic". This illustration
commemorating the
establishment of the
Republic in France
appeared in a daily
newspaper, Le Petit Journal,
in 1912.
IO
FRANÇOIS HARTOG
is a French historian who
teaches ancient and modern
historiography at the Ecole des
Hautes Etudes en Sciences
Sociales in Paris. He is
currently working on a book
on the Ancients and the
Moderns and history. Among
his published works are Le XIX'
siècle et l'histoire: le cas Fustel de
Cou/anges (1988, PUF
publishers, Paris; "The I9th
century and History: the Case
of Fustel de Coulanges") and
Le Miroir d'Hérodote (new
edition 1991, Gallimard
publishers, Paris; "The Mirror
of Herodotus").
similar idea of history, based on the idea of con¬
tinuous progress. Scientific socialism, its face
turned towards the radiant future, for long even
looked like the cutting edge of modernity. In
spite of very real political differences, we were
both beneficiaries of what I would call the same
great regime of historicity. That regime, which
began to exist around 1789, finally broke down
before our eyes in 1989. This is why the
rewriting of history is, for a fundamental reason,
also the business of the West. Should we talk of
rewriting, or of writing? What history should we
write today? What past, for what present?
A complete change of perspective
"When the past no longer sheds light on the
future, the mind walks in darkness." This sen¬
tence written by the French historian Alexis de
Tocqueville conveniently describes what may be
called the ancien régime of historicity and the
moment of its overthrow. Before, when the rela¬
tion of the past to the future was governed by
reference to the past, the "mind" knew where it
was going. For the purpose of writing history,
that was the heyday of the idea of history as a
teacher and guide for living, first set forth by
Cicero and later handed down and referred to
until the present time. History offered a collec¬
tion of examples for the instruction of readers
and primarily of rulers. The general idea was that
history was made for those who were supposed
to make it. By extension it came to be thought
of as "the common school of the human race".
During the period of the French Revolu¬
tion things became blurred, the landmarks of the
past faded, time suddenly seemed to speed up,
and the future became totally uncertain: the
mind walked in darkness. It was also a time
when people referred intensively to the past.
All kinds of analogies were put forward, as
people clung to the comforting idea of historical
parallels in an effort to understand and express
the strangeness of what was happening. The
French revolutionaries, for example, went back
to classical Antiquity to try to describe their
unprecedented actions.
In fact, however, a new regime of historicity
came into effect between the end of the eigh¬
teenth century and the beginning of the nine¬
teenth. Henceforth the past was no longer
expected to shed light on the future; the future
was expected to shed light on the past. The
future would make sense of the past; it would be
the starting-point for the writing of history.
Tocqueville is a witness to this reversal. In order
to understand France's past he travelled towards
or even into the future, sailing to America to
portray the "new" i.e. democratic, society there.
As a result he was able to see the Revolution not
so much as a break but as a continuation, an
extension, in many ways a completion of the
work of the absolute monarchy. This gradual
shifting of the relationships with time went
hand in hand with the growth of a modern
notion of history.



History as articulated in Germany in the
second half of the eighteenth century was history
in the singular, history as an end in itself, a
process. It defined itself as "knowledge of itself".
The philosophy of history superseded and took
over from the theology of history. What had
once been studied in history lessons no longer
had any point. How could history be "exem¬
plary" when the past no longer shed light on the
future? Or else the only lesson of history is
History with a capital "H", with its judgments
and its dustbins. In the logic of progress the
exemplary gives way to the event, which is
always unique. What is past is past.
To quote the French writer Julien Gracq,
"history has become essentially an ultimatum
issued by the Future to the present". I would
merely add that the ultimatum also extended
to the past and fell on historians, who during the
nineteenth century organized and regarded their
discipline as the science of the past. The pre¬
dominant medium of this ultimatum was
national history the nation having of course
been the outstanding phenomenon of the nine¬
teenth and early twentieth centuries. Any his¬
tory worth the name was bound to reconsider
the past in terms of the nation, searching for its
origins, celebrating its past and future glories,
and all too often surrendering to its mystique.
This was also the time when scientific history
and patriotic history went hand in hand, and
when in France three entities three persons,
almost France, the Nation and the Republic,
came together in the writings of Ernest Lavisse
to form a secular Trinity, the foundation of a his¬
tory as memory of the nation.
This regime of historicity was challenged

both before and especially after the 1914-1918
war. The German thinker Walter Benjamin
started to look for a different relationship with
history, i.e. a different historical temporality.
The idea of "remembrance", meaning reliving
the past, was central to this relationship. His¬
torical time only really comes into existence
when there is "a dazzling conjunction between
the past and the present". At the same time his¬
tory freed itself from the "tyranny" of the
national, political history was criticized as super¬
ficial, and in the 1920s economic and social his¬
tory developed in response to this crisis of his¬
tory. There was a search for a different
time-scale, inspired by economists' models and
organized not in simple linear terms according
to a succession of events but incorporating ideas
of cycles and conjunctures, and sensitive to the
recurrences, the enduring features and the long-
term processes of history in a word, ending up
with different layers of temporality, with Fer¬
nand Braudel's concept of la longue durée
long-term structures and trends.
But these criticisms and challenges, impor¬
tant though they were, were not enough to
make us change our regime of historicity espe¬
cially when it was fortified by the revolutionary
vistas opened up by the October Revolution,
followed by postwar reconstruction, the prac¬
tical victories of socialism after 1945 and the
East-West competition that followed them.
Signs of crisis began to appear in the West in
the 1960s. As regards relationships with time,
there was first the widespread acceptance of the
idea that there was no future. Then the idea that
the present is all that matters, each day con¬
suming (and therefore producing) more and
more novelties and historical events to feed the
media system it has created. It is thirsty for pre¬
diction. But, more surprisingly, it has also turned
out to be obsessed with conservation (the suc¬
cess of the "heritage" theme). It would also like
to be able to watch itself happening, with,
already, the eye of history.
The most typical manifestation of this dream
of controlling or abolishing time is the concern
to save more and more time to the point of
almost making it disappear, forgetting about it
or escaping from it. But this present, which is
somewhat unreal because it wants to be the
whole of reality, is also a time when people are
seeking identity and roots. Memory and com¬
memoration became the catchwords of the
1980s, and were eventually, though not at first,
taken up by historians, as they began skating
over the surface of memory.
All in all, it gradually appeared that the future
no longer shed light on the present, and hence not
on the past. History has ceased to be the future's
ultimatum to the present. At the same time, the
future has regained its unpredictability (the oppo¬
site of an end of history) and the past its opacity.
It is the historian's task to revisit the past, to
find other ways through it, to ask it other ques¬
tions, to acquire new points of view, and to
express a different relationship with time in
short to try and define the features of the regime
of historicity that we have now entered.
It is not a matter of putting across a back¬
ward-looking view of the past, nor of setting up
the past as a judge of the present under the
impression that the days when history taught
lessons have returned; but rather of reading the
marks left by a forgotten, repressed, aborted
past against the background of the present
not so much commemoration as remembrance.
"We must reopen the past," wrote the philoso¬
pher Paul Ricceur in 1985, "and revive its unful¬
filled, inhibited, nay its murdered potentiali¬
ties." That is what Michelet, who saw historians
as a bridge between the living and the dead,
meant when he called on "the silences of his¬
tory" to speak.
1 "The End of History ?" was published in summer 1989
and later appeared in expanded form in a book, The End
ofHistory and the Last Man (New York, Free Press and
Toronto, Maxwell Macmillan Canada, 1992).
trotest posters in the
eastern part of Berlin
against a decision by the
authorities to remove the
statue of Lenin ( 1 99 1 ). The
large panel bears the
ironical message: "Here
the Berlin Senate
decontaminates German-
German history in the
framework of a cleansing
operation against those
who think differently.
Sponsor: Clean and
Remove All. Contractor:
Black-out and Co."
i»	-r.<
I I
