The dangers of an idea of
history that fuels ethnic
conflicts
The
historian's
responsibility
by Georges
Charachidzé
10
GEORGES CHARACHIDZE,
is a Georgian-born French
historian who teaches the
languages and civilizations of
the Caucasus at the Institut
National des Langues et
Civilisations Orientiales and at
the Ecole Pratique des Hautes
Etudes (IV* section), both in
Paris. He is also director of a
research centre on the
Caucasus and the Indo-
European world associated
with France's National Centre
for Scientific Research (CNRS).
Among his published works are
Prométhée ou te Caucase (1986,
Flammarion publishers, Paris;
"Prometheus or the
Caucasus") and La Mémoire
indo-européenne du Caucase
(1987, Hachette, Paris; "The
Indo-European memory of the
Caucasus").
IT is a well-known fact that the Soviet Union's
intellectual bureaucrats, from the 1930s
onwards, imposed upon the country a theory
of history that they had put together from scratch.
Strangely enough and here we come to the
heart of the matter this theory was taken on
board and, as it were, absorbed by everybody,
from social scientists and intellectuals to school¬
children and the man in the street. It entered the
public domain, merging with people's own ideas
about their national past. The theory is easily
summarized, since it boils down to a few crude
assertions: the history of any human group, seen
as something smooth and uniform, describes a
flawless trajectory from its palaeolithic origins
through to the predictable, inevitable stages of
modern evolution. It progresses under its own
impetus along the clearly signposted path leading
to the ideal society of tomorrow, if not indeed
today. All this is familar, all too familiar.
An unexpected convergence
What is less well known are the ways in which
this theory was adjusted to fit in with the ways in
which the history of the various peoples of the
U.S.S.R. was written. In Georgia, and doubtless
elsewhere, there was no problem in making the
adjustment: officialdom's view of human evolu
tion fitted in nicely with the "national" concep¬
tions of history. Thus, an early view of the past,
that of the chroniclers and their royal masters of
the eleventh to eighteenth centuries, pictured
humanity, worldwide to begin with and then
Georgian, as marching straight towards its first
goal, the introduction of Christianity in the fourth
century. It then brought on stage the unbroken
line of Georgian sovereigns, whose epic story
likewise tended towards a single end: the defence
of the faith, the frontiers and the rights of the
kingdom, which would lead to the complete ful¬
filment of its Christian grandeur and legitimacy.
There was nothing in this that was contra¬
dictory to Soviet official dogma: these stages
indeed corresponded to those that any well
ordered community should pass through before
achieving its final goal and entering the promised
society. School textbooks and other official pub¬
lications were quite clear about this, vying with
one another to stress the positive nature of the
country's conversion to Christianity, and it is
obvious that neither perestroika nor indepen¬
dence has made any difference in this respect.
Let us take another example. Nineteenth-
century history, that of the philologists and the
romantics but also that of their followers in
more recent times, according to whom Georgia

was engaged in a constant struggle to preserve its
identity, also fits in easily with the official Soviet
version. The main thing was to see the course of



Georgian history as leading up to the country's
entry into the Russian, and later Soviet, empire.
On the way, the saga of the Georgian people
merges spontaneously into the march of uni¬
versal history as its destiny blends in with that
oftheU.S.S.R.
It was not that the Soviet authorities
"decreed" and imposed on the Georgians the
view the latter should take of their own his¬
tory. They simply encouraged the development
of this view, changing its emphasis slightly and
"adding to" it (especially the end of the story, the
country's incorporation into Russia and then
into the U.S.S.R.) in other words they
endorsed it.
They likewise endorsed the resumption and
continuation of the task begun by the kings and
queens of Georgia, that of compiling the complete
annals of the kingdom. It was, again, the Soviet
state that, through its specialized academic insti¬
tutions, authorized and supported the scientific
enterprise of publishing historic manuscripts and
documents, especially religious texts. Finally, the
three conceptions of Georgia's past that of the
former monarchs, that of traditional historians,
and that of doctrinaire Soviet historians worked
their way together into the collective conscious¬
ness, becoming part and parcel of Georgian lore
and combining to form the new, commonly
accepted version of history.
This, then, is how things stand after inde¬
pendence (1991). Georgians all know, and never
tire of repeating, that they must now cast off the
old ideological straitjackets and at last give his¬
tory, regained at the same time as national sov¬
ereignty, free rein. The question is, how to go
about it and, above all, what to do?
There are, first of all, two obvious tasks to
which many people have already committed
themselves: that of expunging or correcting the
falsifications practised for seventy years by Soviet
officialdom and its local representatives, and that
of filling in the "gaps" in history, its "forgotten"
or forbidden periods. For several years now,
newspapers, magazines and books have been
making a good job of bringing to light the history
of independent Georgia from 1918 to 1921 and of
the national uprising of 1924, reconsidering the
"Russo-Georgian rapprochement" of 1783 to
1801, and revealing the extent, the depth and the
true nature of terror and repression, with their
camps and massacres. All this is happening spon¬
taneously, so to speak; the competence of those
involved is almost as great as their enthusiasm, and
it will not take long to put paid to Soviet manip¬
ulations of the past.
But what about history as such, in particular
that blend of different views of history that
people carry around in their heads? These ideas
are so familiar that it is hard to reject them lock
stock and barrel. They do not lend themselves
easily to analysis or even to being sorted out. The
counterfeit versions of the past put about by
Soviet officialdom are difficult to separate from
the other conceptions of history since they
overlap with them, enfold them and are contin¬
uations of them.
Remembering 'forgotten' times
Since independence, two changes have occurred
but have not affected the basic doctrine. Firstly, all
references to Soviet-style "socialism" have been
removed. History is thus again seen as performing
a perfect trajectory, from its beginnings to the
goal towards which the Georgian people is
heading of its own free will: that of the nation, free
and entire, at last coming into its own. The sce¬
nario is thus the same as that of the nineteenth-cen¬
tury historians. Secondly, in this case marking a
break with those historians but harking back to the
ideas held dear by the kings and their chroni¬
clers, the Christian faith is regarded as the driving
wpposite page,
The new man ( 1 92 1 ), a
watercolour by Nikolai
Kogut (1 89 1- 1 959).
Below, a mid- 19th-century
lithograph depicting a
Georgian prince.
21

I n May 1 989, a young
woman brandishes a
sacred ¡mage In Tbilisi
during a massive
demonstration to
celebrate the anniversary
of the Georgian Republic
of 1918.
force in history. In other words, the saga of the
Georgian people is still working itself out in
accordance with the very model that was until
lately favoured by the Soviet authorities, the
only difference being that it now culminates in
the fulfilment of the Christian faith.
This is why recent historical publications,
whatever their level, their scope or their reader¬
ship, add nothing new to the existing edifice.
They either carry on from where traditional his¬
tory left off, supposedly purging it of all
"Marxist" impurities, or they re-issue religious
texts that have already been studied and pub¬
lished for a long time, simply giving them a wider
circulation. All the major historical research pro¬
jects are oriented towards the past of the
Orthodox church or religious archaeology, or
towards republishing, on a grand scale, the writ¬
ings of the fathers of the Georgian church
which have in any case long been in print. There
is no escaping the obvious fact that Christian
teleology is purely and simply taking the place of
the teleology of "scientific socialism".
As to the idea of history as destiny, unfolding
uninterruptedly from ancient times, close to
the very beginnings, through to the ultimate,
quasi-eschatological goal, there is no question of
modifying or even touching it. That idea, how
ever implausible, remains firmly in place, for it
makes it possible to set up, as a defence against
the demands, legitimate or otherwise, of the
ethnic minorities, the Abkhazians and Osse-
tians in particular, the perfectly preserved mono¬
lith of Georgia's long history.
As long as the ethnic conflicts continue and
as long as they are being fought on the battlefield
of what is mistakenly supposed to be history, the
rewriting of history, necessary and salutary
though it be, will remain a dead letter. It is not
enough to rid the theory and practice of history
of the superficial traces left by Soviet ideology,
which are more a matter of vocabulary than of
substance. Such measures will continue to be
insufficient as long as the conception under¬
lying the whole historical edifice remains intact.
While the Georgians' almost pathological blind¬
ness to their own history persists, it will be
quite impossible to extirpate its real Soviet roots.
In fact, the persistence of this blindness in
regard to the past and the return to a retrograde
conception of history fuel and reinforce the cul¬
tural and political component of the present
ethnic conflicts. In Georgia, more than else¬
where, history and historians bear responsi¬
bility for the present and the future which in
Georgia's case is a great pity.
22
