INTERVIEW
TRINH
XUAN
THUAN
talks to
Neda El Khazen
Trinh Xuan Thuan is an astrophysicist from
Hanoi (Viet Nam). At the University of Vir¬
ginia in the United States he teaches a
course on astronomy for poets. As a "sur¬
veyor of the universe," he tries to under¬
stand its structure using the most sophis¬
ticated instruments of observation available
today, such as the Hubble space tele¬
scope. He has written widely and with
great clarity on the formation and evolution
of galaxies. His The Birth of the Universe:
the Big Bang and After appeared in 1993
(Harry N. Abrams, New York and Thames &
Hudson, London) and Secret Melody will be
published later this year (Oxford University
Press).
Astronomy bas made amazing strides
since the time of Galileo's telescope. How
does an astronomer work today?
The telescope is still the astronomer's
favourite instrument because communi¬
cating with the universe is usually done via
light and this light has to be captured. Since
the telescope that first enabled Galileo to
discover the mountains on the moon and
the satellites orbiting Jupiter, telescopes
have continued to improve, growing bigger
and better. In the world today there are
about fifteen giant telescopes with mirrors
measuring more than three metres across.
On top of an extinct volcano in Hawaii, at
an altitude of 4,500 metres, a colossus of a
telescope with a diameter of ten metres has
just been completed.
By putting telescopes into orbit around
the earth, we have been able to completely
escape turbulence from the earth's atmos¬
phere. The Hubble space telescope, which
was launched in 1990, is one of the greatest
achievements of contemporary astronomy.
It weighs eleven tons and is eleven metres
long it is as big as a locomotive. Because of

It is the stars that made the elements necessary for life. ... The
story they have to tell is one of the utmost importance to us because
it leads to our own. We are only Stardust
an optical flaw, it suffered from myopia, but
thanks to repairs done by astronauts from the
American space shuttle, it has now regained
its sight. Already it is beginning to give us a
vision of the universe in all its splendid clarity,
pick up even weaker radiation, and perceive
objects at even greater distances. For the
astronomer, to see far is to see early, because
it takes time for light to reach us. Sunlight
takes eight minutes to reach us; light from the
nearest star takes four years, and from the
closest galaxy the light left two million years
ago, when man first appeared on our planet.
We hope that Hubble will allow us to go
back in time to two to three billion years
after the Big Bang so that we can actually
witness the birth of galaxies, which remains
one of the great mysteries of contemporary
astrophysics.
Has the conquest ofspace changed the
way weperceive the universe?
Undoubtedly. Because conquering space
has also meant conquering the electro¬
magnetic spectrum. Generally it is believed
that astronomy is limited to what the eye
can see. But there is a whole range of light
waves that escape human eyesight, such
as infrared waves, microwaves (as in ovens)
and radio waves. So we have developed
radio telescopes that do not pick up waves
transmitted by radio and television sta¬
tions, but those produced by sources in
the cosmos. There are also ultraviolet light,
X-rays and gamma rays which contain a lot
of energy and which are blocked by the
earth's atmosphere fortunately, because
they are harmful to us. And so we have put
in orbit satellite telescopes specializing in
these diverse types of radiation so that
they can restore for us the cosmic landscape
in all its richness and variety.
How doyou analyseall this information?
After the telescope has picked up light
signals they are recorded by an electronic
detector. They are then digitalized, trans¬
lated into digits like the notes of music on a
compact disc. These digits are stored on
magnetic tapes, and using powerful com¬
puters the astronomer can process these dig¬
italized images, which can be viewed on a
screen, converted to colour, contrasted and
varied at will, depending on what he is
looking for.
Astronomers today no longer spend
their nights guiding telescopes in dark¬
ness, looking through the eyepiece, fighting
cold and struggling to stay awake. In a
well-lit, warm and comfortable room,
astronomers now command telescopes by
computer. They simply indicate the posi¬
tion of the star or galaxy they want to
study and it appears on the screen. Soon
communication satellites will enable
astronomers to make their observations
without going to the observatory. They
will not waste their time waiting for the sky
to clear, and they will be able to work in the
quiet of their own offices.
The Hubble space telescope was named
after a great American astronomer whose
workprovided the basis for the Big Bang
theory. What exactly is the Big Bang?
This theory gives the universe a historical
dimension, that is, a past, present and future.
It is based on a fundamental discovery made
by Edwin Hubble, who realized in 1929
that galaxies were fleeing the Milky Way,
and the further away they were, the greater
was the speed with which they were fleeing.
The universe, therefore, is expanding. If we
reverse the course of events, we get back to
the point at which everything started, some
fifteen billion years ago, when energy was
extremely high and there was an enormous
explosion: the Big Bang. The universe is
not immutable, as Newton believed. It has
a beginning and it is not eternal. The Big
Bang created time and expanding space.
Since then, other observations such as the
discovery of the cosmic background radia¬
tion which is left-over heat from the pri¬
mordial explosion have come to support
this theory. It is also confirmed by what
we have learned about the chemical com¬
position of stars and galaxies.
Matter was formed from the incred¬
ible energy freed by the Big Bang.
Yes, a tiny fraction of a second after the
primordial explosion, at exactly 1043 second
afterwards. What had happened before?
No one knows. Here we are up against a
wall that we cannot penetrate with our pre¬
sent knowledge and physics is out of its
depth. So at 10'43 second after the Big Bang
the universe is no bigger than the head of a
pin. It is extremely dense, and hotter than all
the hells of Dante. There is a quantum
vacuum. It is not a vacuum of calmness and
tranquillity, devoid of substance and
activity as we might imagine it but a
vacuum bubbling with all the energy that
had been released by the Big Bang, filled
with phantom particles and antiparticles.
This energy makes the universe expand
with lightning speed: it is dilating at a stag¬
gering rate during an infinitesimal amount

of time. Simultaneously, it is cooling off
and becoming diluted, making the ascent
towards complexity possible. Energy gives
birth to matter. At 106 second, when the
volume of the universe is about the same as
that of the solar system, the most elemen¬
tary particles, quarks, combine to produce
protons and neutrons. At the third minute,
when hydrogen and helium nuclei appear,
98 per cent of the universe's mass has been
constituted. The universe continues to
expand, bathing in a soup of radiation and
matter. But it is a non-homogeneous soup
in which there are irregularities. Some areas
are denser than others and one or two bil¬
lion years later they will give rise to galaxies
and stars. This fabulous ascension towards
diversity will persist to our day.
Where does life begin ?
In the heart of the stars. It is the stars that
made the elements necessary for life
oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, even heavy ele¬
ments such as iron. The story they have to
tell is of the utmost importance to us
because it leads to our own. We are only
Stardust. We are made up of chemical ele¬
ments that were created in stellar crucibles
and expelled into space by supernovae.
One has to realize that stars are born,
live and die just like human beings but on a
considerably bigger time-scale. They are
born in gigantic stellar nurseries, of col¬
lapsing hydrogen and helium clouds com¬
pressed into gaseous balls by gravity. In
their core, which is heated to tens of millions
of degrees, thermonuclear reactions take
place producing intense radiation that dif¬
fuses towards the surface. An equilibrium is
established between the outward push of
radiation and the inward gravitational pull.
During millions, billions of years, the
star consumes its hydrogen. When there is
none left, it starts to use up its helium
reserve. The combustion of helium pro¬
duces an enormous blast of energy. The
star distends on a colossal scale, and turns
red. In this cosmic oven the alchemy that
creates the bricks of life goes on relent
lessly. After several million years, more
than twenty new elements have been cre¬
ated in the heart of the red giant.
After the combustion of helium, it is
the turn of carbon, then oxygen, to burn.
Afterwards, more complex elements such
as neon, magnesium, aluminium and sul¬
phur appear. The same sequence of events
repeats itself: each time a combustible ele¬
ment has been exhausted, a new one starts
to burn, creating heavier and heavier ele¬
ments. When iron appears, the star has
come to the end of its life.
Why does this alchemy stop with iron ?
Because burning iron takes energy and
the star, which is running out of fuel, can no
longer provide energy. It stops radiating
and fades. Gravity takes over and com
presses the star until it collapses and dies.
Low-mass stars transform themselves into
white dwarfs. They then become invisible
and join the countless stellar corpses that
litter the galaxies. That will be the fate of our
sun in nine billion years. A high-mass star
(ten to thirty times the mass of the sun), on
the other hand, dies a violent death. Com¬
pressed by gravity, such a star reaches an
extraordinary density and when its heart
contracts, a shockwave is produced that
leads to a lightning explosion, shining with
the intensity of a billion suns. That is called
a supernova.
A supernova utilizes its enormous
energy to produce elements heavier than
iron, such as gold and silver, which later on
are used to make jewellery for pretty
women! The explosion projects all these

elements into interstellar space at a speed of
thousands of kilometres per second. These
are the seeds for future planets that may
bear life. The atoms of which we are made
today were created in a high-mass star that
exploded more than four and a half bil¬
lion years ago, before the birth of our sun.
Do you believe that life can exist else¬
where, on otherplanets, in othergalaxies?
It's probable. After all, the universe which
we observe is made up of a hundred billion
galaxies like the Milky Way, and each one
has a hundred billion stars, of which billions
resemble our sun. Each one of those stars is
accompanied by a group of planets. Some-
Sunset and starry sky photographed
from a 2,400-metre-high
observatory in the Canary Islands.
where there has to be a planet that is neither
too hot nor too cold for life to develop.
Scientists believe that other intelligent forms
of life can exist in our galaxy, or elsewhere
in the universe, but how and where do we
find them? It's like looking for a needle in a
haystack. We do not know in which direc¬
tion we should point our telescopes nor on
which frequency they should be set to pick
up possible signals. For the 500th anniver¬
sary of Christopher Columbus' voyage,
NASA launched a programme to listen to a
thousand stars like our sun on two fre¬
quencies and also to randomly scan the sky
on millions of frequencies.
What is the "anthropicprinciple" that
appears in modern cosmology?
The term comes from the Greek word
anthropos meaning man and, in a larger
sense, intelligence, consciousness. According
to the anthropic principle, the universe is
fine-tuned to an extraordinary precision
for consciousness to appear. One must
realize that our universe is determined by
four basic forces and about fifteen num¬
bers which are called physical constants.
The basic forces are gravity, which keeps the
planets circling the sun and our feet on the
ground; electromagnetic force, which makes
it possible for molecules to combine and
form strands of DNA; the strong (nuclear)
force, which binds protons and neutrons
together to form atomic nuclei; and the
weak (nuclear) force, which is responsible
for radioactivity. As for the numbers, they
include the speed of light, the mass of a
proton, the charge of an electron or the
gravitational constant. The value of these
numbers has been determined with great
precision: light travels at 300,000 km per
second. Why 300,000 km/s and not 3 m/s?
We have no idea why. We were given these
numbers and we have to live with them.
Astrophysicists cannot reproduce the
conditions of the Big Bang in their labo¬
ratories because these conditions were so
extreme. They would need a particle accel¬
erator the size of several light years which
is impossible. However, with their com¬
puters and their equations, they can have
fun building models of the universe
which I call toy universes to which they
attribute different physical constants. What
is extraordinary is that all these toy uni¬
verses are infertile. If the physical con¬
stants were varied ever so slightly then we
would no longer be around to talk about it.
If, for example, the intensity of gravita¬
tional force were increased, then the uni¬
verse would become more compact and
the stars would be ten million times less
massive than our moon. They would con¬
sume their fuel too quickly and the com¬
plexity necessary for the creation of life
could not develop. On the other hand, if
you decreased only a little the force of
gravity, then interstellar clouds could no
longer collapse and create stars. Without
stars there are neither heavy elements nor
life. Take, for example, the electrical charges
of a proton and an electron. The proton is
approximately two thousand times more
massive than the electron, and yet their
electrical charges are rigorously equal, but
opposite. If they would differ only by a bil¬
lionth of a billionth, the stars, the sun and
the earth would explode.
You can vary any other physical con¬
stant, the result is always the same: toy uni¬
verses are empty and sterile. One can con¬
clude from this that these constants were
fine-tuned to an astonishing precision so
that life could emerge and consciousness
appear. If you want to picture this precision,
imagine the accuracy that would be required
for an archer to be able to hit a 1 square cen¬
timetre target 15 billion light years away.
Talk offine-tuning makes one think
ofa hand that regulates. Should we think
in terms ofsome kindofregulatory mech¬
anism or should we see life as the result of
a long succession ofrandom happenings?
If one opts for chance, then one is forced
to invoke the theory of parallel universes
which quantum mechanics does allow for.
CONTINVED ON PACE SO »

» CONTINUED FROH PAGE 7
In these parallel universes, all combina¬
tions of constants and physical laws would
be possible. Most would be infertile but, by
chance, our universe has found the winning
combination and we are the big prize. In
this hypothesis, we are the result of a lucky
throw of dice.
Also, with quantum mechanics, a first
cause is not necessary. In the microscopic
world of elementary particles, causal rela¬
tionships do not even exist. At any
moment, phantom particles can arise sud¬
denly and unexpectedly from an energy-
filled void. It is impossible to predict where
and when they will appear. Some physicists
think that what is true for one elementary
particle is also true for the entire universe
at its beginning. At 1043 second after the
Big Bang, the universe measuring 10~33
centimetre was 10 million billion billion
times smaller than an atom. It is quantum
uncertainty that made it possible for time,
space, and then the universe to arise spon¬
taneously from the void.
Science cannot decide between this
notion of chance on one hand and necessity
on the other which the anthropic principle
expresses. As for me in this instance I
speak more as a man of faith than of sci¬
ence I opt for the second hypothesis: to
assume that there is an infinite number of
parallel universes inaccessible to observa¬
tion and hence to experimental verifica¬
tion goes against the simplicity and
economy of natural laws. On the contrary,
what I find striking when I study the uni¬
verse is its unity, its intimate harmony;
this allows us, in our little corner of the
earth, to work out physical laws that can
explain phenomena occurring billions of
light years away and discover properties of
celestial bodies so far away that their light
had left before the atoms of our bodies
had even been made.
This same unity can be found in physics
itself, where one discovers links between
phenomena that, a priori, have nothing in
common. In the nineteenth century, James
Maxwell unified electricity and magnetism.
In the twentieth, Albert Einstein taught us
that time and space were one and the same
thing. At the moment, physicists are trying
to prove that the four basic forces of nature
are in fact only one single force.
From the harmony of the universe we
get a deep sense of beauty: not only because
it contains objects of incredible splendour,
but also because it is simple. Such varied
phenomena as the expansion of the uni¬
verse, the movement of the planets or the
form of a snowflake can all be explained by
the action of the four basic forces and by
that alone. Theories that describe the uni¬
verse have to be as simple, as beautiful as
that. I am convinced that beauty and truth
go together, and that an aesthetic sense can
nourish intuition and guide research. The
greatest physicists, such as Einstein or
Dirac, had an acute sense of the beauty of
their theories.
If the extremely precise workings of
the universe are not due to a series of
chance occurrences, then one has to assume
that there was a Creative Principle which
regulated it at the very beginning. As
Voltaire said: "The universe confounds
me, and I cannot believe that this clock
exists and has no clock-maker."
Will the research carried out by astro¬
physicists today using an extraordinary
wealth of resources ultimately lead to a
metaphysical quest?
It certainly responds to a very ancient
yearning that of the first human beings
who turned their gaze upwards to the sky.
My colleagues and I are the descendants of
those men, with greater resources and more
sophisticated instruments. But it is still the
same quest that leads us to ask questions
about our origins and the roots of life. By
making it possible for us to situate our¬
selves in the long history of cosmic evolu¬
tion, astronomy helps us to transcend the
weightiness of our bodies and the brevity
of our lives.
