A LONG LOOK AT THE WORLD'S ARID
3y Michel Bâtisse
34

LANDS Unesco's pioneering work in arid zone research,
begun over 40 years ago, was the starting
point for a continuing effort to mobilize science
in the cause of the global environment
UNE!; c o in ACTION
^^
H
UMANKIND has always encountered
aridity, and over the ages has learned how
to come to terms with it by using water
wisely. Until very recently, however, the indus¬
trialized world viewed arid regions as little more
than the impoverished habitat of a few nomads, or
as a place of adventure or meditation for those
wishing to follow in the footsteps of people like
Lawrence of Arabia and the French explorer and
missionary Father Charles de Foucauld. Scientific
knowledge of the desert was limited to geo¬
graphical descriptions. Only a handful of dreamers
wondered how these desolate areas could be used.
There was plenty of room elsewhere.
The situation changed after the Second
World War with the emergence of newly inde¬
pendent nations facing serious demographic
and food supply problems. In 1948, UNESCO's
General Conference in Beirut adopted a pro¬
posal put forward by India and considered
surprising by many at the time to the effect
that UNESCO should examine the possibility of
establishing an international institute for the
arid zone. The following year a group of experts
was invited to Paris to study the question. The
panel wisely ruled out the idea of a centralized
institute located far from most of the areas con¬
cerned, which are widely scattered across the
globe, and recommended instead that an inter¬
national advisory committee be established. The
new body's first session was held in Algiers in
April 1951. This was the origin of UNESCO's
Arid Zone Research Programme.
Few people today remember the achieve¬
ments of this programme. Leading scientists from
different countries and disciplines served on the
advisory committee, under whose guidance a
series of innovative activities was carried out for
a modest outlay during more than a decade.
The first task was to draw up a complex and
detailed map showing the world's arid zones
A salt caravan passes through
the Danakil Plain bordering the mountains of
northern Ethiopia.
35


and their degree of aridity. This map was based
on an innovative projection of the globe that



resembles the four quarters of an orange. It
became the programme's emblem, and appears
on some thirty documents in the "Arid Zone
Research Scries" published by UNESCO between
1953 and 1969. Today these books with their
sand-coloured covers are almost impossible to
find, but their contents have lost none of their
validity and they may be the most important
An oasis in the Draa valley
in southern Morocco.
legacy of UNESCO's activities in this period.
They examine subjects such as hydrology, cli¬
matology, plant ecology, solar and wind energy,
nomads, and human psychology and physi¬
ology. One of them is devoted to the first world
symposium on climate change a topic very
much in the news today which was held in
Rome in 1961. Another contains a "History of
Land Use in Arid Regions", which describes
the long struggle for survival in these hostile

environments in Egypt, Mesopotamia, central
Asia, Peru, Mexico and on the Indus.



The first steps
UNESCO did more than publish reviews of
research and promote the exchange of infor¬
mation. It also encouraged scientific research
in the field and trained hundreds of specialists.
Above all, in 1957 it upgraded what had hitherto
been one programme among many to the rank
of a "Major Project" with additional funding.
This new status helped to raise the profile of
activities that were already under way as well as
spurring interdisciplinary research and the cre¬
ation of national centres to promote the devel¬
opment of arid regions. The Indian Arid Zone
Research Institute in Jodhpur and Israel's Negev
Desert Institute in Beersheba were established
under the auspices of UNESCO, which also lent
support to other bodies, such as the Egyptian
Desert Institute in Cairo.
The Major Project on arid lands paved the
way for technical co-operation between the
industrialized countries of the North and the
impoverished nations of the South today a
firmly established practice and laid the ground¬
work for a horizontal exchange of skills and
experience between the latter. At the same time
it demonstrated what could be gained from
establishing a more direct dialogue between sci¬
entists and resource managers. This is still
important today for determining to what extent
research findings are applicable and are actu¬
ally applied in the field.
It is one thing to make theoretical studies
based on a wide range of disciplines; imple¬
mentation of their findings is another since it is
confronted with social, economic and political
factors at the local and national levels and
even at the international level through the inter¬
play of world market forces and strategic inter¬
ests. The Major Project showed that the conve¬
nient expression "arid zone" covers a very wide
range of different situations. It taught us that
what might be valid for one place is not neces¬
sarily so for another.
UNESCO's analysis of the factors that con¬
tribute to aridity led to the preparation of a new
world map that was published on the occasion
of the United Nations Conference on Deserti¬
fication held in Nairobi in 1977. It revealed the
whole range of climatic conditions involved,
from the extreme aridity of sandy or rocky
deserts to the many so-called semi-arid or sub-
humid regions, in which farming and grazing
activities are practicable, while entailing more or
Nomads gather at a well in
the Rigestan desert in
southern Afghanistan.
y
*
' \ 4 v.
,-,
---*** TV'
- -w

In the Agades region of
central Niger, Tuareg dig
an irrigation channel after
giving up nomadism
following a drought.
less severe risks of degradation. Furthermore, the
fact that the same physical and biological con¬
ditions obtain in a number of areas does not
necessarily mean that these areas share the same
economic, social and cultural environment; nor
are the same solutions necessarily applicable to
all areas with a given degree of aridity.
One example among thousands may serve to
illustrate this problem. One of the goals of the
arid zone programme was to find out the max¬
imum level of salinity in water that could be
used for irrigation. A study project was devel¬
oped for Tunisia and presented for financing to
the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP). The first reaction, based on expert
advice, was totally negative. The reason given
was that the water in question contained more
than one gram of salt per litre and that research
by a laboratory in California generally accepted
as an authority in this field had shown that
water with such a high degree of salinity could
not reasonably be used for irrigation. The
problem was that this was the only water avail¬
able in Tunisia, and that farmers there had been
using it to grow crops for some 2,000 years!
The project was eventually approved. It turned
out successfully and has served as a model for
several Arab countries.
Asset or burden?
Most arid zones are areas where economic
activity is negligible. Their sunny skies and open
spaces are advantages in countries with other
assets, such as the United States and Australia.
They are ideal for geological research because of
their lack of vegetation. They may also contain
large deposits of minerals and other natural
resources, as in the case of the oil-rich countries



of the Middle East, which are wealthy enough to
subsidize irrigation, deplete their fossil aquifers
and run energy-intensive sea-water desaliniza-
tion plants. For countries like India, Kenya and
38
Brazil, however, arid zones are an additional
burden to their considerable economic and
demographic problems. Other countries, such as
Mauritania and Somalia, have nothing but arid
land to live on.
It is not surprising, therefore, that research
findings are not always applied or that countries
affected by desertification such as those of the
African Sahel, whose plight shocked the world,
are not inclined to attach priority to their
drought-stricken areas. Most of these countries
would rather channel their investments to more
productive land, unless there are sound political
or strategic reasons to do otherwise.
And yet remedies for desertification caused by
population pressure and overgrazing are far from
unknown. They consist of sustainable manage¬
ment of marginal ecosystems, appropriate eco¬
nomic and social development, and more efficient
use of human resources. The lessons of UNESCO's
work, underscored by the United Nations Con¬
ference on Desertification, show that the tech¬
nology exists to maintain agricultural output and
raise living standards, and consequently keep
populations from migrating. The necessary water
and soils can be found, even in the vast Sahel.
However, this presupposes a rapid transition
from a low level of education and technical skill
to the ability to practise modern forms of irriga¬
tion and grazing. It takes time to turn traditional
nomads into efficient farmers, and such a transi¬
tion calls for massive institutional, technical and
financial backing. In a sense, the development
of arid zones raises a problem that is found in all
countries, even the richest: how to use the least
productive areas and how to develop an inte¬
grated land use strategy.
Science to serve the environment
Given these conditions, it is not surprising that
UNESCO's work on arid zones, begun over four
decades ago, is still far from over. The Major
Project was only the start of a long, far-reaching
United Nations effort to use science in the ser¬
vice of the environment and development. The
problem of aridity poses the problem of water
resources, which led UNESCO to launch a new
research programme, in this case based on inter¬
governmental co-operation, into the cycles,
amount and quality of the world's fresh water.
This was the International Hydrological Decade,
in which more than a hundred countries took
part between 1965 and 1974. It was followed in
its turn by the International Hydrological Pro¬
gramme, which still goes on today.
One important step forward made by the
Major Project was to reveal the complexity of
the interactions between natural phenomena

IM
An aerial view of the
Egyptian coast at the
mouth of the Gulf of Suez.
and human activities and to show the need for an
interdisciplinary strategy to understand and
control these interactions. In 1968 an intergov¬
ernmental conference on the "scientific basis
for rational use and conservation of the resources



of the biosphere" was held in Paris. This meeting
was an extension of the arid zone programme
and took account of its experience and the net¬
work of contacts it had created. It focused on all
the world's ecosystems, not just arid zones.
After all, the problems that are emerging every¬
where today are caused by the same conflict
between the functioning of nature and the pres¬
sure of human activity.
It was the biosphere conference, held twenty-
five years ago, that launched the idea that the
use and the conservation of nature should be
reconciled, in other words the notion of "sus¬
tainable development" which was solemnly
adopted by the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development (UNCED) held
in Rio de Janeiro last year. It also called for the
launching of a new worldwide research pro¬
gramme on "Man and the Biosphere" the MAB
programme which is still the main instrument
at the disposal of UNESCO and its member states
for proposing scientifically acceptable solutions
to the problems posed by the use of land and its
resources by the human race, whose numbers
and appetites continue to increase.
MICHEL BATISSE, French
physicist and engineer, is a
.former Assistant Director-
General with UNESCO's Science
Sector. He was the co¬
ordinator of UNESCO's Major
Project on arid lands. 39
