ACHIEVEMENTS, EXPECTATIONS
AND CHALLENOES
by Albert Sasson and Edgar J, DaSilva
HE world of biotechnology is vast and
varied. Some idea of just how varied can
be gauged from a report published by
the Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD), which defined
biotechnology as "the application of scientific
and engineering principles to the processing of
materials by biological agents to provide goods
and services". The "biological agents" referred to
are mainly micro-organisms, animal and plant
cells, and enzymes. The "goods and services"
include the products of the agriculture, fishery,
food processing and pharmaceutical industries.
The scientific basis of biotechnology is mul-
tidisciplinary, and the core disciplines include
molecular and cell biology, biochemistry, genetics,
microbiology, immunology, chemical and process
engineering, computing and data processing. So
many fields of activity are involved that it is per¬
haps more appropriate to talk of "biotechnolo
gies" in the plural rather than the singular. These
technologies may be simple or sophisticated,
cheap or expensive. They range from time-hon¬
oured processes such as fermentation, to genetic
engineering, the ability to take hereditary char¬
acters from one organism and transplant them
into another, thus creating "transgenic" plants and
animals with desired characteristics.
Genetic engineering is a powerful tool that
holds vast promise for medicine and agriculture,
where basic research has advanced so far since the
mid-1970s that there has been much talk of a
"biotcchnological revolution". However, it raises
many sensitive ethical and legal questions, as well
as questions relating to safety and public atti¬
tudes.
During the 1980s, biotechnologies in the
industrialized countries progressed on many
fronts. In North America, research led to the
discovery and manufacture of the first commer-
Advances in
biotechnology
are
transforming
social
and economic
structures
Monoculture
the cultivation of large
tracts of land to produce
a single variety of crop
which is harvested all
at once is a typical
feature of modern large-
scale agriculture. It has
a number of disadvantages
including low resistance
to pests, the use of large
amounts of chemical
fertilizers and pesticides,
and consequent risks
of groundwater pollution.
Below, a wheat field
in Canada.

I hese scientists at the
Botanical Conservatory at
Porquerolles (France) have
propagated in vitro date
palm plantlets resistant to
"Bayoud", an incurable
disease which threatens
the palm groves of North
Africa and, eventually,
elsewhere.
12
ALBERT SASSON is
Director of Unesco's Bureau
of Studies, Programming and
Evaluation. He has written
numerous works on biology,
microbiology and
biotechnology, including
Biotechnologies: Challenges and
Promises (UNESCO, 1984),
Biotechnologies and Development
(UNESCO/CTA, 1988) and
Biotechnologies in Developing
Countries: Present and Future.
Volume I : Regional and National
Survey (UNESCO, 1993).
cial biotechnology-derived products such as
insulin, human growth hormone and tissue plas¬
minogen activator. The most recent such product
was the antihaemophiliac factor VIII, produced
by an American firm for the treatment of
haemophilia A. Also in pharmaceutics, new devel¬
opments in molecular biology made it possible to
produce vaccines using yeasts and animal cells.
Attempts were made to increase the rate of
growth of farm animals by injecting growth hor¬
mones produced via genetic engineering. So far
there are no transgenic animals on the market, but
transgenic animals such as mice are being used in
the laboratory as human disease models. Some of
these recent and possible future developments are
shown in the box on page 14 and others are
described elsewhere in this issue.
However, a "knowledge revolution" does
not necessarily lead immediately to a revolution
in practice. It has, for example, been estimated that
it may take twenty or thirty years before the
impact of recent biotechnological discoveries in
plant and animal breeding and in food production
is truly felt.
Consumer interests and biosafety
In the public mind biotechnologies are often
identified exclusively with genetic engineering
or with human reproduction technologies rather
than with industrial microbiology, biochemical
engineering or fermentation, or associated with
food safety or public health concerns.
Governments and industry are increasingly
aware that there is a need to inform the public
better about the new biotechnologies, that the
participation of both experts and non-special¬
ists is required to assess the objectivity of infor¬
mation, and that public confidence in regulation
effectiveness must be significantly improved.
France is one European country that has
established a mechanism, in the form of a Com¬
mittee on Biomolecular Engineering, to control
the risks associated with the production and
release of genetically-engineered crop species or
domestic animals. According to the Committee,
1993-1994 would be a crucial period when
numerous projects concerning transgenic plants
implemented over several years were close to the
homologation phase prior to marketing. Most of
the requests for trials examined by the Com¬
mittee concerned plants that had been engineered
for resistance to herbicides, insect pests or specific
diseases, or were designed to provide improved
nutritious quality. A similar situation existed in
other industrialized countries.
In the United States, the government was
asked by the Environmental Defence Fund and
several other groups to create new, or modify
existing, regulatory structures for biotechnologies
through legislation. However, the U.S. govern¬
ment's "Report on National Biotechnology
Policy" found that the risks posed by bio-engi¬
neered organisms should not be exaggerated and
stated that "products developed through biotech¬
nology do notper se pose risks to human health
and the environment." On 26 May 1992, the U.S.
administration announced that genetically mod¬
ified foodstuffs would not need special autho¬
rization or labels before being marketed, because
they do not pose specific biosafety problems.
This decision, which was criticized by several
consumer and environmentalist groups, ended a
ten-year period of uncertainty for the industri¬
alists concerning the regulations on the use of
biotechnologies in the agro-food sector.
Economic effects
Biotechnologies are expected to make a significant
impact on agricultural production. Market bal¬
ances published for the United States and Europe
suggest that they could increase productivity by
decreasing costs per unit of output (e.g. fewer
chemical inputs) or by increasing yields per unit
of output. Forecasts made in the early 1990s
mentioned possible milk production increases
of from 10 per cent to 16 per cent within a five-
to-ten-year period, if bovine growth hormone
were to be used. (Its utilization was approved by
the Food and Drug Administration in November
1993.)
Biotechologies are expected to contribute to
long-term trends towards the reduction of the
share of agriculture in total employment, but job
loss may be partly offset by job creation in related
sectors, particularly the food-related services.
Still, the dissemination of agricultural and food
technologies in the OECD countries is expected
to be a gradual process in the next decade, without
major, destabilizing impacts on the social struc¬
ture of employment.
During the 1980s biotechnologies were estab¬
lished in developing countries with varying
degrees of priority and sophistication, a process
illustrating not only the contrasting economic

and scientific development conditions of these
countries, but also the various possibilities for
applying biotechnologies at levels of investment
and complexity suitable for each specific situation.
Biotechnologies
and developing countries
Everyone agrees that developing countries need
to move up the gradient of biotechnologies, from
the low-cost ones to the more sophisticated and
expensive ones. The more richly endowed
national systems are already well on the way,
and even the smallest and poorest need to think
about developing and using modern biotech¬
nologies. For instance, a country where crop
species provide the staple food could profitably
invest in a tissue culture laboratory, at a capital
cost of about $20,000. This would enable it to
import, as tissue cultures, virus- or disease-free
clones developed in research stations abroad,
and to multiply them rapidly, if they proved
adaptable to local conditions and acceptable to
producers and consumers.
The significance of biotechnologies for the
Third World is illustrated by the example of
Asian agriculture. In the early 1990s, Asia has
more than 50 per cent of the global population,
over 70 per cent of the world's farming families,
but only 25 per cent of the world's arable land. At
the beginning of the twenty-first century, the
per capita land availability may be 0.1 hectare in
China and 0.14 hectare in India. Meanwhile, the
average Asian population growth rate is 1.86 per
cent. The only way for countries like China and
India to feed their growing populations is through
continuous improvement in yields. China has
gone into large-scale exploitation of rice hybrids
for this purpose.
There has been an almost three-fold expansion
in the world's irrigated land since 1950, much of
it in the developing countries. Scope for further
r\ biochemical engineer in
the United States carries
out a computer-controlled
process for the
development of a malaria
vaccine using genetic
engineering.
In this water purification
facility at Narragansett,
Rhode Island (U.S.A.),
waste water is purified
naturally though
processing in tanks by
minerals, bacteria, fungi
and algae (foreground),
and then by certain species
of molluscs, fish and large
aquatic plants
(background).
expansion is being gradually reduced and conse¬
quently improved water management and the
incorporation of genes for drought tolerance
into major crop species are now urgent necessi¬
ties.
As we have seen, however, more than excel¬
lent research is needed before biotechnologies
can achieve commercial success. The latter
depends on factors related to "social capability",
which includes facilities for the diffusion of
knowledge and conditions facilitating structural
change. Today scientists and political leaders in
developing countries are concerned about a
number of aspects of current global trends in
biotechnological research and development. Some
of the questions they are asking themselves are:
"S" Will the "biotechnology revolution" help
resource-poor farmers increase productivity?
^ Will genetic engineering research directed
at finding substitutes for national products not
have adverse impacts on the farming sector and
the export products of their countries ? Such fears
are based, for example, on the possible use of
natural or synthetic sweeteners as substitutes for
cane or beet sugar, as well as the development of
substitutes for vanilla flavouring, cocoa butter and
diosgenin.
Will products produced by genetic engi¬
neering be safe? Will developing countries be
used as testing grounds for genetically modified
organisms, as a way of avoiding the stringent
regulations prevailing in the industrialized coun¬
tries?
ts" What will be the impact of the extension of
intellectual property rights to individual genes and
genotypes on the availability of such improved
material to developing countries and resource-
poor farmers? Will intellectual property rights be
exclusively reserved for rewarding formal inno¬
vation, even though the informal innovation
system has played, and is playing, a key role in the
identification and conservation of plant and
animal and genetic resources?
13

Will it be possible to balance the market-
driven features of biotechnology research by
concern for the long-term well-being of
humankind, poor as well as rich? Research on
staple food crop species in the developing coun¬
tries needs to be supported internationally, for
the sake of global, human sustainable devel¬
opment conducted in a spirit of solidarity. The
same international effort is required to find
cures for diseases prevailing in the Third World.
No panacea
The perfecting of conventional biotechnologies
and the expansion of more advanced biotech¬
nologies as a result of further discoveries in
cell and molecular biology are leading to far-
reaching economic and social change because of
their applications in agriculture and food pro¬
duction, the cure and prevention of disease,
the meeting of energy needs, and environ¬
mental protection. The spectacular progress
of biotechnologies is full of promise for
humankind.
However, these advances should not be
seen as a panacea. They are not intended to
substitute, but to complement, the wide range
of technologies used in the various areas of
social and economic development. For instance,
plant biotechnologies, including genetic trans¬
formation of crop species and varieties, are
complementary to conventional crop breeding
and selection of cultivars.
The value of biotechnologies is that they can
be applied at different levels of complexity,
investment and effort in the production of
food crops, livestock husbandry, chemical and
pharmaceutical industries, the conversion of
biomass into fuel, the transformation of agri¬
cultural and industrial by-products and pollu¬
tion abatement. Developing countries are now
taking advantage of these characteristics. This
trend will continue.
r\ cell culture laboratory
in Egypt.
EDGAR j. DASILVA, a
microbiologist and former
vice-president of the World
Federation of Culture
Collections (VVFCC), is
responsible for the life sciences
in UNESCO's Basic Sciences
Division. He has been largely
responsible for the preparation
and implementation of the
MIRCENs (Microbiological
Resources Centres)
programme.
IS
