anniversary
José Carlos MarIÁTEGUI (1894-1930)
José Carlos Mariátegui, a wood engraving by the
Mexican artist Alberto Beltran.
Peruvians called him and still do
the Amauta, the Quechua lan¬
guage word for "master". In his
lifetime, and after his untimely death at the
age of thirty-five, he was regarded as a
master not only in Peru but in many other
parts of Latin America, and today, more
than sixty years after his death, the influ¬
ence of his life and work can still be felt
thanks to the publication ofseveral dozen
of his books, his letters and much of his
journalism.
José Carlos Mariátegui was born in 1894
and died in 1930. His short life, in the last
few years of which he was confined to a
wheelchair and suffered the amputation of
a leg, was remarkable for its richness and
creativity. As one of his biographers has
observed, his considerable output ofwork
is "a triumph of intelligence over pain and
an unceasing battle of the will to domi¬
nate a precarious destiny".
He stood apart from the Peruvian and
Latin American intellectual landscape in
the early part of the century. This land¬
scape, which his tragic life and the pow¬
erful influence of his activities were to
. 0 transform, was then dominated by the
Ho modernist movement in literature and by
Witness to an age
the early working-class and student strug¬
gles. A frail young man from a poor provin¬
cial family, he became an apprentice
printer on the Lima daily, La Prensa, in
1909, and while still an adolescent con¬
tributed light pieces to the paper under
the pen name Juan Chronicler. He soon
founded and ran an opposition paper, La
Razón, an act that forced him to leave for
Europe where he spent three years and, as
he said later, "got married and espoused
the ideas I would later defend". Right to the
end ofhis life he was publisher and editor
of the cultural and literary journalAmauta,
which had a crucial influence on Peru's
intellectual development.
Mariátegui showed remarkable insight
as a witness and analyst of the spiritual
and material crisis of his time and as a
polemicist and popularizer ofcontempo¬
rary ideas, from surrealism and avant-
garde literature (including the work of
Joyce) to socialism (starting with Marx,
although he also grasped the importance
of Gramsci with astonishing intuition and
was a lucid interpreter of Sorel and Croce)
and psychoanalysis. One ofhis many note¬
worthy accomplishments was to discover
and explore the affinity between Freudi¬
anism and Marxism.
The development of a theory ofmyth as
a driving force in modern man's behav¬
iour and a clear-sighted analysis of the
spell cast on the European masses by their
demagogical and populist leaders were
important features of Mariátegui's work
in the 1920s, when he also organized a
trade union and the first Peruvian Marxist
party, which he called "socialist" rather
than "communist". He became swept up in
the turmoil of the times, was condemned
by the Communist International and then
virtually excommunicated from the move¬
ment. The perspicacity of his social
thinking was matched by the indepen¬
dence ofhis political activities and he suf¬
fered the consequences.
It was in the columns of Amauta that
the distinctive nature of Peru and of Latin
America in general was discussed for the
first time in a universal context. Mariátegui
byAlfredo Pita
took part in the debate on the indigenous
Americans a first attempt to understand
in depth and from the inside the cultural
schism that prevented Peru from being a
nation. But when the problems of educa¬
tion and agricultural production in Russia
became headline news, for example, he
turned his attention to them and also
wrote of Jean Jaurès and Rolland, of Bar¬
busse and Valéry, ofPirandello and Trotsky.
Although confined to a wheelchair, the
master continued to work indefatigably,
and welcomed a wide circle of people to
his home in Lima students, workers and
trade unionists, poets such as Martín Adán
and José Maria Eguren, and intellectuals
like the liberal American writer and
thinker, Waldo Franck.
In 1927 the Peruvian government
banned Amauta and Labor, another
journal Mariátegui had founded in support
of the working class, and he thought of
going into exile again. "I prefer exile," he
wrote, "to resigning myself to silence.
Without Amauta and Labor, without a
platform from which to express myself, I
shan't be able to resist my overwhelming
need to breathe the air of a free land."
Amauta reappeared, however, and its
editor stayed. He then published the
extremely influential Seven Interpretative
Essays on Peruvian Reality.
His death brought an end to an
inspiring and many-sided career and
sounded the death knell for Amauta, a
very great loss for Latin American letters.
From 1923 to 1930 Mariátegui had written
in Amauta of revolution and the crisis of
socialism, of the links between revolution
and intellectuals, of the processes of Fas¬
cism, the awakening ofthe Orient and the
rise ofanti-Semitism. What other themes
might he have tackled ifhe had lived ten or
twenty years longer?
ALFREDO PITA
¡s a Peruvian journalist who is presently working with
Agence France-Presse in Paris. He has published
several collections of poems and short stories, and
a novel, El cazador ausente (1994; "The Absent
Hunter").
