T T anniversary XX
nermann von îlelmholtz
Physiologist and physicist
38
TheGerman philosopher and scientist Hermann
von Helmholtz was born in Potsdam in 1821,
the eldest son ofa secondary school teacher. He
is remembered for his statement of the law of the
conservation of energy, which holds that the amount
of energy in the universe is always the same, and for
his major contributions to optics, physiology, elec¬
trodynamics and other branches of science.
<. Helmholtz showed a keen interest in nature from
an early age, and became consumed by a passion "for
discovering the causal relationship between natural
phenomena". At that time, however, physics offered
few career prospects, and since his father could not
afford to pay for him to study the subject, he opted for
medicine instead. He enlisted in the Prussian army as
a doctor, in exchange for which he received a medical
education in Berlin virtually free of charge.
Looking back as a man of seventy on his early
years, Helmholtz said: "Young people like to come to
grips with the most intractable problems from the
very beginning. I therefore turned my attention to the
enigmatic nature of the vital force". The problem
continued to intrigue him after he had taken up his
duties as an army doctor, and he started to examine
its implications for nature as a whole, not just for
living beings. The question he asked was: "What sort
of relationship must exist between the different forces
in nature if perpetual motion cannot provide an
explanation covering every eventuality?" (The pos¬
sibility of a perpetual motion machine had been
rejected by scientists in the late eighteenth century).
In his study of the conservation of energy, he
drew on his knowledge of mathematics, and in 1847
delivered an epoch-making paper on the subject to
the newly founded Berlin Physical Society. As a
"callow" young doctor, he had half-expected his find¬
ings to be received with amused tolerance by the
eminent physicists in the audience, only to discover
to his astonishment that they were determined to
"dispute the truth of the law and, in their diatribe
against Hegel's natural philosophy, to look upon my
own work as likewise being the rambling of an undis¬
ciplined mind". Fortunately, friends of his own age
present at the meeting thought differently and
greeted him with wild applause. His paper has been
described as "one of the first, and certainly the
clearest, statements of the principle of the conser¬
vation of energy." A few years later the theory of the
conservation of energy had become the most widely
accepted tenet of physics.
Thanks to his growing scientific reputation,
Helmholtz was released from his military obliga¬
tions and in 1848 went on to teach anatomy at the
Berlin Academy ofFine Arts. In 1850, he was made an
assistant professor of physiology at the University
of Königsberg. Subsequently, after a brief interlude at
the University ofBonn, in 1858 he became head of the
Institute ofPhysiology specially created for him at the
University of Heidelberg.
Although he was unable to devote all his time to
physics, his main interest, he made a virtue out of
by Reinald Schröder
necessity by applying physics to the study ofhuman
beings, thereby providing a modern basis for physi¬
ology as a natural science. This approach proved to be
particularly fruitful in the study of sensory organs in
which physical stimuli are converted into physiolog¬
ical signals.
While preparing his first lecture at Königsberg
Helmholtz hit on the idea of the ophthalmoscope, the
scientific accomplishment which brought him the
greatest fame. It was known that cats' eyes shine at
night because of the light reflected from the retina.
Helmholtz therefore designed an instrument which, by
focusing light on the retina, made it possible to examine
the eye through a magnifying lens. As a result of this dis¬
covery, a number of illnesses could be studied for the
first time through direct observation of the eye.
Helmholtz's theories ofcolour vision and musical
harmony were also instrumental in relating physics to
physiology and were to have far-reaching conse¬
quences for our knowledge of the mechanisms of
hearing and vision.
Despite these great successes in his specialized
field, Helmholtz wrote to his friend Emil Du Bois-
Reymond that "he had lost interest in physiology and
was only really interested in mathematical physics".
When Germany's most prestigious chair of physics
at the University ofBerlin became vacant, as Du Bois-
Reymond later put it, "the unthinkable happened: a
medical doctor and professor of physiology was
appointed".
The Berlin post was admirably suited to
Helmholtz's talents and temperament. From 1885
onwards, however, he began to suffer from poor
health. He was gratified to be appointed Chairman of
the new Imperial Institute of Physical Technology
responsible for supervising Germany's system of
weights and measures, a post which enabled him to
devote much ofhis energy to scientific research. Active
to the end, he died on 8 September 1894 of a brain
haemorrhage.
Hermann von Helmholtz
(1821-1894)
REINALD SCHRÖDER
is a German journalist and
publisher specializing in the
history of science and
technology. He is the author of a
number of books, including a
study of the industrialization of
the German printing industry in
the 19th century, published in
1993.
