The Tunis
Declaration
Regional Meeting for
Africa
The Ministers and representatives of the
African States meeting at Tunis from 2 to 6
November 1992, in the context of prepa¬
rations for the World Conference on
Human Rights, and pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 46/116 of 17
December 1991... adopt the present dec¬
laration, to be known as the Tunis Decla¬
ration, which reflects both their convic¬
tions and their expectations:
1 . The African States reaffirm their com¬
mitment to the principles set forth in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the Interna¬
tional Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the African Charter on Human
and People's Rights.
2. The universal nature of human rights is
beyond question; their protection and
promotion are the duty of all States,
regardless of their political, economic or
cultural systems.
3. The proper administration of justice
and an independent judiciary are crucial to
the full realization of human rights. The
attainment of these objectives is, however,
impossible without substantial investment
in the area of the administration of jus¬
tice. The African States and the interna¬
tional community are, therefore, called
upon to allocate more resources to this
area.
4. Responsibility for the implementation
and promotion of human rights devolves
primarily on Governments. The compo¬
nent institutions, organizations and struc¬
tures of society also play an important
role in safeguarding and disseminating
these rights; they should therefore be
strengthened and encouraged.
5. The observance and promotion of
human rights are undeniably a global con¬
cern and an objective to the realization of
which all States, without exception, are
called upon to contribute. However, no
ready-made model can be prescribed at
the universal level since the historical and
cultural realities of each nation and the
traditions, standards and values of each
people cannot be disregarded.
6. The principle of the indivisibility of
human rights is sacrosanct. Civil and polit¬
ical rights cannot be dissociated from eco¬
nomic, social and cultural rights. None of
these rights takes precedence over the
others.
7. Political freedom when not accompa¬
nied by respect for economic, social and
cultural rights is precarious. The right to
development is inalienable. Human rights,
development and international peace are
interdependent.
8. Lasting progress towards the imple¬
mentation of human rights implies, at the
national level, effective development poli¬
cies and, at the international level, more
equitable economic relations, as well as a
favourable economic environment.
9. Racism, particularly its new forms,
extremism and fanaticism, whether of reli¬
gious or other origin, pose a serious threat
to the protection and promotion of uni¬
versal human rights values. Governments,
individuals, groups, institutions and non¬
governmental organizations are called
upon to apply their efforts, take the nec¬
essary steps and co-operate in dealing with
this threat.
10. Africa, which has chosen the path of
democracy, economic reform and the pro¬
motion of human rights, in an
unfavourable economic environment, and
which finds itself particularly exposed to
internal tensions deriving from the failure
to meet the basic needs of populations and
from the rise of extremism, will neverthe¬
less remain committed to its choices and its
responsibilities, and calls upon the inter¬
national community to do likewise, in par¬
ticular through an intensification of inter¬
national solidarity, an adequate increase
in development assistance and an appro¬
priate settlement of the debt problem.
11. Africa, which remains committed to
respect for individual human rights, also
takes this opportunity to reaffirm the
importance that it attaches to respect for
the collective rights of peoples, particu¬
larly the right to determine their own
future and to control their own resources.
Accordingly, it condemns the persistence
of apartheid in South Africa and the gross
and systematic violations of human rights
due to foreign occupation, particularly in
Palestine and in the other occupied Arab
territories, including Jerusalem, the armed
conflicts in Somalia and the policy of ethnic
cleansing in Bosnia and Hcrcegovina, and
reaffirms the right of all peoples to self-
determination and free choice of their
political and economic systems and insti-

tutions, on the basis of respect for national
sovereignty and non-interference in the
internal affairs of States. B

