COMMEN TARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND
OUALITY OF LIFE
Fl HE World Summit for Social Development that will be
I held in Copenhagen early next year will be an opportu¬
nity for the international community to search for a new
approach to a very wide range of questions of fundamental
importance to all of us. These questions include the nature
of work and the concept of "active life" (including leisure),
mechanisms for the transfer of knowledge, systems for pro¬
viding assistance to developing countries, trade relation¬
ships, the form of higher education, and many others.
Development efforts in the past have given priority to
economic growth, but they have been unable to prevent
widespread poverty and provide full employment. Among
their consequences have been the marginalization and exclu¬
sion of large sections of the population, the acceleration of
the rural exodus, the deterioration of the urban habitat, the
ghettoization of the suburbs and the degradation of the nat¬
ural environment. Meanwhile, structural adjustment policies
have severely affected social sectors such as education and
health and in some countries have even compromised the
prospects for economic recovery. A world-wide "social
adjustment" must now be achieved.
Economic growth should serve the cause of social devel¬
opment and respect the environment. Machines should
replace people only to do work that cannot really be done
efficiently by men and women. Otherwise, there will be a
huge social price to be paid in terms of unemployment,
extremism and violence.
I believe that action to promote social development
should be taken on six major fronts:
1. Endogenous capacity building in each country.
*" Education and training should be given the highest pri¬
ority and investment in education should be increased so that
socially distant and geographically remote populations can
have access to knowledge. Intensive training courses should
be permanently available without regard to age or level of pre¬
vious studies.
' Education and empowerment of girls and women are key
factors in curbing population growth, promoting gender
equity and in developing the full potential of women.
*" A new role for higher education should be found in all
countries, incorporating lifelong higher-learning facilities.
*" Continuing efforts should be made to promote the
transfer and sharing of knowledge, particular in science and
technology.
** Development should be based on the will of each society
and should express its fundamental identity. Cultural factors
should be an integral part of all strategies designed to achieve
balanced development.
2. Promoting the development of rural areas. The problem
of emigration from rural areas should be tackled at its roots,
particularly through education, through promoting crafts¬
manship and cultural tourism, encouraging the develop¬
ment of indigenous cultures, ensuring that everyone has
access to shelter, and decentralizing education and social
services at municipal level.
3. Combatting marginalization and exclusion and pro¬
motingparticipation in community life. This is a key indi¬
cator of social development respect for human rights and
the forming of democratic attitudes must be promoted from
early childhood. Tolerance and non-violence should be
encouraged by all possible means, as should intercultural dia¬
logue and press freedom.
4. Protecting and safeguarding the environment. As a follow-
up to Agenda 21, the action plan adopted at the Rio Summit
in 1992, efforts should be redoubled to promote environ¬
mental awareness. One extremely important goal is to reduce
the impact of natural hazards (especially recurrent ones).
Research and training on the relationship between Man and
Nature in different parts of the world should be carried out
in an interdisciplinary framework.
5. Improving communication. To foster awareness and to
promote social integration, communication must be
improved world-wide through the use of new communica¬
tion and information technologies. Countries should draw
up overall information policies in these fields.
6. Establishing "observatories" and "early warning systems"
that will be able to detect potential social conflicts and unrest
and will be of great importance for monitoring implemen¬
tation of the work of the World Summit. UNESCO has
recently launched a programme called MOST (Management
of Social Transformations) to respond to the growing demand
from developing countries and countries-in-transition for
assistance in building their capacities in social sciences and in
monitoring social change and transition.
We must indeed be vigilant to all aspects of social change
and seek imaginative ways of dealing with any threats that
may be posed. I am thinking, for example, of opportunities
to promote "eco-jobs" in the field of environmental pro¬
tection concerning water supply and quality, industrial gases,
the use of fertilizers and other artificial compounds, as well
as the development of small-scale rural food transforma¬
tion industries, cultural tourism, the protection of handicrafts
and cultural property.
Development must have a human face. Sustainable social
development is only possible by way of improvements in the
quality of life: better education, better health, respect for
human rights, democracy, the rational use of resources
through the application of advances in science and tech¬
nology, and a commitment to the culture of peace and inter¬
national solidarity.
