MARTIN Luther King, Jr., who was born
on 15 January 1929, would have been
seventy- five years old this year. He died, aged
less than forty, assassinated in Memphis, Ten¬
nessee, on 4 April 1968.
Anniversaries have a definite role to play in
the mental calendar. With each passing year,
events which have stamped a particular mark
on the history ofhumanity resurface from the
shadowy pool ofmemory. However, there is no
doubt that some of the events and public fig¬
ures recalled by a particular date speak to us
independently of such anniversaries, moving
through our daily lives and conditioning, in
some way, our present circumstances. They
are not waiting to pop out from the next page
of our diaries. They are ever present, chal¬
lenging us. Thus it is with the life and death of
Martin Luther King.
As is the case with a number of other
exceptional public figures, circumstances in
the closing years of this century are such that
the fate of this son of black America is again
becoming topical as a landmark and an inspi¬
ration. It is tempting to echo the words of
Albert Dürer who, four centuries earlier-
believing Martin Luther to have been killed fol¬
lowing the Diet of Wormswrote in his
journal on 17 May 1521: "0 Lord, would that
you might give us such another man as this!"
"Such another man" as Martin Luther King
would be a warrior ofnon-violence, one who
sought his weapons in Gandhi's armoury, to
wage war without sword, bullet or bomb.
During a voyage to India in February and
March 1959, on the invitation ofPandit Nehru,
Martin Luther King and his wife Coretta visited
New Delhi to add a wreath to the carpet of
flowers permanently adorning the sanctuary
where Mahatma Gandhi was cremated. "I may
travel to other countries as a tourist," he told
journalists, "but I travel to India as a pilgrim."
These were flowers ofgratitude to a man who
stood up against the staunch defenders of the
caste system in a sub-continent steeped in
almost unbearable poverty, a man who dared
to raise the Untouchables to the rank ofHar-
ijans (Children of God). Was this not precisely
the same cause as that to which Martin Luther
King strove to devote himself: ensuring that
the blacks of the United States should not be
considered as inferiors or even pariahs?
In New York, shortly before this journey,
while he was signing copies ofhis book Stride
Toward Freedom in a department store, a men¬
tally-deranged forty-five-year-old black
woman had struck Martin Luther King in the
chest with an ornamental paper-knife, grazing
his aorta. Had the victim so much as sneezed,
the aorta would have punctured, leading to
certain death. This was only one of numerous
attacks which dogged the career of this
remarkable pastor, whoin December 1955,
at the age of twenty-six, on hearing that
another black woman, Rosa Parks, had been
arrested in Montgomery, Alabama, for refusing
to give up her seat on a bus to a whitehad
decided to devote himself to freeing his com¬
munity from the scorn, derision and shame
which had been heaped upon it. Freedom
became his watchword and rallying call.
Surrounded by friends, all of whom
believed as he did that "the time for silence is
past, the time has come to speak out", he leapt
into the fray, armed by the memory of the
Martin Luther who, seeking to lead his com¬
panions out of the Babylonian Captivity (the
title of one of Luther's treatises), wrote these
words which must have been familiar to
Martin Luther King: "Would it not be against
Nature if, a fire being declared, each citizen
were to remain still and let the fire wreak its
havoc, solely because he is not Mayor of the
city?"
The violence endured by Martin Luther
King in thirteen years of campaigning
included both physical and moral attacks: he
was to be arrested several times, beaten,
imprisoned, prosecuted for "incitation to riot"
and fraud, accused of treason against America
by those who opposed his stance on the Bay
of Pigs operation in Cuba and the Viet Nam
war, and "to spice things up" Martin Luther
King's opponents circulated tapes made with
the use ofhidden microphones, even sending
to his wife tape-recordings of high-spirited
Martin Luther King in 1 966, two years before
he was assassinated in Memphis (Tennessee).
evenings spent while on tour in the southern
States.
He was to be spared no form of attack. But
nothing was able to break his resolve to build
a new America, the land of the famous
"dream" which he described on 28 August
1963 to a crowd of200,000 peopleblack and
whiteassembled in Washington D.C., and to
millions ofAmericans at home, sitting in front
of their radio and television sets. Martin Luther
King's words on that day will remain forever
etched in the memory of people in all cor¬
ners of the world: North, South, East and West.
Indeed, nothing could halt the war
declared by Martin Luther King in the name of
his fellow black Americans. He fought the
good fight to the end, stubbornly rejecting
violence, trusting in the civil disobedience he
had learned from Henri David Thoreau, who
had himself been influenced by the same
Hindu mystics who had nourished the sub¬
lime non-violence of Mahatma Gandhi, the
inspiration for Martin Luther King's approach
to his task. Nothing could stop him, until a
bullet fired from a rifle struck him down on the
evening of 4 April 1968, sounding the death-
knell of the man: "with the golden voice, melo¬
dious as the flutes of angels/ A voice of blazing
brass which rings out over Sodom and
Admah."*
* L.S. Senghor: Elegy for Martin Luther
King.
EDOUARD J. MAUNICK, Mauritian poet and
writer, former Director of the UNESCO
Collection of Representative Works, is at present
associate editor of the magazine Jeune Afrique. He
is the author of some fifteen works, including
Ensoleillé vif, which won the Prix Apollinaire in
1 977, Anthologies personnelles (Actes Sud, Paris,
1 984) and Paroles pour solder la mer (Gallimard,
Paris, 1989). 45
