A new departure by Alois Mock
38
ALOIS MOCK,
Austria's Minister of Foreign
Affairs and Chairperson of the
European Democratic Union,
was president of the World
Conference on Human Rights.
THE second World Conference on Human
Rights brought together all the parties con¬
cerned with the implementation of these
rights governments, United Nations agencies,
specialized and regional international bodies,
non-governmental organizations, national insti¬
tutions, parliamentarians, the media and pri¬
vate individuals.
The Conference was thus like a living mosaic,
reflecting the present situation of human rights
in the world: a lot of pieces need to be polished
and fined down and then put in their proper
places to form a meaningful whole. The Con¬
ference was likewise at pains to define, and often
to redefine and reaffirm, principles that have
existed for decades or even centuries. Some of
these principles may have given rise to contro¬
versy in the past; the Conference at last gave
them universal authority.
Guaranteeing all human beings fundamental
rights stemming from human nature is a long-
term undertaking that in the first place entails
reaching agreement among states. What is
needed is to establish the principles of human
rights first as political and then as legal obliga¬
tions, and finally to see to it that they are put into
practice.
The final document of the Conference, con¬
sisting of the Declaration and Programme of
Action"', paves the way for a dynamic develop¬
ment of the UN system to promote and protect
human rights in the following fields:
The universality ofhuman rights: the Dec¬
laration confirms that all human rights are uni¬
versal, indivisible and interdependent, even
emphasizing that the universal nature of these
rights and freedoms is beyond question. It was
clear from the preparatory proceedings, and
then from the discussions during the Confer¬
ence, that this principle needed restating.
Respect for human rights as a subject for
international discussion: the final document
stresses that the promotion and protection of all
human rights is a legitimate concern of the inter¬
national community. Raising questions about the
effective respect for these rights can thus no
longer be regarded as unwarranted interference
in the affairs of a state.

The relationship between democracy, devel¬
opment and human rights: the Conference
brought out clearly the interdependence
between respect for human rights, economic
and social development, and individuals' par¬
ticipation in public life.
Minority rights: the participating states rec¬
ognized the importance of the promotion and
protection of the rights of minorities to the
political and social stability of the states in which
they live, and accepted the obligation to ensure
that persons belonging to minorities may fully
and effectively exercise all human rights without
discrimination.
The position of women and vulnerable
groups: the final document attaches particular
importance to the rights of women and of various
vulnerable groups, including children, indige¬
nous people, migrant workers and the disabled.
It declares that the full and equal participation of
women in political, civil, economic, social and cul¬
tural life, at the national, regional and international
levels, and the eradication of all forms of gender-
based discrimination are priority objectives of the
international community.
It also reaffirms the commitment of the inter¬
national community to the economic, social
and cultural well-being of indigenous people,
and their enjoyment of the fruits of sustainable
development.
The Programme ofAction: unlike the first
World Conference, held at Tehran in 1968, the
declaration of the Vienna Conference is com¬
bined with a Programme of Action containing
guidelines for its implementation in future years.
The United Nations system is called upon
to take concrete measures for the practical appli¬
cation of the recommendations contained in the
final document. To this end the Conference asked
that the Geneva Centre for Human Rights be
strengthened and its financial resources and staff
be increased, and that existing machinery for
promoting and protecting human rights be made
more effective. The proposal that a post of High
Commissioner for Human Rights be created has
since been adopted by the General Assembly.
The realization of human rights is, however,
an undertaking that is far from complete. The dis¬
cussions at the Conference confirmed that the
modern world is in total disarray. Armed aggres¬
sion, flagrant and systematic violation of human
rights, and the denial of fundamental freedoms
continue in various parts of the world. As the
Nobel Peace prizewinners gathered at Vienna
emphasized during the Conference: "One of the
fundamental lessons of our time is that respect for
human rights is essential for peace. There can be
no real peace without justice, and any lasting
peace must be founded on universal devotion to
the human family. National interests must be
subordinated to international obligations	
"The only way of permanently settling the
conflicts still rife throughout the world is by
tackling the main causes of human rights viola¬
tions. Ethnic wars, growing militarism, racial,
religious, cultural and ideological hostility, and
the denial of social justice will come to an end if
all individuals are brought up, educated and
trained in a spirit of tolerance based on respect
for human rights in accordance with the various
instruments relating to human rights adopted by
the United Nations system." H * Sec extracts overleaf
I he Conference was like
a living mosaic. . . ."
Right and opposite page
above: details, at various
stages of preparation, of a
mosaic ( 1 99 1 ) by Slobodan
Bijeljac, an artist born in
Sarajevo.
T
t
