THE BIRTHRIGHT
OF HUMANITY
IN order to protect and implement human rights, we have a prac¬
tical task to perform, that of securing wider acceptance of the inter¬
national instruments adopted in this field by the United Nations,
the International Labour Organisation, UNESCO and other institu¬
tions, so that the whole of humanity is covered by them.
This practical, effective universality that we are striving to achieve
is the reflection and corollary of another kind of universality that
underpins it, the universality of the values enshrined in the Uni¬
versal Declaration of Human Rights, the landmark text whose forty-
fifth anniversary we celebrated in 1993. The universality of human
rights: the words say so much and yet so little. Are we fully aware of
the ethical truth summed up therein, that each and every human
being has the same rights? Do we truly understand that each individual
is both a unique being and the epitome of the species ? Do we recog¬
nize, in our way of life and behaviour, the implications of the fact that
human rights belong within the common heritage of humanity?
These rights are common to all because they belong to each and
every one of us, universal because they transcend cultural differences.
One may argue against their being uniformly applied to all cultures,
to the extent that such an objection is part of a larger struggle to resist
the creeping uniformity threatening to engulf the world. However,
the values in whose name these rights are invoked correspond to aspi¬
rations inherent in human nature and are therefore indeed universal.
These rights have a collective dimension, in the sense that they may
be claimed by individuals as members of a group, or when their
enjoyment presupposes a social framework. In this connection, on the
eve of the International Decade of the World's Indigenous People, the
voice of those people must be given a hearing, must be heeded, and
must bear its part in the democratic polyphony.
At the dawn of the third millennium, the concept of human
rights interactive, inseparable and indivisible has broadened to
encompass economic, social and cultural rights, civil and political
rights, the right to a healthy environment, the right to human and sus¬
tainable development, and even the rights of future generations. We
should welcome this continuing process of expansion, which is nec¬
essary for the full realization of these rights.
Federico Mayor
Director-General of Unesco
8
msmm&mm®
