INTERVIEW
NOËLLE
LENOIR
talks to
Bahgat Elnadi and Adel Rifaat
The first woman member of France's Constitutional
Council, Noëlle Lenoir has been president of Unesco's Inter¬
national Bioethics Committee since it was established in
September 1993. She also chairs the group of advisors on
the ethics of biotechnologies of the Commission of the
European Communities. A specialist in public law, she is
the author of a major report on bioethics, Aux frontières
de la vie (2 vols., 1991, La documentation française, Paris).
In what respects are advances in the life
sciences, and especially in genetics, impor¬
tant landmarks?
There are stages in the history of sci¬
ence when knowledge takes such great
steps forward that our understanding of the
world is completely transformed. The dis¬
coveries involving the human genome
belong to one of these stages.
By choosing the plants they gathered
and by influencing the diversification of
animal species to cater for their own needs,
human beings have always been involved
in genetics without realizing it.
The era of the life sciences really began
in the eighteenth century, when the idea of
the evolution of species emerged in what
might be called an intuitive manner,
through the work of Buffon1 in particular.
These insights were later borne out by the
observations made by Gregor Mendel2 in
the second half of the nineteenth century,
even though he did not have a clear grasp
of the idea of "genes" and never made
explicit reference to them.
It was not until the twentieth century,
however, that genetics as an independent
scientific discipline really came into its own.
Progress in the field has since been marked
by increasingly striking discoveries, such
as the unravelling of the double helix struc¬
ture of DNA by Francis Crick and James
Watson in 1953, the elucidation of the work¬
ings of messenger RNA by François Gros,
François Jacob and Jacques Monod in the
1 960s, the emergence of genetic engineering
techniques in the 1970s, and by the most
recent developments in physical and genetic
mapping.
These discoveries are revolutionary not
only for the history of science but also for
the history of humanity. For the first time,
human beings now have access to knowl¬
edge about their own life mechanisms
through genetics, neurobiology and embry¬
ology. Also for the first time, as a result of
genetic engineering, they can take steps to
alter the human genome. They could also
acquire the capability to transform their
own species.
This is what manypeople regard as the
mind-boggling side ofgenetics.
I think there are three reasons for this.
First, as a result of the astounding devel¬
opments in genetics in the past forty years
or so, people are now faced with the hard
facts about their condition. The explana¬
tion of life, and of human life in partic¬
ular, is capable of bringing about a pre¬
cisely programmed transformation of
human beings.
Second, this capacity to alter living
things is not just something that is theo¬
retical or might happen one day. It results
from techniques that are already being
used at least as far as other species are
concerned. Transgenesis the process
whereby a "foreign" gene is inserted into
the reproductive cells of a living organism,
so that it is altered and becomes capable of
transmitting certain properties to its off¬
spring is already being used on animals
and plants. We are now creating laboratory
animals, into which we inject, say, cancer
genes, so that they can then be used as
models for human diseases. Eventually we
shall be able to "humanize" animals by
injecting them with human genes for trans¬
plantation purposes, so that their organs
will become compatible with the body of

the person receiving the transplant. Exper¬
iments on producing transgenic animals
are even being carried out in order to pro¬
duce improved stock, such as pigs with a
reduced amount of fat. But the terrible
question arises as to whether there is a
taboo on applying transgenesis to the
human species, even though there might be
a therapeutic justification for doing so.
The third reason why people are bewil¬
dered is because of the incredible short¬
ening of the time-lag between the making
of a discovery and the time of its applica¬
tion. As a result of this, the gap between
different cultures is growing wider, since
some adapt more quickly than others. At
the same time, we can see cases of countries
in the forefront of research where there is
a growing mismatch between the wealth of
new possibilities being offered by science
and people's mentalities and ways of life
and their view of the world. This "credi¬
bility gap" is becoming even wider because
of the speed at which the media pass on
information about scientific discoveries to
the public. In the past, before discoveries
became public knowledge, they had to go
through a process of verification, publi¬
cation and discussion within the scientific
community. Nowadays, it is accepted that
even though the results of research may
only be approximate or tentative, they can
be published.
The technological and scientific age in
which we live can accordingly be regarded
as both positive and negative. It is positive
because of the hopes aroused by science as
a result of the progress made in therapeutic
treatment, the relief of human suffering, the
improvement of individual and collective
welfare, and the creation of forms of cul¬
ture which the mass of the population can
enjoy or which offer increased scope for
individual freedom. It is negative because
of the increasing duality of the societies
in which we live. Inequalities exist not
only between rich countries and poor,
between those which have research centres
and industries and those which do not,
but also within each national or cultural
community. It is absolutely imperative for
the sake of democracy worldwide that
everybody should be informed about what
is going on in the life sciences, so that they
can have some idea of the changes taking
place. Over and above the struggle against
inequality, what is at stake is the protection
of rights and freedoms. Ignorance and false
knowledge are sources of prejudice. In
genetics, any misreading of the facts can
also give rise to behaviour that is liable to
undermine those freedoms.
What kindofsocio-cultural upheavals
are being caused by genetics?
Research on the human genome has
implications that are not exclusively sci¬
entific or medical. They lead on to appli¬
cations which affect all aspects ofpeople's
lives, whether it be private life (their choice
of life-styles and consumption patterns;
their perception of their genetic "identity");
family life (the plans people make as couples
or parents; their relations with other family
members); or life as members of society
(health protection and access to medical
care; the availability of jobs or state or pri-
Confronted
with the upheavals
due to the progress
of genetics,
one wonders towards
what Kind of society
and what new
planetary equilibrium
we head.
vate health insurance; provision for chil¬
dren's education, and so on).
Particular emphasis should be laid on
two areas of thinking. The first is bound up
with the concentration of research in the
industrial countries, which is giving rise
to economic and socio-cultural imbalances.
There is an urgent need to study the poten¬
tial spin-off from this research in the devel¬
oping countries, so that its applications
can be controlled. The second area is con¬
cerned with the eternal question about the
meaning of life and the human condition.
It would be dangerous to imagine that
there is some kind of scientific answer to
this question. Science does not relieve us of
our responsibility as individuals and mem¬
bers of the human family quite the oppo
site. The quickening pace of scientific
progress could even be said to make us
more aware of the fact that "our future is
not written . . . and the human condition is
incompatible with certainty".3
Is this where bioethics comes in?
Bioethics arose out of fundamental ques¬
tions that were asked about the influence of
the development of molecular biology on
the future of humanity. The term appears
to have been coined in the United States in
the 1970s, when genome manipulation
techniques, what we call "genetic engi¬
neering", were being developed.
With the passing of time, these ques¬
tions have become increasingly crucial. In
view of the upheavals caused by the devel¬
opment of genetics, people are wondering
about the kind of society we are moving
towards and the kind of planetary balance
that will be struck.
Bioethics is not confined to thinking
about the relationship between science and
society. It is concerned with the relations
between human beings and nature in all its
biological diversity, including the nature of
human beings themselves.
This may account for the constant
progress being made by the ethics move¬
ment all over the world. Nowadays, it is
impossible to keep pace with the number of
ethics committees (see page 27) and ethics
research centres being set up. Although
bioethics is essentially multidisciplinary, it
is now being taught as a subject in its own
right in universities, schools and vocational
training institutions.
The human genome mapping pro¬
grammes launched in the United States,
Europe and Japan are all being matched by
special funding for ethics research. Ethics
has become an important feature of
research and health policies and even of
industrial strategies. It now addresses itself
to decision-makers, in both the public and
the private sectors.
Bioethics is a way of thinking about
our future and our values, but at the same
time it is a form of language. It enables
specialists to enter into a dialogue with
decision-makers and the public, to work
together on the problems of humanity
raised by scientific knowledge and to
ensure harmonious relations between indi¬
viduals and society and, in the final
analysis, the survival of the human species.
It has to be acknowledged that

bioethics has grown up in a context in
which doubts are being voiced about the
general idea of progress as being intrinsi¬
cally a source of good. In this respect, it
reflects the anxieties of our age.
What part do scientists and doctors
play in all this?
A decisive one, obviously. However, the
problems that have to be resolved in order
to contend with the new situations cre¬
ated by science go far beyond the sphere of
responsibility of scientists and doctors.
Take the case of prenatal diagnosis. It may
reveal anomalies in the foetus or some
more or less serious handicap or disease
that is bound to affect the unborn child.
This diagnosis is made in response to a
pressing social demand from parents. How
will the parents react if the diagnosis reveals
an anomaly? Who will help them make
the decisive choice as to whether or not to
let the pregnancy go on to its term, try in
utero treatment that is still at the experi¬
mental stage, or else prepare to accept the
disabled child and provide it with the nec¬
essary postnatal care?
As knowledge and its applications
grow, an increasing number of decisions of
this kind have to be taken by doctors, fam¬
ilies and communities.
Some of the advances made by science
do provide solutions. Take the case of in
vitro fertilization. When it becomes pos¬
sible to cryopreserve oocytes, a process
which is currently at the experimental
stage, it will no longer be necessary to
freeze surplus embryos. Other advances
made in biology and genetics pose new
questions, however. This is the case with
"micro-injection", which can make it pos¬
sible to choose a child's sex by separating
out the X and Y spermatozoa, although
this is not the purpose for which it is
intended. This technique, which is designed
as a remedy for male infertility, consists of
the in vitro injection of a spermatozoon
into an oocyte, so that it becomes fertilized.
The resulting embryo is then transferred
into the womb by in vitro fertilization.
Should we allow this kind of selection
process for choosing the sex of an unborn
child?
There is also the question of diagnosis
before conception, if a man and woman
belong to families that are carriers of some
transmissible defect, they can have a genetic
examination. If they both carry the same
defect, they may decide not to have chil¬
dren. In Cyprus, the Orthodox Church, in
agreement with the government, has used
this type of premarital examination to
check the spread of thalassaemia, a very
common genetic disease on the island. By
appealing to people's sense of responsi¬
bility, it has proved possible to cut the
morbidity rate of the disease by half.
This is one example of how decisions
involving reproduction can be monitored
at the instance of the political authorities
and society, with a helping hand from the
church. Other examples can be cited. In
China, an interventionist approach seems
to be the practice in similar situations.
There may be a temptation to adopt an
authoritarian attitude, especially in societies
facing serious difficulties in allocating
health resources, largely due to demo¬
graphic factors.
How does bioethics differfrom scien¬
tific ethics generally?
Bioethics is not the ethics of the bio¬
logical sciences. It is not the same thing as
a code of professional conduct. It is not
concerned with professional practice but
with its impact on society. The key idea
behind bioethics is respect for human dig¬
nity. This idea runs through all currents of
ethical thinking, including religions. One
of the basic instruments in bioethics is the
Nuremberg Code drawn up by the World
Medical Association in 1947, following
the revelations made about the excesses
perpetrated in the name of science under
Nazism. This document lays down the
principle that anybody invited to take part
in medical experiments should give his or
her consent. The Nuremberg Code stipu¬
lates that man cannot be an object for sci¬
ence. The principles of human dignity,
individual freedom, equal rights and soli¬
darity appear to command an international
consensus as guidelines for bioethics.
Based on these foundations, bioethics
is a way of resolving conflicts of values. The
conflict between community pressures and
individual freedom, for example, is illus¬
trated by the case of genetic screening pro¬
grammes. Should such programmes be
made compulsory in the interests of public
health or should it be left to the discre¬
tion of individuals to decide whether or
not it is advisable to undergo tests,
knowing that the results may be fraught
with consequences for themselves and their
families?
The French National Ethics Com¬
mittee recently gave an opinion on the
subject. The issue was whether screening
for trisomy 21 (Down's syndrome) should
be compulsory or voluntary for certain
women. The Committee considered that
people had to face up to their responsibil¬
ities. It recommended that, in certain cases,
doctors should be required to suggest as a
matter of course that families "at risk" be
tested. Those families would then be free to
decide whether to accept the suggestion
or not.
From the standpoint of bioethics, are
there are a certain number of rules that
are valid for all countries and in all com¬
munities?
I feel that bioethics rules out a dogmatic
approach, any idea of one culture domi¬
nating another. For instance, some African
communities develop a stronger sense of
solidarity than that in Western communi¬
ties, which are often individualistic. Yet
the art of living together is not practised
only in the context of villages, regions and
countries. Nowadays, it has to be envisaged
in planetary terms. From this point of view,
bioethics tries to set up a bridge between
cultures, so that the new powers arising out
of genetics do not make discrimination
and exclusion any worse.
What about eugenics?

Eugenics is a form of racism based on a
pseudo-rationalist scientific approach.
There can be no question of science
"improving" the human species, in the
sense of some people being of greater value
than others. We must make sure that the
folly of genetic purity does not take over
from the folly of racial purity.
The only way to oppose eugenics is to
ensure that human rights come first.
Human biodiversity is sometimes said to
be proof of the absurdity of racism. I per¬
sonally am embarrassed by this sort of
talk. Can we draw any social or philo¬
sophical conclusions from the fact that we
'are all different? Probably not, because
biodiversity is simply a fact of life. People
are what matter. The idea of "scientifi¬
cally" manufacturing a set of people exclu¬
sively composed of individuals with certain
characteristics must be outlawed because it
runs counter to the dignity of human
beings, who are unique, free and respon¬
sible for their actions. Even so, we must ask
why, for the sake of biodiversity, we should
seek to preserve some human communities
from any outside inputs. What is unique
about human beings is that they can adapt
to their environment and change them¬
selves, at the same time as they change the
natural world around them. In the words
of the American novelist Paul Auster4,
"Each man is the entire world, bearing
within his genes a memory of all mankind".
Does bioethics have anything to tell
us about North-South disparities?
Bioethics must help to obliterate the
disparities between North and South
arising from the quickening pace of sci¬
entific research and its applications. Sci¬
ence, economics and social development
are all interlinked. The economically
advanced countries are virtually the only
ones to invest in research' and they are also
the first to reap the benefits from it.
It is in a bid to break with this trend
that UNESCO, under the impetus of Fed¬
erico Mayor, has pledged not only to con¬
tribute to the human genome programme
but to foster intercultural dialogue on the
subject through the International Bioethics
Committee. I shall merely mention the
new generation of medicines that will be
developed through the progress made by
genetics. They will not be standardized
medicines but will be individually designed
to eradicate diseases at their source. It
would be quite wrong to use them exclu¬
sively to treat the diseases found in the
industrial countries. With the spread of
Aids, we can no longer say that the diseases
of our time are respecters of geographical
barriers. We have to take a worldwide
approach to human health.
Even so, considerable difficulties are
involved in framing a policy for sharing
between rich and poor. How are we going
to apply gene therapy in the countries of
the South say a therapeutic operation on
an individual's genome, so as to provide a
missing gene and counter the effects of a
pathological defect? How can we make
sure that the people in those countries can
enjoy the benefit of new medicines pro¬
duced using gene therapy techniques,
whose potential is enormous? How can
we ensure that the new generation of vac¬
cines produced by genetic engineering can
be manufactured and distributed all over
the world?
Areyou suggesting that there should be
a universalist approach to bioethics?
It's essential. Bioethics, I repeat, must be
based on human rights.
Even so, the time has come to lower the
temperature of a debate that sometimes
gets so heated that the public becomes
bewildered. We must take account of a
number of factors. In the first place, we
should remember that human history has
always gone hand-in-hand with scientific
advances that have revolutionized civi¬
lizations. The discoveries made on the
human genome form part of that history
and people have to be capable of coping
with the issues they raise. Secondly, it is not
surprising that seemingly desirable changes
brought about by the applications of
genetics should give rise to anxiety and
even to opposition. However and this is
the third important point bioethics has to
distance itself from an outlook that is dom¬
inated by the risk of taking the wrong
turning. In other words, it is urgent to
switch from a defensive attitude to a more
balanced approach that makes allowance
for benefits and risks alike. Scientific
progress should be neither worshipped
nor reviled. Nevertheless, it calls on the
universal conscience to provide a guar¬
antee that everyone-individuals and soci¬
eties alike-has access to it and that it will
not get out of control.
Bioethics accordingly requires us to
be "good, honest and virtuous", regardless
of the economic and power issues at stake
in scientific competition. This being so, it
is bound to be a universal ethic of respon¬
sibility and solidarity.
1 The French naturalist and writer Georges Louis
Leclerc, Comte de Buffon (1707-1788). Through
his study of the earth and its geological ages, he
became increasingly convinced that the universe
had come into being through a slow process of
transformation and that living species were not set
in a hard and fast mould. He paved the way for the
theories of evolution. Editor
2 The Austrian monk and botanist Gregor Mendel
(1822-1884). His work on the hybridization of
peas led to his discovery in 1 865 of the laws gov¬
erning the transmission of hereditary characters
which bear his name. He is regarded as the
founding father of genetics. Editor
3 Primo Levi, in Other People's Trades, New
York, Summit Books, 1989.
4 The Invention ofSolitude, New York, Sun Press,
1982.
8
