- .
The story of the
guitar from the
Renaissance to
the age of jazz
and rock



LISTENING
"^^Ste-
Strings down the centuries
by Isabelle Leymarie
48
I The guitar, with its sensually curved body, is
I a favourite instrument of folklore and popular
music, the faithful companion of footloose trav¬
ellers, students and hippies. It can be heard not only
in classical compositions but in Spanish flamenco
and Portuguese fado, in folk music, blues, jazz and
rock, in the high-life music of Ghana and the soucous
of Zaire, and, in one form or another, in almost all
of Latin America and some of the countries of Asia.
Although the word "guitar" may have originally
been derived from kithara, the name of an ancient
Greek stringed instrument, it has been used to
describe instruments differing both in the tech¬
nique used to play them and in their shape.
A member of the lute family, the guitar as we
know it first made its appearance in Renaissance
Europe. However, instruments with similar names
already existed some 300 years earlier, and there are
references in medieval French literature to the
gitere and in fourteenth-century English literature
to the gitarer. Prototypes of the guitar may have
existed in ancient Mesopotamia, Anatolia and Egypt
and also in Central Asia at the beginning of the
Christian era.
As time went by, changes were made to the
shape of the instrument and to the layout of the
soundboard and fret. The guitar was initially smaller
than it Is today and had "courses" or sets of four and
later five or even seven strings, and eventually ten
individual strings. The modern classical guitar, on
which Andrés Segovia (d. 1987), and Alejandro
Lagoya are regarded as being among the foremost
virtuoso performers, was developed by nineteenth-
century Spanish instrument makers.
The guitar was first used as a solo or chamber
instrument, especially in Spain and Italy. The first
compositions for the instrument were published in
about the mid-sixteenth century. In Italy, the guitar
tended to be superseded by the lute and the vihuela,
but in France it became very popular, giving added
zest to courtly entertainments and providing the
accompaniment to the songs of troubadours and folk
dances. It reached the height of its popularity at the
end of the eighteenth century through the compo
sitions of Lulgi Boccherini (1743-1805), the Catalan
Fernando Sor (1778-1839) and Niccoló Paganini
(1782-1840).
FROM FLAMENCO TO BOSSA NOVA
In Europe, there are still a number of popular vari¬
ants on the guitar, like the vertically-held flamenco
guitar made of Spanish cypress wood, which weighs
less than the rosewood used in the classical guitar
and is fitted with a fingerboard for beating out the
rhythm. Other forms include the chitarra batiente of
Calabria, with its single-note bass string, and various
types of Portuguese guitar.
The American guitar, which usually has six to ten
metal strings mounted on a slender neck, first came
into prominence in the nineteenth century. It was later
to become the preferred instrument of blues musi¬
cians and singers like Big Bill Broonzy, Leadbelly
and Bukka White, who often played it using the "bot¬
tleneck" (or "slide") technique, where the strings are
stroked with the sharp edge of a knife, a broken-off
bottleneck or a brass ring fitting on the middle or
index finger of the left hand. It is widely used in
country and western music and is particularly popular
with folk singers like Joan Baez and Bob Dylan.
From the 1920s onwards, jazz bands and variety
orchestras also started using the crisp sound of the
non-amplified guitar, later followed by the electric
guitar, whose sound is amplified by a microphone and
whose strings are plucked with a plectrum. Freddie
Green, a member of the Count Basie orchestra, and
subsequently Charlie Christian, the pioneer of the
bebop guitar, along with Django Reinhardt in Europe,
were primarily responsible for the growing popularity
of the electric guitar, which gradually took on a
variety of forms. The ultimate in fantasy was reached
in rock music, in which the guitar is both a marvel of
technology and a sex symbol, while musicians like
Jimmy Hendrix have experimented with electronic
effects known as wa-wa, reverb or phaser. Acid rock
and heavy metal in particular are noted for their use
of outlandish distortion effects.
In the cooler bossa nova style, guitarists Joäo
Gilberto, Laurindo Almeida and Charlie Bird prefer to
use an acoustic guitar with nylon strings, and Joäo
Gilberto has invented a form of off-beat accompani¬
ment to produce a swinging effect known as the
balanço.
At the end of the nineteenth century, a type of
three-course metal-stringed guitar known as the
tres appeared in Cuba's Oriente province. Rudi¬
mentary tres were often made of old salt-cod cans.
From the 1920s onwards, the fres became the typ¬
ical instrument of the rhythm known as son. Arsenio
Rodriguez and Niño Rivera were among the best-
known treseros of the 1950s and 1960s.
The guitar was the preferred Instrument of
Cuban solo singers (trovadores), duos and trios.
Guitar trios, such as the famous "Trio Matamoros"
from Santiago de Cuba, also played in Puerto Rico
and Mexico. In Puerto Rico, a guitar with four pairs
of strings, the cuatro, was originally used in peasant
music, but was introduced into salsa in the 1970s.
In Mexico, people play the jarana, while the cha¬
rango, which is sometimes made from an armadillo
shell, is played in Bolivia, Peru, Chile and northern
Argentina. Musicians in Brazil play the samba and
other rhythms on the viola or the cavaquinho, while
Venezuela has its own type of cuatro, as well as the
quinto, with its five pairs of strings.
Throughout Latin America, and especially in
Peru, Argentina, Chile and Uruguay, the guitar con¬
tinues to be the preferred instrument of singers of
the folk song style known as nueva trova. In Hawaii,
the guitar, which may have been introduced by
Portuguese seamen, later gave rise to the four-
stringed ukelele. Java has its own five-stringed
guitar and the Philippines the tlape, a three-stringed
guitar which may have been named after the small
Latin American guitar known as the tiple. In Viet
Nam, sentimental songs are often sung to a guitar
accompaniment.
ISABELLE LEYMARIE, a Franco-American
musicologist, is the author of La Salsa et le Latín
Jazz (PUF, Paris, 1993). She is currently working on
a study of black music in Latin America and the
Caribbean.
