Roads to revolution
by Ehsan Naraghi
In Iran the Shi'ite clergy rallied the
discontented to trigger off the
insurrection that brought down the Shah
22
I From the beginning of the sixteenth cen-
I tury the time of the foundation of the
Safavid dynasty during which Shi'ism became
the state religion of Iran the Shi'ite clergy shared
the governance of the country with the monarchy.
Even the democratic constitution of 1906-1907
recognized the clergy's right to name five Shi'ite
mullahs to verify the conformity of state law
with Islamic law, the Shar'iah. This clause in the
constitution was respected during the first legis¬
lature, but after 1912 it was not implemented. It
gave the clergy a pretext to claim its share of
government power and legitimized its criticism
of the monarchy. Furthermore, the clergy kept
control over two important fields: education and
justice. However, after 1921, the date when the
Pahlavi dynasty was founded, this control was
denied and the clergy were completely elimi¬
nated from responsibility in the field of justice. In
education, they were still allowed to train mullahs,
but that was all. Thus a Westernized policy
replaced the clergy in all fields. This explains the
immense frustration of the Shi'ite clergy towards
the imperial regime.
Modernization and social disorder
During the following decades, with the accel¬
eration of an anti-democratic modernization
process and the social disorder created by it,
the clergy found strong allies in the growing
numbers of young people uprooted from the
countryside and directed towards the towns,
and in university students who were firmly kept
down. Lastly, the clergy won the support of
the middle class bazaar traders, who felt left
out by the process of modernization.
Thus, by the mid-1960s, religion was again
making a wide impact on social and economic life.
An eloquent young Islamic intellectual, Ali
Shariati, painted the picture of a religious utopia
which held a strong attraction for the young,
The Prince and the Saint, a
17th-century Safavid miniature.
Below, Teheran, 1979: a
demonstration in support of
Ayatollah Khomeini.
EHSAN NARAGHI,
Iranian sociologist and historian,
is Special Advisor to the
Director-General of Unesco. His
most recent published work in
English is From Palace to Prison:
Inside the Iranian Revolution
(1994).
who had become disenchanted with the Soviet
Union. Ali Shariati spoke to them of the law of
the Qur'an and the words of the Prophet and of
the Prophet's son-in-law, Ali. As examples of
Islamic militants he pointed to Ali and his son,
Hussein, and especially to their martyrdom,
which became the symbol of the Shi'ite combat.
The Shi'ite leader Ayatollah Ruhollah
Khomeini, who lived in exile between 1964 and
1979, first in Iraq, then in France, made the most
of being outside government control and
preached a different message from that of the
apolitical Shi'ite tradition. Young theologians
used the errors of the regime (such as the spec¬
tacular celebration at Persepolis in 1971 to mark
the 2,500th anniversary of the founding of the
Achaemenid dynasty) to fan popular discontent.
Finally, during the reign of the Shah there
were far too many ties with foreign countries,
especially the United States. The presence of tens
of thousands of American experts provided a
pretext for the opponents of the regime to criti¬
cize Iran's subordination to foreign influence.
Nationalist language complemented the moral¬
istic discourse.
By the end of the 1970s, the charismatic figure
of Khomeini had become the incarnation of puri-
tanism, radicalism and nationalism opposed to a
discredited government.
