A FRESH LOOK AT THE PAST
Presenting the first volume of the new
HISTORY OF
HUMANITY
IN 1946, UNESCO's first Director-Gen¬
eral, Julian Huxley, wrote that "The
chief task before the humanities today
would seem to be to help in constructing
a history of the development of the
human mind, notably in its highest cul¬
tural achievements". With these words,
Huxley set forth the idea which led to the
production under UNESCO's auspices of
a six-volume History ofthe Scientific and
Cultural Development of Mankind, an
enterprise which began in 1950 and took
almost twenty years to complete.
The ink of the first edition was barely
dry before Paolo E. de Berrêdo Carneiro,
President of the International Scientific
Committee in charge of the project, was
thinking about bringing it up to date.
"The day will come when what we have
written will, in its turn, have to be
replaced," he wrote. "I like to think that
our successors will attend to this, and
that a revised edition of the work we
have begun may be published at the
dawn of a new millennium."
Now UNESCO is embarking on the
publication of an entirely revised and
updated edition of this major work. Enti¬
tled History of Humanity and com¬
prising seven volumes, the new history is
far more than a simple revision. Both in
structure and content it is radically dif¬
ferent from its predecessor. "If the first
history could be thought of as a summing
up," says S.J. De Laet, editor-in-chief of
Volume I of the new History of
Humanity, "the second is more like a
new point of departure."
Published in June 1994, Volume I is
entitled Prehistory and the Beginnings
of Civilization. It consists of two parts.
The first covers the period from the ori¬
gins of humankind to the beginnings of
food production; the second continues
the story to the appearance of the first
societies, 5,000 years ago. Some forty
internationally known specialists have
contributed studies of the world's dif¬
ferent geo-cultural areas from Africa
to China, from Europe to the Andes,
from North America to Australia
giving a comprehensive picture of the
infancy of humankind.
With more than 700 pages of richly
documented text, as well as detailed bib¬
liographies, many figures, tables and
maps, this is an attractively produced
book as well as an important contribu¬
tion to scholarship.
Christophe Wondji
Head of UNESCO's Section of General
and Regional Histories
History ofHumanity, Volume I, Prehistory
and the Beginnings of Civilization,
edited by S.J. De Laet,
co-edited by A.H. Dani, J.L. Lorenzo,
R.B. Nunoo, published by UNESCO, Paris
& Routledge, London, 1994
(850 French francs from UNESCO;
£85.00 from Routledge).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Cover, pages 3, 30: Baldev © Sygma,
Paris. Pages 5, 6: Christian Irrgang ©
Wolf Lepenies, Berlin. Pages 8-9, 23,
24-25: Abbas © Magnum, Paris.
Pages 10-11,22 (above), 28, 3 1 : ©
Roland and Sabrina Michaud, Paris.
Page 1 2 (left): © Gamma, Paris.
Page 1 2 (right): Roger Sandler ©
Cosmos, Paris. Page 13: © Digital
Art/Westlight/Cosmos, Paris. Pages
14, 1 7: © Patrick Lagès, Paris. Page
15: ©Jean-Loup Charmet, Musée
Carnavalet, Paris. Page 1 6: Laurence
Chaperon © Gamma, Paris. Page 1 9:
© Alain Guillou, Le Croisic, France.
Page 20: © Tapabor, Paris. Page 2 1 :
©Jean-Loup Charmet, Bibliothèque
des Arts Décoratifs, Paris. Pages 22-
23: Alain Mingam © Gamma, Paris.
Pages 26, 27: Benito © Sygma, Paris.
Pages 32-33: Atlas des Religions ©
Plon/Quarante-quatrième Parallèle,
Paris. Page 35: UNESCO/lnes Forbes.
Pages 36, 37, 38, 39: © Edouard
Bailby, Paris. Page 40: © Tatiana
Zolozova. Page 4 1 : Jean Gaumy ©
Magnum, Paris. Page 42: Bruno
Barbey © Magnum, Paris. Page 43:
Harry Gruyaert © Magnum, Paris.
Page 44: Veiller © Jacana, Paris. Page
47: © Explorer Archives, Bibliothèque
Nationale, Paris. Page 48: © Peruvian
Embassy, Paris.
49
