
46
Right from the beginning of the slave trade,
black people in almost every part of the New
World rose up against slavery and, whenever they
could, escaped from the slave ships or froiTi mines and
plantations. They took refuge in the impenetrable trop¬
ical forests, where they set up more or less self-gov¬
erning communities, in some cases with a highly
organized ranking structure. The runaway slaves
were called "Maroons", probably from the Spanish
cimarrón meaning "wild". These communities were
given such African-sounding names as cumbes,
mocambos, quilombos and candombes. In some
countries, such as Puerto Rico, they were also known
as palenques, from another Spanish word meaning
"stockade", since they often built fortifications to
defend themselves from attack. Some of them were
short-lived, but others survived for several centuries.
One of the most famous quilombos was that of Pal¬
mares in Brazil, between Alagoas and Recife, which
featured in Carlos Diegues' film Quilombo. The pop¬
ulation of Palmares chiefly consisted of blacks of
Bantu origin. When they were attacked by the whites,
their king, Zumbi, threw himself over a precipice
rather than surrender.
In some cases, the members of these Maroon
communities all had the same ethnic origins and,
because of their isolation from other groups, were able
to preserve musical forms going back to their Ashanti,
Yoruba or Bantu roots. These forms, which generally
evolved more slowly than in Africa, now provide us
with an idea of the kind of music that used to be
played on the continent in earlier times. In cases
where peoples of different origins lived together in the
cumbes and palenques, they produced original forms
of music specific to their particular locality.
REBEL COMMUNITIES
Four main groups of Maroons, each remarkable for its
closely-knit social structure and the strength of its cul¬
ture, have survived up to the present day. These are
the Garinagu (singular: Garifuna), also known as
Bush Negroes, who settled on the seaboard of Belize,
Honduras and Guatemala; the Djukas and Saramakas
of Suriname; the palenque of San Basilio, near Car¬
tagena in Colombia; and the Maroons of Jamaica
living in the Saint Elizabeth parish of Accompong
Town and in Cockpit Country and the Blue Mountains.
The Garinagu took refuge with the Carib Indians
of the island of Saint Vincent, intermarried with
them, learned their language and shared their way of
life. In 1797, some years after France had ceded
Saint Vincent to Britain, the British deported these
Maroons to the virtually barren islands off the coast
of Honduras, from where they made their way to the
mainland.
The Djukas and Saramakas escaped in 1633
when their Portugese Jewish planter owners hid
them in the jungle in order to avoid paying taxes. Their
ranks were swollen by fugitive slaves from the Dutch
coastal plantations.
San Basilio was founded in 1608 by slaves who
had escaped from Cartagena under the leadership of
Domingo Bioho (known by the name of "King
Benkos"). Benkos was eventually captured and
hanged, but the palenque survived.
In Jamaica the Maroon phenomenon began during
Spanish colonial rule. When Oliver Cromwell seized the
country in 1655, other slaves took advantage of the


LISTENING
The
Maroons,
musicians
of
freedom
by Isabelle Leymarie
political disorders to escape in their turn. A number
of chiefs, named Juan Lubola, Cudjoe, Johnny, Accom¬
pong, Cuffee and Quaco, took command and grouped
their followers into "nations", each with its own poli¬
tical system, language and customs.
One distinctive feature of the Maroon commu¬
nities is the overwhelming importance they attach to
spiritual things. They worship their ancestors, along
with forest and water spirits, animal deities and the
gods of the Ewe, Fon and Congo "nations", a clear
pointer to the ethnic origins of their members. Some
cults are hybrid; the W/m7(a word meaning "wind")
of Suriname pray to the divinities of both Dahomey and
Congo. The Kromanti rites of the Djukas and Sara¬
makas are intended to appease the anger of their gods
and heal the sick. The Kromanti play of the Jamaican
Maroons is used to call up the spirits of the dead
thrcugh religious dances named after the Ibo, Man¬
dinga and Kokose Mongola (Bantu) "nations".
For the uprooted Africans of the quilombos and
palenques, sometimes speaking different languages
The Maroons, runaway slaves
whose descendants still live in
a few communities scattered
round the Caribbean, have
preserved a culture in which
music and dancing are the
prime modes of expression and
are a hymn to freedom.
and with no other way of communicating among
themselves, music came to play a fundamental role.
In the Caribbean during colonial times, the rebels gave
the signal to attack the whites by beating their
drums or by blowing into conch shells (known as
"lambis" in Martinique and Guadeloupe) or cow horns
(called "abengs" in Jamaica). As intermediaries bet¬
ween humans and their ancestors or gods, the drums
are endowed with divine properties, and the dan¬
cers pay their respects to them before they start dan¬
cing or performing before them. The drums are
blessed and plied with offerings. Each god or group
of gods has its own drums and rhythms, and the
ancestors or gods whose favours are being sought
stand over the worshippers and convey messages to
them.
A FORM OF RESISTANCE
According to African custom, death gives rise to
outward expressions of joy in order to gladden the
dead person's soul, and in some cases it cuts across
the dividing-line between the sacred and the pro¬
fane. In Garinagu funeral rites, for instance, the mour¬
ners perform the punta, an ancient fertility dance
which is notable for its gyrations of the pelvis and qui¬
vering buttock movements and is also performed on
other occasions out of sheer pleasure. The Awasa,
which is sung and danced at funeral wakes among the
Maroons of French Guiana, is sometimes performed
in play-acting situations in which members of the
opposite sex are openly taunted. In such cases, it
helps to relieve tensions that would otherwise be
liable to upset the fragile balance of the community.
In black societies generally singing, dancing,
instrumental music and the words accompanying
them are all connected and are a favoured mode of
expression. The words of songs in particular are
used as a way of mocking other people and exercising
social control. Although the Maroons show respect
for their religious traditionsbecause ritual streng¬
thens the solidarity of the community and its links
with the ancestral homelandin their secular music
they attach special importance to improvisation and
innovation, which help to preserve the vitality of
their societies.
In the 1930s, for example, local orchestras in the
palenque of San Basilio adopted the Cuban rhythm
known as son, while in the 1960s the Maroons of Suri¬
name added the kaseko, a kind of calypso from the
coast, to their repertoire. In Jamaica, young Maroons
have introduced a reggae beat into their traditional
drum playing and in Belize and Honduras Maroons are
returning from the cities with a modernized version
of the punta called punta rock.
The Maroons are also well known for their graphic
art and their oral tradition and are a striking symbol
of the forces of resistance and freedom. Their survival
is under threat from the encroachment of the modern
world. Will it be possible to safeguard their music,
their songs and their paintings before they disap¬
pear forever?
ISABELLE LEYMARIE,
a Franco-American musicologist, is the author of La
Salsa et le Latin Jazz (PUF, Paris, 1993). She is
currently working on a study of black music in Latin
America and the Caribbean.
