The StoneAge temples ofMalta
byAnn Monsarrat
46
During the first half of the present
centuryEuropean archaeologists,
puzzling over the similarities
between ancient cultures, came up with
the diffusion theory: a steady spread west¬
wards of ideas, skills and inventions from
the early civilizations of the Near East. In
this way the mud-brickziggurats ofancient
Sumeria (the first temples known to man)
had influenced the Egyptian pyramids (the
oldest stone monuments in the world) and
Malta's megalithic buildings were a mere
reflection of the glories of ancient Greece.
There was only one problem. They had
no way of confirming exactly when any¬
thing had happened. Then came radio¬
carbon dating, an offshoot of the research
that produced the atomic bomb. The first
radiocarbon dates did little to disturb the
basic fabric of the theory, but when the
technique was refined in the mid-1960s it
blewholes through the entire edifice. Small
communities, previously considered to be
talented imitators, were shown to have
been ingenious innovators astonishingly
advanced for their time.
The Egyptians could no longer be said to
have created the oldest free-standing stone
monuments in the world because the Stone
Age temple builders of Malta had beaten
them to it.
The new dating showed that in the tiny
cluster of Maltese islands, way out in the
middle of the Mediterranean, a people
without awritten language or knowledge of
any kind of metal had raised vast, highly
sophisticated structures several hundred
years before the Egyptians began work on
their own triumphs in stone. They had
begun building around 3600 B.C. and con¬
tinued for over a thousand years.
They built their temples singly and in
groups, added to them, embellished and
enlarged them. Their richly decorated inte¬
riors were previously thought to have been
inspired by the great Greek civilizations
of Crete and Mycenae, but it is now clear
that Malta's temple culture had flourished
and died before the Greek civilizations
were born.
The imposing temple complex at Hagar
Qim in Malta.
Today four of the largest temple com¬
plexes figure on the tourist trail. At least
forty more survive in various stages ofdis¬
array. Others have disappeared completely,
spirited away into boundary walls and
house foundations. They were built on a
small archipelago with a total land area
of little more than 300 square kilometres:
a massive stone construction for every
seven square kilometres. As British archae¬
ologist David Trump has written: "there
is probably no other area of this size in
the world with such a number and variety
of antiquities."
The oldest and best preserved of the
temples is on Gozo, the second largest and
most northerly of the islands. As with all
their other temples the builders selected a
choice site. Its great, grey mass stands on
one of the island's distinctive flat-topped
hills above a fertile valley. Its vast mega¬
liths, never completely covered by the
silting up of time, led to folk stories of a
female giant who, by day, strode the land
carrying the great slabs on her head, and
built by night. It is still called Ggantija, the
Maltese word for giantess.
The builders found on the islands an
abundance of two kinds of limestone: a
durable grey upper layer and beneath it
one that cuts and looks like butter. They
put both to good use in nearly all of their
temples but nowhere else did they build a
surrounding wall quite as astonishing as
the one at Ggantija. Massive blocks ofhard
grey stone, one of them the size ofa small
cottage, are laid alternately upright and
sideways to form a first course eight metres
high. Above them smaller blocks teeter
upwards for a further two metres.
Two temples, with great lobed cham¬
bers, built of smaller stones, share this
colossal overcoat. The two entrances stand
side by side on the concave façade, flanked
by pillars of soft, golden limestone once

doubtless capped by lintels of equally
impressive dimensions. The oldest temple
has a threshold made of one enormous
slab ofgolden stone and beside it lie round
rocks, the size of cannon balls, that rolled
it into place. The interior walls were orig¬
inally plastered and painted with red
ochre, the remains ofwhich could still be
seen clinging to the stones until only a
few years ago.
Unhappily, Ggantija was the first of the
temples to be uncovered. In the 1820s it
was dug out (rather than excavated) by
enthusiastic but untrained hands. Many
treasures must have disappeared with the
rubbish. A carved snake climbing a stone,
another rather more phallic stone, and
THE IMPACT OF TOURISM
The influx of tourists over the past twenty
years or so has been both good and bad for
Malta's neolithic remains. Temples built to
receive only a select few are now daily bom¬
barded by coachloads of sightseers. How¬
ever, the enthusiasm of foreign visitors does
seem to have contributed to a growing local
awareness of the inestimable value of these
national, indeed world, treasures. The listing
in 1993 as World Heritage Sites of all the
buildings of Malta's Temple Period (which
are now regarded as a single unique phe¬
nomenon) has given this awareness an
additional boost.
The islands' prosperity, to which tourism
has been a large contributor, means that more
funds are available to help preserve the mon¬
uments. Rescue archaeology is well organized,
and Malta's university is providing more
archaeologists to deal with it.
PRESERVATION
The preservation of so many sites is an
undoubted burden for a small nation with a
population of only 350,000, but in the last
few years great strides have been made and
the help ofworld experts enlisted.
Unesco has funded the plans for a com¬
prehensive scheme for the preservation ofthe
Hypogeum ofHal Saflieni and is contributing
to the costs ofputting them into effect. Within
a year this unique subterranean complex
should have its own microclimate and a care¬
fully controlled number ofvisitors.
For years the main temples have been
caged in unsightly iron railings but these are
now coming down and the buildings are
gradually being protected instead by archae¬
ological parks. The aim is again to set them in
an appropriate landscape and to tactfully
discourage all but the seriously interested
visitor from exploring the actual remains.
Last year the entrance fees were raised from
a sum hardly worth collecting to one com¬
parable with museum prices in other Euro¬
pean countries. The number of visitors has
gone down while income has increased con¬
siderably. With free entry on Sundays this
still leaves the sites accessible to all, but cuts
down on wear and tear.
A.M.«
two finely modelled stone heads give some
indication of what else might have been
there. A charming piece of pottery, part
of a bowl incised all round with two lines
of birds in flight, is difficult to associate
with the term Stone Age.
Two more temple complexes, Hagar
Qim and Mnajdra, which stand within
sight of each other above the southern
cliffs of the main island ofMalta, received
only slightly better treatment. But it was
here, at Hagar Qim, that were found the
statues which have become a symbol of
the temple culture. They are known as "fat
ladies", though whether they really are
ladies is still in dispute. They have massive
hips, thighs and upper arms, and neat
little hands and feet, and they sit in lady¬
like positions, but very few of them have
female breasts.
Fortunately, Tarxien, the last great
temple to be built, and the Hypogeum of
Hal Saflieni, an underground cemetery in
use during almost the entire temple
period, remained undisturbed until Malta
had produced an archaeologist worthy of
them. Both of them were discovered at
the start of this century by builders digging
foundations. Both of them now stand in
the middle ofhousing developments, but
at least most of their treasures were pre¬
served.
If there had ever been any doubt about
the importance of the fat ladies in temple
culture this was dispelled by the discovery
of their giant sister at Tarxien. Local
farmers, tired of catching her in their
ploughs, had done their best to break her
up, but her elegant feet, massive calves
and outsized pleated skirt survived the
onslaught. When complete she would have
stood nearly three metres high. Placed on
a richly carved plinth, and given the prime
position, she was, breasts or no breasts,
undoubtedly the deity the Earth Mother,
Life, the Goddess of Fertility, or whatever
it was they called her.
It had long been thought that animal
sacrifice had played a part in temple rituals
and Tarxien appears to have confirmed
this too. When the excavators removed a
small flap, cut by the temple carvers into a
richly decorated altar front, they found in
the cavity behind it a long flint knife and a
bundle of animal bones.
Tarxien displays the apex of the temple-
carvers' art. As well as elaborately
branched and running spirals and the stip¬
pling of incised dots on the stone, there are
fine reliefs of bulls and horned sheep or
goats and a sow followed by her piglets. A
pair of particularly dense spirals stares
sternly from a step leading up into what
was probably the most sacred of the inner
sanctums, like a pair of eyes keeping a
watch for trespassers. The temple builders
carved all this, as they did everything else
from megaliths to underground caverns,
with nothing to aid them but stone tools.
Legs and skirt are all that remain of this
statue of an Earth Mother in the ruins of
the temple of Tarxien (c. 2800 B.C.) on the
island of Gozo.
The Hypogeum, a man-made series of
caves that reaches through several levels
deep into the earth, is considered to be
even more remarkable than the temples on
the surface. An estimated 7,000 bodies
were buried here, along with their grave
goods of pottery, shells and polished
stones, but the most astounding thing
about it is the large circular chamber, cut
from the living rock to imitate the inte¬
rior of the temples above ground. Many of
the temples contained small models of
themselves, but here, sheltered from the
elements, is a full-size replica unwithered
by time.
Peacefulfarmers
What kind ofpeople could they have been
who created all these riches? Where did
they come from and what happened to
them? Some of the answers are now
emerging from another subterranean
burial site, the Brochtorff Circle, near
Ggantija on Gozo. An Anglo-Maltese team
of archaeologists, meticulously probing
and recording, has been working there for
the past six years and from long buried
grain and pollen, bones and artifacts, they
are beginning to piece the story together.
It seems that around 5000 B.C. the
islands' first inhabitants made their way
across the sea from Malta's nearest neigh¬
bour, Sicily, ninety kilometres to the north.
They were farmers, growing barley and
wheat and bringing with them cattle,
goats, sheep and pigs. They appear to have
been a remarkably peaceful people, fearing 4J

48
no threat from each other or from the out¬
side world. They lived in caves and mud-
brick houses without a trace ofany kind of
fortification. The only things found from
this period even resembling a weapon are
two tiny arrowheads.
They also appear to have been unusu¬
ally healthy with strong bones and teeth.
Rather touchingly a few of them had
bunions and one small child was buried
with a puppy. It could be that only the
privileged few were buried here, but sev¬
eral skeletons seem to indicate otherwise.
These were men with particularly thick,
strong limbs and distinctively craggy faces.
The same team (Doctors Anthony Bon-
nanno and Tancred Gouda of Malta, and
Caroline Malone, Simon Stoddart and
David Trump from England) has recently
tentatively put forward a theory which
might explain the whole temple phenom¬
enon.
For a thousand years or more the new
settlers seem to have maintained links
with the outside world. They had tools of
flint and obsidian, which could never have
been obtained on Malta itself, and the tiny
greenstone axes that were common
exchange goods of the time. Their pottery
remained similar to that on Sicily and the
mainland of southern Italy. Then a dis¬
tinctive local culture began to emerge. The
pottery changed completely, unique bone
pendants were made, of a shape found
nowhere else, and local chert began to be
used instead of the superior imported flint
and obsidian. It was at this stage that the
first temples were built. As the temple cul¬
ture flourished, the temples themselves
appear to have become the guardians of
what remained of these now rare,
imported goods.
The thinking is that, as the islands
became increasingly isolated, the rivalry
and prestige involved in foreign trade was
transferred to the building of great mon¬
uments. As the population grew, every set¬
tlement not only had to have one of its
own, but one bigger and better than all
the rest.
Until recently it was assumed that the
temple builders, after their last fine flourish
at Tarxien, had been replaced by a very
different race, who brought with them
tools and weapons of copper and bronze.
But there is now some evidence to show
that the two cultures may have overlapped
and that not all the temple builders were
driven off the islands. It would be pleasant
to think that Malta's modem building skills
were a talent inherited from such remark¬
able ancestors.
ANN MONSARRAT
is a British writer and journalist. She is the author
of An Uneasy Victorian: Thackeray the Man, a new
edition of which was published in 1989 by Cassell,
London.
