R H
Rabindranath Tagore
A greater awareness oftruth
The letterpublished below, in
abridgedform, appeared in
Correspondance, ajournaipublished
(in French) by the International
Institute ofIntellectual Co-operation.
It was sent in 1934 by Rabindranath
Tagore to the British classical scholar
GilbertMurray. In response to
Murray's "friendly appeal"fora
"closer comprehension ofthe
problemsfaced by our common
humanity", the greatBengali writer,
who had won the Nobel Prizefor
Literature in 1913, set out to "deal
with some details ofourpresent
problems ofIndia andput them in
relation to the larger aspect of
international relationship as I view
it". For Tagore, then aged seventy-
three, it was an opportunity to express
yetagain his unshakable confidence
in humanity.
"Uttarayan",
Santiniketan, Bengal.
September 16th, 1934.
My Dear Professor Murray,
.... I must confess at once that I do
not see any solution of the intricate evils of
disharmonious relationship between
nations, nor can I point out any path which
may lead us immediately to the levels of
sanity. Like yourself, I find much that is
deeply distressing in modern conditions,
and I am in complete agreement with you
again in believing that at no other period
of history has mankind as a whole been
more alive to the need ofhuman co-oper
ation, more conscious of the inevitable
and inescapable moral links which hold
together the fabric ofhuman civilization.
I cannot afford to lose my faith in this
inner spirit ofman, nor in the sureness of
human progress which following the
upward path ofstruggle and travail is con¬
stantly achieving, through cyclic darkness
and doubt, its ever-widening ranges of
fulfilment	
Now that mutual intercourse has
become easy, and the different peoples
and nations of the world have come to
know one another in various relations,
one might have thought that the time had
arrived to merge their differences in a
common unity. But the significant thing is,
that the more the doors are opening and
the walls are breaking down outwardly,
the greater is the force which the con¬
sciousness of individual distinction is
gaining within	
Individuality is precious, because only
through it can we realize the universal.
Unfortunately there are people who take
enormous pride in magnifying their spe¬
ciality and proclaiming to the world that
Rabindranath Tagore (1 86 1- 194 1).
they are fixed for ever on their pedestal of
uniqueness. They forget that only discords
are unique and therefore can claim their
own separate place outside the universal
world of music.
It should be the function of religion to
provide us with this universal ideal of truth
and maintain it in its purity. But men have
often made perverse use of their religion,
building with it permanent walls to ensure
their own separateness. Christianity, when
it minimizes its spiritual truth, which is
universal, and emphasizes its dogmatic
side, which is a mere accretion of time,
has the same effect of creating a mental
obstruction which leads to the misunder¬
standing of people who are outside its
pale	
We have seen Europe cruelly unscrupu¬
lous in its politics and commerce, widely
spreading slavery over the face of the Earth
in various names and forms. And yet, in
this very same Europe, protest is always
alive against its own iniquities. Martyrs
are never absent whose lives ofsacrifice are
the penance for the wrongs done by their
own kindred. The individuality which is
Western is not to be designated by any
sect-name of a particular religion, but is
distinguished by its eager attitude towards
truth, in two of its aspects, scientific and
humanistic. This openness of mind to
truth has also its moral value and so in
the West it has often been noticed that,
while those who are professedly pious
have sided with tyrannical power, encour¬
aging repression of freedom, the men of
intellect, the sceptics, have bravely stood
for justice and the rights of man	
In India we have ourselves become
material-minded. We are wanting in faith
and courage. Since in our country the gods
are sleeping, therefore, when the Titans
come, they devour all our sacrificial offer-

ings there is never a hint of strife. The
germs ofdisease are everywhere; but man
can resist disease only when his vital force
is active and powerful.
So, too, even when the worship of the
blood-thirsty and false gods ofself-seeking
are rampant on all sides, man can lift up
his head to the skies if his spirit is awake.
Both matter and spirit are active. They
alone become entirely materialistic who
are only half men, who cripple the native
majesty of the spirit before the blind rep¬
etition of unintelligent activities; who are
niggardly in knowledge and palsied in
action; who are ever insulting themselves
by setting up a meaningless ritual in the
place of true worship	
Beggars at thegate
In India, what is needed more than any¬
thing else is the broad mind which, only
because it is conscious of its own vigorous
individuality, is not afraid of accepting
truth from all sources	 I have come to
feel that the mind which has been matured
in the atmosphere of a profound knowl¬
edge of its own country, and of the perfect
thoughts that have been produced in that
land, is ready to accept and assimilate the
cultures that come from foreign countries.
He who has no wealth ofhis own can only
beg, and those who are compelled to
follow the profession of beggary at the
gate of the intellectually rich may gain
occasional scraps ofmental food, but they
are sure to lose the strength of their intel¬
lectual character and their minds are
doomed to become timid in thought and
in creative endeavour.
A certain number of us do not admit
that our culture has any special features of
value. These good people I leave out of
account. But the number of those others is
not few, who while admitting this value
in theory, ignore it more or less in practice.
Very often, the flourishing of the banner of
this culture is not for the sake of the love of
truth but for that of national vain-glori-
ousness like brandishing a musical
instrument in athletic display before one's
own admiring family, instead ofusing it to
make music	
The evolving Hindu social ideal has
never been present to us as a whole, so
that we have only a vague conception of
what the Hindu has achieved in the past,
or can attempt in the future. The partial
view before us at any moment appears at
the time to be the most important, so we
can hardly bring ourselves to the true ideal,
but tend to destroy it. And there we stand
fasting and telling beads, emaciated with
doing penance, shrinking into a corner
away from the rest of the world.
We forget that Hindu civilization was
once very much alive, crossing the seas,
planting colonies, giving to and taking
from all the world. It had its arts, its com¬
merce, its vast and strenuous field ofwork.
In its history, new ideas had their oppor¬
tunity. Its women also had their learning,
their bravery, their place in the civic life. In
every page of the Mahabharata we shall
find proofs that it was no rigid, cast-iron
type ofcivilization. The men of those days
did not, like marionettes, play the same set
piece over and over again. They progressed
through mistakes, made discoveries
through experiment, and gained truth
through striving	
Man shows his mental feebleness when
he loses his faith in life because it is diffi¬
cult to govern, and is only willing to take
the responsibility of the dead because they
are content to lie still under an elaborately
decorated tombstone of his own make.
We must know that life carries its own
weight, while the burden of the dead is
heavy to bear an intolerable burden
which has been pressing upon our country
for ages.
The fact stands out clearly today that
the Divinity dwelling within the heart of
man cannot be kept immured any longer
in the darkness of particular temples. The
day of the Ratha-yatra, the Car Festival, has
arrived when He shall come out on the
high way of the world, into the thick of
the joys and sorrows, the mutual com¬
merce, of the throng of men. Each of us
must set to work to build such a car as we
can, to take its place in the grand proces¬
sion. The material ofsome maybe ofvalue,
of others cheap. Some may break down
on the way, others last till the end. But the
day has come at last when all the cars must
set out.
The great awakening
Your letter has been a confirmation to
me ofthe deep faith in the ultimate truths
of humanity which we both try to serve
Text selected and presented
by Edgardo Canton
and which sustains our being. I have tried
to express howreligion today as it exists in
its prevalent institutionalized forms both
in the West and the East has failed in its
function to control and guide the forces of
humanity; how the growth ofnationalism
and wide commerce of ideas through
speeded-up communication have often
augmented external differences instead
of bringing humanity together. Develop¬
ment of organizing power, mastery over
Nature's resources have subserved secret
passions or the openly flaunted greed of
unashamed national glorification. And yet
I do not feel despondent about the future,
for the great fact remains that man has
never stopped in his urge for self-expres¬
sion, in his brave quest for knowledge; not
only so, there is today all over the world in
spite of selfishness and unreason a greater
awareness of truth	
In India, too, there is a great awakening
everywhere, mainly under the inspiration
of Mahatma Gandhi's singular purity of
will and conduct, which is creating a new
generation ofclear-minded servers ofour
peoples	
I feel proud that I have been born in
this great Age. I know that it must take
time before we can adjust our minds to a
condition which is not only new, but
almost exactly the opposite of the old. Let
us announce to the world that the light of
the morning has come, not for entrenching
ourselves behind barriers, but for meeting
in mutual understanding and trust on the
common field of co-operation; never for
nourishing a spirit of rejection, but for
that glad acceptance which constantly
carries in itself the giving out of the best
that we have.
Yours sincerely,
Rabindranath Tagore 45
