Ascetics have always been drawn to life in the desert, far from the
world and the pleasures of the flesh. Some of them became a prey to
strange forces and malign spirits...
THE CALL OF THE
WILDERNESS
if Jean-Claude Carrière
ii
JEAN-CLAUDE CARRIERE,
French author, dramatist and
scriptwriter, is director of
FEMIS, a cinema and
audiovisual school in Paris. He
has adapted the great Indian
epic The Mahabharata, for the
stage and, for the screen,
Edmond Rostand's play Cyrano
de Bergerac. He has recently
published a novel, Simon le
Mage (Plön publishers, Paris,
1993).
THREE calls come from the desert. The first
is the call of God, who manifests himself
in the wilderness, as he did to Moses. It is
in the desert or so the early Christians
believed that we can really make contact with
the other, supernatural, transcendent world. It
is there that the essential word can be heard.
The second call is one of disgust and con¬
tempt for the world and for a corrupt, con¬
demned society in which God's presence is
obliterated by commerce, by the family and by
a thousand and one mundane, pernicious desires.
In contrast, the solitude and aridity of the desert
seem pure, unsullied. Ironically, despite the lack
of vegetation, the desert is where the last traces
of paradise can be found.
The third call is sounded by the trumpets of
the apocalypse. During the early centuries of the
Church, the founding fathers of Christianity
were certain that the end of the world was nigh.
At any moment the heavens might split asunder
and exterminating angels with flashing swords
surge forth. When that terrible vision came to
pass, woe betide those caught in a state of sin or
even of forgetfulness; they,would be hurled for¬
ever into Gehenna. When the end of the world
comes, we should be in a state of retreat and
prayer, as near to God as possible. That is why
the desert is there.
A hotbed of temptation
Early in the Christian era, many people were
drawn by these three calls to arid lands, in Syria
but above all in the Thebaid, the desert around
Thebes in Egypt. They soon became legendary
figures. The most famous of them was St.
Anthony, who lived in Egypt to the age of a
hundred and five. His experiences showed that
if the desert is a sacred place it is also a hotbed
of temptation where the devil and evil forces can
rise up in the form of strange, whirling shapes
ready to drag into the abyss anyone bold enough
to turn his back on worldly comforts and the
reassuring relationships of social life.
This ardent, perilous life in a remote place and
in absolute poverty a practice that Luther and
the Protestants would later denounce as stulti¬
fying gave rise to extreme forms of behaviour
that appear extraordinary to us today. The desert
teems with images that came to obsess these holy
men, driving them to the brink of madness and
even beyond: it is a land of wonders and hallu¬
cinations because of the burning sun; its aridity
is an allegory of the soul's separation from God;
it is a powerful symbol of unity; sand and wind
are symbolic elements inseparable from the

eternal theme of the vanity of all things, while
rock symbolizes permanence; baptism is per¬
formed with the water of life, all the more pre¬
cious in the desert because of its scarcity; it is the
haunt of tireless, aggressive, wandering demons,
seemingly stirred by the hermits' asceticism and
self-denial. The Church kept these men at arm's



length, sometimes pointing out that they were not
following the example set by Christ, who had
chosen to live and die among people. Neverthe¬
less, a multitude of Lives of the Desert Fathers
related their exploits in great detail.
It is no exaggeration to talk of physical
exploits or even of competitions or champi¬
onships, for the desert fathers strove to outdo
each other in fasting and praying. Some hid their
faces, others flagellated and mortified themselves.
St. Macarius the Egyptian remained standing
"for sixty years", from time to time running
The fortified Monastery of
St. Catherine in the Sinai
Peninsula (Egypt), one of
the cradles of Christian
monasticism in the Orient.
through the desert carrying a heavy basket of
sand. When asked what he was doing, he replied,
"I am tormenting him who torments me".
St. Paul the Hermit, who recited 300 prayers
a day (he counted them with pebbles), was
"humiliated" when he learned that a virgin in a
neighbouring village recited 700. St. Elpid, who
lived near Jericho in the fourth century, never
faced the west and never looked at the sky after
six in the evening for reasons "known to him
alone. Others lived covered with chains, sur¬
rounded by sharpened branches or wearing
strange helmets from which stones that kept
them from falling asleep were suspended
(because God may come "like a thief in the
night"). They never washed, out of scorn for the
flesh. Live maggots crawled from the mouth of
a Greek ascetic named Matthew. The hermit
Meletius was covered with running sores, and 13


whenever a maggot fell out of one he carefully


put it back so that it would not suffer.
Perhaps the most extraordinary of all were
the stylites, who lived on top of pillars in order
to be closer to heaven. According to legend, St.
Simeon Stylites, the best known among them,
stayed on a column for over forty years. He
inspired a poem by Tennyson and Luis BuñuePs
film Simon ofthe Desert (1965).
Simeon ate nothing but a few blades of grass
hauled up to him in a basket attached to a rope;
his excrement was black pellets. He had
numerous visitors, and several rulers even sought
his advice, bearing gifts, which he refused. On
one occasion, he thought he saw an angel of
light swoop down in a chariot of fire to take him
to heaven, but just as he raised his foot to climb
in, the vision faded. As a punishment he con¬
demned himself to stand on one foot for the
rest of his life. (He died a year later.)
The flesh is weak
In this desert that was both a challenge to them
and an arena for their feats of endurance, the her¬
mits seem to have been possessed by a terror of
women. They took drastic steps, even going so
far as self-mutilation, to combat this fear. One
desert father saw a woman's footprint in the
sand and immediately caused it to disappear.
Another, on a journey with his aged mother,
wrapped his hands in several layers of cloth
before carrying her across a stream, thus
avoiding contact with dangerous flesh.
There are many stories about hermits who
tamed and domesticated wild animals (some
spoke the language of crocodiles, another trained
a bear to take sheep to pasture at certain fixed
times), but women, even holy women, evoked
feelings of horror and panic. St. Martinian, from
Caesarea in Palestine, inflicted serious burns
on his feet to resist the blandishments of a young
woman who had tried to seduce him. As soon as
his wounds were healed, he retired to a rock in
the middle of the sea a desert of another kind.
One day a ship ran aground on the rock and was
smashed to pieces. The sole survivor was a
young woman who cried out for help as she
clung to apiece of wreckage. St. Martinian took
her onto his rock but then jumped into the sea
to get away from her. With the help of God and
the currents, he safely reached the shore.
Women who went into desert seclusion were
faced with similar pitfalls. Apollinaria, daughter
of the Emperor Anthemius, had herself disfigured
by mosquitos in a swamp before withdrawing to
the Thebaid; she did not want the other hermits
there to find her attractive.
Some did give way to desire. After a long
stay in the desert, a certain Herion went home to
Alexandria, where he devoted himself to night life
and horse-racing and took up with a dancer.
God, however, had not abandoned him, and the
chronicles recount how the Lord saved Herion
from debauchery by "making a tumour grow
on his glans".
A multitude of hermits
The silence of heaven can be as relentless in the
desert as anywhere else, and some hermits gave
up. Others followed their vow unswervingly,
experiencing hallucinations or madness. Fanatics
sometimes formed gangs armed with thorny
sticks, killed all those they believed to be impious
and even invaded the cities. In 415 a blameless
Alexandrian Neoplatonist philosopher, Hypatia,
was murdered and her body torn apart by a
horde of Christians.
In the desert some ascetics encountered the
14
The erg, or sand sea, of
Admer in the Algerian
Sahara.
Preaching in the desert as
illustrated in an early- 1 6th-
century fresco in the
chapel of St. Anthony at
Clans in the south of
France. St. Anthony (25 1 -
356), the patron saint of
hermits, founded the first
Christian monasteries in
the deserts of the Thebaid
in Egypt.

crowds they were trying to escape. Near the
Thebaid town of Oxyrhynchos, there was said
to be a "prodigious multitude of hermits"
apparently more than 10,000, plus 20,000 virgins.
It was impossible for such large communities
to live without laws, or at least without rules. The
earliest organization of hermits into groups, the
earliest attempts at communal life and the earliest
monastic codes grew out of the need to cope with
spiritual and physical dangers and to create a new
order. The Essene sect is generally considered to be
the first of these movements in the West.
The first monasteries and convents were
founded in the Thebaid and in Syria in the fifth
century. The word "monk" comes from the
Greek word for "alone", but no member of an
order lives in seclusion. Indeed, communal living
is part of the definition of monastic life.
Monasteries left the wilderness and settled
near to and in cities fairly early on, for the desert
of stone and sand had proved incapable of
healing the desert of the soul. Other weapons
and an inner cure are needed. The Church came
back to the world, which in the meantime had
not been consumed by heavenly flames. The
desert experience did, however, leave traces in
mystical fervour (the self alone with God) and
in the need to get on with others. These traces
were born of the calls that were heard, of the
silence of heaven, of the impossibility of solitude,
of a hard, dry life, of a world not really lost, of
the troublesome devil that one always finds
within oneself, and, most of all, of the human
fabric tough and tender, ruthless and
yielding that neither wind nor sand can tame.
IS
