THE STATE OF THE ART
The 1980s and early 1990s have seen rapid
advances in biotechnologies on many fronts.
Here is a sample of achievements and pros¬
pects:
PHARMACEUTICALS
Today . . . production by microbial or animal
cells of hormones, substances for breaking
down blood clots, blood coagulants, lympho-
kins, interferons (anti-cancer), vaccines
against viral, bacterial and parasitic
diseases (e.g. hepatitis B and C, schistoso¬
miasis, malaria)
and tomorrow. . . Breakthroughs may occur
in the fields of anti-Aids vaccines or drugs
and anti-cancer medicines.
DISEASE-RESISTANT PLANTS
Today. . . Progress has been rapid since
1982, when the first transgenic plant was
created. Several dozen plants have since
been modified to increase growth perfor¬
mance and resistance to viruses and other
pathogens. In 1994, several hundred trials
were being carried out on transgenic plants
in Europe, North America, Japan and Aus¬
tralia.
and tomorrow. . . Some of the transgenic
plants already tested (potato, cotton, rape-
seed, tomato, tobacco, soybean) are
expected to be marketed by the mid- or late
1990s. A transgenic tomato variety with a
prolonged shelf-life (U.S.A.) is already being
marketed; this will also be the case for a
virus-resistant tomato variety (Japan).
However, delays due to safety requirements,
public concern and the need for more
research may slow down large-scale market¬
ing of genetically modified crop species bet¬
ween now and the year 2000.
NEW FOODS
Today. . . Bioconversion of starch into sweet
products, food flavours and enhancers, fruit-
juice processing; derivation of amino-acids
and other nutrients, pigments and vitamins
from micro-algae; new foods from fermenta¬
tion; cheese-making enzymes, lactose-free
dairy products, yeast hybrids.
and tomorrow. . . Products that may be mar¬
keted by 1995 include genetically modified
baker's yeast, new food colourings and
ingredients, high added-value compounds
from plant cell and micro-algal cultures. By
the end of the century we may see geneti¬
cally modified food bacteria for flavour and
quality, modified food enzymes, novel bio-
catalysts for food processing, and increasing
numbers of rapid biotests and biosensors for
food contaminants or pathogens.
FASTER-GROWING ANIMALS
Today. . . Already in commercial exploitation
are: diagnostics, new vaccines and drugs, in-
vitro fertilization and embryo transfer in
domestic animals, growth hormone adminis¬
tration to increase growth and milk yield,
feeds and feed additives. So far no trans¬
genic domestic animals are on the market.
Transgenic animals such as a transgenic
mouse carrying a human cancer gene have
been used in the laboratory as human
disease models.
and tomorrow. . . Between now and the end
of the century, the development of fish, pigs
and cattle with rapid growth potential
through the insertion of growth hormone
genes, improved carcass quality and, for
cattle, increased milk yield, is expected to
be rapid. Gene transfer may also lead to the
multiplication of genetically superior animals
through the development of disease-resis¬
tant breeds.
MORE PRODUCTIVE
FISH AND ALGAE
Today. . . Growth hormone genes from
rainbow trout have been inserted into a
number of other commercial fish species. No
transgenic fish have yet been patented. A
wide range of products derived from micro-
algae are used in the manufacture of food¬
stuffs, cosmetics, dyes, paints, paper, tex¬
tiles, etc.
and tomorrow. . . Vaccines for disease and
stress control in aquaculture is a probable
growth area. In Scandinavia nearly all trout
and salmon produced by aquaculture are
vaccinated, compared to 5% ten years ago.
Promising new antibiotics, anti-cancer
agents and food additives will be developed.
T. Yoshida
TOSHIOMI YOSHIDA, of
Japan, is a Professor at the
International Centre of Co¬
operative Research in
Biotechnology, Faculty of
Engineering, Osaka University.
