COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR
programme on
Fthe arid zone, one of
A the first international sei
wL entific co-operation pro
A grammes to be set up
within the United Nations
system, was launched in
Algiers in April 1951. The
programme continued
until 1964 and contributed not only to the mobilization
of the scientific community concerned, but also to the
development of technical assistance programmes and
projects and to the opening and expansion of research,
training and development assistance institutions in
many countries. On the scientific level, it led to the
preparation of the "Map of the World's Arid and Semi-
Arid Zones" and the publication of some thirty volumes
in the "Arid Zone Research" series.
From 1964 onwards work continued within the
framework of a broader programme of "natural
resources research" and the International Hydrolog¬
ical Decade, which focused on the advancement of sci¬
entific knowledge and the preparation of methods
based on specific case-studies.
With the start of the Man and the Biosphere (MAB)
programme in 1971, arid and semi-arid zone activities
took a new turning based on an integrated multidisci-
plinary approach in this instance one in which the
social and the exact sciences were combined.



It was around this time that the ecological crisis
revealed by the drought in the Sahel reached its climax.
This crisis was one of the principal factors behind the con¬
vening of the United Nations Conference on Desertifi¬
cation, which was held in Nairobi in August-September
1977, and with which UNESCO was closely associated.
More recently, UNESCO vigorously supported the ini¬
tiative taken by France, with the support of several
A halt to advancing deserts
other countries, on the occasion of the Arche de la
Défense Summit in 1989, which resulted in the setting
up of the Observatory of the Sahara and Sahel (OSS).
We regarded this venture as a demonstration of concern
for the development problems and efforts to combat
desertification of the twenty countries in and around
the Sahara and as a political gesture designed to
encourage co-operation among and in favour of these
countries.
A COMBAT ON MANY FRONTS
Desertification is a global environmental problem, and
the solutions to it are bound up with those that must
be found in order to create conditions for sustainable
development that will meet the immediate needs of
the population and guarantee the long-term protection
of the environment. Unesco thus favours a global
approach in which the fight against poverty, literacy
work, the management of population dynamics and the
rational use of natural resources are all linked. Only
through an interdisciplinary effort conducted on sev¬
eral fronts by partners working in unison can the
living conditions of disadvantaged populations be last¬
ingly improved.
Efforts to combat desertification must not be con¬
sidered outside the social and human context in which
they are undertaken. They will never be effective if the
people who are to carry them out and benefit from
them are not convinced of the need for them and of the
advantages they will bring. The better informed local
populations are, the more motivated they will be to take
part in this work. Education for all is therefore clearly
essential. Given the requisite knowledge and know-
how, the populations of countries affected by deserti¬
fication will react with greater speed and effectiveness,
making sustainable development more likely to spread
throughout the world. OE
