Intriguing
patterns of
cross-fertilization
have developped
between
microbiology and
modern art
ART ANO THE
SCIENCE OF LIFE
by John Hodgson
ART and science both endeavour to
explore the mysteries of existence.
_> Art does it by creating physical forms
that reveal intangible subject matter or illu¬
minate previously unconsidered aspects of the
physical world. Science progresses by dis¬
secting the physical world, assessing how each
of the parts works first in isolation and then as
a part of the whole. One significant difference
between art and science, however, is the extent
to which they concern themselves with telling
people about their discoveries.
The archetypal scientist caricatured as a
person devoid of normal human drives, human
emotions and human values is concerned
with the acquisition of knowledge. Moving
from one piece of knowledge to the next like
a hunter, he or she is generally unconcerned
about communicating that knowledge to a
wider public. Indeed, science often appears to
build its walls high with the bricks of experi¬
ment and cement them together with quick-
drying jargon and runic mathematics. In its
keep are the precious jewels of knowledge,
jewels that belong to everybody but are jeal¬
ously guarded. In media reporting of science
you will often find phrases such as "researchers
have revealed" or "scientists have unlocked
the secrets of", reflecting both the mystery
that has become attached to science and the
possessiveness about knowledge that has
become attributed to scientists.
In art criticism, on the other hand, the
stock phrases are "X shows us that" or "What
Y is trying to say to us is", phrases that demon¬
strate the intrinsic role of communication in
art. It is not enough for the artist merely to
have had insight; if he or she cannot convey
that insight to other people, then the art has
failed.
We all have an interest in biology, even if it
extends only to our personal health, longevity
and ultimate mortality. Because biological sci¬
ence now has its public to please, biologists,
perhaps more than any other scientific group,
need to communicate widely. But even within
the narrow confines of their profession, the

Left, false-colour scanning
tunneling micrograph of
DNA.
Above, Pathway, a Carrara
marble and sheet plywood
sculpture (1 22 cm high, 30
cm diameter) by the
British artist John Maine.
imprecise nature of living organisms even
the simplest bacterium or virus decrees that
biologists cannot call upon precise formulae to
describe their discoveries. They need to invoke
artistic forms.
For instance, proteins, which are respon¬
sible for most metabolic processes, are often
depicted as winding ribbons, reminiscent of
Maurits Escher's graphic art. This style of rep¬
resentation was developed by Jane Richardson,
a highly-regarded researcher at Duke Univer¬
sity in North Carolina. Richardson's work is
the design of completely new protein mole
cules based on information she has gleaned
from existing natural proteins. Part of her con¬
tribution to her field, however, has been her
ability to capture certain qualities of proteins
by depicting them in certain ways.
No protein actually looks like Richardson's
ribbons. In fact, no protein could ever be seen
at all because the wavelength of visible light is
too long to resolve the detailed structures.
Proteins are "visualized" through a combina¬
tion of X-ray light and computer analysis, a
combination that produces the Escher-like
images. However, the ribbon provides a useful 3J

way for scientists to think about proteins
because it illustrates the way that the com¬
plex chemical chain that makes up the pro¬
tein winds round on itself.
By adjusting the computer analysis, pro¬
teins can equally well appear as pointillist
paintings, as similar to the works of Salvador
Dalí or as architectural drawings. There is no
"correct" way of depicting a protein. What
needs to be recognized, however, is that the
way scientists visualize the molecules does
influence how they think about them.
Conveying emotions
Just as an Impressionist painting is not a pho¬
tograph but an image that can convey a sense
of emotion or atmosphere, images of proteins
and other important biological molecules can,
if portrayed in a suitable fashion, indicate a
whole range of properties of the molecule.
For instance, some regions of proteins are
known to be very mobile; but how can you
show that in a two-dimensional image? One of
the solutions that protein chemists have come
up with is to use "glowing coal" images;
mobile parts of the molecule are represented by
yellow and orange colourations while static
regions are much darker. There is probably a
good case to be made for showing the regions
where the structure is uncertain as soft-focus
images.
An appreciation of aesthetics can be impor¬
tant for scientists who wish to understand the
mechanisms of biology. Perhaps the best
example of this is the work of James Watson



and Francis Crick in elucidating the structure
of the fundamental heredity material, deoxyri¬
bonucleic acid (DNA) in 1953. Watson and
Crick performed very little experimental work
Above, hand-tinted
electron-transmission
micrograph showing the
DNAs of two bacterial
viruses partially spliced
together. Where the two
DNAs are spliced together
they are coloured yellow.
Above right, Untitled
(1988), oil on canvas by
Noel Forster (United
Kingdom).
on DNA; instead they attempted to build
models of DNA based on the research findings
of other scientists. One expectation they had,
however, and adopted as a guiding principle,
was that the structure of DNA would have
an inherent beauty. This enabled them to elim¬
inate some of the possible structures as inele¬
gant or downright ugly. The symmetrical mol¬
ecular structure that they developed in 1953
has stood the test of time and has become an
icon of the revolution in biological under¬
standing.
dm '-mm
& m -A &
ft O '?. *!
Coexistence Human-Vein
Air-leaf Parasite-Tree Sun-
Breath Fragility. Sycamore
leaves on wood panel
(Il8x 191.8 cm),
by the British artist
Garry Fabian Miller.

If biotechnology is undoubtedly being
enriched by the application of artistic consid¬
erations, the reverse is also true. The forms of
molecules and organisms that are first seen by
scientists, even if they have not inspired art, can
certainly find parallels in recent art. The helical
structure of DNA, for instance, is reflected in



John Maine's plywood and marble sculpture,
Pathway. Noel Forster's untitled oil painting
shows a weaving, bullet-shaped pattern which
is highly reminiscent of the false-colour pictures
of viruses produced by electron microscopists.
And the images that neuroscientists produce of
nerve cells in the brain are extraordinarily sim¬
ilar to paintings such as a red gouache work
produced by Anish Kapoor in 1989.
Similar parallels can be seen earlier in the
century. The American artist Alexander
Caldcr's Calderberry Bush of 1932 is one of the
artist's free-standing mobiles. In the way the
size of the red disks increases, the work
reminds one of the molecular machinery that
is present in all living cells for the synthesis of
proteins. The same theme is expanded in
Caldcr's Wh*) Four leaves and three petals, in
which protein synthesis appears to be taking
place on an undulating framework. That frame¬
work has its equivalent in what is called the
"endoplasmic reticulum", a sort of membra¬
nous network that spreads throughout the cell
and forms a kind of work-bench on which
protein synthesis takes place.
Whereas Calder used three dimensions, the
Catalan artist Joan Miró expressed similar
images in two dimensions. Much of Miró's
work appears to depict simple cell-like struc¬
tures that have various functional forms dotted
inside them. These forms closely resemble
mitochondria chloroplasts or other sub-units
of cells.
For me, one of the most provoking and
biotechnologically relevant pieces of modern
art is Garry Fabian Miller's arrangement of
sycamore leaves, which goes by the rather
extended name of Coexistence Human-Vein
Air-Leaf Parasite-Tree Sun-Breath Fragility.
Miller has taken square sections of sycamore
leaves in various states of health and decay
and arranged them on a panel. As one views the
work from left to right and top to bottom the
leaves become progressively more decayed
until the final squares show nothing more than
a leaf skeleton.
For me, the work illustrates both the peren¬
nial and natural process of autumnal rotting
and the role of interacting organisms in this
process. It is clear that many of the leaves are
being degraded by cellulose-eating fungi and
these fungi are an integral part of the recy¬
cling process. Looked at from a biotechno-
logical point of view, the work reminds us of
the importance not only of trees but also of
fungi. Biotcchnologists use fungi for antibiotic
production, for traditional and modern food-
making processes and for solving problems in
waste disposal or recycling. On a more global
scale, the Miller piece also brings home the
self-sustaining nature of biology and the
dependence of human life on the cycle of
growth and death in nature.
*0> *»'S- :,' Il «g am
s V * .-£ - !* "
JOHN HODGSON, a British
microbiologist, is senior editor
of the London magazine
BiolTechnology. He has written
widely for the press and has
been responsible for drafting
several governmental reports
and brochures. He is the
author of Biotechnology-changing
the way nature works, and is the
publisher and editor of The
Genetic Messenger.
