Interview with Pavel Lounguine
** :*.^
Pavel Lounguine, director of Taxi Blues (1990), travelled to the polar regions to witness the
collective suicide of a culture. He returned with a documentary film, A People too Many (1994).
Above, Pavel Lounguine in
Chukotka, Siberia, while
shooting his fiim about the Inuit
in 1993.
B What gave you the idea of making a
film about the Inuit of eastern Siberia?
Pure chance. My eldest son spent a year
living with them as part of his history
studies. Like all young intellectuals, he
finds the taste for material values that cur¬
rently prevails in Russia quite repugnant.
The violence, the aggressivity, the constant
struggle to get ahead	 When he returned
from living with the Inuit, he told me,
"They are a people who refuse to live, who
are committing collective suicide." I was so
strongly moved by this idea of a people
refusing to live that I decided to go and see
for myself. And I found what he said was
true. I don't think it's an exaggeration to
speak of collective suicide.
The first impression one gets, the
moment one arrives in Inuit territory, is of
the great contrast between the beauty of
the surroundings and the dire situation of
the population. The magnificent moun¬
tains, the ocean, the majesty of nature. And,
in the midst of this, these appalling con¬
structions, horribly dirty. . . . Refuse is
strewn everywhere. Mountains of refuse,
broken-down shacks with tiny windows, a
rising stench	 This filth, the accumulation
of debris, is the tangible result of contact
between the Inuit and modern society!
U What happened on your first meeting?
When they meet an outsider, the first
thing the Inuit do is ask whether you have
any cigarettes or alcohol. Have you got
anything to sell or give away? They are a
people who have no desire to talk. Talking,
for them, is a waste of effort.
In our society conversation may some¬
times bring comfort. A trouble shared is a
trouble halved. But not for the Inuit.
It's only through seeing them at sea,
in their kayaks, that one can begin to
understand them. On board these tiny
boats, which are now equipped with out¬
board motors, these men go through a
complete transformation. It really is like
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, an astonishing
case of dual personality. Suddenly, their
eyes light up, their faces change completely,
and they live again as they were meant to
live and as they lived for thousands of
years. Handsome and strong, magnificent.
At sea, none of them would think of
drinking, even during rest periods.
M What is their daily life like?
I would almost say it is like a caricature
of paradise.
There are no taboos in their lives. They
have complete sexual freedom. Nobody
cares whose son or daughter they are; fam¬
ilies are more or less collective. Days are
spent drinking, eating, making love,
smoking, making love again, drinking	
No history, no memory. The whole lot of
them the old, the young, even the chil¬
dren drink and make love. No rules or 19

"Nobody cares whose son or daughter they
are: families are more or less collective. Days
are spent drinking, eating, making love.
smoking, making love again, drinking	 No
history, no memory. The whole lot of them
the old, the young, even the childrendrink
and make love. No rules or regulations.
Nothing is forbidden. But since ail this is wal¬
lowing in dirt, it is a filthy, squalid paradise."
Three stills from Pavel Lounguine's
documentary about the Inuit.
10
regulations. Nothing is forbidden. But
since all this is wallowing in dirt, it is a
filthy, squalid paradise.
Does the family exist in this restriction-
free society?



Of course, the family exists, but in a
very particular form. As almost all the
Inuit are of mixed race, the problem is not
so much one of knowing who one's father
is as of knowing to whom or to what one
belongs. Each of them, whether they
appear to us to be white, red-haired, blond,
Indian, oriental or black, is an Inuit. They
are all completely convinced of their Inuit
identity. They all share, in a sense, a phys¬
ical inability to live anywhere else.
They are extremely attached to their
land, their hills. Alaska is only thirty kilo¬
metres away. They could put their families
on board their kayaks and go and visit
their cousins, their relatives in North
America. The American and Canadian
Inuit live in a modern culture, with cars,
houses, and so on, on reservations where
white people are not allowed.
D Are the Russian Inuit allowed to go
there?
Today they are prohibited from going to
join those in America. But when they had
the right to go there not one of them chose
to stay. They went for day trips and then
came back.
D In your film you speak of 3,000 years of
civilization	
Under the communist regime, the chil¬
dren were forcibly educated in boarding
schools, where they were taught to speak
Russian. They lived in a Russian cultural
system. But the Inuit have nothing in
common with Russian farmers. Their psy¬
chological make-up is extremely subtle.
Half of them paint	 Their language and
their culture are rich and complex. They
are great readers and the library is a revered
place. They know an enormous amount
about culture and history.
At the same time the Russian adminis¬
trators are crying out for them to work.
There is practically no contact between
the two worlds.
O You say that the Inuit read a great deal.
Do they listen to the radio or to music?
Of course they do. You can see children
who sport the trappings of modern life.
They wear smart shoes like kids all over the
world, and listen to Michael Jackson on
their personal stereos!
O This is all a far cry from their tradi¬
tional culture.
The ancient Inuit created a thoroughly
original culture. As their land is very fragile,
their food supply is unreliable and the
winter is extremely cold, they developed a
way of life which is highly sensible and
ecologically sound. There never used to
be any waste. . . . They would capture a
walrus and cut it up. All the villagers would
share in the booty, eating the flesh, making
kayaks from the skin, tools from the bones
and fire from the fat. Even the intestines
were used. Every conceivable part of the
walrus served some purpose. The animal
was consumed in its entirety. Not a scrap
was thrown away!
The Inuit lived in harmony with nature,
before the arrival of caterpillar tracks,
which tore up the earth and brought waste,
packaged food, heating oil	 They had a
spiritual life, a mythology and a philos¬
ophy: they built one type of house for the
winter and another for the summer. They
proudly looked after plots of grass.
All so-called primitive peoples have an
"ecological" culture. The Inuit cannot
understand why the Russians take so many
fish out of the sea, only to throw half of
them back and leave them to rot. They
seem to find this deeply disturbing. Abhor¬
rent. It is soul-destroying for them.
Nowadays they dream of independence.
They want to set up a kind of national park

run by wise old sages, and live without
the whites, as before. But will they suc¬
ceed? It's doubtful whether they will be
able to maintain their houses, their heating
systems, their electricity supply. . . . They
are not sure themselves.
You say that there are as few as 1,500
Inuit in the area now, whereas there were
far more of them in the past. Is this due to
emigration?



I'd prefer to describe it as a disappear¬
ance. The Inuit are dying out and they are
not reproducing. They die very young of
disease, from drowning, of asphyxiation.
Basically because of alcohol. They are a
people born to live among nature, and now
nature is being destroyed. So what reason
is there to go on living?
PAVEL LOUNGUINE
is a Russian film-maker who wrote a dozen scenarios
for television and cinema before making his first
feature-length film, Taxi Blues (1990), which won him
the award for best director at the Cannes Film
Festival. Since then he has made another feature
film, Luna Park (1992), and several documentaries.
