talks to
Fernando Ainsa
The Chilean writer José Donoso is a
leading Latin American novelist. After
teaching English literature in the United
States and travelling in many countries,
he lived in Spain until 1980, when he
returned to Chile. His works have been
translated into many languages. Among
those translated into English are The
Obscene Bird of Night (1979), A House
in the Country (1984), and The Garden
Next Door (1992). Here he explains his
conception of the writer's role in
society.
FERNANDO AINSA,
Uruguayan writer, is director of the Unesco
Collection of Representative Works.
In the minds ofcritics and readers alike,
the Latin-American novel no longer occu¬
pies the dominantposition that it heldat the
time ofthe "explosion " ofnovel-writing in
the 1960s, although thegreat writers ofthat
period Gabriel Garcia Marques, Carlos
Fuentes, Mario Vargas Llosa andyourself
are still publishing regularly, and a new
generation ofwriters has emerged in every
one ofthe countries ofLatin America.
A clear distinction has to be drawn
between, on the one hand, the ballyhoo and
commercial exploitation surrounding the
1960s explosion, which I denounced in my
personal account of it (Historia personal
del "boom", 1972), and on the other the
grand ambitions that the writers of the
period entertained to write the "total" novel.
One thing that is certain is that, in the last ten
years, Latin-American novelists have aban¬
doned their dream of upholding, so to
speak, the great blueprints for society that
were a characteristic feature of the political
and cultural life of the 1960s and 1970s.

Those blueprints were an integral part of the
"cosmogonie ideologies" that proposed
universal, radical solutions and stemmed
from an unquestioning belief in the power
of the will.
In Latin America, that period was
marked by a "Bolivarian" dream of the con¬
tinent's literary unity. At the same time,
each novel aimed to be a literary "super-
production" by virtue of its encyclopaedic
accumulation of knowledge. Conversely,
during the 1980s and even more so in the
present decade, novels have ceased to offer
the sort of absolute and all-embracing vision
represented in the weighty tomes that many
authors of my generation perpetrated,
myself included. Our aim was not only to
interpret the world but to change it as well.
Yet you have never been one for cer¬
tainties. You deal rather in doubt, ambi¬
guity and contradictions.
Contradictions and doubts that never¬
theless formed part of an ambitious self-
appointed task, that of saying "everything"
in a novel that aimed to be representative of
a particular moment in history, a moment
whose special, unique nature seemed to us
to be beyond doubt. History is now per¬
ceived subjectively and deciphered through
the individual; what it has gained in relativity
it has lost in "certainty". Novelists today
present individual life-stories, which may be
more or less representative, but they no
longer have any pretensions to give lessons
to their readers. Their characters are helpless,
often loners and disoriented. We have no
place to go to get warm now as we used to
do, when ideology gave us a roof over our
heads: nowadays, and I think this is all to the
good, we are exposed to the elements, no
longer sheltered by revealed truths from
the storms of life.
That is truefor the characters, but what
about the authors? What are theirpoints of
reference now? People have to believe in
something, after all.
Literature and aesthetics have taken the
place of ideologies, and it's not the first
time this has happened. I am thinking, for
instance, of John Milton, the author of
Paradise Lost, tugged this way and that
by the forces of the Renaissance and those
of puritanism. His cultural references were
those of his time: the recently rediscov¬
ered Greek and Latin poets, the writings of
the Fathers of the Church, the Bible he
was writing for a readership steeped in the
Scriptures rather than for one that shared
his political beliefs. At times of crisis, it is
the gossamer threads spun by the authors
of the past that hold writers back from the
brink of the existential void. It is this cul¬
tural heritage that helps them to go on
living. The works of the past are our real
strength and stay: it is on them that we
lean to write new ones, especially when
all the other certainties totter and tremble.
But the crisis also means that individ¬
uals are tempted to withdraw into their
shells, to create a safe hideawayfor them¬
selves. Everythingpoints to thefact that we
are "cocooning" ourselves, to use a
favourite American expression, adopting a
mode of behaviour compounded of self¬
ishness and cosiness, isolation and an
absence ofsolidarity.
I don't know which is worse, individual
cocooning or the collective cocooning in
ideological certainties that used to provide
us with answers to every question. In any
case, it is a very healthy development that
certain barriers have come down and certain
definitions have been challenged. I am
thinking in particular of the little self-con¬
tained worlds created by the disciples of
the various "sects" that have had such an
influence on modern thought, from Freud
to Lacan or from Marx to Althusser, or the
jargon used by some critics, which is impen¬
etrable except to the initiates of their own lit¬
erary coterie! The shackles have all fallen
from us and it seems that nothing else has
yet come along to take their place. The pos
itive side to this, in my opinion, is that we
find ourselves in a new situation, beset with
questions we cannot answer.
Why shouldwriters have all the answers
anyway?
This is perhaps typical of Latin-American
intellectual life. Importuned by the realities
of the world around them, writers feel con¬
stantly obliged to make statements and take
stands. The worst of it is that many of them
feel it their "duty" to voice an opinion on
"Novelists today
present individual
life-stories that may
be more or less
representative, but
they no longer have
any pretensions to
give lessons to their
readers."
everything that happens in their country
and elsewhere in the world. Intellectuals in
our part of the world are "know-alls" who
feel free to hold forth from the pulpit on a
whole range of topics, from economics to
current political affairs, whereas European
writers tend rather to concentrate on the
work in hand, believing, quite rightly, that
the cobbler should stick to his last. So many
"prophets" have come a cropper by dis¬
cussing subjects they know nothing about!
Would it be true to say that the idea, so
fashionable not long ago in Latin America,

ofthe writergrappling with the realities of
"the here and now " is today in crisis ?
Every writer is obliged to live with the
uncertainties of his own times. It is some¬
thing inevitable but not specifically Latin-
American. The question "Who are we?" is
implicit in all literature. But it should be
remembered that writers must always be, at
least to some extent, outsiders. If they are
not so by nature, they must be able, albeit at
some personal cost, to distance themselves
from anything that would identify them
too closely with a particular group, ide¬
ology or class, or with their country. One
should be wary of the idea of belonging.
Outsiders see things differently. This is pre¬
cisely what the marginal characters in my
books, those who are "excluded from the
banquet of life", all say.
Chilean writers, in spite ofeverything
and even in the darkest hours of the
Pinochet dictatorship, have always main¬
tained strong emotional ties to their
country. The "garden next door" from
which one ofyour novels takes its title is
that of childhood and the homesickness
that is the backdrop to allyour books.
Chilean writers do, it is true, have a very
special relationship with their country.
Even those of us who have lived and
worked abroad and could be called
"transnational" writers cling to certain
images and memories a secret garden
where we find shelter from the inclement
weather of the real world. As you know, I
am now back living and working in my
own country. I am at present putting the
finishing touches to a novel, Sparrows sing
in Greek, set in the Lota coal-mining
region; the spare, taut language draws
inspiration from the way the miners talk.
Is that why you went back to Chile in
1980, when the dictatorship was in full
swing?
That was only part of the reason. It was
mainly because I felt that everything that
had to be done in Europe had already been
done, and people like me were not needed to
do what remains to be done. I am firmly
"Literature and
aesthetics have
taken the place of
ideologies, and it's
not the first time
this has happened."
convinced of this. I could leave no footsteps
behind me in the Old World, but in Chile
there is still so much to be done. Of course
there was the advantage that in Europe I
was anonymous, I could wear various masks
to "disguise" myself, I could hide and go
unnoticed. In Chile I cannot get away from
the image that people have formed of me.
Everything is preordained: I have to play
out my role as writer which is not easy
when, like me, one is a prey to doubt and
uncertainty. But to answer your question, the
primary reason why I returned to Chile was
homesickness, which gets worse as one gets
older and for which there is no remedy.
The theme ofexile ispainfullypresent
in The Garden Next Door,published [in
Spanish], it is worthpointing out, in 1981,
and the theme ofhomecoming appears in
Desesperanza ("Despair") published in
1986. Is there an autobiographical element
in this?
"Writers must
always be, at least
to some extent,
outsiders."
Many myths have been woven around the
theme of exile. Wherever people go, what¬
ever they do, they take their homeland,
their home town, with them, and there is no
way of going into voluntary exile from one's
own self, whatever some people may think
or claim to the contrary. Even the most cos¬
mopolitan traveller remains bound up with
his place of origin. As the Greek poet Con-
stantine Cavafy wrote, "You'll always end
up in this city". It is worth quoting the
whole poem:
You said: "I'll go to another country, go
to another shore,
find another city better than this one....
You won't find a new country, won't
find another shore.
The city will always pursue you.
You'll walk the same streets, grow old
in the same neighbourhoods, turn grey
in these same houses.
You'll always end up in this city. Don't
hopefor things elsewhere:
there's no shipforyou, there's no road/'
So in the end it's not such a bad thing
to have roots and a home!
I have never said it was, despite the fact that
Chileans, however deep their roots in the
South, of course also feel drawn back to
Europe, which, when all is said and done, is
a part of their background. The theme of
the voyage haunts the works and lives of
many Chilean novelists: take Criollos en
Paris by Joaquin Edwards Bello, Los
trasplantados by Alberto Blest Gana or the
tradition of the "initiatory voyage" to
Europe among nineteenth-century intellec¬
tuals. The great Chilean poets have always
been great travellers too Pablo Neruda,
Vicente Huidobro, even Gabriela Mistral,
despite her profound attachment to the real
life of her country! There's nothing like
having been out in all weathers to make you
appreciate the warmth of hearth and home.
That's why we are now in such a state of
happy uncertainty, torn between the urge
to leave and wanting to stay.
*"The city", from C.P. Cavafy, Collected
Poems, translated by Edmund Keeley & Philip
Sherrard, Chatto & Windus, London, 1975.
