L..
THE CHICKEN AND THE BANANA
SOME ofthe world's most unusual languages
are spoken in the Santa Cruz Islands, a vol¬
canic archipelago located between the
Solomon Islands and the islands of Vanuatu (for¬
merly the New Hebrides) in the southwestern
Pacific. The languages, which belong to a small,
interrelated group, are spoken by a population
numbering about 5,000. They are remarkable for
the ways in which they subdivide and minutely cat¬
egorize the world into sets or classes some forty
of them in all, each indicated by a special prefix.
Some of these classes of words reflect complex
ways of thinking. In one of the languages, Ayiwo,
for example, the basic meaning of the v/orApaa
is "sliver", but it never occurs without a class
prefix. It may be combined with nyi-, the pointed
objects class prefix, to make nyi-paa, which means
"a chip", or, literally, "a pointed sliver". With
the prefix no-, which refers to indistinctly sepa¬
rated parts of a whole, it becomes no-paa, which
means "pieces of bark peeling off a tree trunk", or,
literally, "slivers indistinctly separated and still
attached to the thing to which they belong and of
which they form a part". When preceded by
nyo-, the class prefix for moving away into the
distance, it makes nyo-paa, which means "type of
arrow" or, more exactly, "sliver-type object that
moves away into the distance". With te-, the
class prefix for something foreign, particularly of
Polynesian provenance, it becomes te-paa,
meaning "a nail", literally a "sliver of foreign
metal, probably of Polynesian origin".
Another such word is -modyi, which means
"concept of the right hand and strength". It also
only occurs with prefixes of this kind, so that
when combined with lo-, the class prefix for
acquisition through labour and effort, it makes lo-
modyi, which means "small adze", literally
"something used for acquiring something else
through labour and effort by one's strong right
hand". Combined with mo-, the class prefix for
extending far, it becomes mo-modyi, meaning a
"small outrigger canoe", or, in the literal transla¬
tion, "something that goes far when using one's
strong right hand for paddling". And with oyä-,
the mangrove class prefix, oyä-modyi means "a
type of mangrove with very strong wood".
Another feature of this language is that many
of its nouns are descriptions based on verbs, with
a class prefix added. The verb va, for instance,
means "to be immature". When class prefixes
are added to it, the following words emerge. The
addition of the masculine human class prefix, gi-,
produces gi-va meaning "male baby". The addi¬
tion oí si-, the feminine human class prefix, pro¬
duces si-va meaning "female baby". Me-va means
"human babies" {me being the collective human
class prefix). Pi-va means "adolescent" (pi being
the prefix for the half-developed human class).
Va-, is the prefix for the chicken class so that
vä-va means "small chicken". And since h- is
the banana class prefix, u-va means "small, unde¬
veloped banana".
While such multiple class systems, though
with fewer classes, occur in other parts of the
world, the Santa Cruz Island languages add
another highly complicated, quite different class
system to indicate possession, with the object
possessed determining which of the numerous
possessive classes should appear in any given
case. For instance, if someone wants to say that
a chicken belongs to them, the word indicating
"my" would be different depending on whether
the chicken was thought of as food or as a pet.
What's more, the chicken class prefix would
also have to be added to the "my" word chosen.
Verbs are also put into classes indicated by
prefixes, according to whether the action
referred to is carried out using one's hand, a
tool, or a knife. For example, vä-gäte means
"to tear apart by hand", while tä-gäte means "to
tear apart with a tool" and lä-gäte means "to slit
with a knife". Other prefixes indicate other
activities carried out by exerting energy, or con¬
stituting a single violent action, etc.
There is also a system that uses verbs to pre¬
cisely indicate the location of an action in rela¬
tion to the speaker (i.e. near, at some distance,
behind, near the person addressed, or not close
to either the speaker or the person addressed,
etc.); the general direction of the speaker or the
person addressed (upwards or downwards); and
the direction ofthe action (towards the speaker,
or the person addressed, or a third person).
Vä-va (a small chicken) and
u-va (small bananas).
Elgeklrt
This text was compiled by
Stephen Wurm from
information supplied by
speakers of the languages of
the Santa Cruz Islands,
especially Patrick Bwakolo,
John Mealue and Ini Lapli. 37
