COMMENTARY BY FEDERICO MAYOR
Preventing pollution
WATER, soil and air pollution is a world¬
wide problem. We cannot go on taking
a piecemeal view of the preservation of
our heritage. We must adopt worldwide rules of
conduct. A situation in which one country takes
appropriate action while its neighbour does the
opposite cannot be tolerated. Some countries
are much worse polluters than others, and it is
they who should foot most of the bill.
The industrialized countries are at present
responsible for between 70 and 85 per cent of all
pollution and its disastrous effects on the world's
cultural heritage. Although they have a much
larger population, the developing countries
account for far fewer of the sources of pollution
and contribute less to environmental degradation.
How can countries that cannot afford to do so be
asked to behave as the industrialized countries
themselves have failed to behave? Take defor¬
estation, for example. In the North memories
should not be so short that people forget how, for
centuries, they have been devastating their forests.
Instead of laying down the law to others they
should be helping them to adopt rules of conduct
better than theirs have been in the past.
Like natural disasters, man-made catastrophes
know no frontiers. There have been many episodes
in history as sombre as the eruption of Mount
Pinatubo in the Philippines. That volcano gave off
as many toxic substances in a day as the burning
oil wells in Kuwait gave off in a year. The differ¬
ence, however, is that there was nothing we could
do to prevent the Pinatubo eruption, but we were
perfectly capable of averting the Kuwaiti oil well
fires, and should have done so. These were exam¬
ples of, on the one hand, an unavoidable disaster
and, on the other, of a problem that was remedi¬
able because it was the work of human hands.
A moral duty
Prevention is a duty demanded of us by something
much more than cultural, economic or political
considerations. As in the case of preventive mea¬
sures in the field of health, it is our moral duty. If
we want to preserve the health of our planet and
of its cultural monuments in particular, we should
take all the preventive steps our resources allow.
The resources we now have at our disposal are
considerable those, for instance, provided by
satellite-based remote sensing, which covers the
whole world. To find out whether monuments in
Iraq had suffered war damage, there was no need
to send a fact-finding mission; we had only to
examine the photographs accumulated day by
day in two or three world centres.
We therefore have the technical means to ensure
that international standards are respected, and to
avoid pollution that is mainly attributable to the
activities of 18 to 22 per cent of humanity, by
which I mean that highly privileged fraction of the
world's population whose appetite for creature
comforts and gadgets, so characteristic of the con¬
sumer society, needs to be curbed and corrected.
Respect for future generations is now a moral
duty. It is the supreme concern of such people as
Captain Cousteau, who has for so many years
been opening our eyes to the wonders of nature
and who is now sounding the alarm, alerting us to
the fact that we are in the process of destroying the
seas, the very lungs of the planet. As we all know,
there is no life without light, but it is precisely at
the interface between the waters and the dry land
that we are destroying ecosystems by dumping
huge quantities of toxic products. The great threat
now hanging over the human race is the human
race itself.
