When the
collective
memory has
been warped by
Stalinism and
national-
communism,
re-establishing
a critical
outlook is an
uphill job
Past imperfect oy Zoe Petre
16
IN the countries of eastern Europe, control of
the collective memory has been an essential
feature of dictatorship. From the time of
the Communist Manifesto of 1848, history was
the arena in which the very legitimacy of the dic¬
tatorship of the proletariat was decided. As
George Orwell wrote in his famous novel, 1984,
"Who controls the past controls the future."
To begin with, this take-over of history had a
dual purpose. First, it was designed to impose an
official interpretation of the past as a forecast of
the present and a supposedly glorious future.
Second, it was a deliberate attempt to blot out all
consciousness of national history and all positive
memories of the past. The Romanians, who had
shown a reprehensible loyalty to their nation by
claiming their historic provinces and their national
identity, had to be taught that this loyalty and this
identity were "bourgeois prejudices" generated
by a false view of history. Impoverished by Stal¬
inist dogma and subjected to an obsessive search
for the "class struggle" the historian's only
legitimate criterion this new version of history,
which denied the past any specificity, was
designed only to justify the present.
Hundreds of teachers, hastily trained during
the 1950s, continued to use the rudimentary
stereotypes of this Stalinism which they had par-
rotted in their youth. Later, however, another
branch was grafted onto this stock, namely the

"i
7W:
^^V1 A .
i - kj
Left, Nicolae Ceausescu
addresses the National
Assembly In 1 977 during a
ceremony to mark the
centenary of Romania's
independence.
Below, televised images of
the trial of Nicolae and
Elena Ceausescu In 1989.
national communism of Nicolae Ceausescu and
his entourage.
National history was muzzled for ten years.
Then, playing the card of restoring the past,
giving the impression that the "people" had man¬
aged to preserve the sense of national identity that
had been distorted by professional historians,
and exploiting the frustration of people trauma¬
tized by the crushing of their memories, this
second manipulation finally destroyed the critical
approach to history. First national history was
annihilated by the universalist claims of Stalinist
doctrine. Then universal history was annihilated
by being reduced to a mere backcloth for an
inflated vision of national glory. Increasingly
pompous language, together with a growing
refusal to think about method or exercise critical
judgment, eventually brought in a falsely pious
rhetoric of commemoration whose deleterious
consequences are far from forgotten today.
Admittedly this exercise was never entirely
successful. In the interstices of the system some
people continued with dignity and humility to
practise the profession of historian with dignity
and humility, and a brilliant array of teachers,
trained between the wars in Europe's great history
departments, went on teaching until the 1970s.
These historians handed down to their pupils an
ethic, a model and a historian's conscience that
helped them survive both intellectually and
morally. During the short and deceptive interlude
of 1965-1971 when the regime made apretence
of openness to the outside world in order to con¬
solidate its position this generation of pupils
managed to make contacts and set up a network
of intellectual communication that mitigated
their isolation and allowed them to maintain a cer¬
tain professional dignity.
Exploring continents, rethinking
concepts
These remnants of historical awareness became
essential after 1989, when a revival of the human
sciences began to get under way. The enormity of
the task still to be accomplished by historians is
obvious. It involves rethinking concepts and
bringing to light the forgotten continents of his¬
tory, with drastically reduced human and mate¬
rial potential. A brief list of the objectives of this
work shows that it will be an uphill job. In my
opinion, such a list consists of two main parts: one
of gaps to be filled, and one of ideas to be chal¬
lenged. And of course the two parts overlap.
The most important gaps are due to the pro¬
hibitions of the period just ended. Both docu¬
ments and interpretation were subject to cen¬
sorship. The state archives only kept part of the
documents prc-dating the Second World War.
Those regarded as "sensitive" (documents
relating to the Royal Family, the political parties
and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs) were placed
in reserved archives, mainly those of the com¬
munist party's Institute of History. These
archives have only become accessible since 1990.
For the documents of the past fifty years
ÎI

Ihe Romanian royal family
photographed between the
(those of the communist party, the political
police, and the army), it is still necessary to
apply jointly to the army and the secret ser¬
vice. The recent opening of the state, communist
party, Komintern and KGB archives in Russia
has added a mass of documents essential for the
study of the history of the communist regime in
Romania. Moreover, one of the most urgent
tasks is to quickly establish a stock of "non-
traditional" documents oral history and audio
and visual archives of the last fifty years. This
is indispensable for sophisticated modern
research into the mentality of totalitarianism.
The history of the origins, establishment
and development of the communist regime,
with all its ramifications, is the area which most
urgently needs to be studied. In a critical exam¬
ination of the past fifty years, far more is at
stake than mere scholarly interest: it amounts to
a test of a society's capacity to make a clean
break with its past. Some major topics that must
now be studied include: the history of the anti-
communist resistance and the repression; the
history of the institutions of communism, and
of the divergent, indeed marginal and under¬
ground economies and societies, that the system
controlled or masked; and also the leading fig¬
ures of the system and the dynamics of its polit¬
ical, military, and intellectual elites.
This field, so far more closed to critical inves¬
tigation than any other, needs to be reopened. At
the same time, research should be carried out
into the great taboos of official communist his¬
toriography: the institutions of the modern
Romanian state (the monarchy, the army, the
parliamentary system and the political parties in
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, including
18
the real history of the communist party, which
was subject to a particularly distorting cult);
the history of Transylvania, the key to the dis¬
putes between Romania and Hungary a front¬
line subject for historians; universal history,
systematically marginalized by the institutional
system and also by lack of information and con¬
tact with the international academic commu¬
nity; and lastly the basic techniques of historical
research epigraphy, palaeography, and literary
criticism, genealogy, diplomatic and heraldry.
These tools of rigorous investigation were
neglected as well as feared by the kind of rough-
and-ready history that prevailed for so long.
As regards concepts, the situation is even
more difficult. On the one hand, resistance to the
ideologization of history was often reflected in
a kind of conceptual paralysis, a rejection of
any historical discussion, and a positivism that
was never really questioned. Moreover, no his¬
torian managed to escape completely from the
division of the historical field laid down by the
regime, even by keeping the official line at arm's
length. Once at least half the resources of his¬
torical research were devoted to the study of
social or national movements, the accumulated
results of this work were bound to end up by
endorsing a viewpoint in which social conflicts
(or the nation) constitute the main driving force.
The sleep of reason
The two-pronged offensive against the critical
awareness of history Stalinist indoctrination
and then the official history of national commu¬
nism thus resulted in the establishment of a his¬
torical mythology. If even professional historians
sometimes find it hard to remember that this
mythology exists and to free themselves from it,
what can be expected of people at large? The
myth of a people's origins, of founding fathers or
saviours, of a people both chosen and crucified by
history, this edifying "nineteenth-century" per¬
spective focusing on a people's identity, is the
most difficult obstacle to surmount. This approach
is the basis for a false appreciation of the present,
which is all the more difficult to correct because
it has become sacrosanct. There is still widespread
confusion about whether history is an essentially
critical exercise or an act of commemoration, a
pious discourse about the past.
Keeping the invasion of stereotypes at bay is
not easy, particularly in a society which has
known not only the traumas of forty-five years
of totalitarian rule but also the violence of a
bloody and spectacular change of regime. This
violent break was seen as a threat to the identity
not only of the privileged groups of the old

regime, who were directly accused, but also of
the "little people", who had resigned themselves
to coming to terms with totalitarianism and
whose precarious inner comfort was now dis¬
turbed. These men and women, hitherto crushed
by fear, refuse to give up the amnesia that for so
long helped them to survive and in many cases
cling to the myths of national identity in order
to regain their shaky dignity. Not the least of
them are the professional historians who repress
their critical spirit.
If, in the field of history, "collective knowl¬
edge" today corresponds to neither of the two
official versions, the mongrel view that has
emerged from them has no more affinities with
a critical consciousness of history than they do.
A separate study would be needed to cover this
curious blend of incredulity and myth, of dis¬
trust and stereotypes, in which emotions (espe¬
cially hatred) overcome rational thought. It pro¬
duces a kind of rant, a tissue of empty and
inconsistent verbiage that robs of its meaning not



only the fabric of the myths of official history,
but also history as a rational judgment, sup¬
ported by evidence, of the past.
Such a climate cannot foster calm historical
discussion. But this discussion must take place.
If critical learning and a truthful collective
memory are not re-established, the sleep of
reason may continue. The real historians of the
East, Romanian historians among them, must
recover the memory of their own history. It is
they, with their experience, both individual and
collective, who are best equipped to recall the
real memory of communist totalitarianism as a
global phenomenon of twentieth-century his¬
tory. The destructive nature of the century now
drawing to a close, which stems not from some
chance feature but from the inhuman, deeply
perverse essence of both fascism and commu¬
nism, has only just begun to be considered. It is
our duty to think more deeply about it. The
lion's share of this task will no doubt fall on
the historians of eastern Europe. It is for them
to collect the documentary evidence, and to
carefully dismantle the institutional, social, and
ideological machinery in order tô put the tools
essential for the search for truth within reach of
their colleagues the world over.
The great illusions of the past about the
heuristic or educational capacities of writing
history have collapsed. Critical study of the
past remains the only defence, fragile though it
be, against a hideous return of human error.
Demonstrators give the V
for victory sign after the fall
of Ceausescu.
ZOE PETRE,
of Romania, is professor of
ancient history and dean of the
history faculty of the
University of Bucharest. She
was co-author with Liana
Lupas of a commentary (in
French) on Aeschylus's "Seven
against Thebes" ( 1 98 1 , Paris
and Bucharest) and recently
published (in Romanian) a
study on "Greek Civilization
and the Origins of Democracy"
(1992, Erasmus publishers,
Bucharest). 19
