the African
by George Darley-Doran
For eleven months a year,
Elvis Johnson-ldan lives in
London with his wife
Elizabeth and their three
children. Each December,
however, he returns to the
village ofJukwaa, his
birthplace in Ghana, where
he reigns supreme. In the
previous issue George
Darley-Doran described how
he met the young Anglo-
African chief In London and
Accra. Here he
accompanies him on his
return to Jukwaa.
I It was late morning when we reached
Jukwaa. People emerged from all the tintop
mud and brick houses and gathered excitedly
around the car as we parked in a little open space
on the other side of the main road. A man of
about fifty-five, in a T-shirt and shorts, thrust his
hand through my window and exclaimed: "You
are a 100 per cent welcome!" He introduced
himself as Elvis's brother Rutherford. We got
out of the car, smiled back at the crowd and filed
into a simple little house. This apparently served
as a kind of royal sitting room with sleeping
quarters attached to it.
We had only been in the room for a couple of
minutes before we made for the Bethel Chapel
the big, grey Methodist structure that looms in a
solemn and imposing manner over a village oth¬
erwise characterized by an atmosphere of happy
chaos. We must have made an unusual sight:
Elvis, Matthew, Christopher and myself in jacket
and tie and Liz, Eunice and Theresa in dresses. We
walked into the church from a side entrance,
with the congregation beaming at us.
The preacher, a diminutive man of about sixty,
continued his sermon in a high falsetto. Every few
moments the sermon would be interrupted by a
member of the congregation, to whom he would
nod sagely in agreement. At the front of the con¬
gregation was the choir, who in their black cloaks
and mortarboards looked as if they were about to
receive their diplomas. After a few minutes, the
preacher broke off from his sermon, came down
from the pulpit and announced in English
everyone's happiness that God had brought us
safely to Ghana and his wish that God would
inspire us all towards greater love and unity.
Then the whole congregation shouted
"Akwaaba!" (welcome) and burst into a rousing
Fanti rendition of "While Shepherds Watched
Their Flocks by Night" to the accompaniment of
bongos, maraccas and jazzy vocal harmonies.
That was followed by some more preaching,
after which everybody left the church and we
headed back to the royal sitting room.
Nana Elvis and Liz took their places on the
ceremonial U-shaped wooden stools at the head
of the room, and the rest of us sat on armchairs
and sofas around the walls. Matthew and Christo¬
pher fidgeted in their formal clothes. People
immediately began filing in to pay their respects.
They introduced themselves to me as either a
brother, sister, cousin, nephew or niece of Elvis.
I later discovered that these terms are applied to
even the most distant of relations. The main thing
was that everybody was family, and overjoyed to
see their chief and his broni (white) family. Elvis
smiled benignly and murmured his thanks to all
and sundry. Matthew leaned over and asked me,
"Why is everybody being so nice to us?"
A walking encyclopaedia of. traditional
knowledge
Seated protectively in front of Elvis was Dou¬
glas, his okyeame, the direct translation of which
is "linguist". Every Fanti chief has a linguist, who
serves as a kind of first lieutenant, communicating
with the people on behalf of the chief and acting
both as a political envoy and a personal bodyguard.
The linguist is a walking encyclopaedia of all the
traditional knowledge and information connected
to the stool under which he serves. He is also the
bearer of the akyempona, or sceptre, of his chief.
These sceptres are made of wood, stand about
two metres high and are topped by a gilded sym¬
bolic emblem. Elvis's akyempona, for example, fea¬
tures a little seated man pointing his finger at three
smaller figures an indication of his special
responsibilities for youth.
Douglas occupies a position of some impor¬
tance, and certainly looked the part that day:
short, thick-set and bullish, he was swathed in
a heavy robe of thick blue cotton (as worn, in
various colours, by all Fanti men on ceremonial
occasions). He had a gold chain around his neck,
from which dangled a gold lion pendant. Dou¬
glas is in his early thirties and will serve under
Elvis until one or the other dies. There is little
doubt that Douglas would lay down his life to
protect his chief.
The next morning, Elvis had to attend a formal
welcoming ceremony, which the rest of us
(including even Liz) were excluded from. When he 4J

A village party in Jukwaa.
48
GEORGE DARLEY-DORAN
is a Turkish-born Englishman
who lives in London, where he
works as a television
correspondent.
came back towards midday, he was wearing a
stripy blue robe and cap. He did not give much
away about the ceremony. All he said was that liba¬
tions had been poured and that spirits had been
invoked, which had manifested themselves



through some of the people attendant. We went to
a restaurant for lunch. Over the meal, Elvis joked
that we didn't need to worry about dinner because
he had fined someone a goat that morning. I asked
what sort of crime had been committed and he just
replied, "Oh, somebody said something they
shouldn't have in my absence."
The main event of the day
The main event of the day was a "beach party" on
the banks of the Ayensu River, which flows past
Jukwaa towards the sea. The party was orga¬
nized as a fund-raising event for the public latrine.
This happens to be the major construction pro¬
ject ofJukwaa. The site is on the outskirts of the
village, and the project will cost another 1 .5 mil¬
lion cedis (about $3,500) to complete. The village
does what it can to raise the money, while Elvis
has been approaching various charitable foun¬
dations in Britain. Until such funds are raised, and
the latrine is completed, the people ofJukwaa will
simply have to make do as they always have
done with the village dump.
The beach party was a great success. Elvis (in
his robe) and Liz (in a more demure European
outfit) sat on their ceremonial stools in the shade
of a big green awning. Surrounding them were the
senior members of Jukwaa's six leading clans.
These were accompanied by their wives, who
all wore Dutch wax-printed cotton dresses. It
was every Westerner's idea of a traditional African
durbar. Facing away from them, it was a dif¬
ferent story. Hundreds of children and adoles¬
cents danced wildly to the HiNRG disco music
blasting out from the banks of speakers on either
side of the DJ. A big crowd assembled on the
banks of the river and cheered as the little nanas
Theresa, Matthew and Christopher were pulled
through the water on an inflatable plastic dinghy.
I left the party towards evening with Ruther¬
ford, who had offered to show me around the vil¬
lage. Our first stop was at a small, four-walled
structure located to one side of the royal sitting
room. This was thepusuban or spiritual heart of
Jukwaa. Growing out of the roofless monument
was a thicket of plants and trees. These, according
to legend, had been planted by the original Idan
settlers of the village. Painted on one of the walls
of the monument was the message (in English),
"KNOW YOUR ASAFO LEADERS", under
which was a long list of names. Rutherford
explained that the asafo leaders constituted a
kind of military hierarchy. In the old days, the
asafo class had been responsible for defending the
stool lands against marauding tribes. Nowadays,
titles such as tufohene, asafo supi and asafo akyere
are only ceremonial, but they do confer an ele¬
ment ofprestige. Another wall of thepusuban was
decorated by a marvellous picture of a double-
headed flying dragon. This, Rutherford told me,
was a mythical beast relating to the legend of the
people of Jukwaa. Many generations ago, the
ancestral forebears were routed from their orig¬
inal home by the Asante. They went into exodus,
in the course of which legend has it they were
led by this mythical dragon to the present loca¬
tion of Jukwaa. The name of the village, inci¬
dentally, means "place of peace", which is what
the first Idan settler is said to have exclaimed
upon arriving at the site.
A place of peace
The legend ofJukwaa and its people is an ongoing
one. The "keeper" of the legend is the Okyeame-
hene, or state linguist. From an early age, the
Okyeamehene will have memorized and learned
how to articulate the history of his people. On the
most significant occasions, he will recite the
legend in the form of extended poems and songs.
Part of the legend is related in drum language. The
entire recitation takes an hour a day for two
weeks. The Okyeamehene of Jukwaa died in
1990 and his son is still in the process of being
groomed to take his place.
From the pusuban, Rutherford and I went
down a path that led away from the main road,
out of the village and past the school (a long,
low building at the top of a gradually sloping
football pitch). After a few minutes, we came
upon the local akpeteshie distillery. Akpeteshie is
a spirit derived from sugar cane. The distillery was
operating at full capacity, and the chief distiller
kindly agreed to give us a guided tour.
Around the distillery compound were large
piles of sugar cane, which resembles thick
bamboo. In the middle of all these piles was a
shed in which was situated an antique petrol-
driven sugar cane crusher. This made a roaring
noise as long stalks of sugar cane were fed into .
it. Juice poured out from one side and crushed
pulp from the other. The pulp is taken away
and burnt, and the juice is fermented in big
metal vats. After two weeks, the fermenting
liquid is transferred into old petrol drums. The
drums are covered with lids and log fires are lit
underneath them. There are usually about six
drums on the go. Emerging from each lid is a
metal pipe, which spirals downwards through a
vat of cool water. The alcohol condenses in this
pipe and then seeps through a cotton-wool filter,

from which it spurts into a plastic bottle. The
resulting akpeteshie is a clear white spirit, the
Ghanaian equivalent of Italian grappa, Cretan
raki, and Yugoslavian slivowitz.



It was dark by the time Rutherford and I left
the distillery. We got back to the village and entered
the royal sitting room, where Elvis and Liz were
holding court. Somebody brought in the goat
referred to earlier. It was presented to Elvis, who
patted it affectionately. Then the animal was led
away to be slaughtered as a ritual offering to the
spirits.
Sports day
Liz and Elvis went to Accra the next day. I spent
the morning in the village, where life was carrying
on as usual. In front of each house women were
making fufu, the staple of the Ghanaian diet,
which is prepared from plantain and cassava.
The two ingredients are boiled until soft, usually
over a charcoal fire. Then they are transferred into
a big wooden mortar and pounded for about fif¬
teen minutes with a long, thick sugar-cane pestle.
The final result is a doughy lump of fufu. This is
covered in a spicy tomato broth and eaten with
fingers out of a communal bowl. Fufu is swal¬
lowed without being chewed, like oysters.
Ghanaians of every class love fufu so much that
they will happily eat it every day of their lives. The
"thump, thump, thump" of fufu being pounded
is perhaps the archetypal sound of Ghana.
Around the women making their fufu, chil¬
dren played, chickens pecked at the dust and
goats wandered about with their kids. Children
queued up with buckets at the village water tap.
It made a peaceful little scene. Tranquil as things
were, however, one could also feel the excite¬
ment mounting for a major event that was to be
held that afternoon: the annual sports day.
After lunch I walked up to the school with
Elvis's older brother, Payne, who is an architect.
There was already a big crowd by the time we got
there, virtually the entire population ofJukwaa.
The normally featureless schoolyard had been
turned into a spectators' gallery. Beneath the
green awning, the men of consequence sat with
their wives. All of them were in their best robes
and dresses. Payne and I sat down, he on a stool
and myself in an armchair that had been carried
up especially for me.
Launching the afternoon off was the under-
10s' football. One of the teams was called the
Christian Babies. They had black uniforms, with
a white skull and crossbones on the chest. The
other team was called the Idan Stars. There was
laughter and applause from the audience as the
little boys battled it out. The Christian Babies
came out on top.
Next was a game played by the teenage girls.
This is a little difficult to describe. There are sev¬
eral teams of about fifteen girls each. They all
form a big ring. Girls hop into the ring two at a
time, from opposite sides, making a kicking
motion as they hop. The first girl to make such a
motion "kicks" the other one out, although they
never actually touch. The girls compete with one
another until there is one clear victor and her
team wins the game. As the game progressed,
Village elders with teams
before a football game.
the girls displayed a competitive spirit that can
only be described as intense. Upon their victory,
the winning team let out an enormous cheer and
then trooped in formation around the chiefs'
enclosure, chanting all the while.
The high point of the afternoon was the
men's football. This pitted the born and bred
Jukwaa men against those who had come to
live in the village from other parts. Prior to the
game, the two teams lined up in the centre of the
field to be given a speech by Nana Kwesi Ansa,
a frail but dignified elder in a colourful che¬
quered robe. He called upon them to play fairly
and honourably. Then he sat down and the game
kicked off. Regrettably the result was a foregone
conclusion. The visiting residents were tougher,
almost to a man. Jukwaa's finest played hard
but were just not up to the competition. The
game was considerably livened by the occa¬
sional invasion of the pitch first by a flock of
chickens, then by a herd of goats and finally by
a long green snake. Douglas went to work on the
snake with his big stick and then picked it up and
waved it at the crowd, to the horrified shrieks of
all the females. Despite all the mishaps, it was a
fine match and the final score was only 1 -0 to the
visitors.
Once all the games were over, the prize-
giving took place. The Christian Babies were
presented with a bunch of plastic flowers, the
winning girls' team with a silver plaque and the
visiting men with a silver trophy. As he pre¬
sented the trophy, Nana Kwesi congratulated the
visitors warmly and called upon the home team
to bear no hard feelings and to play better next
year. Then everybody dispersed and gradually
trailed back to the village.
Payne and I returned to the royal sitting room
and rested for a while. We were going to need
plenty of energy for the funeral rite that was to be
held later that evening.
49
