Disregarded by most
approaches to
development in the
past fifty years, the
Bedouin pastoral
economy is coming
back into favour. But



for how long?
he return of the Bedouin
by Riccardo Boceo and Ronald Jaubert
Above, a falconer of the al-
Khrayshah tribe in Jordan. The
Bedouin train falcons and hunt
with them or sell them to the
emirs of the Gulf.
s' The term steppe (bâdia) is
used to describe regions
where the rate of
precipitation varies between
50 and 350 mm annually, as
opposed to the extremely arid
desert areas (sahra).
I The vast areas of land in arid and semi-
I arid regions known as the steppe make
up more than 70 per cent of the Arab Middle
East. For several centuries the main form of
human adaptation to this environment has been
pastoral nomadism. The Bedouin (badw) who
live in these regions take their name from the
Arabic word for steppe, bâdia/' The rhythm
of their lives has long been determined by the
seasonal movements of their herds from their
winter pastures in the arid regions to summer
encampments close to wetter areas or oases.
Today the steppe is no longer an ecological
unit, and the dangers of environmental degra¬
dation are great. In several regions natural plant
life has given way to large-scale cereal cultiva¬
tion. In others the spread of roads and the extrac¬
tion of hydrocarbons, phosphates and cement
have transformed the landscape. The introduc¬
tion of new technology and expanding national
and international markets have modified the
pastoral economy. Government policies in
favour of sedentarization have reduced the
autonomy of the tribes and led them to practise
new forms of mobility.
A changing tribal society
Traditionally the social counterpart of the pas¬
toral economy of the steppes has been the tribe,
an institution in which solidarity ('asabiya) and X I

"Once condemned
for their 'anti-
nationalist' and
'primitive'
attitudes, local
tribal organizations
are now seen as
virtue incarnate."
Above, in the Rub al-Khali
desert, in Saudi Arabia, a
Bedouin woman of the Yam
tribe prepares flour and water
paste to give to the camels as
a supplement to their meagre
forage.
Top, Bedouin tents in the
desert near the Gulf of Aqaba
(Jordan).
18
social bonds are based on blood ties (nasab).
Networks of blood relationships contribute to
the definition of tribal territories (dirah), within
whose moving frontiers members of the group
exercise the right to control resources, espe¬
cially water and grazing land.
Although in the Arab world the tribe is the
form of social organization typical of the people
of the steppes, it is not exclusive to Bedouin
societies. And just as pastoralism has never been
a self-sufficient economic system, Bedouin soci¬



eties have never been socially or politically iso¬
lated. Traditionally, the Bedouin economic
system has formed part of a context of comple¬
mentary and interdependent relationships with
crop-growing regions and urban centres through
trade in the products of herding, agriculture
and craftsmanship and also through caravan
transportation. Usually living on the fringes of
the empires that have succeeded one another in
the region, these societies have often been depen¬
dent on the interests and expansion strategies
pursued by sedentary governments.
Half a century of modernization
The nomadic herders were far less marginal¬
ized, demographically, economically and polit¬
ically, at the turn of the century than they are
today. The fall of the Ottoman Empire led to
great upheavals, and the emergence of new states
had far-reaching consequences.
First of all the creation of new frontiers lim¬
ited the herders' mobility and deprived them of
considerable economic space. New legislation on
landed property within the young states implied
the abolition of rights over the tribal dirah.
Between the two World Wars state inter¬
ests prevailed throughout the Middle East over
local arrangements, and the tribal policies of
the authorities (both Arab and colonial) set the
seal on the decline of the tribal order.
Although the European powers took charge
of military security in the steppes, they left the
problem of the political integration of the
Bedouin to the independent states. In the 1950s
most states adopted programmes of scdenta-
rization, which was considered the main if not
the best solution to the nomad "problem". These

programmes, supported and legitimized by
international organizations, were based on an
ideology of modernization subscribed to by
regimes whose political orientations were very
different. Most international experts and Arab
regimes stigmatized nomadism as a backward
social condition and condemned tribalism as a
hindrance to the ideal of a united nation.
Sedentarization policies allowed several states
to maintain tighter fiscal control over the former
nomads and enabled the latter to benefit from
public health and education services. However,
the transformation of herders into farmers rep¬
resented a denial of the importance of livestock-
raising and the abandonment of grazing-land
regeneration programmes in dry areas to the
benefit of intensive and extensive agriculture
that penalized the pastoral economy.
By the early 1970s, the effects of the policy
of sedentarization together with the direct and
indirect results of oil revenues were contributing
to a transformation of the Bedouin economies
into "multiple resource systems" in which live¬
stock-raising and farming had become one
option among a number of possibilities of
salaried employment, notably in the civil service,
the military and transportation.
Development out of control
Today rampant population growth and a
growing agricultural deficit in the Arab countries



of the Middle East are returning the arid regions
to centre stage in matters of food security. Tra¬
ditionally the main areas of sheep production,
Above, inside a Bedouin tent
of the Sba'a tribe at Wadi al-
Azib in Syria.
Top, Bedouin women milking
ewes near Palmyra (Syria).
Left, a meal prepared during a
religious festival by members of
Saudi Arabia's al-Murrah tribe.
Using his right hand, each
guest serves himself to kebssa,
the national dish of rice and
meat.
19


RICCARDO BOCCO
is an Italian anthropologist and
political scientist who teaches at
the University Institute for
Development Studies (IUED) of
the University of Geneva. A
specialist in peoples of the arid
zones in the Middle East, he has
devoted particular attention to
the relationships between
Bedouin tribes and states.
RONALD JAUBERT
is a Franco-British economist
presently teaching at the
University Institute for
Development Studies (IUED) in
Geneva. A specialist in arid
regions, he has worked on
projects in Syria and Mexico.
Both authors have
published many articles in
specialist journals and are, with
F. Métrai, co-editors of Steppes
d'Arabie. Etats, pasteurs,
agriculteurs et commerçants: le
devenir des zones sèches
(Cahiers de l'IUED n" 23,
Geneva, and PUF, Paris, 1993).
Since 1993 they have jointly
directed the interdisciplinary
training and research
programme entitled Aridité et
Sociétés at the IUED in Geneva.
A typical village southwest of
Aleppo (Syria). Its inhabitants
are former nomad pastoralists
whose families settled there
permanently in the 1930s.
the arid and semi-arid regions are playing a
decreasing role in the supply of meat to regional
markets where demand has grown without
precedent partly as a result of urbanization and
revenue from oil.
In some countries of the Near East, such as
Syria, the explosion of regional markets has led to
a considerable increase in the number of sheep
and has tightened the pressure on the arid and
semi-arid zones, which until the 1960s were the
primary food source for herds but today supply
less than 20 per cent of their annual consumption.
On the regional level, government land and
economic policies have not only contributed to
breaking up the former management systems
but have also made for considerable expansion of
cultivated areas in the arid zones. At present the
Bedouin share the use of their former territories
with villagers in the farming areas, shop-keepers
and livestock-raising entrepreneurs from the city
whose interests often compete with those of the
formerly nomadic populations.
The increased fragility of the steppes due to
soil deterioration now appears to be one of the
most disturbing effects of the development poli¬
cies of the past thirty years. In spite of the modern
technological facilities at their disposal, states
have not been able to control the environment or
ensure the success of models drawn up by experts.
Full speed astern!
Since 1960 when the majority of studies sup¬
ported sedentarization and turning the steppe
into cropland, studies carried out in Saudi Arabia
have highlighted the need to develop systems for
regenerating grazing land and drawn planners'
attention to the existence of a traditional man¬
agement system known on the Arabian Penin-
20
sula as hima (plural ahmia, literally, "protection"
and, by analogy, "reserve").
Formerly used in the Near East as a means of
controlling the degradation of grazing land, the
hima system could also supply large reserves of
forage for herds. According to Omar Draz, an
FAO consultant, the reintroduction of such a
system might have changed the populations'
attitude to local resources by introducing a phi¬
losophy of protection and improvement and
not simply exploitation.
In the present international context of envi¬


ronmental awareness, the latest approach
favoured by social and natural scientists relies
heavily on the hima system as a means of com¬
bating desertification. The system enjoys an
Islamic seal of approval which may go back to
the Prophet, but so far no detailed analytical
study of its feasibility on the Near-Eastern
steppe has been made. Furthermore, according
to specialists in favour of hima programmes,
their implementation would depend on the
return of tribal land rights on the steppes, on a
participatory approach that would take account
of Bedouin tribal organization, and on govern¬
ments taking a back seat in project manage¬
ment. This about-turn from the policies fol¬
lowed in the 1950s and 1960s is in itself a form
of criticism of the sedentarization projects that
were carried out.
One steppe at a time
The consensus that is forming around the hima
programmes should not prevent us from asking
some basic questions about them. Once con¬
demned for their "anti-nationalist" and "prim¬
itive" attitudes, local tribal organizations are
now seen as virtue incarnate. Their rehabilitation
is based on an idyllic vision of the Bedouin
tribes that, before state intervention, were sup¬
posed to manage the resources of the arid regions
harmoniously by respecting ecological balances.
This perception, which sweeps away fifty
years of history and "development", points to a
useful alternative solution but it also raises many
questions. Is it realistic? How will it be inter¬
preted locally? What are the interests of those
newly involved? What is the political weight
of public administrative bodies and private
groups in this new approach?
Development programmes are always based
on ideas about the world that are the product of
their time, and it might be asked in this case
whether the presuppositions and knowledge of
specialists are not backing a new ideology that
may once again turn out to be short on analysis
of the real situation.
