BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR BEGINNERS
by Monkombu Sambasivan Swaminathan
rrevious page, lettuce
grown in liquid nutrients,
using the technique known
as hydroponics, in a
Japanese vegetable factory.
Kept at constant
temperature with 24-hour-
a-day lighting in a carbon-
dioxide-rich atmosphere,
the lettuce reach maturity
4 to 5 times faster than
normal.
AMONG the more than five billion
. women, men and children living
on our planet, no two individuals
are alike and the same is true of cross-polli¬
nated plants as well as animals and micro¬
organisms. This kaleidoscopic diversity, which
exists in all living beings, provides the basis for
biotechnology, which may be described as the
technological modification and improvement
of living organisms.
The rediscovery of Gregor Johann
Mendel's laws of heredity in the early part of
this century helped promote an understanding
of the origins and workings of genetic diver¬
sity. The principal phenomena involved are
segregation, mutation and recombination of
genes. Together, these three actions generate
opportunities for the immense genetic diver¬
sity in living organisms.
In the past, the existence of genetic vari¬
ability enabled humans to select plants and
animals for domestication. Over 10,000 years
ago, plants such as wheat, barley and rice were
selected for cultivation from the wild flora.
After their initial domestication, these crops
were continuously improved through selection
of naturally occurring variability. In plants
like fruit trees and the potato, occasional muta¬
tions gave rise to new varieties. Thus, today, we
not only have over 1.5 million species of plants
and animals, but also a large number of genetic
strains within species. For example, more than
100,000 varieties of rice are grown in different
parts of the world.
From the beginning of this century, tech¬
niques such as planned hybridization and later,
the induction of mutations, were used by agri¬
cultural and biological research institutions
to create new genetic combinations.
Hybridization also became a method of
increasing the growth of crops and animals, a
phenomenon known as hybrid vigour. Hybrid
maize developed in the United States in the
1930s helped to double maize yields. The iden¬
tification of genes for a semi-dwarf plant type
in wheat in Japan and in rice in China in the
1940s provided the raw material for the green
revolution witnessed in these crops in Asia in
the late 1960s. Identification and utilization of
genetic mechanisms for male sterility in plants
made the commercial exploitation of hybrid
vigour possible even in a self-pollinated crop
like rice. Today, hybrid rice occupies nearly 18
million hectares in China.
Biological diversity thus became the basis
of continuous improvements in productivity.
Selection, mutation and hybridization were
used to improve plants, animals and micro¬
organisms of interest to agriculture, industry
and medicine. Thus, new antibiotics and vac¬
cines could be developed. Fermentation tech¬
nology made rapid strides. Classical biotech¬
nology involving non-molecular techniques
is responsible for many of the improvements
witnessed in scientific endeavours involving
living organisms.

Genetic engineeringthe hard core
of modern biotechnology
Against this background, we may examine the
new vistas opened up by molecular biology.
This area of science was inaugurated by James
Dewey Watson and Francis Crick forty years
ago when they described the double helix
structure of the deoxyribonucleic acid mole¬
cule, commonly known as DNA. Since then,
emphasis has shifted to the study of the mol¬
ecular basis of genetic diversity and to the
standardization of methods that can help
achieve novel genetic combinations through
what are known as recombinant DNA tech¬
niques, whereby scientists use tiny circular
pieces of DNA known as plasmid vectors to
achieve gene splicing. These techniques have
opened up a new world of genetic engineering,
leading to the creation of transgenic organ¬
isms organisms containing genetic material
into which DNA from an unrelated organism
has been artificially placed. They are already
being used in the production of insulin, inter¬
feron, and human growth hormone. Although
the term "biotechnology" is used to denote a
wide range of procedures such as cell and
tissue culture, micro-propagation and fer¬
mentation, the hard core of modern biotech¬
nology is genetic engineering.
The birth of an industry
Present-day biotechnology, which combines
conventional and molecular techniques, has
every prospect of becoming a great industry. In
addition to already existing applications in
health and medicine, large-scale uses in agri¬
culture, industry, energy supplies, environ-
Diogas production
on a farm in the village
of Rangasamudra,
Karnataka province (India).
Cow dung is mixed
with water in a trough
from which it is piped
into a tank where it is
transformed by heat into
natural gas (photos I
and 2). As a result of this
easy-to-use system,
gas can replace wood
as domestic fuel (photo 3),
thus helping to halt
deforestation in this part
of southern India.
In the United States
tomatoes with a shelf-life
of several weeks
are grown by deactivating
the enzymes that cause
them to rot. In container
at left are ordinary
tomatoes 25 days
after being picked;
at right, genetically
altered tomatoes.
mental protection and the exploration of space
are becoming exciting possibilities. Biotech¬
nology will probably provide the key to pro¬
ducing more food and other agricultural com¬
modities from less land and water in the
twenty-first century without the adverse eco¬
logical implications associated with the high
doses of mineral fertilizers and chemical pes¬
ticides being used now to make high-yielding
varieties of rice, wheat, maize and other crops
express their full potential.
Many transgenic plants are currently under
field testing in several parts of the world. Early
applications of recombinant DNA method¬
ology gave rise to micro-organisms that can
clean up oil spills. This led to the birth of
biorcmediation technology, which has been
widely used to treat the problems of "oil lakes"
created by the 1991 Gulf War. In fact, biotech¬
nologies have opened up unlimited opportu¬
nities for the purposeful use of biological
diversity. For example, at our Research Centre
in Madras, we are assembling a gene pool for

Drought-resistant crop
varieties and a new system
of drip irrigation enable
farmers to grow asparagus
in the desert of lea (Peru).
IO
MONKOMBU SAMBASIVAN
SWAMINATHAN is an Indian
scientist who played a leading
role in the "Green Revolution"
in Asia. He is Director-General
of the International Rice
Research Institute, Los Baños,
The Philippines, and has
worked extensively in the
fields of plant genetics and
agronomic research and
development.
breeding crops for tolerance to salt-water
intrusion. Mangrove trees that inhabit inter-
tidal regions along the shore have such genetic
traits. When we have enough scientific knowl¬
edge, it may be possible to transfer genes for
salt-water tolerance from mangrove trees to
other plants. Such research is important due to
the possible rise of the world's sea level in the
not-so-distant future.
Microbiological enrichment of cellulosic
wastes can be an important source of animal
feed, particularly where farm animals are
reared under stall-fed conditions. Biomass
refineries are now being established in several
countries.
Questions of safety and ethics
New research tools always generate hope and
fear, and questions about safety and ethics
have kindled public concern about biotech¬
nology. Critics fear that "playing God" with
living systems may create an environmental or
medical disaster, or lead us to interfere with
human nature itself. This is why countries
with a significant biotechnology programme
also have strict biosafety regulations. Com
mittees dealing with ethical issues also exist in
many scientific organizations.
Another issue of public concern, particu¬
larly in developing countries, is the use of
basic genetic material from plants from these
countries by private seed companies in indus¬
trialized nations solely for private profit. Since
most biotechnological research in industrial¬
ized nations is in the private sector, and the
private sector depends on developing countries
for genetic resources, questions relating to
systems for patenting and monetary compen¬
sation are the centre of widespread interna¬
tional attention. This was reflected in the
Global Biodiversity convention signed by
over 150 nations at Rio de Janeiro in June
1992.
Besides providing the foundation for global
food security and for sustainable livelihoods,
the wise use of biotechnology and a broader
understanding of both conventional and mol¬
ecular genetics could contribute to the elimi¬
nation of irrational beliefs and prejudices
about the dangers of diversity. These societal
benefits may ultimately be the most significant
contributions of modern biotechnology.
