Known since Antiquity,
fermentation processes offer
great opportunities to today's
food industry
FERMENTED foods and beverages, in their
many and varied forms, have been a great
source of pleasure to humans over the cen¬
turies. The ancient art of cheese-making involves the
fermentation of milk or cream. Bread involves a
yeast fermentation, and loaves of bread have been
found in Egyptian pyramids built 6,000 years ago.
The discovery of fruit fermentation was made so
long ago that the ancient Greeks believed that wine
had been invented by one of their gods, Dionysus.
And from about 2500 B.C., Egyptian documents
describe the malting of barley and the fermentation



CREATIVE FERMENT
by Peter L. Rogers
of beer. Kui, a Chinese rice beer, has been traced
back to 2300 B.C. More than 3,000 years ago, the
Chinese used mouldy soybean curd to clear up
skin infections and Indians living in central America
used fungi to treat infected wounds. The Pénicillium
mould in cheese-making was often used for similar
purposes.
It is only since the time of Louis Pasteur, who in
1 857 established that alcoholic fermentations were
caused by living cells, that we have begun to under¬
stand the fundamental role of micro-organisms in
these fermentation processes. In fact, the successful
development of the food industry in Western coun¬
tries has involved the use of micro-organisms not
only to enhance the flavour, texture and nutritional
qualities of many foods and beverages, but also to
control spoilage through sterilization and proper
packaging. In other societies as well, control of
spoilage has been achieved by fermentation.
In recent times, there has been a growing interest
Above, rows of ewe's milk
cheeses in a cave at
Roquefort-sur-Soulzon in
the Aveyron department
of France. Bread-mould
(inset) is added to the
cheeses as they ripen.
19

in studying traditional food fermentations with a
view to understanding the characteristics of the
micro-organisms and to designing better processes
for foods with enhanced flavours and better nutri¬
tional and preservative qualities.
A recipe for flavoursome fish sauce
Fermented foods can be classified broadly into
three types, depending on the way the fermentation
is carried out. Some fermentations occur under
liquid culture conditions, some take place almost
entirely on solid material, while others are a com¬
bination of both. Some of these processes are now
being practised on a very large industrial scale, but
it is important to remember that most, if not all, had
their origins in traditional small-scale activities.
In liquid culture fermentations, the raw mate¬
rials for the fermentation are allowed to solubilize
or are mixed together with large quantities of water.
Then either a specific inoculum is added to start a
new culture, or a natural culture develops. A good
example is the production of fish sauce, which has
been practised widely in Korea, Japan and other
Asian countries for centuries. Because fish are
highly proteinaceous, they spoil very rapidly in
tropical temperatures. To make fish sauce, the fish
is normally mixed with salt (20-35 per cent) and
allowed to solubilize in vats or tanks at tropical
ambient temperatures.
The maturation process, which involves the
transformation of the fish tissue into simpler com¬
pounds (by the action of enzymes) and the subse¬
quent growth of beneficial microbial flora (which
suppresses harmful micro-organisms) usually takes
three to twelve months or longer. During this period
special bacteria and yeasts, which are capable of
surviving the higher salt concentrations, develop and
give the final fish sauce its distinctive flavour and
aroma. Other examples of liquid culture fermenta¬
tions are fermented milk products such as yoghurt
and soy sauce. (Soy sauce production was described
in seventh-century Chinese and Japanese litera¬
ture and more than one million kilolitres of it are
produced annually in Japan today.)
Semi-solid fermentations are usually carried
out with solids such as grains or chopped vegetables
that are mixed with water and allowed to ferment.
The production of ogi, a traditional African fer¬
mented starch cake made from maize, sorghum or
millet grains, is a good example of a semi-solid
process. Fermentation is anaerobic and sponta¬
neous, and requires only one or two days. During
this time, the ogi develops a yoghurt-type flavour
which is a critical factor in its acceptability. Various
moulds and bacteria have been identified during the
fermentation process and it is evident that Lacto¬
bacillus bacteria are responsible for the produc¬
tion of lactic acid, which is the major component of
In Abomey (Benin), a girl
sells yovo-dofco, a fritter
made of marwè, a
fermented paste of sugar,
yeast, wheat and maize
flour.
PETER L. ROGERS, of
Australia, is a Professor of
Biotechnology at the
University of New South
Wales. A member of
UNESCO's Southeast Asian
Network on Microbiology
since 1975, he has
published extensively on
fermentation processes and
the application of recombinant
micro-organisms.

ogi flavour. The industrial production of ogi is
based on an upgraded village method and the final
product is a dry form of the starch cake that has a
longer shelf-life.
A soybean-enriched variant called soy-ogi has
about 15 per cent protein content and has been
used to treat children suffering from kwashiorkor,
a protein deficiency disease. Other well-known
semi-solid fermentations are the fermented veg¬
etable products of sauerkraut and the Korean
kimchi.
The third type of fermentation, solid substrate
fermentation, can be seen in the creation of soybean
tempeh, a fermented product consumed as a staple
food in Indonesia and other countries in Southeast
Asia.
Tempeh manufacture involves a two-step fer¬
mentation process. In the first stage, soybeans are
soaked in tap water for twelve to twenty-four hours
during which an acid fermentation develops. After
soaking, the soybeans are boiled in water, drained,
cooled and then arranged in trays for the second fer¬
mentation, which is conducted with the fungus
Rhizopus oligosporus. A mixed culture of bacteria
and fungi occur, with the bacteria being very impor¬
tant in improving the nutritional content, in par¬
ticular enhancing vitamin B12.
In Indonesia, tempeh is eaten by all sectors of the
population and is often used as a substitute for
meat among many low income groups as it is an
excellent high protein food that can be preserved
without the need for expensive refrigeration. It is
also becoming increasingly popular among vege¬
tarians in Western countries in the form of tempeh
burgers.
Besides tempeh, other examples of such
solid substrate fermentations include fermented
meat products, cheese making and the produc¬
tion of gari, a staple in parts of Africa such as
Nigeria.

Nuoc, a fermented fish
sauce widely consumed
in Asia, is stored in these
containers at a small
Vietnamese factory.
21

Brewing p/'tto, a kind of
beer, in northern Ghana.
Gari is a gritty, pre-cooked, dry starch food pro¬
duced by fermentation of cassava roots. Although
it is a good source of calories, it is deficient in pro¬
teins, vitamins and minerals.
Remarkable advances
Although the major commercial emphasis of
biotechnology in recent years has been the pro¬
duction of recombinant proteins for pharmaceutical
purposes, there are also many opportunities in food
biotechnology that will make an impact on both
developing and developed countries.
The new opportunities in food biotechnology
can be grouped into four main areas: the improve¬
ment of microbial cultures, larger and improved fer¬
mentation processes, improved food properties
and better detection of contaminations.
Many indigenous fermented foods are pro¬
duced on a very small scale either in homes or in
small-scale cottage industries in villages. In these sit¬
uations, the microbial cultures are often traditional
and highly variable. For example, some types of
tempeh in Indonesia are produced by wrapping
the soaked soybeans in a hibiscus leaf, which pro¬
vides the natural flora for inoculation.
As our understanding of the microbial ecology
of such fermented foods has increased, there have
been efforts to produce a more standardized
inoculum which would create tempeh of higher
quality for the villagers. These programmes have
been initiated by government research laborato¬
ries in countries such as Indonesia and Malaysia.
A similar pattern has emerged in developed
countries involved in cheese-making: specific cul¬
tures of lactic acid producing bacteria are now
being supplied to manufacturers for better quality
cheeses. Techniques of genetic engineering are also
being used to isolate new strains that are resistant to
attack by various bacteriophages, small virus-like
particles that can infect the usual lactic acid bacteria
and cause the disintegration and dissolution of
cells.
Food biotechnology can also lead to improved
food properties. The main advantages provided by
fermentation include higher vitamin levels and
increased digestibility, better flavour and texture,
and longer storage properties. Inoculation with
selected micro-organisms can protect the foodstuff
against breakdown by contaminating micro-organ¬
isms. In many cases, metabolic products of the fer¬
mentation process such as acetic acid (vinegar),
lactic acid and alcohol provide natural inhibitory
compounds. In other cases, the fermenting micro¬
organisms can produce natural antibiotics, which
provide further protection against invaders. The
use of these antibiotics in food preservation is likely
to be an area of considerable importance in the
future.
22
