The royalpakces ofAbomey
byjasmina Sopova
UNESCO IN ACTION
HERITAGE
46
A lion, emblem of KingGlèlè (1858-1889).
"The sliark who does notfear the
cayman!
The king who saved Daiioitieyfrom
dishonour
Is theMasterofthe Universe who will
fulfill the country's hopes!"
EAQi day at dawn Panlingan, crier 


of
the court ofGezo, king ofDahomey
in the first half of the nineteenth
century; used to chant his sovereign's praises
in these words in the main courtj'ard ofthe
royal palace ofAbomey. He would then
prostrate himself and throw dust over his
head. The custom had originated two cen¬
turies earlier, when King Ouegbadja had
ordered his court crier never to address
anyone without having first proclaimed his
glory. It passed down from king to king until
the fall ofthe last ruler, Behanzin, a hundred
years ago.
Tlirough that same courtyard today, vis¬
itors enter one of Africa's largest ensem¬
bles of historical monuments, the royal
palaces ofAbomey, a site which in 1985
was placed on the List ofWorld Heritage in
Danger.
The site, which extends over forty
hectares, includes not just tlie main palace
complex, which now houses a museum
and craft centre, but also an archaeolog¬
ical zone containing the ruins ofother, ear¬
lier palaces. Each ofthe two sections has a
tale to tell ofthe great kingdom's history The
archaeological zone evokes its birth and
growth as a small city-state, while the main
palace complex recalls the golden age and
the decline of the kingdom, as well as its
enduring heritage.
A CENTRAUZED STATE
Located 1 60 kilometres north ofCotonou in
what is now Benin, the town ofAbomey
was for three centuries the capital of the
Eon kingdom that was created around 1 620
by Do Aklin, a prince of the royal Aliada
family. His son Dako was to become the
first king ofAbomey five years later, but it
was Dako's son Ouegbadja (1645-85) who
made the kingdom a powerful one.
Ouegbadja laid the foundations of a
social hierarchy whose pinnacle was the
court; local chiefs were appointed by the
central government Responsibility for ritual
matters was entrusted jointly to a priest
and to a minister appointed by the sover¬
eign. Having thereby distanced himself
from religious affairs, the king was free to
concentrate on problems ofstate. The priv
ileges granted to the royal wives were shared
out equitably, thereby removing, in prin¬
ciple at least, the risk ofjealousy or plots. In
terms of political influence, none ofthe
wives could rival the queen mother,
enthroned at the same time as her son and
invested with important administrative
functions. An ingenious system ofsucces¬
sion permitted the ruler to choose his own
heir, enabling him to distance his own sons,
if necessarj', from the throne. Brothers ofthe
reigning sovereign were often killed as a
preventive measure.
Thanks to its solid political, social and
religious organization, the tiny city-state
rapidly became the principal power in the
region. Sadly, only one ruined entryway
survives ofthe palace of Ouegbadja, who
was considered the father of his country.
In 1685 Ouegbadja was succeeded by
Akaba, vv+io continued the task ofenlarging
and enriching the kingdom. He built a
dwelling for himself that had more than
one storey, a rarityat the time (though other
rulers were later to follow his example);
one imposing wall still survives. Following
custom, he built a new palace for himself

Above, thrones ofthe kings ofAbomey
(Benin) are displayed in the ceremonial
throne-room.
Left, detail ofthe tapestry in the throne-
room.
near that of his predecessor, constructing a
new precinct that was linked by passage¬
ways to its neighbours.
The walls sim'oimding these inner enclo¬
sures were dwarfed by the gigantic ram¬
parts, from five to eight metres high, that
surrounded the entire palace complex. The
fortress, which housed barracks for the
royal guard and was flanked by dwellings,
was further protected by a ditch and a huge
barricade 


of thorns. At the height of the
kingdom's prosperity, its outer walls
stretched for three kilometres. It is not hard
to understand why the place became
known as Abomey, which means "within
the walls".
Sadly, the complex was twice ravaged
by fire. In Akaba's reign, a conflagration
reduced much ofthe site to ashes. Two cen¬
turies later, when the palace had been fur¬
ther enriched with seven additional royal
residences, another fire this one started
deliberately, as we shall see was to cause
further damage.
The remains of Akaba's palace and of
the multi-storey cabin built by Agadja
(1708-1740), his successor, provide valu¬
able evidence of the time when the
kingdom began to increase its links with
the coast so as to monopolize the provi¬
sion ofslaves to European traders. The slave
trade had become the foundation of the
economy ofDahomey, and it sparked fierce
competition with the Yoruba of Oyo, who
took a share in the traffic and even man¬
aged, between 1728 and 1818, to force four
successive kings ofAbomey Tegbesu, Ken-
gala, Agongolo and Adandozan to pay
them an annual tribute.
THE GOLDEN AGE
Adandozan was notorious for his incom¬
petent handling of the economy, his
despotic temper and his contempt for tra¬
dition. He was deposed by Gezo (1818-
1858), Abomey's best-known ruler who,
according to an English commodore who
had dealings with him, bestrode the earth
as though it should be honoured to bear 4J

48
Above, the palaces ofthe 19th-century
King Gezo and his son Glèlè are today a
history and art museum. Among the
exhibits is this carving of a hornbill, one of
Gezo's emblems.
Below, the courtyard of a royal palace of
Abomey. The walls are adorned with
coloured low-relief carvings.
such a burden. Besides Gezo's personal dig¬
nity, there was much to impress foreign
visitors in the splendours ofhis court, which
was served by some 10,000 people
including an army 


of about 4,000 female
warriors.
Even today, despite the ravages of time,
an aiua ofnobility surrounds Gezo's palace.
Following the example set by his prede¬
cessors, he organized the area within the
ramparts into three separate, walled-off
courtyards. His multi-storey cabin opened
on one side onto the main square
(singbodji) and on the other onto the outer
courtyard (kpododji), which was used for
religious ceremonies and military parades.
The "seat of power", the throne-room, the
sanctuary and the royal residence were all
situated in the private courtyard.
To differentiate religious structures from
those with other uses, the formerwere cir-
ctdar while the latter were rectangular. In
either case, the roofwas an important fea¬
ture. Gezo's residence, which had a huge
verandah and seven doors, was covered by
a straw roof that in its original state was
twice the size of what could be seen ofthe
walls. There were good practical reasons
for the roof's imposing dimensions. It pro¬
tected the building from the torrential rains
ofthe wet season and provided insulation,
while also lending an air of majesty to the
entire courtyard. Furthermore, it came
down so low that visitors were forced to
stoop to enter the building, thereby showing
their respect for the monarch, and also
giving them an opportunity to admire the
magnificent polychrome low-reliefs deco¬
rating the foot ofthe walls. To enter some
tombs in the complex, people almost had to
get down on all fours.
The roofs, which were built on a frame of
branches, have not stood the test of time.
Now the straw is supported by corrugated
iron, which has substantially reduced its
volume. The famous low-reliefs, painted
with natural pigment, have also suffered
damage, particularly from tornadoes in
1975, 1977 and 1984.
Since the site has been included on the
list ofWorld Heritage in Danger, restoration
ofthe dwellings, the roofs, the bamboo ceil¬
ings, the low-reliefs, the sculpted doors and
windows and what is left ofthe fortifications
has been taken in hand.
The royal residence and throne -room
where you can see Gezo's throne, among
others, resting on the skulls of four enemy
chiefs now serve as galleries for the
Abomey museum, as do the jewel room
and the armoury in the private courtyard of
Glèlè, Gezo's son.
DECLINE AND SURVIVAL
The courtyards ofthe palace ofGlèlè (1858-
1889) were as rich and elaborate as those of
his father. He established two dwellings
and two roofed shelters for weavers, cop-
perworkers and sculptors, where present-
day craftsmen still practice Abomey's tra¬
ditional arts. The descendants ofthe royal
families continue to live within the walls
of the complex and are responsible for
maintaining the tombs and sanctuaries.
In Glèlè's reign, Dahomey underwent
radical political and economic change. On
the one hand the slave trade was declared
illegal, and agriculture was developed, as
was palm-oil trading. On the other, Glèlè's
conservatism in foreign affairs produced
a climate of tension in his relations with
Europe that soon turned to open hostility.
By the time Behanzin came to power in
1889, conflicts with France had escalated to
a dangerous level. The French complained
of "the insolence of the king ofAbomey",
who had once asked "Have I gone to France
to make war on the French?" The people of
Dahomey were not prepared to pay the
price demanded for peace: "flying the
French flag in Abomey and handing over
the arms of all the warriors". Both sides
took to arms. A series ofengagements over
a period of months ended with Behanzin
being forced into exile.
Abomey was made a French protec¬
torate, and in 1894 a brother of Behanzin
named Agoli-Agbo replaced him on the
throne. His succession can be seen as an act
of family treachery or as a colonial intrigue;
whichever the case may be, Behanzin is
regarded as the nation's last independent
king. Before leaving the palace complex,
he had just enough time to set it ablaze.
That desperate gesture, a final response
to the challenge issued by history to the
ancient kingdom, could stand as a symbol
ofthe decline ofa renowned civilization. But
vestiges still survive in spite of fire and the
violence of men. In preserving them from
destruction, Unesco has put this major site
back into the history books.
JASMINA SOPOVA
is a Macedonian essayist who has written many
articles and studies on the art and literature of
black Africa, the Indian Ocean region and the
West Indies.
