
A SLAVE'S STORY 


a crime without punishment
'My name is Moses Grandy'
Below, an advertisement
which appeared on 4 October
1775 in the Feu/7/e d'annonces,
Affiches et Avis divers des Isles
de France et de Bourbon, a
newspaper and advertising
gazette published in the islands
of Mauritius and Réunion, which
were then French possessions.
I was born in Camden County, North Car¬
olina. I believe I am fifty-six years old	
I remember four sisters and four brothers; my
mother had more children, but they were dead or
sold away before I can remember. I was the
youngest	
[The master's] wife, with much to be done,
prevailed on him not to sell me; but he sold my
brother, who was a little boy. My mother, frantic
with grief, resisted their taking her child away:
she was beaten and held down: she fainted; and
when she came to herself, her boy was gone. She
made much outcry, for which the master tied her
up to a peach tree in the yard and flogged her. . . .
My young master and I used to play together;
there was but two days' difference in our ages.
My old master always said that he would give me
to him. When he died ... I fell to young master: his
name was James Grandy. . . .
This continued till my master and myself were
twenty-one years old	 The first who hired me
was Mr. Kemp, who used me pretty well: he gave
me plenty to eat and sufficient clothing.
The next was old Jemmy Coates, a severe man.
Because I could not learn his way of hilling corn,
he flogged me naked with a severe whip made of a
very tough sapling; this lapped round me at each
stroke, the point of it at last entered my belly and
broke off, leaving an inch and a-half outside. I was
not aware of it until on going to work again it hurt
my side very much, when on looking down I saw
it sticking out of my body: I pulled it out and the
blood spouted after it. The wound festered, and dis¬
charged very much at the time, and hurt me for
years after. . . .
My brother Benjamin returned from the West
Indies	 While I was sitting with his wife and him,
his wife's master came and asked him to fetch a can
Foliad
famftuie.sUvefwaTe^ne^^
of water: he did so, and carried it into the store.
While I was waiting for him and wondering at his
being so long away, I heard the heavy blows of a
hammer: after a little while I was alarmed and went
to see what was going on. I looked into the store,
and saw my brother lying on his back on the floor,
and Mr. Williams, who had bought him, driving sta¬
ples over his wrists and ankles; an iron bar was
afterwards put across his breast, which was also
held down by staples. I asked what he had been
doing, and was told that he had done nothing
amiss, but that his master had failed, and he was
sold towards paying the debts. He lay in that state
all that night; next day he was taken to jail, and I
never saw him again. This is the usual treatment
under such circumstances.
Narrative of the Life of Moses Grandy; Late a Slave in
the United States ofAmerica, London, C. Gilpin, 5
Bishopsgate Street, 1843.
Slaves in Dahomey (present-
day Benin), photographed in the
second half of the 19th century.
