e are Siamese
ifyou please
by Morgan Sportes
In his novel Persian Letters (1721), the French philosopher Montesquieu gave a satirical portrait of the society of his time, supposedly
seen through the eyes of two visitors from the East. Did he know that some fifty years before, three ambassadors from Siam (today Thai¬
land) had caused a sensation at the court of Louis XIV?
48
rThe three ambassadors sent by King Phra
Narai to the court of Louis XIV at the end
of the seventeenth century aroused widespread
curiosity. They inspired novels and farces. Their
likenesses were reproduced by the thousand in
gazettes and almanachs, especially their flat noses
and their pointed white ceremonial hats. Crowds
of people swarmed around the landing-stage to
greet them when they arrived. When they broke
their journey to Paris at Nantes, Blois, Chambord
and Vincennes, beautiful aristocratic ladies gave
them a warm welcome, plying them with teas-
ingly playful questions.
People were surprised that they washed
every day and even several times a day. They
wanted to know how the visitors managed to
satisfy the twenty-odd wives each one was sup¬
posed to have.
Siamese women are always half naked
The chief ambassador, Oc Khun Wisutra Sun-
thon (more commonly known as Kosapan)
knew perfectly well how to behave in such cir¬
cumstances and gave these ladies as good as he
got, always with the greatest courtesy.
A paparazzo of that time, one Jean Don-
neau de Vizé, a hack who wrote for a weekly rag
called the Mercure Galant, scrupulously noted
it all down, especially the ambassador's rejoin¬
ders, which delighted the court. This Siamese
gentleman was considered to be full of "hon¬
esty", "cool good sense" and "gallantry".
One day Madame de Seignelay, the very
pretty wife of the Minister of the Navy, visited
the château of Berny, where the ambassador
was staying for a month, and insisted on being
fVSOU NNU-IX AMIVASSAUi 1)1 lUrt IH SIAW M IKAI'Ol'KI.
\SM l h II ! 11 I D'OHKM I.K.I i I I" W>SII > 1)1 I \ I.I.I Mil I I

told whether he considered French or Siamese
women were more beautiful. Kosapan courte¬
ously replied that French women were more
beautiful, that Madame de Seignelay was the
most beautiful French woman he had ever seen,
and that she would undoubtedly be the most
beautiful woman in the world if only she would
dress like a Siamese woman. It was only after
much pressing that the interpreter, a well-trav¬
elled missionary who was blushing with con¬
fusion, was made to reveal exactly what Kosapan
meant, namely that, "Siamese women are always
half-naked." There was loud laughter, especially
at Madame de Seignelay's expense. The story
went all over Paris.
Kosapan was so intelligent and perceptive
that he could "enter into each nation's idiosyn¬
crasies, however different the nations may be."
He needed to have all his wits about him to
keep track of the intrigues that went on in the
wings of the great "theatre" of Versailles as he
was shunted from dinners to high masses, from
operas to light theatre. There was also plenty of
walking to the Orangerie at Versailles, for
example. "A very big house indeed for simply
sheltering trees," Kosapan noted.
Ambassador Kosapan becomes prime minister
The purpose of Ambassador Kosapan's mission to Versailles was to offer a trading post
to Louis XIV in Singor (now Songkhla) in southern Siam, where the Compagnie des Indes
Orientales and a handful of troops would establish themselves and provide a coun¬
terweight to the all-powerful Dutch.
Siam always played off one imperialist power against another: French against Dutch,
English against French, Japanese against English and French, with the result that the
country was never colonized.
France requested the right to build a fort outside Bangkok and sent a squadron of
five vessels with 700 heavily armed soldiers to back up her claim. Kosapan was one
of the main architects of the revolution that overthrew the prime minister, King Phra
Narai himself, and resulted in the expulsion of the French. After being besieged in
Bangkok for six months, the French surrendered and left the country in November 1688,
exactly a year after their arrival.
The monarch who then came to the throne of Siam showed little gratitude to Kos¬
apan. He appointed him prime minister, but a few years later began to distrust him, tor¬
tured him and had his nose cut off.
In 1700 Kosapan committed suicide. It seems that he always felt a certain nos¬
talgia for what he called the "great and good kingdom of France". A German traveller
who met him in Siam in 1690 saw several paintings of the Sun King and the most emi¬
nent members of his family hanging on the walls amidst the cobwebs.
Sic transit	 M. S.
The dark regions of idolatry
Kosapan soon formed an idea of the strange
religious passions that were swirling through
Louis XIV's kingdom, shaken by the anti-
Protestant persecutions that followed the revo¬
cation of the Edict of Nantes.
In the land of the Sun King there was "one"
truth, i.e. Catholic. Idolaters and heretics had to
submit ... or go into exile. Fortified by these
"Three ambassadors sent by the King
of Siam to the court of Louis XIV in
the late seventeenth century aroused
widespread curiosity. Their likenesses
were reproduced by the thousand in
gazettes and almanachs. especially
their flat noses and their pointed
white ceremonial hats. Beautiful aris¬
tocratic ladies gave them a warm
welcome. People were surprised that
they washed every day and wanted to
know how they managed to satisfy
the twenty-odd wives each one was
supposed to have."
religious certainties, many courtiers and great
noblemen asked Kosapan when he intended to
renounce the "dark regions of idolatry" and
discover the "true faith". To which Kosapan
would answer diplomatically, "What is said of an
unknown religion must seem ridiculous to
people who know nothing about it and who
believe in another, because it is natural to believe
that the religion one has adopted or into which
one is born is the best of all."
Sometimes he was more sharply questioned
and put in a tight spot, whereupon he would
make even more concessions. His reply to the
Bishop of Tournay was, "Please obtain from
the true God that I may know Him and that it
may please Him to save me from the darkness I
am in so that one day I may profess the true
faith."
This remark delighted the French prelate,
who thought that grace had already begun to
descend on this idolater full of goodwill. The
bishop would probably have been less inclined
to indulge in wishful thinking if he had read
the works of another bishop, Louis Laneau,
who had spent twenty years in Siam. Laneau
warned young missionaries who went to Siam to
beware of the "irony" of the Siamese who only
admit to us "that they are in darkness" in order
to get us to understand that "we are in darkness
Opposite page, the
ambassadors of the King of
Siam arrive at the château of
Versailles for an audience with
the French King, Louis XIV.
French engraving of 1687.
ourselves.
MORGAN SPORTES
is a French writer who has
published a dozen books,
including two novels about
Thailand, Siam (1982) and Pour
la plus grande gloire de Dieu
(1993), both published by Seuil
(Paris). He has also written a
historical essay, that will be
published shortly, on touis XIV's
attempt to seize control of Siam.
49
