The Cairo
Declaration
on Human Rights
in Islam
The Member States of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference,
Reaffirming the civilizing and historical
role of the Islamic Ummah which God
made the best nation that has given
mankind a universal and well-balanced
civilization in which harmony is estab¬
lished between this life and the hereafter

and knowledge is combined with faith;
and the role that this Ummah should play
to guide a humanity confused by com¬
peting trends and ideologies and to provide
solutions to the chronic problems of this
materialistic civilization;
Wishing to contribute to the efforts of
mankind to assert human rights, to protect
man from exploitation and persecution,
and to affirm his freedom and right to a
dignified life in accordance with the Islamic
Shari'ah*;
Convinced that mankind which has
reached an advanced stage in materialistic
science is still, and shall remain, in dire
need of faith to support its civilization and



of a self motivating force to guard its rights;
Believing that fundamental rights and
universal freedoms in Islam are an integral
part of the Islamic religion and that no
one as a matter of principle has the right to
suspend them in whole or in part or violate
or ignore them in as much as they are
binding divine commandments, which are
contained in the Revealed Books of God
and were sent through the last of His
Prophets to complete the preceding divine
messages thereby making their observance
an act of worship and their neglect or vio¬
lation an abominable sin, and accordingly
every person is individually responsible
and the Ummah collectively responsible
for their safeguard.
Proceeding from the above-mentioned
principles,
Declare the following:
Article 1:
a) All human beings form one family
whose members are united by submission
to God and descent from Adam. All men
are equal in terms of basic human dignity
and basic obligations and responsibilities,
without any discrimination on the grounds
of race, colour, language, sex, religious
belief, political affiliation, social status or
other considerations. True faith is the guar¬
antee for enhancing such dignity along the
path to human perfection.
b) All human beings are God's sub¬
jects, and the most loved by Him are those
who are most useful to the rest of His sub¬
jects, and no one has superiority over
another except on the basis of piety and
good deeds.
Article 6:
a) Woman is equal to man in human
dignity, and has rights to enjoy as well as
duties to perform; she has her own civil
entity and financial independence, and the
right to retain her name and lineage.
b) The husband is responsible for the
support and welfare of the family.
Article 10:
Islam is the religion of unspoiled
nature. It is prohibited to exercise any
form of compulsion on man or to exploit
his poverty or ignorance in order to con¬
vert him to another religion or to atheism.
Article 11:
a) Human beings are born free, and
no one has the right to enslave, humiliate,
oppress or exploit them, and there can be
no subjugation but to God the Most-High.
b) Colonialism of all types being one of
the most evil forms of enslavement is
totally prohibited. Peoples suffering from
colonialism have the full right to freedom
and self-determination. It is the duty of all
States and peoples to support the struggle
of colonized peoples for the liquidation
of all forms of colonialism and occupa¬
tion, and all States and peoples have the
right to preserve their independent identity
and exercise control over their wealth and
natural resources.
Article 12:
Every man shall have the right, within
the framework of Shari'ah, to free move¬
ment and to select his place of residence
whether inside or outside his country, and
if persecuted is entitled to seek asylum in
another country. The country of refuge
shall ensure his protection until he reaches
safety, unless asylum is motivated by an act
which Shari'ah regards as a crime.
Article 16:
Everyone shall have the right to enjoy
the fruits of his scientific, literary, artistic
or technical production and the right to
protect the moral and material interests
stemming therefrom, provided that such
production is not contrary to the principles
of Shari'ah.
Article 19:
a) All individuals are equal before the
law, without distinction between the ruler
and the ruled.
b) The right to resort to justice is guar¬
anteed to everyone.
c) Liability is in essence personal.
d) There shall be no crime or punish¬
ment except as provided for in the Shari'ah.
e) A defendant is innocent until his
guilt is proven in a fair trial in which he
shall be given all the guarantees of defence.
Article 22:
a) Everyone shall have the right to
express his opinion freely in such manner
as would not be contrary to the princi¬
ples of the Shari'ah.
b) Everyone shall have the right to
advocate what is right, and propagate what
is good, and warn against what is wrong and
evil according to the norms of Islamic
Shari'ah.
c) Information is a vital necessity to
society. It may not be exploited or misused
in such a way as may violate sanctities and
the dignity of Prophets, undermine moral
and ethical values or disintegrate, corrupt
or harm society or weaken its faith.
d) It is not permitted to arouse nation¬
alistic or doctrinal hatred or to do any¬
thing that may be an incitement to any
form of racial discrimination.
Article 23:
a) Authority is a trust; and abuse or
malicious exploitation thereof is absolutely
prohibited, so that fundamental human
rights may be guaranteed.
b) Everyone shall have the right to par¬
ticipate, directly or indirectly in the admin¬
istration of his country's public affairs. He
shall also have the right to assume public
office in accordance with the provisions of
Shari'ah.
Article 24:
All the rights and freedoms stipulated
in this Declaration are subject to the
Islamic Shari'ah.
Article 25:
The Islamic Shari'ah is the only source of
reference for the explanation or clarifica¬
tion of any of the articles of this Declaration.
Cairo, 14 Muharram 1411H
5 August 1990
* Shari'ah: the Holy Law of Islam. Editor
