This issue of the
Unesco Courier,
devoted to human
rights, focuses on the
proceedings and
outcome of the World
Conference on Human
Rights convened by the
United Nations and
held in Vienna (Austria)
from 14 to 25 June 1993.
The Conference was
attended by more than
7,000 people, including
delegates from over 170
states and 800 non¬
governmental
organizations. In the
article below, its
Secretary-General
explains how, in spite of
many differences of
viewpoint, the principle
of the universality of
human rights was
endorsed.



The U-word by Ibrahima Fall
Above, Iridescent
copenetration ( 1 9 1 2- 1 9 1 3),
drawing on paper
by the Italian painter
Giacomo Baila
WHEN the United Nations World Con¬
ference on Human Rights adopted the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action on 25 June 1993, it marked the culmi¬
nation of a process that had lasted over two
years, in the course of which the international
community had woven a network of activity
embracing all regions of the world and an
impressive range of sectors of society.
The genesis of the Conference can be traced
to the end of the Cold War when, in the new
spirit of optimism and renewed confidence in the
United Nations, the international community
considered that the time was appropriate to
hold a world meeting that would review and
assess the progress made in the field of human
rights since the adoption of the Universal Dec¬
laration in 1948, and identify obstacles and ways
in which they could be overcome to facilitate
progress in this area.

During the May 1993
election in Cambodia,
held under United Nations
supervision, a crowd
in Phnom Penh follows
the results as they are
posted up.
The World Conference on Human Rights
thus marked a watershed in the consideration of
human rights. It helped to soften the antagonistic
overtones of the North-South divide, as well as
narrow the gap between what initially appeared
to be two mutually irreconcilable positions.
The process of reconciliation was not easy.
The North-South differences which replaced
the East-West confrontation ranged from such
diverse questions as universality versus regional
particularity, the interlinkage and indivisibility
of all human rights, the interdependence
between the right to development and civil and
political rights, and the threat of terrorism to the
enjoyment of civil and political rights. Other
controversial areas included implementation
machinery, monitoring, prevention and the
strengthening of United Nations mechanisms in
the field of human rights.
Among the more important achievements of
the Conference was the reinforcement of the
universality of human rights. The Universal Dec-
IO
IBRAHIMA FALL,
of Senegal, is the United
Nations Assistant Secretary-
General for Human Rights and
head of the UN Centre for
Human Rights, which is based
at the United Nations Office in
Geneva. He was Secretary-
General of the World
Conference on Human Rights
in Vienna.
laration adopted by the General Assembly of
the United Nations in 1948 was globally recog¬
nized as "a common standard of achievements for
all peoples and all nations". During the 1960s,
however, with the collapse of colonialism in Asia
and Africa, this notion was challenged by many
Afro-Asian thinkers and philosophers on the
grounds that since the Universal Declaration had
been adopted before the onset of decoloniza¬
tion, universally recognized human rights stan¬
dards needed modification in order to take into
account differing religious, historical and cul¬
tural values. However, human rights activists
and thinkers feared that any such modification,
if accepted, and based on differing religious and
cultural norms, would undermine internationally
recognized human rights norms and standards. In
other words, the post-colonial period witnessed
a deadlock. There was an avoidance of debate
on this question by metropolitan scholars and
intellectuals, and consequent suspicion on the
part of formerly colonized peoples.
The preparatory process of the World Con¬
ference, including the regional meetings for
Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, and
Asia, adopted different formulations on this
question. The most interesting formulation, and
certainly the most far-reaching, was contained in
the Bangkok Declaration (see page 44), which
states that while human rights are universal in
nature, they must be considered in the context
of a dynamic and evolving process of interna¬
tional norm-setting, "bearing in mind the sig¬
nificance of national and regional particularities
and various historical, cultural and religious
backgrounds."
A spirit ofcompromise
The Tunis Declaration, on the other hand (see
page 42), was more positively worded when
it stated that "The universal nature of human
rights is beyond question; their protection
and promotion are the duty of all States, regard¬
less of their political, economic or cultural
systems."
The San José Declaration (see page 43) fol¬
lowed a middle path when it stated: "Reaf¬
firming that our countries represent a broad
grouping of nations sharing common roots
within a rich cultural heritage based on a com¬
bination of various peoples, religions and races,
and that our roots unite us in the search for col¬
lective solutions to present problems	"
The Declaration of Asian non-governmental
organizations, also made at Bangkok, put for¬
ward another possibility of reconciliation: "We
can learn from different cultures in a pluralistic
perspective and draw lessons from the humanity
of these cultures to deepen respect for human
rights. . . . Universal human rights standards
are rooted in many cultures. . . . While advo¬
cating cultural pluralism, those cultural practices
which derogate from universally accepted
human rights, including women's rights, must
not be tolerated	"
Right through the preparatory process, this
question dominated the debate, both of Member
States and non-governmental organizations.
Notably the Western European and Others Group
hoped for a strong reaffirmation of universal
values as enshrined in the Universal Declaration.
Failure to reaffirm these values would have implied
that the World Conference had not succeeded in
one of its primary objectives to enhance and
strengthen the United Nations human rights pro¬
gramme, and to move human rights to the centre
stage of all United Nations activities.
I was convinced that a satisfactory negotiated
outcome of the paragraph on universality would

" IS" ^-r^w^U^MB
!
W«
..>>>
V->~»<lrvlT.
¡BÏRM
ï-r" -, '-.--.- ri
1 i '
facilitate a breakthrough in the final document
of the Conference (see page 40). Accordingly, in
the working paper prepared by the Secretariat
containing elements for inclusion in the draft
final document, a compromise formulation was
included as follows: "All human rights are uni¬
versal, indivisible and interdependent. The uni¬
versality of civil, cultural, economic, political and
social rights requires that every state throughout
the world recognize, protect, respect and pro¬
mote internationally recognized human rights
standards, whatever the state's level of economic
or political development. Regional and national
specificities must contribute to the strength¬
ening of the universality of human rights. The
exercise of any human right must not be denied
because the full enjoyment of other rights has
not been achieved. It is the duty of states, regard¬
less of their political, economic and cultural
systems, to promote and protect all human
rights and fundamental freedoms."
However, despite many informal consulta¬
tions, the paragraph remained in square brackets.
The principal difficulties experienced by the
Western Group was the insistence by the Asian
Group that all human rights are interrelated
and interdependent and that regional and
national specificities must be taken into account
to strengthen the universality of human rights.
For this reason, as Secretary-General of the
World Conference, I convened consultations
at ambassadorial level to consider, inter alia,
consensual language on this question.
This was, in fact, one of the first paragraphs
to be adopted by consensus in the Drafting
Committee in Vienna. The formulation con¬
tained in paragraph 5 of the Vienna Declara¬
tion is positive and forward-looking. It reads as
Ina Zimbabwe village, a
member of an itinerant
volunteer team of human
rights campaigners
explains to farmers their
basic rights.
Ina remote village of
Yunnan, southern China, a
woman belonging to the
Hani minority is an object
of curiosity to the Han-
majority villagers.
follows: "All human rights are universal, indi¬
visible and interdependent and interrelated. The
international community must treat human
rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the
same footing, and with the same emphasis. While
the significance of national and regional par¬
ticularities and various historical, cultural and
religious backgrounds must be borne in mind,
it is the duty of States, regardless of their polit¬
ical, economic and cultural systems, to promote
and protect all human rights and fundamental
freedoms."
The relative ease with which this formulation
was accepted in a spirit of compromise demon¬
strates once again my conviction that all issues
of human rights, when addressed with compas¬
sion and understanding ultimately result in a
global consensus.
I I
