lonth by month
Two hundred years ago revolutionary France abolished slavery, but then
a few years later, as if frightened by its own audacity, re-established
it. This brief spark of humanity would have to be re-ignited many
times in Europe and the Americas during the nineteenth century,
and revolts, bloody repression and civil wars (including the War of
Secession in the United States) would have to be endured before
slavery was at last proscribed on a worldwide basis. But this first vic¬
tory for freedom was far from complete. There arose other forms of con¬
tempt for human beings and other forms of exploitation of forced labour:
the colonization of most non-European societies, fascist and Nazi
repression, and Eastern Europe's descent into totalitarianism.
It took another centurymarked by revolutions, military expeditions
and two world warsbefore the colonial system finally ended, insti¬
tutionalized racism was defeated and the socialist gulag was dissolved.
Does this mean that today at long last respect for human dignity pre¬
vails everywhere? Unfortunately, new inequalities are arising as a result
of physical constraints and threats, because of terror imposed by indi¬
viduals or groups, and the exploitation by some of the weakness of
others. These inequalities exist where States are unable to prevent
them and where medieval customs survive; where the law can be
ignored with impunity, and isolation and secrecy permit terrible
abuses.
What is this dark side of man that has always led him to despise, sub¬
jugate and debase his fellows? Why is it that for thousands of years
inidividuals and in some cases entire peoples have been bought,
sold and treated like beasts? And how is it that such a crime against
humanity has remained unpunished even since the inception of Human
Rights?
There is probably no simple answer to these terrible questions. We
know, however, that we must never cease asking them.
This issue comprises 52 pages and a 4-page insert between
pages 10-11 and 42-43. BAHGAT ELNADI AND ADEL RIFAAT
