;
MODERN MANAGEMENT AMD
LOCAL TRADITIONS
by
Philippe d'lribarne
The actor Sakata Hangoro III
in the role of a warrior,
Japanese print by Katsukawa
Shunei (1762-1819).

B
USINESS firms, especially big industrial
firms, are held up as a model of ratio¬
nality and organization. Many countries
where "traditional" cultures still prevail look to
them to play a catalytic role in bringing about
change and to challenge social practices that are
looked down upon as archaic; they are sup¬
posed to be a force for modernization, not only
of technology but of mentalities and forms of
organization.
Credibility is lent to this view by the exis¬
tence of international management methods,
developed in the industrialized countries, which
countries with less efficient economies are urged
to adopt if they want their business organiza¬
tions to become competitive. These methods
are publicized by books on management, "busi¬
ness schools", certain management consultants
and major institutions like the World Bank and
the transnationals.
It might be supposed, looking at things this
way, that there was a standoff between some
universally valid organizational principle, rep¬
resented by the "right" management methods,
on the one hand, and, on the other, a host of spe¬
cific traditions, each expressing specific preju¬
dices, that need to be overcome if the highest
levels of productivity are to be reached.
Reality is, however, obstinately at odds with
this view. Japan has scored great economic suc¬
cesses while managing its businesses in its own
particular way. American companies, long held
up as a model of efficient, rational management,
are now criticized for "short-termism" and
over-compartmentalization, and the difficulty
they have in making the necessary improve¬
ments seems to be linked to certain cultural
characteristics peculiar to the United States.
Yet methods everywhere have been inspired
by the American model. When consultants go
off to far-flung corners of the planet to suggest
remedies for ailing businesses, they come up
with the same answers: explicit job descrip¬
tions, clearly formulated objectives and a free
choice of the means for attaining them, quan¬
tifiable criteria for assessing performance, and
performance-related rewards and sanctions.
These management methods do produce
results relatively objective assessment criteria
are an incentive to work rather than to suck up
to one's superiors, and the exercise of setting
objectives provides a good opportunity to think
problems through and find solutions to them
but they also have limitations. As a result of
undue emphasis on the tangible, certain factors
may be overlooked which, though subtle, con¬
tribute to the successful functioning of a business
organization goodwill gestures that create a
good atmosphere and make for co-operation,
informal aspects of customer service, and so on.
The cult of specific objectives, clear-cut
responsibilities and quantifiable results is in fact
the outgrowth of a particular political culture. In
the American political tradition, any form of
arbitrary power is viewed as creating servitude,
and such arbitrary power is held strictly in check
by the labour contract. John Locke, in his
famous Two Treatises of Government (1690),
thus evokes the "freeman" who "makes himself
a servant to another by selling him for a certain
time the service he undertakes to do in return for
wages", but gives his employer only "a tempo¬
rary power over him, and no greater than what
is contained in the contract between them", as
opposed to "slaves", who are "subjected to the
absolute dominion and arbitrary power" of
their masters. In the United States today, the
contract binding superior to subordinate in the
IO
Metalworkers, France.

same way as a contract between buyer and seller
still acts as a safeguard to the relationship
between free individuals under the rule of law.
The French "feudal" model
This is by no means a universal model, and to
prove it one need look no further than a European
country like France. The French example is all the
more convincing in that France, like the United
States, proclaims its devotion to universal values
and considers itself, regardless of any cultural
specificity, to be the birthplace of human rights.
The rejection of servitude, in a relationship
of subordination to a business firm, is just as
forceful in France as in the United States, but it
takes different forms and gives rise to different
modes of organization. As long ago as the Middle
Ages, whereas in England the relationship between
free men was governed by contract, feudal alle¬
giance to an overlord was the rule in France. The
French thought certain forms of personal loyalty
and allegiance compatible with freeman status
while to the English they may have smacked of
servitude. This allegiance was, however, primarily
a way of showing respect for the privileges vested
by custom in a noble office, not servility, and this
attachment to the nobility of a certain estate
nowadays of a certain occupation and to both its
prerogatives and its obligations has impacted pro¬
foundly on the modern French business world.
The concatenation of contractual buyer-seller
relationships that is the order of the day in Amer¬
ican corporations is nowhere to be found in French
businesses, where the general rule is for informal
relations among occupational groups passion¬
ately attached to the rights and duties associated
with their work. The same individuals who are so
keen to "do a good job", professionally speaking,
are equally hesitant about carrying out any orders
from above that they see as damaging to their tra¬
ditions, and the external show of respect for supe¬
riors that often results in France being ranked
among the countries with a strongly hierarchical
structure goes hand-in-hand with a high degree of
independence in the performance of the func¬
tions that each considers to be his or her own.
Combining the rational and the
traditional
There is a common tendency to contrast what arc
supposed to be strictly rational organizational
methods with what are described as purely tra¬
ditional forms of behaviour, but in point of fact
any efficient organization, in whatever cultural
context, is both rational and traditional.
Business management presupposes the estab¬
lishment of a set of structures and procedures
for ensuring the division and co-ordination of
labour. This demands a deliberate effort at rational
organization directed towards the goal of effi¬
ciency. The desired results will not, however, be
forthcoming unless the behaviour expected of
the staff is in keeping with their sense of duty and
their idea of authority and of respect for their own
dignity matters that bear the strong imprint of
tradition.
The relationship thus created between ratio¬
nally designed structures and procedures on the
one hand and, on the other, local traditions is
one of synergy, not competition. Tradition alone
is powerless unless it is given expression in struc¬
tures and procedures, whilst it is only in the light
of tradition that the latter make sense in a way that
makes it possible for them to be imposed and
respected. The headway made in correlating these
two factors and adapting them to different cul¬
tural contexts has so far been uneven.
Every industrial country has its own man¬
agement tradition, often handed down in the
form of local practices or of skills transmitted by
word of mouth rather than in theoretical works.
This tradition reflects the adaptation of a long-
established cultural background to the needs of
a modern economy. Built up gradually as the
economy itself is built up, it is constantly being
enriched, propelled by its own dynamics, or rein¬
terpreting and then assimilating practices that
have proved effective elsewhere.
In countries where they have generally been
introduced from abroad, modern business orga¬
nizations have brought with them methods often
ill adapted to the local context, and the low level
of success obtained by these methods is usually
attributed to those countries' inability to run a
modern economy, for which radical cultural
changes are reputed to be necessary. Fortunately,
there is little basis for this view, and the few
efforts that have been made too seldom, alas
to reconcile rational organization with tradition
have produced many promising results as the
present issue of the UNESCO Courier sets out to
show.
r\ Swiss watchmaker, heir
to a tradition of
craftsmanship over 300
years old.
PHILIPPE D'IRIBARNE,
of France, is director of
research at France's National
Centre for Scientific Research
(CNRS). He has carried out
comparative studies of
business management systems
in different countries and the
relations between principles of
rational organization and local
traditions. He is the author of
Le chômage paradoxal (PUF
publishers, Paris, 1990) and La
logique de l'honneur (Point-Seuil,
Paris, 1993).
I I
