T E R V I E W



JEAN MALAURIE talks to
Bahgat Elnadi and Âdel Rifaat
The Arctic, from
stones to man
In 1948, twenty-six-year-old Jean
Malaurie embarked on his first polar
expedition, to the west coast of
Greenland. Two years later he spent
a winter with the Inuit, learning their
language and hunting techniques
and sharing their everyday
experiences. On his return to
France, he initiated with the Paris
publishing house of Pion a series
entitled "Terre humaine" with the
publication of Les derniers rois de
Thulé (The Last Kings of Thule,
Jonathan Cape, 1983), his account of
his experiences among the Inuit,
which has since been translated
into twenty-two languages. He holds
the only chair in France in polar
geography (at EHESS, the Ecole des
Hautes études en sciences
sociales) and was the founder, with
the historian Fernand Braudel, of
EHESS's Centre of Arctic Studies.
As well as pursuing an academic
career, he has continued to carry
out research in the fieldover
thirty one-man expeditions have
taken him from Greenland to Alaska
and northeast Siberia. Specialists
from all over the world contributed
to a work published in his honour in
1990: Pour Jean Malaurie, 102
témoignages en hommage à
quarante ans d'études arctiques
(Pion publishers, Paris).
Not the least ofyour many claims to
fame is to have initiatedan important series
of ethnographic publications, "Terre
humaine".
"Terre humaine" is the embodiment of a
current of ideas, a growing awareness of
"transdisciplinarity", the overstepping of
the boundaries of academic disciplines. Like
the UNESCO Courier, it is devoted to the idea
of getting to know one another. Under the
influence of Marxism, interest has in our
times focused on systems, tending to leave
individuals out of the picture. Structures
and economic and social forces do, of
course, exist, but there is also an unpre¬
dictable player on the stage of history
the human being. That was why I thought
it essential to create a current of ideas that
would reintroduce the personal element
and put into perspective what we acade¬
mics call anthropology, sociology or eth¬
nology the observation of other people, in
short.
Its other concern is to let people speak
for themselves. In the West, who writes?
The writer. But tape recorders now enable
us to take down the remarks of people who
have never held a book in their hands. My
aim in this collection, which began in 1955
with my own book Les derniers rois de
Thulé {The Last Kings of Thule) and now
comprises over seventy volumes, was to
abolish the class struggle one far more
insidious than that denounced by Karl
Marx between intellectuals on the one
hand and the meek and lowly on the other.
I have on occasion recorded the words of
convicts, even of some awaiting execution
on death row in one of the toughest jails in
Texas. In another book, to be published
shortly, an Indian woman, a pariah from
southern Madras, tells her life story. What
these men and women have to say is irre¬
placeable.
"Terre humaine" also serves as a
reminder that the social sciences are not
alone in studying humanity, and that the
Bible, the Qur'an, the Vedas and the great
works of literature throw a necessary light
on our societies' problems. I have there¬
fore sought out unpublished material by
great authors. Who would have thought
anything remained unpublished of the
works of Zola, one of the world's most
translated authors? And yet 800 pages of
notes, tied together with string, had been
lying around for eighty-three years in
France's Bibliothèque nationale until I pub¬
lished them under the title Carnets
d'enquêtes en France, une ethnographie
inédite. This document is a real lesson in
modern journalism, written in the manner
of Truman Capote, a style that was new for
its time. I also published Les Immémoriaux
by Victor Segalen, which was gathering dust
in the Plön publishing house. Written by a
Breton Catholic, it is a remarkably out¬
spoken piece of work, describing the effects
of the introduction of Christianity in a tra¬
ditional society, that of Tahiti, which lost its
balance and its joie de vivre as a result, and
discussing the whole question of this inter¬
ference in other peoples' lives, with the
backing of the colonial power, from the
right to conquer their territory to the right
to subjugate their souls. The notebooks of
a great unknown writer, comparable in
stature to Gide, André Suarès, are to be
published soon. I am currently negotiating
with UNESCO for some of these books,
which have a universal appeal, to be made
more widely available, in languages other
than French or English, less widely used
languages.
Your understanding oftraditionalsoci¬
eties has hadconsiderable influence on your
criticisms of industrial society.
We are going through a terrible crisis,
with unemployment increasing daily not
only in western Europe but in Japan and
America too. The jobless are the outcasts of

industrial society, and the crisis can only
get worse as more and more jobs are auto¬
mated. We are condemned to live in a society
where human beings are at the centre of
the crisis. In "economism", the human being
is a nuisance. This is the height of absurdity!
We need only look at the case of the many
young people who go on living with their
parents beyond the age of thirty because
they are unemployed. With no work to go
to, glued to the television or absorbed in
video games, their lives become an extension
of adolescence, and they may well reach
early retirement age without ever having
held down a proper job, so their outlook
remains that of adolescents a situation
unprecedented in history.
In spite of that, we go on advocating
development. Every international confer¬
ence discusses development. Some of the
"developing countries" will never know
what it is. What is more, by showing them,
in the television series we export to them,
affluent families enjoying a comfortable
lifestyle they cannot aspire to, by dangling
before them a future they will never reach,
we are helping to upset their balance. We
shall have destroyed them completely before
they can straighten themselves up. These
are unwholesome practices that are under¬
mining an age-old balance for the sole pur¬
pose of finding outlets for the products we
manufacture.
The concept of loss ofbalance seems to
play an important role in your thinking.
Balance is essential in nature. For fifteen
years I studied balance in stones, stones
that have been there since the very beginning
of all things 700 million years in the case
of the Archaean platform in the Arctic.
Under the influence of my first intellectual
mentor, Emmanuel de Martonne, one of
the founding fathers of modern geography,
I came to be interested in weathering
processes. I began by studying scree, the
rock fragments that accumulate at the foot
of cliffs, and the geodynamics of its forma
tion in the great cold and hot deserts, with
their extremes of temperature. As my
research progressed, I turned my attention
to the stones themselves and the labyrinths,
grooves and cavities that form in them.
There is a special dialectic at work here that
gives each stone an identity of its own. Like
ourselves, stones have a "passport" to the
future. Theirs is the result of a compromise
between their mechanical resistance sand¬
stone, limestone and granite each have their
own and the destructive forces of frost,
humidity and geochemical agents. As in
human societies, there are various forms of
compromise: for a particular stone to last for
millions of years it protects itself by com¬
promising as to its shape triangular or
oblong or its size, creating what we call an
ecosystem. I took systematic measurements
to verify this balance, from top to bottom of
the scree-slopes, first in the Sahara, among
the Tuareg, then among my friends the Inuit
in northern Greenland, and found that if a
single factor, humidity or temperature,

varied, however slightly, the compromise
was disrupted and the process of finding
the right balance had to start again.
The Inuit realized rather early that their
understanding of the world began with
stones. My debt to them is incalculable:
they have an exceptional ability to read
nature's book. The fact that their five senses
are, through constant use, far more acute
than ours they can see in the dark means
that they can observe the world around
them very closely. Learning from these great
teachers, I gradually came to transfer my
attention from stones to human beings.
We have a lot to learn about teaching
from these peoples who for ten thousand
years have been bringing up their children
naturally, in a way very different from ours.
They have no books and believe in chil¬
dren and adolescents learning by doing and
by example, which is how they taught me.
Bringing up children is, after all, "raising"
them, awakening their self-awareness
through the encounter of one culture with
another, seeking out hidden wonders and
discovering the genius loci.
So you were gradually introduced by
the physical ecosystem to the social
ecosystem?
The Inuit were a people without a written
language, so they had no Homer, Mon¬
tesquieu or Rousseau, yet they have estab¬
lished a social contract that would have fas¬
cinated Lenin. At the level of small groups
of fifty to a hundred families, theirs is a
communist, a truly egalitarian society, where
everything is shared. There are no social
classes because they want to prevent any
accumulation ofwealth, and land and prop¬
erty belong to the group. They even try to
pool their thoughts: the first duty of Inuit
when they meet is, as in any nomadic society
for that matter, to converse and tell each
other what they have been doing. Even
families are affected: a ritual exchange of
men and women takes place at certain times
of the year, not only to cement relations
among members of the group but also to
prevent a particular man becoming the
master of his companion, or vice versa. One
child in three is handed over to a family
that is not consanguineous. Children are
the children of the group. But at the same
time this is an anarchist society that rejects
the state.
In addition to this social contract, which
is concerned with the organization of per¬
sons and property, this society has a broad
religious vision, shamanism, centred on the
balance between man and nature, a vision
that is not limited to the immediate envi¬
ronment but opens upwards to embrace
the cosmos earth, moon, sun and stars
in a profound understanding. The shaman
is convinced that the world is held in balance
and that due respect must be paid to certain
age-old taboos whose meaning is wrapped
in mystery but which obey their own
.underlying logic. As to reading nature's
great book, it was by first studying stones
that I discovered an invaluable key to deci¬
phering it.
H How does aperson become a shaman?
The shaman starts out by subjecting him¬
self to sexual and dietary asceticism. When
he thinks that his education has gone far
enough, he goes to a high point, a cliff facing
the sun that is riven with fractures that put
it in contact with earth-forces, like the
Pythia of Delphi in ancient Greece. He
stands there facing the sun and takes a rock
which he rubs against another, for hours,
days, weeks or months until the moment
comes when he reaches a state of spiritual
ecstasy. Sometimes nothing happens in the
first year. He may come back again and
again, until ecstasy takes place. He knows
this is happening when he becomes two
entities. He sees his body break up, his skin
comes off, his bones are laid out on the
ground before him! Reconstituted in the
form of a bear or a walrus, he sees himself as
a bear and hears himself talking like a bear.
But there is a great danger that he will be
unable to return, to recover his human state.
Inuit art is obsessed by this anguish which
is depicted in many sculptures of figures
that are half-human, half-animal.

The idea of metamorphosis is undoubt¬
edly a very important component of human
thought, as in the return to the unity of the
sexes, in which male and female are one.
This great aspiration is often depicted by
small androgynous statuettes. In some cases
shamanistic initiation involves homosexu¬
ality, as it does in other traditional societies,
notably among Amerindians.
Which otherpeoples haveyou studiedat
close quarters?
I have been carrying out research for the
last forty years in northern Greenland but
I have also been many times on mission to
northeastern Canada Hudson's Bay and
Baffin Land, to the central Arctic regions of
Canada and the Alaskan societies of the
Bering Strait area (Saint Lawrence Island).
The island of Ittygran
in the Siberian Far North, an Inuit
sanctuary since the 1 3th century.
I have lately turned my attention to
northern Siberia. For forty years the Soviet
government prevented me and all West¬
erners from going there. Then in 1989 I
learned, through one of Mr Gorbachev's
advisers, that I was being offered, in com¬
pensation for all those years lost to research,
the chairmanship of the "Committee for
the Defence of the Arctic Peoples of Russia"
that had been set up under the Russian Cul¬
tural Fund, at present chaired by Nikita
Mikhailov. I was at last to have an oppor¬
tunity to visit the cradle of the Inuit people,
born on those shores at the time of its migra¬
tion from Asia towards Alaska.
An international expedition, the first
since the October Revolution, went out
there in 1990, with myself as scientific
director. I have carried out thirty-one mis¬
sions to the Arctic and this was one of the
most fruitful of my career. It enabled me to
visit a site of outstanding historical signifi¬
cance, the island of Ittygran, the Carnac of
the Arctic, which was hidden from the eyes
of the world by the Soviet authorities until
1976, when it was studied by the distin¬
guished archaeologist Sergei Arutiunov. I
was the first Westerner to set foot there. It
is a small island, lying offshore to the north
of a hunters' village, silent, deserted, with
eagles circling overhead. Great spears point
skywards and the skulls and jawbones of
whales are set in lines along the shore.
From the thirteenth century onwards,
groups of Inuit hunters came here to per¬
form sacrificial rites in a state of mystical
exaltation. The most interesting feature of
the site is undoubtedly the numerical rela¬
tionship that forms the basis for the align¬
ment of fifteen groups of enormous whale
jawbones, some weighing nearly 600 kilo¬
grams: the alignment follows a strict 2:4
alternation that refers back to the logical
structures of the most ancient Chinese book
of divination.
While investigating the stones on the
island and checking their orientations
against the map, I came upon a grave, a
recent grave containing the remains of a
Soviet Inuit hunter with a comb and a rifle
by his side. These peoples have remained, at
least in their innermost being, impervious to
seventy years of indoctrination in dialectical
materialism. The four batteries of psycho
logical tests that I carried out provided evi¬
dence, when they were analysed by Marie-
Rose Moro and Tobie Nathan, of their rich
imaginary world dominated by the Relet, or
spirits, despite the fact that the Soviet gov¬
ernment had banned the shamans, or at least
banned them from practising shamanism.
Was the Soviet system totally negative in
this respect?
No. It has to be admitted that, concerning
the Arctic regions, not everything about it
was bad. A market economy would have
been, and would still be, disastrous for tra¬
ditional societies. Protected until now by a
policy of guaranteed prices, the hunters and
herdsmen of- northern Siberia have man¬
aged to preserve their way of living and sub¬
sisting. By being kept out of the mainstream
they have been spared the frightful media-
borne contamination and other catastrophic
influences that our so-called "advanced"
civilization brings in its train. They have
escaped the ravages of drugs that could dec¬
imate the peoples of Alaska, as smallpox
and diphtheria decimated the Amerindian
populations in the eighteenth century. They
have also been preserved from Aids, a ter¬
rible threat to these traditional societies,
whose relatively open-minded attitude to
sex and to addiction to alcohol makes them
particularly vulnerable.
In addition to the obvious mistake
made by the Soviet authorities in trying to
impose atheism upon the societies of
northern Siberia, whose identity is based
on a cosmic, religious vision, they also
made the mistake of not forming a cadre of
trained specialists from among these peo¬
ples who, since they were granted
autonomy in 1926, were supposed to run
their own affairs. I accordingly impressed
upon the authorities that they should, as a
matter of urgency, make it their business to
form such a local elite.
You were recently appointedPresident of
the Saint Petersburg PolarAcademy. . . .
A staff college for the peoples of the north
was set up in Saint Petersburg under the
aegis of the Russian Ministry of Education,
the Ministry of National Minorities and
Regional Policy, and the government of the
Sakha Republic, and on my initiative. On 21

January 1994, it was transformed, in the
course of a solemn ceremony at the cele¬
brated Russian Geographical Society, into
the Polar Academy. The authorities asked
me to be its president, and I was honoured
to accept. The Academy has a staff of sixty
Russian teachers, the cream of Saint Peters¬
burg's academic community, plus ten French
experts whose places will in due course be
taken by other European or American
teachers. French is the first foreign language
and is compulsory. Our aim is to help the
twenty-six ethnic groups of northern Siberia
- to take charge of their own administration.
I have given the Russian authorities my
personal undertaking to train, in two-year
courses, candidates selected by their respec¬
tive autonomous regions. We have at present
thirty students, aged around thirty, on each
course. The celebrated Paris Ecole nationale
d'administration is sponsoring us, and other
leading French educational institutions are
participating in the teaching activities, with
the Ecole des Hautes études en sciences
sociales and the Centre of Arctic Studies
being responsible for overall co-ordination.
As we would like to launch a daily paper for
the far north, Le Monde diplomatique, the
international affairs supplement of Le
Monde newspaper, is also taking part in the
project, and I have every hope that UNESCO
will join in this undertaking, which is very
much in its line of action.
For the time being, the trainees have to
travel to Saint Petersburg, but it has been
decided that a nomadic school will be set up.
This means that every two years the
Academy will send out a team comprising
the year's top five students and their Russian
and French teachers, all of whom will be on
the same footing. The Sakha Republic will
select a specific area of its territory for global
study, covering environment, medicine,
ethnography, education and the economy.
The Sakha Republic was chosen as being the
most advanced of the northern republics.
Teachers and students alike will be billetted
with the local inhabitants and with the rein¬
deer herdsmen and will have to enjoy the
cold. As I know these societies well, I am
convinced that the teaching will have an
infinitely greater impact by being integrated
in this way into their lives. As happened to
the geographer Arsenev in Kurosawa's great
film Derzou Ouzala, shot in Siberia, the
learner on his home ground will become
the teacher.
How do you explain thefact that these
peoples, who are obviously fascinated by
our modem civilization since they want to
be incorporated into it, are not afraid of
losing their authenticity and their specific
values?
They want to go down the road of devel¬
opment because of the deal they are being
offered nice houses with television, city
lights and so on without being told they
will have to pay for these amenities and
without necessarily having the means to do
so. What is more, we descend on these soci¬
eties in the role of conquerors with our tech¬
nology, our cars and aircraft. We are well fed
and well equipped, we've made it! And
above all we come proclaiming aloud that we
are going to help them, whereas in fact we are
only looking out for new markets.
This is where it seemed to me there was
an urgent need to step in. The north Amer¬
ican Indians and the peoples of northern
Siberia must be made fully aware that the
deal they are being offered is a swindle
whereby they will lose out completely. After
losing their religion, their culture and their
language they will lose their very selves.
You surely wouldn 'tpropose a system of
complete self-sufficiency.
Traditional societies should move for¬
ward at their own pace, which is not our
pace; they should not go for abrupt change
but for a slow, considered evolution so that
they can take the best, not the worst, of
what our Western civilization has to offer.
Like the physical world, the history of
traditional societies has its own biological
clock. We should help, as honestly as we can,
to train the new elites so that they can
choose for themselves, so that they can
weigh the pros and cons of what is on offer.
We should help these societies to an aware¬
ness of this. In order to do so we should, as
a matter of priority, help them to train
people who are capable of taking or leaving,
in full knowledge of the issues, what we
offer them.
Intellectuals, men of goodwill with no
vested interests in the market, must help
these people to understand and thwart our
most subtle commercial machinations. By
doing this we also defend our own long-
term interests. If we continue to exploit
them by pretending to help them, then
sooner or later there will be a a terrifying
revolt, perhaps even involving atomic
weapons. We have an intellectual duty to act
in such a way that our industrial societies
cease to blindly export their pseudo-devel¬
opment, as they have done to Africa, with
catastrophic results. Too many ruling-class
Africans imitate us and despise their peas¬
antry, rural people migrate to the cities to
become functionaries think of places like
Dakar and Nouakchott the creatures of a
parasitic state dependent on the West. That
is what is called neo-colonialism. They are
not trustworthy representatives of their
societies, but joke figures who will one day
wreak horrible vengeance.
Cadres belonging to indigenous peo¬
ples must be trained as a matter of urgency,
throughout the world.
In the Siberian Arctic, the situation is
already alarming, what with leaking oil
pipelines and nuclear pollution by the armed
forces. This is an international problem, we
are all concerned. Siberia is so vast that it
influences the Arctic Ocean, at the top of the
world, where climatic development is
shaped. And who are the guardians of these
waters if not the indigenous people, who
have a vocation for ecology? Because of
our obsession with short-term profits we
cannot see the wood for the trees. Those
whom the gods wish to destroy they first
make mad!
If it proved impossible to avoid pollu¬
tion at the time of economic planning (Gos-
plan), what shall we do to prevent it when
American and European companies flock to
the Far North? Do we want to ruin the Far
North in the same way as Amazonia? That
is another reason for training the indige¬
nous people so that they can see all these
dangers, decide what to do, and take their
future in hand.
And let's be quite clear about this. We
shan't be teaching them to defend their
future out of generosity or charity. By pro¬
tecting them we protect ourselves; we
defend our own future on an earth that will
at long last be human.
