How a writer of Jewish origin, a defender of
human rights, came to know those he calls
"exiles in their own country"
Jewish
he son ofPolish
immigrants
looks at the
Palestinians
by Maurice Rajsfus
For as far back as I can remember I have
always pricked up my ears whenever I
heard someone talking about Palestine, a myth¬
ical, far-off land where my father lived and
worked hard as a young man. He used to tell
me that Palestine was a land of orange trees and
sunshine, and I thought it was a Jewish country.
In 1923, however, my father finally chose to settle
in France, which he saw as a haven of liberty.
In Russian Poland before the First World
War my father had been a Zionist. After he
moved to France, he ceased to be one. I never
knew the reason for this change of heart and I
never asked, because ideological problems had
not yet begun to torment me.
¿S-2

So I was not a Zionist by virtue of cultural
heritage. However, I accepted that other Jews
might think of going to settle in Palestine. I was
not yet aware of the colonial aspect of the
problem. I did not imagine that Jews might
behave as exploiters of other peoples.
It was not until 1984 that I was ready, phys¬
ically and morally, to make my first trip to the
region. I had to go and sec for myself what was
happening there. In the plane I felt anxious.
People all around me were impatient to see the
land of the Bible as tourists and became tremen¬
dously excited. These men and women, even
the children, suddenly seemed alien to me. I
was travelling to a country under permanent
siege, the army of which was occupying neigh¬
bouring territory in a less than kindly fashion.
And my fellow passengers were as joyful as if
they were on the way to Paradise. I was con¬
cerned. Their joy seemed dangerous to me.
A country in arms
On my first day in Israel I was more struck by the
difficulty of being with Israelis than drawn
towards Palestinians, whom I glimpsed from
afar they did their best to be inconspicuous. It is
true that very few real natives of the place ventured
into the white city. However, I could not help
but notice that Israeli labourers were strangely
absent from Jerusalem's many building-sites.
The sight of this country in arms at a time
when there was no threat to civil peace seemed
to me more than strange; it was fearsome. The
army was not in barracks but permanently out
on the streets, in public places and on the public
transport system. I could not bear these sol¬
diers, these boys and girls so full of life and
laughter who would bump into me on the buses
with their loaded Uzi machine-guns.
Who were they waging war against here in
Israel? The armed civilians strolling up Ben
Yehuda Street in their white shirts contrasted
oddly with the crowds of people jostling around
the ice-cream sellers and thronging the café ter¬
races. Was it a paranoid show of strength? An
attempt to inspire fear? Self-intoxication?
I soon thought I had found an answer to
these questions. On my second day, I was
making my way into the old city through the
Jaffa Gate when suddenly I came across an
odious sight. A group of children, apparently
from a town in the occupied territories, was



crossing the street under the watchful eye of a
woman monitor carrying the inevitable Uzi
machine-gun. At the same moment a Palestinian
boy pushing a heavy cart was coming from the
opposite direction. The cart was so heavy that
the boy was unable to stop, and the children had
to slow down. At that moment the monitor's
Left, passers-by at the
Damascus Gate, one of the
entrances to the Old City
of Jerusalem.
Opposite page, an Arab market
in Jerusalem.
"Israelis, Palestinians and Jordanians have started to talk
to each other. Will they create the kind of common economic
unit that will really make the desert blossom and transform
the region into a Switzerland of the Middle East?"
happily smiling face became contorted with
hatred. Giving vent to a stream of invective, the
charming young thing invited the delivery boy
to go around them. He had to give way.
Forty years before, it was a good average
Frenchman not a cop who had thrown me
out of a metro car that I had boarded by mistake,
brutally informing me that because I was
wearing a yellow star the only car I had the
right to use was at the rear of the train.
"I am from Palestine"
Right from the start I felt very uncomfortable
with these triumphant Israelis. But where were
the Palestinians? My first real contact with them
took place a few days after my arrival, when
my pal Michel Warshawski, formerly of Stras¬
bourg, suggested that we visit one of his friends
in Deheishe refugee camp near Bethlehem. That
day the camp entrance on the Hebron road was
barred with rolls of barbed wire and cement-
filled barrels. To get inside wc had to go all
round this grim settlement built on a hillside. In
the rocky alleyways between dwellings that
looked more like glorified hovels than low-
MAURICE RAJSFUS,
French journalist and writer, is
the author of some 15 works,
most of which deal with the
Second World War period. He
wrote Mon père l'Etranger
(1989) in memory of his father,
a Polish Jewish immigrant who
was deported to Auschwitz in
1942, and has published two
books on the Palestinian
problem, Retour de Jordanie.
Les réfugiés palestiniens dans
le royaume hachémite (1990)
and Palestine, Chronique des
événements courants (1990).
43

"The sight of this country in arms at a time when there was
no threat to civil peace seemed to me more than strange;
it was fearsome. I could not bear these soldiers, these
boys and girls so full of life and laughter who would bump into
me on the buses with their loaded Uzi machine-guns."
grade suburban housing, I suddenly felt that I
was walking through a ghetto.
Although profoundly shaken, I had not yet
made up my mind to feel active solidarity with
the Palestinians. But it was no longer possible for
me to regard the Israelis in the same way. I was
repelled by the behaviour of the Jewish
colonists their certainty that right was on their
side . . . and might as well!
I spoke to children who described their vil¬
lages, places where they had never set foot. Then
followed the disturbing refrain, "I am from
Palestine! " It did not sound as if they had learned
it by rote. The country that had been wiped off
the map was still alive.
My two subsequent visits in January 1986
and November 1987 only strengthened my
impression of being in a colonized country
whose inhabitants were submissive in appear-
Israeli soldiers on the West
Bank.
anee only. On 28 November 1987 Hamdi, a
journalist from Deheishe camp, told me: "We
don't intend to remain passive until the end of
time, but there's no doubt that if we lift a finger
they'll throw tanks at us, maybe even planes!"
He smiled sadly as he spoke. In the three
years since I had met Hamdi, his happy opti¬
mism had gradually faded away. He appeared
nervous, even feverish. His time in jail, followed
by a long period of house arrest, had done
nothing to boost his morale. He must have fore¬
seen darker days ahead.
The next day I left Israel, never to return
again. A week later the Intifada began.
"I have a dream! " said Martin Luther King,
a man who knew the value of words, when he
called for the fulfilment of an impossible dream.
Israelis, Palestinians and Jordanians had to talk
to each other some day. Now they have begun
to do so. Will they create the kind of common
economic unit that will really make the desert
blossom and transform the region into a
Switzerland of the Middle East? A confederation
where differences would not prevent the imple¬
mentation of a generous programme?
While waiting in hopes of such a conclu¬
sion, I do not forget that I have a standing invi¬
tation to visit my friend Anwar in Hebron as
soon as he gives up driving his Paris taxi and
I fully intend to honour it some day.
44
