AFRICA: LEARNING TO MANAGE THE DESERT
3y Mohammed Skouri
UNESCO IN ACTION
A palm grove in an oasis in
southern Tunisia.
THERE are more arid lands in Africa than in
any other continent. In addition to these
natural deserts where there is very little
rainfall, there is also an area twice as large, strad¬
dling the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, that
receives insufficient rainfall and is affected to
varying degrees by processes that lead to deser¬
tification.
The problem, whose main cause is human
activity, is not new but rapidly expanding human
and animal populations are making it worse
and more widespread by increasing the pressure
on fragile ecosystems.
The severe drought that struck the Sudano-
Sahelian region of Africa between 1968 and
1973 drew attention to this disruption in the
ecological balance and to the deterioration of
living conditions in the region. It also brought
widespread sympathy and support for the
people of the Sahel, and sparked a new interest
in arid regions that found expression notably in
the United Nations Conference on Desertifi¬
cation held in Nairobi in 1977. The Conference
was followed by numerous regional initiatives,
including the creation of an interstate com¬
mittee on drought control in the Sahel. Within
the framework of its Man and the Biosphere
(MAB) programme, UNESCO launched a
number of projects which provided an oppor-
40
MOHAMMED SKOURI
is a member of UNESCO's
Division of Ecological Sciences.
An agronomist, he specializes
in problems of arid zones.
tunity for specialists in the field to share expe¬
riences and information.
From 1976 to 1987 the integrated project
on arid lands in northern Kenya, implemented
in co-operation with the United Nations Envi¬
ronment Programme (UNEP) and with assis¬
tance from Germany, focused on traditional
livestock farming systems in the dry lands of
northern Kenya. The main aim was to develop
these systems in such a way as to improve local
living conditions while also protecting the envi¬
ronment.
The region's climate, soils, flora, fauna and
water resources were analysed as part of the
project, which led to the establishment of a
management plan for about half the 22,500-
square-kilometre area studied, which extended
between Lake Turkana and Mount Marsabit.
The integrated project on arid zones in
southern Tunisia, implemented between 1980
and 1984 with support from UNEP, took a very
different approach. This part of Tunisia had
already been extensively studied, and the project
sought to update research findings and put them
to better use, and to extend training programmes
designed to develop local skills. As a follow-up,
a pilot project on desertification control in
southern Tunisia was carried out, in which
remote sensing was used for continuous moni¬
toring of desertification. The pilot project also
focused on the ecology of plants that hold down
the sand and on improving plant cover, notably
by extending the planting of species that could
serve as fodder.
The project's results provided the technical
basis of the anti-desertification strategy adopted
by the Tunisian government in 1986.
The project on training for integrated pas¬
toral management in the Sahel concentrated
largely on the development of human resources
and on the adoption of a new approach to rural
development specially adapted to local condi¬
tions. Between 1980 and 1989 112 senior man¬
agerial staff and 151 technicians from twelve
countries in the Sudano-Sahel region were
trained, and ten regional seminars on agricul¬
tural, pastoral and sylvicultural development
were held.
The training programmes encouraged a com¬
prehensive, interdisciplinary approach to the
problems of the Sahel that took account of the
different aspects of development biophysical,
socio-economic and technical and of the rela¬
tions between them.
