INTERVIEW
ANTONI
TAPIES
talks to
Serafín García Ibáñez
Born in Barcelona in 1923, Antoni Tapies is
one of the greatest Spanish artists of our
time. Largely self-taught, he was influenced
early in his career by the Dadaists and the
Surrealists and then in the 1950s he engaged
in the experimentation with informalism for
which he became famous. Major museums
began to hold exhibitions of his work and
in 1958 an entire room was devoted to it at
the Venice Biennale. Awards from Unesco
and the Carnegie Foundation testified to his
growing international reputation. He has a
highly personal way of using materials, con¬
structing his compositions from common¬
place and discarded objects packaging,
sand, marble dust, latex, cast iron, rags
mixed with thick impasto and incised with
expressive graffiti-like markings. His later
assemblages incorporate objects such as
buckets, mirrors and even larger items. He
has written widely about his art, and a
volume of Conversations with Antoni Tapies
was published in 1991 (Prestel Verlag, Ger¬
many).
SERAFÍN GARCIA IBANEZ
is a journalist with Unesco's
Office of Public Information.
You started out as a law student and
then abandonedyour law studies to devote
yourself to painting. Did you take that
decision on an impulse?
I had an artistic vocation. When I was
a child I loved drawing. I lacked the basic
skills, but as time went by I became con¬
sumed by a desire to do better than all
my classmates. My father, who was a
lawyer, hoped that I would follow in his
footsteps and join his practice. He was so
insistent that I actually studied law for
five years before dropping it. Then I had
the good fortune to win a scholarship
awarded by the French Institute in
Barcelona which enabled me to go to Paris.
Those scholarships were wonderful. They
carried no obligations, and although they
were not worth very much financially,
they provided enough to live on. For me
it was an extraordinary stroke of luck.
What sort ofperson are you?
I would say off the cuff that I am an
anxious person. I worry about everything.
I need to know everything. I tend to live in
a state of anxiety with the feeling that life
is some kind of great catastrophe. I feel the
desire, or rather the intense need, to do
something useful for society, and that is
what stimulates me. In every situation I
always look for what is positive and ben¬
eficial for my fellow citizens. I am inter¬
ested in study, reflection, philosophy

One should come to art with an open mind, without searching
for references. One should simply listen to one's feelings.
but always as a dilettante. I also consider
myself a dilettante as a painter.
It is hard to reduce art to aformula and
one might almost say that everyone has
their own definition. What is yours?
For me, art is a mechanism, a system
that makes it possible to change the spec¬
tator's way of looking and to bring him or
her closer to a state of contemplation of
reality at its deepest level. The artist is like
the mystic: each one acts in his own way
but their common purpose is to achieve
the inner illumination that enables them to
perceive the depths of reality. For me this
is what art is about.
What do you mean by "reality", a word
you often use?
When I talk of reality, I am always
thinking of essentials. Profundity is not
located in some remote, inaccessible
region. It is rooted in everyday life. That
is what great thinkers have taught me,
above all the philosophers of the Far East,
for whom true wisdom which I am far
from achieving is the conjunction of
samsara (the ordinary world) and nirvana
(profound reality). To achieve contact with
reality is not to transport oneself else¬
where, it is not transcendence but thor¬
ough immersion in one's surroundings. A
reality which is neither purely physical
nor metaphysical, but both at once.
Your work is known all over the world
but manyfind itperplexing. Do you think
this is because the public is used to figu¬
rative art?
It is true that the education we receive
inculcates certain mental habits. As far as
art is concerned, for example, it is gener¬
ally thought that painting is copying
nature, in other words reality in its most
superficial form. Today this is the role of
photography, the cinema and television.
What is called photorealism in painting
no longer has any point. Not because it is
questionable in itself but because there
are other ways of expressing and
explaining what it shows us.
You yourselfstarted out asa figurative
painter. . . .
Yes of course, just like everyone else.
Like the artists of my generation, at any
rate. We were attracted by what we have
just been talking about: the imitation of
nature. I did not attend an academy, I
made one for myself, painting the por¬
traits of my friends and forcing myself to
control what I wanted to express.
Does a work ofart have a message?
Is the medium the message? This is an
endless source of debate. The way in which
things are presented is one part of the mes¬
sage. Like the most conventional of figu¬
rative painters, I could paint a still-life
with apples, for example, but I would do
it in terms of something else that I wanted
to express. I would paint those apples in
my own way. Perhaps I would sketch a
whirlpool, or a world in movement, an
impression of living, organic matter.
Painting expresses the painter's way of
thinking, his perception of reality. The
kind of realism we are talking about is not
so far from the work of certain contem¬
porary painters. Today we have other tech¬
nical possibilities, but some of them are
very simple. People think that computers,
new machines, the power of technology
make it possible to reproduce reality with
a high degree of precision. My equipment
is extremely modest it amounts to a
brush whose bristles are rather worn.
That's all I need. The simplest tools can
express the deepest feelings.
You use very ordinary materials such as
cardboard or hessian for yourpaintings.
That too is a message. Materials are
expressive. Gold leaf will make a totally
different impression on you from that
made by a piece of torn cardboard. And
the piece of cardboard will have different
connotations, and will arouse different
feelings from those produced by a piece of
polished marble. These commonplace
materials, which had been ignored, were
exactly what I was looking for. They pro¬
voked the spectator and made him think.
Perhaps on the spur of the moment he
thinks they are rubbish, but when he gives
the matter a little thought he sees that
there is profound wisdom in the humblest
objects. The Japanese say that the whole
universe is contained in a grain of sand.
These objects, which seem to be nothing
but rubbish, can deliver an authentic
human message.
Is it necessary for the artist andhis work
to bepolitically, socially or morally com¬
mitted? Or is beauty sufficient justifica¬
tion for a work ofart?
I have always thought that the ideolog¬
ical component the political component
even was necessary. But it has to arise
from the artist's general vision and not,
as has happened in totalitarian fascist or
communist countries, from an overtly
political discourse. My political commit¬
ment results from my way of working.
The details naturally take their place on
this backcloth. The message, whatever it is,
is essential. The person who only paints to
amuse the gallery or play the fool must be
very unhappy. But, I repeat, the message
emerges from the work itself; it is the
work that reveals its social, political or
philosophical content.
A message only has meaning if it is
understood, and the language ofcontem¬
porary art isperhaps not within everyone's
reach. Is an initiation necessary?
I think so. An initiation in the educa¬
tional sense of the term. Unfortunately, it
is a training one must follow when young,
for sensibility is formed in childhood. I do
not think that educational systems in the
West, especially in Spain, are up to it. Art

must be taught at school in order to edu¬
cate the taste of children and young
people, to prevent them from falling into
banality. Most people approach art with
preconceived ideas: they want to see in it
what, as a result of conformism or because
they are ill informed, they expect to find in
it. One should come to art with an open
mind, without searching for references.
One should simply listen to one's feel¬
ings.
Which painter orpainters do you most
admire?
There are so many of them that it would
be boring to give you a list of all of them.
I am a collector in a small way and I like
to be surrounded by my favourite authors,
painters and sculptors. And I am
extremely eclectic. I am deeply moved by
the great art of Egypt, Chinese painting of
the Song and Yuan periods (which has
inspired some of our contemporaries) and
the works of the great Chinese and
Japanese calligraphers. African art and
pre-Cortesian and pre-Columbian art as
well.
And among Spanish painters?
Spanish painting and art cover an
immense range. I love the Romanesque
style Catalan Romanesque above all
but also certain features of Gothic art, the
mysterious works of Ribera, Zurbarán,
and of course Picasso and Miró.
You have left out another Catalan
painter, Dalí.
Dalí produced some very interesting
work in the 1930s. Then he began to do the
kind of thing I was attacking a few minutes
ago photo painting. And from an ideo¬
logical point of view, Dalí ceased to
interest me from the time of the Civil War.
I was disappointed by his behaviour as a
citizen and as a human being.
Do you have any pastimes or hobbies
outsidepainting?
I collect books, all kinds of books, old
and new. Books that talk of the mysteries
of life in every period. I also love listening
to music. I am particularly fond of
Romantic music: I find Wagner
enchanting. But I also appreciate later
composers such as Bruckner and Mahler,
and even more modern composers such as
the Italian Scelsi, whose admirable work is
still not widely known. At present his is
my favourite music. I also like the modern
French composers and some of the Ger¬
mans, such as Stockhausen.
Do you like flamenco?
I don't know it well. I ought not to say
that, because one cannot know flamenco,
one can only feel it. It hasn't often hap¬
pened to me, but whenever I have had an
opportunity to see and hear great cantes
being interpreted, I have been extremely
moved.
Literature uses words, music uses sounds.
Architecture, sculpture andpainting deal
in matter. Does this mean that there are
uncrossable frontiers between these dif¬
ferent forms ofexpression?
Speaking from experience I will say no.
These are academic classifications that are
used by force of habit. Sometimes I feel
that I am very close to the poets: it has even
been said that some of my paintings are
poetic metaphors. At other times I feel
affinities with music: I use fragile materials
which when they crack produce a musical
sound. I have also been told that my relief
effects in painting are close to sculpture,
and in fact I deliberately work in three
dimensions. Today the very precise fron¬
tiers that separated painting, sculpture and
other forms of art arc tending to fade away.
You designed the medal struck by
UNESCO to commemorate the centenary
of the birth of Pablo Picasso. And you
recently designed another to mark the cen¬
tenary of the birth ofJoan Miró.
When UNESCO entrusted me with
these commissions, I felt a tremendous
sense of satisfaction since it created a kind
of continuity, a link with the preceding
generation through Picasso and above all
Miró whom I knew very well and to
whose work I have devoted much study. I
even worked with him since I was a
member of the governing body of the
Miró Foundation in Barcelona. I feel very
close to him and I have always had great
admiration for him both as a man and as an
artist. He was extremely human and had a
vision of the world that was full of fantasy.
We both tend to escape into dreams,
dreams that are rooted in the depths of
our being and awaken in the unconscious
mechanisms that are far closer to tangible
reality and everyday life than one might
think. I see in Miró's painting the convul¬
sions of the break with academicism and
the return to innocent things charged with
meaning. As for Picasso, with the gen¬
erous positions he took, his fidelity to
humanism, and his espousal of certain crit¬
ical approaches to social and political
issues, he was for me a great master.
