The true history of Africa
is only now beginning to be
written
Above left, brass head of the Oni, a
religious chief, from lle-Ife (Nigeria). It
was produced by the lost wax method..
The tiny holes In the surface were used for
attaching ornaments.
Above centre, terra-cotta
anthropomorphic statuette from
Bankouni, near Bamako (Mali). Date
unknown.
Above right, bronze head of an Oni. It
belongs to the art of Ife (Nigeria) and was
produced by the lost wax method in the
mid- 1 3th century.

An authentic picture by Jean Dévisse
AT a very early stage, Western historians
surrendered to the stubborn refusal of
African history to fit into their conceptual
frameworks. They left it to sociologists to study,
in piecemeal fashion, the cultures of individual
"ethnic groups" or "tribes". The sum of their
efforts was to draw attention to a number of
curious features and to suggest that they existed
throughout the continent and its deliberately
obliterated past. The institutions of the priest
king and chieftainship, both obviously phe¬
nomena quite unlike anything that had existed
anywhere else in the world, were all that was
needed to define the continent's past.
African peoples too have felt tempted to assert
unique features that distinguish them from others.
Three striking examples have been analysed in
recent years, from among the hundreds already
recorded or presently being studied. The
Nubians,1 who once considered themselves "emi¬
nently Christian" were from the fifteenth century
onwards eager to claim Arab origins and genealo¬
gies. The Hausa,2 in common with many other
peoples from Africa and the Indian Ocean, also
lay claim to an Arab origin. The Tuareg3 claim a
relationship with the Ottoman Empire.
One must therefore constantly be on guard
against the oversimplification which says that the
true history of Africa, which was deformed or
denied by "negationist" European studies of
the nineteenth century, is that which the peoples
themselves and their story-tellers repeat orally
today. To rediscover and rewrite African history
means going backwards in time. The writing of
African history today runs as much risk of being
retarded by a prickly regard for African speci¬
ficity as it did in the past by colonialist negativity.
A symposium1 held in Nice in 1986 on the
initiative of Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, then
Director-General of UNESCO, demonstrated
that the writing of history in the late twentieth
century must be based on the use of two impor¬
tant disciplines.
The first of these is chronology. Without a
solid framework, history soon becomes nothing
more than a vague anthropological discourse.
History is more than a mere sequence of events,
but without precise reference to a fixed time-
scale, interpretations become hazardously
impressionistic.
The second discipline is the comparative
method, which should be more widely used. Too
many detailed studies are hidden away in mono¬
graphs. As anyone knows who has contributed to
the reconstruction of African history during the
millennia prior to 1700, comparisons can be
highly illuminating. They reveal convergences,
nuances and differences, always provided that
the results are related to a construction of world
history composed of more than the mere juxta¬
position of national or continental histories.
Comparative study presupposes the rapid

Ambassadors to the king
of the Congo are shown In
this illustration from the
Dutch physician and
geographer Olfer Dapper's
"Description of Africa"
(1686).
Below right, cross-section
of a slave ship. The slaves
are packed below deck.
(Illustration from a mid-
1 9th-century French
treatise on naval
engineering).
publication which receives little encourage- taken place in this field in the United States and
ment from present economic systems of the Jamaica, for example, is now being echoed in the
burgeoning crop of excellent work produced countries of Central and South America and the
each year, particularly by African researchers. Caribbean, in lands which have long been reticent
about such matters. The repercussions of the
BrealfinS new SrOlind rewriting of African history on "racial integra-
- , . it- i tion" a watchword in many states of the Amer-
Spectacular progress is currently being made in L r i j i i j
r ~.r , ° . , J r i- icas may prove benehcial, provided they do
two areas, rirstly, growing numbers ol studies are i j 1 1_ j j- ui
, . -il n- r i i not lead to racial hatred and irreparable ruptures,
being carried out on the ellects ol the exploitation T , L -li l.
r,° -at- -11111 It has now become possible to examine other,
ol human resources in Africa, particularly black , , , f r ¿ i » r
. r . 1-11 i i i i r much older forms ol human migration irom
Alnca, which has occurred not only in the last lew Ar- A jr i ru-i
. , , . ' . . n Alnca to Asia and Europe, the existence ol which
centuries, but over several millennia. 1 he înllu- , u u u i ur i_ j ï s
[ , . ... ... c r has been shown by a recently published atlas.
ence ol this exploitation on the lives ol groups ol ,-n i_ i i i i il ï j
, i-i i 1 he stages by which the planet has been populated
human beings and on the economies, strate- r a r a -ja v
j- ° j -Jill from Alnca America and Australia were popu-
gies ol response and protection developed by , < , , u . j
°. r . , , , . r i i lated much more recently can now be traced as
African societies, the slow evolution ol which is r j -r j i r i. i r
, , . ..... . part ol a more detailed analysis of the evolution of
currently being perceived with increasing r, i_ j r
, . \ , ° r r r. ° the environment over thousands of years,
clarity has become a mai or focus of interest. Ti i u r j u
,. , ,. , 1 he same rigour must also be applied to the
Ihese studies are enabling us to make a i . r »t
, , ö . r , critical treatment of sources. IN o one now sen-
	 serious attempt to explore the question of the , * r i u u- .
ill » r 1-1 ously contests the use ol oral sources by histo-
arrested development ol a continent which, J , ¿
JEAN DEVISSE, i- if i i « i i nans. However, we still need to refine our
* ,r , according to all the evidence, was devel- i j r n j- j n
of France, is professor . ? . , , . . , .. , , methods ol collecting, editing and critically exam-
»m oping in the global sense, including the cul- _. °i ^ . ,,' i >m.
emeritus of African history at r &. . &,., . '. b, . , ining oral data, just as historians in the North did
the University of Pari? i and tural dimension which is now integrated into the _ ° _ ' . , _
tne university oí rans i ana b two centuries ago with regard to written sources,
rapporteur of the International concept of development-in the fourteenth cen- Work has onl ^ust b &¡n this fidd but extra_
Scientific Committee for the tury, at the very time when Europe was expen- ,. i i j l j
,...,,. , ,. , ' ., { . j c . . r r ordinary progress has already been made,
publication of Unesco s General encing a terrible period of crisis. /r & /
History ofAfrica. He is Secondly, work is commencing outside Africa
^r«hiwtonwÎe in an area which was long considered unfruitful Ai|,»ea's ea|,|y metalworkers
Ki-V 'l.S- u-'i. and even dangerous, namely the study of the Another endangered legacy consists of the irre-
Niger basin which was r. & ..' . J r -i i i 11 -j i i j ji
described in the November African communities that were forcibly inte- placeable evidence that can be produced by metic-
_ M^ 1993 ¡ssue of the Unesco grated into the life of Asia and the Americas. ulous archaeological research. In recent decades,
Trw Courier. The spectacular change of attitude which has many spectacular discoveries have been made in

this domain. The discovery of many aspects of the
past traces of animal and plant substances,
remains of meals, shrines, villages, towns, evi¬
dence of climatic change, ceramic objects has
considerably enriched our knowledge.
One revealing example is provided by studies
on copper and iron. Until recently, it was taken
for granted that south of the Tropic of Cancer
Africa had not produced copper nor refined
methods of making copper alloys. Today, the
map of Africa is dotted with sites where metal was
smelted during the past 3,000 years, and others
where objects made of fine alloys have been
found, many of them produced using the "lost
wax" technique. At one time there was a debate
among those who believed that iron could only
have entered Africa from the north-east: either
from the Caucasus or Egypt. Now, however,
archaeological evidence from seven or eight coun¬
tries of the intertropical zone, particularly around
the equator, proves that the forging of iron was
practised there as early as 1000 B.C. The era of
quasi-theological debate has fortunately given
way to meticulous work in the laboratory.
Lastly, there is a need for greater co-opera¬
tion between disciplines. History must be allied
more closely with other domains: the environ¬
mental sciences, geology, geography, human
and animal palaeontology, dietetics, linguistics,
medicine, and palaeobotany, to name but a few.
Nor should one forget the essential role of sci¬
entific laboratories, which are now deeply
involved in research on African history.
The "rewriting" of the history of Africa will
require a major international effort, sustained
over several generations. First and foremost it
calls for the mobilization of African govern¬
ments and researchers. For my part, I only regret
that sufficient time no longer remains for me to
witness this development.
1. See L. Kropacck, ch. 16 of General History ofAfrica,
vol. IV, UNESCO-Heinemann International-University of
California Press, 1984.
2. W.K.R. Hallam, "The Bayajida Legend in Hausa
folklore"', Journal of African History, 1966, pp. 47-60.
3. M. Hamani Djibo, Le sultanat touareg de l'Aya. Etudes
nigériennes no. 55, 1989.
4. See Etre historien aujourd'hui (edited by R. Rcmond).
UNESCO-Crès, 1988. 350 pages.
5. Grand Atlas de l'archéologie. Encyclopaedia Universalis
publishers, Paris. P. 309, map by Jean Chavaillon.
