From sub-Saharan Africa to southeast
Asia, ine iniernanonai Laoour urganisa*
tion is rooting out the last vestiges of
slavery. But it is easier to change laws
than to free children from exploitation in
factories and prostitution.
Forced labour
human bondage in today's world
by George Thullen
26
Slavery was a feature of many societies
until fairly recent times. For instance,
according to information brought to the atten¬
tion of the International Labour Organisation
(ILO) in 1992, it appears that slavery has not
been eradicated in Mauritania, despite being
outlawed by official decrees and constitutional
provisions. Lack of adequate and effective
inspection measures and of a mechanism to co¬
ordinate the struggle against slavery have ham¬
pered efforts to stamp out a practice deeply
rooted in the country's economy and culture.
Similarly, reports supplied to the United Nations
Working Group on Contemporary Forms of
Slavery showed that slavery and practices
analagous to slavery, such as certain forms of
serfdom, still exist throughout the country, and
that cases of kidnapping and sales of children and
their exploitation continue. Even where freed,
ex-slaves have been finding it very difficult to
support themselves away from their former
masters. The ILO's Committee of Experts has
asked the Government for information on spe¬
cific measures and policies which would lead to
a real abolition of slavery in Mauritania.
Traditional slavery also survives in modern-
day Sudan. Allegations of slavery in that country
reached the UN Working Group on Contem¬
porary Forms of Slavery for the first time in
1988 and were also discussed at the Interna¬
tional Labour Conference in 1989 and subse¬
quently. Indeed, as a result of that country's
civil war, slavery seems to be on the increase.
The Sudanese Government maintains that
the allegations are related to conflicts of a tribal
nature, such as disputes over pasture and water
resources in areas where there was an overlap of
tribes. As a result, each tribe involved in a dis¬
pute captures members of the other tribe or
tribes as hostages while waiting for the dispute
to be settled according to tribal traditions and
customs. However, the UN Special Rappor¬
teur on the situation of human rights in Sudan,
who visited the country in September and
December 1993, has concluded that reports and
eye-witness accounts reveal a great deal of con¬
sistency regarding the circumstances of abduc¬
tion, the locations of destination, the names of
locations where children and women are said to
be kept in special camps, and where people from
the northern Sudan, or even from abroad,
reportedly come to buy some of these people.
Debt bondage, a widespread evil
Sale or traffic of children, the Special Rapporteur
has noted, seems to be an organized and polit¬
ically motivated activity, of mass character.
Abductions of children have been repeatedly
reported, including the abduction in the summer
of 1993 of 217 children, mainly Dinka. The UN
Committee on the Rights of the Child, in a
report ofJanuary 1993, has also expressed con¬
cern regarding issues of forced labour and
slavery in Sudan. In the light of all this, the ILO
Committee of Experts has asked the Govern¬
ment to provide full information on measures
taken or envisaged to ensure that forced labour
practices are really eradicated.
Other forms of slavery, such as debt
bondage, or exploitation of or traffic in per¬
sons, particularly of women and children, are a
far more common occurrence. No region is

spared. Debt bondage is a mechanism whereby
an employer entraps a labourer by offering an
advance which he or she has to pay off from
future earnings. But because wages are generally
very low, and the employer frequently makes
deductions for accommodation or tools and
often levies fines for unsatisfactory work, the
worker is unable to repay. Instead, the debt
increases steadily and the employer may insist
that it be passed from parent to child or even
grandchild: there have been instances of people
slaving to pay off debts eight generations old.
Debt bondage is particularly widespread in
South Asia and in Latin America, and its victims
often tend to be the poorest, often tribal people,
who arc illiterate and relatively easy to deceive
and to keep in ignorance of their rights. If they
try to leave their employment they are usually
caught and returned by force, if not punished
severely or killed outright.
India and Pakistan have long faced some of
the most serious problems of bonded labour. In
India, the non-agricultural occupations in which
bonded labour has been identified include,
among others, stone quarrying, the brick-kiln
industry, fishing, building and construction,
forestry, carpet weaving and pottery-making,
with child labour found predominantly in carpet
weaving, glass-bead manufacturing and the
match and fireworks industries. Bonded labour
in Pakistan is very common in the brick-kiln
industry, but it is also found in other fields,
such as quarrying, shoemaking, carpet weaving
and in the making of bidis (cigarettes), as well as
in agriculture.
On paper, whether by Acts of Parliament or
by constitutional provisions, bonded labour
should have ceased to exist a long time ago. In
practice, however, enforcement of the legal texts
has been hampered by ingrained social, economic
and cultural patterns and practices. Action by
non-governmental organizations and trade
unions, combined with the effects of the media
and improved communications between various
parts of India is leading to growing public aware¬
ness of the existence of bonded labour and is
making it easier for the authorities to take the
requisite steps to stamp out the practice.
Pakistan officially abolished the bonded
labour system by an Act promulgated in March
1992 and there seems to be a strong commitment
in Government circles, up to the highest levels,
to make a clean break with past practices. The
Act provides that every bonded labourer stands
freed and discharged from any obligation to
render any bonded labour. One of Pakistan's
trade union federations, however, has alleged
that bonded labour continues to be practised in
many areas and industries, particularly in the
brick-kiln industry.
Forced labour of the bonded labour type
can also be found in other regions. The ILO
Committee of Experts has noted that in Peru, for
instance, as confirmed by a Government-
appointed committee, practices of debt bondage,
deceitful or violent recruitment of labour, sub¬
human conditions of work and the exploita¬
tion of children in the indigenous communi¬
ties of Atalaya are still current.
Exploitation of children
Unquestionably, as the ILO Committee of
Experts has put it "forced labour exploitation of



children, be it in forced child labour, child pros¬
titution, child pornography, be it in factories,
sweatshops, brothels, private houses or else¬
where, is one of the worst forms of forced
labour". This year the Committee has chosen to
condemn strongly the exploitation of children
for prostitution and pornography by tourists
and visitors from other countries. Eradication of
"these deplorable practices", it states, should
no longer be seen as a responsibility only of
the country in which it occurs, but as an inter¬
national responsibility. Yet child prostitution
for international tourist consumption is only
the tip of the iceberg recent studies show that
the largest share is for local consumption and
must be tackled there.
While child prostitution and pornography
may represent one of the worst forms of forced
child labour, millions of children are bonded
labourers, are kidnapped or otherwise lured
away from their families to be imprisoned in
sweatshops, to work "unseen" as domestic ser¬
vants or to be given or sold at a very young age
to another family. There they receive little or no
pay, arc stripped of any control over their own
lives, and arc often beaten, sexually abused,
starved and subjected to abnormal working hours
and hazardous working conditions. They are
deprived of the right to lead a normal childhood,
deprived of education, deprived of a future.
A direct contacts mission of the ILO to
Thailand in September 1993 reported that
SLAVERY


despite existing laws for the protection of chil¬
dren, recruitment of children by force and
deception for work in factories, sweatshops or
brothels continued in Bangkok as well as in
the provinces. In a study of child labour con¬
ducted in 1986 by the National Youth Bureau
in the Prime Minister's Office, it was stated
that children lacked the opportunity to go home
for a visit, or even to get in touch with their
family, or were found to be confined, scolded
and physically and psychologically assaulted
by their employers. According to information
received by the ILO mission, such practices
continue to exist. One rescued boy, for instance,
who had been kidnapped at a railway station,
was forced with other children to work
extremely long hours, was beaten and was not
allowed to go out or look through the win¬
dows. As noted by the ILO's Committee of



Experts, another facet of forced labour in Thai¬
land is sexual exploitation of children. It is an
extremely serious problem there in terms of
both scale and complexity: it is hidden from
view, protected by gangs and mafias.
Effective policies to enhance social justice
and equity, says the ILO's Committee of
Experts, can go a long way to help children and
families left at the periphery of development
and contribute to the protection of children.
This is in essence the message of the Programme
of Action against Child Bondage adopted in
November 1992 by the Asian Regional Sem¬
inar on Children in Bondage, held in Islam¬
abad, Pakistan, and sponsored jointly by the
ILO and the UN Centre for Human Rights.
By subscribing to this Programme of Action,
the countries which participated Bangladesh,
India, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Thai¬
land have pledged themselves to "effective
and immediate abolition of child bondage" as a
priority goal of a national policy on children.
They have acknowledged that there must be a
firm political commitment, a clear and unam¬
biguous declaration against bondage, and a com¬
prehensive national policy and programme of
action covering legislative reforms, effective
enforcement systems, and a system of compul¬
sory and free education. All this would have to
be sustained by a vigorous media campaign
aimed at changing attitudes and values and at
engaging the public in the larger cause of
freedom and respect of human rights.
The ILO's Committee of Experts considers
that governments should redouble their efforts
in fighting forced child labour and punish those
guilty of it severely and in a manner commen¬
surate with the physical and moral harm done to
the children. To back governments in their fight
against forced labour exploitation of children,
the ILO launched at the end of 1991 an inter-

national programme for the elimination of child
labour (known under the acronym "IPEC")
with a substantial financial contribution from the
Government of Germany. The elimination of
hazardous and bonded child labour is the pri¬
ority of this programme. In India, for example,
one of the first countries to participate, five
"action programmes" are being conducted in the
carpet industry of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar,
where the incidence of bonded child labour is
notoriously high; their aim is to rehabilitate
children who have been working in this industry,
and particularly those who have been liberated
from bondage.
Non-governmental bodies are a vital instru¬
ment in mobilizing public opinion and public
awareness. Thus, for example, at a meeting con¬
vened in The Hague in October 1993 at the ini¬
tiative of the Dutch economist and Nobel lau¬
reate Jan Tinbergen, he and four other Nobel
prizewinners, and representatives of non-gov¬
ernmental organizations and experts from dif¬
ferent parts of the world, laid down a strategy for
combating child exploitation around the world.
Since then, a further 104 Nobel prizewinners
have agreed to join in the campaign named
"Child Right Worldwide" to stop exploitation
of children.
GEORGE THULLEN,
of Ecuador, is the English-
language editor of the
International Labour
Organisation's annual World
Labour Report.
