if v*. ine rrenci
abolishes slaver
by Uuis Sala-Molins
I In 1783, a ten-year "boom" began for
I the slave trade. The price fetched by
slaves had never stood so high, and during
those ten years French ports dispatched more
than 1,100 slave ships to the coasts of Africa,
accounting for one-third of the entire turnover
of the slave trade in the eighteenth century.
From February 1788, when the Société des
Amis des Noirs (Society of Friends of the
Blacks) was founded, until 1793, 424 slave
ships one-eighth of the total trade set out
from French ports to take on board their car¬
goes of "black gold".
In 1791, the rallying cry of the insurgent
black leader Bouckman to the slaves gath¬
ered in the Bois Caiman forest was the signal
for a revolt that would not be relegated to
history like all its forerunners. The events
that were sparked off that night were to cul¬
minate in the eradication of slavery from San
Domingo and the forced removal of Haiti
from French domination.
It is true that, in pre-Revolutionary
France, the Société des Amis des Noirs had
worked to emancipate the mulattoes from
slavery and had advocated setting a series of
time-limits of up to as many as seventy years
for the gradual phasing-out of slavery after the
source of supply provided by the slave trade
had dried up. These time-limits were meant to
ensure that everything would proceed under
the orders of the whites, whose sovereignty
and ownership, which they regarded as sacro¬
sanct principles, would be respected. The fact
is that the "amis des Noirs", who were "Phys¬
iocrats" in politics and "enlightened" philoso¬
phers, were advocates of free labour in the
long run. They argued from time to time over
the prospective merits of setting up colonies
in Africa itself, where the whites would govern
the blacks infinitely better by engaging them
in "free labour" on their own continent rather
than by shipping them to the other side of the
Atlantic. Above all, however, they dilated
endlessly on the monstrous nature of slavery,
the intolerable human price of the slave trade,
the crime of seizing the blacks from their
homes, and the most appropriate length of
time that should be allowed to elapse between
the scheduled end of the slave trade and slavery
and the abolition of both practices once and
for all.
However, the slaves themselves in the
Bois Caiman laid down the absolutely non-
negotiable condition that there should be no
more slavery and no more paternalistic man¬
agement. In 1791, with gunpowder in their
belts, a machete in one hand and a torch in the
other, the slaves acted out the death sentence
of slavery. They had cast off their chains and
set themselves free. At last they were free!
The triumph of Toussaint Louverture
The authorities in Paris did not take kindly to
this unexpected outcome and pointed the
finger of guilt at the "amis des Noirs" who,
through their immoderate language and their
fiery rhetoric, were regarded as being respon¬
sible for the ransacking of the colony. The
"amis des Noirs" protested. They insisted
that they were in no way responsible and also
made it plain that they were only concerned
about the mulattoes. They had repeatedly
said that the blacks would have to wait in
calm, humility, patience and resignation, and
that they would be better off if they were
kept under control by the liberated mulat¬
toes who, in that capacity, would have inter¬
ests identical to those of the whites and would
seek to ensure peace and calm in the colony
and a profitable return on labour.
The Convention provided as best it could
for the defence of its island possessions in the
face of English and Spanish incursions, the
consequences of the slave revolt and the anti-
revolutionary and secessionist attitudes of the
local parliaments. It beat about the bush. It
held debates on the nature of the powers it
should delegate and ... on the colour of the
people to whom it would agree to delegate
them. Its immediate and constant aim lay in
trade and its colonial interests and in effectively
opposing the claims being made to its terri¬
tories by the other powers.
It was against this background that it sent
Sonthonax and Polverel to San Domingo to
inform those "who were not free" (since the
Convention, which was dragging its feet on
the "matter", deliberately refrained from men-
A French engraving dating from 1789
(artist unknown).
tioning the word "slave") that their recogni¬
tion as human beings would come more
quickly if they threw their weapons into the
rivers and went back to their picks and shovels.
No matter how well-disposed the envoys of
the Convention may have been to expediting
matters, the fact remains that it was the
"slaves" and Toussaint Louverture who
dragged the abolition decree out of them on 29
August 1793.
How could the people in Paris contend
with the threefold danger of secession, revolt
and seizure by the English which put such fear
into them? The only way of keeping the West
Indian possessions or what was left of
them was to arm the slaves so that, as free
men and citizens, they could serve as soldiers
and defend the land and the plantations with
their bodies still laced with the freshly inflicted
scars where the lash had bitten into them.
Then came the abolition decree of 1794
endorsing the uprising of Louverture in 1793.
Even people like the Abbé Grégoire were
taken aback by the suddenness of the events,
while others such as Robespierre were busy
with other matters. Danton expressed his sat¬
isfaction at the trick played on the English,
whose trade he predicted as coming to an end.
However, some very pretty phrases were also
heard that day: the least that could be done at
the height of the Enlightenment was to open
the floodgates of rhetoric and to congratulate
the Convention on having taken so imagina¬
tive a step. The event was even celebrated at a
splendid ceremony held at the Temple of
Reason.
LLUÍS SALA-MOLINS, a Catalan writer, is professor of
political philosophy at the University of Toulouse-ll Le
Mirail. He has recently published three books on the
legal arguments advanced to justify the enslavement
of blacks in the Americas and on the involvement of
Enlightenment thinkers in the history of the slave
trade. They are: Le Code Noir ou le calvaire de Canaan
(3rd edtion, 1993), L'Afrique aux Amériques, Le Code
Noir espagnol (1992) and Les misères des Lumières,
sous la raison l'outrage (1992).
25
