Patricia Made
AFRICA'S INVISIBLE WOMEN
The contribution of African women to the life of
their continent is largely overlooked by the media
In Africa, the exclusion of women from the media mirrors their
position in society at large. Between 80 and 98 per cent of them
work in subsistence farmingthey are the figures who can be
seen in the fields across the continent, using very simple Implements
to till the soil. Women who have paid jobs earn from 15 to 36 per
cent less than their male counterparts. Less than 9 per cent of
African parliamentarians are women, and women reaching ministerial
level are often shunted off into "soft" ministries such as health,
social welfare, education and women's affairs. Despite the education
drives of the 1960s and 1970s, 56 per cent of African women remain
illiterate. Women are excluded from power ¡n all sectors of society.
The media help to perpetuate this situation by gender stereo¬
typing and negative portrayal of women. The African media principally
serve an urban elite. Many of the items they publish are chosen for
their entertainment value, rather than for their value as Information
that could empower the majority of the people. Prominence and top¬
icality are the main criteria of newsworthlness. The people who
appear on the front pages are the people who occupy positions of
power. Most African women do not fall Into this category.
African women are often depicted ¡n the media as victims or sex
objects. They make the headlines when they are "battered" by
their husbands or commit bizarre or sensational acts. In one African
country it was noted that when the media did admit the existence
of gender gaps in education and employment, editorialists insisted
that women themselves are to blame because they do not take suf¬
ficient advantage of the available opportunities.
Nor do journalists (both men and women) view women as a
target audience for the information they write and produce for the
media. Since the majority of women are Illiterate and live ¡n rural
areas, they are generally disregarded as a media constituency.
The situation cannot be improved without an increase in the
numbers of African women actively Involved in the media, including
in management and training. As long as women remain without the
power to influence the flow of information and the type of coverage
given to events, ¡t will be extremely difficult to persuade the media
to present a less negative ¡mage of them.
A high drop-out rate
The dominant forces in the media, however, tend to resist any
move towards change. Women who are appointed to editorial
boards cr programming positions often lack professional experience
and are usually isolated in a male-dominated environment where it
A member of an Eritrean TV
camera crew filming in the
streets of Asmara, the
country's capital.
¡s difficult for them to be genuinely effective. Women who achieve
influential positions In the media are regularly subjected to harsh
critical scrutiny by male colleagues and other women. Some studies
show that there is a high drop-out rate among women who do
reach senior management positions. Women who are tied to a
home environment lack the flexibility and mobility essential to the
successful journalist; and women journalists have a reputation for
loose morals simply because they work long hours, often In close
collaboration with men. Because of such pressures, the numbers
of women entering the media are actually falling in some parts of
Africa.
In any case, the appointment of women to senior editorial posi¬
tions does not in Itself provide any guarantee against gender bias
in news reporting. The strictures of "producing good copy" are
such that even women editors will often regard women as news¬
worthy only when they do something sensational or bizarre.
Twenty years ago, at the Mexico City World Conference on
Women1, the media were seen as a catalyst for change. Since
then, however, little has changed, especially in Africa.
1. See the Unesco Courier, August-September 1975.
PATRICIA MADE,
a Zimbabwean journalist, is Managing Editor of the Southern
African Economist, a regional economic and business
magazine. She writes regularly on women's Issues for the
Women's Feature Service, an independent news and feature
agency based in India.
