Fi ty years on
We ail know that thé Inequalitles
existing in the world today are a scandai
that must be brought to an end. We know too
that the burden of debt must be alleviated so
that the spiralhng process whereby the poor
continue to get poorer and the rich richer can
be halted. We are aware of the need to promote
lifelong vocational training and éducation, to
foster scientific and technological development
so that countries may become masters of their
own fates, to facilitate urban renewal as weM as
rural development, to ensure that the law and
freedom of expression are respected, that the
independence of the judiciary is maintained
and that democratic principles are embodied in
everyday practice.
So much we ait know. But now is a time
for action, in the first instance at the national
level. It is pointless to adopt declarations,
strategies and charters unless countries set
themselves definite plans with precise objec-
tives and deadlines, so as to undertake-
while there is still time-the changes of
direction that are now unavoidable. There
must be changes in behaviour and attitudes
towards the consumption of energy and raw
materials, of production and employment
and also of welfare. Such changes take time,
they require sustained effort and a long-term
outlook ; but it is unfortunately difficult to
reconcile the demands of national politics
with medium-and long-term preoccupa-
tions. When things too obviously go wrong
and imbalances become too glaring, the
powers that be prefer to recommend adjust-
ments, and then apply corrective measures to
offset the often devastating effects of those
adjustments. And they take it upon them-
selves to transpose-or even impose-
models from elsewhere instead of helping
individual countries and peoples to work
out their own plans for the future.
While it is true, however, that history
marches on, contemporary history-the his-
tory we are living through-is not a piece of
machinery that only needs oiling when it
by Federico Mayor
seizes up or can be improved by repeated tin-
kering. We are dealing with the aspirations of
billions of people throughout the world who
need to be provided with a more tolerable
present, and at the same time enabled to
envisage the future as a project, respectful of
their dignity and their culture, from which
they may draw sustenance and to which they
may contribute, often with a creativity that
others better off than themselves might envy.
This urgent need for interdependent
action also involves a thorough-going
reform of the United Nations system. The
system was designed to deal with the prob-
lems of the postwar world but it is ill pre-
pared to meet thé challenges of the present
and the foreseeable future, which are, fìrst
and foremost, those of world development.
We must in ail honesty admit that the
efforts made by the international commu-
nity over the last fifty years to promote
development are far from having achieved the
desired effects. The promises made by the
richest countries, twenty or so years ago, to
help the development of the poorest coun-
tries have not really been kept, while large-
scale movements of capital and market forces
are Increasingly outside states'control.
The undertakings in which we have
invested have ail too often ended in failure,
and the emphasis now placed on peace-
keeping operations-with results that do not
always justify the large sums of money
poured into them-shows that the logic of
responding to emergencies still prevails. But
international stability and security today
transcend the military sphere ; they rely upon
a whole set of economic, financlal, political,
educational, scientific and technological mea-
sures that need to be worked out in concerted
fashion and applied in good time.
We therefore need to revise our conception
of the role of the United Nations system
without delay. We are spending vast amounts
on deploying armies to"re-establish"peace
and then on restoring, repairing and recon-IJ

structing what has been destroyed by warfare,
but it is war itself that we should destroy, by
rooting out the underlying causes of conflict :
poverty, social injustice, political oppression,
and discrimination and exclusion in ail their
forms. The time has come to put the Charter
in its totality into effect and to move on
from a conception of the rôle of the United
Nations whereby peace-keeping constituted
ils principal task to a more ambitious concep-
tion, having in view the prevention of con-
flicts and the building of peace.
The places where peace has hitherto made
most headway are those where societies have
succeeded in maintaining their cohesion and
progress while preserving respect for human
rights, providing themselves with democ-
ratic structures and making development a
ioint undertaking, i. e. ensuring that its fruits
are fairly shared. Many societies today are,
however, aiso under threat from faceless ene-
mies : unemployment, poverty and exclusion
that are becoming worse and worse from day
to day, despite the emergency measures
applied in some places. Even where tolerance
used to be the order of the day, a shift
towards xenophobia is becoming more evi-
: sent, and chauvinist or racist utterances that
han seemed to be a thing of the past are heard
more and more often, and are taken up and
wmetimes amplified by certain intellectual
alites who are incapable of seeing beyond the
horizon of national frontiers.
Indignation is an insufficient response to
this state of affairs. We need to find a real
riposte to the real threats now posed to
international security in the shape of exclu-
sinon, rural decline and urban decay, large-
scalpe emigrations, deterioration of the envi-
ronment, new pandemic diseases and the
traffic in arms and drugs.
In UNESCO's own specific domain, we
need to rally the forces of the human mind
to this cause. We must concentrate our
efforts on the development of human
resources with a view to getting back, after
décadres when strategies have been character-
ized by a narrowly economic approach, to
that which lies at the very heart of develop-
ment, the human individual. We are learning
to invest in that intangible asset, human cre-
itivity, and in the acquisition, transfer and
pooling of knowledge, which hold the key
to any process of individual and collective
émancipation. Emancipation can never be
ichieved in isolation or by turning in upon
Jneself. It is by receptivity and interaction
that cultures grow strong, and it is by expe-
riencing and seeking out the Other that indi-
vidual personalities are formed.
A symbolic dove of peace at
Lillehammer (Norway)
To counter the culture of war wc must
construct a culture of peace, a culture of con-
viviality, founded upon the principles of
freedom, justice and democracy, of tolerance
and solidarity, and upon respect for ail
human rights ; a culture that rejects violence
and seeks solutions to problems through
dialogue and negotiation ; a culture of pre-
vention that endeavours to get to the very
root of conflicts in order, as far as this is
possible, to stop them erupting.
Development for peace and peace for
development, these are the two thrusts of
our action. Helping the weakest, bringing
society's outcasts back into the fold, facili-
tating the exercise of civil rights and the par-
ticipation of the whole population in devel-
opment, learning to live together and build
together in spite of disagreements and dif-
ferences, these are our objectives, t
1
