Attiya Inayatullah
THREE WOMEN FROM PAKISTAN
Women leaders in villages of the developing world are starting to take practical
steps to dismantle the barriers that keep them in inferior status. Here are
portraits of three of them.
BIBI GUL
Bibi Gu! is thirty-five years old. She was born and grew up in the rough
tribal area of Baluchistan. When she was nine years old, her mother
died, her father remarried, and she was placed in the care of her
grandparents, who lived in penury. At thirteen, for a bride price that
was common in the area, they assured their financial future and
passed her on to a man more than twice her age.
For the next fifteen years her life was a cycle of repeated preg¬
nancies. She had six children who survived and three miscarriages.
Neither health nor education centres reached Bibi Gul's village,
because of opposition from the men of the community, who, however,
allowed an embroidery centre to be established to revive the dying
art of traditional stltchcraft.
Bibi Gul was encouraged by the embroidery trainer, who was
quick to appreciate her intelligence and learning ability, and rapidly
emerged as a competent teacher herself. She not only helped to pro¬
vide other girls and women with an Income-generating activity but also
established a forum for discussing women's issues.
In recognition of her emerging organizational abilities, Bibi Gul
was invited to a leadership workshop in 1989. It was the first time
that she had left her home town. She did not remove her burqa (the
local veil) throughout the eight-day workshop although only women
were present, and did not speak during the sessions. But when she
returned to her community, a great change came over her.
She began to visit other women in her village and talk to them
about health, Immunization, education, family planning and income-
generating opportunities, and encouraged them to participate in the
women's programme. She was gradually made responsible for three
of the villages in her area. This entailed travelling by public transport
to visit other house-bound women. She slowly shed not only her fears
and inhibitions but also her burqa when in female company. She devel¬
oped Into an active member of the community.
Bibi Gul had to face her husband's initial resentment of her new¬
found independence, and also became the object of adverse com¬
ment from the conservative community in which she lives. Never¬
theless, she has worked with quiet determination, teaching her
husband to care for their children when she is away on training
courses and gradually earning the respect of the female community
as a whole.
SHABANU
Shabanu Is thirty-eight years old. She comes from a large and
Impoverished family in an area where education for females is
regarded as unnecessary or even as a disadvantage. She dropped
out of school at eleven, first to look after her brothers and sisters,
then to marry a clansman. Then her husband deserted her and her
four children, and she was forced to borrow from her mother and
brothers to make ends meet. She resolved to overcome her depen¬
dence and ensure that neither she nor her children would ever be vul¬
nerable again.
She started attending women's group meetings, showing par¬
ticular interest in sessions devoted to education, income-generation
and the status of women. Recognizing that she faced problems
without formal educational qualifications, she privately prepared
for and passed her matriculation examination. She also took a
training course for birth attendants. She used modern, hygienic
techniques that benefited the mothers she delivered. Shabanu also
participated in a women's festival in which women from all over Pak¬
istan met to share their experience, demonstrate how they were over¬
coming their problems and participate in rarely available recre¬
ational activities.
When she was appointed as a supervisor in the local women's
programme, her income increased and she became able to educate
her children. As a supervisor, she motivates other women to take
action to improve their lives through education, health, hygiene, family
planning and income-generating activities.
KALSOOM
From as far back as she can remember, sixteen-year-old Kalsoom has
always wanted desperately to go to school. Her dream was to become
a teacher. Her family objected as they faced economic problems. A
maternal uncle, seeing her potential, helped her out. In 1993 Kalsoom
first came ¡n contact with the concept of human development when
she was selected from her school to attend a Girl-Child Workshop, an
Initiative aimed at encouraging young women to value themselves and
Increase both the opportunities available to them and their contri¬
butions to their community. The participants were encouraged to
improve their living conditions. Kalsoom's interest in helping others
resulted in her selection by other participants as a local leader, and
with her group she formulated a work plan for the community.
Kalsoom arranges regular meetings of local girls to explain to
them the importance of personal hygiene, cleanliness, basic health
care, education and the environment. She has organized a street
cleaning schedule in the village and encouraged the girls to plant fruit
trees and set up kitchen gardens to improve their diet and the envi¬
ronment. She has been trained as a home-school teacher, passing
on her own limited education to those unable to pursue formal edu¬
cation, and she oversees two other home-schools and an adult lit¬
eracy centre in her village. She is also active in seeking out and ini¬
tiating income-generating opportunities suitable for girls such as
tailoring and bag-making.

ATTIYA INAYATULLAH,
of Pakistan, is Chairperson of
Unesco's Executive Board. Her
fields of interest include
sociology, demography and
women's issues. 17
