The birth of writing
by Béatrice André-Salvini
In ancient Mesopotamia writing was invented in response to the
need to keep accounts and make lists. The earliest recorded
calculations were inscribed on tablets of clay, an abundant material
in the valleys of the Near East.
I Writing appeared for the first time around
I 3300 B.C. in the land of Sumer, during a
period of far-reaching change which coincided
with the construction of the first towns. At this
time, the political, social and cultural condi¬
tions needed for writing to be invented were
all met.
Mother-of-pearl sheep and goats The city of Uruk, in the south of the country,
encrusted into a lapis lazuli was prosperous and began to engage in long-dis-
mosaic adorn the "Standard of i _ _ i i i i
.. . - . . , x tance trade to import the raw materials which it
Ur (above), a Sumerian artefact r
produced around 2800-2100 B.C. lacked.
The temple of the tutelary god became a
great administrative centre, placed under the
authority of a political and religious leader, the
"king-priest". Relations became complex and the
temple administrators had to manage move¬
ments of personnel, salaries and incoming and
outgoing goods and flocks of animals. Since the
capacity of the human memory is limited, it
became necessary to find a new and unified
system of reference enabling oral information to
be preserved and recovered later on in spoken
form. This is how writing was born. It represents
symbols of society in images. New concepts
were therefore depicted in an abstract form in
the earliest attempts at writing. The word for
sheep, the animal which had to be counted most
often, was, for example, first represented by a
cross in a circle the animal in its enclosure.
Writing started out as a simple memory aid 11

Towards the middle of the third millennium signs were split up,
reversed and simplified. No longer used to represent an object
but the sounds that made up its name, they lost some of their
symbolic content. Cuneiform writing had reached the stage at
which it could express ideas.
but its form and content gradually developed in
the following centuries.
The form of the linear script, incised with a
pointed tool, soon changed. The signs lost all
resemblance to the original figurative outline.
This phenomenon was due to the medium used
to support writing, i.e. clay, which was the only
eligible natural material in southern
Mesopotamia. Its constraints led to the trans¬
formation of the signs. As it is hard to draw
curved lines on soft clay, they were broken
down into straight lines which, instead of being
incised, were soon imprinted using a reed
calamus with a triangular end which produces
wedge-shaped impressions. These may be hor¬
izontal, oblique or vertical, and their different
combinations form a sign.
A neo-Sumerian administrative As the script changed, the scribes also endeav-
tablet dating from the end of the
3rd millennium B.C.
oured to increase the range and efficiency of the
ideographic system by creating composite signs.
To simplify writing, attempts were made to
reduce the number of signs, so that the same
ideogram was soon used to transcribe similar
actions or concepts. The reader had to choose
between these different meanings by reference to
the context, and this was not always easy.
To remedy this difficulty of interpretation,
"determinatives" were invented; these were
placed at the beginning or end of words and
were probably not pronounced. They specified
the category to which the concept that was
expressed belonged: God, man, planet, bird,
country, stone object, etc. The need to tran¬
scribe proper nouns and grammatical elements
led to the invention of signs representing sounds
(phonograms) by ridding ideograms of their
meaning and retaining only their sound.
These techniques led to a diminution in the
repertoire of signs, which was reduced from
900 in the early period to about 500 around
2400 B.C. It thus became possible to develop a
system which was partly syllabic, enabling
written sentences to represent linear relation¬
ships between words and to represent all the
nuances of the spoken language.
12
The development of cuneiform signs
c. 3100 c. 2400 c. 6S0
B.C. B.C. B.C.
UDU
(sheep) ©Bar
AB2
(COW, ^ Cxt>-
EBÄlXÄJEiffiäEJ2
DINGIR (god,
a deity determinative)
¡£323X330.;
DU1
(to go, to move)
^^SJT^ESSZl
DU3
(to make, to build)

The content of the texts was also enriched,
reflecting the new possibilities for reproducing
all the elements of the Sumerian language.
rrom book-keeping to narrative
The first written versions of Sumerian litera¬
ture, in which only the roots of verbs were tran¬
scribed, leaving the reader to fill in the missing
elements, appeared in the era of the archaic
dynasties (around 2700 B.C.), together with
contracts and other commercial documents.
Towards the middle of the third millennium



signs were split up, reversed and simplified; no
longer used to represent an object but the sounds
that made up its name, they lost some of their
symbolic content. Their forms increasingly
changed. By now the writing of grammatical
forms was well defined and cuneiform writing
(from the Latin cuneus or wedge) was able to
express ideas. It spread beyond the confines of
Sumerian territory, and its adaptation for use in
languages other than Sumerian was to become
the main factor in its evolution.
Around the year 2340 B.C., the new masters
of the country, the Akkad emperors, used the
Sumerian script to transcribe their own Semitic
language, Akkadian. At the end of the third
millennium, a brief return of the Sumerians to
power witnessed an effort on the part of poets,
writers and scholars to transcribe and circulate
the great literary works of the oral tradition:
hymns to the gods, myths, prayers, epics, philo¬
sophical essays and collections of knowledge.
The Gilgamesh epic was to become the most
widely disseminated work. Around the year
2000 B.C., Sumerian disappeared from
Mesopotamia as a spoken language and was
This clay tablet from Lower
Mesopotamia (4th millennium
B.C.) is a title deed with the
owner's hand appearing, above
left, as a kind of signature.
replaced by Akkadian, which then split into
two dialects: Assyrian in the north and Baby¬
lonian in the south. But Sumerian was to remain
the language of erudite culture until the last
days of cuneiform writing in the first century of
the Christian era.
Despite its complexity, this system spread
throughout the ancient Near East, to be used for
writing many different Semitic, Indo-European
(such as Hittite) or "Asiatic" languages. The
decline of cuneiform began in the first millen¬
nium when Aramaean nomads penetrated into
Mesopotamia and introduced their own written
language using a linear alphabet which was easy
to learn and handle, was readily accessible and
could be set down on a lighter material, i.e.
papyrus. Cuneiform writing, which was clumsy
and was practised only by a small number of ini¬
tiates, gradually declined.
Composite Ideograms
SAG, head KA, mouth: the relevant part of
the head is emphasized
KU 2, to eat:
the mouth + bread (NINDA)
NAG, to drink:
the mouth + water (A)
ft «m) ^ c4=n ^ (<tó) ^c<»:
BEATRICE ANDRE-SALVINI
is a French Assyriologist who is
head curator and inscription
specialist in the department of
Oriental antiquities of the
Louvre Museum, Paris. Among
her published works are The
Birth of Writing in Ancient
Mesopotamia (Asian Art V,
Washington, 1992), L'invention
de récriture (Nathan, Paris,
1986) and Les tablettes du
monde cunéiforme (Bibliología,
Turnhout, Belgium, 1992).
Thirty letters of cuneiform
script are inscribed on the
finger-sized piece of clay, below,
unearthed in 1948 on the site of
the ancient city of Ugarit
(present-day Ras Shamra in
Syria). Dating from the 14th
century B.C., the object reveals
one of the earliest attempts to
create an alphabet.
13
