Manolo plugs into the sun
by Christopher Flavin and Nicholas Lenssen
A unique andpotentially revolutionary means
ofgeneratingpower, solarphotovoltaic cells are
meeting the energy needs of thousands of
villagers in the developing world. One of them
is Manolo Hidalgo. . .
Above, a solar energy power
plant at Carrisa Plain, California
(U.S.A.).
In Joba Arriba, a scattered farming set¬
tlement of about 5,000 people on the
Dominican Republic's northern coast, Manolo
Hidalgo decided to give his family a different
kind of Christmas present in 1991: electric
lighting. No longer content with dim and smelly
kerosene lamps to light the homework of his
three children, Hidalgo knew that his chances of
getting electricity in the conventional way by
hounding government officials in the hope they
would extend the nearest power line the neces¬
sary fifteen kilometres were faint at best.
Hidalgo came up with a faster, more reli¬
able option. Travelling to the nearby town of
Sosua, he visited a small store called Industria
Eléctrica Bella Vista, which offered a self-con¬
tained solar panel that converts the sun's rays
directly into electric current. With help from the
store's electrician, Hidalgo mounted the roughly
one-metre-square panel on his roof and wired it
to a lead-acid battery in order to store electricity
for use in the evening. The day after visiting 25

A solar-powered water pump in
a refugee camp in Hargeysa
(Somalia).
Below, solar panel and water
pump in a Moroccan village.
Sosua, his home had five working electric lights,
as well as a radio and television set, all pow¬
ered by his solar photovoltaic (PV) panel. With
the flip of a switch on that December day,
Hidalgo and his family joined tens of thousands
of rural people who in the past few years have
begun getting their power directly from the sun.
It is hard not to be struck by the irony that
the basic energy needs of some of the world's
poorest people are being met by what is arguably
the most elegant and sophisticated energy tech¬
nology yet developed. Indeed, solar photo¬
voltaic cells, which can be used in everything
from handheld calculators to suburban rooftops
and large desert power stations, are a unique
and potentially revolutionary means of gener
ating power. Solar cell technology is advancing
rapidly, and many experts expect the devices to
be ubiquitous in the early part of the next cen¬
tury. But the greatest short-term impact of solar
photovoltaics will be in the rural Third World,
providing power to many of the more than two
billion people like Manolo Hidalgo who do not
yet have it.
Solar photovoltaic cells are semiconductor
devices made of silicon similar to but far less
expensive than the chips used in computers
that convert the energy from sunlight into
moving electrons, avoiding the mechanical tur¬
bines and generators that provide virtually all the
world's electricity today. French scientist
Edmond Becquerel discovered in 1839 that light
falling on certain materials could cause a spark
of electricity known as the "photoelectric
effect" and that this charge could, under the
right conditions, be propagated, forming an
electric current. Within fifty years, scientists
began to manufacture primitive solar cells out of
a rare element known as selenium. The high
cost and low efficiency of these devices made
them useful in only one serious application
photographic light meters.
The precursors of the modern photovoltaic
cells used on Manolo Hidalgo's roof did not
emerge until 1954. Early that year, a small team
of scientists at the Bell Laboratories in New
Jersey began looking for a way to generate elec¬
tricity for telephone systems in remote areas. As
they tried to improve the selenium cells, a sep¬
arate Bell team discovered that a silicon device
26
CHRISTOPHER FLAVIN,
of the United States, is Vice-
President for Research at the
Worldwatch Institute in
Washington, D.C., a private non¬
profit environmental research
organization.
NICHOLAS LENSSEN,
of the United States, is a Senior
Researcher at the Worldwatch
Institute. His research and
writing deal with energy policy,
alternative energy sources,
nuclear power, radioactive
waste, and global climate
change.
This article has been
extracted from their book Power
Surge, Guide to the coming
energy revolution (W.W. Norton
& Company, New York and
London, 1994).

Cleaning domestic solar
heating panels in Australia.
they were testing produced electricity when
exposed to sunlight. When the work of the two
groups was merged, a breakthrough was
achieved: a silicon cell that converted 4 per cent
of all incoming sunlight into electricity five
times as much as the best selenium cell. Within
a few months, the Bell team had pushed the
cell's efficiency to 6 per cent. Excitement about
this development was compounded by the fact
that silicon is the second most abundant ele¬
ment, constituting 28 per cent of the earth's
crust. Soon, the Bell scientists began to speculate
that silicon solar cells might become a major
source of electricity, and their enthusiasm was
echoed by the popular media, which touted the
imminent arrival of a solar-powered future.
Dpin-off from the space race
Realizing that potential turned out to be a far
greater challenge than anticipated. The initial
silicon solar cells cost roughly $600 per watt
($3,000 in 1993 dollars), several thousand times
as much as electricity from conventional plants.
After building a few prototype solar panels,
Bell Labs decided that no commercial applica¬
tions were within reach and shelved the new
technology. The photovoltaic cell was saved
from obscurity by the U.S. -Soviet space race
in the 1960s. In the rush to find a practical way
to power satellites, U.S. space scientists dusted
off the solar cell.
During the next decade, a sizable infusion of
U.S. government funds served to jumpstart the
photovoltaic industry. Within ten years the price
of solar cells was cut by a factor of five to ten, the
cell efficiency rose and the durability of the
devices improved. Producing these early PV
cells required pure, expensive silicon and
More than 200,000 homes in
Mexico, Indonesia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka and other developing countries
have obtained electricity from
rooftop-mounted solar systems over
the past decade.
wasteful, energy-intensive manufacturing
processes. Individual wafers of silicon were
sliced from long crystals grown at temperatures
above 1,400 degrees Celsius. Although costs
were beginning to fall, PVs were still too expen¬
sive for any application other than the govern¬
ment-funded space programme.
The 1973 oil crisis created a new race to
bring photovoltaics back to earth. Government
energy agencies and scores of private companies
invested billions of dollars in advancing the state
of photovoltaic technology. By 1980, the effi¬
ciency of commercial PV modules had risen to
more than 10 per cent, and the price had fallen to
roughly $12 a watt ($21 in 1993 terms). Finally, sil¬
icon PV cells were cheap enough to fill the niche
Bell Labs originally tried to create for them.
During the 1980s, solar cells were widely deployed
at telephone relay stations, microwave transmit¬
ters, remote lighthouses and roadside callboxes
applications where small amounts of power are
needed and where conventional power sources are
either too expensive or not reliable enough.
The technology continued to advance during
the next decade, and by 1993 the average whole¬
sale price of photovoltaics had dropped to
between $3.50 and $4.75 a watt, or roughly 25-400
a kilowatt-hour, thanks both to higher efficien¬
cies and more automated manufacturing
processes. As costs fell, sales rose from 6.5
megawatts in 1980 to 29 megawatts in 1987, to 60
megawatts in 1993. The worldwide industry,
including ancillary activities such as retail sales and
installation, did roughly $1 billion worth of busi¬
ness in 1993.
Although still too expensive to compete
head-to-head with conventional generating
technologies, photovoltaic cells have found ever-
larger niches in the global energy market. The 27

Some of the many uses of
solar energy. Above, a solar
reflector cooker (Kenya); above
right, a Paris street lamp
(France); right, a telephone
booth in Australia.
28
technology's versatility was best demonstrated
in the mid-1980s, when Japanese electronics
companies came up with a particularly inge¬
nious application, attaching tiny solar cells to
small consumer devices such as handheld pocket
calculators and wrist-watches. These require
only a trickle of electricity, well within the capa¬
bility of a small solar cell even when oper¬
ating in a dimly lit room. Since the late 1980s, the
Japanese have sold an average of about 100 mil¬
lion such devices each year, an application that
absorbs 4 megawatts of solar cells annually, 6 per
cent of the global market. The use of solar cells
in consumer electronics has levelled off in recent
years, as has that in telecommunications, sur¬
passed by more rapidly growing applications
ranging from rural water pumps to village homes
and rural electricity.
By the early 1990s, thousands of villagers in
Africa, Asia and Latin America were doing the
same thing as Manolo Hidalgo, using photovoltaic
cells to power lights, televisions and water pumps,
needs that are otherwise met with kerosene lamps,
rechargeable batteries and diesel engines. More
than 200,000 homes in Mexico, Indonesia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka and other developing countries
have obtained electricity from rooftop-mounted
solar systems in the past decade.
Prospects for using solar photovoltaics in
ever-wider applications hinge on how rapidly
the technology evolves. Prices will need to be cut
by a factor of three to five in order for large-scale
grid-connected applications to become eco¬
nomical. Most PV experts are confident that
such reductions can be achieved by continuing
the advances in cell efficiency and manufac¬
turing processes of the past two decades and
by capturing the cost-saving potential of mass
production.
