NICOLAE
BREBAN
talks to
Edgar Reichmann
Nicolae Breban (born 1934) is one of
Romania's finest novelists. During the
last years of the communist
dictatorship he lived in Paris, returning
to Bucharest after the December 1989
revolution. Today he is editor of a
leading cultural review, Contemporanu/.
His novels include In absenta stapinilor
("In the Landlords' Absence"; 1966),
Bunavestire ("The Annunciation";
1977) and Don Juan (1981).
What was the situation of fiction in
Eastern Europe over the last half century?
In Romania as in most of the countries
that suffocated for decades under totali¬
tarian regimes, fiction had in the first place
to struggle to survive and hold on to its
public. It lost its readers in the Stalinist
era, when many writers gave in to pressure
from the authorities, but by the 1960s
things began to change as a result of the
clandestine combat they waged against cen¬
sorship, against the bureaucracy and even
against certain fellow-writers who had
become the dictator's yes-men. Battle was
joined firstly by poets, then by critics,
essayists and novelists. Romanian litera¬
ture, like that of many other countries, is
now out of the rut and is gradually winning
back its readers.
Some people nevertheless consider
that culture in general and literature in
particular are still in crisis.
Romania as a whole is in crisis, an eco¬
nomic and social crisis, an institutional
crisis, a crisis of confidence and of course
a crisis in culture, in literature and in the
novel, but a crisis is not necessarily a bad

T E R V I E W
thing: it can be seen as a sign of vitality and
renewal, the first step towards profound
changes that need to be made. The trans¬
formations my country is going through at
present, spectacular though they are, are
vastly preferable to the socially lifeless,
brain-dead state in which it existed for
decades.
What could poets and novelists do in
those days?
Creative artists had to obey the peremp¬
tory directives issued by the authorities,
who made use of the publishing houses all
strictly state-controlled to oblige them
to conform to the fatuous criteria of so-
called "socialist realism". Bookshops were
flooded with Soviet-inspired works in
praise of the "positive hero", the "new
man", a mythical creature that existed
only in the minds of the communist leaders.
Many creative artists, and not minor ones
either, totally renounced their intellectual
freedom and independent judgment,
placing themselves at the disposal of the
authorities and glorifying "the collec¬
tivization of agriculture", "the class
struggle" and "the heroic traditions" of a
communist party that scarcely existed
before Romania was overrun by the Soviet
army.
There were a few great Romanian
authors, notably the philosopher and
poet Lucian Blaga, the novelist Hortensia
Papadat-Bengescu, and the poets
Gheorghiu Bacovia, Ion Barbu and Vasile
Voiculescu, who chose to remain silent,
the only form of resistance that was pos¬
sible under the Stalinist terror. They are
now dead, but each of them left behind a
body of work.
Some younger writers, who were drawn
into politics at the end of the 1940s, were
misled by the regime's slogans into believing
that Romania's brutal incorporation into
the Soviet bloc was the country's liberation
and marked the dawn of a better world, a
world of greater justice. Eventually they
realized their mistake and came into con¬
flict with the authorities.
Did Romanian writers' resistance take
specific forms?
Whereas in other countries a joint
struggle was organized on the basis ofpolit¬
ical demands, in Romania resistance took
individual forms. Each author had to
defend his or her own writings against the
censorship exercised simultaneously by
the party, the publisher and the fearsome
political police who in the 1950s used a
whole battery of measures such as the ban¬
ning of books, the blacklisting of authors
and the imprisonment of recalcitrant
writers.
In the 1960s, when the regime was
trying to make itself more popular as well
as to establish its legitimacy, it finally aban¬
doned these brutal practices in favour of
other forms of pressure. Authors were
forced to join the Writers' Union, which
was the only institution empowered to
remunerate authors and grant them var¬
ious perquisites, depending on how sub¬
servient they were. Some of them were
thus able to travel, with authorization from
the political police, to western Europe.
There was a positive side to these trips
abroad insofar as they helped to raise
writers' awareness and bring them face to
face with new situations.
In the mid-1960s, taking advantage of
a short-lived thaw, writers began to
demand independence of the regime and to
protest against its interference in their
work. The Writers' Union gradually
emerged from state supervision to become
a professional body of sorts , trying to pro¬
tect authors' rights and the integrity of
their works.
This slight change for the better did
not last, but novelists and poets made the
most of it to free themselves from the rules
imposed on them and win a certain degree
of freedom in matters of aesthetics and
form; but the ban on any political demands
or any challenge to the system remained in
place. Novelists were required to practise
self-censorship. This apparent renuncia¬
tion of any social mission and the ongoing
game of hide-and-seek with the apparatus
49

INTERVIEW WITH NICOLAE BREBAN
of repression did much to stimulate writers'
ingenuity and imagination by fostering a
distancing process that was propitious to
novel-writing.
These innovative aesthetic endeavours
constitute albeit against a background
of tragic events what may be a unique
phenomenon in modern literary history.
Provided the dictatorship was not
attacked, it allowed writers a certain
amount of elbow room and lifted the
"socialist realism" edict. Any writer
infringing this compromise arrangement
was punished with a publishing ban or
with exile. While novelists as a result
became less pugnacious, their writings
gained in depth. This was the age of
metaphor and allegory, a real head-ache to
the publishers, censors and bureaucrats in
the ideological employ of the tyrant.
How was this new strategy for writing
novels reflected in your works?
How does someone become a tyrant?
This was perhaps the underlying meaning
of "The Annunciation", a 700-page novel
I published in 1977, when the short-lived
Romanian thaw was only a faded memory.
Although denounced at the time as "anti-
socialist" and "obscene" by the country's
top-level authorities, it won the fiction
prize awarded by the Writers' Union. A
kind of political Annunciation whence
the title emerged from the cruel depiction
of a lethargic provincial community, as if a
second novel, hidden from view, was tun¬
nelling its way through the first before bub¬
bling up to the surface. The novel's hero,
Grobei, a truly archetypal personification
of mediocrity, undergoes a strange meta¬
morphosis, to become a charismatic figure
who is prepared to exploit the masses in the
name of a ramshackle ideology. The duality
of the novel's structure reflects the dual
nature, the ambiguity, of this character.
For the purposes of this Romanian-
style "childhood of a leader", which had
the ambitious aim of exposing the origins of
a political myth, I deployed a wide range of
narrative techniques, not attempting to
hide my taste for the baroque and the
tongue-in-cheek use of clichés. Did my
compatriots have a special gift for toler¬
ating the abuses of absolute power? This
may be the question hidden in this story,
which combines the features of an alle¬
gory, a novel of manners and a satire on a
desensitized society, ready to accept any
sleazy compromise. The book's hidden
meaning did not escape the attention of
the regime, which explains the virulence of
the criticism to which it was subjected. Its
publication was held up for a long time by
the censor, and soon after it came out I
left Romania and went to live in Paris,
where I stayed until the collapse of the dic¬
tatorship in December 1989.
To what tradition of novel-writing do
you claim to belong, now that authors in
your country have regained a freedom of
expression unimaginable only a few years
ago?
I would be hard put to say to which lit¬
erary line of descent I belong. I no longer
believe in reductionist labels like "mod¬
ernism", "realism", "post-modernism",
"oneirism", "surrealism" and so on. I only
believe in the durability and vitality of the
novel, a major, universal genre and an
essential factor in communication, what¬
ever techniques novelists may wish to use.
I am naturally somewhat taken aback to see
Western literature awash with slim intimist
volumes, trivial confessions, novels and
opuscules that are not without charm, that
are sometimes intelligent and exquisitely
crafted but have little to contribute to the
debate on issues of the day that readers,
adrift in this rapidly changing world, so
urgendy need. I still feel nostalgic for novels
that raise problems and cause readers to
change their ways of thinking, as epito¬
mized, to my mind, by the works of
Thomas Mann, The Magic Mountain in
particular, and the whole of Dostoevsky's
work.
The theorists of the "nouveau roman",
as widely practised in France thirty years
or so ago, declared character and plot to be
dead; the cold eye of the novelist was all
that mattered. I, on the contrary, believe
that narrative and character, without
which there are no novels deserving of the
name, are alive and well. I would even go
so far as to assert that not only is the novel
the basis of universal culture but that the
character remains the novel's mainstay
the story, the plot, as well, of course, but
above all the character, with his or her
internal divisions. In "The Annunciation",
as in my other novels, I often tried to bring
about this kind of break with my heroes'
type-casting. The unity of the hero of a
novel, like that of real-life characters, is
always made up of contradictions. Nothing
is ever entirely black or white. No one has
understood as well as Dostevsky the mul¬
ticoloured nature of the human soul, at
times detestable and at other times sub¬
lime. I
EDGAR REICHMANN is a writer and literary critic.
