WHAT IS IT?
It has become virtually impossible
to open a newspaper, a news¬
magazine or a professional journal
without finding something about the
Internet. This super-telematic net¬
work, the world's largest, is being
seen as a phenomenon unequalled
since the invention of the printing
press and a revolution in the pro¬
duction, circulation and exchange of
information. It consists of more than
13,000 interconnected computer net¬
works, and the number of its users
(high-school and university students,
researchers, engineers), already esti¬
mated to be some 30 million in 150
countries, is increasing every day.
Forerunner of the "information
superhighways" of the twenty-first
century, to use the expression coined
during the American presidential cam¬
paign of 1992 by vice-presidential
candidate AI Gore, the Internet was
set up in the United States in the
1960s. Originally intended only to
link up a few computers belonging to
research centres and universities
working on a defence project, the
network is today growing at the rate
of 20 per cent per month, and its
management is completely decen¬
tralized. Internet is not owned by
anyone. Each network pays for the
installation and operating costs as
well as its being connected up to the
other networks.
In short the Internet is both an
electronic village and an international
campus where all information is grad¬
ually organized into an immense vir¬
tual library. It is also a gigantic test
bench for developing open networks
covering the entire planet.
WHAT ARE ITS USES?
First of all it is used for communi¬
cating via electronic mail (e-mail).
This abolishes the notion of distance.
Users from the world over can chat
back and forth or take part in round-
table discussions at low cost. For
example, high-school students in San
Diego (U.S.A.) send and receive let¬
ters from students in a school in
Israel. During the attempted coup
d'état in Russia in August 1991,



THE INTERNET
JOURNEY INTO CYBERSPACE
by Denise Pelissier
People all over the world are taking their first steps on the information
superhighway by joining the Internet. Chatting about science,
sport or politics with someone on the other side of the globe; con¬
sulting the catalogue of the Library of Congress in Washington;
admiring the masterpieces in Florence's Uffizi Gallery; delving into
Unesco's data base in Paristhese are just a few of the myriad pos¬
sibilities open to Internet users.
RELCOM, a small network linked to
the Internet through Finland, was the
only means of communication
between Moscow and the outside
world.
The Internet mailbox hosts
debates and forums, serious and light-
hearted, on all kinds of subjects,
from science and politics to leisure,
sports and games. In order to receive
messages in your electronic mailbox
from other subscribers and to send
out replies all you have to do is sub¬
scribe. It is an unparalleled device for
finding the solution to a problem.
There is always someone along the
highway who knows the answer.
Images and sounds, as well as
computer data, travel around the
Internet, which makes it possible to
consult from a distance the cata¬
logues of the world's great libraries,
that of the Library of Congress, for
example, in the United States, visu¬
alize satellite photos taken by the
American national meteorological
service, admire the masterpieces on
display in Madrid's Prado, the Orsay
Museum in Paris or the Uffizi in Flo¬
rence. It is also possible to procure
softwarefree-of-charge if it is in
the public domain [freeware) and for
a nominal charge if it is shareware.
Books and newspapers can be pub¬
lished electronically on the Internet,
and international conferences can
even be organized through it.
WHO'S INTERESTED?
Most universities and a growing
number of research bodies are
already hooked up to the Internet.
Many United Nations agencies are
also on itthe United Nations itself,
the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the International Telecom¬
munication Union, the United Nations
Development Programme, the World
Health Organization, the World Bank,
the Food and Agriculture Organiza¬
tion, UNICEF (the United Nations
Children's Fund) and Unesco. It is
thereby possible to find out about
each agency's goals, activities, pro¬
grammes and publications, consult
each agency's data base and hop
from one server to another.
It is also possible for individuals
to hook up to the network through pri¬
vate companies such as CompuServe
and Delphi. All that's needed is a
computer, a modem (telephone con¬
verter) and communications soft¬
ware.
Benefit from the Internet explo¬
sion is not confined to the developed
countries; it is also a particularly
interesting tool for the developing
countries, although the situation
varies widely from region to region.
The Internet has great potential for
promoting exchanges and strength¬
ening North-South and South-South
co-operation, for it facilitates direct
contact between researchers and
helps those who feel cut off to get
into the mainstream.
GROWING PAINS
Originally free of charge and intended
to provide mutual help among
researchers from around the world,
the Internet is changing. In the United
States 60 per cent of the institutions
presently connected to it are private
companies, as against 40 per cent in
France. A number of pay-per-service
networks are appearing. Problems
are arising about security, information
reliability and copyright.
Anyone with a personal computer
can disseminate information. And it
is very easy to copy the electronic
version of a document or a data base
and rebroadcast it, with or without
modifications, under a different name.
To provide security on the net¬
work and prevent undesirable intru¬
sions, devices known as firewalls-
barriers that shut off parts of
computer systems have been devel¬
oped. Confidential information must
be encrypted before being sent.
The Internet is also a victim of its
success. Traffic jams are not
unknown. At certain times of the day
the networks are so crowded that it
is practically impossible to connect
with certain servers. In France, for
example, it is a good idea to take
advantage of the time difference by
working with American servers in the
morning.
Despite its growing pains,
Internet is already an exceptional
means of communication. Cross-
border transfers of Information have
become a daily reality for millions of
users the world over.
DENISE PELISSIER
is chief of the Clearing House of
Unesco's Bureau of Documentation,
Informatics Services and
Telecommunications.
FURTHER INFORMATION:
John R. Levine, Internet for Dummies, San Mateo, Ca., IDG Books,
1993, 352 pp.
Ed Krol, The Whole Internet: User's Guide and Catalogue, Sebastopol,
Ca., O'Reilly cop., 1994, 534 pp.
Recent Literature on Internet, Electronic Mail and Electronic Net¬
working, bibliography available from the Institute for the Development
of Research of the University of Tilburg, Holland. E.mail: ewoldt@kub.nl;
fax (31) 13 663 015.
Anne Sanouillet, L'Internet pour nous autres, Centre du 20e siècle.
Université de Nice/Sophia Antipolis, 81, rue de France, 06000 Nice,
France, ISBN 2-902311-86-9, 20 pp.
19
