Norwegianpolitics bridges the gender gap
Norwegian Prime Minister Gro
Harlem Brundtland (centre) at
the Earth Summit in Rio de
Janeiro (Brazil), June 1992. A country where women are integrated
into party politics at national level
I On 9 May 1986 a social democratic gov-
I ernment was formed in Norway. Its com¬
position set a world record: eight of the eighteen-
member cabinet appointed by the new Prime
Minister, Ms. Gro Harlem Brundtland, were
women. Since then, no Norwegian cabinet has
contained less than 40 per cent women, and the
representation of women in parliament has grad¬
ually reached approximately the same level. In
recent elections Norwegian voters were presented
with three different alternative governments; all
three candidates for Prime Minister were women.
To outsiders this development may seem
somewhat mysterious even insiders have
referred to it as "a political miracle", although it
is a miracle which is still largely confined to the
world of party politics. In large economic orga¬
nizations, the state bureaucracy and academic
institutions, the proportion of women in posi¬
tions of power remains low. And private sector
corporations are almost exclusively run by men.
Feminist influence
28
HEGESKJEIE,
of Norway, is a senior
researcher at the Institute for
Social Research in Oslo. She
has written several studies on
women's integration into
political elites in Norway.
Women's successful integration in Norwegian
politics is largely due to the influence the Nor¬
wegian feminist movement has come to wield in
the political parties. Unlike its counterparts in
many other countries, the Norwegian feminist
movement advocated integration into the
existing political structure as a viable strategy for
empowering women. Right from the start, the
movement co-operated with women inside the
party structure in making demands for political
representation. This co-operation was expressed
to a notable extent in local and national election
campaigns. In the 1971 local elections, it helped
to produce a majority of women on the city
council of the Norwegian capital, Oslo.
Women should represent women
From the 1970s on, two lines of argument were
advanced by women activists. Some women
maintained that the conflicting interests of men
and women required a balanced representation of
both parties. Others, in line with more conserv¬
ative political ideologies, argued that women's
experience could make a valuable contribution to
the decision-making process. Both sides agreed,
however, that representation of women by
women was necessary. Men could not negotiate
the values or the interests of women.
These arguments fitted in with a strong tra¬
dition of social representation in Norwegian
politics. While it is true that the Norwegian
parliament recruits its members disproportion¬
ately from social elites, it does so less than many
other national legislatures. The parties control
the nomination of candidates to almost all
important political appointments, and one issue
on which they compete for votes is that of their
own profile. Most party leaderships have tended
to believe that voters will take note of the rep¬
resentativeness of party lists with regard to
occupational background, region and age.
Arguments about the political relevance of
gender thus struck a familiar note.
Gender, however, was not merely regarded as
one more "relevant background criterion". Once
women managed to gain access to various party
leaderships, gender achieved a prominence that
forced most political parties to adopt a set of
formal regulations governing their composition.
The system of gender quotas, which is at present
practised by four of the six major Norwegian
parties, comes near to guaranteeing equal partic¬
ipation rights. The quota regulations state that
both sexes are to be represented by a minimum of
40 per cent and apply both to the composition of
party election lists and to appointments within the
national party organizations.
Apolitical rhetoric ofdiffterence
While men and women alike maintain that party
politics has now become a place for the ncgotia-

tion of the different interests of men and women
politicians and that such differences are relevant



to political decision-making, some feminists con¬
tend that this "old" way of arguing for women's
political participation, even when proved suc¬
cessful, still smacks of continuing male political
domination. The obvious, self-evident right to
participate in politics, these feminists argue, is
still a male prerogative, and women have to jus-
tify their presence on the political scene. Even if
they are present in nearly equal numbers, they still
have to prove themselves.
This overlooks some simple political facts.
Firstly, providing justification or reasons for polit¬
ical participation is something that is demanded of
all political leaders. Justification is a general aspect
of representative politics. Secondly, new polit¬
ical movements commonly present themselves
as "an alternative". It is true that men have never



defended their positions with explicit reference to
gender. Only women's participation in politics has
been argued in these terms. But women political
leaders are relative newcomers to the political
community. By presenting themselves in terms of
the alternative, women are merely using a well-
known political stratagy.
The divisions between "masculine" and
"feminine" have long contributed to the legit¬
imization of practices which kept women out of
political life. In Norway today, they legitimize
instead practices which secure the presence of
women in political life.
Ugné Karvelis
