Rigoberta Menchú
'WE HAVE COME A LONG WAY...'
Rigoberta Menchú (centre)
takes part in a traditional
Indian celebration in
Guatemala, October 1992.
Rigoberta Menchú, a
Guatemalan Indian, was
awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize for 1992. A United
Nations goodwill ambassador
for the International Year of
the World's Indigenous
People, she has become the
spokeswoman for the
indigenous peoples of Latin
America and elsewhere.
am self-taught. When I was twenty I had the opportunity to
learn another language and discover a different world from that
of my own Maya culture. At the same time, unfortunately, I also
had to leave my home and my land, and see my parents, my
brothers and many of my friends die. Since then I've kept on
learning, sometimes painfully, far from my family and my commu¬
nity, in a foreign language and an unknown world
I
A collective memory
It is important to me that my personal experience should fit Into a
collective context that belongs to all peoples, but primarily to the
Guatemalan people. I lived through the most violent period in the
history of Guatemala, which had a profound influence on the cul¬
ture of the country's indigenous people and the society at large.
Everything I have been throughflight, exile, homesickness-
has been experienced by many Guatemalans.
One of the most important things I've learned is that one must
remain humble before knowledge. I'm still a student, a student of
time, of life, and I hope to keep on learning until my dying breath.
People should constantly renew themselves, their ideas and their
feelings. 1 have been awarded the Nobel Prize, and honorary doc¬
torates at several universities, but I am still intimidated when a jour¬
nalist asks me questions. Every question teaches me something.
I am very religious; I believe ¡n life. But I have my own own way
of believing, and if I were asked to explain what the heart of the sky
or mother earth mean to me, the short term and the long term and
even life itself, people would probably not understand anything about
my gods. I only know that if I didn't believe in something, I would
cease to exist.
My father died fifteen years ago, on 31 January 1980. My
mother died three months later. It was a tragic period for Guatemala,
a devastated land. Many of my compatriots were forced into exile.
I remember living for maybe a year and a half in very difficult cir¬
cumstances, terrified and traumatized by the war, with no experience
or prospects, knowing nothing of the world or what I should do.
Since those dark years we have come a long way in joy and enthu¬
siasm, fighting alongside the peasants for their rights. In fifteen years
we've made considerable progress. A growing number of my indige¬
nous brother Guatemalans are, for example, not only going into pol¬
itics, economics and local government but also into cultural and
artistic activities. Many are famous artists, and a lot of young
people are embarking on scientific careers without sacrificing their
identity. Pride in their identity is what makes a people great.
The all too familiar image of indigenous people as museum
pieces is the result of ignorance and the lack of information and
education that are typical of the late twentieth century. It ¡s unfair
to claim that indigenous people have made no contribution to
world culture. It always amuses me to read ecologists' mani¬
festoes ¡n defence of the environment, nature and respect for life
because they are simply rehashed versions of our own beliefs.
Indigenous peoples also have their own approaches to science and
medicine, and they have something to contribute to ways of
thinking and living.
Our Maya people have a rich, multifarious culture which they
have succeeded ¡n keeping alive. It is a profoundly collective cul¬
ture which tries to strike a balance between the rights of the indi¬
vidual and the interests of the community, and has succeeded in
surviving poverty, famine, suffering and war. For us, progress is
meaningless unless ¡t is shared by everyone. Every step forward
evolves from a collective rationale, and nothing is gained by the
action of an Isolated individual. In this respect our culture is
sometimes at odds with the rampant materialism and individualism
that you sometimes see in Western culture.
But we also have a lot of values In common at a time when rich
and poor peoples alike are united in the fight for survival, cultural
as well as physical. We have all joined forces to preserve the highest
human values. And as far as that is concerned I see no difference
between indigenous people and the rest, between men and women,
between Latin Americans and Europeans.
Grounds for optimism
We have also made a lot of progress internationally. Ten years ago
no one cared about indigenous people, but today we are wel¬
comed in Unesco and other International bodies. The world is
beginning to recognize and value indigenous people's way of
thinking. We have come a long way, and that is why I am profoundly
optimistic. Not only can we walk through the corridors of the
United Nations without being taken for a folk attraction, but people
now listen to what we have to say.
Our goals are ambitious, and it will be a long job. What we are
looking for is a solution to the conflict that is tearing my country
apart so that we can build a multilingual and multicultural nation
for all Guatemalans. But the international community still has a long
way to go If it wants to help us. Governments still misleadlngly talk
about indigenous "populations" rather than "peoples". It hardly
needs saying that at present the rights and personalities of these
peoples are not recognized as they should be, but here too, I think
that it is primarily a question of education and Information. 25
