The Iguaçu falls
cascading wonder
of the subtropical
forest
by Edouard Bailby
UNESCO IN ACTION
HERITAGE

On the border between
Argentina and Brazil, the
Iguaçu Falls are one of
the natural wonders of
the world and the main
attraction of the Iguaçu
National Park (Iguazu in
Spanish) which is
registered on UNESCO's
World Heritage List.
The 275 cataracts formed by
the waters of the Iguaçu River,
on the border between Brazil and
Argentina, create a permanent cloud
of spray above the surrounding area.
The breathtakingly spectacular
falls occur above the point where, the
1,320-kilometrc-long Iguaçu, which
rises in southern Brazil, joins the
Paraná, the country's second-largest
river after the Amazon. Twenty-eight
kilometres before the confluence, the
1.2-kilometre-wide Iguaçu suddenly
plunges into an 80-metre-deep
canyon. Its raging waters form an
immense succession of brilliant white
cataracts, forming a horse-shoe
shaped front of 2.7 kilometres. It is
an awesome sight: the mighty roar of
the river as it crashes down to the
bottom of the canyon at an average
rate of 1,700 cubic metres of water
per second, with peaks of nearly four
times that quantity, can be heard for
several kilometres around.
Long before the arrival of the
Spanish, then the Portuguese, in the
sixteenth century, the area belonged
to the Guarani people. Iguaçu means
"great waters" in Guarani. The story
goes that a tribe forming part of a
powerful people known as the
Caiguangue worshipped Tupâ, the
Supreme God, and his son JM'Boi, the
Serpent God. On learning that Tarobá,
a young warrior from a neighbouring
tribe, had fallen in love with the
Indian Naipi and fled with her in a
pirogue, M'Boi flew into a rage. Sum¬
moning up all his strength, he parted
the earth and created the gorges of
the Iguaçu. The pirogue was swept
over the waterfall and vanished into
the raging waters. Tarobá turned into
a palm tree and Naipi became a rock
at the foot of the falls. M'Boi buried
himself upright up to his neck in one
of the caves in the canyon so that he
could keep an eye on the two lovers
and ensure they would never be able
to embrace each other.
A IIAIK-K \ISI\G Tllll»
UPSTltliAM
The river waters flow relentlessly and
at terrific speed through the green
jungle. The surrounding trees harbour
toucans, parrots (in particular the
glaucus macaw, which is an endan¬
gered species) and budgerigars.
Singing birds of every possible hue flit
from branch to branch. Other
denizens of the forest include monkeys
and silently fluttering blue butterflies
of impressive proportions. There are
few large cats, which shun the pres¬
ence of man. But the paths trodden by
visitors are sometimes crossed by deer,
wild pigs and other tropical mammals.
Iguaçu National Park, which was
included on UNESCO's World Heritage
List on 28 November 1986, consists
of two sections, one in Brazil, covering
an area of 1,750 square kilometres,
and the other in Argentina, on the
left bank of the river, covering an area
of 550 square kilometres. The two
sections were connected a few years
ago, when a bridge was built across

the Iguaçu downstream from the
Falls. No visitor should fail to visit
both sections, which are very dif¬
ferent in appearance. While the most
impressive spot is the Garganta do
Diabo (Devil's Gorge) in Brazil, it is
only from the Argentinian side that it
is possible to get a panoramic view.
The canyon can be admired in all its
splendour from various forest paths
and from a 117-metre-long footbridge
over the waters. Last year, 970,000
tourists paid the $2 entrance fee to
get into Iguaçu National Park
(Iguazú in Spanish).
Visitors can take a dirt road down
through the forest on the Brazilian
side to a small landing stage on the
Iguaçu River. There, a specially
designed inflatable dinghy waits to
take them on an extraordinary forty-
minute trip. It can accommodate
batches of ten seated passengers at a
EDOUARD BAILBY
is a French journalist who has been a correspondent
with the weekly L'Express and a press officer in
Unesco's Office of Public Information. He is the author
of guides to Cuba (4th edition, 1993) and Hungary
(1991) published by Arthaud, Paris.
time equipped with lifebelts. The
boat takes off at spectacular speed.
Firmly fastened to his seat, the pilot
is forced to drive upstream at a speed
of 80-100 kmh in order to overcome
the force of the current and to wend
his way between whirlpools and
rocks. As it is swept along by its own
momentum, the dinghy sometimes
rears almost vertically out of the
water, before falling back and contin¬
uing on its difficult way upriver, even¬
tually gliding gently along the
Macuco falls, whose countless
droplets form a translucent haze.
Till] DANGERS OF TOUKISM
Can tourism harm this spectacular
site? Until now, it has not done so,
since both Brazil and Argentina have
taken the necessary steps to protect
wildlife. But the fragile balance of
the forest could be jeopardized if
either country were to take a wrong
decision. Controversy has already
been caused by the helicopters
which carry tourists on trips above
the falls every day.
The fact is that the Brazilians and
Argentinians are chiefly interested in
protecting the Park from poaching
and the illegal felling of palm trees.
At night, groups of men creep
secretly into the forest to hunt game
and fish for salmon in the Iguaçu.
Others trade in palm hearts, which
they gather in Brazil and sell in
Argentina, where they fetch a higher
price. Contraband has declined
thanks to the presence of the forest
rangers, but there are only about fifty
of them, which is not enough to
guard an area of 2,300 square kilo¬
metres. It is all the easier for
poachers to trespass on the Park
because it is not surrounded by a
buffer zone. When it was created in
1939, says José Carlos Ramos,
director of the Brazilian Park, the
notion that nature reserves needed to
be protected did not yet exist.
The Brazilian journalist and envi¬
ronmentalist Jackson Lima, with the
support of his Argentine colleagues,
has denounced various plans hatched
by private companies with an eye to
profit. One multinational woidd like
to illuminate the falls at night. The
cost of the installation would be Si.4
42

million. "What do they want to do?
Frazzle birds with the heat of their
lamps?" asks Lima. "We get a full
moon every month it's much more
beautiful!" Another company has
plans for a seventy-metre-high tower
with a revolving restaurant at the lop,
from which diners would be able to
admire the falls. A third linn has
come up with the idea of building a
miniature Disneyland-type railway
that would run around the cataracts.
In the last twenty years, 85 per
cent of the rainforest cover on the
banks of the Paraná River has been
destroyed to make way for fields of
wheat and soya. Straddling the Iguaçu
as it does, the National Park has
ended up becoming a veritable island
that has preserved most of its flora and
fauna. But Ramos is particularly con¬
cerned by a new development project.
To reduce the road distance between
two small Brazilian towns, Capanema
and Mediancira, by 140 kilometres,
there have been moves to drive an
asphalted road straight through the
middle of the Park from the southeast
to the northwest. "1 shall continue to
oppose that plan as hard as 1 can.
Iguaçu is sacrosanct," he says. Unfor¬
tunately, he simply does not have the
human and financial resources he
needs to keep the site in good shape.
A ISOL» YIÎIMlJISi:
The need to improve the Iguaçu
National Park's protection system is
all the more urgent because the Park
is located at the meeting point of
three countries, Argentina, Brazil and
Paraguay. The population of the
Brazilian town of Foz do Iguaçu,
which is only thirty kilometres from
the falls, has risen from 30,000 at
the beginning of the 1960s (when
work started on the world's most
powerful hydro-electric power sta¬
tion at Itaipu, twenty kilometres to
the north on the Paraná River) to over
200,000 today. Koz do Iguaçu is now
Brazil's third biggest tourist attrac¬
tion, after Rio de Janeiro and Sao
Paulo, and boasts 160 hotels of every
class. Yet two-thirds of their rooms
are taken not by tourists who have
come to admire the falls, but by
sacoleiros, people who drive across
the Bridge of Friendship, a few kilo¬
metres away, to go shopping in the
thousands of duty-free shops in the
border town of Ciudad del Fste in
Paraguay. On some days, especially
Wednesday and Saturday, cars wait
four hours to cross the Paraná River.
In 1994, 4.1 million people crossed
the bridge.
It is very tempting for Foz do
Iguaçu in Brazil and Puerto Iguazii
in Argentina to take advantage of this
more or less clandestine trade, while
at the same time preserving the nat¬
ural environment of the National
Park. It will be a tricky enterprise
that will require continual co-opera¬
tion between the authorities of the
two countries. Last June, 270 travel
agents from all over the world met for
four days in Foz do Iguaçu to look at
ways of attracting more tourists to
the region, which lies at the heart of
Mercosur, the common market of four
South American countries (Argentina,
Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay) cre¬
ated in January 1995. The question
is: what, in addition to the falls, can
tourists be offered to induce them to
stay more than forty-eight hours on
the banks of the Iguaçu River?
This is an issue that is likely to
provoke heated debate between
defenders of the environment and
champions of growth. "We shall need
UlNKSCO's help," says Ramos.
