The first Indian
Romain Maitra
Three studios where
the world's most prolific film
industry was born
HuZl'l .^"SKi
g
B^& ^^3 Ifir £^P Rjfl
SAT WtIiBÍ"
The logo of New
Theatres Limited.
The Indian film industry was born
and took root in and around Cal-
.cutta, Bombay and Madras,
major port cities where there was
a strong backdrop of intellectual
and theatre activities. From the 1920s on,
enterprising film-makers in these regions
made films in a variety of genres such as
mythology, history, folklore and fantasy,
whose popularity cut across social barriers.
These films were products of the studio
system. The major studios had distinct iden¬
tities of their own. Three of them in partic¬
ular left a mark on Indian cinema in the 1930s.
New Theatres Limited, with its famous
banner of a trumpeting elephant, was the
vision of Birendra Nath Sircar, a civil engi¬
neering graduate of London University,
who gathered a group of talented men
around him and raised Indian cinema from
the status of a novel form of entertainment
to that of an art. New Theatres was a nursery
for a number of directors and actors who
later became household names.
As one cinema historian has written,
"Sircar wanted, not a production company,
studio and cinema halls, but a system, a perva¬
sive, self-supporting, efficiently managed,
supremely equipped network of men and
women and machines which would sell the cel¬
luloid dream like it had never been sold before
in India, in markets determined by the caprice
of public preference." The artistes, who
worked as salaried staff and not on contract,
had to be at the studios whether or not they
were working on a film; when not acting, an
actor might be given riding or fencing lessons
or assigned temporary technical duties.
New Theatres' first big success, Chan-
didas, was based on the life of a Hindu saint.
With Devdas, adapted from a famous Ben¬
gali novel, it captured the huge all-India
market. Most Indian films had hitherto been
vehicles for song-and-dance sequences, but
Devdas was a serious treatment of a pow¬
erful dramatic situation. A fire in the studios
in 1940 and later a sharp financial decline
brought about the demise of New Theatres
in 1955. The impact of communalism in the
1940s and the advent of the star system also
helped to seal its fate.
The second important studio, Bombay
Talkies, was founded in 1934 by Himan Rai
and became the true precursor of the Indian
commercial cinema. Its films captivated audi¬
ences with a blend of political and social

Studios
A Throw of Dice (India,
1929) by Franz Osten and
Himansu Rai, was
produced at the Bombay
Talkies studio.
comment, glamour, melodrama and melo¬
dious soundtracks. Achhut Kanya (1936) is
the tragic tale of an Untouchable girl in love
with a Brahmin youth, who ends by giving
up her life on the altar of caste barriers and
religious bigotry. Films such as Savitri
(1937), a mythological tale from the Mahab¬
harata, effectively captured Hindu values
and sentiments.
Foreign technicians, mainly German and
British, were employed at the Talkies, and a
lot of modern equipment was used. A staff
of more than 400 Indians ate together in the
company canteen, irrespective of the castes to
which they belonged. Well-known actors
would sweep the floors if need be. Famous
authors conducted seminars for the staff,
who were assigned a variety of duties to
broaden their knowledge of the film medium.
Prabhat Studio was launched by a group
of men who had learned their trade as junior
apprentices in a film company in Kolhapur.
One member of the team had done odd jobs
at the Bombay docks before becoming the
art director. Another had worked as a
mechanic, accountant, electrician and scene
painter before becoming the sound recordist.
The most important director of Prabhat's
early films, V Shantaran, started out as a
sign-painter and doorman in a makeshift
cinema. These barely educated men possessed
indomitable will, energy and organizing
ability. In 1933 they moved to a fine location
on the outskirts of Pune, 100 miles south of
Bombay, covering a wide expanse ranging
from hilly tracks to marshland The facilities
at this great film production complex, which
had no highbrow pretensions, ranged from a
huge studio and art factories to accommoda¬
tions for the staff and actors.
The veteran actress Durga Khote recalled
later, "At Prabhat we reported for work at
5:30 in the morning, and we knew that
shooting would be definitely over by 4:30 in
the afternoon. There was no departure from
this routine as shooting was done in sunlight,
and no artificial lights or arc lights were used.
We were called for work at 5:30 because it
took two full hours for make-up with the
hard grease of the old days. By 8 o'clock we
were ready for takes, and by tea-time we used
to pack up, as no more shooting was possible
with the fading sunlight."
Prabhat Studio made many good films,
including Amrit Manthan ("Churning of
Nectar"), produced by V. Shantaram after his
return from a study tour of German stu¬
dios. Amrit Manthan was a milestone in film
technique and evoked a wide-ranging human¬
itarian appeal on the issue of animal sacrifice.
Prabhat's peak period lasted barely ten years
since it could not cover a wider market
due to its early regional language films in
Marathi.
In addition to these three studio units,
an equally strong complex of studios arose
in the mid-1930s in Madras, South India.
Films in the South Indian languages enjoyed
autonomy from the all-embracing Hindi
film market. Modern Theatres near Madras,
founded by T. R. Sundaram in 1936, had a
staff of 250 and made an average of three
films per year.
Romain Maitra
is an Indian journalist
and critic specializing in
dance and the fine arts.
He also writes scripts for
documentary films.
The emblem of Prabhat
Studio.
The logo of Bombay
Talkies Ltd.
M
