EMPOWERMENT
An escape route from
poverty
by John Friedmann
and Leonie Sandercock
The needy lack power as well as possessions
Hey
C'mon
Come out
Whereveryou are
We need to have this meeting
At this tree
Ain' even been
planted
yet
June Jordan "Calling on All Silent
Minorities" (1989)
-
14
This poem by African-American poet June
Jordan is about the process of empowerment. It
urges those without a voice to find their collec¬
tive voice, to get out there and meet and discuss
and make demands.
There are, according to United Nations esti¬
mates, about 1.3 billion people in the devel¬
oping world living in poverty. If we add to these
the people who live near the edge of absolute
poverty, the world's poor would easily rise
above 2 billion people. That is more than a third
of world population a silent minority on a
global scale.
Economic growth has not trickled down to
them. On the contrary. To all intents and pur¬
poses, the poor are excluded from "develop¬
ment".
The failure of economic policies over the
last thirty years to address the plight of the
world's poor requires that we rethink first the
very definition and interpretation of poverty, and
second what solutions are appropriate.
Our new definition centres on the notion of
poverty as disempowerment, and we argue for
a politics of collective self-empowerment on
the part of the world's poor, complemented by
certain new state policies.
The old theory of poverty
The United Nations figures on poverty cited
above are derived by calculating a "poverty
line" which is expressed in money terms,
whereby the poor are defined according to their
ability (actually inability) to consume. Although
household income is sometimes used in sur¬
veys, the usual emphasis is on the individual.
This understanding of poverty fits neatly
with the assumptions of neo-classical econo¬
mists, wherein the population is roughly divided
into producers and consumers. Both are treated
individually. Individuals enter labour markets,
and what their labour earns, they consume,
sharing their income with whomever they choose.

According to this theory, the situation of
the poor may be improved by increasing the
productivity of labour, by redistribution of
income through various forms of subsidies and
welfare programmes, and by the (increasingly
faint) hope of "trickle down".
This neo-classical model makes invisible the
huge amount of work that takes place outside the
market, specificially, work that is performed
inside the household economy. For the most part
this work is done by women and children, and its
object is the social reproduction of the household
and its members. Perhaps each household should
be seen as a small group of producers who have
joined together to produce their life and liveli¬
hood. This production of life and livelihood
includes work that results in paid income, but it
gives equal worth to the unpaid work of house¬
hold members. In short, it acknowledges the
value of the moral economy of the household,
which is based on reciprocity and affection, as dis¬
tinct from the market, which is based on profit.
The household economy is double-edged. It
is both the smallest unit for the self-produc¬
tion of life and livelihood, and the smallest polit¬
ical community. As such, it involves both co¬
operation and conflict, both a "collective" and
a conflictive arrangement among individuals
with greater and lesser degrees of dependence on
each other, and with claims on the household
and its distribution of resources.



empowerment
Those who are relatively well off can claim to be
relatively empowered, because they have rea¬
sonable access to resources that enable them to
pursue the ends of life that they value. Those
who lack such access are relatively disempow-
ered, or poor.
There are three kinds of disempowerment:
psychological, social and political. Psychological
disempowerment has to do with low self-esteem.
Social disempowerment means having little or 15

'To all intents
and purposes,
the poor are
excluded from
development'
16
no access to the bases of social power. Political
disempowerment means having no say in how
one's life is shaped and determined within the
political communities in which one moves.
All three forms of disempowerment are
important in the definition of poverty and in the
ways of escaping from poverty. To begin the
long climb out of poverty, all three forms of
power must come together and be engaged.
Here we will emphasize social disempow¬
erment. From the perspective of the household,
eight bases of social power are crucial: a pro¬
tected life space; surplus time over and above the
time needed for the maintenance of life and
livelihood; social organization; social networks;
knowledge and skills; information related to
using existing knowledge and skills; tools and
instruments of production, including good
health; and, finally, financial resources.
The bonds of family and community
A protected life space is the most basic condition
for the production of life and livelihood. This
implies housing and, in the case of rural settle¬
ments, access to productive land. Landless
labourers and unhoused households in cities
are among the poorest, most disempowered
segments of a population.
But households also need connections to
the world beyond their walls. They need social
organization and social networks. This includes
the bonds of family, of community, and of net¬
works of individuals (friends, work compan¬
ions, quasi-kin, patrons, and so on) who operate
largely on the basis of reciprocity.
"The production of life and
livelihood in the household
acknowledges the value of the
household's moral economy,
which is based on reciprocity
and affection." Above, mother
and daughter in Cairo (Egypt).
A co-operative grain mill in a
Burkina Faso village.
Reinforcing and strengthening these connec¬
tions between household and community must
be worked at, which involves investments of
time, care and effort. (By community we mean
social organizations based in local neighbour¬
hoods where people know each other and where
relations of personal trust can be established.)
The production of life and livelihood is a
social process that requires co-operation. In the
case of poor households, the dependence of mem¬
bers on each other, on family, friends, neigh¬
bours and social organizations, is substantial.
But before these social relations can be mean¬
ingfully engaged, an even more fundamental con¬
dition of social power comes into play: surplus
time, in the context of protected life space.

Households obviously need the relative secu¬
rity of a home. But they also need to have time,
over and above that needed for subsistence at
present levels, in order to improve their life
conditions.
Whether it is political action, starting a small
business, participating in community affairs, or
contributing with sweat equity to the con¬
struction or improvement of their home, time
has to be salvaged. This could mean living closer
to the centre of the city, to minimize commuting;
having child care services available during the
day; having access to piped water; having basic
community facilities nearby. These are only a
few examples of what might save on and release
time for other (productive, political, commu¬
nity-building) activities.
There are, however, limits to what poor
households can do for themselves. The inter¬
vention of the state is still needed.
The importance of the state
Access to productive land and to housing, for
instance, cannot usually be generated exclu¬
sively from within poor communities. Access to
the use of land is regulated by the state, and
housing aid and investments for poor people
must come from the state. The same is true for
surplus time. Household and community efforts
are basic, but action by the state is required, for
example, in water and sewerage service provi¬
sion, in transport facilities, in the location of
new settlements and so on.
Now it is one thing to argue that states have
a responsibility to act in these ways, and quite
another to get states to use their powers on
behalf of poor people's livelihoods. States do
not act out of benevolence but because they are
politically pressured to do so. The development
of a politics of poor people's movements is
essential. The object of such a politics is to call
the attention of the state to the basic needs of the
poor, and to pressure governments to act on
behalf of these needs.
Successful political and other collective
actions are very empowering psychologically to
those who participate in them. And political
and collective action in securing rights of access
to the bases of social power draws particularly
on the strength, leadership and imagination of
women. For women, such struggles are empow¬
ering in a special sense, as they emerge from
the privacy of their households into the public
sphere of community-based action on behalf
of their own families.
But state actions when states respond at
JOHN FRIEDMANN,
of the United States, is
professor and programme head
of urban planning at the
University of California, Los
Angeles. For several decades he
has worked as a planning
consultant in Latin America,
East and Southeast Asia, and
Africa. His most recent book is
Empowerment. The Politics of
Alternative Development (1992).
LEONIE SANDERCOCK,
of Australia, is a lecturer in the
urban planning programme at
the University of California, Los
Angeles. She has worked as a
planning consultant in Australia
for several decades. Her current
work focuses on gender and
race Issues in urban planning
theory and practice.
In Lima (Peru) young people
from rural areas are taught the
techniques of photojournalism
(above right) by "Social
Photography Workshops"
(TAFOS). During their training,
the budding photographers build
up a portfolio of photo reports
on social issues that help them
to defend their identity.
Photo right, taken by a TAFOS-
trained photographer, shows
strikers blocking a railway line.
17


all can be both empowering and disempow-
ering. When solutions are imposed from above,
they are disempowering to both poor people and
their communities. Solutions are empowering
when they work through democratic, partici¬
patory processes in which the energy and inven¬
tiveness of communities are directly engaged.
Solutions to problems of livelihood are most
meaningful when they are tailored to commu¬
nity conditions and needs and involve the active
collaboration of the organized community.
States have found it convenient to rely on
non-governmental organizations for meeting
some of the needs of poor people, and much
good has been done in this way. But the
resources devoted to non-governmental efforts
are woefully inadequate when faced with the
massive needs of poor people.
The state alone has the resources and the
legislative powers to address the problems of
life and livelihood of the disempowered on a
scale that begins to be meaningful.
Our model of poverty as disempowerment
has a number of advantages over the old bureau¬
cratic model based on neo-classical assump¬
tions. It acknowledges and includes the impor¬
tance of non-market work. It validates
co-operative action, inherent in the produc¬
tion-orientation of the model (as opposed to
the consumer-based individualism of neo-clas¬
sical economics). It argues for an anti-poverty
strategy that is based on the needs of life and
livelihood rather than on the logic of accumu¬
lation. And it envisions anti-poverty strategies
that combine individual and collective forms
of psychological, social and political empower¬
ment. Finally, our model acknowledges the role
of the state in improving the access of the dis¬
empowered poor to the bases of social power,
while emphasizing that any state intervention
must be democratic and participatory, strength¬
ening civil society.
"Households need connections
to the world beyond their walls.
They need social organization
and social networks. This
includes the bonds of family, of
community and of networks of
friends, work companions,
patrons and so on, who operate
largely on the basis of
reciprocity." Below, a family
outing (Turkey).
18
