The new library of Alexandria
'ALEXANDRINA NOVA7:
A STAR IS BORN
In 1988 the Egyptian government, in co-operation with Unesco,
began work on the new library of Alexandria, which will open at the
beginning of the next century. It is designed to meet a threefold pur¬
pose: to foster a spirit of openness, to explore many fields of
knowledge and to render knowledge accessible through state-of-the-
art technology.
Alexandria was predestined to play this role. In Antiquity it was
the site of the first universal library in the history of humanity. As
a crossroads in today's world between the West and the Middle East,
Alexandria will use its new library to become a beacon once again
for the Mediterranean world.
An instrument of knowledge and education like its illustrious
ancestor, the new "Bibliotheca Alexandrina" will be fully comput¬
erized. Its catalogue will gradually become available for consulta¬
tion in the region's universities and information centres. Through
a regional server, researchers throughout the world will be able to
access a data bank containing the library's important collections.
In addition to specialized collections on Mediterranean civiliza¬
tions, the library will contain major collections on science and
technology, environmental issues and economic development. It will
also house an international school for the information sciences.
Strikingly beautiful in its architecture and entirely functional,
the library is being built on the shores of the Mediterranean in the
form of an up-ended cylinder, 160 metres in diameter. Its "roof"
slopes at an angle to counteract the harmful effects of sea spray
and allow the upper floors of the library to enjoy natural light.
The architects have not strictly speaking designed the library
as a solar symbol, but they agree that it is intended as an image of
radiance and openness. From above, its circular form resembles the
sun as generally depicted in ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. This asso¬
ciation with the solar disk is accentuated by a desire to renew con¬
tact with the universal knowledge and wisdom of the ancient
library and to contribute, through this ultra-modern centre of cultural
and scientific exchange between East and West, to understanding
between peoples and to the construction of peace.
