COMMENTARY
Reinventing the press
34
Has the time come to rein¬
vent the press? This ques¬
tion becomes particularly rele¬
vant against the background of
two other prospective questions:
what does the future hold for
relations between the press (the
"fourth estate") and the world of
power, or rather the various cen¬
tres of power? And what are the
prospects for the written word
in an age of channel-hopping, the
multimedia revolution and infor¬
mation superhighways?
Has the press caught the power disease? Has it
been contaminated by power? "If the press did not
exist, it ought not to be invented. But the fact is
that it does exist," as Balzac put it. I would contrast
that vision with the ideal of Thomas Jefferson,
who declared that "The basis of our government
being the opinion of the people, the very first object
should be to keep that right. And were it left to me
to decide whether we should have a government
without newspapers or newspapers without gov¬
ernment, I should not hesitate a moment to prefer
the latter." In 1787, he added, "I mean that every
man should receive those papers and be capable of
reading them".
The end of the Cold War and the upsurge of
democracy all over the world are opening up new
continents to freedom of expression. The press will
have no future in these regions unless it builds
highways to lasting freedom, and this will require
a certain separation of powers. It is not enough to
win freedom: freedom must also be organized and
strengthened in face of established authority. How¬
ever, the press is first and foremost the reflection of
a society and of its readers. This is why Jefferson's
message of hope still has meaning for us since it
makes the link which is at the heart of UNESCO's
mission between the principle of press and media
freedom and its essential adjunct: literacy, education
for all and the freedom of scientific and academic
inquiry without which the concept of freedom can
only be an empty shell.
There can be no democracy without freedom of
the media and the free flow of ideas by word and
image. We therefore cannot accept the slightest
restriction on freedom of expression. However,
independent media can only exist to the extent
that the preconditions for freedom also exist. And
there can be no free and influential press or true
democracy without well-informed readers. Respon¬
sible and informed citizens are the best shield of
democracy.
The new faces offreedom
UNESCO is working to promote free, independent
and pluralist media in the public and private sector
alike. Two meetings held with this in view by
UNESCO, one in Windhoek, Namibia, in 1991, the
other in Almaty, Kazakhstan, in 1992, have been
major turning points and have opened up many
new perspectives. In these "march-lands" of democ¬
racy where everything needs to be rebuilt or
invented freedom of expression, a free press, pro¬
fessional ethics UNESCO is acting as a catalyst by
promoting public and private bilateral initiatives,
by encouraging the new print and audiovisual
media groups and non-governmental organiza¬
tions to work together, and by helping with the
establishment of training centres for journalists.
The Windhoek Declaration laid the groundwork
for the reinvention, or perhaps even the creation,
of a democratic press in the countries of the South
and East which had been deprived of it for so long.
These new media, these new and often heroic
journalists, many of whom have known impris¬
onment, are reinventing the press from day to day
and drawing the new shapes of freedom, some¬
times even laying down their lives in this cause.
The advent of a society of global communica¬
tions, a "programmed society" in which computers,
information and communication all converge, is
revolutionizing our outlook on culture, education
and development indeed on life itself.
The civilization of the written word may well be
replaced by a new empire of invisible and intangible
signs, forming the basis of a new commercial,
worldwide economy governed by what the Amer¬
ican political economist Robert Reich has called
"manipulators of symbols". And yet, the coming
change will also be a transition that is rich in
promise and will lead us to a civilization of knowl¬
edge and information. Some are alarmed by this
trend, just as in the past some people were wary of
the advent of the steam engine and the invention
of the telephone and the computer. Will we come to
regret the alienation of man enslaved to the

BY FEDERICO MAYO
assembly line, as immortalized by Charlie Chaplin
in Modern Times} We must now learn to navigate
on the seas of information and knowledge. Post¬
modern society is awash with culture, but it has at
one and the same time too much and too little cul¬



ture. A danger lies in store for us here. What if
technology is what the French writer Jean Bau-
drillard has called "a new artificial paradise of intel¬
ligence"? Will the human mind grow addicted to
virtual reality, to simulation?
The multimedia galaxy
Hence the urgent need to reinvent the press and
reinvigorate its critical function, its missions and its
instruments. This calls for a fresh look at the new
revolution in the media that transmit knowledge.
Consider the great technical and social transfor¬
mations of the past: they were closely linked to the
radical changes affecting the acquisition, preser¬
vation and, above all, the flow of knowledge. The
invention of writing led to historic changes.
Printing gave birth to countless extraordinary
developments and led to the industrial revolution.
To what new shores is the cognitive revolution
brought about by digital telematics leading us
today? How will it reshape the press? What cultural
changes will it bring in the long run?
The upheavals taking place today are signposts
to the press of the future. The merger of the cul¬
tural industries into a single multimedia galaxy
brings with it the risk of the hegemony of "edu¬
tainment", a mixture of education and commercial
entertainment. Knowledge and culture in its var¬
ious forms will indeed be available at home via a
single multi-purpose appliance. But what of those
who will not be able to afford the luxury of an
electronically equipped home? In the medium term,
the gap between the insiders and the outsiders will
widen. Moreover, the impact of such a revolution
is as yet ambiguous. Will it bring cultures closer
together or on the contrary hasten the erosion of
unique skills and forms of knowledge in a dazzling
world of simulation based on products of low cul¬
tural quality but high added value?
In his 1994 report to the Prime Minister of
France on information highways, Mr. Gérard
Théry notes that "the press, which is one of the
oldest and most important producers of informa¬
tion, will make growing use of the new networks"
once it has entirely digitalized its production pro¬
cedures, and that process will soon be completed in
the most advanced countries. While increasing
competition, which incidentally provides economic
stimulus and is in keeping with democracy, the
new electronic networks also provide a great
opportunity for the press: they offer new means of
dissemination to professionals with proven skills
and expertise in this area.
Creative tension
With the information superhighways, these ser¬
vices will be developed and enriched through a
considerable increase in the flow in communica¬
tions, through interactivity and the possibility of
combining text and images. The print media will
thus further diversify their content, and at the
same time develop new documentation and briefing
services. New audiences and new readers are thus
within reach of the press if it manages to act in time
and transform itself successfully.
There are other key issues, such as free access of
information to markets and networks; protection
of copyright, which will be the theme of a UNESCO
symposium in 1996; guarantees of independence
which many publishers of electronic services would
like to enjoy in relation to network operators this
raises the question of the control that is liable to be
exercised in practice over access to networks and
markets; the usefulness of clarifying the status of
networks in order to promote the dynamic growth
of new markets; and the types of support which
must be provided for the digitalization of press
archives, whose cultural implications and cost will
be enormous. I also believe that some barriers
against the excesses of competition, and the asso¬
ciation of the press with the process of reflexion and
experimentation on information highways, to take
up two of Mr. Théry's suggestions, might con¬
tribute to a positive start.
It is in situations of "human tension" that it is
possible to create, imagine, reinvent, give and con¬
tribute a part of oneself to the future. Changes
take place at positions which are far from the point
of equilibrium. Nothing can be expected of the
complacent who lack the resolve and the dynamism
to bring about change. They are too concerned
with their own future to think of the common
future. It is only through creative tension that
one can discover treasures, get to the essence of
things, and change direction.
More often than not, reinventing means
knowing how to get back to the source and
uncover the original seed; daring, with the sower's
determined and clear-minded gesture, to sow the
seed afresh in the field of our common future, to
which sharing alone can give meaning. JK
