The Pantheon, Rome's other
symbol by Cécile Duvelle and Mauro Rosi
The Pantheon is one ofRome's oldest, best-preserved and most
popular monuments. It is located in the heart ofthe old city, which
was included on Unesco's World Heritage List in 1 980.
People are sitting round the foun¬
tain. Some are reading, some are
chatting, and even though it is
midwinter some are eating a granita di
caffé con panna (iced coffee topped with
whipped cream), the speciality of a nearby
coffee shop. Here in the Piazza della
Rotonda, a square in the heart of Rome's
historic centre frequented twenty-four
hours a day by strolling tourists, Romans
and the ubiquitous pigeons, people often
sit and relax at the foot of this great
baroque fountain from which water
gushes endlessly and which is topped by
an authentic Egyptian obelisk from a far-
off temple to Isis.
Across the way, ignored as only a
familiar feature of the landscape can be,
stands a monumental circular domed
building the Pantheon which gives
onto the square via a marble and granite
portico more than thirty metres wide. The
passersby seem unaffected by its myste¬
rious presence and the ancient and sacred
aura it exudes despite its excellent state of
preservation. One might even think that all
this puts them at their ease.
The Pantheon has stood there since it
was built in 27 B.C., during the turbulent
period between the fall of the Roman
Republic and the rise of the Empire, when
Julius Caesar's adopted son, Octavius, was
pitted against Antony and Cleopatra,
among others. Some tourist guides refer to
it, after the Coliseum, as "the other symbol
of Rome". It was in the heart ofRome that
the Pantheon was built, was transformed
and survived many centuries of change.
Perhaps because it provides a thread of
continuity it seems such a natural part of
the great city today.
A familiar temple
At first, as its Greek name indicates, the
Pantheon was "the temple ofall the gods".
Its appearance changed over the centuries
to accompany the metamorphoses of
Rome itself as capital of the early and
then the later Empire, of the Western
Roman Empire, as Papal Rome, as the
baroque Rome of the Counter Reforma¬
tion, as the city of the Vatican and, since
1870, as the capital of Italy. Each of these
stages in Rome's history was marked by
momentous events.
36
Opposite page, aerial view of
part of the old city of Rome.
Near centre of photo is the
dome of the church of
Sant'Agnese in Agone on the
Piazza Navona. Higher up is the
dome of the Pantheon, pierced
with a round opening or oculus.
Left, the Pantheon's imposing
façade on the Piazza della
Rotonda. The portico bears the
Inscription: M. AGRIPPA L.F.
COS. TERTIUM. FECIT (Marcus
Agrippa, son of Lucius, consul
for the third time, built this).

Originally the Pantheon resembled a
Greek temple with a central altar and a
pronaos (or portico). A rectangular
building, it was rebuilt in its present cir¬
cular form by the Emperor Hadrian. The
most radical functional change was intro¬
duced in 609 as a result of a decision by
Pope Boniface IV, who restored it, dedi¬
cated it to Christian worship and named it
Santa Maria dei Martiri (St Mary of the
Martyrs).
The history of the Pantheon has not
been uneventful. Pope UrbanVII ordered it
to be stripped of its bronze statues so that
they could be melted down and used in
the canopy of St Peter's basilica. Later, the
great Counter-Reformation architect
Bernini added what the Romans soon
began to call "donkey's ears", i.e. two small
pinnacles, one at each end of the pediment.
In 1980 the Pantheon and the historical
centre of Rome were added to Unesco's
World Heritage List. The listing was justi¬
fied in the following terms, "Ever since its
foundation, which legend sets in 753 B.C.,
Rome has always been associated with the
history of humanity. The capital of an
empire that dominated the Mediterranean
world for five centuries, it later became
the capital of the Christian world and still
today performs these essential religious
and political functions." The Pantheon,
which wears its 2,000 years so lightly, is a
living historical reality.
Naturally most people are primarily
interested in the Pantheon as a monu-
UNESCO INACTION
HERITAGE
ment and as a museum. It is the eternal
resting-place of the immortals and of a
number of artists and kings, including the
first king ofunited Italy, Victor Emmanuel
II, his son King Humbert I, and Humbert's
queen, Margherita of Savoy. A few years
ago, the prospect of transferring to the
Pantheon the mortal remains of Italy's last
king sparked off controversy in some sec¬
tions of Italian public opinion which has
still not died down. Also in the Pantheon is
the tomb of Raphael, who was long con¬
sidered as the greatest of all painters and
whose genius conferred so much beauty
on Rome. Other major artists interred there
are Giovanni da Udine, Perin del Vaga,
Annibali Carrachi, Taddeo Zuccari and
Baldassare Peruzzi.
A living monument
The Pantheon is also a favourite meeting
place for Romans and for visitors to Rome.
With its apocalyptic traffic jams Rome is a
city where punctuality is always threat¬
ened; the slightest incident can make you
half an hour late for an appointment.
People often arrange to meet in a familiar
place where they can sit and wait. The por¬
tico of the Pantheon with its sixteen tow¬
ering granite columns and its pediment of
white marble provides perfect shelter on a
torrid summer day or during the acquaz-
zoni, the diluvian summer and winter
rain that is so different from London drizzle
and the only slightiy heavier rain of Paris.
People meet there before going to the
cinema, window shopping or talking busi¬
ness. Impeccably groomed young people,
wearing sun glasses from March to October,
gather at the foot of the walls on each side
of the Pantheon. As they sit and wait, they
read the papers, chat and eat ice-cream. 37

The Pantheon is at the heart of a lively
neighbourhood that does not only live on
its past but is also a centre of commerce,
culture and politics. In this sense Rome's
historical centre is fortunately different
from that of many other cities which, in
Italy and elsewhere, have been destroyed
as living communities and sacrificed on
the altar of their own beauty. So many
places where people live become lifeless
museums dedicated to the past! One day
perhaps we shall decide to protect exam¬
ples of urban beauty from becoming
museum pieces and prevent the impov¬
erishment of life in traditional urban com¬
munities.
Luckily, Rome's historic centre is not a
tourist showcase. Economic life goes on
there independently of the museums and
the visitors. With its pizza stands, its
organic and macrobiotic food shops, its
Zen meditation centre and handicraft
shops, bookshops and jewellers, the Pan¬
theon district bustles with life. On the Via
della Maddalena, there are a number of
excellent and renowned ice-cream shops,
ranging from the innovator who some
wo years ago launched a sensational liquorice
ice-cream, to Giolitti, a temple of tradi¬
tionalism, with its small, round, French-
style tables, elegant and nimble waiters,
and flavours and utensils that have not
changed for a century. Nearby is the Par¬
liament building. The street, paved with
sampietrini, "small sacred stones" or
"small St Peters", is closed to cars but is
used by noisy and acrobatically ridden
mopeds, and horse-drawn carriages filled
with tourists.
In summer the light beige of the Pan¬
theon stonework, mingled with the red
and ochre of the surrounding buildings,
creates an "African" effect that is accentu¬
ated by the greenery that protrudes from
between the stones.
A sublime presence
The Pantheon is a monument, a meeting
place and a refuge, but it is also something
more. It does not stand in splendid isola¬
tion; its mystery gives light and meaning to
everything around it. Not only on the Piazza
della Rotonda, but far beyond in the nanow,
cobbled streets, everything from stray
cats to fashion shops is somehow illumi-
The Pantheon
in figures
DATES
27 B.C.: The Pantheon founded by
Agrippa as a temple to the glory of the
Olympian gods
80 A.D.: First extensive restoration, by
Domitian.
125: Restored by Hadrian. The
Pantheon acquires its extraordinary
coffered dome with an opening (oculus)
at the apex.
609: The Pantheon becomes a
Christian church dedicated to St Mary
of the Martyrs (because of the martyrs'
remains transferred to it from the
catacombs).
1563: Restoration of the great bronze
door.
DIMENSIONS
Portico: 33 metres wide and 15.45
metres deep.
Columns: 12.5 metres high.
Walls: 6.7 metres thick
Dome: 43.3 metres high with the same
diameter
Oculus: 9 metres in diameter.
MATERIALS
Gra lite, marble, brick and bronze.

nated by its poetic grandeur. As Heidegger
writes in his Holzwege of a Greek temple,
such a building "attributes their essential
characteristics to things and the idea they
have of themselves to people". Around the
Pantheon the mundane and the sublime
intermingle.
But even if the Pantheon did not exist,
Rome's historic centre would still be one of
the world's most beautiful places. All
around are exceptional sites, buildings
and monuments, where imperial Rome,
Renaissance Rome, and the Rome of the
popes and the Risorgimento meet and
overlap. To move away from the Pantheon
is not to elude its mystery. Here beauty is
almost commonplace, an unobtrusive,
silent, discreet companion. In Rome the
past is not a memory. The fountains still
exist, as they did four centuries ago, to
provide drinking water for passersby, to
refresh and bring delight. As in the sev¬
enteenth century the churches are open to
the community and the public at large.
They are Christian temples where mass is
celebrated at least twice a day, centres for
social action and for receiving alms. Hands
in pockets, on bicycles or mopeds, people
go about their business through the
entrancing city, occasionally stopping to sit
down on marble benches that date from
the baroque period and wear their 400
years with panache.
Two minutes away from the Pantheon
is the Piazza Navona, unchanged since
the Counter Reformation. Even closer is
the beautiful church of San Luigi de
Francesi with its Caravaggio paintings. In
the opposite direction is the Piazza della
Minerva, where Stendhal once lived. An
Egyptian obelisk crowned by a small ele¬
phant, ironically called "the chick" by the
Romans, stands in front of the church of
Santa Maria sopra Minerva, a gothic
building housing the tomb of St Catherine
of Siena, and a miniature museum of
painting. Also no more than a few min¬
utes' walk from the Pantheon are the
Palazzo Madama, seat of the Italian Senate,
the Mausoleum of Augustus, the Piazza
di Spagna and the Piazza Sant'Ignazio.
Perhaps this explains why there are so
many well-stocked shoe shops in the
Eternal City.
CECILE DUVELLE AND MAURO ROSI
are staff members of the Unesco Publishing Office.
Opposite page, inside the Pantheon. Its dome Is
one of the world's largest. Light pours in through
the unglazed oculus onto the coffered Interior of
the dome and the walls beneath. Large recesses
adorned with columns once contained statues of
the gods.
Below, Via del Corso, one of Rome's busiest
streets. The 1.5-km-long street owes its name to
the horse races that were once held there.
People meet at the Pantheon
before going to the cinema,
window shoppingor talking
business. Impeccably groomed
youngpeoplegather beneath its
walls, readingnewspapers,
chatting, eating ice-cream.
m -
39
