A four-in-hand script
The composite nature of Japanese writing is an aid to flexibility and
effectiveness
by Shim Noda
The "sign of happiness" on a
wooden panel.
24
SHIRO NODA
is a Japanese historian and
linguist who is currently a
lecturer in the Japanese
department of France's National
Institute of Oriental Languages
and Civilizations in Paris. The
present article has been
abridged and adapted from a
longer study.
Although scholars still disagree about the
origins of the Japanese language, the ori¬
gins of its notation system are less obscure.
The notation system currently used in Japan
is a combination of four different forms: 1) kanji
(logograms); 2) hiragana and 3) katakana (syl-
labograms); and 4) roman (phonograms).
It is generally agreed that Japanese writing
dates back to the fifth century B.C., a period
when Chinese writing was formally introduced
into the country through Buddhist texts. Kanji
word signs are derived from Chinese writing,
which was then the prerogative of the intellectual
class. It was used at the imperial court, by the civil
service, and by Buddhist monks for reading and
transcribing religious documents. It was not used
by the mass of the people.
Despite its usefulness, Chinese notation had
one major drawback because of the basic differ¬
ence in the syntactical structure of the two lan¬
guages. It had to be adapted by giving a purely
Japanese reading to Chinese ideograms. A reading
system was invented for this purpose. It was
known as kaeriten (reference mark), an allusion
to the point put to the left of Chinese characters
to indicate the order in which they should be

read. But kanji was hard to apply to the language
of everyday life, and a Japanese sentence written
in kanji seemed highly unnatural.
I he voice of letters
This was the linguistic situation inJapan when, at
the beginning of the Heian period (late eighth and
early ninth centuries), the ladies of the imperial
court invented the cursive syllabary known as
hiragana, which consisted of signs derived from
Chinese characters but considerably simplified
and shaped in Japanese style. This was a crucial
moment in the evolution of the Japanese lan¬
guage, for the invention of hiragana was not a
mere morphological transformation of Chinese
characters. As an ideogram, a kanji character
could express an idea, a concept or an image, but
hiragana added a new dimension to Japanese
writing, namely the phonetic transcription that is
entirely independent of the ideographic system.
The great advantage that hiragana had over
kanji was that it enabled the Japanese to write
about daily life in everyday language. The inven¬
tion of hiragana encouraged the emergence of a
purely Japanese literature, of which The Tale of
Genji, written at the beginning of the eleventh
century by Murasaki Shikibu, a lady of the impe¬
rial court, is the most famous classical example.
Around the same time, towards the end of the
eighth century, a third type of writing (katakana)
was perfected by Buddhist monks in order to
make it easier to read the sutras and to encourage
the spread of Buddhism among the peasantry
Katakana follows the same principle of simpli¬
fying Chinese characters according to their pho-
< -s
A portrait of the Japanese
calligrapher Tofu Ono, thought to
be by the 12th-century painter
Raiju.
A calligraphy competition for
schools is held annually in Tokyo
on New Year's day.
* * .;. -> .> *;.
. * , * .;. ,-.
netic value. Today katakana is used above all to
transcribe borrowings from other languages.
Dimplexity
It might be wondered why the Japanese have not
adopted one or another of the writing systems
(hiragana, katakana or roman), which would
make learning Japanese much easier, rather than
sticking to this combination of the four. The
answer is quite simple. The phonetic representa¬
tion systems ofJapanese call for a linear approach
that slows down the reading process and corre¬
spondingly delays understanding of the content,
whereas the globality of the logogram means that
it can be immediately recognized and understood
once it has been memorized. Paradoxically then,
the consequence of using four integrated kinds of
writing is that the effectiveness and flexibility of
Japanese writing is increased. The complexity of
the system is actually a simplifying factor. 25
