Unequal voices by Armand Mattelart
Globalization of markets and exchanges is creating new disparities
between nations and may lead to a two-speed communication
system as well as a two-speed economy.
Above,
the Tokyo stock exchange.
Communication (not only through the
media, but also in the sense of exchanges
and the free movement of persons, goods and
messages of all kinds) has become a form of
world organization. Confronted with the ban¬
kruptcy of the old ideology of continuous, linear
progress, communication has now taken over. It
has become the yardstick by which the evolution
of humankind is judged at a time when people
have lost their bearings and are searching des¬
perately for the meaning of their future.
The English term "globalization" is often
used to describe this phase in the international
growth of exchanges through the development
of communications. Globalization has already
become a reality: increasingly, our societies are
linked up by information and communication
networks whose logic consists in operating in a
universal mode. But it is also an over-simplifying
notion a ready-made ideological approach
which conceals, instead of revealing, the com¬
plexity of this new world order.
Although the idea of the "global village"
was first mooted in the late 1960s by the Cana¬
dian university professor Marshall McLuhan1,
this view of our planet did not gain a firm
foothold until the 1980s, which witnessed the
globalization of markets, financial circuits, com¬
panies and all kinds of intangible exchanges.
This trend was made possible by a wave of
deregulation and privatization which turned
the market into the regulating factor of society.
This in turn resulted firstly in the weakening of
social forces, the decline of the welfare state
and of the public service philosophy and, sec¬
ondly, in the growing power of the corpora¬
tion, its values and private interests.
In the wake of this change, which encouraged
the deployment of technological networks and
big multimedia groups, the nature and status
of communication itself changed: it became 11

'Freedom of expression now has a competitor in the shape of
freedom of commercial expression, which some wish to elevate
into a new human right. This creates an ongoing tension between
the empirical law of the market and the rule of law, between the
sovereignty of the consumer and that of the citizen.'
increasingly professional and its areas of respon¬
sibility and activities proliferated. As to its
methods, which were presented as models for
the management of social relations, they fin¬
ished up by penetrating the whole of society.
Today, state institutions, intergovernmental
organizations, local and regional authorities,
and even such varied humanitarian associations
as Médecins Sans Frontières, Greenpeace and
Amnesty International have no hesitation in
using public relations expertise to establish
closer links with the general public.
Prom globalization to glocalization
The idea of globalization is therefore the stock-
in-trade of marketing and management experts.
In a sense it is the key to their world-view and
the foundation of the incipient new world order.
They see in it the demise of early-twentieth-
century scientific management techniques
because the hierarchy of authority and the spe¬
cialization of tasks created by those techniques
corresponded to a structure of the world that no
longer exists. In those days the local, national
and international levels were seen as a succession
of compartments which were impervious to
. each other. The new view of businesses and the
In Delhi (India), a group of world in wn;cn tney function as a "network"
young people use stereoscopes
to look at 3-D images.
establishes an association between these three
different levels. Any business strategy on the
globalized market must be at one and the same
time international and local; Japanese managers
use the English neologism "glocalize" to denote
this phenomenon. This new corporate logic is
governed by the keyword of integration: inte¬
gration of geographical scales, but also of design,
production and marketing or even of spheres of
activity which were previously separate. This
word does of course evoke a holistic or per¬
haps cybernetic vision of the organization of
the world into great economic units.
The widespread acceptance of the concept of
globalization in the strategic thinking of entre¬
preneurs has changed the rules of the interna¬
tional game, to say nothing of the course of
negotiations embarked upon in the sphere of
communication networks.
A first conceptual shift has taken place in the
very definition of freedom of expression, which
has now found a competitor in the shape of
"freedom of commercial expression"; attempts
are being made to elevate the latter into a new
human right. This creates an ongoing tension
between the empirical law of the market and
the rule of law, between the sovereignty of the
consumer and that of the citizen. Organiza¬
tions of communication professionals saw this
as a justification and legitimization of their lob¬
bying campaigns in favour of "television without
frontiers" in the second half of the 1980s.
As a principle for the organization of the
world, the concept of the freedom of commercial
expression is indissociable from the old prin¬
ciple of the "free flow of information" which
was invented at the start of the Cold War and has



always come to terms with the unequal distrib-
12

ution of information flows. The managerial doc¬
trine of the corporate undertaking has made this
principle popular once again; it equates freedom
to engage in trade with freedom as such.
Another shift, this time geographical, has
occurred in the assumptions underlying the
debate on the subject of communication. In the
1970s and until the early 1980s, UNESCO was one
of the main platforms chosen by the movement
of non-aligned nations to launch the idea of a
"new world information and communication
order". Since 1985, however, studies of this sub¬
ject have been entrusted to a more technical
agency, i.e. GATT (the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade). Communication is treated
here on the same footing as services and includes
the products of the cultural industries, together
with telecommunications, tourism and man¬
agement techniques.
A special case for culture
The recent GATT negotiations were the set¬
ting for a direct confrontation between the
European Union and the United States on the
subject of the "cultural exception". This con¬
frontation ended on 13 December 1993 in the
outright exclusion of audiovisual and cultural
productions from the scope of the free trade
agreements. On that occasion, the gulf could
be seen to widen between the defenders of cul¬
tural identity and the proponents of the intran¬
sigent application of the criterion of "goods" to
every form of production.
During the debate on the liberalization of
services, the latter advanced arguments of a pop¬
ulist kind. To justify their opposition to the
clause excluding cultural products from the
agreements, they put forward ideas of the fol¬
lowing kind: "Let people watch whatever they
like. Leave them to make their own judgment.
Trust in their common sense. The only judgment
of a cultural product must be its success or
failure on the market."
This argument is not entirely negative in
that it recognizes that the user plays an active
role, whereas the determinist theories of the
1960s and 1970s simply put him on the receiving
end of the communication machine. However,
by restoring the consumer's own discernment
and stressing his freedom to decide for himself,
the problem of the inequality of exchanges on
the world market for cultural products, and
that of the need to protect the diversity of cul¬
tures through appropriate national and regional
policies, are sidelined.
Should the freedom granted to televiewers
reduce them to wholesale consumption of the
Above, a demonstration of
virtual reality simulation
equipment at a show in
Monaco. The helmeted user is
"inside" a computer-generated
environment that closely '
resembles reality.
13

In a shop window in Allahabad
(India) Shiva, the Vedic god of
fire, is used as an advertising
ploy for electric torches.
Below right, hot-air balloons
bearing advertising slogans lift
off from the grounds of a
French château.
14
ARMAND MATTELART,
of Belgium, is professor of
information and communications
at the University of Rennes-2
(France). He is the author of a
number of books on the history
and theories of communications,
which have been translated into
several languages. His most
recent published work in English
is Mapping World
Communication: War, Progress,
Culture (University of Minnesota
Press, Minneapolis/London,
1994). His The Invention of
Communication is scheduled for
publication later this year by the
University of Minnesota Press.
products of a hegemonic industry, or should
they on the contrary be helped to discover the
products of other cultures, starting with their
own? If we are not careful, the one-sided glori¬
fication of the consumer will lead to legit¬
imization of the subordination of certain peoples
and cultures. Until the late 1970s, this process
was known as "cultural imperialism" and eth¬
nologists continue to describe it as "ethnocide".
Unfortunately, when these matters are discussed,
there is often a slender margin between narrow-
minded chauvinism and defence of the right of
each culture to preserve its own access and spe¬
cific contribution to universal culture.
Ureolized cultures
It is disturbing to note the extent to which the
concepts inherent in the idea of globalization are
now taken for granted in any description of the
process of internationalization of cultural and
economic exchanges which is under way today.
If we are to do justice to the complexity of the
phenomena observed, it is imperative to define
a new conceptual framework.
I believe that it is preferable to regard the
current phase as that of the emergence of "world-
communication", a notion which explicitly refers
back to the idea of "world-economy" forged by
the historian Fernand Braudel to describe the
impact of macro-economic flows on the evolution
of national economies. As happened during the
gradual construction of the economic world,
progress towards a planetary "world-commu¬
nication" system is creating new disparities
between countries, regions and social groups. It
is giving rise to new forms of exclusion. By rel¬
egating a part of mankind to its periphery, it is
liable to drag our planet into a two-speed eco¬
nomic and communication system. In future, we
may have a world structured around a small
number of megalopolises situated for the most
The 1980s saw a quest for a global
culture but also the comeback of
individual cultures.
part in the North, but in some cases in the South,
from which all the principal flows of information
and communication radiate out and to which
they return. Globalization is not incompatible
with increasing disparities. These are two sides of
the same coin.
While the 1980s saw a quest for a levelling
global culture on the part of the great transna¬
tional corporations in search of "universals"
which were capable of facilitating the penetra¬
tion of their products onto the world market,
they were also a time when individual cultures
made a comeback. The tensions and disparities
between the plurality of cultures and the cen¬
trifugal forces of commercial cosmopolitanism
revealed the complexity of reactions to the emer¬
gence of a single worldwide market.
Today, greater attention is being paid to the
way in which each culture and each community
receives and adapts the messages carried on the
world communication networks. How do the
negotiations between the specific and the uni¬
versal, between the national and the interna¬
tional elements take place? Can individual cul¬
tures survive? Can they adapt? Or will they go
under? These new approaches have enabled the
terms "Americanization" and "dependence" to
be replaced by others such as "hybridization"
and "Creolization".
This new interest in fragmentation and inter¬
actions may prove ambivalent. It obliges us to
reflect on the process of globalization of
exchanges and on its relationship with everyday
democracy. But it can also cohabit readily with
nationalist and even chauvinist attitudes. A lucid
and critical observation of the former without
falling into the trap of the latter such is the
challenge that awaits us on the eve of the twenty-
first century.
1 In War and Peace in the Global Village (1968), a work
written jointly with Quentin Fiore.
