The great temple of Thanjavur
byAppasamy Murugaiyan
A magnificentsanctuary rich in murals, sculptures
andfriezes bears witness to daily life in southern India a
thousandyearsago.
36
The reign of Rajaraja I (985-1014),
the greatest king of the Chola
Tamil dynasty, marked a glorious
epoch in the history of southern India.
This exceptional figure, a fervent wor¬
shipper ofShiva, a great administrator and
a valiant warrior, is immortalized in many
inscriptions on the great temple ofThan¬
javur the most impressive of the fifty or
so sanctuaries which he built or restored.
The temple seeks to reconcile the spir¬
itual and profane worlds. It is a religious
edifice but at the same time a monument
to the history, literature, art and architec¬
ture of the Chola empire.
The venerable rules of sacred
architecture
The rules governing the architecture of the
temples ofsouthern India were particularly
rigorous. From the sixth century onwards,
stone was the only material used to build
temples. Wood and earth, being less durable,
were reserved for human dwellings. The
shape of a sanctuary, its layout and archi¬
tectural style, depended on the nature of
the objects which were to be venerated in it
and on the cult to which it was dedicated.
Priests and stapati (craftsmen-cum-tech-
nicians) together determined the con¬
struction principles which were codified in

The temple's crowning glory,
left, is the vimana, a 66-metre-
high pyramid.
Above, in a recess of the
vimana, a divinity guards the
entrance to the holy of holies.
Below, an entrance gate seen
from inside the temple.
learned treatises, theAgama, the Vastu and
the Silpa. Once the site had been chosen, the
orientation ofthe temple was uppermost in
the minds of its builders. Thanjavur, which
was built in the year 1000 or thereabouts,
faces eastwards.
Three portals separate the visitor from
the inner courtyard. The first, of more
recent construction (fifteenth-seventeenth
centuries) differs from the next two which
give an immediate foretaste of Chola art
and architecture.
Inside the inner courtyard, the visitor is
welcomed by a statue (nearly 6 metres
long) of a recumbent bull. This is a fine
effigy of Nandi, the mount of the God
Shiva. Then, after crossing the three pavil¬
ions ofthe main sanctuary, the mandapas,
one reaches the holy of holies, which 37

houses the lingo, the phallic image ofShiva.
Above it towers an immense 66-metre-high,
13-storypyramid, the vimana. This hollow
edifice creates a void which unites the linga
with the cosmos. The delicacy of its deco¬
ration, its profusion ofniches and pilasters,
its friezes depicting the Hindu pantheon
surmounted by eight bulls make this a mas¬
terpiece ofChola art.
At the base, two rows of parallel walls
frame the holy ofholies and form a kind of
two-story vestibule. The lower floor is
famed for the beauty of its wall paintings,
while the upper floor houses magnificent
relief portraits of some eighty dance pos¬
tures described in the Natya Sastra, a trea¬
tise written in the first century A.D. on
which the principles of classical Indian
dance are based.
The main sanctuary is surrounded by a
constellation of small protective sanctu¬
aries. One of them is specially dedicated to
Karuvurar, the spiritual mentor of King
Rajaraja. On the day when the temple was
ready and the time came to install the
linga, the priests noticed that, despite all
their efforts, the special paste which was
supposed to fix the monolith to its pedestal
_ _ remained liquid instead ofsolidifying. The
wO god could not be placed in position. In
despair, the king had a sudden revelation:
the mystic Karuvurar must be present for
the proper accomplishment of the cere¬
monies. Conducted to the temple, Karu¬
vurar spat out what he was chewing a
mixture of betel leaves, areca nuts and
quicklime and used it to fix the linga] So
it was that saliva, a symbol of impurity in
Hinduism, was used here as a sacred
cement.
Inscriptions that tell the story
of everyday life
Thanks to the inscriptions engraved on
its interior walls, the temple ofThanjavur
is also rich in information on secular life:
society, history, military history, the
economy, administration, art and crafts.
Rajaraja seems to have been the first Tamil
king to have recorded the salient dates of
his reign in addition to the events associ¬
ated with the life of the temple. His suc¬
cessors were to do likewise.
On the walls of the main sanctuary is a
list ofgifts from the king and from his elder
sister; those from his wives, entourage and
officers are catalogued on the niches and
columns of the temple.
The king's gifts reveal untold prodigality:
utensils for ritual ceremonies and other ser
vices; goldenjewels setwith pearls and gem-
stones to ornament the statues; villages,
lands and money to supply the temple with
rice; camphor, cardamom and perfumes to
add fragrance to the waterused for the ablu¬
tions of the deities; cattle to supply the
temple with ghee (clarified butter used as a
fuel for the lamps) ; musicians and singers for

Facing page, the inner courtyard of the
temple. At left is a 6-metre-long effigy of
Nandi, the sacred bull ridden by the god
Shiva. In background, the third entrance
gate. At right, a smaller statue of Shiva's
mount.
Facing page below, entrance gates to the
temple.
Below right, the gallery lining the northern
perimeter wall.
¡3	H	"	 	"	fvrr-M	n
A: the holy of holies. B. C and D: the three manàapa (pavilions) of the main
sanctuafy. E: the gopura (e "
added in the 12th century.
ntrance towers). F: the Subfahmanya shrine.
the liturgical chants; dancing girls; Brahmin
servants, accountants, treasurers, gold¬
smiths, carpenters, launderers, barbers,
astrologers, guardians. . . . The inscriptions
even detail the earnings and tasks of each
corporation.
Administration of the temple was
under the direct control of the king and his
army. Assemblies of different villages
administered the temple's assets and
public properties. Some received loans
from the temple, the interest being used to
finance rituals. The entire population was
therefore associated in one way or another
with the maintenance of the temple and
with its rituals and ceremonies.
The inscriptions also tell us about the
economic life of the period. We learn that
there was a system ofcurrency and that the
main resources of the state were derived
from income tax and land tax. We even
know that the rate of interest on all loans
was 12.5 per cent! No tax was levied on
communal properties such as the village
pool and the areas inhabited by craftsmen,
or on roads and wells. Urban space was
carefully distributed between the different
social and professional categories there
was a "street of the archers", as well as a
"street of the musicians" and a "district of
craftsmen and shopkeepers".
In short, King Rajaraja turned the
temple ofThanjavur into the focal point of
the urban and rural life ofhis age.
APPASAMY MURUGAIYAN
is an Indian linguist who teaches at the University of
Paris-VIII and at the Ecole Pratique des Hautes
Etudes. He is the author of many publications on
Tamil language and culture, notably Vanakkam =
bonjour, Initiation à la langue tamoule (BPI, Centre
Georges-Pompidou, 1986), the first oral-aural
method of learning Tamil from French. 39
