The watchful eye of democracy
by Richard Hoggart
The task of encouraging tolerance may seem complex
at any time, but we live today in a particularly sombre
era. Our capacity to destroy each other, if we let intolerance
take its course, has never been greater from massive state-
organized destruction to do-it-yourself horrors engineered by
small fanatical groups.
Rabid intolerance is widespread and growing. Religious
intolerance stalks several large nations. Those who exhibit
ethnic intolerance have so far lost any sense of shame as to
flaunt an appalling phrase such as "ethnic cleansing". Nazism
and other intolerant creeds arc increasing, even in the most
"developed" parts of the world. The situation could hardly
be worse, but it worsens yearly.
When a real disagreement surfaces between individuals
and peoples, there is sometimes a tendency to say: "It's only a
failure in communication" as though to go further and fur¬
ther so as to communicate more and more would incluctably
lead to the sunny uplands of mutual respect. Not necessarily
so. As one former British Prime Minister answered when a
member of his Cabinet who was being dismissed said there
seemed to be a failure in communication: "There is no
failure. I understand you very well. You are not up to the
job". We will get nowhere without such frank speaking.
Many of us are congenital joiners of clubs, societies,
neighbourhoods, nations. We like to feel wc belong. That
sense of belonging is umbilically linked to its opposite: the
assumption that other people do not belong, are outsiders
and are to be kept in that condition. Those of us in nations
which arc comfortable and little threatened can keep such
nasty attitudes more or less at bay though if someone out¬
side the pale asked to marry our daughter it might well flare
into life.
These are hard and unpalatable thoughts. What hope is
there? The first hope is in the spread of democratic institu¬
tions. They are not a panacea, only the least bad social system
so far devised. For the idea of democracy is founded pre¬
cisely on the assumption of tolerance, rather than on any type
of authoritarianism, lay or religious: because those take away
the subject's freedom, and that loss is the essence of state
intolerance.
However, democracies only work well when they do better
in some important issues than the majority of their citizens
would wish or would vote for in a referendum. Thus, in 1995,
75 per cent of the population of Britain are in favour of a
return to capital punishment. Probably a majority have ele¬
ments of racism in their altitudes. But parliament has passed
anti-capital punishment and anti-racist laws.
That parliament should have to force its citizens to be
more virtuous than their natural instincts even in a democ¬
racy is a pity but unavoidable. One may look forward to a
time when citizens do not have to be "screwed into virtue" by
their elected representatives. Meanwhile we have to be
thankful for those instances where parliament does better
than the majority of us would collectively do.
So we are quite well on in the debate before we come to
what most well-meaning people put first: the power of edu¬
cation as a force towards tolerance. It is a critical force;
but not easy; not a matter of warm injunctions. In an early
poem the English poet W.U. Auden wrote: "We must love
one another or die". That was a call to a sort of calculated
tolerance. Later he altered it, because he thought it was
phoney, sentimental, face-saving, to: "We must love one
another and die".
We must in teaching (and in its best adjunct, broadcasting,
if it is properly used, and not made the agent either of com¬
merce or of state propaganda) be challenging and firm. We
can arrange, school exchanges, pen friends and all the rest,
but we must not expect too much from them even though wc
prepare most carefully and unsentimentally.
Above all, wc must educate our pupils and students in the
art of critical literacy in a democracy. This means, among
much else, training them both to understand and value their
particular culture but also to stand outside it and be able
and willing to judge it. M
