Cultural counterpoint
by Isabelle Leymarie
Mamady-Keita, one of
Guinea's greatest
percussionists, gives
lessons to children in the
village of Balandugu
where he was born.
Differences between
cultures find an echo
in music
ISABELLE LEYMARIE
is a Franco-American musicologist.
Although children in Europe are usu¬
ally initiated Into music by learning
how to read it, children in Africa start by
refining their ear, watching adult musicians,
copying from them and playing with them as
soon as they are able. Drummers often
teach their students rhythm by getting them
to feel it physically, by holding their wrists
to help them keep time, by singing to the
beat or beating out time with sounds or
rhythmic phrases. All of this helps their
pupils to absorb rhythm physically.
In African and Caribbean societies
instruments "speak", like the "talking"
drums that reproduce through their dif¬
ferent timbres the sounds of tonal lan
guages, and make certain rhythms seman-
tically intelligible by modelling them on
spoken language. "This is the way It says,"
jazz musicians may say when they describe
a virtuoso passage played on saxophone or
piano.
The language of rhythm
Rhythm Is the strongest distinguishing factor
between these different types of music.
The West, which highlights correctness of
timbre and the rigorous application of the
rules of harmony and counterpoint, tries
to tame and neutralize rhythm. It Is no acci¬
dent that some European languages, for
example, refer to offbeat rhythm (which Is, 47

48
incidentally, described in French by a word
with a pejorative connotation, contretemps)
as syncopation, as if rhythmic intrusion
can be so intolerable as to lead to a "syn¬
cope" or loss of consciousness. It is inter¬
esting to remember that when European
colonists made contact with Africans, the
instrument they often banned and destroyed
was the drum, the very symbol of rhythm.
Many kinds of black music use harmony
and counterpoint wonderfully, but they also
have the highest respect for syncopation.
This is not a matter, as in Asian or Arabic
music, of precise rhythmic cells, of a pre¬
determined and memorized rhythm
respected by the musician or the dancer, but
one of skill and personal inventiveness
(even within a group of instruments). It is the
spontaneous art of escaping from the beat,
of playing tricks, being unpredictable, every¬
thing associated with the Afro-American
slang word "hip" (smart, lively, unexpected)
as opposed to "corny" (square, conven¬
tional, boring). The downbeat, which is
favoured in Western music and corresponds
to the rhythm of military music, ¡s consid¬
ered "corny". The upbeat, which is used in
black music, produces the sensation of
swing and Is considered hip.
The West is disoriented by this con¬
ception of phrasing and this cult of rhythm,
and is more inclined to admire Indian, Chi¬
nese and Japanese ritual music, whose
rhythmic and ceremonial qualities seem
more directly intelligible to it than African
FURTHER READING
Dr. Guy Bérard, Audition égale comportement
("Hearing Equals Behaviour"), Maisonneuve, Metz,
1982.
Billy Bergman, Hot SaucesLatin and Caribbean
Pop, Quill, New York, 1985.
John Blacking, How Musical Is Man? University of
Washington Press, Seattle and London, 1973.
Dr.' Etienne Jalenques, La thérapie du bonheur
("The Therapy of Happiness"), Michel Laffont,
Paris, 1993.
music. Yet Yoruba liturgies, for example,
are works of awesome beauty and com¬
plexity. In them the iyá, the largest Instru¬
ment in the bata, the array of Yoruba holy
drums, talks to the gods In dazzling, almost
otherworldly rhythms that seem to emerge
from the void and are beaten out with
amazing precision. Black music also favours
"breaks" that modify the beat whenever It
slips Into a rut.
Abolishing duality
The Irish musicologist John Blacking spent
a lot of time among the Venda people of
South Africa before he really came to under¬
stand their music. He realized that his edu¬
cation had made him consider African art as
"different". At first he stayed in his tent
listening to Bach or Mozart, but in time he
began to change his conception of music.
"They [the Venda]," he wrote, "introduced
me to a new world of musical experience
and to a deeper understanding of my own
music." When he regarded music not as a
set of rules but as a series of human inter¬
actions and a bond between the body and
the mind, the distinction between "clas¬
sical" and "folk" music disappeared. And,
he added, "by discovering precisely how
music is created and appreciated in dif¬
ferent social and cultural contexts, and per¬
haps establishing that muslcality is a uni¬
versal, species-specific characteristic, we
can show that human beings are even more
remarkable than we presently believe them
to beand that the majority of us live far
below our potential."
An open, global, human approach to
musicall musiccombining the ear, the
eye and, above all, the heart, would do
away with this duality that locks us in our
solitude and prevents us from appreciating
cultures different from our own. Other peo¬
ples and cultures are an essential part of
our world, and if we cut ourselves off from
them we shall the poorer for It.

