Pathways to enlightenment
by Michael Pye
In Japan some pilgrimages involve a grand tour of almost a
hundred temples. Others take only a few minutes' walk.
Above, a pilgrim pathway lined
with sacred effigies at Tai Ryu
Ji temple at Anan, a city on the
east coast of Shikoku Island
(Tokushima prefecture).
Pilgrimages in Japan usually combine a
serious religious intention with a readi¬
ness to enjoy the journey as an excursion of
recreational value. This has been true at least
since the eighteenth century, when pilgrimage
became popular as one of the reasons for which
ordinary people could get permission to travel.
Since then it has usually been difficult to dis¬
tinguish between the touristic and the religious
aspects of pilgrimage. Or rather, we should say
that it is inappropriate to try. Leisure travel has
often simply been combined with religious
travel, with the more or less integrated pur
pose of maximizing individual and family wel¬
fare. It is therefore small wonder that nowadays
even the rather serious long-distance Buddhist
pilgrimages are performed with the help of a
comfortable coach and pre-booked hotel
accommodation.
In general two types of pilgrimage may be
distinguished in Japan. One is what may be
called "single-site" pilgrimage, that is, a reli¬
gious journey, for special reasons, to one specific
holy place. This is not different in principle
from pilgrimage the world over. The second is
only complete when a number of sites of equal
importance have been visited. In a strict sense
this type of pilgrimage appears to be special to
Japan.
Single-site pilgrimages in Japan arc important
in several religions. Historically significant was
the pilgrimage to Ise Jingu, the great Shinto 1 1

18
shrine to the sun-goddess Amaterasu. In the
eighteenth century this was immensely popular
and became something of a mass movement.
Today the visitors to Ise Jingu are again very
numerous, though they are relatively restrained,
being satisfied with a short prayer and a com¬
memorative photograph. The journey itself is
not difficult, though it is a little complicated
from major centres such as Tokyo or Osaka.
Other major Shinto shrines draw their own spe¬
cial public. Izumo is one of several shrines where
prayers for a good marriage are thought to be
specially effective.
Uawn on Mount Ontake
In some cases there is a kind of division of
labour according to region. Inari-sama, a divinity
of commerce, is visited at the Fushimi Inari
Shrine near Kyoto by residents of western Japan
and at Kasama Inari Shrine, north of Tokyo,
by those living on the eastern Kanto Plain. Since
visits to these shrines nevertheless involve con¬
siderable journeys they may be regarded as pil¬
grimages in a general sense. After all, it is usually
possible to say prayers to Inari-sama much
nearer to home, as many business areas or even
individual businesses have their own shrine to
this Shinto god or kami. Pilgrimage is the delib¬
erate traversing of a route to a sacred place
which lies outside one's normal habitat.
Buddhism in Japan is organized in several
different strands or denominations, and in most
cases it is the historic head temple which provides
the natural focus for pilgrimage. Some of these
temples are relatively difficult to reach. The
centre of Shingon Buddhism, for example, was
purposely set up by its founder Kukai on remote
Mount Koya. Nowadays the neighbourhood
can be reached by rail or road and there is a cable
car to master the difficult ascent to the top.
Other Buddhist denominations have cen¬
tres in urban areas. Shin Buddhist believers, for
example, flow regularly to the two great temples
in Kyoto, namely Higashi Honganji and Nishi
Honganji, which are both within walking dis¬
tance of the railway station. Visits to these tem¬
ples are not meant to be arduous. Rather they are
understood as an act of loyal devotion and grat¬
itude, for the believers rely on the saving power
of Amida Buddha rather than on any merit of
their own.
Another famous centre of Buddhist pil¬
grimage, an extensive temple area known as
Zenkoji, is jointly cared for by two Buddhist tra¬
ditions, the Tendai and the Jodo (Pure Land)
denominations. Situated high up at Nagano
City, the temple draws thousands of visitors
every year. Regardless of affiliation, many of
them descend into the dark space beneath the
main hall to circumambulate the huge base of the
Buddhist statue up above. Feeling their way
around the central pillars with their outstretched
right hands, they experience the total darkness
of death before being symbolically reborn when
they finally emerge into the light of day.
Some of the historic pilgrim sites ofJapan are
extremely mysterious and escape denomina¬
tional definition. A fine example of this is Mount
Ontake in Nagano Prefecture, a lightly active
volcano which tops 3,000 metres above sea level.
The local bus service stops well short of the
main part of the mountain, which is not served
by any mechanical transport at all.
Rearing up past the tree-line into the clouds,
the mountain itself is regarded as a kami, and
may therefore be worshipped "from afar", that is,
from a small shrine near the bottom. However,
many groups of religious believers prefer to make
the arduous climb to the top, where a Shinto-style
shrine is perched. This climb consists of a
scramble up a barely made up pathway, much of
which is simply a stream of irregular stones.
The horizontal distance is 3,000 metres, but
over this distance the pilgrim makes a steep
ascent of one thousand metres. A popular
approach is to climb up in the afternoon or
evening, stay overnight in a rough hostel and
worship the rising sun at crack of dawn. Many
of the pilgrims wear white clothing which is
similar to that worn on Buddhist pilgrim routes.
Those who climb Mount Ontake generally share
the idea that the arduousness of the climb, which
is undertaken by many people of quite advanced
age, will create merit and empower the rest of
one's life in a positive way.
The Saikoku 33 and the Shikoku 88
The second major type of pilgrimage in Japan is
the "circulatory" type. This is based on the idea
of visiting in sequence a series of, for example,
thirty-three different temples. The number
thirty-three arises because the compassionate
A pilgrim at prayer in Rei Zan
Ji Temple in the city of Naruto
(Tokushlma prefecture). In
foreground, a rosary and (right)
texts commemorating the
pilgrimage.

bodhisattva Kannon-sama (the equivalent of
Kuan Yin in Chinese and Avalokitesvara in San¬
skrit) is said to have appeared in thirty-three
different forms to bring salvation to living beings
in different states of karma.
The most famous group of thirty-three tem¬
ples dedicated to Kannon-sama is known as the
Saikoku Thirty-three. These are quite widely
spread out in westernJapan and require anything
up to two weeks to visit even using modern
transport. This pilgrimage is almost a thousand
years old and must have taken several weeks to
cover on foot in days gone by.
Imitations of the Saikoku pilgrimage have
been developed all over Japan. Well-known and
popular since the Edo period (1600-1868) are the
Bando pilgrimage, which is spread widely over
the Kanto plain around Tokyo, and the Chichibu
pilgrimage which is much more tightly arranged
around the little city of Chichibu to the north¬
west of Tokyo. Chichibu has thirty-four temples
to Kannon-sama, one more than usual, and this
means that a keen pilgrim may link the Saikoku,
Bando and Chichibu routes to complete a circuit
of one hundred in all.
The other dominant pilgrimage of this
second type is the Shikoku pilgrimage to eighty-
eight temples, Shikoku being Japan's fourth
largest island. At these temples the pilgrim first
visits the main hall, which may be dedicated to
any one of several different buddhas or bod-
hisattvas. A visit is then paid to a secondary
hall of worship devoted to Kobo Daishi, as the
founder of Shingon Buddhism, Kukai, was
posthumously named.
While the various regions of Japan are
known for their famous mountains and special
traditions, Shikoku is identified in people's
minds with this very ancient pilgrimage. It takes
about four weeks to complete visits to all the
temples, using modern transport. Since this is
arduous and costly, a number of much smaller
imitations have been set up.
The message on the pilgrim's straw hat
Some require one day's gentle walking. Others
require the circulation, usually clockwise, of a
series of eighty-eight stones or buddha-images,
each of which stands for one of the Shikoku
temples. This can be done in a few minutes.
Such miniatures are well understood, for the
abbreviation of long and difficult practices has
been an accepted principle of Japanese religion
for centuries. While the famous Buddhist saints
have often been known for their astonishing
ascetic feats, nobody is expected to do more
than they can manage.
In the Buddhist pilgrimages simple actions
are performed at each temple and are usually of
three kinds. First a slip of paper is deposited
which bears the pilgrim's name, address and
age, and states the prayers for which fulfilment
is sought. Such petitions include "safety at
home", "success in business" and "welfare of
ancestors". Second, brief prayer, or recitation of
a sutra a piece of scripture such as the Heart
Pilgrims make their way down
from the summit of Mount
Ontake, a holy place in Nagano
prefecture on Honshu island.
19

Feeling their way around the main hall of the
temple, the pilgrims experience the total darkness
of death before being symbolically reborn when
they finally emerge into the light of day.
Sutra or the Kannon Sutra is offered. In Shingon
Buddhism a mantra (shingon) a holy name or
word for inward meditation directed towards
the specific Buddha or bodishattva is often
included here. Third, a temple attendant sitting
patiently in a small office is requested to inscribe
the pilgrim's commemorative book, scroll or
shirt with red temple seals and fine calligraphy
in black ink.
This completed memento, for which a small
fee is paid at each temple, will ultimately be
proof that the pilgrimage has been completed as
a whole. It may be deposited at the last temple
as a final act of donation. In the case of a pilgrim's
shirt, an extra one bought for the purpose, it may
also be given to a sick or very old relative in
preparation for their deathbed. This dedication
shows that the pilgrimage mirrors in life our
ultimate passage through death, but in a manner
which opens this up to a Buddhist meaning.
Through pilgrimage, life comes to be under¬
stood as transitory, or as "empty", to use the
word which occurs in the Heart Sutra itself.
Circulatory Buddhist pilgrimage in Japan is
therefore full of different meanings. For some
The Shinto shrine of Fushimi who go round it is little more than a healthy
Inari, near Kyoto, is dedicated
to the goddess of rice.
leisure activity with simple participation in some
of the general forms ofJapanese religion. Trans¬
actions at the temples involve the payment of rel¬
atively small sums of money in exchange for
the expectation of benefits to oneself and one's
family in this life. These are known literally as
"this-worldly benefits" (genzeriyaku). For
others the meaning is more transformational.
Their experience is deepened as they reflect,
during the journey, on family hopes and grati¬
tude to ancestors, on the sequence of life and
death of which they themselves are a part.
In Buddhist understanding the ups and
downs of this life are put in a more relative per¬
spective. If travelling from one place to another
reflects the difficulties and efforts of life, the
completion of the pilgrimage makes the pas¬
sage through death seem possible. Paradoxi¬
cally this message is carried in a four-line verse
which appears on many a pilgrim's conical straw
hat. It runs in translation:
Through ignorance the three worlds are a
prison
Through enlightenment the ten directions
are empty
Originally there is neither east nor west
Where then shall be south and north?
In other words, the difficulty of finding the



pathways to a multitude of goals is a transient
matter indeed. The real goal is enlightenment,
beyond all thoughts of the points of the com¬
pass. Of this the pilgrim's own hat is a con¬
stant reminder.
20
MICHAEL PYE,
professor of religious studies at
Marburg University (Germany), is
a British specialist In Eastern
Asian Buddhism and
contemporary Japanese
religions. Among his published
works are The Macmillan
Dictionary of Religion
(Macmillan, London, 1993) and
Emerging from Meditation
(Duckworth, London, 1990).
