global )tV¡*e w
Population growth
and development
interview with Jean-Claude Chasteland
*»-*
Poverty, unemployment, social disintegration and other items on the agenda of this month's
Social Summit cannot be fully understood without reference to demography. Here Jean-Claude
Chasteland, a former director of the United Nations Population Division and currently scientific
advisor to the French National Institute for Demographic Studies in Paris, outlines his thinking
on demographic problems today.
The international community has been
concerned about population questions
since the 1950s. At that time world pop¬
ulation was two billion; today, it is 5.7
billion. How should we be reacting to this
situation?
The world population situation has
changed radically in the past forty years
and especially in the past twenty. Ofthe 5.7
billion people living on the planet, about
one billion live in the so-called developed
countries, where fertility is low. But people
should realize that only some 700 billion of
the other 4.7 billion live in countries where
fertility has not yet begun to fall. In most
Third World countries, fertility has defi¬
nitely declined. That was not the case in
1974. Today, the problems ofvery high fer¬
tility are centred geographically on sub¬
sanaran Africa, some regions of south¬
west Asia and one or two countries of
Central America.
In the other areas with a high popula¬
tion density, such as North Africa notably
Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco and above
all China, fertility has fallen very rapidly.
The case of China is particularly extraor¬
dinary. A developing country with 1.2 bil¬
lion inhabitants, representing one-quarter
of the population of the Third World and
one-fifth of total world population, has
managed to bring its birth rate down below
replacement level within a single genera¬
tion. Europe took more than a century to
reach that stage. This unprecedented
decline is an encouraging sign, especially
since other equally spectacular downturns
have been observed in a different polit¬
ical context, in the Republic of Korea and
in Thailand.
However, despite the fall in fertility,
the number of births is still rising in the
Third World and will continue to do so.
There are fewer births per couple but a
very large number ofcouples have already
reached the age of procreation. It is only
when their children in turn reach that age
that the number of births will fall in
absolute terms. There is a gap between
the time when fertility falls and that when
the number of births itself begins to
decline in absolute terms. Because ofthat
gap, population growth will peak early
next century and will only begin to fall
later on.
For the time being, rapid population
growth is continuing and all these people
must be properly provided with food, edu¬
cation and health care, and have access to
work and shelter. That calls for consider-
'Population growth will
peak early next century
and will only begin to fall
later on.'
able investment and poses problems in
terms of development.
Development has been described as the
most effective contraceptive. The specific
link between population and development
was to be examined at the Cairo Confer¬
ence in September 1994 and is also on the
agenda of the Social Development Summit.
The Cairo Conference was supposed to
be dedicated to the problems of popula¬
tion and development, but the develop¬
ment issue was to some extent sidelined.
The emphasis was placed on reproduc¬
tion and on the condition of women, all
this being seen in an individualist per¬
spective which disturbed a number ofpar¬
ticipating countries. Some twenty of these
countries expressed reservations about
the content of some paragraphs of the
action plan, whereas a paragraph in the
introduction stipulates that the recom¬
mendations are acceptable only to the
extent that they are not incompatible with
religious beliefs. This is a retrograde step in
comparison with the previous population
conferences held in Bucharest (1974) and
Mexico City (1984).
How do you explain this disagreement?
It must be accepted that the action plan
was inspired by a Northern approach. The
model of the condition ofwomen is based
on that ofwomen in Sweden rather than in
Saudi Arabia. Similarly, the countries of "W

the North tried to win acceptance for their
very open concepts of the family. Of course
this gave rise to keen controversy, under¬
lining the dichotomy between a religious
vision of the world and what I would term
a more modernist approach without reli¬
gious overtones.
Regardless of their theme, the big
United Nations conferences always reflect
the international atmosphere prevailing at
the time when they are held. The Cairo
Conference was the first population con¬
ference to be held since the collapse of
the Communist bloc. Previously, these
conferences were generally the setting for
East-West ideological confrontations in
which the South played whatever role it
could. With the disappearance of the "left
hemisphere" of international life, con¬
frontations have shifted onto religious
ground, with on one side the Vatican and
certain Islamic countries and on the other
industrialized nations which subscribe to
radically different concepts of the family,
the condition of women, abortion and
sexual life in general.
This being so, is it going to be possible to



^f harmonize population and development
The crowded streets of Sâo Paulo,
capital of Brazil's Sâo Paolo state.
strategies, as desired by the United
Nations?
It was probably the emphasis laid on
individual problems, leaving aside devel¬
opment issues, that weakened the
expected consensus on the programme
of the Cairo Conference. There are other
development problems as well as that of
the condition of women. I fail to see how
women's condition could be improved
independently of other development fac¬
tors such as water supplies, electrification
and employment. A woman is not really
free if she has to walk several miles every
day to fetch water, just as a family cannot
flourish in an environment ofpoverty.
Everybody agrees on the need for
development, regardless of their religious
let us not be pessimistic.
Extraordinary progress
has been made in the last
forty years, in the Third
World as elsewhere.'
or ideological convictions. Let us not be
pessimistic. Extraordinary progress has
been made in the last forty years, in the
Third World as elsewhere. Mortality in the
Third World has declined substantially,
because of education as well as vaccina¬
tion campaigns. In the 1950s the level of
illiteracy was very high as much as 90
per cent in the case ofwomen. Today, even
ifprogress has been uneven, we are dealing
with illiteracy rates of between 20 and 30
per cent.
On the whole, the 5.7 billion people
alive today lead far better lives than the 2
billion who lived in the 1950s. The proof is
that their life expectancy has risen. We
have made enormous progress. Now we
must maintain the pace of advance and
also adopt a cautious attitude towards
population growth and its potential
impact on the environment. We must also
avoid polarizing attention on some
aspects of the problem, such as pollution
or depletion of natural resources, for
which the critical thresholds are con¬
stantly being pushed back either by new
discoveries or by the appearance of sub¬
stitution products.
