listening
The eye and the ear
by Isabelle Leymarie
: -
Should music be
seen and not
heard?
I Music exists in every society, but the dif-
I ferent worlds of music seem divided
from one another by aesthetic standards, by
behaviour and by rules that are sometimes
antagonistic if not irreconcilable. Because of
these differences people sometimes tend to
make value judgements that are invalid because
they are based on a mistaken understanding of
what music is. The gap between western clas¬
sical music and black music is particularly
wide, and in these two cases perception, exe¬
cution and appreciation seem governed by dif¬
ferent criteria.
All human beingsand every civilization-
give precedence to one sense or combination
of senses in their perception of the world.
Whereas people in the West tend to attach
most importance to the eye, black societies
tend to give priority to the ear, leading to
emphasis on the physical and instinctive. Nicole
Ricaille, a French specialist in ear research,
notes that doctors can save some patients
from deep depression by treating the ear, which
is linked to the parasympathetic nervous
system. At night, while we sleep, the ear
recharges the body like a battery, and disorders
of the ear can lead to loss of energy. Auditory
curves based on tests and indicating the fre¬
quencies we hear and the balance between
our left and right ears can reveal details about
our psychological profile, certain physiological
malfunctions, and even, in some cases, about
our family background. During childhood we
may refuse to hear a scolding parent or an
unpleasant teacher by involuntarily "switching
off" the frequencies that correspond to these
disagreeable voices. These missing frequencies,
which played a protective role in childhood,
may lead in adult life to various kinds of disor¬
ders, even depression and suicidal tenden¬
cies. Nicole Ricaille suggests that in general low
frequencies may correspond to earthiness and
high frequencies to spirituality.
A cerebral approach
The West, which has a high regard for the plastic
arts and the written word (both of which are
eye-oriented), tends to approach music cere-
A traditional dance during a
festival in Cameroon.
brally, through the written score and by assessing
the performance, interpretation or "reading" of
a work in accordance with relatively strict, non-
physical conventions. It also promotes the devel¬
opment of discursive disciplines such as musi-
cology and the sociology and philosophy of music.
With their abundance of graphic symbols, some
contemporary musical scores increasingly
resemble works of visual art, and for some
modern composers the conceptualization of a
piece of music takes precedence over its musical
content and even over its emotional charge. The
West also makes a very strong distinction
between classical music (including religious
music), which is considered "serious", and pop
and folk music, which are not.
It also cuts off music from dance and the
spoken word. These are intermingled in black
societies, which are particularly partial to sung
stories (especially the Cameroonian mvet), sto¬
ries told by dance (the kont of Saint Lucia and 49

' < « '
Suriname), danced and sung sketches (the mum¬
ming of biblical or Shakespearean stories to an
instrumental, danced or sung accompaniment
that is found all over the English-speaking West
Indies) and transitions between spoken lan¬
guage and song (soul music and gospel).
The polyrhythmic body
While the West insists on fidelity to a fixed pat¬
tern, Africa and black America highlight the imag¬
ination and the unexpected in oratory, music
and dance. A West Indian choreographer told me
recently that some classical European dancers
A scene from a Salzburg production of
Rossini's comic opera La scala di seta
{The Silken Ladder, 1812).
with whom he had worked knew their steps by
heart and had impeccable technique but did not
dance with the music. It was, he explained, as if
dance and music were two separate areas and
that the dancers had to superimpose them, to
make one fit with the other.
Dancers to black music do not blindly follow
the beat. By dissociating different parts of
their bodies, they create their own polyrhythms,
rather like a musical instrument (tap dancing is
a famous example of the dancer's rhythmic
creativity). Sometimes, as with the Cuban rumba
brava or the Puerto Rican bomba, they impose
their own rhythms on the drummers, who tailor
their playing to the dancers. Billy Bergman, a
specialist in Caribbean music, writes as fol¬
lows about the Haitian voodoo dance known as
yanvalu: "The tempo, which overlays a slow
beat, gives a false impression of speed. It dic¬
tates a fluid dance in which the feet move fast,
the head slowly and the torso even more slowly.
This polyrhythmic dancing ¡s a key to all Latin-
Caribbean dancing. The dancers in these
regions never try to copy exactly the intrica¬
cies of the tempo. Their movements make their
own counterpoint to the texture of the rhythms.
People unaccustomed to African rhythms often
move their feet wildly to the complex beat of a
talking drum, as if they are in a western and an
outlaw is shooting at their feet. The Haitians, on
the other hand, know that fluid, contrasting
movements are more appropriate."
The ritual surrounding the performance of
western musica raised stage separating the
audience from the musicians, an imposing
baton-wielding conductor "interpreting" the
work, ceremonial clothing (tail coat, evening
gowns), the audience's reverent silence and
immobility during the concert, the salvos of
applause which end ithighlights its separation
from the listeners, who take no physical part in
the music and are not allowed to dance to it or
even externalize their feelings too visibly. This
alienation is accentuated by the glorification of
soloists and the adulation showered on opera
singers, show-biz personalities and classical
dancers, who live in a world beyond the reach
of ordinary mortals, a phenomenon that paral¬
lels the cult of the ego in the West.
(To be continued)
ISABELLE LEYMARIE
is a Franco-American musicologist.
