The stones of Byblos
by Sawsan Awada Jalu
Time and cultures have leftan indelible mark on Byblos in Lebanon,
trading centre of the ancient world and a cradle of the modern
alphabet
34
Above, the courtyard of the
temple of the obelisks.
Opposite page, the church of
St. John the Baptist, a fine
Romanesque building with
three apses (12th century).
The ancient Phoenician seaport of
Byblos (the biblical Gebal) on the
coast of Lebanon is reputed to be
the oldest continuously inhabited city in
the world, with a history stretching back
7,000 years to the time when the first com¬
munity of fishermen settled there.
Today the Lebanese town of Jbeil
stands on the site of Byblos, which in
ancient times maintained close ties with
the powerful empires of the Orient and
Mediterranean and was one of the great
cultural centres ofAntiquity.
The violence that has ravaged Lebanon
has left the narrow streets ofJbeil 's old souks
virtually unscathed. Here, as if reading a
book whose pages date back thousands of
years, the visitor can begin to retrace the
story of the serene city to which Yam, the
ancient god of the sea, was believed to have
given the fine natural harbour that for cen¬
turies brought it fame and fortune.
A mighty crusader castle
Avisittothe medieval town is the first stage
of a journey into the past of Byblos. The
decoration of the elegant baptistry of the
twelfth-century Romanesque church ofSt.
John the Baptist, once the cathedral of
Gibelet (as Byblos was called by the cru¬
saders), is a reminder that the citywas for a
time under the sway of the Genoese. Nearby,
a small Orthodox chapel with massive

Renan carried out the first excavations on
it in I860, but it was the work done by the
French archaeologist Pierre Montet
between 1920 and 1924 and continued by
his successor, Maurice Dunand, that did
most to reveal the secrets of the thousands
ofyears ofurban history that unfolded here.
Dunand discovered earthenware vases
ornamented with sea shell impressions,
dating from the sixth and fifth millennia,
great funeral urns and jars containing
grain, food, weapons and jewellery buried
between the aeneolithic dwellings. The
earliest shelters were simple cabins;
houses with stone walls were not built
until the end of the fourth millennium.
The first urban layout worthy of the
name multi-storied houses, a water
drainage system and ramparts reveals
the influence of Mesopotamia and Egypt.
Starting from the centre, a narrow, twisting
street ran through the town; little alleys
ran off it, winding their way between the
dwellings. A twenty-six-metre-long stretch
of the city wall has survived. Originally
supported on the inside by pillars four
metres square, it only enclosed the city
on the landward side. The rocky promon¬
tory on which Byblos was built provided a
natural rampart on the seaward side.
The land of the gods
The golden age ofByblos, in the third mil¬
lennium, is inseparable from its special
relationship with Egypt. There were
numerous temples in which the same gods
were worshipped as in Egypt. The
Pharaohs would send to Lebanon for
timber for their ships and the resinous
wood needed for mummification. In the
great temple dedicated to Baalat-Gebal
(remodelled and restored until Roman
times), vases bearing the names of
pharaohs have been found. They reveal
the veneration by the Egyptian sovereigns
of the "Lady of Byblos" (the Phoenician
goddess Astarte, paredros or secondary
deity of the god El, believed by the Phoeni¬
cians to have founded Byblos), who was
worshipped here for centuries.
The vestiges of another temple, in this
case dedicated to a male divinity, which
was destroyed by fire in 2150 B.C., and
those ofthe "Grand Residence", a vast and
luxurious villa, attest to the city's pros¬
perity at this period.
However, Dunand's major discoverywas
the "Temple of the Obelisks" (beginning of
the second millennium B.C.) and the
remarkable set of standing stones in its
courtyard. These small obelisks (between 0.5
and 2 metres high) symbolized the pres¬
ence of the faithful near their god, who was
himselfrepresented by an obelisk mounted
abutments dates back to the Byzantine era.
The imposing crusader castle whose
massive bulk dominates the town stands on
the site of a structure built by the Fatimids
of Egypt in the ninth century. Its stones
were taken from Phoenician and Roman
monuments. A fortress with vast vaulted
halls, it was begun in the twelfth century
and has been constanüy remodelled down
the centuries. From the top of the keep, the
visitor can look out over the vast archaeo¬
logical diggings of the ancient city, formed
by the superimposition and intertwining of
several ancient towns.
One of the first Mediterranean
cities
The site covers more than ten hectares.
The French writer and historian Ernest 35

on a pedestal. Perforated bronze, gold and
silver axes, daggers with repoussé gold scab¬
bards, bronze figurines covered in gold leaf
and other precious offerings unearthed in
the temple show the artistic refinement of
the local craftsmen.
Byblos was a great commercial and
artistic crossroads. Trade was conducted in
the east with Mesopotamia, in the south
with Egypt, in the north with the Hittite
empire and in the west, across the sea,
with the brilliant civilization of Crete.
Under Persian domination, Byblos
became a strategic point in the defence
system of the Persian empire in the eastern
Mediterranean. After its conquest by
Alexander the Great, it experienced a
period of enormous influence as a centre
for,the cult ofAdonis, a Phoenician divinity
who later entered the mythological pan¬
theon of Greece. In the Roman era, the
site was covered with temples and public
buildings. Excavation of a theatre dating
from the third century has revealed a beau¬
tiful mosaic floor.
The cradle of the Phoenician
alphabet and art
The territory of the Phoenicians was fertile
but too confined, and so they sought their
fortune elsewhere. The Phoenicians were
great navigators and shrewd merchants.
They are described in the Bible as talented
carpenters and ivory carvers who cut the
beams for the Temple ofSolomon and fash¬
ioned its chryselephantine decorations.
The earliest artistic evidence that has
survived consists of votive objects with
geometrical motifs of undeniable
orginality. They were discovered in the
ruins of the temple ofBaalat-Gebal. Highly
stylized zoomorphic vases strikingly cap¬
ture the movements and characteristic
postures of the animals they depict. If the
stylization is sometimes crude, it always
possesses the characteristic vividness of
Phoenician art which, as the French
archaeologist André Parrot has written,
was to become "an elegant and harmo¬
nious synthesis of all the finest and most
sophisticated features already achieved
by neighbouring civilizations".*
To meet the needs of merchants who
wanted contracts and invoices to be made
out rapidly, the scribes ofByblos ("byblos"
is the Greekword for papyrus, an Egyptian
productwhich reached Greece via the mer¬
chants of Byblos) developed a simplified
alphabet and writing system with just
twenty-two signs. Taken over by the Greeks
and Romans and propagated throughout
the Orient and Occident, this was the direct
ancestor of all the Western alphabets.
* André Parrot, Les Phéniciens, by A. Parrot,
M. Chehab and S. Moscati. Gallimard
publishers, Paris, 1975.
36
A CONTINUING
DIALOGUE
THE INTERNATIONAL CENTRE
FOR THE HUMANITIES
Since Byblos was for so long a meeting-point
between civilizations, the idea arose in the
1960s of creating an international centre
there to encourage a dialogue between faiths
and cultures. In 1974, Unesco gave its support
to this Lebanese project, which was included
in the programme of its Philosophy Division
under the name of the "International Centre
for the Humanities and Development at
Byblos". The Centre's aim was "to study con¬
temporary man, his relations with nature and
society and the problems posed by develop¬
ment in all its different aspects".
After sixteen years of war had ravaged
Lebanon, an international symposium was
held at Unesco Headquarters in February 1992
in order to relaunch the idea of the Centre.
One of the participants pointed out that
despite the long conflict, Lebanon had
remained a land of coexistence, mutual accep¬
tance and dialogue and that at Byblos in par¬
ticular different religious communities had
continued to coexist in a climate of uninter¬
rupted tolerance.
Byblos, the setting of a brilliant synthesis
of the arts of the great civilizations of Antiq¬
uity and the birthplace of modern principles of
written communication, may again become a
crossroads of encounters, exchanges and
creation.
S.A.J.

Above, vaults in the crusader castle, a
rectangular fortress begun early in the
12th century and remodelled several times
later.
Top, the 3rd-century Roman amphitheatre
with its mosaic floor.
Left, low walls and colonnades on the site
of ancient Byblos.
SAWSAN AWAOA JALU
is the cultural attachée with the Lebanese
permanent delegation to Unesco.
7,000 YEARS OF HISTORY
5000 B.C.: First human settlement on
the western part of the promontory.
3200 B.C.: Construction of stone houses
3000-2800 B.C.: Incipient urban orga¬
nization on the site. Occupation of the
entire promontory, construction of a ram¬
part and establishment of a water
drainage system. Byblos becomes a
centre for meetings and trade between
the great civilizations of Egypt and
Mesopotamia.
c. 2150 B.C.: The Amorites destroy
Byblos by fire.
c. 1950 B.C.: The city, temples and ram¬
parts are rebuilt and ties with Egypt are
restored. Trading activities extend as
far afield as the Caucasus and Crete.
1725 B.C.: The Hyksos invade Egypt and
the development of Byblos is interrupted.
1580 B.C.: Egypt expels the Hyksos and
makes Phoenicia its protectorate, thus
sheltering Phoenician civilization from
the invasions of the Mitannians and later
of the Hittites. Trade activities are
resumed in Byblos and flourish thanks to
the invention of the alphabetic system.
1200 B.C.: The power of Egypt wanes.
The region is threatened by the peoples
of the sea, and Tyr gains supremacy over
all the other Phoenician cities.
725 B.C.: Assyrian domination
612 B.C.: Babylonian domination
539 B.C.: Persian domination
332 B.C.: Hellenistic domination
63 B.C.: Roman domination
Despite these successive dominations,
Byblos experiences relative economic
prosperity. Above all, it is one of the
main religious centres of the Orient
(notably through the cult of Adonis). Its
sanctuaries are considered to have a
special aura and its religious festivals
attract great crowds.
638: At the time of the Muslim con¬
quest, the importance of Byblos declines.
1104: The town is captured by the cru¬
sader Raymond de Saint-Gilles. After
becoming the lordship of Gibelet, it is
entrusted to the Embriaco family of
Genoa in 1109. The era of the crusades
restores wealth and trade to Byblos.
1187: Saladin I recaptures Byblos, dis¬
mantles the crusader castle and razes
the ramparts.
1199: The city is recaptured by the
Franks.
1266: Byblos ceases to play a leading
role in history and becomes the peaceful
fishing port that it is today.
1960: Ratification by Lebanon of The
Hague Convention (Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the
Event of Armed Conflict).
1984: Byblos, with Anjar, Baalbek and
Tyr, is included on Unesco's World Her¬
itage List.
1993: Application for inclusion of the
Lebanese World Heritage sites on the
"International Register of Cultural Prop¬
erty under Special Protection" of The
Hague Convention. 37
