Mexican melodrama
Jose Carlos Avella
Nostalgia for traditional
melodrama is having surprising
effects on Mexican cinema today
MARIA ROJO JOSE ALONSO
1^,-^.L.í JAIME HUMBERTO HERMOSIILO
Right, María Rojo and José Alonso in Jaime
Humberto Hermosillo's La Tarea (Homework,
Mexico, 1990). Above, a poster for the film.
Jaime Humberto Hermosillo's film La
Tarea (1990, Homework) is a good
starting point for a look at modern
Mexican cinema. The viewer's first
reaction is whether the film really is
"cinema": it consists of a single shot from an
immobile camera that films two characters
who talk incessantly and sometimes disap¬
pear off-screen. It seems more like a piece of
theatre or television than a motion picture.
However, as a result of the skilful use of a
simple set and a dramatic construction that
fits into the solid tradition of studio filming,
the viewer soon realizes that the immobility
is deceptive and that the film has a dynamic of
its own.
The set consists of an apartment with cor¬
ridors, a front hall and a bathroom adjacent
to the room we see through the camera's eye.
Off screen but integrated into the action, the
viewer imagines the existence of a half-open
window through which shadows and noises
sometimes penetrate from the street outside.
In other words, the setting is not limited to
what can be seen on the screen. The outside
world has not disappeared.
The viewer is immediately presented with a
conundrum: why is the camera in this specific

the remake
spot? At the start of the film we see a woman
put a video camera under the table, facing the
entrance door. We don't know why she does
this, but it is a way of getting us interested in
what she is up to. We have been let into what is
clearly a secret to the man who now enters the
room and is invited by the woman to sit down
on the carpet. We smile at her efforts to keep
the man in the frame and at the man's awkward
movements as he tries to remain natural. Grad¬
ually we become accomplices in a game between
the two characters, each of whom seems to be
hiding something from the other.
Part of the secret is revealed about halfway
through the story. Virginia, a student of
cinema, is making a film with her former
boyfriend, Marcelo, who doesn't know what
is going on. She has hidden the camera under
the table to comply with her teacher's insis¬
tence that she should make a film using a
single camera angle, cinéma-vérité style. As the
subject of her film, she has decided to get
Marcelo to talk about the problems in his
love-life. When he notices the camera, he loses
his temper and storms off. But there is a
twist in the story. Marcelo comes back. He
has decided to play himself and to act as if he
does not know he is being filmed.
Dolores del Rio
and Pedro Armendariz
in a scene from
Emilio Fernandez's
María Candelaria
(Mexico, 1943), a
melodramatic treatment
of peasant life.
1

Jorge Fons 's El callejón
de los milagros (Mexico,
1994), based onJlíidag
Alley, a novel by the
Egyptian writer Naguib
Mahfuz.
Yet it is only at the end that the whole
truth comes out. Virginia's real name is not
Virginia, but Maria. Marcelo is actually José,
her husband, who is helping her make a film
for her cinema class.
Eloquent tears The question raised
by this film and what interests me here is
that cinema is not what is seen but the way
in which it is seen. The viewer discovers the
point of view of the person behind the
camera, i.e. either the director or an invented
character. The showing of a film is an occa¬
sion in space and time for an encounter
between the perspectives of the director and
the viewer.
La Tarea is entirely based on this rela¬
tionship. The camera is in fact caricaturing
the point of view of a specific viewer in the
history of the Latin American cinema, the
person who saw the melodramas made by
Mexican film-makers between the mid-1930s
and the late 1950s. These melodramas
brought to the screen a popular narrative
style that Mexicans have always loved and
that is reflected in political cartoons in the
newspapers, in radio serials, popular songs
and music, in national holidays such as 2
November (the day of the dead) and in the
grandiose tragic style of mural paintings. A
good story has to be a tear-jerker.
The major studios (where the Mexican
film industry was born) were ideal places for
making these film melodramas. There it was
possible to create the kind of private world,
tenuously connected with what is going on
outside, that is evoked by the small room in
La Tarea. In this magical setting demigods,
prisoners of a tragic destiny, suffer life's mis¬
fortunes on behalf of the viewer, who
watches what happens on screen like Her¬
mosillo's watching camera, without really
sharing in the characters' suffering. The
viewer is present at a ritual in which crying
becomes a pleasure.
The road to realism Then, in the
early 1960s, Mexican cinema changed.
Under the influence of television news, doc¬
umentary films and Italian neorealism, film¬
makers tried hard to cut loose from the nar¬
rative style of the studios. New ways of
storytelling appeared. Film-makers went out
into the streets with hand-held cameras, to
film what they saw, to look critically at
social problems and transmit images from
real life. All subjects, even non-realistic ones,
were treated in documentary style. Shooting
was done out of doors, in daylight.
But films made in this period are far
from escaping the "grammar" of studio
film-making, which abandons the strait-
jacket of visible reality for the realm of the
imagination. Films may have been shot in
natural settings, but the framing and the
photography in black and white (softening
lines with filters) tended to produce images
that were closer to dreams than reality.
Today we are witnessing a return to Mex¬
ican melodrama but in a revamped form
enriched by new cinema languages that have
appeared in Latin America since the 1960s.



Mexican film-makers are analysing melodrama
of the 1940s and 1950s with eyes that have

Arturo Ripstein's
La reina de la noche
("The Queen of the
Night", Mexico, 1994).
seen militant films, Brazilian Cinema novo,
Argentine Tercer cine, Cuban Cine imper¬
fecto and Bolivian Cine junto alpueblo.
Old Wine in new bottles Melo¬
drama is blooming again. In Alfonso
Arau's Como Agua Para Chocolate (1991,
Like Waterfor Chocolate), young Tita cannot
marry Pedro because tradition says that she
must stay at home and look after her mother,
and so Pedro marries Tita's sister in order to
be near his beloved. In Dana Rotberg's film
Angel de Fuego (1992, Angel of Fire), set in
a circus, a father and his daughter hide their
incestuous love. The narrative style has
changed radically, however. Francisco Athié's
Lolo (1993), the story of young working-class
children on the fringes of society, is a blend of
classic Mexican melodrama and Italian neore¬
alism. Fernando Sariñana's Hasta Morir (1994,
To the Death) adopts an expressionist
approach to a similar theme.
This, then, is no return to past forms but a
sort of constructive, creative criticism of the
old melodramatic principle through films that
differ widely in style and inspiration. Such
films include documentaries like Arturo Rip¬
stein's Principio y fin (1993, "Beginning and
End"); science fiction like Guillermo del
Toro's Cronos (1993); political essays with
militant overtones like Jorge Fons's Rojo
amanecer (1989, Red Dawn) and El Callejón
de los Milagros (1994, "Miracle Lane"); and
cartoons like Carlos Carrera's El Héroe (1994,
"The Hero") in which a young woman who
wants to kill herself pretends that the man
who saves her has attacked her; when he is in
the hands of the police, she calmly prepares
again to take her life. Other examples are come¬
dies like Jaime Humberto Hermosillo's La
Tarea described above and Intimidades en un
Cuarto de Baño (1990, Intimacy in a Bath¬
room). The melodramatic structure, a distinc¬
tive way of looking at the world, varies from
one narrative style to another.
"We didn't do it on purpose," said
Arturo Ripstein about his latest film. "We
didn't say, 'Now we're going to make a
melodrama', as if we had to, but wc are all
children of our time and place, and we all
belong to a generation which was brought
up on and fed by the cinema and whose lives
are shaped by cinematographic images."
These films are indeed the fruit of almost
half a century of Latin American cinema.
This reworking of studio melodrama
reflects the feeling, very strongly held in
Latin America, that political, economic and
cultural life is melodramatic by nature. The
current state of the cinema is ample proof of
this. It seems clear that the market for films
is increasingly restricted to products from
the major audiovisual industries, to films
that resemble video games and vice versa. The
production and above all the distribution of
our films meet so many obstacles that we
fear we may, tragically, become foreigners in
our own land. In such circumstances a return
to melodrama also reflects a desire to make
closer contact with the public by using a
familiar, albeit reworked, language. It speaks
of a certain nostalgia for the days when the
Mexican cinema felt at home in Mexico and
elsewhere in Latin America.
José Carlos Avellar,
Brazilian cinema
historian and critic, is
secretary of the
International Federation
of the Cinematographic
Press for Latin America.
He is a board member of
Riofilme, a Brazilian film
distribution company.
Among his published
works are Le Cinéma
brésilien ("The Brazilian
Cinema", Centre
Georges Pompidou,
Paris, 1987).
M
