INTERVIEW
THE ABBE
PIERRE
talks to Martine Leca



Von. \\ lio thought yourself superfluous, aro needed.
The Abbé Pierre (a pseudonym
adopted in 1942 by Henri Grouès,
born in Lyons, France, in 1912)
has championed the cause of the
poor and dispossessed for almost
half a century. He is internationally
known for his work with Emmaus,
the charitable association which
he founded in 1949 and which now
has branches in many parts of the
world. In 1991 he was awarded
the Balzan prize for humanity,
peace and brotherhood between
peoples. Among his published
works are Emmaus ou venger
l'homme (conversations with
Bernard Lechevallier, Livre de
Poche, Paris, 1987), a liturgical
play, Le mystère de la joie (1985),
Mes images de bonheur, de
misère, d'amour (Text by Pierre
Lunel, photos by the Abbé Pierre,
Fixot, Paris, 1994) and Testament
(Bayard, Paris, 1994). Here he
looks back over his life and work.
You started out as a monk. How did you
come to be the spokesman of the poor,
travelling round the world and meeting
heads of state? How did you come to make
the change from contemplation to action?
When I was eighteen I told my parents I
wanted to become a novice in the
Capuchins, the strictest branch of the Fran¬
ciscan Order. I came from a wealthy family.
I made over my share of the estate to various
charities. My family background was deeply
Christian. My father, unbeknown even to
his close relatives and friends and although
he was in poor health, used to spend his
Sundays, with a small group of friends,
looking after vagrants. When I was fifteen
or so I went through a period of doubt that
lasted for about two years and the pangs of
which were aggravated by a long illness.
Illness has always brought me nearer to a
state of grace. The process of my transfor¬
mation came to a head with my discovery of
St. Francis of Assisi during a pilgrimage I
went on with a scout troop from my school.
Sensing what was to be the characteristic
feature of my whole existence, they gave
me the "jungle name" of "Thoughtful
Beaver" he who builds and meditates
and my life has indeed been one long ven¬
ture of thinking and building.
My encounter with St. Francis was a
defining moment. One night in Assisi,
during Easter week, feeling unwell and
unable to sleep I went out into the streets of
the old town and walked as far as the foot
of the ruined fortress. It was five in the
morning and it was wonderful. It was
springtime, the birds' dawn chorus was
beginning and all the bells of the town
started to ring out the angélus. As the sun
rose I jotted down on a piece of paper
which I still have the feelings that fdled
my heart: "Oh the bells! To die on a
morning of bells. To die on one of those
mornings when the whole earth confesses
the fullness of Love".
That afternoon, my friends and I went
on muleback to what are known as the
prisons, the caves where St. Francis used
to go to meditate. When we returned to
Assisi I knelt and kissed the ground because
back there two things had become power¬
fully evident to me: firstly, that worship
leads to universal communion with
humanity; and secondly, that it provides an
extraordinarily effective preparation for
action, as we can see from the life of St.
Francis, a life spent in contemplation and
at the same time in meeting with princes
and telling them the truths of the Gospel.
Those seven years in the cloister were the
key to my life. Providence was well aware
what lay ahead for me, and my Capuchin
training was to prepare me for it.
What is the life of a Capuchin monk
like?
The studies are rudimentary. In my
time it's not like that any longer we were
awake every night from midnight to two
o'clock. We spent the first hour chanting in
two choirs and the second in pure,

INTERVIEW WITH THE ABBE PIERRE
The truc driving force, the
one that makes things
move forward, is striving
towards Unity, not greed.
unadorned worship, in the dark, without
even a reading to help us. Seven years of
.. such a ritual when you are a young man
leaves a mark upon you like that of a seal in
wax. Without experiencing that extreme,
almost excessive way of life, that training in
worship and in the love of one's neighbour,
I would not have had the strength required
to set up Emmaus and to wage a forty-year
combat. Echoing Archimedes' words, "Give
me but one firm spot on which to stand and
I will move the Earth", the Pope declared
that love is a lever that can move the Earth.
I owe that strength to my Capuchin
brothers. I had to leave in 1938 because of
illness and I was ordained a priest, but I
remained in touch with Franciscan spiri¬
tuality through what is known as the third
order of St. Francis of Assisi. Then war
broke out and I was called up.
You were thrown into active life and
joined the Resistance . . .
I started off as a non-commissioned
officer in the Alps and in Alsace, then, after
I had had diphtheria, I worked as a chap¬
lain in the Isère département. During the
years when the Resistance was under¬
ground, from 1942 to 1944, 1 helped to set
up maquis groups in the Chartreuse and
Vercors regions. While I was a chaplain in
the cathedral of Grenoble, a tragedy
occurred that triggered off everything I
have done since then: the round-up of Jews
at the Vélodrome d'hiver cycle track in
Paris. The French police and gendarmes, in
many cases shamefacedly and reluctantly of
course, carried out the order they received
from the minister responsible for Jewish
affairs in the Vichy government to round up
the Jewish families in the unoccupied zone.
One day some Jewish refugees came to me,
as a man of God, asking for shelter, and I
hid them. Then I learned how to forge iden¬
tity papers and finally, as the arrests became
more frequent, I smuggled Jews out of the
_ country, into Switzerland and Spain, with
O the help of mountain guides.
After the war, prompted by the Car¬
dinal Archbishop of Paris, I entered Par¬
liament so that a priest could speak out
for the poor, as canon law at that time still
permitted. This strengthened me in my
task. I had to plead the cause of society's
outcasts before the multitude and before
the authorities. I resigned my seat in 1951.
It was at that time you founded
Emmaus. Why did you choose that name?
It stands for hope. I rented a derelict
house in Neuilly-Plaisance, in the eastern
suburbs of Paris, and started "beavering"
away, doing up a building which soon
turned out to be too big. So I turned it into
a youth hostel. The young people who came
to it twenty-year-olds, English, Italian,
German, French, some of them orphans of
the war in which their fathers had killed
each other were sad, their disgust with
life increased by the recent discovery of the
horror of the concentration camps.
One day I was re-reading St. Luke's
Gospel, the part where, on the third day
after Jesus' death, the disciples were making
their way towards the village of Emmaus
you remember? They were discussing what
had happened. They were downcast, dis¬
appointed, because Jesus had been
announced as a prophet, come to set them
free, but nothing had happened. As they
walked, Jesus drew near and went with
them but they did not recognize him. It was
only when he was at table with them and
took bread, blessed it, broke it and gave it
to them that their eyes were opened. After¬
wards, they spoke those favourite words
of mine: "Did not our heart burn within
us, while he talked with us by the way?" So
I took a board, wrote "Emmaus" on it and
hung it on the door of the house, and I gave
all those young people this explanation:
"You must believe that a good, successful life
entails disillusion but also enthusiasm. It
first of all entails that honesty which can lose
its illusions with a good grace, for we come
into the world filled with illusions but we
shed them as we grow so as to arrive at the
truth, and we can only succeed by letting go
of them. The disciples, who had lost hope,
recovered their enthusiasm which does
not mean elation but, in the Greek,
becoming one with the Eternal, which is
Love and went off to proclaim the good
news to the apostles, saying that they had
seen the risen Christ."
That was how Emmaus became a move¬
ment giving refuge to those whom life has
treated roughly. One of the first was a man
called Georges who had tried to commit
suicide. He had served twenty years in a
penal colony for killing his father and had
been pardoned after saving someone in a
fire at the prison, but when he came back
he found his wife with another man and
other children. In desperation he tried to
kill himself. Somebody sent for me and I lis¬
tened to him, and I said to him, without
thinking, instinctively it was the Spirit
of God making me its instrument:
"Georges, you want to die, you say you
are going to try to commit suicide again.
Before you kill yourself, wouldn't you like
to come and give me a hand to finish these
houses for families in need?"
The question I asked Georges has now
become a general one You, who thought
you were superfluous, who thought there
was no place for you in society, not only
are you not superfluous, you are needed
and so those who were beggars become
givers. Since those days the movement has
gone on growing as poverty has spread.
Emmaus is still not sufficiently active in
Africa, however.
In fact, branches of Emmaus now exist
on five continents. This "uprising of good¬
ness" goes back to 1954, when you became
known in France as "God's rebel" and the
inventor of the "licence to live" . . .
In the winter of 1954, which was excep¬
tionally hard all over Europe, people were
dying of cold in the streets. No provision
had been made to help them. My friends
and I went out every night to rescue the
homeless, but the friends who helped me at
night had to work in the daytime as well, to
earn a living and to feed the poor. The
task was becoming superhuman, so I
wanted to make an appeal on the radio.
When a certain broadcaster was being eva¬
sive, one of my friends said to him: "Just
Anger is my way of
expressing my love. We
need to combat the
indifference of the
authorities. I shout out
loud to awaken the crowd.

imagine yourself, in the warmth of your
home and with your family around you,
opening the paper at breakfast tomorrow
and learning that more people had been
picked up dead off the streets in the night
you must broadcast this appeal."
The broadcaster gave in, the unprece¬
dented call went out, and it had an extra¬
ordinary impact throughout France. Gifts
in cash and in kind, from rich and poor
alike, came in from all over the country,
and Parliament, which had previously
refused to allocate funds from the public
works budget for what I called "emergency
housing", accepted my request. That
appeal also brought to light the extent of
poverty in France. But having become
"God's rebel" I was a nuisance, as St.
Francis was for the prelates of the Holy
Mother Church. The Minister of the Inte¬
rior said they must strike at the head of the
movement, but the Chief of Police, who
was a secret sympathizer of ours, stood
his ground and said the Abbé Pierre should
be left alone. Why? Because I was a priest,
I had been a member of Parliament, I had
my wartime decorations and I had the
silent support of the underprivileged.
Emmaus now has branches in thirty-
five countries, and I have travelled all round
the world spreading the word. From 1958 to
1965, 1 made many journeys and gave many
lectures in support of the communities that
were coming into existence in Lebanon, in
Scandinavia, South America, Asia and
Africa. Emmaus divides the world into nine
regions, each ofwhich appoints a number of
officers who make up the Administrative
Committee, which in its turn appoints a
ten-member Executive Committee. The
presidency of the international movement is
based in the Paris suburb of Alfortville.
Another thing that has contributed greatly
to the spread of Emmaus are the interna¬
tional camps we have set up, where young
people from all over the world come and
work together for the poor. These volunteers
undertake to devote a major part of their
time, or even their whole Uves, to this cause.
Is Emmaus a specifically religious
movement?
No. Although it was founded by a
Catholic priest and takes its name from
the Gospel, it is non-denominational and
non-political.
Poverty is being constantly aggravated
by the population explosion, the misman¬
agement of resources and the growing
gap between North and South. What role
does Emmaus play in combating these
problems?
It plays not one but two roles. The first
is to stand up to the authorities and remind
them of their basic duties. We have to do
this in order to establish peace on earth and
to be of service, above all, to those who
suffer most, the weakest and the smallest;
and also in order to establish an order in
the world, in a context where the youth of
today are the first generation to have a
planet-wide awareness, where any event,
anywhere in the world, has repercussions
everywhere on account of the speed of
communication.
The second role derives from the fact
that living in the Emmaus communities are
4,000 people who have taken some hard
knocks in life and who are motivated by the
desire not to make more money, but to
work in order to give. They have not caught
the profit disease. How have we fed these
4,000 people, paid their social security
contributions and paid for holidays for
them? By using what the consumer society
throws away, saving things to save people.
We were ecologists before the letter. The
French town of Beaune, for example, asked
us to send a team to tackle the problem of
unauthorized rubbish dumping.
The Abbé Pierre in a Paris building occupied
by homeless squatters (1994).
The poor nowadays can be said to have
a certain power vis-à-vis the democracies.
They are a danger; you compare them to
human time-bombs.
There has been a turning point in human
history. I see the first sign of it in the guffaw
let out by Nasser, the head of a nation,
Egypt, that in the 1950s did not carry much
weight in the international arena. In 1956,
when he nationalized the Suez Canal and
blocked access to it, he brought the two
great nations Britain and France to their
knees. We have entered the age of the impo¬
tence of the strong and the power of the
weak, although the power of the latter is
only relative: it can make the mighty bow
down but can hardly manage the electrifi¬
cation of a country.
The numbers of the dispossessed in
the so-called developed countries are
growing. Does the fault lie with capitalism,
which, necessary though it may be, has
been led astray by the profit motive?
Capitalism may be said to be necessary, _
since even communism was no more than /

INTERVIEW WITH THE ABBE PIERRE
state capitalism. A balance needs to be
struck between private capitalism and a
partially state-run capitalism, which
restores to citizens, in the form of social
security, family allowances and other safe¬
guards, what has been taken away from
them. This reminds me of the last conver¬
sation between Roosevelt and Stalin. The
American President said that their two
countries had got along pretty well in the
war but that the war would soon be over
and what would happen then? Stalin is
said to have replied: "The only problem is
whether our successors will be intelligent
enough to avoid the worst, I mean using
atomic weapons. But eventually the defects
of capitalism will get mixed up with those of
collectivism. People will no longer stand for
being deprived of their freedom, and the
time will come when your sons will marry
our daughters."
You have called for the establishment
of a world government. Isn't that Utopian?
Utopias are the carthorses that have
pulled history along. It's true that
humanity has seen a succession of crises,
wars and atrocities, but this negative side
is offset by advances in technology and
cultural exchanges. Despite atrocities such
as those in Rwanda, humanity is advancing
towards the One, towards Unity, as my
friend the French palaeontologist and
philosopher Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
predicted it would. The true driving force,
the one that makes things move forward, is
this striving towards Unity, not greed. The
One is not the uniformity into which all
individuality fades but that which brings
people together on the mountain top, what¬
ever different paths they take to reach it.
Together with the homeless, you take
over vacant properties, you go on hunger
strike, you camp out in front of government
offices. Is this your way of putting your faith
into practice?
Anger is my way of expressing my love.
We need to combat the indifference of the
authorities. I yell out loud to awaken the
crowd. It's not enough to attend church
and pray every Sunday; you have to act.
Many of the faithful devote themselves to
charitable work. Poverty is there on our
doorstep. That was why I invented the
"licence to live", emphasizing that it was
not a question of charity but of justice.
Because of all this, I have had to be a one-
0 man band lawyer, diplomat, counsellor,
Ö psychologist, trustee in short a man of
When they are assailed by
despair, young people
should let universal
concerns into their lives.
Then they will find their
place in society, where a
state of emergency has
been declared.
action and a darling of the media because
on a world-wide scale journalists have an
essential role of informing, warning and
querying, three vital functions in a society
that harbours exclusion, despair, disori¬
entation and hopelessness. People are
needed to take up the challenge, strong
people, who proclaim the truth, throw it in
people's faces, and do what they can with
their own two hands.
What's more, at the time when our
"illegal" activities were at their height, I
always pointed out that illegality is not
moving into empty premises that could
provide shelter for a woman and children.
What is illegal is the law itself when it fails
to provide everyone with the bare necessi¬
ties food, lodging, work and health
care as human rights, at present flouted,
require. The law in such cases is unjust,
and to observe it is unjust: it must be
changed.
There is also the grave problem of the
unemployed with time on their hands, time
that they should use creatively, not destruc¬
tively.
It is a characteristic of the times we live
in that we are a society foredoomed to
having time on our hands, a civilization
living in the concrete jungle, not the forest,
where the prospects for survival are dif¬
ferent and in the long term capable of
improvement. This is a new kind of time,
which should be made life-enhancing, not
degrading. The French socialist leader
Léon Blum was ridiculed when he pro¬
posed a "Ministry of Leisure", but he was
ahead of his time. There are three million
unemployed in France, not counting those
who have taken early retirement and are
fully able-bodied, in full possession of their
skills but unable to use them. There is an
imperative need to invent life-enhancing
ways of using this spare time, otherwise a
whole segment of our society is in danger of
sliding into drug abuse, drink and delin¬
quency time to help others, time for play
and sport, for instance, not to produce
champions earning fabulous sums of money
but for the joy of the game, of exercising the
body.
Do you have a message of hope for
young people?
Hope is not a matter of age. The main
thing is to be young at heart, to still feel
enthusiasm for great causes, even at eighty-
two. When they are assailed by despair,
young people should let universal concerns
into their lives. Then they will find their
place in our society, a society in which a
state of emergency has been declared. The
lack of a cause to fight for, the desire to live
in an artificial environment, being drawn
into the spiral of consumption, the way
people are forgetting how to be what I call
"extremists in the search for light" all
these things have created the present cli¬
mate of despondency. The coming genera¬
tion must escape from it: this, the first
planet-wide generation, must be mobilized
to fight the only worthwhile war, a counter¬
attack on poverty, which has declared war
on the whole world. These young people
have the good fortune to be mobilized for
the finest of all victories.
What I would say to the young men
and women who are beset by hopelessness
and doubt is that they should go and see
what is being done on the ground to fight
poverty, not like going to the zoo but to
take action, to open their hearts and their
consciences. After this kind of voluntary
service, they will find job openings in
humanitarian work. There is a combat to
be waged against the forces of evil, those
life-denying forces that prevent people
achieving fulfilment and pitch them into
suicidal behaviour. Young people must
remember three things: they are fore¬
doomed to know everything, foredoomed to
new ways of sharing and foredoomed to
have time on their hands, time they must
transform from idleness into creative
activity. It is in these three lines of force
that their hope lies.
MARTINE LECA
is a French writer and journalist.
