Zimbabwe: The social
roots of Aids
Above, a family of gold-panners
in Zimbabwe. The father, 36,
has Aids. The mother, 34, is
HIV-positive. They have six
children.
by Mary Bassett
Epidemics depend not only on
infectious agents but on the social
conditions that sustain their spread
I In Zimbabwe, contemporary sexual cul-
I ture has been shaped largely by the twin
legacies of traditional patriarchal values and
colonial labour relations, which entrenched the
migrant labour system and made separation of
men from their wives a way of life. Migrant
labour dates to the expropriation of African
lands at the end of the nineteenth century.
Landless and forced to pay taxes in cash,
African men left their homes and families for
employment on big farms, in mines and in
towns. Women and children stayed behind in the
overcrowded Tribal Trust Lands, to which the
African population was now consigned. Here
they survived as subsistence farmers on poor
land, assisted by money sent home by their
men. This system remains intact and continues
to affect many families. Perhaps one-third to
one-half of rural households in Zimbabwe sur¬
vive with this "split family" strategy.
Some women also migrated to meet the need
for sexual services created by the artificial set¬
tlement of men without their families. Men
entered into new sexual relationships in town.
Hitherto, in traditional society, a man could
have more than one wife if his wealth permitted.
"Multi-partnering", which has become a fea¬
ture of life for all men, carries little long-term
commitment or financial responsibility.
In a 1987 study of Harare factory workers, we
found that married men whether living with a
wife or not were actually more likely to pay for
sex than single men. The same study showed that
four-fifths of married men had girlfriends in addi¬
tion to their wives. True, there are men who have
sex only with their wives and men who are single
and celibate; they are, however, the minority. Not
surprisingly this configuration of sexual relation¬
ships has led to rampant spread of sexually trans¬
mitted diseases (STDs). For many years sexually
transmitted diseases were the leading cause of the
out-patient attendance for both men and women
in urban areas. Aids is now the leading cause of
adult death in the capital city of Harare, accounting
for nearly one-quarter of deaths. 17

Wc'omen and HIV
Where heterosexual transmission is the most
common way of acquiring HIV, the status of
women has a clear bearing on risk. Much has
been written on women and Aids, often focusing


on prostitutes. Indeed, prostitutes have been
portrayed as the vector of the African Aids epi¬
demic. But very little has been written about
wives, and virtually nothing about the relation¬
ships between these often commingled groups.
The number of women who sell or barter sex
at one time or another is probably larger than is
generally thought. Some of the survey estimates
are so high (ranging up to 10 per cent) that Zim¬
babwean researchers find them unbelievable.
Very often the women involved are divorced
mothers who have children to support, and for
whom remarriage is an unlikely prospect. Added
to these women are growing numbers of young
rural women who flee deepening poverty and
recurrent drought in a bid to support their fam¬
ilies. Some sell single sex encounters. Probably
more common are relationships of varying
degrees of permanence which include domestic
and sexual services.
Despite the emphasis on women who sell
sex, however, it is critical to stress that these
women are a minority of women with HIV. In
fact the majority of women infected with HIV
are monogamous, married women. Of the 6,500
women who tested positive at the National
Public Health Laboratory in 1992, over 50 per
cent were married.
Married women, however, have been
neglected in both research and Aids-preven¬
tion programmes. Warnings to avoid multiple
partners have little relevance to these women.
Their husbands are the ones who are likely to
have multiple partners. It is very common to
hear women talk with a combination of exas¬
peration, amusement and irritation about how
impossible it is for their husbands to maintain an
exclusive relationship with a marriage partner.
Marriage is a vehicle for a woman's sense of
selfhood. To be a person, for both men and
women, involves entering the cosmology of ances¬
tors. In line with patrilineal inheritance, this
process must take place within the male lineage.
In Matabeleland, a
grandmother brings up her
grandchildren orphaned by Aids. Not having a husband has spiritual as well as
material significance. Furthermore, women
without men face a host of economic and social
disadvantages. Economic dependence is perpetu¬
ated by the fact that women are less likely than
men to be educated, have skills or stable employ¬
ment outside the peasant sector. In Zimbabwe,
despite a series of important laws passed in the
1980s which guarantee women's rights to property,
inheritance and maintenance, divorced and wid¬
owed women still face many hardships. These
paper rights have not yet been translated into
actual rights.
'Don't talk to us, go talk to the men'
How many researchers who have talked to
women about Aids prevention have been
admonished: "Don't talk to us. Go talk to the
men"? They are right. We also have to talk to
men. Because men are seen as the "winners" in
patriarchal societies and thus allegedly are not
amenable to change, they have been by-passed
by researchers eager to find ways to empower
women. But men remain the power-brokers in
both reproductive and other sexual decision¬
making. How are men instructed in their roles?
With whom do they talk about sex? How do
they view sexual pleasure and responsibility? In
order to find out what permits men to be sexu¬
ally irresponsible, we need to know what moti¬
vates them. For example, a follow-up study of
18
"Even today, I don't feel that I'm living with the virus. It's something
outside me, something remote. I never realized that death could reach
me. I feel hope and great confidence in life. I'm grateful to Aids. Joys
and sorrows, suffering and laughter, all the things I can share with the
people around me, are due to Aids."


the Harare factory men showed that some are
now foregoing girlfriends because of expense
and are opting for paid single sex encounters. In
trying to save money for their families, these
men are acting responsibly, but by turning to
paid sex, they and their wives may be at higher
risk of HIV infection.
Among adolescents from fifteen to nineteen
years old, the prevalence of HIV infection is low.
Data from the Zimbabwe National Blood Trans¬
fusion Service show that about 2 per cent of donors
in the school-going group test HIV-positive. But
among this group, girls are three times more likely
than boys to be seropositive. An excess of seropos¬
itive women in young age groups has been shown
throughout Africa. The basis of this vulnerability


is probably both social and biological. The social
pattern of partnerships, younger-woman/older-
man, means that men are more likely to be sexu¬
ally experienced and may be HIV-positive. Fur¬
thermore the genital tract is still maturing and
may be more susceptible to infection.
The epidemiology of HIV infection supports
the idea of targeting young people who are just
beginning to become sexually active and still have
low rates of infection. Targeting young people
raises many questions. How are young people
learning about sex? How can they be taught most
effectively? By whom? There were traditional
mechanisms for transmitting such information, but
studies suggest that throughout Africa urbaniza¬
tion and the disruption of traditional life have
eroded the strength of traditional institutions.
How important do young people consider
the Aids problem? In several studies done in
Zimbabwe, it was clear that young people are
more concerned about unemployment than
Aids. They greet with scepticism the concern
that they should practise safe sex when they
cannot find jobs.
N o easy answers
All epidemics depend not only on the "agent"
(in this case the human immunodeficiency virus)
but equally on sets of social conditions which
sustain its spread. It is not surprising that an
epidemic of the dimensions of the Aids epi¬
demic would have clear social roots.
The connection between economic hard¬
ships, the subordination of women and Aids is
apparent in everyday life, but if Aids-prevention
is to succeed, sexual relationships will have to
change before the problems of poverty and
inequality are resolved. At the level of individ¬
uals, we must do more to talk with married
people, both men and women. Difficult though
this may be, there is no alternative. Even with the
expansion of technical options, particularly
those under female control, it is hard to imagine
that we can escape the fact that the way men and
women construct their sexual relations will have
to change. To fail to recognize that culture can
and will change is to step away from a debate
which is central to Aids-prevention.
Finally, at the level of health services, there
is clearly room for improving more "biomed¬
ical" interventions. It is important to ensure
better identification and treatment of other
STDs, which enhance HIV transmission. Zim¬
babwe appears to have had considerable success
in reducing STDs.
Another promising area is female-controlled
methods, including the female condom, reduced
use of intravaginal drying agents and possible use
of microbicides. To tell women to tell men to use
condoms is clearly a limited strategy. The suc¬
cess of the family planning movement can be at
least in part attributed to the development of the
oral contraceptive. Women have the history and
experience of taking responsibility for the out¬
come of sexual activity. It makes sense to take
advantage of this and develop methods to reduce
HIV infection which women can control.
For all these interventions we must directly
face the issue of cost. The need for trained staff,
STD diagnostic equipment and adequate pro¬
vision of antibiotics will cost money, money
that the health services do not have.
Moreover, despite donor support, funds for
condoms are inadequate: although male condoms
cost only a few cents each, we are able to import
quantities only adequate for about 5 condoms
per adult per year. Worse, the female condom at $2
US costs about 100 times more than the male
condom. Obviously, without subsidized prices
this method will not be used widely.
Above, Warren Hills cemetery
in Harare, the capital of
Zimbabwe. "Aids is now the
leading cause of adult death In
Harare, accounting for nearly
one-quarter of deaths."
Attitudes can
and must
changethis is
centrai to Aids
prevention.
MARY BASSETT,
of the United States, is a
medical doctor and a Senior
Lecturer in the Department of
Community Medicine at the
University of Zimbabwe. She is
currently on leave as Director of
Harlem Center for Health
Promotion and Disease
Prevention in New York.
19
