1 The power Of the pen by Henri-Jean Martin
o
"So
o>
o>
The written word has always been closely associated with power. But literacy is a stepping
-c= stone to intellectual freedom as well as an instrument of authority, and has been a factor in the
I great revolutions of world history.
A monk-copyist is shown in this
detail of an illuminated
manuscript dating from 1370 that
once belonged to the library of
the emperor Charles V.
; We may never know what led up to the
appearance of writing at different times
and in different places. In the Far East, the ear¬
liest known examples were intended to facilitate
communication with the gods, whereas in the
Middle East their main purpose was the keeping
of accounts. At a later stage, writing was used to
record customary law and traditional tales for
posterity, while as a result of its use for com¬
mercial purposes in the Middle East it was grad¬
ually simplified, finally giving rise to alphabet¬
ical systems.
itamcö mules ctmt wfcè a)fa; % pjxc
iirmir tr mmtlr to$Jte $n$ rf ncmrl$
wmtmigtcslcm
mttoífítucnmte
ift^tenefavjjB
rfcmáflfccDiiucí
ihefcfavftw;
cbmipmvttqnci
jqiiritfrvncctofti
£*r les mttcm awcftc cfmtc erjmtött i
ymxquï tes ttmtMäuftftnptrui» nut»
cropmmr tore et imtwwxmimve awn
ñvttplu$Viewable ccrmnte onlam
tc imam tangimge fcumiontcr; ftten
gTfrmôtictritîrrtAwet |iu*|îlu0Aitiûi
rr
1 i ¿ï .4?
In parallel with these developments, society
conferred extraordinary power on those who
could write. In some parts of the world, writing
remained the preserve of the priesthood, while
in others, as in ancient Gaul, the priests refused
to set down the secrets of their religion in
writing. As a general rule, it long remained the
speciality of scribes, a situation found in places
as far apart as Mesopotamia, Egypt and China.
A passport to power
Having control over society's collective memory
and having been put in charge of drawing up its
laws, scribes established themselves as counsel¬
lors to the high and mighty and as judges with
authority over their fellow men, often creaming
off their share of the wealth they assessed and the
taxes they gathered. In such circumstances, the
Romans, tired of being judged and governed
according to rules of which they were ignorant,
when they had learned to read and write
demanded that the laws be displayed on wooden
boards in the Capitol.
At the time of the barbarian invasions of
western Europe, written culture took refuge in
the monasteries, which were anxious to pre¬
serve the sacred and liturgical texts. Much later,
after Europe had been reshaped, writing
emerged once more in the re-established towns,
and the feudal warlords who had imposed their
power were obliged to call upon the help of
clerks, specialists in the written word who carved
out for themselves a privileged place in the
young states of western Europe.
At the courts of the Renaissance princes,
the privy counsellor or secretary played a
prominent role, and most of the humanists
were drawn from the papal, Florentine or other
chancelleries, from among the learned men who
were responsible for the drafting of diplomatic,
legislative, legal or administrative documents.
In France, for example, such men who had
bought their way into office created a new social
category, giving rise to the noblesse de robe which
tried, not unsuccessfully, to claim for itself the
greater part of the power and wealth of the state.

In pharaonic Egypt, hieroglyphic
writing ("the word of the gods"),
covered temple walls and tombs,
statues, funerary objects and
items used in everyday life. The
beautifully stylized drawings were
meant to be seen as well as read.
Above, a pyramidion in the Cairo
museum.
HENRI-JEAN MARTIN,
a French archivist and
palaeographer, is director of
studies at the Ecole Pratique
des Hautes études and emeritus
professor at the École Nationale
des Chartes, both in Paris. He is
the author of a number of award-
winning studies on the history
and sociology of books.



I he law of the letter
Writing thus became an instrument of govern¬
ment, and hence of power, wielded by experts.
Simultaneously it imposed its own rationale on
the peoples that used it. By providing a stable
record of custom, it had the effect, over time, of
preventing custom from developing sponta¬
neously as a product of the collective con¬
sciousness, as the oral tradition allowed it to
do. It thus gradually subjected society to the
dominance of the law. The law, for its part, had
an author and a date, and was by definition
written, but it was shackled by its written form
and inevitably, with the passage of time, lost
touch with society's changing requirements,
leading to continual problems of interpretation.
Such developments were not, however, con¬
stant or inevitable. Systems of writing are still in
use today that maintain a more flexible relation¬
ship with the spoken language, systems that are the
product of a combination of factors the structure
of the language, the innate character of each people
and the influences to which it has been subjected
throughout its history. Furthermore, in the West
at least, the presentation of documents has evolved
constantly, in keeping with changes in society
and with society's complex relationship with the
spoken and written word.
The scrolls on which Cicero's speeches were
copied down, for instance, contained a contin¬
uous text without spaces between words or
paragraphs; they were meant to be read aloud
and understood by being heard. It was not until
the eleventh century that copyists got into the
habit of systematically separating words. The
thirteenth-century Summa Theologiae of St
Thomas Aquinas consists of dense pages,
bristling with abbreviations and with lots of
coloured signs appearing at intervals; set out in
the form of an oral disputation, it is divided
into articles proceeding from the particular to the
general in accordance with a stereotyped pattern
intended to keep the reasoning on the rails.
Later, with the invention of printing, the
paragraph as we now know it gradually came
into general use, with the spaces that give the eye
and the mind a rest, helping the reader to digest
what has just been read. It is surely no coinci¬
dence that Descartes' Discours de la méthode
(1637) was the first work of philosophy in
French to be set out in the modern style.
Because of these ways of presenting material
in print, the spoken language and the written
text the latter now intended to be read and
not spoken or heard have, in the West, gradu- 27

An Islamic school in Dar el-Ulum
in Deoband, near Uttar Pradesh
(India). ally drifted further and further apart. This devel¬
opment may have contributed to the comeback
made by the image since the nineteenth cen¬
tury and the upsurge in increasingly hard-hitting
advertising. The trend has now affected news¬
papers, which, to improve their circulation, have
been induced to adopt an attention-grabbing
layout intended to convey the greatest possible
amount of information and emotion in the
shortest possible time.
Uivide and rule
To understand the problems arising at the
receiving end of the writing process, we should
begin by discarding the widespread belief that
some types of writing are more functional than
others. It is now generally acknowledged that lit¬
eracy above all answers a need for decompart-
mentalization, for communication with the out¬


side world. The understanding of a text is not a
simple matter of technique: it also requires
readers to possess the necessary mental equip-
In control of society's collective memory and responsible for
drawing up its laws, the masters of the written word
established themselves as counsellors to the mighty and as
28 judges of their fellow men.
ment, a stock of concepts that will enable them
to establish a personal dialogue with the text.
One of the main effects of the emergence of
writing was to divide people into categories,
according to their capacities to master the
written word. Generally speaking, it soon
became necessary, in most societies, to be able at
least to read, if not to write, so as to be able to
decipher and learn the canonical texts or holy
scriptures. The religious or civil authorities
deemed it necessary above all to teach the rudi¬
ments of reading, i.e. a form of passive access to
the written word.
In Europe, for instance, children were first
taught to recognize letters and spell out Latin
prayers, writing being held over for a later and
often optional stage. The effect of this method,
applied mainly to girls (who, as a character in
one of Molière's plays says, should not learn to
write lest they should correspond with their
lovers), was to produce social categories of semi-
literates, who could often get to know texts
only by reading together in groups. For similar
reasons, it apparently was long-standing practice
to read aloud or in an undertone, particularly in
the case of women reading novels. Only those
who belonged to the ruling classes and who
had pursued lengthy studies in colleges or uni¬
versities were actually able to read silently to
themselves.

Thus Western societies remained for a long
time only very incompletely literate; some people
have claimed, no doubt with some slight exag¬
geration, that the great revolutions occurred
when more than half the population became lit¬
erate. It should also be borne in mind that,
throughout history, there was never a watertight
partition between written culture and oral tradi¬
tion. The great mass movements, such as the



heresies of the Middle Ages, the Reformation in
the sixteenth century, and the revolutions in
England in the seventeenth century, France at
the end of the eighteenth and Russia at the begin¬
ning of the twentieth were inspired by images,
songs and the spoken word as much as by writing.
People in the Middle Ages learned their reli¬
gion from the paintings on church walls. Even
today, we need only think of the place occupied,
in some parts of the world, by open-air
preaching or even soap-box oratory; of topical
songs and the stories told in the workplace or by
the fireside; of the many contacts between lit¬
erates and "educated" people, or of the role that
the self-taught so often play as intermediaries. It
was through all these channels that the theories
of such as Voltaire or Rousseau reached the rev¬
olutionary masses, who blithely claimed to have
been inspired by these thinkers without having
read their works.
Lastly, in the course of the last hundred
years, the new communications media have
brought recorded speech and the moving image
to the fore; but the effect of these technologies,
unlike that of reading, is to highlight emotion
and propaganda over a logical approach and
individual reflection.
The long evolution of writing in the West,
A peasants' university in
Leningrad in 1918.
from the invention of the first pictograms or
ideograms to the full transcription of speech
through phonetic signs, has run parallel with the
development of a logical, analytical spirit that
gives preference, over the transience of the
spoken word, to the written text, with all it
implies of stability or even fixity. While it is an
instrument of authority, writing thus also has a
power to liberate the mind that, by the same
token, makes it an instrument of liberation from
that authority.
One of the main effects of the emergence of writing was to
divide people into categories, according to their capacities to
master the written word.
At a school in Antecume Pata,
French Guyana, young people
learn to read and write in their
mother tongue, Wayana, before
continuing their schooling in
French.
29
