What next ?
Specialized agency chiefs look ahead
.
.
3
Below left, men
and women plant
t rees at Keita
(Niger) in 1985 as
part of an FAO
development
Project. Right, thé
saxe plantation
in 1989.
Thé right to food is the most fundamentalof human rights. Throughout history
chronic hunger, whether caused by war, drought,
poverty or natural disaster, has led to widespread
suffering, and freedom from hunger remains a
long-cherished goal. Alongside peace, hunger is the
most pressing of ail issues.
There must be two principal components in
any strategy to eradicate hunger. One is to increase
food production in order to feed an expanding
world population. The second is to alleviate
poverty at least to the point where every person
has access to the food they need for a healthy life.
While the Food and Agriculture Organization
concentrates on helping to ensure sustainable
expansion of agricultural production and pro-
ductivity, we also promote the concept that,
where feasible, a greater emphasis by developing
nations on the agriculture sector can make a pow-
erful contribution to combating poverty. This
follows from the fact that the majority of the
poor in most developing countries depend on
agriculture for employment and incomes. As
long as this dependence continues, the growth of
food production and of agricultural produc-
tivity in the countries with high concentrations
of rural poverty will continue to be among the
principal means of alleviating poverty and
improving nutrition.
The dimensions of the hunger problem are
great. In the developing countries 800 million
people are chronically undernourished. Among
them, 192 million children under the age of five
suffer from acute or chronic protein and energy
deficiencies. Hundreds of millions more suffer ail-
ments such as retarded growth, blindness and
impaired vision or goitre because their diets lack
essential vitamins and minerais.
Progress has been made, both in absolute and
per caput terms. For example, the figure of 800
million undernourished people mentioned above
is down from 893 million in 1969-1971. It is pro-
jected to drop further to 730 million in 2010, a
figure which still represents an appalling level of
suffering and wasted human potential. Happily,
the number of undernourished people as a per-
centage of total population has declined appre-
ciably over the last two decades and is expected to
continue to drop.
At present, 88 nations fall into the category of
low-income food-deficit countries. Forty-four of
these are in Africa, 19 in Asia and the Pacific, nine
in Latin America, four in the Near East and 12 in
Il

the states of the former Soviet Union. The net
food déficits of the developing countries arc
expected to continue to grow, and the developing
countries as a whole will soon turn from being net
agricultural exporters into net importers. These arc
alarming prospects given the difncutt balance of
payments situation and the unfavourable eco-
nomic prospects for many devetoping countries.
Nothing short of a significant upgrading of
the overatt devetopment performance of the lag-
ging economies, with emphasis on a more equi-
table sharing of the benefits, will free the world of
the most pressing food insecurity problems. The
only feasible option for an early and sustainable
improvement in food security is the enhancement
of the productivity and production of food. The
key to such gains is efficient technology, applied
to the commodities that can make a difference.
The basic goal of food security is one that peo-
plues, governments and the international commu-
nity hâve no alternative but to address. Yet certain
trends are not encouraging. Devetopmenta ! com-
mitment from bilateral and multilateral sources 10
developing country agriculture is declining.
Between 1981 and 1992, overaïï amounts dropped
from $12. 3 billion to $8. 5 billion, in constant 1980
U. S. dollars. During this period, agriculture's share
of total development assistance fell from 25 per
cent to 17 per cent.
l believe that now is the time to raise public
awareness and to promote political commitment
at the highest level for a global campaign to pro-
vide food security for a ! i. Thé Food and Agricul-
ture Organization will host a World Food
Summit in November 1996 to pursue this com-
mitment. Only a combination of faster, poverty-
reducing development and appropriate public
policy, both national and international, will ulti-
mately improve access to food by the poor and
eliminate chronic undernutrition. t
The ! ntemationa) Atomic Energy
Agency (tAEA)
IAEA inspection
of a nuclear
reactor in Iraq,
1991.
IAEA's activities are directly relevant to a
number of areas that are vital to the future
of our planet : the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons, energy, the environment and develop-
ment assistance.
The number of states acceding to the Non-Pro-
liferation Treaty (NPT) has grown significantly in
recent years, For example, several republics of the
former Soviet Union-notably Ukraine-along
with South Africa and, quite recently, Algeria have
joined the 169 countries which had already signed
the Treaty. This has led to the broadening of the
nuclear materials safeguards system, which now
covers more than 1, 000 installations ail over the
world. To perform this field work, IAEA has a
team of 200 inspectors and an annual budget of
some $68 million. It is currently envisaging the
introduction of new technical methods to increase
the effectiveness of monitoring operations.
On two occasions in recent years, this funda-
mental activity has corne up against major diffi-
culties-in Iraq and in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. However, IAEA remains res-
olutely optimistic regarding its ability to con-
tribute substantially to the efforts deployed ta
circumscribe the danger which nuclear weapons
can still represent for world security, in spite of
the end of the Cold War.
With regard to the environment, the energy
sources chosen by a ! ! of us will continue to play
a fundamental role if we wish to hait the process
of degradation that is already we ! I under way. The
choice of a viable form of electricity production
in the coming decades will chiefly lie between
"polluting"fuels, such as coal, oil and gas (above
ail from carbon dioxide), and nuclear energy,
from which the emanations are negligible.El

The mushroom
c ! oud after thé
destruction of
Hiroshima by an
atomic bomb
on 6 August 1945.
It is up to every country to make its own
choice. Some 30 of our member countries have
adopted nuclear energy to provide at least part of
their electricity supply, and 17 per cent of world
electricity production is now nuclear-generated.
Some countries are opposed to its use as an
energy source, but ail are agreed that nuclear
energy should be exploited under the best pos-
sible safety conditions. It is from this standpoint
that IAEA is devoting considerable efforts to
enhancing the safety of nuclear installations, in
particular at the request of countries, including
those of the former Soviet Union and of Eastern
Europe, wishing to obtain thé Agency's opinion
and support in regard to the operation of their
nuclear power stations. Last year, the first Inter-
national Convention on Safety laid down stan-
dards in this area, to which some 50 countries
have already signified their assent.
Lastly, IAEA is also endeavouring to transfer
peaceful nuclear techniques in a number of fields
to its developing member countries. These
include the eradication of the tsetse fly and the
fruit fly by the sterile insect technique, the pro-
duction by radiation of mutant cultivated plants
that are more capable of withstanding crop-dev-
astating organisms or difficult climatic condi-
tions, the use of radioactive isotope tracers to
detect water resources, and the use of radiation in
combating cancer. IAEA attaches the utmost
importance to these transfers, which are a key fea-
ture of its work programme, t
 ! j ! ït ! ent@m''''-''
evelapment p`t
Thé shortage of resources for developmentcaused by the world risis which followed
the collapse of the Soviet Union makes it essen-
tial that these resources should be rationally and
effectively managed.
With this in view, a number of innovations
have been introduced into the project cycle of the
International Fund for Agricultural Develop-
ment (IFAD), in order to make these projects
less costly and more suited to the real needs of
the Fund's clients. The resulting savings will be
used to strengthen operations in priority sectors.
IFAD is devoting increased attention to tech-
nical assistance. A lasting reduction in poverty
requires technologies of a new type that will be
both intrinsically suited to the purpose and
financially affordable. IFAD has applied itself to
persuading international research institutes to
shift their priorities and strategies and to give
prominence in their schedules to the needs of
small farmers and other disadvantaged people
living in rural areas. This preoccupation is at the
root of the Fund's efforts to foster partnerships
between national agricultural research systems in
A woman
extension worker
(second from
right) visits a farm
as pa rt of the
IFAD-supported
Minya agricultural
Project ! n Egypt,
which is designed
to help needy
farmers improve
their livestock.
the developing countries and international
research institutions.
IFAD also attaches special importance to the
elaboration of joint strategies and alliances with
other financing and development agencies. Such
collaboration has to go beyond the co-financing
of projects. IFAD's vast experience could be used
to advantage on a broader front in connection
with joint approaches to combating poverty in
rural areas. The idea is to establish a package of
programmes, centred on an IFAD-type project,
which would benefit from substantial funding
from other international financing agencies.
IFAD's grassroots projects could then be repro-
duced on a larger scale, which would considerably
increase their impact.
IFAD and the World Environment Fund
ID

(WEF) are currently examining ways and means of
strengthening their collaboration in contending
with the interdependent problems of poverty and
the environment. Breaking the vicious circle of
rural poverty and the degradation of the environ-
ment has long been at the heart of IFAD'S con-
cerns, especially in connection with the Special Pro-
gramme for the countries of sub-Saharan Africa.
Through innovative projects and specialized studies
carried out under this programme, new ways have
been found of helping small farmers to protect the
environment by practising ecologically sustainable
agriculture. IFAD is intent on making the most of
this experience in the framework both of concerted
action with WEF and of the International Conven-
tion to Combat Desertification and Drought.
The coming years are likely to be difficult
ones. Resources will be limited, while needs will
keep on growing. It is imperative therefore that
every dollar at our disposât should be used as
effectively as possible. Success in banishing
hunger in twenty years, thirty years or a century
will depend on the sense of commitment of the
donor and beneficiary countries and on the inter-
national institutions. IFAD, in its modest and
positive fashion, is paving the ray. t
The Illernalional Monelary Fund (IMF)
In the last 50 years, many changes have taken
place in the world economy, all of which
have had an impact on the work of the Interna-
tional Monetary Fund (IMF). These changes have
included the emergence and growth of the devel-
oping countries-today there are almost 130 of
them among the IMF's 179 members ; the trend
toward greater symmetry in economic size among
the industrial countries ; the increased interna-
tional mobility of goods, capital, and labour, and
the associated international integration of mar-
kets ; the trend towards regional integration ; and
the integration of the formerly centrally planned
economies into the world market economic
system and the IMF itself.
But the influence has not been only one-way :
some of the changes can be attributed to a signif-
icant extent to the work of the IMF. Over the
years the IMF has corne to see more clearly that
macroeconomic policies need to be conducted
within a medium-term framework of monetary
stability and fiscal rectitude and have to be sup-
ported by structural, cost-effective social and
environmental policies ; that restrictions on cap-
ital flows are generally not to be recommended as
an instrument of policy ; that the requirements
of maintaining pegged exchange rates, especially
in the face of increasingly voluminous and agile
international capital markets, as revealed by the
Mexican crisis, are demanding.
These developments have been reflected in each
of the IMF's three major areas of activity.
First, in the provision of financial assistance :
one major change is the concentration of the
IMF's financing operations in recent years on
developing countries and countries in transition
Plenary session
of the
International
Monetary Fund
(IMF) in
Washington D. C.
(U. S. A.).
and the introduction of new financing facilities
operating in a more flexible framework. These
adaptations have enabled the IMF to continue
serving the needs of countries in balance of pay-
ments difficulties, to play its role in resolving the
debt crisis and recent systemic crisis in Mexico,
to make its contribution to growth-oriented
adjustment in the developing countries, and ta
play its full role in Russia and the other transi-
..
tison économies.
Second, the IMF has adapted its role in the
exchange rate system. It has responsibility for
exercising"firm surveillance"over the exchange
rate policies of members, which involves surveil-
lance over all policies impinging on exchange
rates. IMF surveillance is conducted through reg-
ular-usually annual-consultations with indi-
vidual member countries, and through consider-
ation of policy issues in a global context. This has
been and remains the IMF's principal means of
promoting exchange stability.
The third main area of IMF activity is the
provision of technical assistance to member gov-
ernments in its areas of expertise, including fiscal
policy, central banking and monetary policy, and
economic statistics. There has been a dramatic
growth in demand for these services in recent
years, especially to help with institution-
building in the countries in transition, t
CI

Promoting social justice in the closing years
of the 20th century, marked as they are by
globalization and the triumph of the market
economy, entails taking a firm stand on principles
that are deemed to be essential and adopting imag-
inative strategies. What values should be defended ?
What changes should be made ?
Tripartism is both the cornerstone of the
International Labour Organisation (ILO) and
the feature that makes it fundamentally different
from the other United Nations organizations.
By associating representatives of governments,
employers and workers in ail its deliberations
and decision-makins, ILO ensures that its action
is relevant, topical and effective with regard both
to the setting of standards and their practical
application. However, while ILO is intent on
remaining the social conscience of the world, it
will also have to study ways and means of gath-
ering round it the other intermediary groups
working for the promotion of social justice.
Setting international labour standards and
monitoring their application continues to be the
prime function of ILO. All the views expressed on
the occasion of the Organisation's 75th anniver-
sary in 1994 culminated in reaffirming their use-
fulness and universal value. However, an effort has
to be made to adapt their contents to present-day
realities and improve their effectiveness in practical
terms. The ILO's Governing Body has embarked
on this process. It will endeavour in particular to
draw up a conceptual framework for the revision
of existing standards and the adoption of new
ones. At the same time, ILO will set out to pro-
mote wider acceptance and greater respect for the
standards through its monitoring system and the
direct assistance it provides to its membership.
However, at a time when unemployment has
become the major social blight in most economies,
worker protection cannot be dissociated from job
promotion. In other words, it is necessary to deal
with both labour law and the right to work.
In this perspective, ILO has just published
the. first volume of its World Labour Report,
which presents a global analysis of the situation
in this field, together with proposais aimed at
shifting the emphasis of national and interna-
tional policies in a direction more conducive to
employment and social justice. N
Thé ! tMM N tstd tspment''
OMaMM 
Urgent, practical, solutions are crucial if the
world is to cope with the demands of its
expanding population. The role of industrializa-
tion is central to confronting the causes and effects
of this human explosion as well as to ensuring a
better life for the three quarters of humankind
who live in developing countries.
A complex range of development problems
have to be tackled in most of these countries,
from the provision of basic necessities to the cre-
ation of jobs, raising income levels and using non-
renewable resources efficiently.
Industrialization offers a number of answers
to this growing human and economic dilemma.
Slow industrial and economic growth, which
goes hand-in-hand with poverty, is as much a
cause of rapid population growth as an effect.
To break this vicious circle, a comprehensive
programme is needed, combining socio-eco-
nomic and industrial development.
In the highly competitive international envi-
ronment that has corne to prevail throughout the
world, especially in the aftermath of the
Uruguay Round of trade agreements,'industrial
and technological growth is more crucial than
ever for the economic survival of the South. As
new challenges emerge for developing nations and
economies in transition, the demand for indus-
trial services is increasingly at the forefront of
development issues.
The future of UNIDO lies in providing the
services essential to meet the demands of industrial-
ization today and into the next century.
Responding to the recent dramatic changes in the
world's economic environment, the Organization
has just undergone a major transformation,
making it more responsive to the needs of devel-
oping countries and economies in transition.
Il
The International Labour Organisation
<_______________ !
Frontier
immigration
contre !.

In 1993, UNIDO's Member States adopted the
Yaoundé Declaration calling for a series of far-
reaching reforms of the Organization. The aim was
to build on the strengths gained from more than
two decades of experience in serving the needs of
the developing world. These strengths include the
Organization's impartial, non-profit status, its
multidisciplinary capabilities and the industrial
expertise of its staff, as well as its experience in
technical co-operation at policy, institutional and
enterprise levels and its broad knowledge of
industrial development issues.
Five development priorities were set to
guide the Organization's new course : industrial
and technological growth and competitiveness ;
human resource development ; equitable develop-
ment through industrialization ; environmentally
sustainable industrial development ; international
co-operation in industriel investment and tech-
nology.
With a streamlined management structure and
refocused priorities, the Organization is now in a
better position than ever to meet the development
challenges of the 1990s and beyond. N
Testing a wheel
rim for strength at
the Ludhiana
Bicycle Research
and Development
Centre in Punjab
(India), which
beneflts fro m
UNIDO's upport.
1 The eighth round of international trade negotiations under the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which ended with the
approval of the Final Act of the Uruguay Round at a meeting in
Marrakesh (Morocco) inApril 1994.
a
,,
Spectacular though they are, thé changesthat hâve taken place on the communica-
tions market in recent years appear only to be the
precursors of even greater upheavals.
It is in preparation for these upheavals that the
Universal Postal Union has equipped itself with
two new Councils separating the governmental
function (the Council of Administration) from
the operational function (the Postal Operations
Council). In addition, the development of strategie
planning and programme budgeting now makes it
possible for UPU to define its objectives more
clearly and to make a more accurate assessment of
the resources necessary for their fulfilment.
UPU's current strategy, which was adopted at
its Congress held in Seoul in 1994, is aimed at two
essential points : improving the quality of services
and securing greater management autonomy.
In the first place, UPU is intent on ensuring
that postal administrations set satisfactory dis-
tribution standards, take steps to ensure that
their customers are properly informed and then
watch over the strict application of those stan-
dards. UPU's International Bureau measures the
global quality of services and informs the postal
administrations concerned of any departures
from the norm, so that steps can be taken to
remedy them.
Thé International Bureau has also designed and
set up a world Electronic Data Interchange project
(EDI), which connects postal exchange offices at
the points of origin, transit and destination, sur-
face and air transport companies and customs
authorities to a standardized electronic communi-
cations network. EDI technologies will also help
improve and speed up accounting procedures, the
compilation of statistics on volumes of mail by
categories and destinations, and the monitoring of
quality of service. The goal is to ensure that the
largest possible number of developing countries
will be able to benefit from EDI at the earliest
opportunity.
Since they are obliged to offer universal services
at affordable prices, postal administrations are
subjected to considerable economic pressures con-
nected with competition and technological
progress. The demands of the international market
have accordingly compelled them to transform
their legal status. In order to make sure that dereg-
ulation and liberalization will be effective, it is
essential for governments to allow postal adminis-
trations sufficient autonomy over their human
and financial resources. Government-controlled
postal administrations are therefore being con-
verted into independent or semi-independent
public companies that are progressively adapting
to a competitive international market.
In this new economic and technological envi-
ronment, UPU is continuing to be the main
channel of co-operation between postal services
and is thereby contributing to the maintenance of
a worldwide network of modern products and
services, tIl
