
Catherine Vidal
ARE MEN AND WOMEN ON THE SAME WAVELENGTH?
A scientist answers an awkward question
Does a man's brain differ from a woman's? Yes, say the biol¬
ogists, in the sense that no one has exactly the same brain.
No, say the philosophers, sociologists, historians and
other representatives of the human sciences. The important thing
is to distinguish between the functioning of the brain as an organ,
which is studied by biologists, and the functioning of the human mind,
which ¡s the bedrock of civilization.
The question needs to be clarified both scientifically and ideo¬
logically. Scientific analysis of the brain can only be carried out in cer¬
tain limited conditions, which cannot do justice to the extreme com¬
plexity of cerebral activity. If, for example, exploration of the brain's
mechanisms for handling language ¡s especially important for clinical
medicine, it must be emphasized that even the most exhaustive
"physical" description of language Is not enough to explain language
as a vehicle of thought. Our knowledge of the human mind and its rela¬
tionships with individual and collective history is the result of investi¬
gations in a number of fields such as philosophy, psychoanalysis and
history. All these disciplines attest that men and women share equally
the faculties of intelligence, emotion and imagination.
This explains why scientific observation of a difference between
the sexes in the functioning of the brain should not be taken to reflect
a difference in thinking capacity, nor justify any kind of prejudice
regarding the respective competence of men and women or Inequal¬
ities between the sexes in the socio-cultural distribution of tasks.
The brain, like other physical organs, is influenced by genetic, hor¬
monal and environmental factors. The male (testosterone) and female
(oestradiol) sexual hormones are secreted very early on in the foetus,
permitting the development of the genitalia and of the secondary
sexual characteristics that permanently take form at puberty. Sexual hor¬
mones also influence the construction and functioning of the brain, where
differences between male and female sexual behaviour originate.
And so ¡t Is not surprising that anatomists should have observed
slight variations in size between certain areas of the brains of men
and women. Brain size has nothing to do with mental capacities, as
brain autopsies of great and lesser thinkers have shown. The inner
environment (hormones and diet) and the outer environment (family
and social interactions, relationships with one's surroundings) are
ultimately the factors that influence the precise set-up of the millions
of neuron networks that make up the human brain.
Throughout pre- and post-natal development the diversity of
people's experiences results in microscopic anatomical variations
between their brains. One might expect to find fewer differences
between the brains of men and women who have been raised in sim¬
ilar contexts than those between two Individuals of the same sex who
have had very different experiences.
Spectacular technical progress in the last few years has made It
possible for us to study the living brain. By means of new brain-scan¬
ning techniques such as positron emission tomography and nuclear mag¬
netic resonance, it is possible to scan the living brain rapidly and pain¬
lessly and to draw up detailed anatomical maps of cerebral activity.
Analysis of brain scans of men and women reveals individual vari¬
ations that are statistically insignificant. The only notable differ¬
ence between men and women observed so far concerns the iden¬
tification of word rhymes.
In the last analysis, while every man and woman uses his or her
own set of neuron networks, the Important thing ¡s that our brains enable
us to see the world around us and act upon It with the skills that are
unique to each individual and each sex. This is the basis of the Infinite
diversity of thinking that constitutes the wealth of human civilizations.

CATHERINE VIDAL,
of France, is a neurobiologlst at ij«|
the Pasteur Institute in Paris. Oí
