NELSON
FREIRÉ
talks to Stany Kol
The Brazilian pianist Nelson Freiré revealed
his outstanding gifts and strong artistic
personality at an early age. His international
career, begun when he was very young, has
taken him to cities on every continent,
where he has given solo recitals and
concerts with some of the world's leading
orchestras and conductors. He often
performs duets with the famous Argentine
pianist Martha Argerich, with whom he has
made many recordings. Here he talks about
his life and art.
How does a person become a great
performing artist?
In my case it all started very early. I was
a child prodigy. I was born in 1944 in Boa
Esperança, a little town in Minas Gerais
state, the youngest of five children. There
were no musicians in the family, but my
mother was a music lover and bought a
piano with her first wages as a teacher. I
think there were only three pianos in the
whole town. She made my elder sister prac¬
tise. I began to play a little myself, by ear,
copying what I heard. I was rather sickly as
a child and had several illnesses, but I loved
the piano. When I was four, I told my par¬
ents that I wanted to take lessons.
So they found you a teacher.
Yes, but he lived a four-hour bus ride
away. I went to him once a week and had to
get up at four in the morning. In those days
there were no motorways. In fact the road
was a dirt track, often drenched with rain.
After twelve lessons, the teacher told my
father that there was nothing more he could
teach me and that I'd have to go to Rio de
Janeiro, which was then the capital of
Brazil, to get a decent musical education.
And so we moved to Rio. It was a big deci¬
sion for my parents, who had always made
their home in Boa Esperança, where all
their family lived. My father, who was a
pharmacist, had to give up his profession
and take a job in a bank.
I took tests at the Rio school of music.
The professional musicians were impressed
and said I was a child with "golden hands".
But I was still only playing by instinct. I had
a hard time finding a teacher. I was a rather
unruly child. For two years I went from
teacher to teacher. I even kicked one of
them because he kept touching my ears,
and I hated that. My parents were getting
fed up and were thinking of returning to
Boa Esperança, and then I was introduced
to Lucia Branco, one of the few piano
teachers in Rio I hadn't met. She was a
well-known teacher who had been trained
by a pupil of Franz Liszt. She advised my
parents to send me to one of her students
who, she thought, was mad enough to agree
to work with mc.
That's how I met Nise Obino, her assis¬
tant. It was love at first sight. With Nise I
went right back to square one, including
even the position of the fingers on the key¬
board. She managed to get me to make
remarkable progress. My relationship with
her was very strong, the strongest in my life.
One day when I was ill with a very high
fever, she came to see me and put her hand
on my forehead, and my temperature went
down immediately. We were very close until
her death last January, which was a terrible
blow for me.
Did you go to school while you were
being trained?
Yes, just like any other child. My par¬
ents didn't want me to be uneducated. I 47

NTERVIEW WITH NELSON FREIR
only practised the piano a couple of hours
a day.
When did you first perform in public?
When I was four. Then, when I was
twelve, Brazil organized a big event, Rio's
first international piano competition. I was
invited to take part and was one of eighty
contestants. Several of the others were
already in their thirties and had a lot of
experience. Some had even won prizes in
other competitions. Lucia warned me that
it would be good experience for me but
that I shouldn't set my hopes too high.
Even so, I was among the finalists. The
final was an extraordinary event, a bit like
a big soccer match. The Brazilians are
mad about the piano. The hall was packed,
and the audience was very excited. The
president of Brazil, Juscelino Kubitschek,
who had followed the preliminaries, offered
me a two-year scholarship to go and study
wherever I wanted to.
And that's how you went to Vienna	
Actually, I only went there two years
after the competition, when I was fourteen.
I chose Vienna because I wanted to work
with Bruno Seidlhofer, an Austrian pianist
who was very well known in Latin America.
I'd played for him in Rio. I set off on my
own because my parents couldn't go with
me. I took the boat with Seidlhofer, who was
returning home.
In Vienna I was all alone for the first time
in my life. I was still quite young and didn't
know a word of German or anything about
the city. I found out what it meant to be
independent. Those two years were very
important for my personal development. It
was then that I met Martha Argerich1. I
didn't do much work, though, and didn't
enter any competitions. I did not five up to
expectations. Then the time came when my
scholarship ended and I had to return home.
Returning to Brazil wasn't easy. At sev¬
enteen I was in the middle of an adolescent
crisis, and I had to five with my family again
after acquiring a taste for independence and
living on my own. During the next year I
entered a few competitions but never turned
up on the day. Then in 1962 1 was offered the
opportunity of giving a concert in Sâo Paulo.
The concert was a big success and I recovered
my enthusiasm and desire to play.
You made a fresh start?
_ _ Not yet. Another failure was waiting
10 round the corner, in Belgium where I'd
gone at the age of nineteen to take part in the
Queen Elisabeth of the Belgians Interna¬
tional Musical Competition. When the
results were announced, my name wasn't
even mentioned. It was a bitter disappoint¬
ment. But Martha Argerich was there too.
Neither of us felt on top of the world, but we
were together, and that helped a lot.
Going back to Brazil after a flop like
that wasn't very enticing. Then I remem¬
bered that Anna-Stella Schic2 had suggested
that I should take part in a competition in
Lisbon where she was a member of the jury.
I called for information and was told the
competition was starting in two days' time.
I said I'd be there.
Without knowing the test pieces?
I knew everything except for a compul¬
sory piece that had to be played at the
beginning of the competition, Carlos Seixas'
Sonata in G-minor3. When I got there, I
asked for the score of this sonata, and they
gave it to me but thought I was mad. What's
more, when lots were drawn for the order
of performance, I had to play first. Anyway,
I got down to work and threw myself into
the competition. I walked off with first
prize! Things really changed for me after
that. For six very pleasant months I was
asked to give a number of concerts in Aus¬
tria, Portugese-speaking Africa and
Madeira.
But other countries were a closed book
for me until early in 1965 I received a
telegram from Brazil from Ernesto de Que-
sada, an old man who had been Arthur
Rubinstein's4 first agent and went on to
found the Conciertos Daniel. We had never
met, but he'd heard about me from a
member of the Lisbon jury. In his telegram
he proposed that I should give three con¬
certs in Mexico as a last-minute replace¬
ment for Alexander Brailowsky . That was
my first contract.
After that I returned to Brazil in style.
I did tours in Spain, Argentina, Costa Rica,
the Dominican Republic, Peru and other
countries. In short I started to earn a living.
One day when I was in Caracas Martha
Argcrich's agent contacted me and asked
whether I would fill in for Shura
Cherkassky6 and play Tchaikovsky's
Second Piano Concerto with the Bamberg
Symphony Orchestra.
Did you know the concerto?
When the Germans asked me that ques¬
tion, I said yes of course I knew it, whereas
in fact I'd never seen the score in my life.
And I had two weeks to learn it! I raced to
the music shops in Caracas, but no one had
it. I had to get it from New York. Then for
fourteen days I worked on it. When I
arrived in Schweinfurt I wasn't all that
sure I could do it by heart, so before going
on stage, I asked them to place a closed
score of it above the keyboard, just in case.
The next day the papers said "a new star is
born". That's how I got a foothold in Ger¬
many in 1966 and began receiving concert
offers.
I had a terrible experience in 1967. I
was going to play in Brazil, at Belo Hori¬
zonte in Minas Gerais state, and my parents
decided to go with me. Along the way, the
bus driver fell asleep at the wheel, and the
bus plunged into a ravine killing everyone
else on board, including my parents.
(silence)
When did you start playing duets with
Martha Argerich?
Publicly, in 1968 in London at a fes¬
tival run by Daniel Barenboim7. Martha
was invited to play in a piano duet, and
she accepted on condition that I should be
her partner. We'd often played four-handed
pieces at the house for the fun of it, but
this was the first time we did so in public.
We weren't very well prepared, and the
performance was not excellent. We didn't
play together again until 1980, twelve years
later, in Amsterdam. From then on we
really began playing together in concerts
and for recordings.
How do you explain the quality of your
partnership?
First of all we have known one another
very well for a long time. You know, the best
piano duettists are often brothers and sis¬
ters or couples. People have to be very
close in their personalities, tastes and sen¬
sibilities. What's more, Martha and I have
always been open to new discoveries. I
think we've kept clear of ruts and routines.
Is there a typical style of Brazilian piano-
playing?
After soccer the piano is the second
great love ofBrazilians. But while Brazilian
pianists have mostly worked in Europe and
have certainly been deeply influenced by
Europe, it is generally accepted that they
have a certain rhythm, a kind of vibration
that you don't find elsewhere. For the same
reason, some Brazilian pianists have inhi-

bitions and inferiority complexes. They try
to deny themselves by becoming more Euro¬
pean than the Europeans!
Doesn't that lead towards a certain
standardization?
There is a certain standardization of
styles today, especially, I feel, in the United
States. In my opinion it's due to changing
ways of training musicians, to the increase
in the number of international competi¬
tions and their growing importance in musi¬
cians' careers, to the money that is now
involved in music and to the somewhat hap¬
hazard development of compact-disc pro¬
duction. In other parts of the world,
including Europe, things haven't gone so
far, and musicians seem to be resisting this
move towards standardization. When I sit
on competition juries, for example, I am
struck by the quality and artistic tempera¬
ment of many young Russian pianists.
Do you think that Brazilian composers,
especially Heitor Villa-Lobos8, are performed
as often as they deserve?
No. Brazil has a lot of fine composers,
but Villa-Lobos is about the only one who is
widely known. And even he, who produced
a considerable body of work, isn't per¬
formed very often. I like his music and
think I ought to play it. I do so in my
recitals. I also play works by Santoro9 and
Mignone10, but I'm not sure that this great
tradition of Brazilian classical music has
remained as active today as it used to be.
B You perform all over the world. Is the
public always the same?
Clearly there are different publics in
different countries and continents. I love to
play in Germany. Music seems extraordi¬
narily natural with German music-lovers,
almost as if they become part of the music
during a concert. In Asia in Japan, for
example the public is always very enthu¬
siastic, but it has a particular way of lis¬
tening and communicating. Certain audi¬
ences, like the Germans, are open to all
performers, well known or otherwise. In
Paris on the other hand, people will only go
to a concert to listen to a star. I have a
fondness for Brazilian audiences that I feel
intensely when I play for them.
But I believe that music is and will
always be an international language. At
most the same works are not heard in the
same way in different places. There is
another kind of problem. I sometimes
wonder whether concerts and five perfor¬
mances aren't experiencing a kind of crisis
because of the extraordinary development
of compact discs. I think too much is made
of them, and I feel that people are gradually
losing the desire to go to concerts.
Talking about the United Nations, Villa-
Lobos once said that if world leaders lis¬
tened to more music, there would be fewer
wars	
He was right. Certainly it is hard for a
Brazilian to imagine life without music.
Such a life would be a dreadful propsect.
Talking of Villa-Lobos, the last piano work
he wrote, in 1949, was Hommage à Chopin
in commemoration of the hundredth
anniversary of the composer's death. Who
commissioned it? UNESCO!
1 . Martha Argerich, an Argentine pianist born
in 1941, has an extensive repertoire, including
classical, romantic and contemporary music.
2. Anna-Stella Schic, a Brazilian pianist born in
1925, was a close friend of the composer Heitor
Villa-Lobos, many of whose works she pre¬
miered.
3. Carlos Seixas (1704-1742), a Portugese com¬
poser whose work for the harpsichord is espe¬
cially well known.
4. Arthur Rubinstein (1887-1982), Polish-born
American musician, one of the 20th century's
most famous pianists.
5. Alexander Brailowsky (1896-1976), a
Russian-born American pianist particularly
noted for his brilliant performances of the works
of Chopin and Liszt.
6. Shura Cherkassky, (1911- ), a Russian-born
American pianist, who largely specializes in
romantic music.
7. Daniel Barenboim, noted Israeli pianist and
composer born in Buenos Aires in 1942.
8. Heitor Villa-Lobos (1887-1959), Brazilian
composer. Largely self-taught, he drew inspira¬
tion from Brazilian folk and popular music which
he investigated in his youth as an itinerant musi¬
cian. He later did much to develop musical edu¬
cation throughout Brazil. His music combines
indigenous Brazilian melodic elements with
Western classical music.
9. Claudio Santoro (1919-1989), Brazilian com¬
poser. A student of Olivier Messiaen and friend
of Heitor Villa-Lobos, he explored the possibil¬
ities of atonal music and then turned to musical
forms closer to Brazil.
10. Francisco Mignone (1897-1986), Brazilian
composer. He assimilated the style of the
Brazilian waltzes that the pianeiros played in
cafés at the turn of the century.
STANY KOL is Deputy Secretary of Unesco's General
Conference.
49
