NITIATIVES
U
H
<
Z
LU
LU
CE
Opposite, the
terrifying figure of
"Mr. Aids", created
by Senegalese art-
school students for
ENDA.
44
FRANCE
BEQUETTE
is a Franco-
American
journalist
specializing in
environmental
questions.


ENDA TIERS MONDE, A FRUITFUL THIRD-
WORLD DIALOGUE BY FRANCE BEQUETTE
The international association ENDA Tiers Monde
(Environmental Development Action in the Third
World) is the hub of a network of reflexion,
exchanges and field projects that extends to many parts
of the Third World, from Senegal to Bolivia and from
India to the Caribbean. Set up in 1972, notably with
support from the United Nations Environment Pro¬
gramme (UNEP), it became in 1978 an international
non-profit organization with headquarters in Dakar
(Senegal). Through its efforts, researchers, engineers,
economists, sociologists, educators and communica¬
tions experts offer their services to volunteers, farmers,
city-dwellers and technicians in developing countries,
help them to win respect for their rights, identify their
needs and achieve their goals. ENDA works at grass¬
roots level and does all it can to involve local popula¬
tions in the conception, implementation, management
and control ofdevelopment activities. It promotes local
cultures and the use of local resources, and tries to
resist imported consumption patterns and lifestyles. Its
members are fieldworkers who are more familiar with
village huts than air-conditioned offices and hotels.
IN THE FIELD
In 1990 the people of Dakar and its outskirts were
inspired by the words of a current hit song to start
cleaning up parts of their city and to cover walls with
multicoloured frescoes. A movement known as Set setal,
"be clean and make clean", was launched. ENDAjoined
forces with it an ENDA team was already busy
improving conditions in one of Dakar's slums.
Far away on another continent, in Bogota (Bolivia)
ENDA has created the world's first recycling school,
where children and adults learn about the uses of dif¬
ferent kinds of wastes and are taught techniques for
recycling them. The courses, which began in September
1994, last from six to twelve months and are fee-paying,
although the size of the fee varies according to the
pupil's means. In Rufisque (Senegal), where the local
people were more than willing to pay a small sum to
improve the salubrity of their neighbourhood, ENDA
launched a garbage collection project using wheelbar¬
rows four years ago. The compost produced from the
garbage is sold to urban vegetable gardeners, enabling
them to fertilize their gardens without using chemical
products. Three similar projects are underway in Ho Chi
Minh City (Viet Nam), Santo Domingo (Dominican
Republic) and Bamako (Mali). Know-how and tech¬
nology are imported from Bombay (India), Bogota
(Colombia) and Porto Novo (Benin).
In the Caribbean ENDA is working with a Unesco-
Worldwide Fund for Nature programme on the study of
medicinal plants. Four languages (English, Creole,
French and Spanish) are used in the programme, which
covers fourteen countries. Two competitions involving
the identification and use of medicinal plants have
been held in secondary school leavers' classes in Mau¬
ritius and Dakar.
In Zimbabwe, South Africa and Bolivia, an ENDA
"youth action" team is training street educators to help city
children and teenagers left to their own devices. This
means getting on terms with the street children, helping
them to survive byproviding emergency aid but, above all,
trying to find longer-term solutions to their problems.
In 1987 an ENDA health team joined the fight against
Aids in Africa. It uses every available channel of com¬
munication books, newspapers, comic strips, video,
TV programmes, movies, plays, music and public
events. A telephone help-line has been opened in Dakar.
During major international conferences, ENDA pub¬
lishes a daily newspaper to voice the concerns of the
peoples of the South.
ENDA produces a wide range ofwritten and audio¬
visual documents on environmental and development
issues in English, French and Arabic. For further infor¬
mation contact ENDA Diffusion, 54, rue Carnot, BP 3370
Dakar, Senegal. Tel.: (221) 22 98 90; Fax: (221) 22 26 95.
