1995 UNITED NATIONS
A triptych by Sofia Gandarias
In 1992, the Spanish painter Sofia Gandarias produced
a triptych dedicated to Sarajevo, the beleaguered capital of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The three works are an artist's appeal
for tolerance and solidarity.
"We are going to bury our child"
(1992),
oil on canvas, 162 x 130 cm.
Above, "Why?"
(1992),
oil on canvas,
130 x 97 cm.
Right,
"The last journey"
(1992),
oil on canvas,
130 x 97 cm.
38
SAMI NAIR,
a French
philosopher, is
Professor of
Political Sciences
at the University of
Lausanne
(Switzerland).

YEAR FOR TOLERANCE
The art ofinference by Sami Mr
We know that paintings can speak. Not in the sense that
they construct speeches, arguments or messages. If
they do this, they are posters, tracts, works of propa¬
ganda. A painting, as the French philosopher Maurice
Merleau-Ponty once said, speaks to the mind's eye by
making the image an ideal representation an idea in
action.
All Sofia Gandarias 's paintings speak. A consum¬
mate portraitist and a worthy rival of her predecessor
Velasquez, she holds that painting is not a descriptive
art but a form that has multiple meanings. For this
reason she is interested in what is unsaid rather than
what is said, in the virtual rather than the real, in the
potential rather than the actual, in what can be inferred
rather than what is clearly stated. Take, for example,
her portraits of writers such as Carlos Fuentes and
Juan Goytisolo, or performers such as Frida Kahlo,
Rudolph Nureyev and Yehudi Menuhin. Juan Goyti-
solo's face cannot be dissociated from what is hap¬
pening in Bosnia. The portrait of Fuentes is steeped in
the strife-ridden, violent history of Mexico. These
effects are achieved not through signposts or visual
references but through an exceptionally detailed treat¬
ment of the face portrayed. All the history ofMexico and
all that Fuentes has written can be seen in the hard,
oblique eyes of the great Mexican master. The shedding
of innocent blood, the conflict of a divided identity and
the endless impact of creative discontinuities can be read
in the majestic and irascible face of the great Spanish
writer Juan Goytisolo.
Sofia Gandarias has thus invented a new genre that
displaces the established borderlines between the arts,
the divisions between genres and the restrictive identi¬
fications of things. Look at her series of paintings
devoted to Nureyev: pervaded with undulation, move¬
ment, rhythm and plasticity, this is a blend of painting
and dance. Happy are they, who, like the messenger
god, Hermes, know how to occupy the ground between
things, signs, time and space! They are the mediators
who pave the way for evolving humanity. Sofia Gan¬
darias may be one of their number. This, at any rate,
seems clear to the eye that can register what is happening
in these powerful and ingenious works where the pos¬
sibilities of our civilization can be discerned, in both its
barbarity and its grandeur. 39
