M M N T A
A colossus with feet of clay
32
The sight of this starving
child pains me/Like a great
thorn", wrote that giant of Spanish
poetry Miguel Hernández. What
would he write today if he knew
that only a few months ago a radio
station in Rwanda was broad¬
casting messages urging the
murder of children, or if he had
seen the television pictures of
corpses with hands tied behind
their backs floating in the waters of
Lake Victoria? He would say that
a society which tolerates the intolerable is a society in
decline. He would say that intellectuals should show
their indignation, not just by speaking out, but, above
all, by taking action so that such events can never
happen again.
Since the end of the Cold War and the decline of
the Soviet regime, long-standing conflicts have re-
emerged and new ones rooted in national, cultural,
ethnic and socio-economic differences are erupting
into violence.
It is a good moment to repeat that a war is never
won. Never mind that history books tell us the
opposite. The psychological and material costs of
war are so high that any triumph is a Pyrrhic victory.
Only peace can be won and winning peace means not
only avoiding armed conflict but finding ways of
eradicating the causes of individual and collective
violence: injustice and oppression, ignorance and
poverty, intolerance and discrimination. We must
construct a new set of values and attitudes to replace
the culture of war which, for centuries, has been
influencing the course of civilization. Winning peace
means the triumph of our pledge to establish, on a
democratic basis, a new social framework of tolerance
and generosity from which no one will feel excluded.
A rich but vulnerable world
We are living in a time of hope. The expectations of
peace, co-operation and development raised by the
changes in the last five years can still be met. Rapid
advances in science and technology hold out the
possibility that we will discover new solutions to
many social problems, such as unemployment and
drugs. In terms of public health, medical research
gives grounds for hope that pandemic diseases such
as Aids and cancer may be eliminated. The spec¬
tacular development of the media provides new
opportunities for education and culture. Com¬
puters and fibre optics have brought a new dimen¬
sion, unthinkable until recently, to the organization
and dissemination of knowledge and to data pro¬
cessing and resource management.
And yet this world so rich in resources, knowl¬
edge and experience, shaped by the most progressive
and dynamic societies ever known, is extremely
vulnerable. As in the biblical dream of king Neb¬
uchadnezzar, we stand before a colossus made of
precious metal but with feet of clay. An exclusively
quantitative view of progress and an obstinate atti¬
tude of consumerism and wastefulness are daily
creating an ever-widening gap between a minority
which enjoys the benefits of progress and the
immense majority of the world's inhabitants, for
whom well-being and a minimum standard of living
still seem a distant mirage.
Aprecarious balance
At a time when the Western countries are entering
the age of "information superhighways", there are
around the world 600,000 human settlements
without electricity. At a time when the industrial¬
ized countries of the North have millions of uni¬
versity-educated men and women unable to find
employment, the countries of the South are home
to 900 million illiterate people, often working in
subhuman conditions.
As long as this breach widens, life on our planet
will become ever more precarious. For the same sci¬
entific and technological development that made
possible the opulent life-style of the industrialized
North has also brought the world together in a dra¬
matic fashion. Today more than ever, the world is one.
The drought or war that leads to an exodus from an
African country also affects its European neigh¬
bours, further complicating the economic crisis and
compounding the problem of unemployment by
that of massive and uncontrolled emigration. How¬
ever, the reverse is also true: an economic crisis which
destroys an industry in North America or Australia
may leave a South American peasant or a Central
Asian miner without the means of subsistence.

B Y FEDERICO A Y O R
Nothing illustrates this situation better than
environmental issues. The irrational use of fertil¬
izers, the accumulation of nuclear waste, air, water
and soil pollution, loss of biologicial diversity, deple¬
tion of certain non-renewable resources these are
some of the dangers which threaten our entire
planet, because the degradation of the natural envi¬
ronment knows no frontiers.
UNESCO is endeavouring by various means
to stimulate debate and encourage the search for
solutions that will reverse those trends, reduce the
growing disparity between the standard of living of
the industrialized North and the developing South,
foster scientific and cultural creativity and pro¬
mote peace.
Unfortunately, our society is still shaped, essen¬
tially, by the culture of war. The production appa¬
ratus of the modern world is closely linked to the
military machine. Now that the Cold War is over
and democratic trends are providing us with addi¬
tional safeguards of international peace, we realize
that we are not prepared to confront the most
serious and urgent dangers which threaten the
future of our civilization. We are prepared for the
past; we are not prepared for the present.
Events after 1989 were expected to bring about
a re-evaluation of the concepts of defence and secu¬
rity throughout the world. Yet the conceptual re-
evaluation has not thus far led to any significant
reduction in defence spending. The much-touted
and eagerly awaited "peace dividend" has failed to
result in massive investments in education, public
health or aid to developing countries and other sec¬
tors where public action is urgently needed.
The view of progress and development that has
prevailed until very recently is in need of a thor¬
ough overhaul: the idea that development is little
more than growth, and that raising industrial pro¬
duction indexes and boosting the consumption of
electricity is enough to modernize a country and
provide a better future for its people. This mistaken
belief results in the imposition from outside of devel¬
opment models which fail to take due account of
the historical, cultural and psychological particu¬
larities of the people to whom they are applied. One
consequence of this approach is the enormous mate¬
rial and emotional price paid by many countries
which have been obliged by international financial
institutions to implement economic structural adjust¬
ment policies.
The crucial question facing us today is who
will reap the benefit of development. Are our
efforts directed towards the men and women of
tomorrow, the generations who will inherit the
earth, or are we acting to satisfy short-sighted
economic interests or crude ambitions of power? At
the beginning of this century, another Spanish
poet, Miguel de Unamuno, was already vigorously
criticizing this conception of progress. "We must
produce," he wrote, "produce as much as possible
in all fields at the least cost, and then let the human
species collapse at the foot of the monumental
tower of Babel, overburdened with goods,
machines, books, paintings, statues, tokens of
worldly glory and history!"
The consumerist Tower ofBabel
Above all let us not yield to the siren song of unre¬
strained consumption. Having freed ourselves from
communism, we must now liberate ourselves from
consumerism. The idea that consumption can expand
indefinitely is untenable. The risk of exhausting non¬
renewable resources, the need to avoid pollution and
environmental degradation, and the threats to the
ozone layer, to biological diversity, to the health and
well-being of future generations and to the natural
and cultural heritage of humankind are the strongest
arguments against any fantasy of unlimited con¬
sumption for the next century.
It is essential to counter that mirage with a vision
of all-round, sustainable development, having due
regard for the environment, consumption based on
quality and not on quantity, and a rehabilitation of
spiritual values which will help reorder our priori¬
ties and which must necessarily lead to frugality
and ecological restraint. In the coming decades,
quality of life will be increasingly bound up with
austerity and a responsible attitude towards the
environment.
Nebuchadnezzar's dream ends as follows: "A



fallen stone, not thrown by anyone, struck the
statue on its feet of clay, and destroyed it". Our civ¬
ilization, this highly complex machine, with its
extraordinary achievements in such diverse realms
as the arts, science, industry and culture, is like
the biblical colossus. If we fail to correct properly
the imbalances which threaten it, if we fail to
achieve harmony among all peoples in a frame¬
work of justice and dignity, if we are not capable of
leaving a habitable planet to future generations,
then we shall become daily more like a statue with
feet of clay, at the mercy of a pebble hurled at us by
blind fate.
33
