New therapeutic approaches
by Jean-Marie Andrieu
By slowing down the activity of the immune system it may be possible
to slow down the development of the disease
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infects a specific cat¬
egory of white corpuscles, the CD4 lymphocytes. It causes a bio¬
logical disease typified by the gradual disappearance of these
CD4 lymphocytes from the lymphoid tissue. Clinically speaking,
this disappearance takes place silently between three and fifteen
years after infection. When the CD4 pool is severely depleted,
repeated opportunistic infections occur which eventually lead to
death, even if they are treated with antibiotics. In order to combat
replication of the virus, and the consequent destruction of the CD4
lymphocytes, researchers have turned their attention to the anti¬
retroviral molecules, the chief of which is zidovudine (AZT). For
a period generally lasting no more than a few months this med¬
ication slows down viral replication and thus the depletion of
CD4s.
The phenomenon of activation is a point of capital impor¬
tance in understanding the loss of CD4 lymphocytes. It is a process
encompassing a phase of cellular proliferation accompanied by the
emission of biological molecules and followed by the death of the
cells. Death is either spontaneous or caused by killer cells
according to a biological process called apoptosis. Activation
thus causes excessive cellular consumption. If it is accepted that
cell renewal in the immune system is a finite process, it is clear that
marked chronic cell consumption might exhaust the immune
system. It has long been known that the more biological symptoms
of activation there are, the more quickly infection develops. The
activation level of immune cells results from individual genetic
diversity and from environmental factors. Thus the high number
of pathogenic agents present endemically in Africa and in the
tropical regions are certainly constant factors in the activation of
the immune system, which would explain the faster development
of HIV infection in Africa.
It can thus be seen that forms of treatment that partially
inhibit excessive activation of the immune system may paradox¬
ically slow down CD4 activation and thereby preserve the CD4
pool. Cyclosporine and glucocorticoids are medication of this
kind. We have studied their effects on a small number of HIV-
infected patients . Among the HIV-infected patients treated over
a one-year-period with a small dose of glucocorticoids (0.5 mg/kg,
then 0.3 mg/kg), a decrease in the activation of the immune system
was observed as well as a stabilization of the concentration of the
virus and an increase in the rate of CD4 associated with a decrease
in their apoptosic rate. Nevertheless, a great deal of caution is
called for in exploring this kind of treatment. We hope that in the
near future Aids research groups will paya good deal of attention
to these new therapeutic approaches. Before considering its ther¬
apeutic use, the benefit/toxicity relationship of this kind of treat¬
ment must be evaluated with great precision.
* Journal of Infectious Diseases, March 1995;
AIDS, January 1995; Immunology Today, January 1995.

