Our middle-aged neighbouring star
by Pierre Lantos
8
An X-ray image of the sun
taken by satellite showing the
activity of the corona, the outer
layer of the solar atmosphere.
The corona is formed by gas at
very low density but an
extremely high temperature
(1 to 5 million degrees Kelvin).
The brightest areas are active
regions where sunspots would
be seen in visible light. The
darkest regions are coronal
holes from which a stream of
charged particles is ejected
into space.
PIERRE LANTOS,
of France, is a research director
at his country's National Centre
for Scientific Research (CNRS)
and an astronomer at the Paris-
Meudon observatory. He is the
author of Le So/e/7 (Paris, 1994).
Once upon a time there was a vast empty
space within our galaxy, nearer to the
edge than the centre. We should probably never
have known anything about it had it not become
the birthplace of a star our sun. For the space
was not entirely empty; it c'ontained an enor¬
mous cloud of hydrogen molecules and par¬
ticles of dust. This cloud became unstable, then
collapsed and broke up into smaller and smaller
clouds. Our sun and its planets were born of one
of these tiny clouds.
When such a cloud collapses under the effect
of its own weight, a lot of energy is released, and
the surrounding temperature at first only a
few dozen absolute degrees rises and eventu¬
ally reaches several thousand degrees. Contrac
tion comes to an end when the star's core tem¬
perature reaches a million degrees and nuclear
reactions begin. Tens of millions of years elapse
between the time when the hydrogen cloud
begins to destabilize and the birth of the adult
star. This is a very brief youth for a star like the
sun whose life will last for ten thousand million
years or more.
A nuclear furnace
When they tried to explain the origin of solar
energy, nineteenth-century astronomers
advanced three hypotheses: that it was due either
to chemical reactions, to the contraction of the
star or to meteorites falling into the sun. By the
end of the century the most lucid of them had

The sun is actually a middle-agedstar, But even though halfits life
is ove)) there's no causefor alarm. The heavenly body that gives
us light still has a brightfuture ahead ofit.
Right, computerized false-
colour photo of a giant cluster
of sunspots. The picture was
taken a few months before
maximum in the 11-year cycle
of solar activity.
Above right, Aurora borealis,
the northern lights,
photographed over spruce trees
near Fairbanks, Alaska (United
States). These luminous
displays appear in the night sky
at high northern latitudes when
charged subatomic particles
from the sun interact with
atoms and molecules in the
earth's upper atmosphere.
realized that none of these processes could
supply the energy the star needs over a very
long period. The great experimental and theo¬
retical discoveries made in the first half of the
twentieth century revealed that solar energy is
actually produced by nuclear fusion reactions
that convert hydrogen into helium. These reac¬
tions take place in the core of the sun where
700 million tons of hydrogen are changed into
helium each second and four million tons of
matter are transformed, as Einstein showed,
into energy.
Today several experimental methods can be
used to investigate the opaque interior of the sun.
One of them consists of studying the elementary
particles known as neutrinos that are released by
the fusion of the gas nuclei and are capable of
passing effortlessly through the whole volume
of the sun. But although the neutrinos are very
speedy messengers, the energy released by
nuclear fusion in the central part of the star
takes some ten million years to reach the surface,
moving centimetre by centimetre in a random
fashion. It finally appears in the form of light, an
immense source of life for our planet.
Opots and flares
The main observable phenomena on the sun's
surface are sunspots, which are darker than the
rest of the disc. In Antiquity some observers saw
them with the naked eye. They are signs of the
sun's magnetic field, which, created deep inside
the star, structures its entire atmosphere. When,
during a total eclipse of the sun, the extended
part of this atmosphere the corona can be
observed, it is clear that the solar atmosphere is
not uniform.
Above the spots, in the solar corona, the
magnetic field can stock energy and suddenly
release it. Solar flares which occur frequently
in weak form can nonetheless have a strong î#

In the core of the sun 700 million
tons of hydrogen are changed into
helium each second and four
million tons of matter are
transformed into energy.
Artist Julian Baum's striking
portrayal of the sun as it will
appear near the end of Its life in
around 5,500 million years. It
will evolve into a red giant, 300
times brighter and 50 times
bigger than it is today.
disturbing influence on the interplanetary envi¬
ronment. Like the spots that produce them,
they follow an eleven-year cycle, which is due to
the oscillation of the mechanism creating the
magnetic fields inside the sun. When solar
activity is at its height, the earth's space envi¬
ronment is bombarded with a shower of highly
destructive protons emitted during flares, inter¬
planetary shock waves, and an increase in ultra¬
violet rays and X-rays that are thousands of
times more intense than when the sun is calm.
At such times satellites have a higher rate of
breakdowns and their orbits are greatly dis¬
turbed. Astronauts travelling to the moon or to
other planets would be in serious danger of
radiation during a big flare. On the earth's sur¬
face, we are well protected from the sun's
caprices by our planet's atmosphere and mag¬
netic field. It should be noted, however, that
on rare occasions particle emissions from the sun
may disturb the earth's magnetic field, as can be
seen by an increase in the northern lights, and
have severe effects in telephone and computer
cables and electricity distribution grids. During
flares, radio communication may also be diffi¬
cult, and even impossible, in certain regions.
As already noted, the sun will live to an age of
some ten thousand million years. At 4.5 thousand
million years old, it is now in middle age. It will
continue to burn its hydrogen for about the same
amount of time and remain stable. But then, in its
last thousand million years, the sun will dilate, and
its surface temperature, around 5,800°K at pre¬
sent, will be reduced by half. It will then become
what astronomers call a "red giant", i.e. it will be
at least fifty times bigger and 300 times brighter
than it is today. Life on earth will become infernal.
Then, lacking fuel, the sun will shrink and lose its
brightness, ending up as one of the ghost stars that
wander through the universe.
So, in five billion years, "Stop the world,
we have to get off".
10
