The culture of silence
by Aminata Traoré
My point of view is that of a woman from one of the world's
poorest countries, Mali. The word development has no equiv¬
alent in our local languages. It is primarily an imported theoretical con¬
struct, which has left a mark on our individual and collective lives and
given rise to some surrealist situations.
TERRIBLE HUMAN DAMAGE
In material terms the result of development can be gauged from the
dilapidated state of our infrastructure and from the extent of insalubrity
and mendicity. In mental terms the damage is even greater, though less
easy to evaluate. Under colonialism, and more insidiously during the
last thirty years, self-contempt has been continually instilled into
us. This has profoundly undermined African societies,
Our birth rate is a nuisance; people think we are poor because there
are too many of us. But they forget that without young people there
would never have been democracy in Mali, for it was they who took to
the streets and did what adults no longer dared to do. People do not
realize the tragedy of their lives. Young people represent 60 per cent
of the African population. What future can they look forward to?
DISENCHANTMENT
Nobody talks about the real causes of the failure of development.
Nobody talks about all the waste, or the way this crazy debt has been
contracted. On the ground the process goes quietly on, with its suc¬
cession of senseless projects and programmes. Young people and their
parents do not know about this debt; they do not know that their pre¬
sent and future are mortgaged; they do not know that the World
Bank even exists. Newly elected representatives need fresh money,
and so they keep quiet and let the projects started under previous gov¬
ernments go on. African research workers talking to foreign research
workers also keep their mouths shut, because they are ambitious to
get jobs in international organizations. On the spot, despite the insti¬
tutions' good faith, we deal only with arrogant, pretentious people who
listen to nobody.
It is as though a culture of silence has developed. On the one side
are the so-called illiterate people, entitled neither to information nor
to the truth, and on the other are the decision-makers who prefer to
keep quiet. As for illiteracy, it is not a blemish. My mother, watching
some of your television, said to me: "It seems to me as though hearts
no longer love one another. All this development business is a story
of disenchantment; everybody feels anger towards everybody else".
AMINATA TRAORE,
of Mai!. Is director of the united Nations Development Programme's
regional project on water and sanitation in West Africa.
13
