Interactivity
a matter of give and take by Michel sénécai
A democratic communication system is inconceivable without fair
exchange, plurality of viewpoints, direct contact between
transmitters and receivers, decentralization and respect for privacy
and freedom of expression.
With each new wave of development in
media technology, hopes are raised that
communication in society will be rendered more
democratic. Unscrupulous operators invariably
step forth to promote technical equipment that
they claim will lead directly to fundamental
social change. The word interactive crops up
16
Right, a bundle of optical
fibres, glass filaments that are
increasingly being used for
long-distance transmission of
information in the form of
computer data, voice messages
and video.
ê
*aí^2. * jÈf ^^k
> _r t. i '' m!
^9*éj * 'jrW . .
;^PjA
/ M
f
:w7f
*<

again and again whenever businessmen and poli¬
ticians talk about the electronic information
superhighways of the future. Such metaphors
propagate a new technical and cultural myth,
that of a "communication society" on a global
scale.
Readiness to label all kinds of media tech¬
nology as "interactive" without the term ever
being precisely defined suggests that the word
is being used less to describe these technolo¬
gies than to make them commercially attrac¬
tive. However, there is not necessarily any cor¬
relation between the degree of interactivity
possessed by a piece of technical equipment
and the level of democracy attained by the
media. When a system is described as "uni¬
versal, bidirectional and interactive", we should
ask ourselves who is going to use it and with
whom, and what will be communicated?
Moreover, the fact that a system is universal
does not necessarily mean that it is interactive. It
may enable the suppliers of a service to deliver
directly to subscribers the information and goods
they ask for, but it does not mean that the system's
promoters have equipped it with the technical
facilities (interface, bandwidth, etc.) for commu¬
nication between users. In cable distribution
interactivity has so far been limited to a new way
of choosing goods and services, but one in which
the vertical exchange of data received and trans¬
mitted has remained inegalitarian.
If a communication system is to be used
democratically, it must meet a number of other
conditions as well as being interactive. These
conditions are: immediate and complete reci¬
procity in all exchanges; plurality of viewpoints;
the establishment of direct relations between
partners free both to transmit and receive mes¬
sages; decentralization of information circuits;
respect for freedom of expression and for privacy.
A challenge to civil society
New technical developments must be appraised
critically, taking into account the needs, interests
and values of users.
Regardless of the technological background
of any communications project, what matters
most is its accessibility. Only this can make mul¬
tiple exchanges possible, placing each user, as
often as he or she so wishes, in the position of a
supplier of information to the network.
No communication system can be consid¬
ered genuinely democratic if it causes exclu¬
sion, either because of its inaccessibility or
because of the images of society it creates. If its
architecture is closed and vertical, it may operate
exclusively to the benefit of a few authorized
suppliers.
Will the coming "information superhigh¬
ways" simply renew existing methods of
delivery and distribution of goods of all kinds:
catalogue retail sales, pay-per-view, electronic
entertainment, banking services, video games,
lotteries and so on? The new networks such as
teleshopping via cable TV will resemble elec¬
tronic home distribution centres over which
absolute control will be exercised by certain
private interests. Here interactivity will be lim¬
ited to sophisticated systems of selectivity,
allowing choices to be made among a number of
pre-programmed commercial options.
But it is also possible that information high¬
ways could provide the general public with
access to genuine information networks of the
kind that are already being offered by the
Internet. Combined with decentralized com¬
munication mechanisms, interactivity would
then encourage conversational-type reciprocal
exchanges. The roles of transmitter and receiver
would become interchangeable, allowing a very
Above, a computer exhibition
in Paris.
17

An Afghan journalist being
trained in Peshawar, Pakistan.
At this home shopping centre
in the United States, 2,000
operators can take 20,000
calls a minute.
wide diversity of viewpoints to be expressed.
This socio-political definition of interactivity is
based on a participatory, egalitarian view of
communication, one that would offer all indi¬
viduals and social groups who are excluded
from the dominant models presented by the
media the means to compose and broadcast
messages that correspond to their real commu¬
nication needs.
The Internet is the product of a hybridization
process. Originally designed for military use,
then for institutional use, it finally underwent a
certain process of socialization to become what
it is today. Unfortunately, it is already being
eyed covetously by financial interests, and vir¬
tual shopping malls are appearing on it. This
development calls to mind the period during
which European radio and television stations
were "liberalized", particularly in France and
Italy in the late 1970s, leading to the creation of
private audiovisual companies. The challenge
to state monopolies by social movements mobi¬
lized to remove communication from the thrall
of the authorities and of market forces resulted,
paradoxically, in the commercialization of the



media via privatization.
I wo opposing concepts
Thus there are tensions between two opposing
concepts of interactivity selectivity and reci¬
procity reflecting two different views of the
democratization of the media. In one, viewers
are a captive audience in a commercial environ¬
ment provided to them on a turnkey basis, in
which the idea of interactivity remains frozen at
a purely instrumental stage, entirely oriented
towards consumption. The other calls for a crit¬
ical reappropriation of the media based on plu¬
rality and reciprocity of exchanges as well as
greater participation in the decision-making
process by those who are at the receiving end of
the communication process.
The predominance of the view focusing on
the technical and customer aspects of commu¬
nication is certainly linked to a specific concept
of democracy, subject to the logic of the market
and clearly oriented towards reduced public-
sector services. Interactive technologies will
thus continue to lend themselves to social par¬
ticipation in name only unless citizens mobilize
in support of a more accessible and egalitarian
form of media democratization.
18
MICHEL SÉNÉCAL,
of Quebec (Canada), is a
professor and researcher at the
Télé-université of the University
of Quebec. He is the author of
"The Alternative in Search of its
Identity", which appeared in
Video the Changing World, a
collective work edited by Nancy
Thede and Alain Ambrosi (Black
Rose Books, Montreal, 1991).
His latest book, Une démocratie
du paradoxe, Logiques d'acteurs
et démocratisation de l'espace
médiatique, is scheduled for
publication later this year.
