A mysterious journey
by François-Bernard Huyghe
Pilgrimages are a feature of most of the world's religions
Above, Pilgrims going to
Mecca, a painting by the
French artist Léon Belly (1827-
1877). Mecca, In Saudi Arabia,
is the birthplace and heart of
Islam.
Between non-existent pillars, bathed in
unearthly light, a human clone advances
without moving. As he looks around or conti¬
nues on his imaginary way, the perspective
changes and different parts of the sanctuary
float into or out of his field of vision.
The scene thus described is real enough. By
means of virtual imaging technology, people
wearing headsets linked to computers can "visit"
the basilica of Cluny in France, "walk" around
the ambulatory, "turn" right or left, "gaze
upwards" at the vaulting and so forth, though
they may be hundreds of miles away.
Wearing a virtual reality headset, the believer
can theoretically "see" a place of worship, but
could he or she thereby be considered to make
a pilgrimage? The faithful of all religions would
answer "no" to this provocative question, and,
perhaps, condemn the very idea of such a pre¬
tence. There can be no pilgrimage without a
body of flesh and blood, no pilgrim's way
without a dusty road, no effective devotion
without real space. This is the first paradox
associated with pilgrimage. The body must grow
heavy for the soul to become light. Feet are
needed to go where the spirit breathes. That is
why, in the age of the instantaneous transmission
of images and of rapid transport, great multi¬
tudes surge around the Kaaba, on the banks of
the Ganges or on the plain of Chartres.
Far from being outmoded, pilgrimages are
highly topical. But what are they, exactly? The
concentration-camp survivor who revisits
Auschwitz and the old soldier who tours the
cemeteries along the Verdun road where the
bones of the fighting men of the First World War
lie mingled are commonly said to be making a
pilgrimage. On a less sombre note, we talk of
making a pilgrimage to the scenes of our youth
or to the place where we met a loved one. But
whether they are connected with death or love,
respect or nostalgia, such visits to the scenes of
the past are pilgrimages only by analogy, by
reference to a kind of journey that should not be
confused with any other.

Below, young penitents take
part in a pilgrimage to the
church of Our Lady of
Guadalupe, a few kilometres
away from the centre of Mexico
City. The church stands on the
spot where the Holy Virgin
appeared to an Indian in 1531.
About 10 million pilgrims visit
the shrine every year.
A pilgrimage is a quintessentially religious
act which creates a bond. It connects secular
places with the world above, the wayfarer with
the travelling community of the faithful, and the
flesh-and-blood pilgrim with his second self,
who will be reborn, healed or cleansed by making
the pilgrimage. These bonds or bridges between
orders of reality imply that there is a distinction
between pilgrimages and mere ceremonies, gath¬
erings, acts of worship, processions or devo-
10
tional visits, even though pilgrimages may include
all of these. They require at one and the same time
a sacred place, a sacred way and a sacred goal.
Few religions have been able to do without this
threefold mediation. Some have expressed mistrust
of a practice, often spontaneous and originating
among the rank and file, that can easily degenerate
into superstition, the fetishistic veneration of
relics, or the impious assessment of merits and
rewards. Many Christian theologians, for example,
see pilgrimages as an obstacle to contact with the
divine in the form of a pointless, or impure, detour
through the world of the senses. This was the
attitude of the Reformation towards Catholic
pilgrimages in the sixteenth century.
Buddhism is divided between its reservations
about the relics or representations of the Enlight¬
ened One (since he shows the way to liberation
from the cycle of reincarnation) on the one hand
and, on the other, the demands of the faithful
who, even in the lifetime of Gautama Buddha,
begged him for places, relics or signs to help
them express their fervent devotion to him after
his disappearance. Just as any religion may expe¬
rience a battle between iconolaters and iconoclasts
(is it possible to achieve knowledge of the divine
through the love of palpable representations?), so
theologians waver, where pilgrimages are con-

Left, Hindu pilgrims make their
way to the Amamath caves,
over 4,500 metres high in the
Indian State of Jammu and
Kashmir.
cerned, between fear of degeneration into idolatry
or magic and acknowledgment of believers' per¬
manent needs.
We cannot say for certain that pilgrimages
have always existed, even though there is evidence
to suggest that travellers made their way to holy
places in prehistoric times. In the absence ofwritten
records to shed light on their significance, we shall
never know whether these hypothetical gatherings
met our definition. On the other hand, we have
well-attested written records ofpilgrimages dating
back to the Mesopotamian civilization, to the holy
places of Nippur and Babylon, and of sacred jour¬
neys made by the Egyptians and the Hittites.
Though we cannot be sure that pilgrimages
are a universal phenomenon, geographically
speaking, it should be remarked that very few reli¬
gions that have spread beyond the territorial con¬
fines of a single ethnic group have not given rise
to comparable gatherings in some form or other.
H
Below, pilgrims celebrate
appearances of the Virgin Mary
in the Senegalese village of
Popenguine, some 30
kilometres south of Dakar. The
pilgrimage takes place each
year at Whitsuntide.
oly places
Is the symbolism of the topography of the pil¬
grimage any less worthy to be considered uni¬
versal than the pilgrimage itself? What is the
constant goal? Holy places come in various
kinds. They may be mountains or rivers, grottoes
or lakes, trees or springs, but by the depths
The three essential components of
a pilgrimage are a sacred place, a
sacred way and a sacred goal.
from which they rise or the height that they
attain they suggest a transition to another dimen¬
sion than the horizontal and terrestrial where the
pilgrim lives, moves and has his being. This is the
first interpretation that comes to mind of the pil¬
grim's destination, be it the Ganges or Mount
Arafat, Athena's olive or the Bodhi tree, the
mountain top where the Taoist pilgrim climbs to
seek audience, or the springs of Lourdes where
the sick immerse themselves.
While most pilgrimages lead to a holy city or
building, one should also add the dimension of
time to that of space. The shrine, whether it con¬
tains the relics of a saint or the visible marks of a
past contact with the divine, a temple, a tablet of
the law, signs of a miracle or reminders of a
covenant, recalls some foundation event. The goal
of the pilgrimage, whether it is a place from which
the faith emanates, a centre on which it converges
or a commemorative representation, allows of
many different interpretations. The power at
work is often so great that one and the same site
1»
^ "irî'iB^TiL^^ 1 >p\-s
^** ^_c^*~j w^Bnter^^j "^BhB^Btm ' i» -.. a», ^fr^
L^^ >*v &'^ -o ¿f*Z*f~:^**apyte< - ' j
BL^.^?- ^^W
1 V ^5öSKK--^
Tw, 1 x* *"¿ÍB^i '" ï I
V BlH^^EflBBBAV M
B^L^T ^BV » * ** BH Bm i *^L wM^^" B^r"~JBl I 3
¿\y W* il BF 1 l\ BWfl Br fettBk ^B B
wi 1 i lYilnllMl
j 1
Br ^E ibBL I|^ R55^L Ij'.uH Hi^BBI Im
11

may be revered by various faiths, in succession or
simultaneously. Thus, we learn from medieval
travellers' tales that the same tracks at the top of
a mountain in present-day Sri Lanka were vari¬
ously revered as the footsteps of the Buddha and
as those of Adam, and drew Buddhists, Muslims ''
and Christians alike. Jerusalem, city of peace, is
sacred to the three major monotheistic religions.
Peace often lies more in the significance of such
places than in the logic of men.
A Brahman at prayer on the
banks of the Ganges in Benares
(Uttar Pradesh), a major
pilgrimage centre in India.
Homeward bound
12
The goal is, however, nothing without the way
to it. The pilgrim's progress is a journey through
space and time and within the self, a metaphor
of the secular life and something that endows it
with meaning. The pilgrim's way also estab¬
lishes a bond: it brings together and unites trav¬
ellers at the same high point in their existence, it
spreads ideas and models, and it forges an
alliance between peoples who share a faith and
a culture. It would be absurd to exclude Mecca,
Jerusalem, or the road to Compostela, Delphi or
Olympia from any explanation of the historical
unity of the civilizations to which they belong.
Such an explanation would lack an essential
component the idea that civilization implies
transmission and circulation.
FRANÇOIS-BERNARD HUYGHE,
French writer and journalist, is a
former member of Unesco's
Division of Cultural Heritage. His
most recent published works are
Les Coureurs d'êpices, Sur la
route Oes Indes fabuleuses
("The Spice Hunters, On the
Road to the Fabulous Indies",
J.-C. Lattes, Paris, 1995) and
(with Edith Huyghe) Les Empires
du mirage, Hommes, dieux et
mythes sur la route de la Soie
("Men, Gods and Myths on the
Silk Road", Robert Laffont,
Paris, 1993).
Mere specks borne along in a movement
that is greater than they are, pilgrims are also
transformed when they reach the end of their
personal journey. They may hope for a sick¬
ness to be cured, for the remission of a mis¬
deed, for a cleansing or even a mystical death and
symbolic rebirth, but whatever happens they
will end their pilgrimage different from when
they began it. Regenerated by an initiatory
journey, having cast off their old selves, they
often celebrate this regeneration in the joyous
explosion of festivities and celebrations that
mark the end of a cycle. Then the time of
remembrance begins.
From the Chinese Journey to the West
(Hiyouji) to Hermann Hesse's Journey to the
East and Lanza del Vasto 's Return to the Source,
literature has by no means exhausted the com¬
memoration or interpretation of pilgrimages.
This may be because pilgrimages obey two con¬
tradictory principles: that of otherness (going to
another place, experiencing a different time,
becoming another person) and repetition
(retracing a sacred route, repeating gestures,
returning to a point of departure . . .). Flesh-and-
blood pilgrims solved that mystery long ago.
When pilgrims reach journey's end they know
they have returned to their true home.
