An ethical
commitment
by Devaki Jain
Not everyone shares the pessimistic view of development that
seems to be in the air. Development is the mirror of social
action and the result of an active civil society. In the field we are
resisting development that brings economic growth without bringing
jobs, and this resistance is wasting a lot of our energy. We are
trying to reconstruct on a local level, using our natural resources to
protect our environments against destruction.
GANDHI'S MODEL
Ethics and development go together, and Mahatma Gandhi was suc¬
cessful in combining the two. He implemented a growth model
based on "bubble-up" rather than "trickle-down" economics. This calls
for two basic reforms:
A political reform: government must be decentralized and run by
democratically elected local officials. But political decentralization
is only viable if it is accompanied by economic and technological
decentralization as well.
-* An economic reform: attention should be focused on the poorest
of the poor, who should be at the core of our preoccupations.
India, for example, recently adopted a reform that extends the
power of local government while giving the poor a much greater share
of representation (30 per cent for women and 30 per cent for lower
castes).
MAKING UTOPIA A REALITY
Much is said about alleviating poverty but not about eradicating it.
I believe, however, that the eradication of poverty is the key to sus¬
tainable development. We have to build up economic development
within a framework of justice. To accomplish that, North and South
have to show solidarity. But first the North must become more
democratic by changing its economic policies and allowing its
society to play a bigger role. Personal commitment, solidarity in
thought and action, moral imperatives, ethics, sacrifice, altruism and
confidence in the people's competence, are all key values in the
struggle for development. Intellectuals should mobilize so as to
give these ideas a wider audience. Utopia must be given a chance.
DEVAKI JAIN
Is an Indian economist with the Institute of Social Stjdies Trust (Delhi
and Bangalore). She is a founder member of several associations,
including DAWN (Develooment Alternative with Women for a New Era).
25
