Yitzhak Rabin
in 1985.
Close friends of Yitzhak Rabin say mischievously:
"When he was a teenager Yitzhak was ginger-
haired. There's a slang word in Hebrew to describe the
temperament of people with ginger hair: gingi, which
means inflammable. Gingi people flare up like tinder."
When still only a young man, Rabin was quite pre¬
pared to clash with Ben Gurion, He cut his teeth in the
Palmach, the commando troops secretly formed during
the British mandate. Once Israel had gained indepen¬
dence, Ben Gurion disbanded the Palmach and Rabin
became a "regular" soldier. But he kept in touch with
his former comrades more so than Ben Gurion would
have liked. As a result, Israel's patriarch felt a mixture
of resentment and esteem. He found himself dealing
with a sabra1 who stood up to him and used familiar
forms of language when addressing him. It was enough to
irritate Ben Gurion, but no more than that.
It may seem surprising that someone like Rabin,
whose responsibility when he was Defence Minister was
to put down the intifada, should subsequently be the
man who made peace with the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) particularly since the intifada
eventually ran out of steam. But Rabin realized that
running out of steam is not the same thing as disap¬
pearing entirely. When he recognized the PLO, Rabin
was not renouncing his belief in Zionism. On the con¬
trary, the man who, after Ben Gurion and Begin2, can
lay claim to the title of king of Israel, is determined to
hang on to what he has achieved. If the war continues,
26

YITZHAK RABIN
a hawk with the wings of a dove
by Luc Beyer de Ryke
it will prove an ever-increasing drain on resources. More
seriously, if it is hard to keep law and order in the
streets of the Occupied Territories, it is impossible to
prevent children from being born: the Palestinian
birth-rate will eventually threaten Zionism.
During the First World War, the French socialist
Marcel Sembat proclaimed: "Make war or make a king."
The French did both: in Georges Clemenceau, known as
"the Tiger", they found a republican king who waged
war and won it. Rabin is just as tough as "the Tiger".
But making war does not preclude hard thinking. Rabin
may be quick-tempered, but he also has a methodical
and well-ordered mind. Indeed, he is sometimes criti¬
cized for being almost too rational. If you go to war and
lasting victory eludes you, it is as if you had lost the war.
The important thing for Rabin is to be able to guarantee
Israel's security and, as a result, the survival of Zionism.
The journey from the icy waters of Oslo Fjord to the
White House was a psychological ordeal for him. But it
was necessary and he made it.
HARD BARGAINING
Rabin is familiar with Washington. He spent years
there as ambassador and knows the workings of Amer¬
ican politics inside out. He has had to deal with people
like Presidents Nixon, Ford and Carter and Secretary
of State Henry A. Kissinger. His main interlocutor was
probably Kissinger. Relations between the two men
were marked by a combination of mutual under¬
standing, disagreement, friendship and complicity as
each fought to defend the interests at once conver¬
gent and divergent of his country. One of the reasons
why Rabin's political rival, Yitzhak Shamir, lost the
1992 elections was probably that he and the White
House were no longer on the same wavelength. Begin
had gradually loosened the traditional ties between
Israel and the United States. Shamir soured relations
even further. In the end, while Israel expected much of
Rabin, so did the United States.
But did the Israelis realize, when they elected
Rabin, that the hawk would sprout the wings of a dove?
It remains to be seen just how far Rabin is now pre¬
pared to go. The peace accords are being implemented
with only lukewarm determination. The letter and the
spirit of the law arc two different things. The tram¬
mels of occupation have been eased in Gaza and
Jericho, but they remain firmly in place in the rest of
the Territories. To be sure, the Palestinians are now in
charge of education, health and tourism in those areas,
and that is already something. But, as an Israeli jour¬
nalist has pointed out: "In the Territories, you open
your newspaper and read reassuring headlines; then
you open your window and see an Israeli patrol driving
past." As for Palestinian prisoners, many are being
released, but even more remain behind bars.
It is hard to decide what degree of generosity
should be shown when it forms an integral part of polit¬
ical bargaining. It is a difficult game to play, and there
are many players. There are Palestinians, Jordanians
and Syrians, not to mention Israeli public opinion,
which probably approves Rabin's policies, though
nowadays only halfheartedly.
For the time being, Rabin wants to stick to the
Accord, whether it ends up being called the Oslo,
Washington or Cairo Accord. The agreement implies, in
his eyes, a refusal to accept a Palestinian "state". But
Rabin-watchers think he may shift his ground if the
peace process works. If this turns out to be the case, a
Palestinian "state" would no longer have the explosive
repercussions which the Israelis fear today.
Fresh elections are due a year from now, and for the
first time the Prime Minister will be elected by universal
su ffrage. It is thought that Rabin intends to stand. Were
he to win, Israel would get a taste of a republican
monarchy of the kind experienced by the French under
Charles de Gaulle and François Mitterrand.
If Yahweh and the electorate smile on him, that
election will mark the official consecration of Yitzhak
Rabin as king of Israel and, perhaps, a new stage in the
long road towards peace. I
1. The name given by Israelis to those born in the region of the
modern state of Israel. Ed.
2. Menachem Begin, Prime Minister of Israel from 1977 to 1983.
Joint winner, with President Anwar El Sadat of Egypt, of the 1978
iNobel Peace Prize. Ed.
LUC BEYER DE RYKE,
of Belgium, isa
journalist with his
country's French-
language radio and
television service
(RTBF). He is the
author of several
books on political
subjects, Including
two about Africa,
and an
autobiography.
h5
nn>3V;>3
ryoa
In September 1993 ET 'V
demonstrators in Tel u^Bvftl
Aviv-Jaffa show their jnri > ('
support for the ^ ' :	
policy of seeking
agreement with the ffifi IF
PLO.
.
oprt
I ,U1|
oyrt]
FT
27
