CO
O
In pre-Columbian
America the Maya,
the Toltecs and the
Aztecs developed
largely figurative
writing systems in
which colours played
an important role
>'fl£



Colour-coded languages
by Joaquin Galarza
16
Above, the "Ambassador's stela"
(c. 1500 B.C.) at the Olmec site
at La Venta in Mexico. The glyphs
inscribed on it are among the
oldest script signs found in
Central America.
I Writing has been practised in Central
America since very early times. A wide
variety of symbols appeared as early as the
Olmec period, long before the Christian era.
Some of them continued to be used unchanged
in the later Teotihuacán, Mixtee, Maya, Zapotee
and Aztec civilizations, and arc found in even
more recent manuscripts dating from the six¬
teenth-eighteenth centuries.
Incised, painted, or carved in relief on stone
or wood, writing covered the walls of civil and
religious buildings and monuments. The reader
had to walk around in order to read the texts,
which were mainly concerned with events

related to astronomical observations or marked
the beginning or end of governments. Figures
and dates were abundant.
The first moveable supports used for writing
were probably animal hides (mainly deerskins).
Jadeite masks and figurines sent as offerings to
distant temples bore short, probably religious
texts, explaining where the objects were from.
Longer and more complex texts on mythical,
historical and religious subjects were written
on ceramic receptacles.
Much later on, when cotton was grown, spun
and woven, cartographical and genealogical infor¬
mation was recorded on large pieces of cloth.
In earlier times the bark of the wild fig tree, the
amatl, was used to make long strips of "paper" on
which illustrated texts were inscribed. Leaves of
paper and hides could be kept rolled up in scrolls,
or else folded and protected between two pieces
of wood to form codices (singular codex), the
name given to the European manuscript books
which they resembled.
r ictograms drawn from observation
Because they differ in appearance, it has been
said there are several Central American writing
systems. There is, however, a single basic system
whose most original feature is its pictorial basis.
Images were fully codified in order to tran¬
scribe the basic semantic and phonetic elements
of the languages of the indigenous populations,
which could then be used to record and com¬
municate their ideas and their knowledge, and
also produce works of art.
The pictographic or pictorial manuscripts
of Central America are like strip cartoons in
which every figure counts because each element
signifies a concept and refers to an object, as
well as having phonetic and plastic values.
The pictograms were the result of direct
observation. They showed plants, animals, man¬
ufactured objects and parts of the human body
with various degrees of stylization, sometimes
in completely abstract form.
There was nothing gratuitous or purely dec¬
orative about these drawings, which should be
read as a totality. They originally formed part of
a common plastic convention, although the
image changes in response to the linguistic needs
of each group.
The spatial distribution of the signs also
varies from one civilization to another. The
Maya, for example, tended to favour a linear
arrangement for certain types of sign, though
they also set aside horizontal or vertical areas in
order to write other words continuously, par¬
ticularly when they were recording calculations
or presenting a chronology of events.
However, the first word signs were drawn
inside cartouches in which figurative elements can
be seen. In Central American images the largest
drawings seem distinct from the others. Space in
general seems to be divided into two: glyphic
for small images and iconic for larger ones. Mixtee
and Aztec documents depict "landscapes" and
"scenes" in which different themes are superim¬
posed and information is presented step by step.
Glyphs and icons are combined and associ¬
ated in the pictorial area. There are always some
guidelines to indicate the direction in which the
manuscript is to be read. The script is a mixture
of logography and iconography.
It is only in documents with a highly spe¬
cific purpose, such as calendars, chronicles or
Detail from an Aztec ritual
calendar or "book of destiny"
dating from the time of the
conquistadors (15th-16th
centuries). Painted on paper
made from bark, the calendar was
dedicated to Petecatl, the god of
pulque (fermented agave juice)
symbolized by the pot at his feet.
In front of the god are two
warriors, an eagle and a jaguar.

Essentially, there is a single system
with a pictorial basis. Images were
codified to allow the indigenous
populations to record and
communicate their ideas, and also
produce works of art.
Left, a mural painted by the
contemporary Mexican artist
Desiderio Xochitiotzin for the
government offices at Tlaxcala,
capital of the Mexican state of the
same name. It shows a group of
Tlaxcalans looking at a codex around
the time when America was
"discovered" by Christopher
Columbus.
Above, a Maya manuscript (15th-
16th centuries). Glyphs and drawings
are painted on a strip of paper made
from fibres of the amatl (wild fig) tree.
The manuscript is several metres long
and folds like an accordéon.
18
JOAQUIN GALARZA,
of Mexico, is a research director
at France's National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS) and
is attached to the ethnology
laboratory of the Musée de
l'Homme. Among his published
works is a study on traditional
Aztec writing in Náhuatl (Mexico
City, 1988).
economic lists that the different "texts" can be
distinguished one from another.
The Aztec model
Tlacuiloa, the term used in Náhuatl, the lan¬
guage of the Aztecs, to designate the traditional
writing system means "to write while painting"
or else "to paint while writing" writing and
painting being in this case the same activity.
Although research into the decoding of the
Aztec notation is still in its infancy, we can be
sure that it is a dual system of drawings (glyphs
and icons) originating from the same plastic
convention and based on the sounds of Náhuatl.
Codification of images is thus primarily by
sound: shapes defined by a black outline form
surfaces designed to contain colours. These
symbols transcribe the basic phonetic elements
(syllables) and semantic elements of the Náhuatl
language.
Words, sentences and paragraphs are con¬
structed using combinations of these elements.
The plastic and phonic composition created by
the tlacuilo ("writer-painter") results in "picture-
texts" where the order and direction for reading
the shapes and colours are indicated by the artist
within the drawing itself.
Colours are basic components of the Central
American pictographic system, unlike other
such systems. They are pronounced (each one
has a phonetic value) and the syllables of their
names are combined with those of other ele¬
ments, including their own receptacle-shapes.
This in no way diminishes their representative
value.
These codices or "picture-texts" must first of
all be read in the Náhuatl language before being
interpreted. To do this, the reader must know, in
addition to the language, the code governing
shapes, surfaces and colours in the Aztec system
of representation.
