Dismantling the mechanism
Of eXClllSion by Ignacy Sachs
What can be done to prevent societies from
disintegrating as a result of worsening unemployment
and poverty?
IGNACY SACHS
¡s a French socio-economist who
heads the Research Centre on
Contemporary Brazil at the
School of Advanced Studies in
Social Sciences (EHESS) in
Paris, where he is also in
charge of doctoral studies on
comparative research on
development. His works
published in English include
Development and Planning
(Cambridge University Press,
1987) and Studies in Political
Economy of Development
(Pergamon, 1980).
I In June 1992 the Rio Earth Summit laid
down the founding principle of eco-
development or "sustainable development".
The idea is that any development worth the
name should promote social justice, while res¬
pecting nature and seeking economic efficiency
without the latter two factors' becoming ends in
themselves. The Burkinabé historian Joseph Ki-
Zerbo aptly summed up this approach when
he wrote: "Ecodevelopment? Yes. But only as
long as it is people-centred."1
The Social Summit in Copenhagen also turns
its back on an exaggerated emphasis on eco
nomics, which regards economic growth as the
necessary and sufficient condition of develop¬
ment. Our societies are paying a very high price
for having put economics in the driver's seat
instead of being dependent on a social project
democratically defined. The crisis brought about
by structural unemployment and underem¬
ployment affects the whole world. According to
United Nations estimates, almost one-third of
the workforce is affected.
With very few exceptions, all the models seem
to be running out of steam or even collapsing. The
social cost of restructuring the former communist
societies and economies in eastern Europe on
capitalist lines is very high. It is creating distor¬
tions similar to those observed in the countries of
the South which are engaged in an impossible
endeavour to copy models taken over from the
industrialized nations. Here, the processes of

"The modern sector no longer
needs the services of
marginalized men and women.
At best it relegates them to the
purgatory of the informal
economy." Above, selling bread
in a Yaounde street
(Cameroon).
Black market trading in
Moscow (Russia).
development, or maldevelopment, are bringing
benefits to a minority to the detriment of the
majority.
A 'fair-share' civilization
Contrary to forecasts made by theorists of the
"dual" economy functioning at two or more
speeds forms of social exclusion have emerged
on a massive scale. The modern sector no longer



needs the services of marginalized men and
women. At best it relegates them to the purga¬
tory of the informal economy, which is put for¬
ward as a solution to maldevelopment, of which
it is actually one of the worst symptoms. In the
absence of social protection, productive rela¬
tionships in the informal sector are often
extremely brutal. The survival strategies
deployed by those involved in the informal
economy remain, for the time being, a mere
palliative. They must not be allowed to serve as
10
The growth mechanism
functions in and
through inequality.
Redistribution of income
should be part of
the production process.
a pretext for states to evade their responsibilities
and opt out of the fight against the root causes
of exclusion.
This "dualization" of the economy is also
happening in the industrialized countries, where
the problem of social exclusion has become
front-page news. We are witnessing what might
be termed the creation of a "Third World" on a
global scale. This is where the Copenhagen
Summit comes in. To varying extents and in
different ways, the fight against poverty and
for social integration and the creation of pro¬
ductive jobs concerns most of the member coun¬
tries of the United Nations.
We must rethink our development strate¬
gies and invent new ways of regulating mixed
economies (those in which the public and private
sectors coexist). Development transcends the
material dimensions of human existence but it
cannot disregard them. Even if we view it as
the construction of a civilization based on
human beings, such a civilization cannot flourish
unless resources are fairly shared out.
But resources are increasingly unevenly dis¬
tributed within and between nations. The
growth mechanism functions in and through
inequality. It is very hard to correct this phe¬
nomenon by redistributing a small percentage of
income on the margin. Only the distribution of
income that is part of the production process will
have a decisive impact. Unemployment is not an
inevitable result of the globalization of the
economy. The great majority of countries still
sell the bulk of their products, especially services,
on their domestic market. The growth of the
latter will continue to play an essential role in
development. This is particularly true of big
countries and those in which a significant part of
the population is barely integrated into the

market economy because of its extremely low
purchasing power.
How can hundreds of millions of marginal¬
ized or semi-marginalized people be made more
productive? By identifying opportunities for
employment and self-employment which are
still under-used. These opportunities are bound
up with better management of the resources of
our planet and with the production of services.
This means making a detailed assessment of all
the latent potential for employment, analysing
obstacles, and proposing public policies that
are capable of changing the existing state of
affairs.
The situation is less desperate than it seems.
I believe that the barriers are essentially political
and therefore capable of solution if a broad con¬
sensus of public opinion can be reached on the
measures to be taken. The situation will have to
be examined country by country. But I would
suggest that there are four priority fronts.
Making buckets from used
tyres in Peshawar (Pakistan).
A filling station for mopeds in
Korogho (Côte d'Ivoire).
rour front-line targets
In rural areas we must introduce forms of
modernization which improve the condition of
small farmers without causing a massive reduc¬
tion in their numbers and which simultaneously
create large numbers of rural jobs in the non-
agricultural sector. We must avoid the dispro¬
portionate growth of cities through the influx of
refugees from the countryside and, wherever
possible, halt rampant and excessive urban
growth of the kind experienced in Latin America
and elsewhere. Because they reproduced, in the
name of an ill-conceived modernity, a model
of agriculture requiring little manpower, many
Latin American countries now find themselves
with tens of millions of city-dwellers living in
precarious conditions. These countries have
been unable to reconcile the enormous reserve
of agricultural land at their disposal with the
abundant supply of labour.
Two new factors have changed the nature of
the problem of the rural economy. First, envi¬
ronmental awareness: we must learn more about
biodiversity and the knowledge acquired in this
sphere by different cultures not in order to
revert to ancestral practices but so as to find
better forms of environment-friendly exploita¬
tion of the agricultural and forest biomass. In
theory, progress in biotechnologies brings highly
productive processes (genetic selection, in vitro
reproduction, direct nitrogen fixation, new
methods of fish farming) within the reach of
small farmers. The range of energy-bearing and
industrial products derived from biomass should
be greatly extended as a result.
Secondly, a decentralized form of industri¬
alization is taking shape. Small towns and vil¬
lages will become the setting for units that
11

There is no point in expecting
any significant increase
in jobs in industry, but it is
possible to increase jobs in the
social services.
process biomass and produce goods and ser¬
vices for local use and perhaps even for external
markets. A growing number of industries are
already evolving from mass production towards
flexible specialization.
The redeployment of activities in rural areas
is also of direct interest to certain industrial¬
ized countries which are obliged to reduce the
land area given over to food crops because of
surplus production. These countries may well
become rural deserts dotted with urban archi¬
pelagos unless they find new productive activ¬
ities for the countryside.
However, the countryside and small towns
cannot be fully developed without the imple¬
mentation of public policies to provide access to
the land for small farmers, to make informa¬
tion available about loans and market outlets, to
define and protect outlets for rural industries.
Furthermore, agricultural research should not be
left to a handful of multinational companies
which today enjoy a near-monopoly in the field
of genetics.
In the countries of the South, the enor¬
mous current wastage of energy and other natural
resources must be reduced. An enormous amount
needs to be done here in such fields as recycling
waste, re-using materials, finding uses for by-
The clinic of a Bombay
physician and surgeon (India).
A dispensary in Hué
(Viet Nam).
12
products that are now neglected, and conserving
energy and water. Above all, capital savings must
be made through better maintenance of infra¬
structures, equipment and buildings.
These activities demand a great deal of man¬
power but they are at least partly self-financing
through the savings they make in the use of
resources, and they are also relatively simple to
organize. The greatest need is for financing sys¬
tems, and these could be established by the
public banks. But nothing much is happening
here, even though we know that the fight against
waste is one of the key elements in ecodevelop-
ment strategies.
There is no point in expecting any signif¬
icant increase in jobs in industry. In countries
which are already industrialized, the number
of jobs in industry will continue to decline. Is it
possible, however, to increase jobs in the services
sector, especially in the social services? If there
is one area in which large numbers of people can
quickly make a specific contribution, this is it
in education, health care and caring for people
of all ages, from young children to the elderly.
Substantial unsatisfied demand exists in the
richest countries, but it cannot be met in com¬
mercial terms. We must therefore seek new

forms of partnership between users, citizens'
associations, the state and the market in order to
reduce the need for public funding. The social
economy co-operatives, mutual-aid institu¬
tions, clubs and associations, community-based
business ventures, non-profit-making private
enterprise has a promising future. But at pre¬
sent it is relegated to the sidelines.
As for the countries of the South, instead
of waiting to become rich before acquiring effi¬
cient social services, they should on the contrary
bank on the fact that even a modest allocation of
resources will permit the financing of an exten¬
sive range of educational and primary health
care services. Social services, and increasingly
research, are an area in which the countries of the
South retain their greatest comparative edge.
Finally, one traditional sector must not
go unmentioned, i.e. public works which are
imperative in countries that lack adequate infra¬
structures, to say nothing of low-cost housing.
However, although their importance is acknowl¬
edged in theory, very little is being done as yet
in practice.
1 Joseph Ki-Zerbo, "L'écodcveloppcmcnt: seul développement
viable et valable", BREF, No. 13, June 1994.

