Apioneer ofthe modem era in medical sci¬
ence, Louis Pasteur died a hundred years
ago, in 1895. Among his many great contri¬
butions to knowledge, he showed that micro¬
organisms cause fermentation and disease
and developed vaccines for rabies and
anthrax.
Iouis Pasteur was one of the
greatest scientists of the late
nineteenth century. By cre¬
ating the field of bacteriology, he
revolutionized medical science. His
discovery of the microbial cause of
disease led to the introduction of
asepsis in surgery (the sterilization
of surgical instruments) and made
possible the manufacture of vac¬
cines. By establishing the Pasteur
Institute at the end of his life, he
also began a tradition of research
and prevention that has had a far-
reaching influence on Western
medicine in the twentieth century.
He was born in 1822 at Dole in
eastern France, and spent his child¬
hood in the nearby wine-growing
town of Arbois where his father, a
tanner, set up in business in 1826.
His secondary education took place
in Besançon where he was no more
than an average student. In 1843,
however, he entered the prestigious
Ecole Normale Supérieure in Paris.
Around this time his work on polar¬
ized light led him to an important
discovery that made his name. He
noticed that the crystals of tartaric
acid, a salt found in wine deposits,
are assymmetric. He also discov¬
ered that living organisms, espe¬
cially in the fermentation process,
tend to produce molecules that are
optically active. Studying the mole¬
cular structure of crystals more
closely, he was led to differentiate
organic from mineral substances.
Starting out from chemistry, he had
already reached the frontiers and
mysteries of biology.
The researcher
Pasteur obtained his doctorate in
chemistry and physics in 1 847, and
in the following year was appointed
professor of chemistry at the Uni¬
versity of Strasbourg. In 1854 he
became dean ofthe science faculty
at the University of Lille, where he
began to study the fermentation of
milk and alcohol. By asking such
questions as how fermenting agents
work on matter and where the
microbes responsible for fermen¬
tation originate, Pasteur was exam¬
ining the still-unresolved question
of spontaneous generation, the
theory that living organisms arise
from nonliving matter. This theory,
championed by Félix-Archimède
Pouchet, director of the Museum of
Natural History in Rouen, and
others, was disproved by Pasteur.
In 1862 Pasteur became inter¬
ested in the formation of vinegar,
and in the following year studied
the different forms ofdeterioration
in wine. These studies led him to
discover a way of preserving food
by heating it below boiling point,
thus preventing fermentation. This
process, known as pasteurization,
caused a revolution in the food
industry.
From studying the microbes
responsible for fermentation to the
study of those that cause contagious
diseases was a short step, one that
Pasteur took in 1865 when he began
a mission that led to the isolation of
bacilli causing diseases that were
decimating silkworms in the south
ofFrance and to the development of
methods of preventing contagion.
In 1868, at the age of forty-six,
Pasteur was semi-paralyzed by a
stroke. In a lesser man this might
have spelled the end of a brilliant
career, but Pasteur was soon back at
work. In 1871 he applied pasteur¬
ization to the preservation of beer
and solved the storage problems
experienced by the brewing
industry. In 1873 he was elected a
member of France's National
Academy of Medicine
After 1877 Pasteur, working in
close collaboration with Charles
Chamberland and Emile Roux,
devoted most of his time to the
study of contagious diseases in the
higher mammals. Using findings by
C. J. Davaine, who had already iso¬
lated the infectious agent, he turned
his attention to anthrax, a deadly
disease in sheep and other animals,
and eventually developed a vaccine
against it. In 1879 he began to study
chicken cholera and established
procedures that served as a model

i A ü 1 Ë U K, scientist and humanist by Louise LLambrichs
A portrait of
Louis Pasteur
dating from 1845.
A LIFETIME OF RESEARCH AND DISCOVERY
1847-1849: Pasteur's work on crystals form the basis of
stereochemistry, the study of the spatial arrangement of
atoms in molecules.
1853-1857: studies fermentation, especially alcoholic and
lactic fermentation.
1863-1871: develops "pasteurization", a method of
enhancing the keeping qualities of liquid foods or beverages,
which he applies to wine and beer.
He demonstrates the infectious and hereditary nature of
pébrine, a disease affecting silkworms, and invents a system
of selective breeding, thus saving the French silk industry.
1871-1879: research into ways of treating infectious
diseases; he identifies the anthrax bacterium; the bacterium
responsible for gas gangrene; the staphylococcus and
streptococcus bacteria; the chicken cholera bacillus.
1880: He produces a successful inoculation material against
anthrax, a disease of animals and people.
1885: first successful inoculation against rabies.
1888: foundation of the Pasteur Institute in Paris.
for his method of vaccination. His
research into anthrax led him to dis¬
cover the bacillus that is respon¬
sible for gangrenous blood-poi¬
soning. Later he isolated the
microbe subsequently known as
staphylococcus, which leads to the
formation of pus, boils and
osteomyelitis, an inflammation of
the bones and bone-marrow. This
discovery revolutionized accepted
medical theory, for pus had often
been considered as part of the
healing process rather than a patho¬
logical symptom.
Turning his attention to puer¬
peral fever, which caused the death
of many women after childbirth,
Pasteur showed that its origins were
microbial and convinced doctors
and surgeons of the importance of
asepsis. The practice whereby doc¬
tors sterilize their instruments and
wash their hands before exami-
nating patients, a direct result of
Pasteur's researches, brought about
a dramatic reduction in hospital
mortality rates.
A benefactor of humanity
In 1881, at the height of his fame,
Pasteur was elected to the French
Academy. He now began to investi
gate rabies. After years of false starts
and dashed hopes in the study of
this terrible disease, his discovery of
a vaccine against it crowned his life's
work and has been widely regarded
by posterity as the symbol of his
achievements. About the same time
Pasteur began a subscription cam¬
paign for the foundation of the
research institute that would bear
his name. Eventually, branches of
the Pasteur Institute would be
established in many parts of the
world, where they became a training
ground for researchers involved in
the struggle against contagious dis¬
eases and the search for increas¬
ingly effective vaccines.
When, on 28 September 1895,
Louis Pasteur died in Villeneuve-
L'Etang, near Paris, he was mourned
by the entire nation. The press paid
lavish tribute to a "secular saint",
and he was buried with full national
honours.
What is so remarkable about Pas¬
teur is not only the breadth of his
approach but the fact that his work
had a decisive impact in so many
fields. He was not a dilettante or a
brilliant jack-of-all-trades but a rig¬
orous scientist with prodigious
powers ofsynthesis. Science for Pas
teur was one and indivisible. He
made light of the boundaries
between disciplines, and approached
all the problems he studied in the
same way, attempting to discover
their hidden mechanisms and to
reveal, through the laws that govern
them, the inner logic that links living
and nonliving phenomena.
Pasteur was the living symbol
of the scientific progress that at the
end of the nineteenth century
seemed capable not only of con¬
quering mortal diseases but of pro¬
moting the welfare of individuals
and society. One ofPasteur's greatest
strengths was his ability to defend
the interests of science in the corri¬
dors of power. Unlike his mentor,
Claude Bernard, who always main¬
tained a low profile, Pasteur was
convinced that the battle for sci¬
ence should be waged on the polit¬
ical front as well as in the labora¬
tory. In this respect he was
astonishingly modern.
LOUISE L. LAMBRICHS
is a French writer and philosopher whose
published works include La dyslexie en
question (1989) and (with Dr. Fabrice Dutot)
Les Fractures de l'âme (1988).
49
