
anniversary
4MMKI
"Entwined lovers", a 17th-century Persian miniature.
Mirzâ Mohammad-Ali, also
known as Sâ'cb of Tabriz, is
one of the most brilliant post-
classical Persian poets. He was born in
Isfahan, then the capital of the Persian
empire, in 1607 (400 years ago according
to the Islamic calendar) into a family of
merchants from Tabriz who had trav¬
elled to Isfahan in search of fame and
fortune. At the age of twenty, already a
competent prose writer and calligrapher,
he began to make his mark as a poet.
He may have inherited his early taste
for poetry from one of his ancestors,
Shams-6-Maqrebi, a mystic poet of the
fourteenth century.
Sâ'eb began to attend court but was
disappointed by the atmosphere there.
Torn by centuries of dissension and inva¬
sions, Persia was beginning to regain its
cohesion under the iron hand of the
Safavids. Hut the rulers of this new
dynasty began to impose the Shi'ite faith
on the Iranian people, causing social dis¬
ruption which led numerous intellectuals
to flee from Isfahan, where theologians
held sway and made no attempt to hide
their fierce hostility to poets, philoso¬
phers and mystics. Sâ'eb described the
situation in one of his poems, when he
wrote: "Today intelligence and reason
hardly count any more; it is an age of
wo turbans and well-filled bellies".


Sâ'eb of Tabriz
prince ofpoets
by Hossein Esmaili
As a result of this, Sâ'eb left Persia
for India. On the way he stayed for three
years with a fellow poet, Zafar Khan,
the governor of Kabul. When he arrived
in India he entered the service of the
Mughul emperor, Shahjahân, who was a
great admirer of Persian literature and
entertained him with lavish hospitality.
lie also received a warm welcome from
the other court poets, who admired his
style of writing.
In 1633, his father joined him and
persuaded him to return home. Rack in
Isfahan, where he lived until his death in
1675, he was given the title "Prince of
poets" by Shah Abbas IT and alternated
between life at court and periods of iso¬
lation and retreat. He wrote many pan¬
egyrics and a historical epic in honour of
the king, but mainly worked in the lyrical
vein of love poetry known as ghazal
short, elegantly written poems that
brought him fame and ensured his place
in posterity.
AN ENIGMATIC ITGUHF
Sâ'eb was the most celebrated poet of his
day. His contemporaries read all his
poems they could get their hands on,
and yet he complained that he was unap¬
preciated and misunderstood. He was,
and remains, an enigmatic figure. In
spite of his great reputation in central
Asia and India, the literary critics
largely ignored him, and many of his
poems were not published, although he
was rightly considered one of the mas¬
ters of the "Indian style" in Persian
poetry. A hallmark of his style was his
investigation of subtle ideas and his
sometimes immoderate taste for com¬
plicated rhetorical figures. lie loved to
frequent tea houses, where he was
admired by down-to-earth people who
quoted so often from his poems that they
became well-known sayings. He could
not stand the literary scholars who belit¬
tled him for his lack of rigour and his
vocabulary larded with popular expres¬
sions.
Sâ'eb was a complete poet, a man
who saw the world only through the
prism of poetry. Unlike his predeces¬
sors, who went in for exotic and obscure
metaphors, he was interested in the most
trivial details of daily life and con¬
structed his literary world out of hum¬
drum actions and events. He used poetic
subjectivity to adorn reality with the
colours of dreams, to give it rhythm and
elegance. For Sâ'eb everything has
meaning and poetry: the gentle murmur
of running water evokes the impercep¬
tible passage of time; the ancient tree
whose roots stretch into the bowels of
the earth suggests that an old man clings
to life with more determination than a
young one; the bread that is easily
removed from a cold oven illustrates
how easy it is to free oneself from a world
without warmth.
Sâ'eb's constant association of mirror
images and ideas is ideally suited to Per¬
sian poetry, in which the two lines of a
couplet complement or contradict each
other. Sâ'eb's art breaks reality down
into a multitude of poetic images and
can be compared to the work of a minia¬
turist who builds up a scene from a
crowd of tiny shapes.
The four-hundredth anniversary of
the birth of the "Prince of poets" is an
opportunity to rediscover his exquisite
works and to shed new light on an orig¬
inal and elegant form of poetry that is
still not widely known. I
HOSSEIN ESMAILI
is an Iranian researcher who lectures in Persian
at France's National Institute of Oriental Languages
and Civilizations in Paris. He is the author of
a number of articles on Iranian art, culture
and literature.
