Where the rivers meet by Rustom Bharucha
Ât the confluence of the Ganges and the Jamuna rivers,
millions of Indian pilgrims gather for the Kumbha Mela
festival
Below, massed pilgrims at the
confluence of the Ganges and
Jamuna at Allahabad during the
Kumbha Mela festival in 1989.
At the heart of any pilgrimage in India,
there is a confluence of waters. From the
trickle of underwater springs through the more
steady course of rivers and seas to the vista of the
ocean, pilgrimages derive their sanctity from
their proximity to water, and more specifically
to the mingling of waters. Tirtha the site of a
pilgrimage literally means a "ford" or a
"crossing place".
In the city of Allahabad in northern India, at
the sangam or confluence of the rivers Ganga and
Jamuna, subtly layered by the "invisible" waters
of the mythical river Saraswati, the holy city of
Prayag once stood. To bathe in these waters is said
to be one of the most cherished privileges for any
Hindu regardless of his or her caste, class or
community. More than an opportunity to wash
away sins or to earn merit, this immersion in
the waters offers the richest possibilities of reju¬
venation and self-realization.
Historically, Prayag has been associated with
bathing rituals and ceremonies which over the
centuries have evolved into the Magha Mela, a
religious festival which is celebrated every year
in the month of Magha between January and
February.
Underlying this festival is a myth which
refers to the beginnings of creation when the
gods and the demons were collectively involved
in churning the nectar of immortality from the
ocean. A fight ensued between these two parties
over a pitcher (kumbha) of nectar that emerged
from the primordial waters, along with other
treasures. As the demons chased one of the gods
in possession of the kumbha, we are told that a
few drops of nectar fell on four places in our
world: Hardvar, Ujjain, Nasik and Prayag. These
are the four tirthas in which a great festival
known as the Kumbha Mela takes place once
every three years in rotation over a twelve-year
cycle. Twelve years, we are told, because it took
twelve days for the gods to protect the kumbha
in their cosmic flight, and twelve divine days are
equivalent to twelve earthly years.
31
XL

32
RUSTOM BHARUCHA,
an Indian writer, director and
playwright, lives in Calcutta. He
has written extensively on
indigenous theatres and the
politics of interculturalism. His
most recent publications include
Theatre and the World:
Performance and the Politics of
Culture (Routledge, London,
1993) and The Question of Faith
(Orient Longman, 1993).
The mela or fair held at Prayag (or Tirtharaja
as it is often called, literally king of the tirthas) is
particularly dynamic. Here on the banks of the
Ganga and the Jamuna where the waters have
receded, millions of pilgrims congregate not only
to bathe but to engage in trade, witness religious
performances and dare-devil acts, and listen to
sermons and the sales-pitch of vendors and
mountebanks. This most concentrated of sacred
spaces also accommodates a great celebration of
everyday life, so much so that one is tempted to
view the Kumbha Mela in Prayag as a transcen¬
dence of ordinariness rather than a summation of
the extraordinary. Here we find "India" in all its
multiple dimensions and heterogeneous identities,
where the richest of the rich and the poorest of the
poor can share the same consecrated ground with
an unselfconscious solidarity.
Oacred and profane
Before the first glimmers of dawn, the pilgrims
arrive in droves, entire families and communi¬
ties from the far corners of India with pots and
pans, earthenware stoves, buckets and bedding,
all piled one on top of the other, balanced in pre¬
carious equilibrium. As the pilgrims enter the
camping grounds of the mela, they circumam¬
bulate labyrinths of dusty, triangular, canvas
tents thousands of makeshift edifices silhou¬
etted in an omnipresence of dust. As these chil¬
dren of Ganga move purposefully towards the
confluence of waters they know where they
are going with an almost intuitive knowledge
they become part of a vast sea of humanity
seemingly without beginning or end.
From a distance, you see these eddies of
people moving in circuitous lines (as always in
India, you realize emphatically that lines are
never straight but a continuous series of dots).
As the eddies flow and separate and merge rather
like tributaries in a river, you are almost afraid
to enter their devious currents. But even before
you have completed your thought, you find



yourself wading into the depths where you
become part of a surging humanity in which
strangely and inexplicably you are free to
be yourself.
Despite the rules and regulations enshrined
by the shastras (religious texts) concerning the
rules of pilgrimage fasting, offering ceremonial
rites orpuja, maintaining celibacy and purity of
mind and thought there is always space in this
sacred order for blessings and intimations
received in solitude. No one was more painfully
denied this condition than Mahatma Gandhi
who, on his visit to the Kumbha Mela in
Hardvarin 1915, was so besieged by seekers of
darsan the opportunity to see a holy person
that he found no time for his inner self. No
wonder then that he complained almost like a
foreigner about the oppressiveness of the mela-,
the "absentmindedness, hypocrisy and sloven¬
liness" of the pilgrims, the venal sadhus (holy
men), and the barbarity of such grotesque sights
as a five-legged cow.
If the pilgrimage does not induce an inner
state of being, it can easily become chaos, a
living inferno, or it can degenerate (as it so often
does) into a mere spectacle, a theatrical extrav¬
aganza. As much as one is compelled to respond
to the hyper-reality of the mela the sheer

A multitude of meetings with millions of people and
one's self
dynamics of millions of people sharing a specific
place and time the raison d'être of the pil¬
grimage is not to see (as in a spectacle) but to
simply be. The topography and panorama of
Prayag can be dissolved into an inner state of
being. More elusively, it can be concentrated in
the body and being of another pilgrim, who
can be worshipped as a tirtha, as Prayag itself.
A recurring enigma in sacred geography is its
transference of space, so that Prayag is also to be
found in many other tirthas the foothills of the
Himalayas, Benares, a shrine on a street. In
other words, the tirtha is capable of travelling,
not unlike the mela which can filter into
everyday life long after its auspicious time¬
frame has ceased. It is this fluidity that prevents
the mela from being centralized, homogenized,
bureaucratized, despite recent attempts by the
state to regiment its space.
"Before the first glimmers of
dawn, the pilgrims arrive in
droves, entire families and
communities from the far
corners of India." Left, the
Kumbha Mela festival at
Hardvar (Uttar Pradesh).
Above right, purification in the
waters of the Ganges at Nasik
(Maharashtra), one of the four
places where the Kumbha Mela
festival is held. For Hindus, the
Ganges is a sacred river in
which every believer must
bathe at least once in his or her
life.
A Brahman, a member of the
Hindu priestly class, reads the
sacred scriptures on the banks
of the Ganges.
A celebration of life
What needs to be emphasized, however, is that
the mela is not a carnival. Instead of reversing
the existing social order (and thereby rein¬
forcing the status quo), the mela enhances the
existing order and then transcends it. What is
being celebrated in the mela, therefore, is not
anti-structure but the structure of life itself
with all its hierarchies, disparities and distinc¬
tions, which are allowed to coexist on the same
ground. Far from being an officially sanctioned
deviation from the rules of everyday life, it is an
expansion of life's possibilities.
Yet fear infiltrates one's very desire to enter
the time-space of the mela at very bourgeois
levels. One has to rebuke these fears of disease
and theft, go beyond them, almost laugh at the
rumours of stampedes and terrorist attacks that
hang in the air. Melas are anti-bourgeois sites of
experience. They are not for the timorous or
faint-hearted. Even with all the amenities of
"cultural tourism" which have made pilgrimages
more comfortable, the mela challenges bour¬
geois notions of security.
Despite the need to protect the mammoth
environment of the mela in Prayag, the secu¬
rity provided by the police and the military is
increasingly visible there is something faintly
ridiculous in attempting to "discipline" the
tumultuous energies of the pilgrims. Their min¬
gling of social, cultural and human identities
functions on such a vast scale that it is not one
community that is being celebrated, but a mul¬
titude of meetings with millions of people and
one's self. So epic are the contours of the mela
that they are almost impossible to frame; so pri¬
vate is the privilege of immersing one's self in the
waters of Prayag that the moment defies repre¬
sentation. In the harmonious cacophony of this
largest religious gathering in the world the
loudspeakers blare through the night
announcing children lost who will almost invari¬
ably be found there is silence.
One needs to remember the inner myth of
Prayag in order to counter the recent attempts
by fundamentalists and communalist parties to
appropriate its sacred space in the name of Hin-
dutva. The mela, one should keep in mind, has
its own indigenous hierarchies and modes of
socialization that are not likely to accept the
strictures of a new administration advocating a
centralized view of Hinduism. Somehow one is
compelled to accept that the confluence of ener¬
gies, symbolized by the intermingling of the
Ganga, Jamuna and Saraswati, has the power to
absorb any political ideology attempting to rule
in the name of religion.
Centuries of faith cannot be removed
overnight. Or more precisely, the sheer hetero¬
geneity of faiths that have evolved over the years
cannot be reduced to a uniform code of conduct
and belief. Prayag teaches us more than tolerance
or a passive faith in coexistence. From its multi¬
tudinous configurations and interactions, we can
learn the vitality of living with difference. 33
