
Unesco mobilizes support
for Sarajevo Library
During the night of 25 August 1992
I the National and University Library
ofBosnia and Herzegovina was destroyed
by artillery fire from the hills surrounding
the city of Sarajevo. The shells ignited a
conflagration that completely destroyed
the handsome, moorish-style library
building and most of its collections from
1.5 to 2 million volumes, including 700
manuscripts and early primed books and
a unique collection of specialist publica¬
tions on Bosnia. Less than 10 per cent of
the precious collections were saved. The
greatest loss was the destruction of col¬
lections of some 600 Bosnian periodicals
published between the mid 19th century
and the present. The destruction of the
Library's central catalogues imposes a
severe handicap on the reconstitution of
the collections.
Unesco has set up an International
Assistance Programme to help in the
reconstruction of the Sarajevo Library. "At
a time when the force of arms and hatred
seems to be giving way to that of reason, it
is important that the intellectual and moral
solidarity ofhumanity for which Unesco is
working should express itselfvigorously,"
said Unesco's Director-General, Mr. Fed¬
erico Mayor, at a meeting held last April in
support of the Programme. Mr. Mayor
called on nations, international organi¬
zations, public and private institutions,
financial bodies, associations of librar¬
ians, archivists and documentalists, as
well as private individuals, to participate in
the reconstruction of the Sarajevo National
Library and the reconstitution of its col¬
lections through voluntary contributions
in the form of funds, materials or services.
"The intellectual isolation imposed on
Sarajevo is as dangerous as the shortages
of electricity, water or medicines from
which this shattered city is suffering," Mr.
Mayor continued. "What better symbol
to express solidarity and to break the iso¬
lation than a library in this case a
national and university institute? A place
of teaching and research, of culture, of
information and of intellectual exchange,
the library furthers access to knowledge
and helps to preserve cultural identity
while consecrating the local community's
participation in universal civilization."
The International Assistance Pro¬
gramme has so far enabled reading mate¬
rials and office equipment to be bought.
Despite the blockade, books have been
arriving in small, 20-kg parcels via the air¬
lift organized by the UN High Commis¬
sioner for Refugees and the UN Peace¬
keeping Forces. Librarians, archivists and
members of the university are being
helped to leave Sarajevo in order to attend
training courses and take part in interna¬
tional meetings devoted to the rebuilding
of the Library. Unesco has also sent several
missions to Sarajevo to establish a recon¬
struction programme and study the pos¬
sibility of extending humanitarian assis¬
tance to the acquisition of books and
scientific journals.
"I hope that contributions will be com¬
mensurate with the task involved," Mr.
Mayor concluded, "and that all those who
are concerned to see the universal docu¬
mentary heritage preserved and to pro¬
mote its widest possible utilization by
researchers and general public alike will
play their part in the reconstruction and
equipping of the National and University
Library of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
Sarajevo."
Donations to the Sarajevo Library
Assistance Programme will be
gratefully received. Cheques, made out
to Unesco, may be sent to:
The Director, Division of the General
Information Programme, I, rue
Miollis, F-7S732 Paris Cedex IS,
France. (Please cite ref. 416 BIH 60). 45
