listening
MAMBO MANIA
by Isabelle Leymarie
40
Of African and European parentage, the mambo
is the result of a long cross-cultural journey, an
example of the kind of sensual alchemy which
is a speciality of the Caribbean. Mambo, conga
and bongo were originally Bantu names for
musical instruments that were used in rituals
and gradually became secular. Mambo means
"conversation with the gods" and in Cuba des¬
ignates a sacred song of the Congos, Cubans
of Bantu origin. The Congos have absorbed a
variety of foreign influences and the mambo is
a delicious cocktail of Bantu, Spanish and
Yoruba.
Despite its African resonance, the mambo
can be traced back to an unexpected source,
English country dance, which in the seven¬
teenth century became the contredanse at the
French court and later the contradanza in Spain.
In the eighteenth century the contradanza
reached Cuba where it was known as danza and
became the national dance. Its hold grew with
the arrival of the planters and their slaves who
fled from Haiti after it became independent.
The Haitian blacks added a particularly spicy
syncopation to it called the cinquillo, which is
also found in the tango, itself derived from the
contradanza. Gradually other black elements
found their way into the contradanza, some
titles of whichsuch as "Tu madre es conga"
("Your mother is Congo"), which was played in
1856 in Santiago de Cuba at an aristocratic ball
in honour of General Concha, and "La "negrita"
reflect this blending.
A NEW KIND OF MUSIC
At the end of the nineteenth century the con¬
tradanza threw off its European yoke, and freer,
more spontaneous dancing by couples replaced
the starchy formality of the contredanse. This
new kind of music was known as danzón. In
1877 it had a huge success largely due to
pieces such as "Las alturas de Simpson" by a
young musician from Matanzas, Miguel Failde.
The danzón had several sections, one of which
was a lively coda which musicians soon got in
the habit of improvising. It was played by brass
'MAMBO,
que rico el mambo!'
In the post-war years
the mambo was a euphoric and
voluptuous celebration of the
long-awaited return of freedom.
Many will remember the great
Italian actress Silvana Mangano
dancing the mambo
in the marvellous film of the
same name.
bands or típicas, which gave way in the 1920s
to lighter combos known as charangas, which
featured violins, sometimes a cello, a piano, a
güiro (a grooved calabash scraped with a comb),
a clarinet, a flute, a bass and double drums
adapted from European military drums.
Charangas, notably that of the flautist
Antonio Arcano, flourished in the late 1930s. In
1938 Arcaño's cellist, Orestes López, com¬
posed a danzón he called "Mambo", and in
the coda Arcano introduced elements from the
son, a lively musical genre from Cuba's Ori¬
ente province. As a signal to band members that
they could start their solos, Arcano would call
out, "Mil veces mambo!" (A thousand times
mambo!). Today, in the Latin American music
known as salsa, the mambo is a theme that is
played in unison by the rhythm section and
serves as a transition between two improvised
passages.
Arcano was a talented musician, but it was
his countryman Pérez Prado who was the first
to market his compositions under the name
"mambo", which he popularized as a specific
musical genre. He used jazzier instruments,
including brass and drums. Early in the 1950s
his mambos "Patricia" and "Mambo N° 5" took
Latin America and the United States by storm.
THE TEMPLE OF MAMBO
By the mid-1950s mambo mania had reached
fever pitch. In New York the mambo was played
in a high-strung, sophisticated way that had
the Palladium Ballroom, the famous Broadway
dance-hall, jumping. The Ballroom soon pro¬
claimed itself the "temple of mambo", for the
city's best dancersthe Mambo Aces, "Killer
Joe" Piro, Paulito and Lilón, Louie Máquina
and Cuban Petegave mambo demonstrations
there and made a reputation for their expressive
use of arms, legs, head and hands. There was
fierce rivalry between bands. The bands of
Machito, Tito Puente, Tito Rodriguez and José
Curbelo delighted habitués such as Duke
Ellington, Bob Hope, Marlon Brando, Lena Home
and Dizzy Gillespie, not to mention Afro-Ameri¬
cans, Puerto Ricans, Cubans, Upper East-Side
WASPs and Jews and Italians from Brooklyn.
Class and colour melted away in the incan¬
descent rhythm of the music. Even jazz musi¬
cians such as Erroll Garner, Charlie Parker,
Sonny Rollins and Sonny Stitt fell under the
mambo's charm, as can be heard on the many
latin recordings they made in the 1950s.
In 1954 the cha-cha-cha, a kind of mambo
created by the Cuban violinist Enrique Jorrin, a
member of the Orquesta América charanga,
swept through Havana and New York. Easier to
dance than the mambo, with a squarish beat
and a characteristic hiccup on the third beat, it
spread to Europe, before being dethroned in the
early 1960s by the pachanga and then the
boogaloo.
Since the mambo there has never been a
dance that has given rise to so much unbridled
fantasy and pyrotechnics or reached such
rhythmic rapture. Today it is making a comeback
and bringing a glimmer of paradise regained as
the world again moves to its magical beat, m
ISABELLE LEYMARIE
is a Franco-American musicologist.
