YASSER ARAFAT
by Lotfi El-Kholy
aiestine
"rWlhis is the most difficult situation that we've
-M. ever had to face," Yasser Arafat told me one
day in 1982. We were in his little hotel room over¬
looking the sea, a few kilometres outside Tunis, where
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) had
recently gone into exile after the war in Lebanon. "And
yet," he went on, "there is a glimmer of hope because
we now know that we must choose between existing or
not existing."
Suddenly he broke into a smile and said, "Have you
heard the latest one about Abu Ammar1?" Sometimes
he talks about himself in the third person. "They say
that one day he made the pilgrimage to Mecca. When
it came to his turn to stone the devil by throwing the
customary seven rocks at him, Abu Ammar only threw
six. When somebody asked him why he hadn't thrown
the seventh rock, Abu Ammar answered, 'Do you think
I'm crazy enough to cut off all my links with the
devil?'" And he burst out laughing.
I said I was surprised to see him laugh at a joke
that made him look like a common opportunist. Still
laughing, he answered, "It's a long time since I was
upset by accusations of opportunism. Because of the
secrecy that surrounds them, some of our decisions can
only be understood by a small number of leaders. But
that's not the most important thing. What counts is
whether or not a leader can face up to his conscience
every night before he goes to sleep when he has the
opportunity to sleep!"
I think that this is one of the keys to Yasser
Arafat's personality. The revolutionary rushes impetu¬
ously to the edge of the precipice and then at the last
minute stops himself from tumbling into adventurism
and, political animal that he is, gets ready to take one
or two steps backwards, open up an escape route and
then return to the logic of revolution by another route,
or else open up a new avenue for political action to har¬
vest the fruit of revolutionary action.
FROM REVOLUTIONARY...
In the early days of his combat he believed in the total
liberation of Palestine, from the Mediterranean to the
Jordan, by force of arms. He talked in terms of perma¬
nent revolution, and his watchword was that Palestine
could only be recovered at gunpoint. With experience,
more direct contact with reality and growing awareness of
the real power struggles between Arabs, between Arabs
and Israelis, and between Arabs and the rest of the world,
the political animal began to mature, merge with the rev¬
olutionary activist, keep an eye on him and calculate
what the revolution could accomplish in material terms.
His goal shifted from the liberation of the whole of Pales¬
tine to establishing a Palestinian state on the West Bank
and in Gaza, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Yasser Arafat
(centre) at Unesco
Headquarters in
Paris during the
ceremony at which
he received the
Houphouët-Boigny
Peace Prize. Beside
him is Federico
Mayor. At left and
right, the two other
prize-winners,
Shimon Peres and
Yitzhak Rabin.
28

He stopped defending the hijacking of aircraft and
terrorist operations against Israeli civilians, and
focused armed operations exclusively on Israeli mili¬
tary targets. Later, he refused to let the Intifada use
weapons, insisting on the use of civil disobedience,
strikes and stone-throwing against the Israeli security
forces. After being admitted to the United Nations, he
made it increasingly clear that he was determined to
recognize Israel within its pre-June 1967 borders in
exchange for recognition of the Palestinian people and
the PLO.
He also refined the strategy of harassment and
political cat and mouse with the Arab regimes without
ever going so far as to break with them. He has often
said that "Breaking off ties with an Arab country is a
luxury that beleaguered Palestine can ill afford, no
matter what insults or personal grief are involved."
He has survived ten or more assassination attempts
and has always found out for himself who was behind
them. He has always stopped short of throwing the sev¬
enth rock at the devil, be he Arab, Israeli or Palestinian.
He is constantly meditating on the lessons of his
experience and records all his thoughts and conversa¬
tions in small notebooks that are never far away. No
matter who he is talking to, he never hesitates to pull
out a notebook and jot down anything he thinks is
important. By now he must possess more than four
thousand of these notebooks, numbered in chronolog¬
ical order.
The late Abu Iyad2 often told me about Arafat as
he was in the late 1940s when they were both members
Oni July 1994
Yasser Arafat
returned to Gaza
after a long exile.
LOTFI EL-KHOLY
is an Egyptian
author and political
essayist. Since
1988 he has been
Secretary-General of
the Afro-Asian
Writers' Association.
of the Palestinian Students' Union; of which Arafat
was the president. "He was full of vitality. We mem¬
bers of the executive board would meet and divide up
our activities for the week. Two days later, we would
be called in to see that Yasser Arafat had done all our
jobs by himself. He would ask us to discuss what he
had done and give our approval. We would accuse him
of trespassing on our territory. But he would say,
'Why? What harm have I done? Go on. I'm ready to be
judged.' We would ask him why he had acted on his
own. 'The opportunity presented itself,' he would say,
'and I didn't want to let it slip by. I assumed my
responsibilities as president.'"
Something of this activism survived in Abu Ammar
when he became chairman of the PLO. "It's true that
Abu Ammar sticks to the collectively decided policy
line," Abu Iyad told me. "But just as he did when he
was president of the Palestinian Students' Union,
whenever he can he takes the initiative to put the col¬
lective policy line into action. He can never wait. He
moves faster than other people."
...TO POLITICIAN
As a result, he has often been accused of exercising
personal power. This charge has even been made
against him before the Palestinian leadership, and
frank, sometimes stormy, exchanges have taken place,
with Arafat by turns silent and combative. But these
meetings have always ended with almost unanimous
renewal of confidence in him. The man who has given
everything to the revolution his life, his time and his
personal wealth has become the symbol of the Pales¬
tinian cause.
One day in 1993, at a time when he was the target of
considerable criticism, it was reported that he had been
killed in a plane crash. At once Palestinians everywhere
began to mourn, and when it transpired that Abu Ammar
had survived the crash unharmed, the mourning sponta¬
neously changed into a tidal wave of joy.
Abu Ammar is not the only name given him by his
companions and the children of his people. They also
call him the "father", the "master" and the "khtiare"
(wise old man). After the landmark agreement between
Israelis and Palestinians had been reached, Professor
Edward Said, who had been one of Arafat's closest
friends, made a violent attack on him in the press.
When he read Said's article, Arafat immediately dic¬
tated a telegram which read: "My dear Edward, I have
read your article. I want to tell you that I'll be
returning to Palestine in February 1994. Come and join
us and help build it on the ground. Your brother,
Yasser Arafat." M
1. Abu Ammar is Yasser Arafat's nom de guerre. Ed.
2. Abu Iyad, a leading PLO member, was killed in 1991. Ed.
29
