Shimon Peres,
Prime Minister
of Israel's
government of
national unity
in 1984.
In February 1981, a few months before the general
election, Shimon Peres, then head of the Israeli
Labour Party, was optimistic. At last all the polls put
him in the lead. Secretly, with a few advisors, he began
preparing his programme. His first hundred days as
prime minister would transform Israel and the Middle
East. He left for London where a secret meeting had
been arranged with Jordan's King Hussein.
The two men already knew each other. They had
met several times since the end of the October War1.
But the chances of a real breakthrough now seemed
much more likely.
After the London meeting, Shimon Peres left for
Casablanca via Paris where the French authorities had
arranged a secret meeting with King Hassan II of
Morocco. The Israeli Labour leader told Hassan II that
if elected he would propose placing Jerusalem's holy
mosques under the joint responsibility of Saudi Arabia
and Morocco. When he returned to Israel, Peres
believed that at last things were going to change.
But the election campaign proved to be one of the
hardest ever fought in Israel. The right threw waves of
turbulent supporters into the midst of election rallies
for Peres, who more than once had to beat a retreat
under a hail of tomatoes. He lost the elections. Demor¬
alized, he went through a dark period that was made
24

SHIMON PERES
passion and patience
by Charles Enderlin
worse by the war in Lebanon2. He emerged from his
depression only in 1984 on the eve of a new general
election.
A STATE OF GRACE
When the campaign opened, opinion polls gave the
Labour Party a twenty-four-seat lead. But once again
Peres's enemies were unrelenting in their attacks, and
each day the polls showed that Labour's lead was slip¬
ping away. The final result was a draw between the
coalition of rightist parties the Likud and Labour.
They decided to share power. Peres would be Prime
Minister for just over two years, and Yitzhak Shamir
would be his Minister of Foreign Affairs. Then they
would swap places until the next elections.
At long last, Peres became prime minister.
Although his hands were tied by his deal with Likud,
he could still prove his worth. Within a few weeks he
had launched an economic programme that drastically
reduced inflation. His Minister of Defence, Yitzhak
Rabin, directed the Israeli retreat from Lebanon that
had begun in July 1983. The army redeployed in a
security zone ten kilometres deep along the Israeli
border in Lebanese territory. Things quietened down.
This was a period of grace for Peres with Israeli public
opinion.
He next tried to get peace negotiations going again.
He made secret contact with the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO). A senior Israeli official was sent to
Tunis to sound out Yasser Arafat's intentions, but the
PLO was not ready and so Peres turned to his old idea
of a compromise with Jordan. To King Hussein he pro¬
posed setting up a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delega¬
tion that would negotiate within the framework of an
international conference. But neither the king of
Jordan nor the king of Morocco could commit them¬
selves to negotiations with Israel with only a few
months remaining before Yitzhak Shamir took over the
Israeli leadership. Another opportunity was lost.
Applauded for his management and feted by the
Israeli public and many foreign friends, Peres left the
premiership to become Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Furthering the peace process remained his main objec¬
tive, but he had to pursue it by more devious means.
On 11 April 1987 he had another secret meeting in
London with Hussein of Jordan. The two men reached a
three-part agreement on the calling of an international
conference on the Middle East, the creation of bilateral
regional commissions, and the procedure for talks. The
London accord was submitted to the Reagan adminis¬
tration, which sent it to the Israeli and Jordanian gov¬
ernments as if it were an American initiative. But Likud
rejected the proposals out of hand.
TIME TO THINK
A few months later, in December 1987, the Intifada3
the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories
began. Shamir was in favour of letting the storm blow
over, but Peres was convinced that only peace negotia¬
tions would bring a return to calm. He began preparing
for the next elections, due to be held in 1988. Labour
presented a plan for a partial retreat from Lebanon.
Likud accused Peres of wanting a sell-out.
Events were not on the Labour Party's side. Forty-
eight hours before the election, a Jewish family died in
an attack in Jericho. There was a backlash. Shamir's
party won forty seats; while Labour captured only
thirty-nine. Once again a coalition government was
formed, but this time on Likud's conditions. Shamir
would not share the premiership. Peres tried to bring
down the government with a no-confidence motion in
parliament but in the ensuing crisis proved unable to
Shimon Peres with
Yasser Arafat in
Brussels in
November 1994.
CHARLES ENDERLIN
is a French journalist
who reports from
Jerusalem for the
French television
channel France 2. He
is the author of
Shamir (Olivier Orban
publishers, Paris,
1991).
25


form a new government. On 11 June a right-wing gov¬
ernment was presented to the Knesset4, and the Labour
Party went back into opposition.
They remained in opposition for another two
years time enough to think, and time enough for the
situation in the Middle East to change, after the Gulf
War, and the Madrid Peace Conference which opened
in October 1991. In the meantime Shimon Peres was
challenged by his long-time rival Yitzhak Rabin, who
supported his bid for the Labour Party leadership
with the argument that three failures at the polls were
more than enough. The party activists opted for Rabin,
and Peres became the party's second in command.
In 1992 Labour based its election campaign almost
uniquely on Rabin's personality, emphasizing that he
had been the victorious general in the Six Day War5 and
the Defence Minister who had contained the Intifada.
For the first time in fourteen years Likud went into
opposition. Peres again became Minister of Foreign
Affairs, and most important of all relaunched peace
negotiations.
On 16 November he went on an official visit to
Egypt. He asked his hosts to let the PLO know that he
was ready for a new dialogue. Even Prime Minister
Rabin did not know of this. On 1 December the
Knesset repealed a law that forbade all contact with
the PLO. Three days later Yaïr Hirschfeld, a left-wing
Israeli university professor, met a PLO official, Abu
Ala', in London. The two men decided to begin secret
discussions in Oslo, Norway. The meeting began on 20
January 1993. Peres was informed a few days later. He
in turn informed Rabin, who decided to let the discus¬
sions go ahead, although at first he did not think they
had much chance of success.
THE BREAKTHROUGH
The big moment came on 19 August, and Peres
savoured it to the full. Late at night without the pres¬
ence of reporters and recorded on film only by Norwe¬
gian security guards with a home-video camera, he was
present at the first signing of the Oslo Agreements, by
Uri Savir and Abu Ala'. Shimon Peres's obstinacy had
brought about a fundamental change in the Middle
East. Less than a month later the breakthrough was
officialized in Washington, this time with the cameras
turned on Yasser Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin. H
1. On 6 October 1973 Israeli positions were attacked by Egyptian
forces in the Suez Canal sector and by Syrian forces in the Golan
Heights. Ed.
2. The Israeli invasion of Lebanon on 6 June 1982, known as
Operation "Peace in Galilee". Ed.
3. Arabic for "uprising". Ed.
4. Israel's parliament. Ed.
5. From 5 to 10 June 1967, Israel occupied Sinai, the Gaza Strip,
the West Bank of the Jordan, the eastern sector of Jerusalem and
part of the Syrian Golan Heights. Ed.
