Europe: The political dilemma
by Rita Siissmuth
Can the epidemic be contained more effectively by coercion or by a liberal policy
based on education and individual responsibility?
22
RITA SUSSMUTH
was the Federal Republic of
Germany's Minister for Youth,
Family Affairs and Health from
1985 to 1988. She has been
President of the Bundestag, the
German parliament, since 1988.
Aids is a tough test for democracy. In all
the European countries especially in
the early days of the epidemic in the mid-
1980s demands were voiced for the sur¬
veillance of risk groups and systematic testing so
as to identify carriers of the infection and isolate
them in special institutions, such as "sidato-
riums" (the word is taken from the Aids pro¬
gramme of the French National Front party) or
banish them to uninhabited islands (advocated
by some isolated Scandinavian groups).
The proponents of these radical "solutions",
who were admittedly only supported by a
minority, hoped to protect themselves and
society at large against the risk of infection by
introducing these screening and isolation pro¬
cedures. However specific these problems may
have appeared to Aids, they were in the final
analysis far more general. The Aids debate was
and remains essentially no more than a new
version of a constantly recurring question: to
what extent does the end justify the means? Are
the means appropriate to the ends and are they
legitimate and effective?
Aids confronts our democracies with a rad¬
ical alternative: either we take up the challenge
of Aids courageously and develop new con¬
cepts to consolidate the links between indi-

"You mustn't say, 'I live better' that doesn't mean anything
vidual and collective responsibility and
freedom or we take action under statutory
provisions on epidemics, bringing the illusion of
safety associated with the misguided expectation
that detailed provision for screening can bring
effective protection. But if a test is administered
today, what happens tomorrow?
The role of the politicians
Aids disturbs politicians by confronting them
with new problems, with conflicting statements
by experts, contradictory demands and deci¬
sions whose consequences are serious in the
extreme. Be that as it may, action must be taken
despite all the uncertainty and the provisional
nature of our knowledge. The special responsi¬
bility of politicians consists precisely in taking
decisions in crisis situations and submitting
them to a constant critical reappraisal.
Comparisons in Europe point to effective
control of the epidemic especially through pre¬
vention in countries such as the United
Kingdom, Sweden and Germany, which adopted
an active Aids policy at an early stage and in
which the topic was the subject of detailed
debate in parliament. Countries in which deci¬
sions were taken late in the day (Italy, Spain) and
in which parliament was not effectively involved
show significantly higher Aids figures today.
The reason for this relationship resides in the
legitimacy which Aids prevention acquired
through a broadly based and frank discussion at
but simply, 'I am alive.' Wherever I've heard the word 'better', it
really means 'differently'. My life has been whittled down to its
essentials. But in absolute terms it is not better'. Just the
opposite. It's more burdensome, more painful because you're
closer to the reality of things. You live differently."
the highest level. The resulting political deci¬
sions, which must be taken at governmental
level, are binding on all the public bodies. They
also constitute guidelines for the action of the
professional groups, educational establishments,
associations and organizations set up under pri¬
vate law which are engaged in the fight against
Aids.
Aims and methods
As with any other infectious disease, the primary
aim of Aids prevention must be to reduce the
number of new cases of infection. The ques¬
tion which gave rise to serious controversy in
western Europe concerned the ways and means
of attaining this goal:
- Should authoritarian governmental action
be taken, e.g. compulsory testing where there is
a suspicion of Aids, with reporting of the names
of the victims and isolation of the virus carriers,
as with the epidemics and plagues of old?
- Or should the aim be to bring about a
change in individual behaviour among the virus
carriers and the population at large, following
the model of prevention of cardiac and can¬
cerous diseases which stem largely from indi¬
vidual lifestyles?
The controversy intensified once the HIV
antibody test became available because it was
now possible to introduce compulsory measures
with the help of the biological screening test.



The political debates on the use of HIV tests led
to a broad consensus in all west European coun¬
tries between the health politicians, public health
and Aids specialists and the representatives of
the affected groups. It was agreed that Aids could
not be halted without the active co-operation of
the risk groups and virus carriers and that their
willingness to co-operate depended on their con¬
fidence in the underlying social security system.
Quite rightly, authoritarian strategies were there¬
fore not adopted in Aids policy.
The clear political commitment in favour of
a voluntary fight against Aids based on educa¬
tion and self-responsibility encountered some
opposition.
Opposite page, a young Aids
patient in Paris receives care at
home (1993).
Left, a French Aids prevention
poster targeted at young
people.
23

¡3
<* Tii' bi -i lo »oil with their hands.'*1
Above, a British poster
encouraging the use of
condoms. Below right, a
German poster urging young
people not to close their eyes
and pretend that Aids does not
exist.
24
First of all, the problem arose as to whether,
and if so how, the phenomenon of Aids could be
incorporated into existing statutory provisions
on epidemics. The classification of Aids dif¬
fered from one country to another, but as a gen¬
eral rule it was not included within the com¬
pulsory provisions on the control and reporting
of transmissible diseases. However, the penalties
for punishable offences, such as unprotected
sexual intercourse by a person infected with
Aids who is clearly aware of the inevitable risk
of infection, were applied or made even more
severe in most countries.
To implement a liberal prevention strategy,
it was also essential to make practical means
such as condoms, sterile syringes and sex edu¬
cation material widely available. Hitherto this
had not been a task for the state and the new
measures gave rise to protests on moral grounds.
Finally, it was essential to provide the pop¬
ulation with comprehensive information on the
risk of infection and means of protection against
it, with no moral prejudices and in readily under¬
standable language. Publicity for condoms based
on specific topics such as "healthy and happy
sexuality" (Sweden and Norway) or target-
group oriented advertising, e.g. an appeal for a
sense of responsibility in partnership (Italy, the
United Kingdom, Germany) brought better
results than publicity couched in general terms
To implement a liberal prevention strategy, it Is essential
to make practical means such as condoms, sterile
syringes and sex education material widely available.
Until now this has not been a task for the state.
and intended "for everyone".
All in all, it has been found that relevant
political decisions only gain social acceptance if
they are founded on a frank and constructive
dialogue with representatives of the interests
of risk groups.
Solidarity with Aids victims and persons
infected with HIV requires extensive medical
and psycho-social assistance, acompanied by
protection against social discrimination. It must
include the promotion of scientific research and
provide suitable compensation for the victims of
infected blood products. To put these require¬
ments into effect, substantial public funds have
been earmarked for the fight against Aids,
despite the fact that European health systems
have been constantly obliged to hold their costs
within strict limits since the early 1980s.
Efforts were made to protect the social rights
of Aids victims in order to preserve their oppor¬
tunities on the labour market, their access to
insurance and their normal involvement in social
life. Co-operation between state bodies and pri¬
vate self-help organizations, hospitals and home
care, was not only of medical and preventive
importance, but also pursued the aim of avoiding
as far as possible social discrimination against the
victims of Aids. The "streetworker programme"
in Germany and The Netherlands, the militant
pilot actions pursued by the French humani¬
tarian doctors' organization Médecins du Monde
and the provision of free health insurance in

Table 1. Reported cases of Aids per million inhabitants
31 December 1987 31 March 1994 Rate of increase
Sweden 19.4 115 5.9
Spain 20.2 619 30.6
United Kingdom 21.6 155 7.2
Italy 24.6 376 15.3
Germany* 27.4 137 5.3
France 55.3 506 9.1
* The particularly good position of Germany in terms of the rate of increase is partly
explained by reunification in 1990: the former German Democratic Republic, which still has
a very small number of Aids cases (like all ex-communist countries) has brought about a sta¬
tistical reduction of the rate for Germany as a whole. Without reunification, the number of
Aids cases in Germany would have been similar to that in the United Kingdom.
It's time for schools to act."
A UNESCO poster for World Aids
Day, 1 December 1992.
France for beneficiaries of the RMI (minimum
income) programme, the free access to medical
care and health counselling under the British
National Health Service, and the development
of private therapy groups, often associated with
church organizations, for HIV-infected drug
addicts in Italy, are examples of European
responses to the special problem of Aids victims
who not infrequently become social outcasts.
I he political lesson of Aids
My own personal experience as the former
health minister of the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many between 1985 and 1988, i.e. in the years in
which the Aids debate was particularly vocif¬
erous, allows me to draw three conclusions:
Firstly, the politicians have had to learn to
listen to marginal social groups such as homo¬
sexuals, drug addicts and prostitutes, to under¬
stand their special problems and develop forms
of co-operation with them in order to achieve
effective prevention. They have been obliged
to learn how to deal in a pragmatic manner with
taboo-laden topics such as illness and death,
different forms of sexuality and drug addiction.
Secondly, the development of our modern
social state is inconceivable without special
health protection measures. All state measures
designed to fight Aids must be taken in a spirit
of respect for human freedom and individual
dignity, without discrimination on grounds of
their way of life, origin and position in society.
Thirdly, if Aids strategies are to have any
real prospect of success, they must focus on
education and the development of individual
responsibility. To check the further spread of
HIV we should therefore not count on author¬
itarian statutory measures but rather appeal for
a responsible individual approach to the hazards
of Aids.
Table 2. National profiles of the epidemic. Acute Aids cases by source of infection (adults) 31 March 1994
Total no. Homosexuals Injecting drug Homosexual Heterosexuals Blood Unknown
oteases % users (IDU) % IDU% % industry % %
Spain 24,202 15.6 70 2.2 7.6 2.8 5.8
Italy 21,770 14.6 66.1 2.3 10.3 2.2 4.5
France 30,003 48.8 23.8 1.5 15 5.8 5.1
Sweden 1,001 65.2 9.9 0.8 9.3 7.3 7.5
Germany 11,179 69.1 13.1 0.9 5.9 5.6 5.4
United Kingdom 9,025 74.9 5.4 1.6 11.6 5.4 1.1 25
