Demilitarizing military service
by Anne Baer
Community service as a humanitarian alternative to
military conscription
Ehe good life on earth,
by 11-year-old Prajird
Sangthong (Thailand).
In many countries the army is an organized and
efficient structure and can play an important
role in development. Both in the North and the
South, young people who are called up to do
military service have often done civilian jobs.
They have built roads in Ethiopia and Yemen
and bridges in Guatemala. In the United States
they have joined in the war on drug abuse and
taken part in inner city resettlement pro¬
grammes. In Venezuela, Colombia and some
other Latin American countries, they have
taken part in literacy schemes. They have
worked on environmental projects in the
t-m3A
>*
Ld c*^ *"ä?Jl x5V. X »
Il I-SJ/J ITT
M U
N
¡Il ' J
Bfcfe, *A. 1 ^^^ .¿fl w\. *"* îv
Himalayas and reforestation projects in the
Algerian Sahara.
In most developed countries where com¬
pulsory military service still exists it is
becoming increasingly unpopular. Each year
more and more young people register as con¬
scientious objectors. These countries are
reducing troop numbers, partly because the
Cold War is over and partly because their
public finances are in a critical situation. They
are also reducing the length of military service.
The notion of security has changed. It has
assumed new dimensions. The main threats to
security now come from within, in the shape of
unemployment, poverty, environmental degra¬
dation and social exclusion. People are starting
to hope for a form of security that would be
guaranteed by sustainable human development
and rooted in tolerance and solidarity and not in
a balance of terror.
Exclusively military service could and
should now be replaced by a form of civilian
service which is not based on national defence
but extends to social life, to the environment
and the development of disadvantaged coun¬
tries. Although the principle of compulsory
military service would be maintained, its con¬
ception and practice would be rethought. The
proposed range of activities would be so wide
that it would stimulate young people's interest
in national service and community life. Com¬
munity service could be acceptable to the hun¬
dreds of thousands of young people who object
to carrying weapons and refuse to perform mil¬
itary duties.
There are many solid social and economic
arguments in favour of community service.
The time spent by a conscript in the army costs
money. This is why lack of financial resources is
leading some armies to discharge more and
more young people of military age and in some
cases to abolish conscription outright. A con¬
script who does community service costs less
than one who serves in the armed forces.
,'177

Intitled,
by 16-year-old
Destin Rolex (Haiti)



Another advantage of community service is
that it offers young people useful openings that
may guide them towards a career. Before
embarking on an expensive course of studies
that would perhaps lead nowhere, a conscript
who opts for community service can acquire
experience and skills that may be useful in a job.
Community service, whether at home or
abroad, is useful in itself and may lead to some¬
thing.
The conventional type of military service, in
which all conscripts are supposed to be on an
equal footing, itself provides an exceptional
opportunity for young people of different back¬
grounds to meet. Community service is an even
stronger encouragement to become a full
member of society, as well as being a catalyst for
democratic mixing. The young conscript who
opts for community service will come into con¬
tact with elderly people, delinquents, drug
addicts and problem children. He will learn to
cope with new situations, and will make plenty
of useful contacts. Independent of environ¬
mental or development considerations, the
demilitarization of compulsory national service
may be a first tentative step towards a solution of
such contemporary social and human problems
as the crisis of solidarity, racism, exclusion, urban
malaise, youth unemployment and drug abuse.
Conscripts who choose to perform com¬
munity service in a developing country of the
South must be thoroughly prepared before¬
hand. But this form of service is worthwhile
because young people may become closely
attached to the host environment and become a
major asset to another kind of co-operation,
involving more modest resources but bolder
objectives, with local populations.
The provision of new forms of national ser¬
vice is certainly not risk-free. The availability of
"free" human resources may lead to abuses. In
various parts of the world large-scale public
works projects supposedly of national interest
have sometimes been carried out by dra¬
gooning people in an arbitrary fashion. Other
risks may appear on a smaller scale. A conscript
attached to the civil service, a business firm or
an association may be required to do jobs that
are useful to an elected local politician and not to'
the community at large. Nor should young
conscripts be asked to do work that prevents
young people in the host country from doing
the same type of job. In other words, there
must be rigorous controls.
ANNEBAER,
of Israel, is a Unesco consultant who is currently preparing
a doctorate in development economics.
18
