INTERVIEW



MONTSERRAT
CABALLÉ
talks to
Serafín García Ibáñez
One of the greatest singers of our time, the Spanish
soprano Montserrat Caballé has won accolades in
opera-houses all over the world. Her repertoire includes
no less than forty roles, notably in operas by Mozart,
Richard Strauss and Wagner, and in Italian romantic
opera, in which she has specialized. She has been a
Unesco Goodwill Ambassador since 1994. Here she talks
about her life and art.
Let's begin with your childhood.
It was very happy; I had wonderful par¬
ents. Despite the Civil War and the difficult
post-war period when you never knew
where the next crust of bread was coming
from, they were always happy and opti¬
mistic. It was a joy for us to make that
crust multiply, as it were, by dipping it in
water. A chunk of stale bread was turned
into a kind of copious bread soup for the
five of us.
My father and mother were always
ready to help and share with others. My
father always used to say that in this life we
all travel together down the same road.
This positive attitude on my parents' part
provided me with solid foundations, a
wonderful launching pad for life.
How did you start singing?
Thanks to my parents. They loved
music, especially classical music Spanish
music rather than opera, actually. We had
a few records and the radio. And then they
were always singing! I got a taste for music
very early on, and it grew with age.
I didn't have the money to study, but I
thought that if I could pursue an artistic
career, by singing and serving the cause of
music, then perhaps I would be able to
learn something and at the same time con¬
tribute to my family some of the physical
comforts we had lacked.
Later, when I was about eighteen or
nineteen, I forgot about the materialistic
aspects of my choice and fell deeply in
love with music. I committed myself to it
totally. It became a vocation, an absolute
passion. Not only has it brought me a great
deal of professional satisfaction, it was
through music that I met my husband,
who was also a singer.
In 1965 1 had the opportunity to make
my debut in New York as a stand-in for
Marilyn Home, who was expecting a baby.
That opened many doors for me. While
continuing to serve music, I have been able
to do what I always dreamed of doing
help the suffering, especially young
orphans.
My husband and I created a foundation
which takes in 500 or 600 children a year on
a farm at the foot of the Pyrenees. I also
give charity concerts and am delighted to
be able to contribute to UNESCO's work.

A soprano's voice
is a little like a mother's
cry, which is why it attracts
all human beings.
Is it true that you nearly gave up
singing.
Yes. I had operations in 1974 and 1985
for tumours. But things couldn't have been
too bad, for here I am chatting away with
you! (Bursts into laughter)
What are the essential attributes of a
soprano voice?
Some sopranos have extraordinary range
and can cover up to three octaves, but I'm
not one of them.
A soprano's voice is a little like a
mother's cry, which is why it attracts all
human beings. The sound of a mother's
voice expresses a feeling of great intimacy,
which has a truly magical effect on the lis¬
tener. You have to sing very, very badly for
this not to happen. That's an enormous
advantage that we sopranos have to start
with. I am convinced that the sound of a
soprano's voice affects people so strongly
because it evokes maternal memories in
each of us.
In the course of your career you have
sung in all kinds of opera, from Bellini to
Verdi, from Puccini to Wagner. Wasn't that
a little risky?
Of course! But I can't imagine any
worthwhile work without an element of
risk. You've got to take all kinds of risks if
you want to grow and put the quality and
value of your work to the test. I don't
think that routine work is real work.
Which have been the most difficult
roles you've sung and which have you
enjoyed the most?
Perhaps the most difficult or at least the
most gruelling opera I've sung in is Bellini's
// Pirata.
Salomé is one of my favourite roles. I
love the character and I love what Richard
Strauss made of her. She is a product of that
rare phenomenon, a real osmosis or com¬
munion between the librettist and the com¬
poser.
The role of Isolde is also exhilarating,
but in Wagner the orchestra plays an
important part. In Tristan und Isolde the
real protagonist is the orchestra. Of course
the singers have to be good, but even if
they're not first rate, the opera still gives
pleasure because of the prominent role of
the orchestra.
I also love singing Norma, Semiramis,
La Traviata. In fact I have enjoyed singing
all the roles I have interpreted. Don't ask
me to choose! (Laughter)
When you mentioned Salomé, you
talked about an osmosis between the
libretto and the musical score. Doesn't
that always exist?
I've always let myself be carried along by
the composer's inspiration. If I feel shivers
run down my spine when I listen to the
music, even when I don't understand the
words or know the story, then I know that
the music is going to give depth to the
character even if she seems unexceptional
on a first reading. On the other hand, even
with a well constructed libretto, if the
music doesn't go with the character, then
the character won't come to life on stage.
It has been said that you have a sub¬
lime voice and are thoroughly professional
but that you are not very interested in the
acting side.
It's not that I'm not interested. It's just
that I shall never accept that dramatic con¬
siderations should spoil the performance of
the music. Opera is primarily music, which
has to be well sung and interpreted. The
dramatic aspect comes second, very impor¬
tant though it is. With a creative director
you can put on a magnificent show, but
today we're seeing too much superb visual
presentation at the expense of the music.
In an opera house with an average of
two or three thousand seats some are
even larger it is imperative for the voices
and the feelings they express to reach right
up to "the gods". In a theatre with a smaller
number of seats between 600 and 800
expressions and gestures and the emotional
charge they carry can be seen by everyone.
To reach the most distant members of the
audience and make them tingle, you must
have voice, expression and feeling.
The great singers learn their parts by
heart in languages that are often not their
own. Was that ever a problem for you?
Not for German. I began in Germany
and lived there for six years. I speak and
write the language fluently. Russian, on
the other hand, and English have given me
trouble. And as for French, I must admit
that I don't pronounce it very well. Let's
say that I've got a strong Perpignan accent.
(Laughter)
What happens if you forget your lines
on stage, right in the middle of a phrase?
Oh boy! That's happened to me several
times, and I'm sure I'm not the only one.
When it does happen, the only thing to
do is follow the music until you can pick up
the thread again. If you suddenly dry up,

^
jL
^m^^à
' lfp 1
Montserrat Caballé with the Director-
General of Unesco, Mr Federico Mayor,
at a ceremony to mark the singer's
appointment as a Unesco Goodwill
Ambassador (22 April 1994).
you hang on to the last word you've sung
and hope that you will be able to carry on
where you left off.
What about the type of Spanish
operetta known as zarzuela?
I think it is a superb musical form and
very much a part of our heritage. I have
always tried with the modest means at my
disposal to do what I can for zarzuela
which, I seem to remember, was not always
highly thought of at the beginning of my
career. It went badly downhill during the
Spanish Civil War in spite of the first-rate
companies that managed to keep the tra¬
dition alive, that run by Plácido Domingo's
parents, for example.
But things are better nowadays thanks
to Tamayo and his company and the great
conductor Ataúlfo Argenta, who is fairly
and squarely in the zarzuela tradition.
Singers like Plácido Domingo, Teresa
Berganza, Pilar Lorengar and many others
have done a lot to bring about this revival.
I personally am very proud of the Paris
Grand Prix I received for a recording of a
zarzuela recital.
Can bel canto be practised in the open
air?
It is a good thing that music is being
performed in the open air today. It attracts
a wider audience than the traditional opera-
going public. But I think the open air is
more suited to recitals of popular pieces,
including bel canto arias.
Our music must not be confined to the
elite of some 30,000 or 50,000 people who
can afford opera seats; the hundreds of
thousands of people who show up at big
open-air concerts also have the right to
hear it. But a recital is better because the
visual element that is an essential part of
opera does not work on a vast stage.
In the same context, what advice would
you give to a music-lover? To attend a live
but perhaps mediocre performance or listen
to a perfect recording?
It all depends on what you want. If it's
perfection you're after, you'd do better
with the recording, but to experience
musical intensity, you need to be there in
your seat. Recording techniques are now so
perfect that recordings constitute archives
that people can consult at home whenever
they want. For myself, I like recordings as
a reference, but for intensity of feeling I
prefer a live performance. One's response
is not at all the same. I say that as someone
who sings, records and is never happy with
the result. (A long peal of laughter).
People say there's a crisis in opera.
Not as far as the public is concerned.
The number of opera-goers and the sales of
recordings prove that there are more fans
today than there were twenty years ago.
There are far more music-lovers now.
I would be more inclined to think that
there is a social crisis. The theatre is going
through a crisis because neither private
benefactors nor governments have the
resources to subsidize culture as they did
thirty years ago. There are other, more
urgent needs. So opera seasons get shorter;
only two or three new productions are
staged instead of fifteen or twenty. Only
ten or a dozen operas are presented each
year, whereas twice as many were put on
twenty years ago.
Is there a lack of new talent?
Absolutely not! The present generation
of young singers is outstanding. But to
make a name for yourself you've got to
appear four or five times in the same place-
and come back year after year before
people start to talk about you.
One last question. What are your inter¬
ests outside music?
I'd like to see all human beings, in dif¬
ferent countries and within each country,
draw closer together and understand each
other better. I'd like to see the North and
the South stop regarding each other
uncomprehendingly and try to understand
that what seems a defect in some may be a
quality in others.
Tolerance, in other words?
"Tolerance" is the word. But unfortunately
it often sounds like an impossible dream.
SERAFÍN GARCIA IBÂREZ is a journalist with
Unesco's Office of Public Information.
