Susali. pearl of the Tunisian Sahel
by Moncef Ghachem
40
UNESCO IN ACTION
HERITAGE
Jewel of the Sahel on Tunisia's east coast, witness to
3,000 years ofMediterranean history, the Medina
ofSitsah is a treasure-trove ofpast and present.
Famed for its craftsmanship, its
festivities and its hospitality,
Susafi is the capital of the Sahel,
the olive-growing region bordering the
Mediterranean in eastern Tunisia.
During the hot Tunisian summer its
streets are filled with singing and
dancing. Visitors flock from other parts
of Tunisia and from abroad to enjoy the
rhythms, colours and games of the
Aoussou (August) festival, when
colourful costumes and parades evoke
episodes in the long history of this cos¬
mopolitan city whose heritage includes
Christian catacombs, Roman mosaics,
the vestiges of a Byzantine citadel and the
ramparts of the Arab Medina (old town).
A thousand years before the Christian
era, Susah was already a trading centre
and a stopping-off place on the route
from Tyr to Spain. The Phoenicians,
who called it Hadrumet, established an
important trading station there two cen¬
turies before the foundation of Carthage.
During his campaign against Seipio at
the end of the Second Punic War, Han¬
nibal sailed to Hadrumet from Italy,
used its port and pitched his camp there.
Under the Roman Empire, rich colonists
who owed their wealth to the agricul¬
tural produce of the fertile back country
poured into Susah. In the seventh cen¬
tury battles between Arabs and Byzan¬
tines reduced the city to ashes. Then it
rose from its ruins and was given its pre¬
sent name. But two centuries went by
before it regained some importance
under the rule of the Aghlabids, who
improved its port and erected its main
monuments. In the twelfth century the

Left, Susan's Great Mosque,
built in 851. Right, massive
pillars and arches in the prayer
hall.
Normans of Sicily used it as a base, and
in the sixteenth the Spanish attacked
and tried to occupy it. Two centuries
later it was bombarded by the French. In
the Second World War the Germans used
its port, which was badly damaged by the
Allies in the winter of 1942-1943. Fol¬
lowing the war, the modern city was built
and the Medina carefully restored.
THE GREAT MOSQUE
Its souks teeming with life, the Medina of
Susah is one of the most remarkable old
quarters in Tunisia. It gives onto the port,
where freighters laden with salt and oil
wait to weigh anchor. There are several
gates in the ramparts that girdle it, but the
main access is in the northeast, near
Farhat Hached Square, where Allied bom¬
bardments in 1943 opened a wide breach.
At the entry to the Medina on the right
flank of a broad esplanade paved with
rough stones is the Great Mosque, which
dates from the ninth century. Careful
restoration work has recreated its original
appearance. The main courtyard is sur¬
rounded by three vaulted galleries whose
squat pillars and tall arches are austere
and functional. The more decorative
southern gallery (modified in 1675 and
restored in 1965) leads to the prayer hall,
whose thirteen naves, each
with six bays, are similar in
style although they date from
different periods. The fourth
bay from the present mihrab
(the prayer niche in the wall
facing Mecca), is covered by
a dome resting on small shell-
shaped arches. Its lower sec¬
tions are adorned with highly
stylized floral patterns,
sculpted squares framing
rosettes and a fine inscrip¬
tion in Kufic script. The
ornate minbar (pulpit), like
a piece of wooden lacework,
contrasts sharply with the
sober architecture of the
Mosque.
A FORT MANNED BY
PIOUS WARRIORS
On leaving the Great
Mosque, the visitor can
wander through the narrow
streets of the Medina lined
with chalk-white houses,
climb stairways and and
plunge into mysterious pas¬
sageways before coming to
the austerely beautiful
Left, the minbar or pulpit of finely
carved wood.
Ribat, a fortified monastery dating from
the end of the eighth century. The Ribat
was one of the coastal forts that, from
Alexandria to Ceuta, formed a defen¬
sive line for Islam against the fleets of
Byzantium. Mooring rings attached to
the walls indicate that the latter were
once battered by the waves. The Ribat
takes its name from the murabitin, pious
warriors who were stationed there to
defend the city from enemy incursions.
The Ribat too has been recently
restored and now looks as it must have
done centuries ago. Ancient columns and
capitals flank the entrance, which was
protected by a portcullis. Openings in the
roof were used as points from which to
harass attackers. The low, dark guard¬
rooms used by the murabitin stand on
each side of the entrance hall, the roof of
which is supported by intersecting
arches. Around the central courtyard
are rooms that were used by the devout
soldiers for their ablutions, and galleries
concealing windowless cells. On the first
floor the cells only occupy three sides of
the quadrangle: the south wing contains
a prayer hall divided by heavy cruci¬
form pillars into two bays of unequal
size. The qibla, the inner wall facing
Mecca, is pierced with loopholes,
reflecting the building's combined reli¬
gious and military character. From the
top of the nador, which is both a watch-
tower and a minaret, there is a won¬
derful panoramic view over Susah and
the surrounding countryside.
MOSAIC MASTERPIECES
After leaving the Medina by the western _ -
Gate (Bab el-Gharbi), a stroll along the nfJL

m
CHRONOLOGY
42
Above, the Ribat, a late 8th century fortified
monastery. It is protected by a square perimeter wall,
each side of which is nearly 30 metres long. At each
corner and halfway along each wall are semi-
cylindrical towers.
A street In the Medina climbing to the Khalef el Fata
tower at the southeastern corner of Susah's ramparts.
The tower is thought to have been built in the 9th
century and modeled on the great Roman lighthouse
at Leptis Magna on the Tripolitanian coast of Libya.
ramparts takes us to the Kasbah, which
is dominated by the imposing Khalef
tower, built in 859. Fully integrated into
the urban fabric, the Kasbah houses the
city museum, which is noted for its col¬
lection of Roman mosaics, discovered
in Susah and in the surrounding area.
Masterpieces by the finest mosaic makers
line the walls of the patio. The opulent
lifestyle of the Romans who lived in the
Tunisian Sahel in the second and third
centuries seems to have provided the
craftsmen with their main themes. As
well as remarkable portraits of the sea
god, a triumphantly dancing Bacchus,
Apollo and the muses, Venus at her toilet
and Orpheus calming wild animals, there
are also many scenes from daily life, of
hunting, fishing and horse-racing, and
depictions of fish, fruit and birds
including fan-tailed peacocks.
The Kasbah museum also contains
Punic, Roman and Byzantine funerary
objects and remarkable stelae found in
the catacombs around Susah and assem¬
bled here after galleries collapsed as a
result of water infiltration. Used in the
second and fifth centuries and discovered
MONCEFGHACHEM
is a Tunisian poet and journalist. His latest work,
L'éperviernouvelles de Mahdia ("The Sparrow-
HawkStories from al-Mahdlyah", SPM, Paris,
1994) received a special mention from the jury of
the Albert Camus prize, 1994.
at the end of the last century, the cata¬
combs contain 15,000 pagan and Chris¬
tian tombs. They are over five kilometres
long and are lined with niches dug in the
walls and closed off by tiles or marble
slabs.
It would be wrong to leave Susah
without taking the magnificent corniche
that winds its way above the beach at
Boujaâfar. The sea stretches away into
the distance, its sounds seeming to offer
an eternal promise of happy and pros¬
perous voyages. Like many other
Tunisian coastal towns, Susah encour¬
ages tourism. The tourist area stretches
northwards, beyond the yacht harbour
at El-Kantawi, built beside a holiday vil¬
lage whose houses follow the curve of
the bay. These are elegant structures
that do not detract from Susah's cul¬
tural heritage. On the contrary they con¬
firm that Susah is still what it has always
been, a city of new beginnings.
'
9th century B.C.: Hadrumet is founded
by Phoenician sailors.
6th century B.C.: Hadrumet comes under
Carthaginian rule and becomes involve
in the Punic Wars.
310 B.C.: It is sacked by the Syracusan
Agathocles.
202 B.C.: Hannibal sets up his camp at
Hadrumet before being defeated by
Scipio.
146 B.C.: Wisely taking sides with the
Romans during the Third Punic War,
Hadrumet is granted the status of a free
city and named "Hadrumetum".
46 B.C.: Caesar annexes the Numidian
kingdom and rescinds Hadrumetum's
privileges.
A.D. 284-305: The city becomes the cap¬
ital of the new province of Byzacena.
429: Vandal invasion.
533: The city is reconquered by Justinian,
emperor of the eastern Roman empire,
and renamed Justinianopolis.
647: The city is conquered by the Arabs
and destroyed.
End of the 7th century: It rises from the
I ashes and is called Susah.
800: Beginning of the Aghlabid dynasty
(Sunnite Muslims).
827: Susah is used as the port of embarka¬
tion for the Muslim bines attacking Sicily.
844: Construction of the first Kasbah.
851: Construction of the Creat Mosque.
909: The Falimids (Shi'ites) come to
power.
1053: \fter the Zirids break with the
Fatimid Suzerain in Cairo and Ifriqiya
returns to Sunnite orthodoxy, Susah
rebels and its harbour is burned.
12th century: The city is occupied by the
Normans and then falls under the domi¬
nation of the Almohad Moroccan Berber
dynasty.
I.'5th century: The Hafsids come to power.
14th century: Decline of the Hal'sid state,
which collapses in the 16th century.
1574: The Turks dominate the whole of
Tunisia.
1 7th century: Susah becomes a port used
by big Ottoman pirate ships.
1705: The Husaynids come to power.
1770: Susah is bombarded by the French.
1784-86: Venitian bombardments cause
major destruction.
1864: The Sahel rises against Ottoman
rule.
1942-194.'): Susah is seriously daniagt
during allied operations in the Tunisia
campaign.
1988: The Medina of Susah is placed on
I MESCO's World Heritage List.
