istening
OPERA FROM TAIWAN
by Isabelle Leymarie
48
I Beijing Opera, widely regarded as the
I paragon of Chinese opera, is severely
stylized. Its Taiwanese cousin (ke tsai hsi),
less well known abroad until recently, is more
flexible and has shown a remarkable capacity
to adapt to the contemporary world.
The ancestry of Taiwanese opera can be
traced back to ke tsai chen, a form of street the¬
atre that developed from folk songs and folk
tale's introduced into Taiwan by immigrants who
arrived there in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries from Fujian province in southeast
China. In the 1920s, it returned to Fujian, then
spread to Singapore and developed fully in
Taiwan after the Second World War. It has never
lost its spontaneity or its roots in folk art.
The Ming Hwa Yuan company, founded in
1929, is a distinguished exponent of ke tsai hsi.
One of the main works in its repertoire is
Buddha Incarnate, the plot of which is based on
the conflict between the fatalistic Taoist master
Ch'un Yang, who believes that there is a fun¬
damental difference between human beings
and non-human beings, and the Buddhist monk
Ji Gong, who professes unconditional love for all
living creatures. These are two of several arche¬
typal characters from Chinese literature and
folklore who appear in the opera. Ji Gong is
thought to have been a wild, drunken monk
who lived in the thirteenth century in Zhejiang
province and, in spite of his unkempt appear¬
ance and contempt for conventions, achieved
illumination long before his more respectable
correligionists. Another stock figure is the Taoist
master who is able to perform supernatural
feats but is power-hungry and amuses himself
by baiting the Buddhist hero. Other characters
in the opera include a cunning white fox, who is
also a figure of Japanese mythology, and a
peach-tree, a sturdy figure whose symbolism is
obscure.
MEN PLAYED BY WOMEN
Bored by the hereafter, the white fox and his
acolyte the peach tree decide to assume human
form and come down to earth to see what is
going on in the living world. The fox is victorious
in a martial arts competition organized by a man
who is on the look-out for a suitor for his
daughter, and duly wins the young woman's
heart. His love is returned, but he is unmasked
by the Taoist Master, who tries to prevent the
union. Now aware that the fox is a superhuman
being, the young woman's family opposes the
wedding. To prove his sincerity, the fox gives up
his natural form and the magic powers that go
A colourful form of
entertainment inspired by
music hall, cinema and
folk theatre
with it, and turns into a simple mortal. After
many adventures and with the help of Ji Gong,
who fights with the Taoist Master in the pres¬
ence of the rulers of hell, the fox becomes a
scholar, brilliantly passes his state exams,
weds his beloved and wins the affection of her
parents.
In Chinese theatre, the feminine nature of
certain characters is heightened by the fact
thateven in rural Chinawomen play male
roles (in Japanese kabuki drama the reverse is
the case). In Buddha Incarnate the fox and the
peach tree are both played by young women. "Tai¬
wanese theatre is very gentle," explains Ming
Hwa Yuan's director. "We don't like violent things.
Women have gradually come to play male roles
because with a woman it is more beautiful."
A METAPHOR FOR
THE BUDDHIST WAY
Although archetypal characters appear in Tai¬
wanese opera, the legends on which it is based
are sometimes modified or invented. In Buddha
Incarnate, for example, Ji Gong is moved by the
sincerity of the fox's love for the young woman
and uses all kinds of stratagems and martial
arts skills to help bring about their marriage
an episode which does not appear in the orig¬
inal version of the drunken monk's biography.
After suspense worthy of a Kung Fu movie,
Buddha Incarnate comes to a happy end. The
moral undertones of such operasin this case
the themes of redemption and the deceptive-
ness of appearancesare very important. In
order to get what he wants, the fox triumphs
over dark forces. As his inner revolution pro¬
gresses from the opening of his heart to the
renunciation of false friendships, the fox
becomes a metaphor for the Buddhist way.
Once a family affair, the Ming Hwa Yuan
company today recruits actors among teenagers
who have completed their secondary studies.
In the past, Chinese peasant families found
their children a place in theatre companies to
provide them with a future. Chen Kaige's film
Farewell, My Concubine shows that their training
could be hard and often cruel. In Taiwan today,
however, young people are only too happy to
embark on a career in show business. The
aspiring performers follow their apprentice¬
ship, which lasts about two years, by watching
their seniors and playing small parts. "We like
young people," says the director. "They have
lots of enthusiasm and energy."
Plenty of physical energy is certainly needed
for the long dally grind of rehearsal, and early
to bed and early to rise is the rule when the com¬
pany is on the road. The performers rehearse
on stage for hours, learning not only their lines
but collective choreography, acrobatics and
martial arts, especially the arm gestures taken
from the chen form of Tai chi, the ancient Chi¬
nese art of body movement. Everything is made
more attractive by emphasizing the surreal and
the fantastic in order to enchant the audience.
Without their extraordinary make-up the actors
look much more vulnerable than they do during
the show. Many of them are still children or
rebellious teenagers, sometimes tired, preoc¬
cupied or unruly.
A DAZZLING SPECTACLE
Taiwan opera is a dazzling spectacle with its
blend of sets, lights and traditional and kitsch
costumes taken from music hall, movies and
other kinds of theatre. All kinds of odds and
ends are tacked on to the main plot. "It is a free
form," says the director. "In this way the show
becomes a mirror of present-day life. The audi¬
ence feels that what is happening on stage is
close to their lives, and this has an effect on
them. We have to rehearse constantly because
even a well prepared show never follows a set
course. It is subject to constant variations."
The lively, rhythmic music also plays an
important role. Played on traditional Chinese
string and percussion instruments, it is based
on peasant songs arranged by the company's
own composer who, depending on require¬
ments, adds snatches of already existing music
or composes original passages. It may be used
deliberately to go against the flow of the action,
relax a tense situation or create a comic atmos¬
phere and special effects. At various moments
during the performance the players start to
dance disco style, keeping a two-four beat as in
black music, a scansion unknown in the Asian
tradition.
ISABELLE LEYMARIE
is a Franco-American musicologist.
