well as human sisterhood, and both must rise
and fall together. Woman cannot be elevated
without elevating man, and man cannot be
depressed without depressing woman also". Or,
as one social reformer put it at the beginning of
this century, "Feminism will make it possible for
the first time for men to be free."



30
Men supporting
women
by Michael S. Rimmel
The feminist movement has always counted men among its
supporters
Most men have regarded the women's
movement with bemused indifference.
Some have actively opposed women's rights, as
if women's freedom would diminish men's
freedom. In a few countries there has been a
men's movement to encourage men to run off to
the woods to "bond" with other men, as if to
escape the effects of feminism.
But some men support feminism, in the
belief that equal opportunity is a right, not a
privilege. Pro-feminist men believe that the
changes feminism has brought to women's lives
are positive for men as well as for women. Some
of them support feminism because their moral
commitments or political ideologies are based on
the right of the individual to determine his or her
life, or because of a commitment to a principle
of equality that demands that all people enjoy
the same rights as citizens. Others support fem¬
inism because they are the sons of feminist
women, the brothers of feminist sisters, the
fathers of feminist daughters, the husbands of
feminist wives, or the friends of feminist women.
From the time of the earliest feminist move¬
ment in the nineteenth century until the present,
however, the most common reason why men
have supported feminism is because they believe
it is the right thing to do, because women are
equal individuals with rights that cannot be
abridged. As the great nineteenth-century Amer¬
ican abolitionist Frederick Douglass put it, male
support of feminism is a matter of "conscience
and common sense".
Some men have also supported feminism on
the grounds that women are socially and morally
superior to men. These men believe that women
can redeem men from the "muddle we have made
of politics", as one social reformer put it at the
turn of the century, and "will correct many of
these law-made wrongs that man has made".
Finally, some men have supported feminism
because they believed that it would benefit men
by demolishing conventional standards of
morality and allowing men to fully develop
themselves. As Frederick Douglass put it: "This
cause is not altogether and exclusively woman's
cause. It is the cause of human brotherhood as
A househusband hangs out the
washing.
A battle cry for freedom
Wherever feminist women have agitated for
reform, there have been men to support them.
Educational pioneers opened the doors of colleges
and universities to women in the nineteenth cen¬
tury, and supported women's entry into profes¬
sions historically closed to women. The founder
of Wellesley College in the United States wrote
that he supported women's education as a form
of "revolt": "We revolt against the slavery in
which women are held by the customs of
society the broken health, the aimless lives, the
subordinate position, the helpless dependence, the
dishonesties and shams of so-called education.
The Higher Education of Women is one of the
world's battle cries for freedom; for rights against
might. It is the cry of the oppressed slave."
On the economic front, pro-feminist men
supported women's rights to work, to own
property, to join unions, to enter the profes¬
sions, to receive equal wages for equal work, and
to be free of harassment on the job.
Politically, pro-feminist men were preoccu¬
pied with the struggle for suffrage. Since that was
granted to women in the first decades of this cen¬
tury, they have supported women candidates
for public office and have worked to eliminate
barriers to women's full political participation.
Socially, pro-feminist men have been active in
campaigns for birth control, the right to divorce,
and the right of a woman to keep her own name.
In addition, men have supported women's efforts
MICHAEL S. KIMMEL, -
of the United States, is
Professor of Sociology at the
State University of New York and
national spokesperson for the
U.S. National Organization for
Men against Sexism (NOMAS).
He is the author of a number of
books, including The Burdens of
Proof: A History of Men in
America, which will be published
later this year.

to end sexual harassment, domestic violence,
spouse abuse and the ritual torture and genital
mutilation of which women in certain societies are
victims. Around the world there are men who
oppose female circumcision, dowry death, and
customs which give men the power of life and
death over their wives and daughters.
Many pro-feminist men also feel a need to
support each other as they travel the painful,
often confusing path of challenging and
changing the assumptions about gender which
they have been taught. All over the world, there
are support groups for men who seek to be
more active and engaged fathers and in many
countries men are involved in efforts to end
violence against women.
In the United States, the National Organi
zation for Men Against Sexism (NOMAS) was
founded in 1982 to support "the continuing
struggle of women for full equality" and to pro¬
mote a vision of men and women working
together "as allies to change the injustices that
have so often made them see one another as
enemies."
NOMAS stands for four co-equal princi¬
ples: (1) to oppose sexism and support women's
full equality in the public and private sphere; (2)
to oppose heterosexism and homophobia, and to
support full equality for gay men and lesbians;
(3) to support the struggle of minorities for full
equality; and, (4) to oppose rigid definitions of
masculinity and promote changes among men
that will enable them to live richer and more
fully expressive emotional lives.

