UNESCO's programme for peace
by Ahmed Saleh Sayyad
A strategy to influence attitudes and act on the root causes
ofconßct
Peace-keeping is a function of the United
Nations Organization. Peace-building, an
activity concerning the human conscience and
the moral and intellectual foundations of human
behaviour, is a task which is incumbent on
UNESCO. The level on which UNESCO exercises
these responsibilities is that of culture as it is
expressed in everyday life. Culture must be
inspired and informed by the ideal of peace.
The American poet Archibald MacLeish,
who played a leading part in the drafting of
UNESCO's Constitution, described what the idea
of peace meant to him and to UNESCO's
founders in the following words. "Peace ... is
a process and a condition," he wrote, "not a
static objective periodically achieved and lost. It
is a condition of mutual confidence, harmony
of purpose, and co-ordination of activities in
which free men and women can live a satisfac¬
tory life ... in which war is affirmatively pre¬
vented by the dynamic and purposeful creation
of a human and social order between the people
of the world, in which the incentives to war are
neutralized by the human and spiritual advances
created and achieved."
Alfredo Cristiani, the President of El Sal¬
vador, believes that the culture of peace is
simply the "culture of life", while UNESCO's
Director-General, Federico Mayor, regards it as
"a way of living one's everyday life".
A NEW PERSPECTIVE
In the Medium-Term Strategy (1996-2001)
being submitted to UNESCO's General Confer-
14
ence the culture of peace is defined as "all the
values, attitudes and forms of behaviour, ways
of life and of acting that reflect, and are inspired
by, respect for life and for human beings and
their dignity and rights, the rejection of violence
and commitment to the principles of freedom,
justice, solidarity, tolerance and understanding
among peoples and between groups and indi¬
viduals."
These are tasks that must be performed by
all categories of civil society. But it is quite nat¬
ural that teachers and intellectuals (poets,
writers and creative artists) should play a leading
role in developing the ideas and values under¬
lying this process. They can also use their
knowledge and creative powers to inform the
rest of society and infuse these values into the
lives of their contemporaries.
Peace, like war, makes its own demands. It
implies a new way of looking at traditional
modes of thought which still abound in warlike
references epic tales that extoll the courage of
warriors, monuments commemorating battles,
school books that teach children the illustrious
exploits of soldiers, history books describing
world wars, civil wars and holy wars.
A LONG-TERM
JOB
Peace also calls for a large-scale programme to
eradicate the poverty, inequality and discrimi¬
nation that give rise to the violence which fuels
the conflicts of today. Many peoples and soci¬
eties are familiar with a state of political and
social instability that could lead to terrible racial,
ethnic or religious confrontations. The gap is
widening between the haves and the have-nots.
Human rights and fundamental freedoms are
too often scorned. These trends have led

UNESCO to take the initiative by contributing to
national and international projects that promote
the search for common ground and bases for
compromise. These projects involve steps that
UNESCO can take to isolate conflicts before they
degenerate into violence, and in cases where
they have already done so, to help contain them
and to cope with their consequences.
This means creating an environment of jus¬
tice and social harmony, building confidence
between states and peoples, reflecting on the
remote or immediate causes of conflicts and
seeking solutions that short-circuit temptation
to violence, by means of cultural activities, edu¬
cation, communication and legislation.
IN THE FIELD
"A culture of peace cannot be imposed from
outside. It must be a process that grows out of
the people themselves and develops differently
in each country depending on its history, cul¬
tures and traditions." This statement from



UNESCO's Action programme to promote a cul¬
ture of peace, launched in 1993, reveals the
dynamics of a concept which is beginning to
take practical shape.
UNESCO's first steps in this field took place
in El Salvador, where the "First International
Forum on the Culture of Peace" was held in
San Salvador in February 1994. The previous
year a "Forum for Education and Culture of
Peace" organized in the same country had led
to a nation-wide programme the goal of which
was to contribute to the "country's economic,
social and cultural renewal".
In Mozambique a "Peace consolidation pro¬
gramme" has been organized with the authori¬
ties, non-governmental organizations and local
community associations. It covers a wide range
of activities including adult literacy work, the
social reintegration of demobilized soldiers, the
promotion of folk culture, radio programmes
and cultural exchanges between young people.
In Burundi a "National Symposium on the
Culture of Peace" gave an opportunity for a
broad spectrum of socio-professional groups,
political organizations and associations to reflect
on "problems connected with the interdepen¬
dence of democracy, human rights, peace and
development in the Burundi cultural context".
Other experiences in the Congo and
Somalia have enabled UNESCO to develop var¬
ious steps by which bellicose attitudes can grad¬
ually give way to a spirit of compromise and
reconciliation.
A RECONCILIATION
PLAN IN
THE CONGO
A forum on the theme "Intercommunity dia¬
logue for peace, democracy and sustainable
development" was held in Brazzaville in
December 1994. It was organized jointly by the
government of the Republic of the Congo and
UNESCO. Discussions focused on the questions
of how to integrate the mechanisms for
I he earth weeps,
by 14-year-old Rita Yamashita
(Japan)
15

conflict-settlement that exist in traditional soci¬
eties into the new democratic process, the role
of democratic institutions in peace-building
between ethnic groups and the ways in which
political parties can support social integration.
The action plan "for promoting a culture of
peace" that was devised after the Forum sug¬
gests a series of measures that could be adopted
either to prevent conflicts or to encourage rec¬
onciliation. The plan is based on the mobiliza¬
tion of intellectuals, artists, educators and jour¬
nalists. Among the measures it proposes are
providing support for research programmes on
pre-conflict situations and on the traditions of
dialogue and past experience in solving con¬
flicts; monitoring the ways in which different
communities respect cultural, social and polit¬
ical rights; and upgrading road, rural radio and
telephone systems to improve communica¬
tions between rural and urban areas.
Steps are also to be taken to improve the
status of women, who have often acted as con¬
ciliators in traditional African societies, and to
educate young people by developing and dis¬
tributing teaching aids and aiding schools and
universities.
There are also plans to encourage disarma¬
ment and the disbanding of private militias, and
to speed up the reintegration of young militia
recruits into civilian life and the integration of
unemployed young people and disaster victims
into society.
RECONCILIATION IN
SOMALIA
A Symposium on the Culture of Peace in
Somalia, organized on UNESCO's initiative, was
held from 17 to 20 April 1995 in Sana'a (Yemen).
It was attended by about seventy Somali intel¬
lectuals and professional people (some living in
Somalia, others belonging to the Somali dias¬
pora), representatives of the Organisation of
African Unity, the Arab League, a number of
UN bodies, international organizations and
donor countries. There were three main items
on the agenda: rebuilding Somali society, reha¬
bilitating the state and reintegrating the country
into the international community.
The Symposium was part of a broader
framework of activities deployed in Somalia by
UNESCO, which in the last two years has orga¬
nized 55 teacher training workshops (in many
parts of Somalia and in refugee camps in neigh¬
bouring countries), printed 850,000 school
books and handbooks for teachers, and distrib¬
uted emergency teaching materials.
However, the war has caused incalculable
damage. Hundreds of thousands of people
were killed; families were destroyed; people
displaced and children orphaned. All the tradi¬
tional values of African civilization have been
overthrown. The only schooling for young
people was training in handling weapons. The
elders who had settled conflicts in the past were
no longer listened to. Many people sought pro¬
tection in a clan. Despite the efforts of many vil¬
lages, violent tribalism replaced the traditional
mechanisms of peaceful dialogue between
ethnic groups.
The participants in the Sana'a Symposium
emphasized the need to combine tradition with
modernity in order to build a new way of living
together. Political pluralism, power sharing and
a developing democratic system should find a
source of ideas in certain kinds of traditional vil¬
lage democracy that still exist today.
As in the Congo and in any other country
seeking the path of reconciliation, steps must be
taken towards disarmament, administrative
restructuring and educational reform. In short,
Somalis must learn again how to live in peace. M
AHMED SALEH SAYYAD
is the permanent delegate to Unesco of the Republic of
Yemen and president of Unesco's General Conference.
16
