Juanearlos I In
Madrid in 1988.
Juan Carlos I of Spain is a king for our times. Not
for him ermine robes, crown, sceptre, or throne
although he was well and truly on the throne when he
brought about the collapse of an attempted military
coup in February 1981. On that occasion he revealed
his moral stature to his fellow citizens and showed the
world his democratic convictions.
"The Crown cannot tolerate the slightest act or
behaviour that seeks to disrupt by force the democ¬
ratic process enshrined in the constitution that has
been approved by the Spanish people by refer¬
endum." With these words the King ended his short
and solemn television address on the night of 23-24
February 1981, when the government, the parliament
and a group of journalists were being held inside the
Cortes by a clique of officers nostalgic for the old
regime.
Juan Carlos's action served to inject an anti-putsch
vaccine into the fragile, youthful body of Spanish
democracy. Ever since, no Spaniard has ever had to
ask what the king is there for.
His opposition to the putsch, which marked a final
break with the previous regime, endorsed the legitimacy
of a monarch who from that moment could rightfully be
called the "democratic King of Spain". His democratic
purpose had, of course, already been clearly shown
during the difficult transition period, but here suddenly
32

JUAN CARLOS I
the democratic king
by Ramón Luis Acuña
it was expressed in a founding act that confirmed the
shift from dictatorship to democracy.
After inheriting from General Franco full powers
over the army, the Council of Ministers, the Cortes and
the legislative system, the King thus rendered to the
people a sovereignty that was a political hot potato
since it was based on a military victory won in the
Spanish Civil War of 1936 to 1939. He returned Spain,
according to a widely used phrase, "to the hands of the
Spanish people" and, with the agreement of all democ¬
ratic forces, applied the Constitution approved in
1978. This Constitution is in many respects one of the
most advanced in Europe, particularly concerning
regional political freedoms and the defence of the
rights of cultural minorities.
Juan Carlos's actions met the expectations of
Spanish civil society which had entered the post-
Franco era long before Franco's death and wished to
get into step with the civil societies of the other devel¬
oped countries of Europe. At first, some politicians
wrongly saw Juan Carlos as the successor of the pre¬
vious regime, even going so far as to nickname him
"Juan Carlos the Short". They could not have been
more mistaken. Juan Carlos soon came to embody the
Spanish people's aspirations for change one of the
profoundest collective feelings expressed in Europe in
the second half of the twentieth century.
The King always insists that "the protagonist of the
transition was the people" and that he has done
nothing more than his duty in assuming the responsi¬
bility that history and the demands of the moment
imposed on him.
He was in fact the catalyst of a decisive political
change that astonished other democratic societies and
gave hope to those still subject to dictatorship. The
transfer of power in Spain was a model, a source of
inspiration for guiding democratic changes not only in a
number of Latin American countries but also, and
despite a very different political situation, in the
Eastern bloc countries, including Russia.
Juan Carlos started out from a simple, solid prin¬
ciple: he wished to be "the King of all the Spaniards"
that he was proclaimed to be in the posters waved by
his supporters on coronation day, 22 November 1975.
During the
attempted putsch
of 23 February
1981, 200 Civil
Guards invaded the
Spanish Parliament.
He would not only be the king of those who had won
the Civil War; he would also be the King of those who
had lost it. He would not only be the king of the Castil¬
lans and the Aragonese; he would also be the king of
the Basques, the Catalans, the Galicians and the other
inhabitants of Spanish territory. His attitude coincided
with the widespread opinion in the political parties in
favour of national reconciliation, the feeling that the
Civil War was a thing of the past: Spaniards realized
that while change was inevitable, a brutal break with
the immediate past could lead to serious confronta¬
tions. In consequence most of them chose the middle
way of reason, and their king, like them, preferred to
build the future rather than dwell on the past.
HISTORIC RECONCILIATIONS
And so he obeyed a second principle: that the rank of
monarch is not conferred by divine right or exclusively
by inheritance. It must be earned by doing the job well.
A monarchy only makes sense if it shows itself to be
useful to the nation. If it does not, it may become
redundant or even harmful, as happens when it falls
into discredit. Because of this approach, a two-thou¬
sand year-old institution provided what the king called
"a propulsive stimulus" to the modernization of Spain.
The king's third goal was harder to implement. He
wished to effect without violence or trauma the transi¬
tion from a dictatorial government to a constitutional
monarchy. The former regime was anachronistic and
lifeless, held together until the end by nothing more
than its autocratic figurehead. The ship had to be
scuttled. On his own and caught in a cross-fire between
33

RAMON LUIS
ACUÑA,
of Spain, is
assistant general
manager of the
Spanish news
agency EFE and
special advisor for
communications to
UNESCO. His most
recent published
work is Las Tribus de
Europa (1994, "The
tribes of Europe").
King Juan Carlos
(centre) out walking.
the hostility of the hardline Franco supporters and the
initial mistrust of the democrats, Juan Carlos used the
wide powers he had received with skill and determina¬
tion. "Everyone was against me," he said later. But he
succeeded in influencing the course of events. The
authoritarian structure was methodically dismantled
without bloodshed, and democracy built on its ruins.
The facts speak for themselves. This is the "democ¬
ratic king's" contribution to the history of Spain.
His powers are defined by the constitution. As
arbiter and guarantor of the institutions, the king is
the head of the armed forces and his country's highest-
ranking representative abroad. However, he appoints
the head of government in strict conformity with elec¬
tion results and can only dissolve parliament if
requested to do so by the head of the executive. His
authority is primarily of a moral nature.
Juan Carlos has a high reputation in Spain. More
than 80 per cent of Spaniards questioned in polls over
the years have given a favourable opinion of him. He
has become the most popular king in Europe. This is
largely due to his warm personality and joviality. He
has a straightforward manner which immediately puts
people at their ease. He likes laughter and jokes. Once
when I was interviewing him, some small change
slipped out of my pocket and onto the armchair where
I was sitting. When I was leaving, a member of his staff
caught me up on the staircase, handed me the coins,
and said, "His Majesty has asked me to tell you that for
the moment he makes no charge for interviews."
But this relaxed manner should not be misinter¬
preted. Juan Carlos is thoughtful and well-informed,
an avid reader of books, reports and newspapers. In pri¬
vate he is extremely spontaneous; in public and in the
performance of his duties he detests improvisation.
He loves family life and spends as much time as he
can with his children. He takes advice from his wife,
Queen Sophia, whose "inestimable support and under¬
standing" he readily acknowledges. A sports enthu¬
siast, he runs every day, rides off on his motorbike
whenever he can, sails in summer and skis in winter. For
a fifty-eight-year-old, his physical activity is intense.
When I last visited Cartagena in Colombia, the
guide who showed me around that beautiful colonial
town kept saying, "and here, when the king came. . . ."
After a while I asked him which king he was referring
to. "Our king, of course! Who else?" he answered
without hesitation. Just as he has managed to trans¬
form the Spanish into "Juancarlistas", if not outright
royalists, Juan Carlos has succeeded in being sponta¬
neously dubbed "the king" by Latin Americans.
Reconciliation within Spain has also led to historic
reconciliations with the world outside. Regarded in
Latin America as a symbol of the new democratic
Spain, Juan Carlos has to a large degree contributed to
reestablishing links with Spanish-speaking nations on
the other side of the Atlantic. In 1991 he was the
prime mover for an annual Latin-American summit and
himself attends these meetings of heads of state
designed to reinforce the community of Spanish- and
Portugese-speaking countries. In Madrid in 1992, com¬
memorating the 500th anniversary of the discovery of
America, Juan Carlos spoke in full awareness of criti¬
cism of Spanish and Portuguese colonization when he
declared, "We must assume our part in the history of
peoples with dignity and responsibility in order to
make a better future." He often points out that Spain
promulgated the "Law of the Indies", the social
aspects of which were extremely progressive and that
the first universities in the Americas were founded in
Lima and Santo Domingo in the sixteenth century at a
time when many European cities had none.
A MODERNIZING MONARCHY
Also in 1992, 500 years after the expulsion of the Jews
from Spain, Juan Carlos paid tribute in the Madrid syn¬
agogue to the "Spanish Jews who had to leave Spain
because the state saw religious uniformity as the basis
of its unity". He went on to express the wish that
"never again should hatred or intolerance provoke grief
or exile".
The 500th anniversary of the fall of the last Muslim
bastion in Spain, the Kingdom of Granada, also
occurred in 1992. On that occasion Juan Carlos paid
tribute to Arab Andalusia, Al-Andalus, as a place
where "several peoples formed the habit of sharing
over the centuries and where each of them maintained
their respective identities without losing respect for
difference". This history shared between the Jews and
Arabs for centuries "left a cultural heritage in Spain of
supreme importance," said the king, "and contributed
to the definition of Spanish national identity." These
thoughts also harmonize with current Spanish thinking
that is trying to recover the culturally rich roots the
country is so proud of.
During one of my interviews with King Juan Carlos I
asked him what was left for him to do in Spain since, if
one looked at his list of achievements, his task seemed
to be complete. "You must be joking," he said with his
usual candour. "There is much to be done. Nothing less
than the modernization and renovation of Spain. And in
this field too, I'd like the crown to be a spur."
34
