Baroque Zacatecas
40
UNESCO IN ACTION
HERITAGE
Silver mines brought fabulous wealth
to the Mexican city ofZacatecas,
founded in the 16th century. In 1993
the remarkable monuments in its historic
centre earned it a place on [/JVESCO's
World Heritage List.
by Francisco Segovia
InDecember 1429, the Spanish con¬
quistador Ñuño de Guzman set out
J from Mexico City at the head of
an army of 500 Spaniards and 15,000
Mexican and Tlaxcaltec Indians. He was
travelling west towards the mythical
kingdom of the Amazons, but also to the
very real riches of the vast region which
corresponds to the present-day State of
Michoacán. He had taken its cacique,
Caltzontzin, prisoner and ordered him to
be burned alive.
On reaching Michoacán, he pursued
his conquest in the direction of the ter¬
ritories which were to become New
Galicia. He then divided his army into
three columns. He himself set out to
explore Nayarit and Sinaloa, while one
of his two lieutenants, Cristóbal de
Oñate, marched on west towards the
future city of Guadalajara. The other,
Pedro Almindes Chirinos (Peralmindes)
was to make for the unknown lands lying
further to the north. So it was that when
he reached the site of Zacatecas "of
which he took possession with little or no
opposition", as the chronicler Fray
Antonio Tello relates, alluding at one

and the same time to the ease of the ven¬
ture and the apparent lack of strategic
interest of this inhospitable and arid
land. The conquistador did not suspect
the fabulous mineral wealth which lay
below the soil of Zacatecas.
SILVER MINES
As soon as they had taken possession of
these regions, the Spanish soldiers began
to search for the legendary riches of the
northern provinces. In 1546, one of
them, Juan de Tolosa, brought back
from an expedition to the Cerro de la
Bufa, the long rocky eminence at the
foot of which the city of Zacatecas was to
be built, several bags of ore which
proved to be rich in lead and silver "of
very fine quality". The fate of Zacatecas
was sealed.
All through the sixteenth century, the
territories conquered by Peralmindes
were to remain the forward bastion of the
conquerors of New Spain. They were
also quite naturally to be used as the
point of departure for the evangelizing
missions and the first expeditions to
northern Mexico and what are now Cal¬
ifornia and Texas.
Despite the resistance of the Chichimec
Indians, the mining centre of Zacatecas
soon began to prosper as a result of the
influx of Spaniards, indigenous people
and black slaves captured in Africa and
brought over to work in the mines. So it
was that the camp set up by Tolosa at the
foot of the Cerro de la Bufa spread grad¬
ually southwards along the course of the
Arroyo de la Plata, whose former bed
lies beneath what is now Manuel Hidalgo
Avenue, the city's main artery. Because of
the steepness of the terrain Zacatecas
lies at an altitude of some 2,400 metres in
a mountainous valley the architects
Opposite page, view of Zacatecas
with the cathedral In right
foreground.
Left, framed by an archway, the
massive towers and dome of the
Jesuit church of Santo Domingo
are silhouetted on the horizon.
Above, the 18th-century cathedral
with its ornately decorated towers
and façade.
were obliged to erect tall buildings on
each side of the river.
»PmVEKEEL AM» INTROVERTED
ARCHITECTURE'
That is the reason for the very unusual
character of this city with its irregular
layout, in which the narrow, winding
streets seldom afford an overall view of
the buildings. For instance, it is virtu¬
ally impossible to contemplate the façade
of the cathedral, "the finest example of
baroque architecture to be seen anywhere
in the world", according to the historian
Guillermo Tovar de Teresa, from a dis¬
tance of more than two or three metres.
The first house in Zacatecas is
reported to have been built in 1547, just
before the fortress and the first metal
foundry. By 1550, the city had already
acquired a hospital (Santa Veracruz),
and a chaplain had been appointed to
watch over spiritual matters. In 1558,
the Franciscans founded their first hos¬
pice. Later the Dominicans, Jesuits and 41

other religious orders were to leave their
mark on the city by building a succession
of churches, convents and charitable
foundations. The diversity of their archi¬
tectural concepts, together with those
of the Spanish governors, shaped the
city's appearance throughout the six¬
teenth and seventeenth centuries, and
even much later, until the days of the
revolution (1910-1921).
Raúl Toledo Farias describes this as
"a powerful and introverted architec¬
ture, as befits a somewhat harsh cli¬
mate", reflecting the sober and mea¬
sured character of the inhabitants, which
is far removed from tropical exuber-
.. anee. However, there are also historical
reasons for this sobriety. Although
Zacatecas very soon became a city whose
population was strongly marked by
ethnic intermingling, the indigenous
influences on colonial art are far less
visible here than in southern Mexico.
In fact, Zacatecas as it is today is first
and foremost a creation of the eighteenth
century, a product of the development of
the mines but also of efforts to spread
Christianity. The convent of Our Lady of
Guadalupe was founded by the Francis¬
cans in the suburbs in order to spread
the faith. It was inaugurated on 12 Jan¬
uary 1707, but some parts of the build¬
ings (such as the south tower) were not
really completed until the nineteenth
century. Today it houses an important
museum of Mexican colonial art.
CATHEDRAL, CHERCHES
AND MUSEUMS
The construction of the cathedral itself
was fraught with vicissitudes. The pre¬
sent building replaced the Chapel of
Santo Cristo, which in 1718 became the
parish church to which a chapel was
soon attached. The architectural com¬
plex began to acquire harmonious fea¬
tures in 1721. Only one of the three orig¬
inal façades was preserved. Work went
on for a considerable time: the dome
was rebuilt in 1848 and the south tower
completed in 1904.
Almost opposite the cathedral, the
Jesuit church of Santo Domingo, built
between 1746 and 1749 by Cayetano de
Sigüenza, is a magnificent example of
Mexican baroque. Its eight altar-pieces
in carved and gilded wood in the chur-
Hfc rigueresque style, are the work of Felipe
An alleyway in the old town.
de Ureña and his son-in-law, Juan
García de Castañeda. Taken over by the
Dominicans again following the expulsion
of the Jesuits, this monumental church
was often used as a cathedral when the
latter was closed for structural work.
The former Jesuit College of San Luis
Gonzaga (1616) stands next to this
church. San Luis was famous throughout
Latin America for the quality of his
teaching (one pupil of this college was
Father Antonio Núñez de Miranda, the
spiritual father of Juana Inés de la Cruz,
the Mexican poetess). Following the
expulsion of the Jesuits and a brief inter¬
lude in the hands of the Dominicans, the
college was converted successively into a
barracks, a prison and a warehouse
before being restored in 1981. Today it
houses the Pedro Coronel Museum,
named for a painter and sculptor from
Zacatecas, whose rich and varied col¬
lections include ancient Greek and
Roman objects as well as paintings by
Antoni Tapies and Robert Motherwell.
The museum also contains an important
collection of medals and 25,000 volumes
which made up the libraries of the old
convents (including 15,000 from Our
Lady of Guadalupe alone).
The church of San Agustín has also
had a checquered history. Consecrated
in 1617, it was refurbished and conse¬
crated again in 1782. Tovar attributes it
to Andrés Manuel de la Riva, the archi
tect of the famous church of La Valen¬
ciana de Guanajuato and its baroque
convent. With the adoption of the
Reform Act (separating church and
state), San Agustín was sold to private
buyers who turned it into a billiard hall
and hotel! In 1882, the complex was sold
again to the missions of the American
Presbyterian church, which for religious
reasons decided to demolish the main
façade, which had been the architec¬
tural jewel of the city. The Catholic
church regained possession in 1942 and
it is now the bishop's palace.
AN ISLAND OF PINK STONE
AND STUCCO
The remains of the church of San Fran¬
cisco also deserve a mention. The church
was built in the sixteenth century but
today lies in ruins. On the other hand,
the restored convent has housed a
museum since 1990; the collections of
Rafael Coronel, brother of Pedro and
like him a painter and enlightened con¬
noisseur, are exhibited here. He brought
together several works by Diego Rivera
and a unique collection of 5,000 masks.
Last but not least, the Goitia Museum,
outside the city centre, is also well worth
a visit as it houses, in the former resi¬
dence of the Governor (1948), the works
of six artists who are thought to have
come from Zacatecas: Francisco Goitia,
Julio Ruelas, the two Coronel brothers,
José Kuri Breña and Manuel Felguérez.
The civilian architecture of Zacatecas
is in no way inferior to that of its religious
edifices. One prominent example is the
old house of "Gonzalez Ortega" which
stands next to the cathedral and is today
part of the Governor's palace. The two
buildings look out over the Arroyo de la
Plata, which is lined by a number of
remarkable edifices including Mala Noche
palace, Jesús González Ortega market
and the Calderón theatre. A stroll through
this labyrinth ofnarrow streets punctuated
with little squares and distincitve build¬
ings, is one of the charms of the colourful
island ofpink stone and stucco which is the
historic centre of Zacatecas . H
FRANCISCO SEGOVIA
is a Mexican poet, essayist, lexicographer and
translator who formerly taught literature at the
National Autonomous University of Mexico. Among
his published works are Figuraciones (1989), Nao
(1990) and Fin de fiesta (1994).
