APPEAL BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL
"The twentieth century will go down in history
as the century that added a new art to the his¬
tory of civilization: the seventh art. An art
which, if we really make an effort to safeguard
it, will preserve philosophy, history, daily life and
the problems, emotions and attitudes of an
entire age."
elina Mercouri
(Greek Minister of Culture and actress)
"What would we do if negatives of Amarcord
or of And the Ship Sails On were to disappear
forever? Surely the works of Sembène Ous-
mane, Fernando Solanas, Mrinal Sen and
Merzak Alouach also deserve to be protected?
I am not convinced that it is necessary to
appeal to intellectual snobbery, charity or clair¬
voyance to make people aware of the cata¬
strophe that is threatening the cinema. I should
prefer to think that it is through humanity, intel¬
ligence and above all through love for future
generations that we will save the cinema."
oussef Chahine
(Egyptian film-maker)
"Africa has a right to its ¡mage and its memory.
We must preserve, but we must also help to
distribute films in Africa. The African cinema
must develop because Africa has something to
contribute to the memory of the world. Africa
wants to have its own image, to produce and
preserve it."
(Burkinabé film-maker)
"I invite you to take action to defend the three
fundamental rights of cinema pluralism: the
'i m right of all nations to develop their own cinema
and to enable cinema and audiovisual works to
Saving the
cinematic heritage
Embracing as it does painting, the¬
atre, music, literature and pho¬
tography, the art of the cinema,
which was invented in 1895, is the
custodian of the memory of the
twentieth century and one of the
leading forms of expression of a
changing world.
A product of human creative
imagination and inventive genius, the
art of the cinema developed along
lines running counter to those of the
other arts, in that its discovery and
the progress it made were based on a
technical invention. It owes its suc¬
cess, which was immediate, to the
new dialogue it established with the
public, where every spectator is
under the illusion of actually being in
the midst of the action caught on
film. Film, the miracle of the moving
image, abolishes spatial and temporal
distance. It records, recounts, illus¬
trates and invents.
Today, more than three-quarters
of the perishable and highly inflam¬
mable nitrocellulose-based films
made prior to the 1950s are lost for
ever, while some 60 per cent of the
cellulose-acetate films made after
1950 are threatened by a process of
deterioration known as the "vinegar
syndrome", which bleaches the
image if the film is not properly con¬
served.
The wealth of images captured in
art films, features, documentaries,
full-length films, shorts, popular-sci¬
ence films, newsreels, instructional
and educational films, cartoons and
others, is in danger of disappearing
forever. The cinema has to be saved.
Under its Constitution, UNESCO
is responsible for "assuring the con¬
servation and protection of the
world's inheritance of . . . works of
art and monuments of history and
science", and devotes itself to fos¬
tering the action needed to safeguard
them. The conservation and restora¬
tion of the international cinematic
heritage entail special problems that
private support and spontaneous
gestures cannot by themselves
resolve. It is accordingly considered
necessary to look for answers to
them through partnership arrange¬
ments.
This is why, on behalf of the
United Nations Educational, Scien¬
tific and Cultural Organization and
of the Honorary Committee for the
Celebration of the Centenary of the
Cinema,
I solemnly appeal to the Member
States of Unesco to take appropriate
legal, administrative and financial
steps to set up or strengthen the
structures that are essential for safe¬
guarding the international cinematic
heritage, such as film archives, film
libraries, cinema museums and
restoration laboratories. If this action
is to be successful it will have to be
carried out in consultation with the
International Federation of Film
Archives (FIAF), the specialist inter¬
national organization whose mem¬
bership includes more than 100 such
archives in 63 UNESCO Member
States.
I invite cinema specialists and

OF UNESCO
film-goers to join their efforts to
those whose task it is in every
country to ensure that their national
cinema is safeguarded, so as to make
it possible to compile exhaustive fil¬
mographies.
I invite film producers, actors,
directors, technicians and operators
to join forces, as they are already
doing in some countries, and set up
national foundations or associations
to alert the public to the urgent need
to preserve the national and interna¬
tional cinematic heritage; collect pri¬
vate or public funds to help finance
the restoration of national film col¬
lections; encourage projects for cre¬
ating copyright registration systems
in countries where archives for the
preservation of the cinematic her¬
itage do not yet exist; and ensure that
the national preservation practices
introduced are consistent with the
norms laid down by the Interna¬
tional Federation of Film Archives.
I invite the photography, cinema,
video and television industries, film
producers and distributors and all
industries concerned with cinema
generally to participate generously in
the national and internationl effort
being made by associations and orga¬
nizations to safeguard the cinematic
heritage, by contributing to the cre¬
ation of an international fund
designed to defray the cost of film
restoration and preservation work.
This fund will be created in the
International Federation of Film
Archives and Unesco::".
I invite cinema and television film
producers holding rights to films or
successors in title to join in the safe¬
guarding operation by participating
in it financially or setting up appro¬
priate restoration programmes; I
also ask them to do their utmost to
facilitate the distribution of restored
films in commercial and non-com¬
mercial circuits by concluding
agreements with film distributors
and distribution agencies.
I invite film festivals all over the
world to create a section in their
programmes on "films that have
been saved" and to organize public
showings with the co-operation of
the International Council for Film,
Television and Audiovisual Com¬
munication (IFTC).
I invite schools of film, television
and the audiovisual professions to
take appropriate steps, in conjunc¬
tion with the International Liaison
Centre for Film and Television
Schools, to alert future professionals
working in the film industry to the
problems of conserving and safe¬
guarding cinematic works.
I invite the industrialized coun¬
tries to co-operate with the devel¬
oping countries, so that the latter can
successfully engage in research on
their film production and ensure the
training of conservation specialists
through the requisite transfers of
knowledge and technology.
In conclusion, I invite members
of the international community,
such as film critics, specialists,
cinema-goers and others, to con¬
tribute in all appropriate ways to the
movement to safeguard the cinema
in conjunction with the national,
regional and international bodies of
the International Federation of Film
Archives.
Federico Mayor
UNESCO Headquarters,
2 November 1993
* The UNESCO Fund for the Safeguarding of
the Film Heritage was established in 1995. (Ed.)
be seen as the right of all authors and directors
to express their aesthetic and cultural identity
freely, and the right of all peoples to know and
benefit from the films made by all the different
nations of the world."
ernando Solanas
(Argentine film-maker)
"Throughout Black Africa, South America and
almost everywhere in Europe, cinemas, which
were meeting places just as important in their
own way as country churches, are closing
down one after the other because, at their very
doors, pirate video cassettes are sold for less
than the price of cinema tickets. We are not
asking you to set your face against progress,
but we invite all of you, in your respective
countries, to save these places of mass com¬
munion where, as Freddy Buache so neatly
puts it, 'members of the audience together
shared the same emotions.'"
(French film-maker)
"We know that without libraries, literature
would disappear, the memory of writing would
die with its authors, everything would be con¬
temporary, no worse than journalism but also
no better and the journalism not inspired by
the epic and romantic forms of the past. What
would our cinema look like if we had no
memory of its development? The question is
almost too banal, and yet we still treat that her¬
itage as if it had no value. Arrangements for
preservation and exhibition of past work fall far
below what is barely necessary."
(International Liaison Centre for Film and
Television Schools)
g
