SPECIAL FEATURE
AUNG SAN SUU KYI
Winner of the Nobel Peace prize, under
house arrest in Myanmar since 1989
Human rights activist, champion of democracy in her country,
daughter of the Burmese nationalist leader Aung San (assas¬
sinated in 1947), Aung San Suu Kyi has been under house
arrest since 1989. In spite of the victory of her party in the
elections of May 1990 and support from all over the world,
the authorities have so far refused to restore her freedom. She
was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991. A collection of
her writings, edited by her husband, Michael Aris, has been
published under the title Freedom from Fear by Penguin
Books, Harmondsworth, UK.
Peace as a goal is an ideal which will
not be contested by any government
or nation, not even the most belligerent.
And the close interdependence of the culture
of peace and the culture of development
also finds ready acceptance. But it remains
uncertain how far governments are pre¬
pared to concede that democracy and
human rights are indivisible from the culture
of peace and therefore essential to sustained
development. There is ample evidence that
culture and development can actually be
made to serve as pretexts for resisting calls
for democracy and human rights. It is
widely known that some governments argue
that democracy is a Western concept alien to
indigenous values; it has also been asserted
that economic development often conflicts
with political (i.e. democratic) rights and
that the latter should necessarily give way to
the former. In the light of such arguments
culture and development need to be care¬
fully examined and defined so that they
may not be used, or rather misused, to block
the aspirations of peoples for democratic
institutions and human rights.
'Development means more than
economic growth'
The unsatisfactory record of development
in many parts of the world and the ensuing
need for a definition of development which
means more than mere economic growth
became a matter of vital concern to econ¬
omists and international agencies more
than a decade ago1. In A New Concept of
Development, published in 1983, the
French economist François Perroux stated,
"Development has not taken place: it rep¬
resents a dramatic growth of awareness, a
promise, a matter of survival indeed. Intel¬
lectually, however, it is still only dimly
perceived"2. Later in the same book he
asserted that ". . . personal development,
the freedom of persons fulfilling their
potential in the context of the values to
which they subscribe and which they expe¬
rience in their actions, is one of the main¬
springs of all forms of development"3.
While the concept of human develop¬
ment is beginning to assume a dominant
position in the thinking of international
economists and administrators, the Market
Economy, not merely adorned with capital
letters but seen in an almost mystic haze, is
increasingly regarded by many govern¬
ments as the quick and certain way to
Democracy,
the common heritage of humanity

I
SPECIAL FEATURE
'It is not enough merely to
provide the poor with
material assistance. They
have to be sufficiently
empowered to change their
perception of themselves.'
material prosperity. It is assumed that eco¬
nomic measures can resolve all the prob¬
lems facing their countries. Economics has
been described as the "deus ex machina, the
most important key to every lock of every
door to the new Asia we wish to see".
When economics is regarded as "the
most important key to every lock of every
door", it is only natural that the worth of
man should come to be decided largely,
even wholly, by his effectiveness as an eco¬
nomic tool4. This is at variance with the
vision of a world where economic, political
and social institutions work to serve man
instead of the other way round; where cul¬
ture and development coalesce to create
an environment in which human potential
can be realized to the full.
The value systems of those with access
to power and of those far removed from
such access cannot be the same. The view¬
point of the privileged is unlike that of the
underprivileged. In the matter of power
and privilege the difference between the
haves and the have-nots is not merely
quantitative, for it has far-reaching psy¬
chological and ideological implications.
And many "economic" concerns are
seldom just that, since they are tied up
with questions of power and privilege. The
problem of poverty provides an example of
the inadequacy of a purely economic
approach to a human situation. Even those
who take a down-to-earth view of basic
human needs agree that ". . . whatever doc¬
tors, nutritionists and other scientists may
say about the objective conditions of depri¬
vation, how the poor themselves perceive
their deprivation is also relevant"5.
The alleviation of poverty thus entails
setting in motion processes which can
change the perceptions of all those con¬
ti cerned. Here power and privilege come
AUNG SAN SUU KYI
into play: "The poor are powerless and
have no voice. Power is the possibility of
expressing and imposing one's will in a
given social relationship, in the face of any
resistance. The poor are incapable of either
imposing, coercing or, in many cases,
having any influence at all"6.
It is not enough merely to provide the
poor with material assistance. They have to
be sufficiently empowered to change their
perception of themselves as helpless and
ineffectual in an uncaring world.
'Empowerment is central to culture
and development'
The question of empowerment is central to
both culture and development. It decides
who has the means of imposing on a nation
or society their view of what constitutes
culture and development and who deter¬
mines what practical measures can be taken
in the name of culture and development.
The more totalitarian a system the more
power will be concentrated in the hands of
the ruling elite and the more culture and
development will be used to serve narrow
interests. The "national culture" can
become a bizarre graft of carefully selected
historical incidents and distorted social
values intended to justify the policies and
actions of those in power7. At the same
time development is likely to be seen in the
now outmoded sense of economic growth.
Statistics, often unverifiable, are reeled off



to prove the success of official measures.
Many authoritarian governments wish
to appear in the forefront of modern
progress but are reluctant to institute gen¬
uine change. Such governments tend to
claim that they are taking a uniquely
national or indigenous path towards a
political system in keeping with the times.
In the decades immediately after the
Second World War socialism was the pop¬
ular option. But increasingly since the
1980s democracy has gained ground. The
focus on a national or indigenous way to
socialism or democracy has "the effect of
stressing cultural continuity as both
process and goal; this in turn obviates the
necessity of defining either democracy or
socialism in institutionally or procedu¬
rally specific terms; and finally, it elevates
the existing political elite to the indis¬
pensable position of final arbiter and inter
preter of what does or does not contribute
to the preservation of cultural integrity"8.
It is often in the name of cultural
integrity as well as social stability and
national security that democratic reforms
based on human rights are resisted by
authoritarian governments. It is insinu¬
ated that some of the worst ills of Western
society are the result of democracy, which
is seen as the progenitor of unbridled
freedom and selfish individualism. It is
claimed, usually without adequate evi¬
dence, that democratic values and human
rights run counter to the national culture,
and therefore to be beneficial they need
to be modified perhaps to the extent that
they are barely recognizable. The people
are said to be as yet unfit for democracy,
therefore an indefinite length of time has to
pass before democratic reforms can be
instituted.
The first form of attack is often based
on the premise, so universally accepted
that it is seldom challenged or even noticed,
that the United States of America is the
supreme example of democratic culture.
What tends to be overlooked is that
although the U.S.A. is certainly the most
important representative of democratic
culture, it also represents many other cul¬
tures, often intricately enmeshed. Among
these are the "I-want-it-all" consumer cul¬
ture, mega-city culture, superpower cul¬
ture, frontier culture, immigrant culture.
There is also a strong media culture
which constantly exposes the myriad prob¬
lems of American society, from large issues
such as street violence and drug abuse to
the matrimonial difficulties of minor
celebrities. Many of the worst ills of Amer¬
ican society, increasingly to be found in
varying degrees in other developed coun¬
tries, can be traced not to the democratic
legacy but to the demands of modern mate¬
rialism. Gross individualism and cut-throat
morality arise when political and intellec¬
tual freedoms are curbed on the one hand
while on the other fierce economic com¬
petitiveness is encouraged by making mate¬
rial success the measure of prestige and
progress. The result is a society where cul¬
tural and human values are set aside and
money value reigns supreme.
No political or social system is per¬
fect. But could such a powerful and pow-


DEMOCRACY, THE COMMON HERITAGE OF HUMANITY
erfully diverse nation as the United States
have been prevented from disintegrating if
it had not been sustained by democratic
institutions guaranteed by a constitution
based on the assumption that man's capacity
for reason and justice makes free govern¬
ment possible and that his capacity for pas¬
sion and injustice makes it necessary?9
Democracy in the plural
It is precisely because of the cultural diver¬
sity of the world that it is necessary for dif¬
ferent nations and peoples to agree on those
basic human values which will act as a uni¬


fying factor. When democracy and human
rights are said to run counter to non-
Western culture, such culture is usually
defined narrowly and presented as mono¬
lithic. In fact the values that democracy and
human rights seek to promote can be found
in many cultures. Human beings the world
over need freedom and security that they
may be able to realize their full potential.
The longing for a form of governance that
provides security without destroying
freedom goes back a long way10.
Support for the desirability of strong
government and dictatorship can also be
found in all cultures, both Eastern and
Western: the desire to dominate and the
tendency to adulate the powerful are also
common human traits arising out of a desire
for security. A nation may choose a system
that leaves the protection of the freedom and
security of the many dependent on the incli¬
nations of the empowered few; or it may
choose institutions and practices that will
sufficiently empower individuals and orga¬
nizations to protect their own freedom and
[In a totalitarian system]
'the "national culture" can
become a bizarre graft of
Icarefully selected historical
incidents and distorted
social values intended to
justify the policies and
actions of those in power.'
Aung San Suu Kyi in
October 1988. She is
holding a photo of her
father, Aung San
(1915-1947).
security. The choice will decide how far a
nation will progress along the road to peace
and human development".
Many of the countries in the Third
World now striving for meaningful devel¬
opment are multiracial societies where
there is one dominant racial group and a
number sometimes a large number of
smaller groups: foreign, religious or ethnic
minorities. As poverty can no longer be
defined satisfactorily in terms of basic eco¬
nomic needs, "minority" can no longer be
defined merely in terms of numbers. For
example, it has been noted in a study of
minorities in Burmese history that "In the
process of nation-building ... the notion of
minority in Burma changed, as one group
defines itself as a nation those outside the
group become minorities"12.
Once again, as in the case of poverty, it
is ultimately a question of empowerment.
The provision of basic material needs is
not sufficient to make minority groups
and indigenous peoples feel they are truly
part of the greater national entity. For that
they have to be confident that they too
have an active role to play in shaping the
destiny of the state that demands their alle¬
giance. Poverty degrades a whole society
and threatens its stability while ethnic con¬
flict and minority discontent are two of
the greatest threats to both internal and
regional peace. And when the dispossessed
"minority" is in fact an overwhelming
majority, as happens in countries where
power is concentrated in the hands of the
few, the threat to peace and stability is ever
present even if unperceived.
As the United Nations Development
Programme's Human Development Report
points out, "National governments must
find new ways of enabling their people to
participate more in government and to
allow them much greater influence on the
decisions that affect their lives. Unless this
is done, and done in time, the irresistible
tide of people's rising aspirations will
inevitably clash with inflexible systems,

SPECIAL FEATURE AUNG SAN SUU KYI DEMOCRACY, THE COMMON HERITAGE OF HUMANITY
leading to anarchy and chaos. A rapid
democratic transition and a strengthening
of the institutions of civil society are the
only appropriate responses"13.
The argument that it took long years
for the first democratic governments to
develop in the West is not a valid excuse for
African and Asian countries to drag their
feet over democratic reform. The history of
the world shows that peoples and soci¬
eties do not have to pass through a fixed
series of stages in the course of develop¬
ment. Moreover, latecomers should be able
to capitalize on the experiences of the pio¬
neers and avoid the mistakes and obstacles



that impeded early progress. The idea of
"making haste slowly" is sometimes used
to give backwardness the appearance of
measured progress. But in a fast devel¬
oping world too much emphasis on
"slowly" can be a recipe for disaster.
There will be as many kinds of democ¬
racies as there are nations which accept it
as a form of government. No single type of
"Western democracy" exists; nor is democ¬
racy limited to a mere handful of forms
such as the American, British, French or
Swiss. Each democratic country will have
its own individual characteristics. With the
spread of democracy to eastern Europe
the variety in the democratic style of gov¬
ernment will increase. Similarly there
cannot be one form of Asian democracy; in
each country the democratic system will
develop a character that accords with its
social, cultural and economic needs. But the
basic requirement of a genuine democracy
is that the people should be sufficiently
empowered to be able to participate sig¬
nificantly in the governance of their
country. The thirty articles of the Uni¬
versal Declaration of Human Rights are
aimed at such empowerment. Without
these rights democratic institutions will
be but empty shells incapable of reflecting
the aspirations of the people and unable to
withstand the encroachment of authori¬
tarianism.
The democratic process provides for
political and social change without vio¬
lence. The democratic tradition of free dis¬
cussion and debate allows for the settle¬
ment of differences without resort to
armed conflict. The culture of democracy
O and human rights promotes diversity and
dynamism without disintegration; it is
indivisible from the culture of develop¬
ment and the culture of peace. It is only by
giving firm support to movements that
seek to empower the people through
democratic means that the United Nations
and its agencies will truly be able to pro¬
mote the culture of peace and the culture of
development.
Let me in conclusion summarize my
argument. The true development of human
beings involves much more than mere eco¬
nomic growth. At its heart there must be a
sense of empowerment and inner fulfill¬
ment. This alone will ensure that human
and cultural values remain paramount in a
world where political leadership is often
synonymous with tyranny and the rule of
a narrow elite. People's participation in
social and political transformation is the
central issue of our time.
This can only be achieved through the
establishment of societies which place
human worth above power, and liberation
above control. In this paradigm, develop¬
ment requires democracy, the genuine
empowerment of the people. When this is
achieved, culture and development will nat¬
urally coalesce to create an environment in
which all are valued, and every kind of
human potential can be realized.
Extracts from an address written by Ms.
Aung San Suu Kyi and delivered at her
request by Ms. Corazón Aquino, former
President of the Philippines, at a meeting
of UNESCO's World Commission on Cul¬
ture and Development held in Manila on
21 November 1994.
'it is precisely because of
the cultural diversity of the
world that it is necessary
for different nations and
peoples to agree on those
basic human values which
will act as a unifying factor.'
1 It has been pointed out that the idea of growth as
a performance test of development and not an end in
itself was put forward by economists as early as the
1950s: Paul Streeten et al., First Things First: Meeting
Basic Human Needs in the Developing Countries,
Oxford, 1982.
2 François Perroux, A New Concept of Develop¬
ment, Unesco, Paris, 1983, p. 2.
3 Ibid., p. ISO
4 "The logic of an economy governed by solvency
and by profit, subject to the increasing value attached to
capital and to the power of those who command it is to
reject as 'non-economic' everything which cannot be
immediately translated into quantities and prices in
market terms", Paul-Marc Henry (ed.), Poverty, Progress
and Development, London, 1991, p. 36.
5 Streeten et al., First Things First, p. 1 9.
6 Henry (ed.), Poverty, Progress and Development,
p. 34
7 The Palestinian writer Edward Said comments that
governments in general use culture as a means of pro¬
moting nationalism: "To launder the cultural past and
repaint it in garish nationalist colors that irradiate the
whole society is now so much a fact of contemporary life
as to be considered natural". See Edward Said, "Nation¬
alism, Human Rights and Interpretation", in Barbara
Johnson (ed.), Freedom and Interpretation: The Oxford
Amnesty Lectures, 1992, New York, 1993, p. 191.
8 Harry M. Scoble and Laurie S. Wiseberg (eds.),
Access toJustice: Human Rights Struggles in South-East
Asia, London, 1985, p. 57.
9 See Clinton Rossitcr's introduction to Hamilton,
Madison and Jay, The Federalist Papers, Chicago, 1961.
I owe thanks to Lady Patricia Gore-Booth for the orig¬
inal quotation on which Rossitcr presumably based his
words, "Man's capacity for justice makes democracy
possible; but man's inclination to injustice makes democ¬
racy necessary", from Rcinhold Niebuhr's foreword
to his Children of Light and Children of Darkness: A
Vindication ofDemocracy and a Critique of its Tradi¬
tional Defence, London, 1945.
10 "The best government is that which governs least"
are the words of a Westerner, John L. O'Sullivan, but
more than a thousand years before O'Sullivan was born
it was already written in the Lao Tzu, a Chinese classic,
that "the best of all rulers is but a shadowy presence to
his subjects". The notion that "in a nation the people are
the most important, the state is next and the rulers the
least important" is to be found not in the works of a
modern western political theorist but in that of Mencius.
1 1 Ehsan Naraghi has shown in his memoirs, From
Palace to Prison: Inside the Iranian Revolution (I. B.
Tauris, London, and Ivan R. Dee, Chicago, 1994), that
a critical attitude towards the monarch, decentralization
of power and division of responsibilities were part of
Oriental tradition. His fascinating conversations with
Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi throw into relief the
dangers of cultural and development policies divorced
from the aspirations of the people.
12 Ronald D. Renard, "Minorities in Burmese His¬
tory", in K. M. de Silva et al. (eds.), Ethnic Conflict in
Buddhist Societies: Sri Lanka, Thailand and Burma,
London, 1988, p. 79.
13 Human Development Report 1993 p. 5. Scoble
and Wiseberg (eds.), Access toJustice, p. 5, point out the
difference between fundamental reform that "involves
a redistribution of power, a broadening of participation
and influence in the making of authoritative decisions"
and contingent reform that "involves a sharing of the
benefits of power holding, or the uses of power, in
order to avoid the sharing of power itself".
