COMMENTARY
Building a culture
/see two global threats which are jeopardizing
the future of the world and call for the utmost



vigilance from UNESCO.
The first is the split between North and South,
which is growing wider and can only be gradually
reduced by establishing a genuine world partner¬
ship for development. If this development is to be
genuine, it must be human, in other words it must
be endogenous, sustainable, equitable and con¬
scious of its cultural dimension. Promoting this
kind of development on a worldwide scale will call
for a new sense of solidarity in the international
community and developing much greater synergy
between the organizations and mechanisms
involved internationally.
We should invest less in peace-keeping, for which
countries are traditionally well equipped, and more
in peace-building, which is a much more difficult
exercise, as so many recent events have shown.
The most crucial problem of our time is that of
population growth, which it will only be possible to
control through education and the development of
human resources. By investing in education, espe¬
cially in education for young women, it should be
possible within the space of fifteen years to scale
down the rate of population increase, which is cur¬
rently running at one million persons every four
days. Furthermore, the only way to stem the flow
of emigration, which may in a few years' time
result in violent social upheavals, is to encourage
endogenous development: helping countries to
34

B Y FEDERICO MAYOR
of peace
release their own potential and to encourage the
transfer of knowledge so as to alleviate the poverty
and distress that compel people to leave their own
countries.
The type of human development which Unesco
is advocating and is resolutely encouraging in all
the fields of its competence is not confined to the
economically least privileged countries. The con¬
cepts and principles involved apply as much to the
rich countries as to the poor: as long as the privi¬
leged 20 per cent of the world's population, who
enjoy 80 per cent of the resources it has to offer, are
not prepared to share them and reduce current
inequalities and imbalances, all strategies for the
future will remain empty rhetoric. Human devel¬
opment is not meant for some as opposed to others,
but for everyone. The "haves" must realize that
sharing means giving something up, and the ben¬
eficiaries of aid must realize that only develop¬
ment based on their own talent and natural wealth



will enable them to control their own destiny,
without relinquishing their culture, identity and
history.
The second threat is one that compromises the
peaceful coexistence of different cultures and ethnic
groups. Such coexistence is both a duty and a right.
Here UNESCO has set itself the priority of pro¬
moting a "culture of peace". Accordingly it must
step up its efforts to encourage the development of
a worldwide culture of non-violence, peace and
equity, especially through respect and mutual tol
erance and the consolidation of pluralistic and
open societies that can flourish in a climate of
democracy and respect for human rights.
We start from the central idea that the use of
force to keep the peace is symptomatic of conven¬
tional attitudes and procedures. Force is costly in
terms of economics and human suffering, but it is
a price we have become accustomed to paying. It
must be admitted that the good sense needed to
forestall conflict, to make coexistence and recon¬
ciliation possible, in short to build the defences of
peace, does not yet form part of our "defensive
capability". In the case of most nations, the vision
of the founding fathers of UNESCO, who had just
lived through the horrors of war and genocide,
has not been interpreted as it should have been, by
adopting appropriate domestic and international
instruments. As a result, the prevention of war
does not feature in our budgets or our political
programmes and some, with a short-sightedness
that it is difficult to understand, wonder what ben¬
efits can accrue to them by helping Unesco to
grow and prosper.
The future will depend on those who are capable
of attaching a value to intangible things, who
realize that not everything can be measured in
terms of foreign exchange or can be bought and
sold. As the Spanish poet Antonio Machado warned
us, "only fools confuse value and price". The only
way for us to change course is by attaching value
to good sense, not by paying the price of force.
35
