From global village to global
mind by Derrick de Kerckhove
While television has turned the planet into a village in which we are all neighbours,
telematic networks abolish time and space and suppress traditional bearings of personal
and collective identity
If books, especially novels, fostered and
sustained the development of private
minds in public space, television has done the
reverse, bringing a public mind to private spaces.
Television screens are collective extensions of our
individual minds. Instead of information being
processed by a single person, namely me, the
television screen presents me with information
processed by a collective of which I am an inte¬
gral part.
"Live" TV, or "real-time" TV, is a kind of
collective eye which allows my eyes to look at
reality processed for me and for every other
person watching at the same time. Whenever
something happens that is internationally news¬
worthy, a huge thoughtwave made up of millions
of people grinding the same information at once
forms and reforms itself every evening and
sweeps over the nations from one time zone to
another. Even in its standard programming, TV
20
is a form of collective imagination, averaging
people's hopes and fears on the basis of a regular
public-pulse-taking through ratings.
Such thoughts may have occurred to Amer¬
ican journalist Bill Moyers when he called his
four ground-breaking shows on the workings of
television "TV, the Public Mind" (1989). Of
course, Moyers was really thinking about U.S.
television, and at that time Hollywood and the
Big Three U.S. channels still seemed to present
a united front and a coherent vision of the world.
Two questions are raised when the notion of
television as a form of public mind is examined
more closely. First, is the public mind uniquely
dependent on TV, and if it is, then what happens
when TV and TV audiences fragment as they are
doing today? Second, is TV generating a public
mind beyond the confines of the United States,
and if so, who is running the show? According
to French culturologist Augustin Berque, "If
the world said OK to the crusade against
Saddam [Hussein], it is not only because the
world drinks Coca Cola. It is because, to a large
extent, the meaning of today's world finds its
source, its creation and its distribution in the
United States."
There is no doubt in my mind that television
has done a lot to expand a sense of global destiny
beyond the confines of North America. Trips to
the moon, royal marriages and the Olympics,
among other world coverage shows, have served
to provide a common focus for the attention
of hundreds of millions of people of different
cultures. Cheap Hollywood movies and soaps
have proposed to do the same on a day-to-day
basis. Thus it is quite true that the public mind
of the world has been more or less grounded in
the country where the greatest expertise in tele¬
vision was found. But this may be changing
very quickly. Just as quickly, in fact, as the world
itself is "changing its mind".
With the U.S. military controlling all news
delivery via the American news channel CNN,
the Gulf War was perhaps the last occasion when
a single television channel was given full range,
albeit under duress, for the one-way production
Above, an impression of a trip
inside a computer.
Left, Madeleine Reading, a
portrait by the Flemish painter
Ambrosius Benson, who died in
Bruges in 1550.

of meaning. The era of television as the principal
supporter of the mass creation of meaning may be
over. At least three new technological factors are
undermining the hegemony of television and
especially of American television: interactivity,
digitization and networks.
Interactivity, the recovery of
psychological autonomy from TV
Television had already begun to "disintegrate"
in the mid-1970s with the invention of the
zapper. Zapping in and out of a commercial was
the first step in giving power to the people over
the screen. The second step was the widespread
distribution of videorecording equipment. By
recording one programme while watching
another, or recording a programme while doing
something else, the private user was becoming
an informal "editor", taking revenge over the
content/time constraints of television broad¬
casting. The third step was the appearance and
fast distribution of personal computers.
Interactivity only became a concept after
people had begun to use a keyboard and a
mouse. They began to feel that they were taking
power over the screen. Another step, a sidestep
really, is the development and continuous refine¬
ment of videocameras. While in the 1960s and
1970s everybody was a consumer of television,
in the 1 990s we can expect to see more and more
producers taking advantage of lightweight and
efficient electronic pencils. After decades of
passive acceptance of their dictatorship, we have
learned to talk back to our screens.
universal digital culture
By 1991, personal computers had already stolen
the attention of a full generation from the seduc¬
tion of the television screen. Computers affect
culture in depth because they combine the char¬
acteristics of a mass-medium with those of a
private one. They allow universal access to indi¬
vidual input and vice-versa. The new universal¬
izing principle is that of the binary code. Thanks
to digitization, the binary code can translate
anything into anything else forms, textures,
sounds, feelings, even smell and why not taste
soon. This is the nature of multimedia.
The binary code is the new common sense,
the new common language which allows us to
DERRICK DE KERCKHOVE,
of Canada, has since 1983
directed the McLuhan Program
in Culture and Technology
(sponsored by Origin Technology
in Business), which is part of
the Faculty of Information
Studies at the University of
Toronto. Between 1968 and
1979 he worked with Marshall
McLuhan as a translator,
researcher and co-author. Among
his publications are The
Alphabet and the Brain: The
Lateralization of Writing
(collected essays edited in
collaboration with Charles
Lumsden, Springer-Verlag,
Heidelberg, 1988) and
Brainframes, Technology, the
Mind and Business (Bosch and
Keuning BSO, Utrecht, 1991).
21

'Computers combine the characteristics
of a mass-medium with those of a private one.'
recreate technically outside our minds the com¬
plex arrangements that we have learned to build
in our private imagination when we read novels.
It is much more powerful, spreads far wider,
and provides far more complex access to infor¬
mation-processing than television.
On the other hand, in spite of its universal
calling, the binary code does not present a par¬
ticular threat to local cultures and identities.
On the contrary, it may allow them to flourish
eventually because it is capable of supporting
competing representations in non-exclusive
fashion. The kind of collective mind produced
by computers is different from the public mind
of television. It is not only an object ofattention,
but also the subject of processing. It is an activity,
not a spectacle. Thus it includes the user in the
process. This is the reason why computers
depend on networks to fully realize their socio-
cultural potential.
N etworks and other highways
Delow, a tele-conference
in the United States.
Participants can talk to each
other from a distance, maintain
visual contact and exchange
documents.
By 1991, computers were already celebrating
what has become known as "convergence" with
the telephone (the most powerful of the unsung
technologies of communication) and television.
The networks of national telephone companies
today are vying for markets once reserved to a
few broadcasters and cable operators. Audiovi¬
sual information is becoming ubiquitous as mul¬
timedia. On the electronic data highway, tele¬
vision will eventually lose its status as a
broadcasting mass-medium and acquire that of
the telephone, the narrowcasting medium with
a billion interactive channels.
22
W^ ^ßß^^^^^E
^^fc^^. . -
.. ....M. JÊ r^i 1 1
wM
; ^B^^/"^ ^5
W, \*£
Am
The Internet, which is the earliest and as yet
the most complete expression of the electronic
data highway, comes as close as has ever been
possible to enabling a very large number of
people to process information simultaneously.
It is a technological expression of collective
consciousness. To be more precise, the Internet
is becoming a kind of global subconsciousness,
with myriads of points of immergence for indi¬
viduals into the collective, and points of emer¬
gence of the collective into the individual. Thus
digitization turns everything into information,
interactivity allows anyone to get into the pro¬
cessing, and networks connect every user to
every other.
Wr'here do we all fit in?



The idea of the "global village" was adequate for
the television era which made everybody a
neighbour to everybody else. It is quite inade¬
quate to describe the new conditions of net¬
worked communications. Indeed, if television
clearly supported the notion and even the per¬
ception of a common space, instant data net¬
works abolish both time and space. They thus
suppress the traditional bearings of identity,
both personal and collective. In fact, many
people seem to cultivate a new kind of
anonymity on the Net. It is also apparent that,
far from discouraging local initiative, the Net is
promoting all kinds of new associations based
not on political but on psychological boundaries.
Different cultures can surely coexist on the Net.
So we may be soon moving out of the global vil¬
lage, out of the public mind, into the "global
mind". The rules that operate that mind are still
unknown, but one absolutely essential crite¬
rion for guiding nations in their regulatory
process is that universal access and guaranteed
privacy be ensured.
While regulators are trying to resolve that
paradox, we are all fairly confused. The cre¬
ation of meaning is not homogeneous any more,
ideologies have been thoroughly trashed along
with the Berlin Wall, and television is henceforth
too decentralized to pretend to the status of a
public mind. Political and social strife find us
irresolute. We are now too conscious of local
sensibilities rather than insensitive to them. We
fear to tread where we once ran. The world's
record in Bosnia, Somalia and Rwanda is dismal
and yet, around the evidence of disaster, there are
signs of hope. Global thinking, evidenced by a
rising sense of ecological responsibility and
attendant environmental accounting, is finding
expression in local action. Multiculturalism and
political correctness are beginning to address
North-South concerns. All these are indicators
that in spite of hesitations about interfering in
local affairs, the general level of attention and
psychoplanetary pressure is rising.
