Kirchgessner/Schuste © Explorer, Paris



f\J TIV T\ A the sleeping beauty of northeastern
V/Jjlll 1/lX Brazil by Joel Franz Rosell
Above, Olinda, with the city of Recife in the
distance.
Opposite page, traditional handicraft shops line
the Mercado da Ribeira, the former slave market.
JOEL FRANZ ROSELL,
of Cuba, is a journalist with the French radio station
Radio France Internationale. He also teaches Spanish-
American literature at the University of Marne-la-Vallée,
near Paris, and is the author of many children's stories.
38
The city of Olinda in north¬
eastern Brazil once wore its heart
on its sleeve. It owes its name to the
exclamation uttered by its Portuguese
founder when he saw its site for the first
time: "Oh linda situaçâo para se fundar
huma villa!" ("Oh what a beautiful
place for a city!"). Today it does not
reveal its charms so quickly. Visitors
who set out from Recife, the capital of
Pernambuco state, and drive through
seven kilometres of built-up area, will
not see on the skyline the eight unin¬
habited hills sweeping down to the sea
which so enchanted the sixteenth-cen¬
tury Portuguese colonizers of Brazil.
Only when they discover Olinda's
"high town" will they be able to appre¬
ciate this haven of peace on the doorstep
of bustling Recife. Then they will savour
the dialogue of palm trees, roofs and bel¬
fries, the admirable contrast between old
walls and luxuriant nature, between a
glorious sun and the pure blue sea. Only
then will they exclaim, like the Por¬
tuguese explorer of old: "Oh, what a
beautiful place. . . ."
SWEET AMI SOUK
Olinda was founded in 1537. It soon
became a magnet for the rich slave-

Some of South America's finest colonial architecture
has survived in a city
that was once the capital of Brazil's sugar trade
owners of the plantations, who built on
the hillsides magnificent houses where
they could take refuge from the stifling,
insalubrious heat of the inland plains.
Churches and monasteries were built,
and the commercial infrastructures
required by the flourishing sugar and
slave trade began to be developed.
In 1612, when Brazil was the world's
leading sugar exporter, there were a
hundred-odd sugar refineries in
Olinda twice as many as there were in
Salvador, the capital. But the pros¬
perity of the northeast kindled envious
appetites, and the Dutch captured the
future province (capitanía) of Pcrnam-
buco. It was (luring the brief period of
Dutch occupation (1630-1654) that the
fate of Olinda was sealed.
First of all, the new arrivals set out
to modernize Olinda and turn it into a
port that could compete with Recife.
When the population rebelled they
were forced to abandon their plans. In
reprisal they put Olinda to lire and the
sword in 1631. A large number of six¬
teenth-century houses, churches and
monastic buildings, the fine flower of
colonial architecture, disappeared in
the flames.
The return of the Portuguese in
1654 coincided with the expansion of
Recife as a trading centre and a city,
and encouraged the rich land-owners of
Olinda to rebuild their city. They vied
with each other in building luxurious
houses, giving rise to a saying which
became proverbial: "People live better
in Olinda than at the king's court." But
rivalry between the merchants of Recife
and the Olinda sugar magnates led in
1710-1711 to a civil war which was won
by Recife.
This political blow took place at a
time when most of Olinda's architec¬
tural heritage had already been built.
Fortunately, the city's economic decline
was slow enough to enable the magnates
39

to complete the buildings they had
begun.
Although Olinda lost temporal
power, it became an important religious
centre. Between 1678 and 1823 it was
the seat of an archbishopric whose sem¬
inary, monasteries and schools became
the mainspring of religious activity in
northern Brazil. Two important events
(the modernization of religious educa¬
tion begun by Bishop Azeredo Coutinho
in the late eighteenth century and the
creation of a law faculty a few years
later) had such a great impact that
Olinda became known, with a certain
amount of exaggeration, as the
"Brazilian Coimbra".
GOXE WITH THE W I IN II
The visitor to Olinda who looks in the
city's churches and monasteries for
treasures accumulated over the cen¬
turies will look in vain. A handful of ves¬
tiges of these treasures can be seen in
the city's museums, but most of them
have mysteriously disappeared, possibly
40
recovered by their owners (to compen¬
sate for the lack of banks, rich families
entrusted their precious objects to the
protection of the churches).
The history of Olinda was also punc¬
tuated by a series of crises which opened
the door to the systematic pillage of pre¬
cious jewellery, paintings, furniture,
books and even ceramic tiles (azulejos).
Between the expulsion of the Jesuits in
1760 and the collapse into ruins of the
Carmelite monastery in this century as a
result of neglect, examples of vandalism
were legion. One prior removed a statue
of Our Lady of Mercy from its pedestal
and sold it to make money for himself.

BRAZIL
OLINDA
Above, a house with a façade of enamelled tiles
[azulejos).
Opposite page above, the cathedral, the oldest
church in Olinda, was built around 1540.
Opposite page below, the Monastery of Sao Bento
(St. Benedict), entirely rebuilt in the 18th
century.
All the same, Olinda has suffered
less from the infidelity of its elites, the
negligence of its clergy, piracy and the
hand of time than it has from slapdash
restoration work carried out at the
beginning of this century, including
"improvements" made to the cathedral
in 1911 and the demolition of vestiges
of the Carmelite monastery by order of
the prefect in 1907.
A ¡NEW ACE
OE PROSPERITY
Fortunately, it was not yet too late when
the Brazilian government stepped in and
took the first steps to save Olinda's her¬
itage in 1937. The implementation of a
battery of judicious protection and
restoration measures in 1962, 1973,
1975 and 1980 was crowned on 21
March 1983, when the site and city of
Olinda were included on UNESCO's
World Heritage List. This marked the
start of a new age of prosperity for
northeastern Brazil's sleeping beauty.
There is much to admire in Olinda
OLINDA
LOCATION:
Olinda occupies a hilly coastal site, 7 kilome¬
tres from Recife, capital of Pernambuco State
in northeastern Brazil.
DESCRIPTION:
The city's 17th- and 18th-century layout has
survived almost intact, and many civil and reli¬
gious buildings are, by virtue of their architec¬
ture and rich decoration (wood carvings,
azulejos, silver work), remarkable examples of
Portuguese baroque art. A short distance from
the factories and skyscrapers of Recife, Olinda
still has the charm and enchantment of a city
of the colonial period.
LANDMARKS:
1537: Olinda is founded by Duarte Coelho
Pereira.
1631: The town is sacked by the Dutch.
1654: The Portuguese return and a long period
of reconstruction begins.
1678-1823: Olinda is the seat of an archbish¬
opric.
1800: A seminary is founded.
1811: A botanical garden is planted.
1828: The Academy of Legal Sciences is
founded.
1980: Olinda is declared a national monument.
1983: Olinda's historic centre is included on
Unesco's World Heritage List.
MAIN BUILDINGS:
Cathedral
Church of the Mother of Divine Grace
Carmelite convent and church
St. Benedict's monastery and church
Monastery of St. Francis and the church of
St. Mary of the Snows
Church of the Misericord
Church of St. John the Baptist
Church and monastery of Our Lady of
the Immaculate Conception
Archbishop's palace
Pernambuco Museum of Contemporary Art
(the former prison)
Many houses and other buildings decorated
with azulejos
Ribeira Market
41

today: the imposing façade of the
Carmelite church, the rustic grace of
the houses with their pastel-coloured
walls and Moorish balconies, the
restrained baroque of the monasteries
of St. Benedict and St. Francis, with
their magnificent interiors, their pre¬
cious wood furnishings, their frescoes
and their azulejos decorated with
designs that unexpectedly blend sacred
and profane themes. No visit to the city
is complete without a stroll through the
Ribeira market, where wood and clay
statues and paintings depict men who
were once sold there as slaves. And
Olinda would not be Olinda without its
tropical vegetation, its eternal garden of
trees palm and coconut, mango and
spondias, cinnamon and bread-fruit,
flame trees and banana trees.
Sometimes too the sleeping beauty
awakens and emerges from her tropical
torpor. There are explosions of joy at
carnival time, feast days and Christmas;
processions in honour of St. Antony, St.
Francis and the Sacred Heart take
place with time-honoured splendour,
memorable for African drumbeat and
spangled costumes.
In Brazil there is a tendency to con¬
trast Olinda and Ouro Preto, two jewels
of "classical" architecture that feature
on the World Heritage List. Ouro Preto,
the capital of the "gold cycle" in the
eighteenth century, is isolated in the
mountains of the hinterland. It is an aus¬
tere and imposing jewel, which seems to
have been hewn from an inhospitable
mountain-top. By way of contrast,
Olinda, capital of the "sugar cycle" is
the flower of the northeast, whose
corolla, as if modelled in clay soaked in
the juice of sugar-cane, straggles over
sunny hillsides rocked by the rhythm of
the sea.
If Olinda needed a patron saint, the
"Virgin of the Siesta" would be a good
choice. Not so much because of the
sleepiness encouraged by its peaceful
Above, Matriz church.
Right, traditional folk
dancing in an Olinda street.
streets barely disturbed even by bird-
song, its quiet gardens and the shadows
cast by its buildings, but because the
long sleep that for a century preserved it
from the sound and the fury of the world
also preserved it from the property spec¬
ulation and rampant urban growth that
have turned neighbouring Recife and
many old colonial towns into soulless
modern cities oblivious of their past.
Several suitors have tried to awaken
the sleeping beauty: students at the
beginning of the last century, holiday-
makers attracted by its deserted
beaches, geologists who dreamed of
turning it into a phosphate centre. They
all failed because they did not under¬
stand that only a kiss of love for its past
could work this miracle.
If Olinda lives from its heritage
today, it is not a dead or immobile city.
Craftsmanship, culture and tourism are
the main sources of income for its
youthful population of over 200,000.
Olinda could take as its motto an anony¬
mous graffiti drawn on an old wall on
Carmel Square: "Saudade do futuro",
nostalgia for the future. I
42
