Workpiace
discrimination
The affirmative action debate
by Stephen Steinberg
In the U.S.A., govemment action to combat
workpiace discrimination against minorities faces
growing criticism
Above, wartlme women
workers keep a locomotive of
the Pennsylvanie Rallroad
spick and span (1943).
^^1; The civil rights révolution in the United
^ffl+. States was primarily a struggle for liberty,
not equality. It sought to dismantle the System
of officiai ségrégation that had been erected in
the aftermath of slavery and to secure full rights
of citizenship for African Americans. The
abiding faith of the movement was that once
the walls of ségrégation came tumbling down,
blacks would be free to assume their rightful
place in American society.
No sooner were the historié Civil Rights
Acts of 1964 and 1965 passed, however, than
it became clear that législation alone would
not address the deep-seated inequalities that
were the legacy of two centuries of slavery
and another century of Jim Crow. This was
acknowledged by Président Lyndon Johnson
in a commencement address at Howard Uni¬
versity in Washington, D.C., in June 1965, the
very month that the Voting Rights Act
received Congressional approval. As he told
the graduating class:
"Freedom is not enough. You do not
wipe away the scars of centuries by saying:
'Now you are free to go where you want, do
as you désire, choose the leaders you please.'
You do not take a person who for years has

tn 1961 Président Kennedy issued an



Executive Order requiring fédéral
contractors to take 'affirmative action'
to desegregate their workforce.
Two young readers In the
Harlem district of New York
(1930). been hobbled by chains and liberate him,
bring him to the starting line and then say,
'You are free to compete with ail the others,'
and still justly believe that you hâve been
completely fair. We seek not just freedom but
opportunity, not just equality as a right and a
theory but equality as a fact and as a resuit."
Passive and active policies
Johnson's oratory was punctuated by the out-
break of racial violence in the Watts section of
Los Angeles only two months later. In the
ensuing years there were scores of other
"riots" that threw American society into a
deep political crisis, one that forced the nation
to confront the issue of equality as well as lib¬
erty. This is the historical context in which
affirmative action evolved as national policy.
Affirmative action has never been formu-
lated as a cohérent policy, but evolved incre-
mentally through a séries of presidential exec¬
utive orders, administrative policies and
court décisions. Partly for this reason, the
term itself is so fraught with ambiguity that it
is not always clear what advocates and oppo-
nents are squabbling about. Let us therefore
make several crucial distinctions.
First, affirmative action must be distin-
guished from policies of non-discrimination.
Although both seek racial justice in the work¬
piace, policies of non-discrimination merely
enjoin employers not to practise discrimina¬
tion in the recruitment, hiring and promotion
of workers. It is essentially a passive injunc-
tion not to discriminate. Affirmative action,
on the other hand, commits employers to go
a décisive step beyond non-discrimination
and to actively seek out protected groups in
employment. In this form essentially "out-
reach" programmes reliant on the good faith
efforts of employers affirmative action
arouses little or no opposition.
There is another form of affirmative action,
however, that goes a décisive step beyond out-
reach and involves granting "préférence" to
minority applicants in order to guarantee the
desired resuit. This is where controversy
begins. For example, in his confirmation hear-
ings to the Suprême Court in 1991, Clarence
Thomas spoke passionately of his support for
outreach programmes to extend opportunity
to women and minorities, but he was equally
adamant in his opposition to affirmative action
programmes that involve préférence.
Thèse three forms of anti-discrimination
are not mère abstractions, but are anchored
in history. Let us briefly review how social
policy evolved from non-discrimination, to
outreach, to préférence.
Occupational apartlieid
Africans were originally imported to the
United States to provide labour in the South 's
evolving plantation economy. In the century
after slavery, when tens of millions of immi¬
grants from Europe were rapidly absorbed
into the North's burgeoning industries, a
colour line excluded blacks from employ¬
ment in the entire industrial sector, with the
exception of a few menial and low-paying
jobs. When the Southern economy finally
underwent modernization, blacks were still
confined to "negro jobs" servile and unde-
sirable jobs that were reminiscent of slavery
itself. As late as the 1960s, even as the civil
rights movement reached its triumphant
climax, the United States had, in effect, a
System of occupational apartheid that
excluded blacks from entire job sectors. Most
black men worked as unskilled labourers;
most black women as low-level service
workers, especially domestics.

This racial division of labour went virtu¬
ally unchallenged until the Second World
War, when the black union leader A. Philip
Randolph threatened a mareh on Washington
unless blacks were given access to jobs in
defence industries. This also led to the estab¬
lishment of a Fair Employment Practices
Committee. Even though the FEPC had few
resources and virtually no power to enforce
non-discrimination, it was quickly engulfed
in controversy and disbanded as soon as the
war was over. Hère was an early sign that
attempts to enforce compliance with non-
discriminatory policies would encounter
enormous résistance.
In the 1940s and 1950s a second FEPC,
along with other fédéral and state agencies,
preached non-discrimination, but with
meagre results at best. Indeed, this is pre-
cisely what eventually led to a 


shift from non-
discrimination to affirmative action. A major
turning point occurred in 1961 when Prési¬
dent John F. Kennedy, again in response to
rising protest from the black community,
issued Executive Order 10925, which
required fédéral contractors to take "affirma¬
tive action" to desegregate their work force.
Unlike similar déclarations in the past, the
presidential edict established spécifie sanc-
LITTLE R,0<^CEMTRJ
tions, including termination of contract, to be
applied against contractors who were not in
compliance. Three years later Title VII of the
1964 Civil Rights Act proscribed employ¬
ment discrimination on the basis of race,
colour, religion, sex or national origin. A year
later Président Johnson issued Executive
Order 1 1246 that put further teeth into affir¬
mative action by requiring fédéral contrac¬
tors to develop spécifie goals and timetables
Little Rock (Arkansas), 1958.
Fédéral troops called In to
malntain order during school
desegregation escort black
students into Central High
School for the first time.
Delow, the "mareh on
Washington", 1963. Some
250,000 people joined In this
démonstration In support of
equal rights for blacks. Many of
the picket signs call for access
tojobs.

for increasing the employment of women
and minorities.
Corporate inertia
One might think that thèse developments
would hâve dealt a fatal blow to America's
System of occupational apartheid. This was
hardly the case. In 1973 nine years after the
passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act a télé¬
phone Company which was the nation's largest
corporate employer and a major government
contractor still had a highly segregated work¬
force. The Company employed 165,000 per-
sons in low-paying operator classifications
99.9 per cent of whom were female. Of
190,000 higher-paying craft workers, 99 per
cent were maie. Virtually no women were in
management positions, and even supervisory
personnel in "female" departments were maie.
The Company, furthermore, could boast
of "equal opportunity" policies that had
increased black employment from 2.5 per
cent in 1960 to 10 per cent in 1970, but this
mainly reflected the hiring of black women
as operators to replace white women who
were experiencing a high rate of turnover.
There were virtually no black maies in craft
jobs and even fewer in management. This was
the context in which the Fédéral Communi¬
cations Commission opposed a rate increase
on the grounds of the company's discrimina-
tory employment practices.
Eventually this resulted in a landmark
consent decree with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC), the
Department of Justice, and the Department
As part of a racial Intégration
programme, a community
worker teaches youngsters
from a neighbourhood in
Cincinnati (Ohio) how to
handie a bow and arrow
(1965).
Robert N. C. Nix Jr.,
the Chief Justice of the State
Suprême Court of
Pennsylvanie during his
swearing-in ceremony in
Philadelphia (1984), when he
became the first black to head
a state suprême court in the
United States. His father (left)
was the first black
congressmanfrom
Pennsylvania.
of Labor in which the company paid mone-
tary damages to aggrieved classes and agreed
to change its employment policies and meet
employment targets for women and minori¬
ties. According to a study on the impact of
the consent decree, the programme got off to
a poor start but by 1976, 99 per cent of its
short-term targets had been reached. Fur¬
thermore, thèse gains occurred in the context
of a declining labour force due to the impact
of new technology.
Wliat's at stalte
As this case illustrâtes, good-faith efforts to
increase minority représentation were gener-
ally ineffective until they were backed up by
spécifie "goals and timetables" that, in effect,
gave préférence to minority applicants who
met basic qualifications but might not hâve
been 


hired or promoted without affirmative
action mandates. Critics, of course, complain
that this amounts to a System of de facto
quotas. Like Clarence Thomas, they raise no
objection to affirmative action so long as it
involves "outreach", but reject affirmative
action as soon as it involves "préférence".
What thèse critics overlook, however, is
that décades of preaching non-discrimination
produced little or no change in the System of
occupational apartheid. Indeed, this is why
affirmative policy shifted from outreach to
préférence in the first place.
Unfortunately, no systematic body of évi¬
dence exists that would permit a précise
accounting of what has been achieved under
affirmative action. This much is clear, how-

Much progress, particularly the émergence ofa large black
mlddle class with roots in mainstream économie structures, Is a
direct product of affirmative action.
ever: the occupational sphères where blacks
hâve made the most notable progress in
government service, in major blue-coUar
occupations, in corporate management, and
in the professions are ail areas where vig-
orous affirmative action programmes hâve
been in place over the past two décades.


Before affirmative action, the black middle
class consisted of a small number of profes¬
sionals and businessmen anchored in the
ghetto economy. Most of the progress that
we celebrate particularly the émergence of
a large black middle class with roots in main¬
stream économie structures is a direct
product of affirmative action.
Thus, much is at stake in the current
debate over the future of affirmative action.
In récent years there has been a rising chorus
of criticism against affirmative action pro¬
grammes, and it has not come only from
whites who feel that they are being asked to
pay the priée for crimes that they did not
commit. Criticism also has been levelled by
légal scholars who challenge the constitution-
ality of affirmative action and see it as
betraying the cardinal principle of the civil
rights movement itself: a colour-blind
society. A new genre of black conservatives
hâve denounced affirmative action as patron-
izing to blacks and subversive of black self-
esteem. Even some libérais who say they
support affirmative action in principle hâve
concluded that it is self-defeating because it
triggers a popular backlash that only serves
their political enemies.
Thèse are powerful arguments, based as
they are on légal and moral principles as well
as on political pragmatism. However, they fail
to recognize the lesson of history: that even
laws proscribing discrimination and well-
intentioned efforts to increase minority rep¬
résentation were never effective until they
were backed up with spécifie affirmative
action mandates.
Thus, the problem is stated falsely when it
is suggested that we must choose between
merit or préférence, or between the rights of
individuals and the rights of groups, or
betweeA a colour-blind or a colour-conscious
society. Rather, the paramount choice is
between racial progress or returning to the
status quo ante: the period before affirmative
action when we salved our national con¬
science with laws on the books that did little
or nothing to reverse centuries of occupa¬
tional apartheid.
The Révérend Martin Luther
KIng Jr. (centre) leads the
Freedom Mareh to Selma
(Alabama) In support of civil
rights for blacks (1965).
STEPHEN STEINBERG,
an American sociologist, is a
professer in the Urban Studies
Department at Queens Collège and
at the Graduate School and
University Center of the City
University of New York. His most
récent bool< is Turning Back: the
Retreat from Racial Justice in
American Thought and Policy
(Beacon Press, Boston, 1995).
