BY GILLES A. TIBERGHIENART'S
BACK-TO-THE-LAND MOVEMENT
By intervening
in the
environment,
land art creates
anew
relationship
between space,
time and the
spectator
Atthe end of the 1 960s, a number of
artists, most of them American,
challenged the notion that galleries
and museums are the most suit¬
able places in which to exhibit art. They pre¬
ferred natural sites, derelict industrial zones,
quarries and mines, where they produced
works out of natural materials, sometimes on
a massive scale, thus creating a new tendency
known as "earth art" or "land art".
At the end of the 1950s, interest in the
human body, the "events" staged by the Fluxus
movement that flourished in New York and
Germany, Allan Kaprow's "happenings" and
productions by the Living Theater and other
street theatre companies focused attention on
the importance of movement and improvisa¬
tion, and created a cultural environment which
also provided a context for music, painting and
sculpture. At a time when the consumer soci¬
ety was riding high, artists started creating
works that appealed to the active conscience of
individuals and encouraged them to redefine
their position as spectators.
Body art, in which the body becomes a vehi¬
cle for experimentation, was the logical outcome
Oun Tunnels (1976) by
American artist Nancy Holt,
Great Basin Desert, Utah
(U.S.A.). The four "sun
tunnels" are specially
constructed pipes each
measuring 6 metres long and
2.5 metres in diameter. They
are aligned with the solstice
and their sides are pierced
with holes corresponding to
the constellations. They act as
observatories and a mirror of
the day and night skies.
Shown here, the setting sun at
the summer solstice as seen
through two of the tunnels.
> GuTHE UNESCO tpURIER DECEMBER 1996

>
Uissipate (1968) by the
American artist Michael
Heizer. Wood-lined gashes in
the Black Rock desert,
Nevada (U.S.A.).
\ ife
- »
of these practices. But some artists preferred to
make a mark on the natural world. In One Hour
Run (1968), for example, Dennis Oppenheim
scarified a snow-covered dune with a motorcy¬
cle, and in Foot Kick Gesture (1968) Michael
Heizer marked the ground with his heels. One
of Richard Long's first works, Line Made by .
Walking (1 967), was the result of his walking to
and fro in a straight line over a stretch of grass,
leaving behind an ephemeral trace of his passage.
From then on, two trends emerged which
either combined or were mutually exclusive.
The first, found chiefly in Europe, focused on
the body (Gilbert and George) or body move¬
ment (Richard Long, Hamish Fulton). The sec-
ond, more particularly American, trend sought
to create a new relationship between the body
and space by intervening in the natural world,
which it used both as an inscriptive vehicle and
as a material. From 1 968 on, for example, Heizer
created a series of works in the deserts of the
American West, in some cases drawing inspira¬
tion from Indian pictograms, as in Primitive
Dye Painting (1969), in others seeking to pro¬
duce simple geometrical forms with "nega¬
tive" in other words hollowed-out sculp¬
tures, such as Rift or Dissipate (1968).
But earth is also used for building, some¬
times on a very large scale. For the Sonsbeek 71
exhibition in Emmen (Netherlands), Robert
THE UNESCO lOURIER DECEM8ERI996
23

Morris made an Observatory, subsequently
destroyed then reconstructed in 1977, which
consisted of two concentric, circular earth¬
works with a diameter of 91 and 24 metres
respectively. He was returning to the primitive
architectural forms that inspire certain land-art
artists. Such imposingly large works have to be
explored by spectators, who arc prompted by
their movement in space to look afresh at how
sculpture relates to the movements of their
own bodies.
The distinctive feature of land art is this
use of earth (or sand, rock, or wood) on nat¬
ural sites, which then become components of
the sculpture, or even the sculpture itself, as in
Heizer's Double Negative (1969). This work
consists of two colossal gashes ten metres
wide, 17 metres deep and almost 500 metres
long, gouged out of the side of a plateau, pro¬
longed by two platforms consisting of 240,000
tonnes of excavated rubble.
Involving the spectator
This form of art should be distinguished from
arte povera, which appeared in Italy around
the same time. Examples of it, made out of
natural materials, were mostly exhibited in
galleries. A distinction should also be made
between land art and other forms of inter¬
vention in the natural world, many of them
more recent, such as the work of Nils-Udo,
Bob Verschueren and Andy Goldsworthy,
who practise what might be called vegetable
art in that they often work with flowers, bark
and leaves. A similar case is the work of Michael
Singer, who erects large ephemeral structures of
wood and bamboo in the open air (First Glade
Ritual Series 4, 1979).
Whether they are ephemeral or not, land art
works are not easily accessible, either because
they no longer exist, or because they are located
in remote spots. In a sense, the effort needed
to reach them contributes to the pleasure expe¬
rienced in looking at them. The journey and
the crossing of the landscape rather than the
landscape itself are in some respects a constituent
part of these works. For example, Richard
Long who denies any affiliation with land art
even if it may fairly be asserted that he had a
hand in its beginnings shows, in galleries where
he exhibits, not only captioned photographs
and maps that indicate a date, a place and some¬
times the duration of the journey, but also
stones arranged in a circle or row, which he did
not bring back from his travels but extracted



from quarries, and whose purpose is to pro¬
vide the spectator with a kind of perceptible
equivalent of the essence of his art: walking.
Other related art forms display some of
the concerns of the exponents of land art. Cer-
Briroken Circle (1971), a
curved jetty by American artist
Robert Smithson in Emmen
(Netherlands), is one of several
works executed in an
abandoned quarry. Although
intended to be temporary, it
was preserved on the request
of local inhabitants.

tain artists consider the most important ele¬
ment to be "the process". One of them is Peter
Hutchinson, who used a rope to tie together
five floating calabashes and waited for them
to rot (Threaded Calabash, 1969). Others
focus on "the environment", such as Christo
and Jeanne-Claude, who unfurled a 40-km-
long cloth fence across Sonoma and Marin
counties in California and left it there for two
weeks (Running Fence, 1972-76). Others are
more interested in light, in our relationship
with the sun and the stars, or in landscapes.
Others again find inspiration in the notion
of the garden, whether traditional or pic¬
turesque, or make allusions to sanctuaries and
fortresses.
Photography, although not essential, often
plays a central role in this form of art because
turrounded Islands
(1980-83), an installation
by American artists Christo
and Jeanne-Claude, Biscayne
Bay, Florida (U.S.A.). Eleven
islands located in Miami
were surrounded with
603,850 m2 of pink woven
polypropylene fabric.
By using natural sites and
man-made monuments,
Christo and Jeanne-Claude
induce people to see their
environment in a different
light.
it keeps a record of the act of creation. Its func¬
tion is twofold: it can be cither a perceptible
equivalent of a singular artistic experience, in
which case it is presented as secondary for both
artist and spectator, or a document about a
work which it is up to the spectator to go and
experience on the spot. For even in the case of
certain monumental creations, which can only
be fully appreciated from the air, photography
cannot replace direct contact with the work
itself. It is only through such contact that we
can experience the human condition and the
p recariousness of the world, and become aware
of such notions as duration and transience
which is indeed the purpose of this kind of
art, just as it was of seventeenth-century Van-
itas still-life paintings of objects symbolizing
the vanity of earthly achievements.
THE UNESCO lOURIER« DECEMBER 1996
