flowers as raw
material
WORKING NOTES
BY NILS-UDO raw with flowers. Paint with clouds. Write
with water. Record the May wind, the flutter
of a falling leaf. Work for a storm. Anticipate
a glacier. Curve the wind. Give direction to
water and light. The cuckoo's verdant call, the
invisible trajectory of its flight. Space. An ani¬
mal's whimper. The bitter taste of bay. Bury
the pond and the dragonfly. Illuminate the
fog and the scent of yellow barberry. Combine
sounds, colours and odours. The green grass.
Count a forest and a meadow.
pen the tangible, living, three-dimensional
space of nature. With the slightest possible
intervention, switch on and transform this
space of nature into a space of art.
tI atural space should be perceived by sight,
hearing, smell, taste and touch: like a kind of
total work of art, a utopia, born of nature
and returning to it.
short-lived reorganization, of course: one
day the operation will be effaced by nature.
I wrote these lines about making my first big
nest, constructed of birches, earth and stones:
"Perched on the high wall of the nest, my gaze
followed the forest floor, crossed the branches
of trees, the sky. I thought: The nest is not yet'
finished; I am building myself a house. Silently
descending, crossing the tree-tops, it rests on
the forest floor. Open to the cold night sky,
yet warm and soft, buried in the dark earth."
I he archetypal nature of the nest. An image to
try to overcome at long last, as in a magnify¬
ing glass, all the categories and painful separa-
28 THE UNESCO Q)URIER DECEMBER 1196

tions in the ardour of an act in which every¬
thing is fused.
^nly in its final refuges is nature still intact,
inexhaustible. Only there is enchantment still
real, at every moment, at every season, in all
weathers, in great and small alike.
otential utopias sit under every stone, on
every leaf and behind every tree, in clouds and
in wind. Sensations are ubiquitous. As a real¬
ist, all I have to do is gather them. Deliver
them from their anonymity. With an idiotic
and ineradicable faith in utopia. Inject poetry
into the inhuman river of time.