Between two worlds
by Myriam Smadja
In a silent ritual in black Africa the living
communicate with the dead
MYRIAM SMADJA
is a French ethnologist
specializing In the funerary and
initiatory rites of the Temberma
people of northern Togo. She is
the author/director of a
documentary film on the
Temberma, entitled Tibenti.
14
Silence fills the Atakora valley on the
nights when the Tammariba1 celebrate a
tibenti, a mourning ritual practised by the
elders of the clan. All the elders come and sit in
front of the dead man's takienta his house, a
small earth-built fortress with windowless walls
flanked by two towers topped by granary-
lofts with pointed roofs, out in the middle of
the fields. In the moonlight the takienta, whose
name means "that which guards" (the living),
shows its real face the gigantic face of the dead
person, and through it, the face of the ancestor
who founded it.
It is the dry season. Blowing off the desert, the
harmattan brings clouds that blot out the stars.
The clan members are motionless and silent,
seeming to melt into their surroundings. Their
ears are filled with the sound of the wind. "When
an elder passes on, a violent wind gets up."
Why this long silence? "It is through silence
that the living communicate with the dead.

J
wflñ
>c?z°
. f ,
> M
M*?
-
*
-
É
Silence is the true word." In observing this
silence, the clan makes contact not only with
the breath of the recently deceased but with the
b reath of all the ancestors of his line, which goes
back to Dinabaa, a mythical place from which
came the first Tammariba and the first men.
The breath of the ancestors
When the moon rises, the breath of the dead
elders leaves the tombs in the cemetery and
makes for the houses, where each one of them
has an altar. The silence of the clan calls to them
and invites them to join the living. They too will
take up position in front of the house and pre¬
pare to guide the recently dead clan member
down the road to "the place where one goes".
But if "the night is on the side of the dead, as
the day is on the side of the living", it also
belongs to the real masters of the place, i.e.
"those underground", who come in the guise
of the wind. By day, these underground spirits
are curled up in the roots of trees, in the depths
of springs and under rocks. They coil up in the
folds of the "Earth's thick skin", which is like
the inside of the skin of the immense female
python who is the mother of the Tammariba or
"Kneaders of wet earth". The name the Tam¬
mariba give themselves thus refers both to
their own origins and to that of their takienta,
which they have shaped with the flesh of Earth
irrigated by waters from underground.
Opposite page, at the end of
the second day's mourning,
villagers walk to the cemetery.
Below, a chicken is sacrificed
In front of a house in
mourning.
Below left, baobab trees.
From earliest childhood, the Tammariba
know that at nightfall they must lower their
voices and lighten their step. In the evening
the underground spirits, in the form of white
mares, take possession of their territory trees,
rocks and the "beloved" marshlands. They
hate the noise made by humans: the loudness
of their voices, the stamping of their feet, the
pounding of pestles and the smith's hammer.
But they put up with this as long as they are
forgotten at night, when the world returns to its
primal state, "still beautiful, filled with silence",
when all that can be be heard is the wind
sweeping over the surface of the earth.
By keeping silent, the members of the clan
René Char (1907-1988), French poet
15

sharpen their hearing to a pitch comparable to
that of the underground spirits and the dead.
"Isn't hearing the last sense remaining in the
grave?"
An inaudible call
At the moment when the "dogs themselves
stop barking", a call seems to ring out. A man
who has climbed unobtrusively onto the bal¬
cony has uttered the name of the deceased,
the secret name of the master of the takienta,
the name it was forbidden to call him in his life¬
time. The call has not been addressed sky¬
wards, but simply murmured through a hole
linking the upper part of the house with the
lower floor. It was "whispered in a breath", or
"muttered inaudibly in the throat".
But the silence has dug such a space in each
of them a space as broad as the surrounding
plain that the controlled voice of the Caller
has sounded with the force of a horn.
"At the sound of his name, the dead man's
soul has jumped!" Drums and flutes begin to
play. The breath, separated from the shadow, is
now ready to live again in a child. The power of
this call to the dead to bring forth a new life
*ir*»f '
only exists because of the silence from which it
draws support a silence as vast as the night,
swollen by the breath of the living massed
before the takienta.
Among the Tammariba, silence is the
pedestal on which the clan's solidarity is based.
For each generation, this tibenti or collective
listening before a house in mourning weaves
unbreakable bonds between the members of
the clan. The Tammariba avoid using "the lan¬
guage of daytime, which is kept for arguing
and joking," to name that which is greater than
they are the mystery of death. That which,
from death, again becomes life. Rather than
betray, deform or make a mockery of this mys¬
tery, the Tammariba prefer to keep silent about
it, knowing that "others, like themselves, have
felt the same".
The Tammariba might echo Ludwig
Wittgenstein's phrase: "Whereof one cannot
speak, thereof one must be silent".
1. The Tammariba (singular Tammari) are hunters,
herdsmen and farmers who live in the Atakora
mountains and valley on each side of the frontier
between Benin and Togo. They number around 100,000
and in Togo are more commonly known as Temberma
and in Benin as Somba. A typical fortress-like
earthen house of the
Tammariba people of Togo.
>"
'V\
%
... -
16
