THE ARAB WORLD
emancipation
by Wendy Buonaventura
Women dancers
in the Arab world
are both admired
and rejected
by society
The Tunisian dancer, teacher
and choreographer Leila
Haddad during a performance
of Oriental dance in 1995.
Some years ago, at a wedding in
Morocco, I was invited to go and see
the hired dancers perform for the men (the
women of the house having retired to their
own quarters to entertain each other). Whilst
I was watching one of the performers dance
with a tray of lighted candles on her head, I
became aware of a rustling and whispering
above my head. I looked up at the balcony
and caught a glimpse, between the wooden
bannisters, of the women in their brightly
coloured dresses. So eager were they to see
the hired troupe that they had crept softly out
of their room and were crouched there, out
of sight, enjoying the performance.
Later, my Moroccan friend, knowing that
I myself performed and wrote about Arabic
dance, invited me to give a short improvisa-
30

radition and renewa
tion. Afterwards several of the Moroccans
went over to my partner and shook his hand,
congratulating him on my dancing and telling
him I had danced "like a real Moroccan".
When they learned that I had danced in the¬
atres in my own country, they looked at me
with curiosity. Why was I, a European,
dancing in such a way and, moreover, in
front of strange men? And why, with my
education, did I not belong to a "respectable"
profession such as teaching?
It was ten years ago that this happened,
but almost the same situation obtains today
vis-a-vis professional dance as it did then.
For an Arab woman of my background it is
almost unthinkable to contemplate a career
as a professional dancer. It is uneducated
women from the poorer classes who
become dancers. Dancing in the home is one
thing. Dancing in public is something else.
Dancers may bring a sense of celebration and
delight to social gatherings. They may thrill
their audience with their grace and beauty
and earthy sensuality, yet in the eyes of
society they are nonetheless engaged in the
lowest of professions. Indispensable at every
wedding, they themselves are hardly consid¬
ered marriageable material.
In this, their situation is no different from
that of Western ballerinas a hundred years
ago. Whilst opera was a popular art form,
upper-class girls were not allowed to attend if
a ballet was included in the opera. A balleri¬
na's costume in particular, which revealed
her legs up to the thigh clad in salmon-
coloured "fleshings", was considered far too
risque for the innocent eyes of well-bred
young ladies.
Social outsiders
Traditionally, Arab women dress splendidly
in private, yet in public they are expected to
conceal their charms beneath all-enveloping
robes. If they display themselves in public
and look about themselves too freely they
lay themselves open to being dishonoured.
Most Islamic societies have never looked
kindly on dancers. In Islamic thought the
sacred and the secular are indissolubly linked,
and it follows that recreational pursuits must
be reconciled with ethical principles. In tradi¬
tional Islamic society a woman's place is the
home.
Dancers have been the only women who
have not only intruded upon a male environ¬
ment, but appeared unveiled in public. They
are doubly disturbing to men in that their
S amia Gamal, a legendary
Egyptian dancer, in You're My
Love (1949), a film by Ahmed
Badrakhan.
dance includes a strong sensual element. A
woman who performs in public in front of
strangers thus transgresses a traditional pro¬
hibition. Yet, paradoxically, she performs a
necessary function in her society. For the
presence of sensuality must be acknowl¬
edged somewhere in public life, and dancers
are the expression of it.
Professional performers were often out¬
siders, women from Gypsy and other
minority groups, and while they paid lip ser¬
vice to Islam, they often maintained their old
customs.
In a sense, condemnation of public
dancing by "respectable" women was advan¬
tageous to the poor, opening up a place for
them in society which could not have been
31

filled by anyone else. And today, dancers
enjoy benefits which counteract their pre¬
carious position in society. Their status as
breadwinners inevitably lends them self-
confidence and authority, as well as a
freedom not permitted other women. This is
reflected in popular descriptions of them.
The Moroccan chikhat who travel from
village to village, entertaining at family festiv¬
ities, are known as "women who do not want
men to tell them what to do". They are not
necessarily denied marriage themselves, nor
the rewards of a family, and indeed, their
male relatives are likely to be dependent on
them for a living. It is an interesting reversal
of the normal order in which men are the
breadwinners and women, confined to the
home, are considered in their own society to
be protected from the harsh realities of a
cruel world.
Mobility and independence
In the Arab world a family generally hopes
for the birth of a son rather than a daughter.
Yet in an interview some time before his
death, Yousef Maazin, the father of a famous
Egyptian troupe, said that he had been lucky
to have been blessed with so many beautiful
daughters, for they had provided him with a
handsome living.
Yet despite their fame the Maazin sisters
are acutely aware that, among their own
people, they are not considered acceptable
marriage partners. As one of them says:
"The only time I wish I wasn't a dancer is
when a man from another tribe falls in love
with me or one of my sisters. His family
would fight a war to stop him marrying a
dancer, a girl who performs in front of
others. They call us ghaiuazee, which means
'outsiders', 'invaders'. To them it's a dirty
An Oriental dance at a
marriage in Fez (Morocco).
word. But to us it means we invade their
hearts and minds with our dancing."
In many respects dancers like the Maazin
sisters can be regarded as fortunate. They are
not obliged to conform to all the rules of
society; their work gives them social
mobility and independence; and though their
position may be ambivalent, that in itself can
be a kind of freedom.
Arab films offer a fascinating insight into
the social status of dancers, and also give a
good idea of street morality and aspirations.
They testify to the popularity of dancing by
very often making the heroine a performer.
The film Balak Min Zouzou ("Beware of
Zouzou", see box) is one of the few Arab
films which advances the proposition that
there is nothing inherently shameful about
being a dancer. But such a film is rare, and
today Islamic fundamentalist groups are
seeking to eradicate the public expression of
sensual female dancing. Some performers
have been bribed to stop dancing, and in
some cases less protected dancers have been
beaten up.
A career in dance
At the other end of the spectrum, the situa¬
tion is more encouraging. For a new genera¬
tion of dancers is emerging among educated
women from middle-class families who have
such a love of Arabic dance that they are pre¬
pared to withstand convention and family
pressure in order to pursue a career about
which they are passionate. In the Middle East
a theatre structure docs not exist for the bold,
sensual women's solo dancing known as raqs
sharqi; folk dance alone is encouraged and
sponsored by the government in countries
such as Egypt, Lebanon and Tunisia.
Dina is a celebrated performer in her
twenties. She has a university degree, studied
ballet as a child and danced in a government-
A LYRIC OF LOVE
The solo dance of Arab women, known as raqs sharqi or oriental dance, has for centuries exercised
a fascination on men and women alike, both in the West and in the Arab world. Western travel liter¬
ature is full of lengthy descriptions of it. In the mid-nineteenth century, an American journalist, G.
W. Curtis, witnessed a performance by the legendary Kutchuk Hanem, whom many travellers jour¬
neyed up the Nile to visit at Esna. He wrote:
"The sharp surges of sound swept around the room, dashing in regular measure against her
movelessness, until suddenly the whole surface of her frame quivered in measure with the music.
Her hands were raised, clapping the castanets, and she slowly turned upon herself, her right leg the
pivot, marvellously convulsing all the muscles of her body. There was no graceful dancingonly the
movement of dancing when she advanced, throwing one leg before the other as gypsies dance. But
the rest was most voluptuous motionnot the lithe wooing of languid passion but the soul of
passion starting through every sense, and quivering in every limb. It was the very intensity of
motion, concentrated and constant. It was profoundly dramatic; a lyric of love which words cannot
tell; profound, Oriental, intense and terrible." W.B.
32

Souad Osny, the star of Beware of Zouzou (1972),
an Egyptian film by Hassan El Imam.
ZOUZOU DEFENDS HER ART
In the film Khali Balak Min Zouzou (Beware of Zouzou), Zouzou is a student who has paid her way
through college by dancing in her mother's troupe. She has kept this fact a secret, but has decided
to give up dancing because she has fallen in love with a college professor. Zouzou 's lover breaks
off a former engagement, and his ex-fiancee discovers Zouzou's secret. A wedding is to be cele¬
brated at the lover's home. Unknown to Zouzou, the abandoned fiancee arranges for Zouzou's
mother's troupe to entertain at this wedding. Meanwhile, there is a poignant scene in which
Zouzou admits that she has loved working in the troupe, and tells her mother, "I used to sit at your
feet and watch you dance. You were so beautiful. Why should we be ashamed of what we do?"
The day of the wedding dawns. Zouzou, who is there as her lover's guest, sees her mother's
troupe arrive, and in a moment of grand confusion everyone realizes Zouzou's connection with
them. Her mother is so humiliated for her daughter that she stops dancing. But Zouzou, rising mag¬
nificently to the occasion, ties a scarf round her hips and performs in her mother's place. She
ends by giving a dignified defence of her art.
When this film was originally screened in Lebanon some years ago it created quite a stir. For the
first time, raqs sharqi was portrayed as being acceptable for its own sake. That women should
dance for the joy of it, and even take it up as an honourable profession, were startling notions.
Many women in the audience jumped up and began to applaud, and it would be nice to think that
some of them danced in the aisles. W.B.
Europe and America, where a craze for this
dance has spread like wildfire over the past
ten years or so. They have to contend with
considerable family pressure in order to go
this way, and more than one of them has not
felt able to tell her family back home what
she does for a living. For these women all
have one thing in common: they have left
their native countries, and are working
within a context of Western art and theatre.
A Tunisian friend with whom I have per-
« formed has found opposition from an unex-
¿ pected quarter. Performing at an arts festival
| in Tunis she encountered a group of Tunisian
f feminists who said to her, "Why do you try
1 and take this dance into the theatre? Why not
I leave it where it belongs? In cabarets and
clubs?" My friend went on, "For them, intel¬
ligent women must only use their heads, sac¬
rificing their bodies and denying their sensual
side."
In the non-Christian world the sensuous
arts have always been celebrated. Ironically,
by accepting the puritan ethics of their
Western counterpart, feminists such as these
deny a vital, life-enhancing aspect of their
own culture. And it is this sensual aspect of
the dance that has proved such an attraction
to the thousands of Western women who
are now flocking to studios in the major
cities of Europe and America to learn Arabic
dance.
funded folk troupe early on in her career.
Today she is one of the most popular cabaret
performers in Egypt. Her family still has not
accepted her change of career, despite her
fame. She says her ambition is to open a
dance school for children. But she knows
that she will not be able to obtain a licence
from the government to do this. And even if
it were possible, no women would send their
little girls along to her school.
Yet who knows what will happen in the
future? For, ten years ago, it would have
been unthinkable for a woman with her
background to even contemplate such a
career. I know and have worked with
women from similar backgrounds to Dina's,
women from Egypt, Iran, Lebanon and
Tunisia who are treading the path of profes¬
sional dance, but this time with significant
differences.
One difference is that they are seeking
ways in which to develop and expand raqs
sharqi in a theatrical context. They perform
not in cabarets but at festivals of the per¬
forming arts. They teach at dance studios in
Tahia Carioca, one of the
great exponents of Oriental
dance, in Niazi Moustafa's
fi Im The Magic Bonnet (1942).
WENDY BONAVENTURA
is an Anglo-Italian dancer, dance
troupe director and teacher of
Oriental dance in the United
Kingdom.
33
