The seeds of hâte
by Michel Wieviorka
Crisis in the modem world is fanning the embers of
racism and nationalism
An elderly woman with the
yellow star Jews were forced to
wear by the Nazis.
iij % In the wake of the Second World War
«-* f and, later, of decolonization, Western
societies had reason to believe that racism in
their countries would gradually fade away.
After the discovery of the Nazi concentration
camps and gas chambers, antisemitism could
no longer be regarded as a matter of opinion; it
had become a crime and a taboo. Colonial
racism ceased to hâve any justification when
colonized peoples achieved independence.
The modem âge beckoned, and nothing
seemed likely to hait the mareh of progress.
Then, in the early 1970s, the situation
altered radically. The idea that political and
économie change would lead towards more
and more growth and democracy and less
and less poverty, racism and anti-semitism
began to run out of steam.
The fîrst signs of this reversai appeared in
the United Kingdom in the late 1960s when
Enoch Powell criticized current immigration
policy in the name of English nationalism, and
when the National Front movement emerged.
During the 1980s, racism, xenophobia and
anti-semitism became features, often central
features, of political life in most European
nations.
A rising tide
Today, the situation is particularly disturbing.
A number of studies and surveys hâve
shown that racial discrimination in employ-
ment and housing has become widespread in
the United Kingdom. There has been an
upsurge in racist violence, mainly in towns
and cities but also in rural areas. In France,
where public opinion poils reveal growing
race préjudice and racialist attitudes, the most
conspicuous sign of racism has been the rise
of a populist nationalist party, the Front
National, which has scored considérable suc-
cess in élections since 1983. The party gives
shape to popular feelings in which racism,
more than antisemitism, has an important
place. In France, a country where racist vio¬
lence is limited in extent, race discrimination
is a less central issue than that of social and
ethnie exclusion. The French expérience is
différent from that of Britain, where there is
little specifîcally political expression of racism.
Racism in the former Fédéral Republic of
Germany took real but limited form in xéno¬
phobie campaigns linked to économie down-
turns in 1966-1967 and 1974 and in the treat-
ment of Turkish immigrants. The situation
changed radically with reunification. After

the bombing of a hostel for immigrant
workers in Hoyerswerda in September 1992
a wave of violence swept through the former
German Démocratie Republic and then
spread throughout the country. In this case
the violence had more to do with xenophobia
than with racism and 


involved groups of
skinheads or néo-Nazis. At the same time
anti-semitism gained some ground, and
Jewish cemeteries were desecrated. Racism,
xenophobia and anti-semitism also had a
political impact as extrême right-wing groups
did well in élections. This breakthrough was
not however followed up in élections in the
mid-1990s.
In Italy, whose traditional non-racist cre-
dentials include the reluctance of the fascist
régime to take its eue from Nazi anti-semi¬
tism, racism has been a subject of concern to
the média and intellectuals since the early
1990s. Racism exists on a very limited scale in
what was for many years a country of émi¬
gration but has now become a country of
immigration. It mainly consists of social ten¬
sions due to dislocation of the urban fabric
where there are large numbers of immigrants,
or to économie compétition from immi¬
grants on the clandestine job market, in door-
to-door trading or in illégal trafficking, espe-
A British National Party
(BNP) démonstration agatnst
a multiracial society (United
Kingdom, 1991).
cially in drugs. It gets more exposure in the
média than in politics. Anti-immigrant racism
was only a minor plank in the platform of the
populist Leagues of northern Italy during
their ascendancy in the early 1990s. It would
be misleading to compare thèse movements
with the French Front National, for instance.
In Belgium, on the other hand, racism is
above ail political and institutional. There is
very little violence, but extrême right-wing
parties are growing, especially the Flemish
Vlaams Blok party, whose focus on intercom-
munity différences is largely shaped by the
crisis of the state and Belgian national identity
as well as by tensions between the Flemish and
Walloon communities and Brussels.
This review of the situation in individual
European countries could be taken further.
The essential point, however, is that we are
dealing with a problem whose common fea¬
tures transcend différences in the ways in
In the early î970Sf the situation altered radically. The idea that
change would lead towards more growth and democracy and less
poverty and racism began to run out of steam.

which racism, xenophobia and antisemitism
are expressed.
Crumbling Structures
Throughout Western Europe the structure of
situations that had been relatively stable until
the 1970s is tending to change. European
societies were industrial societies with strong
labour movements that played a central rôle
in social, political, cultural and intellectual life.
Now thèse societies hâve entered the post-
industrial era and their labour movements
hâve split up and atrophied. They hâve lost
the power to set the agenda of debate on the
main social and political issues. Germany is no
exception to this rule. Reunification posed
serions problems to the German unions,
which had stood up to the crisis in trade
unionism more successfully than their coun-
terparts elsewhere 


in Europe.
The problems of exclusion and social and
économie polarization hâve become a major
source of concern, and racism has found a
new breeding ground. On the one hand the
"poor whites", who are victims of social
change or afraid of becoming so, regard
IVIICHEL WIEVIORKA,
of France, is director of the centre
of sociological analysis and
intervention at the School of
Advanced Studies in Social
Sciences (EHESS) in Paris. His
Works published in English include
The Making of Terrorism (Oxford
University Press, 1993).
An anti-racist démonstration
(Italy, 1995).
A mareh in Paris to show
solidarity with foreigners
(France, 1993).
immigrants as scapegoats. They act as if their
own exclusion and social décline were the
fault of immigrants, whose situation, more-
over, they often share. On the other hand,
people on the "right" side of the social divide
act individually or coUectively in ways that
amount to building social and racial barriers
to keep at arm's length the "dangerous"
classes, to which the immigrants are widely
considered to belong.
Throughout this century the European
nations hâve developed welfare-state policies
in an attempt to promote equality of oppor-
tunity and the redistribution of social
resources. Thèse policies hâve been under
fire since the 1970s, primarily for économie
reasons. The intensification of market com¬
pétition combined with the globalization of
the economy and the internationalization of
business are increasing the cost of welfare
policies to a prohibitive degree, especially at a
time when the ranks of the unemployed are
swelling and society is ageing.
In thèse circumstances, neo-liberalism
made constant headway during the 1980s
while social democrat-style approaches fell
by the wayside. This explains the resentment
and in many cases the populism of those who
feel abandoned by the state and ignored and
betrayed by the politicians. Once again thèse
people think that they lose out to the immi¬
grants, who abuse public institutions to the
détriment of native-born citizens.
The question of identity has been a major
préoccupation in Europe since the 1970s.
There hâve been widespread appeals to spé¬
cifie allegiances. On the one hand, régional,
religions and community loyalties hâve given
a certain weight to the notion of ethnicity. On
12

the other, manifestations of a tense and anx-
ious nationalism hâve reflected varying
degrees of xenophobia and racism and hâve
been more intent on isolating nations from
the outside world than opening them up to
the universalist values of reason and democ¬
racy. Thèse forms of nationalism usually
reflect the feeling that national identity or cul¬
ture are threatened. They accuse Jews and
Gypsies, as well as immigrants, with being the
perpetrators of a cultural invasion, and they
point to the intransigent nature of their cul¬
ture or religion. In this situation, racism
becomes cultural.
A sombre outlook
This leads us to the hypothesis that we hâve
entered a new era of European racism, con¬



current with the triumph of modernity. It
may take the form of a universalism that
sought to subjugate colonized peoples and
destroy them if they resisted, or to dominate
and exploit them whilst allowing them to join
the mareh of progress via the back door. It
may take the form of a "differentialism" that
regarded the Jews in particular as the symbol
of the most controversial aspects of moder
nity the cosmopolitanism of money and
power, and even socialism and révolution.
Racism and anti-semitism faded into the
background with the formation of national
political frameworks which created the condi¬
tions, especially through éducation, for éco¬
nomie modernization and industrialization,
expansion and cultural intégration. Today thèse
frameworks are disintegrating. Economie
activity is taking place in an international con-
text and more often than not seems at odds
with the nation-state; institutions are col-
lapsing; racism, xenophobia and anti-semitism
are re-emerging in societies that find it increas-
ingly difficult to connect the values of reason
and économie progress with those of cultural
and national individuality.
A démonstration to condemn
violence against foreigners
(Germany, 1992).
When nationaiists accuse Immigrants,
Jews and Gypsies of perpetrating a
cultural Invasion, racism becomes
cultural.
13
