'Beneath the dark sun of racism. . . '
Elias Canetti
An ima^inary interview by Edgar Reichmann
Elias Canetti In 1983.
The novelist, dramatist and philosopher Elias Canetti (1905-
1994), who wrote in German, was born at Ruschuk in Bulgaria.
His parents were Sephardim, Jews of Spanish origin. In 1981,
when he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature, the
Swedish Academy noted that the characteristic features of his
work are "a satirical bite in the observation of people's
behaviour, a loathingof wars and dévastation, bitterness at
the thought of life's brevity". This imaginary interview has
been composed by writer and journalist Edgar Reichmann
using extracts from Canetti's work.
EDGAR REICHMANN
is a novelist and literary critic. His
most récent novel, Nous n'Irons
plus à Sils Maria, was published
earlier this year by Denoêl, Paris.
You left us on 14 August 1994. Where did
you come into the world?
Elias Canetti: I was born at the beginning of the
century at Ruschuk on the Bulgarian bank of the
Danube. It was a marvellous city for a child.
People of the most varied backgrounds lived
there, and on any one day you could hear seven
or eight languages. As well as the Bulgarians, there
were Turks, Greeks, Jews, Albanians, Arme-
nians, Gypsies and Romanians who came from
the opposite side of the Danube. I lived with my
parents and my two brothers in the neighbour¬
hood of the Sephardim, the Spanish Jews, where
my father had a successful business.
The looming threat of war led your family
to emigrate to England. Your father died when
you were living in Manchester in 1912.
E. C.:lt was a terrible shock and in a way I never
got over it. Someone who has been exposed to
death too soon can never rid himself of it. It is a
wound which becomes a kind of lung through
which one breathes.
But you try to use remembrance as a kind
of counterweight to death. . .
E. C: One must visit the dead and localize them;
otherwise they slip away with astonishing speed.
As soon as you join them in their proper place,
they return to life. In a flash, you remember
everything you thought you had forgotten
about them, you hear their words, stroke their
hair and see your reflection in the brightness of
their gaze. Once upon a time you might never
hâve been quite sure of the colour of their eyes;
now you recognize it immediately. Perhaps
everything in them is more intense than when
they were alive; perhaps the dead await com¬
plète self-fulfilment in the résurrection that one
of those they hâve left behind will offer them.
Then you left England. . .
E. C: In 1913 I left with my mother for Vienna,
then we moved to Zurich and at the end of the
Great War to Frankfurt, where I passed my
school certificate. After learning English, I
learned German, which became my second
mother tongue and the language in which I
wrote. I went back to Vienna to study chem-
istry. I was very excited by the intellectual fer¬
ment in the capital of the former Austro-Hun-
garian empire. It was there, in 1924, that I met
Veza Taubner-Calderon, who became my wife

ten years later. In 1928 I went for the fîrst time
to Berlin, where the artistic and cultural life was
just as intense as it was in Vienna.
But intolérance was also rife at this time.
The rise of totalitarianism had begun. This
climate is reflected in your writing.
£ C.;My first play, Hochzeit ("The Wedding"),
which I wrote in 1932, is not based on a model. It
stands on its own. The way in which the charac-
ters express themselves reveals ail kinds of tur-
moil and none 


of them grasps what the others
want to say. The lack of communication is total.
Komôdie der Eitelkeit ("Comedy of Vanity") was
written in 1934 beneath the dark sun of the
tragedy that was unfolding in Germany. At the
end of January Hitler came to power. From then
on every event bore its load of anguish. In 1925 I
began to try to find out the meaning of the con¬
cept of the crowd, how crowds functioned and,
later, how power sprang from crowds. When the
madness that was later to become all-consuming
took control of the heart of Europe I felt the need
to understand this even more strongly.
In 1925 I began to try to find out tbe meaning of the concept of
the crowd, how crowds functioned and, later, how power sprang
from crowds.
while books were being burned in Berlin, I
was writing my metaphor-novel, originally enti-
ded Kantfdngt Feuer ("Kant takes fire") and later
Die Blendung ("The Blinding"). In it I tried to
expose the narcissistic verbiage of the mandarins
who were incapable of foreseeing the horror that
would soon destroy them or force them into exile.
The book was rejected by Austrian publishers and
first appeared in a Czech translation. After the war
it was published in English as Auto-da-fé.
Then came your key work, Crowds and
Power, essential reading for anyone who
wants to understand the twentieth century.
E. C.'This book grew out of research that I had
begun in adolescence and pursued more deeply
rratern/ty (1980), acrylic on
canvas, by Tsing-Fang Chen.
1

/ hâve always thought It was mad to Insist that everyone should
think in the same way, submit to the demanàs ofa single faith
and only regard the world from a single standpoint.
with the rise of Nazism. I concentrated on
threats 


of war in the hope that I would be able to
dissipate them.
After my mother's death in 1937, an event
that prostrated me, I returned to Vienna. A year
later I saw Hitler's troops enter the city. I stayed
there a few more months in order to observe
the horror at close quarters and to understand
more about how the crowd functioned.
Men's feeling for their own increase has
always been strong. The large numbers of the
herds they hunted blended in their feelings with
their own numbers which they wished to be
large. They expressed this feeling in a spécifie
state of communal excitement which I call the
rhythmic or throhbing crowd.
Their excitement grows and reaches frenzy,
until they are ail doing the same thing. They ail
swing their arms to and fro, and shake their
heads. In the end, there appears to be a single
créature dancing, a créature with fifty heads and
a hundred legs and arms, ail acting in exactly the
same way and with the same purpose. When
their excitement is at its height, thèse people
really feel as one, and nothing but physical
exhaustion can stop them.
The fact that wars can last so long and may
be carried on well after they hâve been lost
arises from the deep urge of the crowd not to
disintegrate; to remain a crowd. This feeling is
sometimes so strong that people prefer to
perish together with open eyes rather than
acknowledge defeat and thus expérience the dis-
integration of their own crowd.
What suddeniy créâtes this uncanny
cohésion?
E. C: The phenomenon is so mysterious that it
must be approached with a measure of caution.
People décide that they are threatened with
physical destruction and proclaim the fact pub-
licly to the whole world. They say "I can be
killed", and secretly add "because I myself I
want to kill this or that man." The stress prop-
erly belongs on the second half of this sentence.
It should run: "I want to kill this or that man.
therefore I can be killed myself." But when it is
a question of a war starting, of its éruption and
the awakening of a bellicose spirit, the first ver¬
sion will be the only one openly admitted. Even
if in fact the aggressor, each side will always
attempt to prove that it is threatened.
What is the place of the individual survival
instinct during thèse deadly confrontations?
E. C: Death, which threatens every individual at
every moment, must hâve been proclaimed as a
collective sentence before people will oppose it
actively. There are, as it were, declared times of
death, times when it turns on a definite, arbitrarily
selected group as a whole. It is "Death to the
French" or "Death to the English." The enthu-
siasm with which people accept such déclarations
has its root in the individual's cowardice before
death; no one likes facing it alone. The death that
thousands approach together is entirely différent.
The worst that can happen to men in war is to
perish together; and this spares them death as indi¬
viduals, which is what they most fear.
Where does force come into ail this? You
make a distinction between force and power.
E. C: The word "force" suggests something
close and immédiate in its effect, something
more directly compelling than power. When
force gives itself time in which to operate it
becomes power. The distinction between force
and power can be illustrated very simply by the
relationship between cat and mouse. The cat
uses force to catch the mouse, but while it is
playing with its prey another factor is présent. It
lets it go, allows it to run about a little, and during
this time the mouse is no longer subjected to
force. But it is still within the power of the cat
and can be caught again. The space which the cat
dominâtes, the moments of hope it allows the
mouse, while continuing however to watch it
closely ail the time and never relaxing its interest
and intention to destroy it ail this can be called
the actual body of power, or, more simply,
power itself. Inhérent in power, therefore, as
opposed to force, is a certain extension in space
and time.
What rôle does religion play?
E. C.rThe distinction between force and power
can be seen in another, quite différent sphère. Ail
those who believe in God believe that they are
continuously in His power, but there are some

for whom this is not enough. They await some
sharp intervention, some direct act of divine
force, which they can recognize and feel as such.
They live in expectation 


of God's commands; for
them He has the cruder features of a ruler. His
active will and their active and explicit submission
become the core of their religion. Believers of
this kind yearn for God's force. His power alone
does not satisfy them; it is too distant and leaves
them too much room for thought and personal
initiative. The state of continuons expectation of
command to which they surrender themselves
for good and ail, marks them deeply and has a
momentous effect on their attitude to other
people. It créâtes a soldierly type of behever, men
to whom battle is the truest représentation of life.
Religious literature seems to hâve been
important to you.
E. C.;Just as people once prayed every day, I
immersed myself in the sacred to find in it an
explanation for the evils from which humanity
suffers. I was not sure that I could learn from
the arguments and scholarly dissertations of the-
ologians, but I wanted to know everything they

said. I knew that they could be refuted but I
wanted them to be a part of me. I hâve always
thought that it was mad to insist that everyone
should think in the same way, submit to the
demands of a single faith and only regard the
world from a single standpoint. It is as if
everyone should build alone the city in which
he or she lives. That is why I made it my duty to
approach ail thèse truths, to keep them alive in
my mind and to meditate on them. Essentially
that was my reason for living.
l crowd cheering Hitler.
