The virus of power
by Eugenio Raúl Zaffaroni
Defence of the rule of law is
the best antidote to the
misuse of power
"Speculation has become a
world-wide phenomenon."
Above, drawing by Jean-Pierre
Gaùzère.
"Paradoxically, repression
increases the opportunities for
corruption."
Corruption is as old as the idea of the
state itself. When the French philoso¬
pher Montesquieu set forth his theory of the
separation of powers in the eighteenth cen¬
tury, he did so to fight corruption. He was not,
of course, the first to join battle. The function
of constitutional law has always been to orga¬
nize the sharing of power in order to control
the way it is exercised and prevent it from
being misused.
The fields in which corruption occurs
change with the growing complexity of the state
apparatus (which takes on new monitoring and
management functions), but its main form con¬
tinues to be abuse of power. Unfortunately,
s- legal experts have not yet discovered the infal-
f lible tool for nipping the evil in the bud.
I The history of institutional law could be
summed up as one of constant efforts by legal
experts to build barriers against corruption and
combat those who devote all their ingenuity to
getting round such barriers. Some models, of
course, are less well adapted to circumstances
and allow corruption to gain a greater foothold
than others, which tend to reduce its room for
manoeuvre.
All power corrupts. . .
a.
t After many poor countries achieved inde-
| pendcnce, corruption in them was often
g encouraged and taken advantage of by certain
31

"The fight against corruption
must involve greater freedom of
information." Above, Existe
(1976), a work by the French
artist Gérard Fromanger.
leaders of the rich countries, who saw it as a
convenient way of recruiting obedient clients.
Growing doubts about this kind of relation¬
ship in recent years have caused a breakdown
in the mechanisms of "traditional" corruption.
We are very interested in corruption today,
almost as if it were a new phenomenon,
because it is beginning to disrupt economic
and political life in the developed countries as
well as in the developing countries where it
has been going on for a long time.
Probably the only new element in the pre¬
sent situation is the fact that corruption is now
feeding on itself corruption in the developing
countries is directly sustaining that in the indus¬
trialized nations. One of the objectives of the
new world economic order is perhaps to try
to stop corruption in the poorest countries,
thus sparing them the exorbitant and uncon-
trolable accumulation of money that all kinds
of illegal trafficking has led to in the rich nations.
Serious investment is needed to finance
the apparatus of production, and this means a



reliable, predictable legal system to deter spec¬
ulators. Investors regard the misuse of power
To develop the state's repressive apparatus within a
framework of defective institutions where there are no
checks on power is to increase opportunities for abuse ,
and encourage arbitrariness, violence and, eventually,
corruption. /
(and the corruption it encourages) as a threat;
speculators see it as an opportunity. If the
world economy is to be healthy and stable, it
is clear that responsible investment must win
out over speculation, otherwise the economy
will be unstable with possibly disastrous
results.
Speculation has become a world-wide phe¬
nomenon in recent years. This fact should be
enough to dispel the illusion that the blunt
instrument of the criminal law is the only
weapon needed to roll back corruption. Glob¬
alization requires more rigorous control of
corruption, and the only way to achieve this
goal is to reduce the areas where corruption
prospers. This means an across-the-board
improvement of all institutions. No one simply
wants to increase the repressive power of
states.
To develop the state's repressive apparatus
within a framework of defective institutions
where there are no checks on power is to
increase opportunities for abuse and encourage
arbitrariness, violence and eventually cor¬
ruption. Advocating repression as a solution is
a good ploy for politicians trying to whip up
support from some parts of the electorate, but
apart from that it is dangerously simplistic
because paradoxically it increases the oppor¬
tunities for corruption.
And so, even if the criminal law plays no
small part in the fight against corruption, the
first move must be to carry out political and
institutional reforms designed to promote a
better balance of power, greater freedom of
information and speech and the widest pos¬
sible participation by citizens in monitoring
and managing public affairs.
A fight
for democracy
One of the most difficult types of power to
monitor is in fact the repressive power, which
is by definition selective. The law comes down
more heavily on some sectors of the popula¬
tion than others (just as the victims of crime are
generally sociologically typecast), and this
32

process whereby criminals and victims are
selected has an arbitrary quality which can lead
to misuse of power and to corruption.
Moreover and this is perhaps the most
important point repression is much less



effective as an instrument for regulating a polity
than it is as an instrument of police surveil¬
lance. It is a dangerous illusion to think that
essentially political phenomena can be regu¬
lated by repression. To give the police and
bureaucratic machine the capacity for com¬
plete control especially with the facilities
made available by modern technology is to
expose it to a vast new field for dishonesty and
abuse. The belief that corruption can be fought
by increasing the discretionary power of those
institutions which are most exposed to it is as
absurd as seeking protection from wild ani¬
mals by taking refuge inside their cages.
But corruption is not inevitable. If this
threat, which is inherent in the very nature of
power, is to be avoided, solutions must be
sought in state political, institutional and
bureaucratic structures and in a healthy civil
society.
In short, the fight against corruption is a
political struggle akin to the fight for a law-
abiding state based on equality before the law.
Yet a state based on the rule of law is never
attained once and for all. Its existence depends
on a regulatory principle that is in permanent
The first move in the fight against corruption
must be to carry out political and institutional
reforms aimed at a better balance
of power, greater freedom of information and
speech, and the widest possible
participation by citizens in monitoring and
managing public affairs.
opposition to the temptation of authoritari¬
anism. Ultimately, the fight against corruption
is an unrelenting effort to approach as near as
possible to the values of a law-abiding state,
to monitor and reduce the repressive forces
that are inherent in this state and try to infil¬
trate into the slightest fissure in its institutional
edifice.
Neutralizing corruption depends less on
the severity of the repressive arsenal than on
the existence of a truly democratic system,
with strong political parties, a responsible civil
society, respect for the rights and freedoms of
everyone, an independent judiciary, and effec¬
tive financial regulatory bodies. Another
absolutely vital factor is the neutralization of
the transnational levers of corruption, and this,
of course, calls for new forms of co-operation
on a world-wide scale.
EUGENIO RAUL ZAFFARONI
of Argentina is director of the
Department of Penal Law and
Criminology at the University of
Buenos Aires and Vice President of
the International Association of
Penal Law (IALP). He is the author
of En busca de las penas perdidas
(1993; "In Search of Lost
Sentences").
"The function of
constitutional law
has always been to
organize the sharing
of power in order to L
control the way It Is
exercised and prevent
It from being
misused." Right, Pitt
addressing the
Commons (1793-
1795), a painting by
Karl Anton Hickel.
33
