The underside of globalization
by Flora Lewis
Corruption is an old story, one way
or another as old as society. Periodi¬
cally there have been explosions of anger fro m
long-suffering, docile victims seeking to wipe
it out. It has been a causal element in most re v-
olutions, sometimes the dominant one. The
disgust it provoked was a central urge in the
Protestant Reformation. And it is still with us,
all around the world, in the poorest and the
richest countries.
But there are new aspects, as well as
ancient habits, which make corruption in
these days both easier to spread and more
intolerable. One is easy movement of people,
goods and money. Economic globalization
has created tremendous new opportunities
for illicit as well as productive creation of
wealth. Another is the sheer volume of
money that modern trade and construction
make available. In traditional subsistence soci¬
eties, oil can bring a sudden flood of riches
easy for a few to tap with no compulsion to
distribute reasonably. When there is large-
scale building, government favours can be
worth billions to be siphoned off in quantities
never before imaginable.
And, on the other side, modern business
requires assurances, a framework of law to
give confidence in vast, long-term investment
which arbitrary corruption undermines.
Democracy by definition requires account¬
ability, a rule of law based on an agreed sense
of who is entitled to what. It may co-exist with
corruption, but it is hard to reconcile and
sooner or later there is a collision. Somebody
blows the whistle and scandal erupts.
Part of the trouble is that corruption isn't
easy to define. You may know it when you see
it, but it is hard to spell out. In some ways,
democracy promotes it by limiting the power of
authority. Elections cost money. At what point
15

does the equation of money and votes become
criminal?
The Mafia in Sicily evolved as people
banded together to resist cruel and rapacious
overlords, and then extorted money for "pro¬
tection" against its own ability to be cruel and
greedy as well. Mussolini nearly wiped it out
with his fascist police, because he didn't depend
on elections and therefore didn't need the
gangs to deliver the votes. The U.S. was to
some extent responsible for reviving the net¬
work as an unintended result of World War II
operations. Mafia member "Lucky" Luciano,
then in an American jail, was recruited to go to
Sicily before the Allied invasion clandestinely
to prepare the way by encouraging his old
friends among the islanders not to resist.
Then, as occupying forces moved in to set up
civil government, they wanted to be sure not to
reinstate the local fascists. They opened the jails
and gave responsibilities to those whom Mus¬
solini had imprisoned. But these weren't all anti¬
fascists. Some were just Mafiosi. They busied
themselves delivering votes when the time came,
to establish a new base, as well as exploiting the
black market which always develops when there
are shortages and too many controls without
overwhelming official terror.
A vicious circle
Corruption tends to be a private enterprise,
even within government structures, because
official institutions can justify what they take
on other grounds, valid or false. But of course,
it is a mistake to think of corruption as the
inevitable enemy of government. The worst
cases always come from collusion that feeds
on itself. The more money the corrupt can
extract from smuggling, black marketing, intim¬
idation, the more they can buy off police, judges
and other officials to help promote their affairs.
The complexity of modern economics
adds a whole new dimension to corruption, ,
piling layer on layer of illicit obligation.
There is a chicken-and-egg interdependence.
The more government imposes petty restric¬
tions, red tape, arbitrary rules, the greater the
temptation to grease the way through it and
when, as is usually the case, officials are poorly
paid, the greater their susceptibility.
There are countries where this is a way of
life, almost inescapable. But the complexity of
modern economics adds a whole new dimen¬
sion, piling layer on layer of illicit obligation.
Contacts, connections, secret understandings
are essential. The networks used to be pri¬
marily local. This is what has changed in the
big open world.
Traffic in drugs is the most obvious case.
Its enormity is obviously the result of an insa¬
tiable demand, beyond explanation in social
theory but a clear sign of social and psychic
pathology. Since consuming countries have
no idea of what to do about it, they try to
address the plague from the supply side which
only increases the opportunities for corrup¬
tion. Such fortunes have been amassed that
they can hardly be spent and therefore they
induce investment. That requires money-laun¬
dering, which didn't start with drugs but with
tax havens taking advantage of the fact that
every state has the right to make its own
banking and currency laws.
The system functions because national
authorities, jealous of sovereignty, have not
organized against the increasingly intricate,
widespread and well-organized criminal syn¬
dicates. The facility of communication has made
Destruction of a drug haul
(Paraguay).
FLORA LEWIS,
a noted American journalist
specializing in international affairs,
is the author of several books,
including Europe: Road to Unity
(1992).
16

possible links which add up to such a magni¬
tude of resources that they can swamp vul¬
nerable officialdom. It has been reported that
Western drug traffickers route money through
Russia, which may cost as high as 20 to 30 per
cent of dollar face-value, but comes out as legit¬
imate transfers which can then be deposited or
invested anywhere. In the process, the Russian
gangs enhance their ability to corrupt, extort
and impose their will by violence.
Fighting back
There is a grave imbalance between the frag¬
mented international system of laws and the
increasingly well-knit international system of
the lawless. It can't be corrected by blocking
the flow of money and goods without dis¬
rupting everybody's economy. It requires a
level of co-operation among governments and
police forces which they are only beginning
to envisage, and which some governments
don't even consider because their establish¬
ments are beneficiaries of things as they are.
At times, it seems that cynicism and toler¬
ance of corruption as the inevitable way of the
world are unshakeable. It isn't that people don't
know, they just don't know what to do about
it until it suddenly becomes too much and they
find a way to hit back. In recent years, this has
happened in Italy, Japan, South Korea, France,
Spain. It is a critical factor in the rise of Islamic
fundamentalism because, deep down, most
people find dishonesty a dirty and disagree¬
able way to live. It saps pride and dignity.
After the last Turkish election, a twenty-
three-year-old shop-keeper named Erdol
Nergiz explained his vote to a Western jour¬
nalist. He said he has a Christian girl-friend,
goes to discotheques and drinks alcohol, travels
to Europe, but nonetheless gave his ballot to
the Welfare Party, an Islamic movement which
made strong gains in the secular state. "That
shouldn't be my choice," he said. "But I did it
because 80 per cent of the people in this
country are poor and the leaders of the other
parties don't do anything for them. The cor¬
ruption and bribery here are just too much."
Violent crime and corruption, which often
reinforce each other, played an important part
in turning people to vote for the communist
party in Russia's last parliamentary election.
Under the dictatorship with its repression, there
was relatively little private crime and generally
at a low level. The regime had a monopoly on
the use of force. To the extent that the state itself
was corrupt, people had long been indoctri¬
nated not to think of it that way. So many of
them blamed reforms for the new lawlessness
and, especially, the new uncertainties.
The persistence of corruption in all kinds of
systems should make clear that it won't go
away by itself. There have to be constant vig¬
ilance and rigorous rules. While democracy
may make it harder to eliminate than the iron
fist of authoritarianism, it also offers better
tools for mobilizing people to resist corrup¬
tion once they realize its pervasive perni-
ciousness is intolerable. But for that to work,
the democrats themselves have not only to be
honest but to join in their determination to
maintain an honest society.
And they need to join across the borders
which have become so porous to criminals as
well as to commerce. Since, after all, this is
about money and the great plague is about very
large amounts of money, the technical means
for control are becoming available through the
same electronic networks which move tril¬
lions worth of dollars around the globe each
day. It can be done through the dozen or so
major financial centres. That would take agree¬
ments among governments, big banks, big
commodities traders going much further than
ever before to track and report unjustifiable
flows. Legitimate business is coming to see it
is in their interest, as it is in the interest of soci¬
eties everywhere to fight an ancient malady
which threatens to be a raging epidemic.
IrlK
if
fe.
' 1 ii
i
*m 1
" Economic globalization has
created tremendous new
opportunities for illicit as well
as productive creation of
wealth." Above, a baggage
trolley at an international
airport.
"The technical means for
control are becoming
available through the same
electronic networks which
move trillions of dollars
around the globe each day."
Below, a computer
manufacturing plant (U.S.A.).
Y r
17
