Modern
technology and
management
techniques
cannot begin
to correct the
problems they
create until
they question
their own
dominance
O urui Amerindian children
watch a logging road being
cut through their reservation.
THE UNESCO lOURIER
24
SEPTEMBER 1996

A ClOUS CIRCLE
BY TERRENCE HEATH
r
The accomplishments of tech¬
nology have been the text of a
hymn to progress that has been
loudly sung for the past 200
years. It has been largely a hymn
celebrating human control over Nature.
Recently, however, the celebration has
become more muted as we have begun to
realize some of the effects that technological
change can have not only on natural systems
but also on our social and political systems.
The most obvious concerns are what we call
"environmental problems". These include
the impact of the automobile and the house¬
hold refrigerator as well as the incalculable
issues associated with the operation of
nuclear power stations and the disposal of
nuclear wastes. Many other problems are
connected with heavy industry, raw material
extraction, production processes, disposal
methods, the use of non-degradable pack¬
aging and the overconsumption of renewable
and non-renewable resources made possible
through "improved" harvesting technology.
Managing the
environment
Solutions to these problems are almost always
conceived of in terms of managing the envi¬
ronment. Through monitoring, regulation,
better science and technology, and conserva¬
tion, we hope to correct at least the worst
aspects of what is wrong. This approach to
controlling environmental degradation is
largely what is understood by the term "sus¬
tainable development". Basically, we are
saying that the instruments by which the sit¬
uation has been created can also be used to
correct it. But while we must applaud
Western culture's concern to address the
problems that it created in the first place, it is
clear that this approach almost invariably pre¬
cludes looking outside the boundaries of
Western culture when trying to define what
sustainable means.
At the same time as technology is being
used to attempt to correct the problems it has
created, there is a growing awareness of the
social and political consequences of technology.
Examples could be drawn from indigenous cul¬
tures around the globe, but the Inuit of Arctic
Canada are a particularly striking example of a
people who live in a remote part of a highly
industrialized nation and have had to cope with
dramatic change in two generations.
The rifle, the powerboat and the skidoo
have, for example, changed the Inuits' techno¬
logical impact on their environment, and
imported technologies have also changed
social aspects of their culture. Inuit hunters can
now travel to herds, make kills and bring the
animals back to the settlement for processing.
It is no longer necessary for them to live in
camps close to the herds, and women and chil¬
dren no longer take part in the hunt itself as
they did during the time of camp life. The
women and children become increasingly set¬
tlement-minded, and this attitude is reinforced
by schools, health care facilities, jobs, and per¬
manent, independent homes.
Relationships within the family change;
the use of language changes; the role of elders
changes. In addition to its effects on the ani¬
mals and the terrain, the use of rifle, power¬
boat and skidoo also leads to a shift in cultural
relationships and in the relationships of the
Inuit with what they call nunavut ("our
land"). And, because the technology comes
from Western culture, the Inuit's culture is
also influenced by the methodologies and
assumptions of Western culture.
The case of the Inuit is relevant because
people of "civilized" cultures are becoming
increasingly uneasy with the results of their
activities and are turning to so-called "primi¬
tive" cultures for wisdom to guide them. The
R BSEE UNESCO (¿U SErTEMBER 1996

wisdom they seek is largely what might be
called selective spirituality, that is, sayings,
prophecies and advice which can be separated
from the traditional context in which they arise
and which is often basic to understanding
them. They arc rarely attracted to the science,
technology and sustainable development for
subsistence of many of these cultures, even
though these may be the only base for coping
with environmental degradation.
Western technology and management
techniques are not only an integral part of
market- and commodity-based culture, they
also change every culture they come into
contact with. Because they are part of
Western culture which has a global system of
production, distribution and consumption,
they absorb, change and destroy other cul¬
tures, whether intentionally or unintention¬
ally. Even if local cultures wished to integrate
this technology and these methods, they
would have to be protected in order to have
the time to absorb and adapt. But Western
culture can only provide such protection by
dismantling its own dominance.
The failings of a
dominant culture
Western technology and management tech¬
niques are successful in dealing with isolated
parts of processes, but they are not only inad¬
equate, but actually destructive when dealing
with whole, integrated processes. If there is a
market for wood products, Western tech¬
nology and management can be applied to the
selection, planting, fertilizing, harvesting and'
marketing of, say, Eucalyptus trees, but they
are singularly incapable of dealing with the
integrated system of land, trees, water, human
subsistence, religion, art, memory, invention,
feedback and inter-regional relationships
which have to be modified or destroyed in
order to satisfy market demand.
The shadow side of the development of
Western culture has been a scramble to
counter-balance, modify, explain away, and,
on occasion, replace these methods which
were initially overwhelmingly successful but
eventually became terribly dangerous. Envi¬
ronmental degradation, which was accepted
light, children in Cameroon
paint a mural as part of an
environmental education
p roject.
Below, a demonstration
against the construction of a
motorway across Twyford
Down in the south of England.
,,MW"4,,;,u
i***'*i
m *****
THE UNESCOlOURIER «W BP «SEPTEMBER 1996

in the belief that the resources of the planet
arc limitless, now threatens the very eco¬
nomic base that sustains the consumption
patterns of Western culture.
When green is the
dominant colour
Three strategic objectives have been pro¬
posed in order to cope with this degradation:
maintenance of essential ecological processes
and life-support systems, preservation of
genetic diversity, and sustainable use of
species and ecosystems.
There is a growing interest in attempting
to include environmental costs in the eco¬
nomics of development. These costs are
increasingly being referred to as "externali¬
ties", which in itself is semantically interesting
in assessing the mindset which is developing
them. There is even talk of the "countcrpro-
ductivitics" of economic growth, such as the
stress caused by what used to be called
TERRENCE HEATH
is a Canadian consultant on the
arts and the environment.
"labour saving devices". The industrial world
has moved from efficiency experts to stress
management experts.
Governments in the industrialized world
are attempting to adapt these solutions to
their legislative and development policies. In
Europe and North America, laws and regula¬
tions are slowly being put into place and pop¬
ular awareness is growing, both formally
through curricular development at all levels
of the educational system, and informally
through non-governmental organizations
dedicated to environmentalism. There is also
a growing awareness of the global responsi¬
bilities that some industrial enterprises should
embrace. "Being green" is even seen as a
competitive advantage for industrial firms of
the future.
No one would wish to discourage efforts
by Western culture to correct these prob¬
lems. Many if not most of those seeking
solutions to environmental degradation are
motivated by genuine concern. It must be
emphasized, however, that their solutions are
dominant culture solutions, based on tech¬
nological and managerial applications of the
methods and mores of that culture. Taken to
their ultimate stage, they envisage a planet
which is totally managed and technologically
controlled.
Us and them
Let us imagine that these approaches arc
completely successful and then ask whether
the resultant world is the world we want to
live in. In the North America of the 1 950s the
answer might have been an enthusiastic
"yes"; in the world of the 1990s I think I hear
a resounding "no". How can wc act so that
wc all can enjoy some of the benefits of tech¬
nology and management and not become
their slaves? How can wc limit the dominant
culture before it destroys itself and everyone
else along with it?
The most basic reason to be apprehensive
about the ability of Western culture to solve
the environmental problems it has created is
its marked inability to include itself in the
concept of nature. As someone once said in
response to a request for a definition of
"environment", "it is everything except me".
The word "environment" itself explains that
most clearly. The problems are "out there"
and wc will address them through tech¬
nology and management expertise. Coupled
to this attitude is the assumption that people,
THE UNESCO ^OURIE 27.
SEPTEMBER 1996

Mn environmental education
teacher in Cameroon describes
the dangers of deforestation
to his pupils.
usually others, are part of the problem and
that the solution lies in technology and man¬
agement, usually ours. A first step in looking
at the entire problem that the planet faces
might be simply to apply some of these solu¬
tions to Western culture.
Human cultures have adapted ideas, rit¬
uals, techniques and beliefs from one another,
and it might be argued that the success of the
human species has been based on this char¬
acteristic ability to learn, to adapt, and to be
open to the experience of others (even when
at times attempting to destroy them). One of
the most problematic issues concerning the
future of the planet is the seeming inability of
Western culture to understand and take seri¬
ously the experience of other cultures which
have developed very different solutions to
the problem of survival.
Perhaps a first step might be to apply to
human cultures some of the solutions being
proposed for environmental problems. The
destruction of human cultures is arguably
more devastating in the long run than the
environmental degradation of the planet,
which can be seen as its symptom.
Biodiversity is one area of concern to envi¬
ronmentalists today. The loss of species is
occurring at a potentially disastrous rate. The
triumphant "survival of the fittest" of nine¬
teenth-century science is suddenly sounding
hollow as we begin to realize that no species
survives by triumphing. Every survival is the
result of a complex system of life which
involves competition but also involves co¬
operation and dependence. And beyond that it
involves interdependence and enormous
diversity of plant, animal and mineral presence
to sustain the cycles within cycles of birth,
growth and death. The huge agro-businesses
are finding that the one-crop approach may be
a short-term triumph for technology and
management, but that the long-term results
are land degradation, displacement of peoples
with the accompanying problems of urbaniza¬
tion and poverty, loss of species, and eventu¬
ally a curve of falling profits.
A recipe for disaster
Monoculture in agriculture is a recipe for dis¬
aster, but what about monoculture in human
culture? We talk volubly about the loss of
species and the shrinking of the gene pool in
the environment, but what of the loss of lan¬
guages, words, thoughts, values, skills, rituals,
relationships, knowledge, traditions, not to
mention songs, dances, plays, adornments,
paintings, sculpture and sounds? What of
human diversity? It is possible that Western
culture can through conservation, preserva¬
tion and sustainable use partially manage the
loss of species. Is it not even more important
that the diversity of human cultures should be
conserved, preserved and used sustainably?
The agro-business, to use a much discussed
example, destroys species through the intro¬
duction of monocultures; it also destroys
human cultures through the concomitant
monocultural technology and management.
Diversity is as sure a sign of success in human
affairs as it is in the environment "out there"
and the two are intimately related.
It is difficult to imagine where the
counter-balance to Western culture can come
from if not from the cultures it has thus far
either pushed aside or treated as curios.
Without a counter-balance, it is difficult to sec
Western culture's "solutions" doing anything
but furthering the monoculture based on
technology and management which have
shown themselves inadequate to deal with
the situations they create. The most basic
solution will have to include local consulta¬
tion and decision-making and a cessation of
mega-projects which destroy environment
and human communities for the sake of
export markets and foreign capital exigencies.
But, beyond that level, we have to recognize
that sustainable development is not primarily
an economic/environment issue, but an issue
of sustaining the interrelationship of human
cultures and nature.
THE UNESCO lOURIER . SEPTEMBER 1996
