^
The rarest, most precious vital force
by Marie Curie
This text by Marie Curie (1867-1934), who shared the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1903 and was sole winner
of the 1911 Nobel Prize for Chemistry, is the preamble to a memorandum on international scholarships for
the advancement of science which she presented in Geneva in 1926 as a member of the Committee on
Intellectual Co-operation of the League of Nations.
IL
I shall devote but few words to an affirmation of faith in
the importance of science for mankind. If at times this
importance has been questioned and if the words "the
failure of science" have been pronounced in moments of
bitter discouragement, it is because man's endeavours to
achieve his highest aspirations are never perfect, like
all that is human, and because these endeavours have
too often been diverted from their path by forces of ego¬
centric nationalism and social regression.
Yet it is through the constant effort to expand sci¬
ence that man has risen to his present pre-eminent place
on our planet and that he is also winning increasing
power over nature and a larger measure of well-being.
We should join with those who, like Rodin, pay homage
to the devoted efforts of scholars and thinkers and with
those who, like Pasteur, "believe indomitably that sci¬
ence and peace will triumph over ignorance and war".
If, to judge from the experience of the recent world
conflict, the aspirations of the elites in different lands
often appear less exalted than those of the great mass of
less well educated persons, it is because of the perils
inherent in all forms of intellectual and political power
when these are not controlled and channeled toward the
high ideals which alone justify their use. No enterprise
can therefore have greater importance than those which
seek to promote international ties between the dynamic
thinkers in all countries and especially between the
young in whose hands lies the future of mankind.
I am sure that no one will deny that even in the most
democratic of countries existing social systems offer a
considerable advantage to the wealthy and that the
roads to higher education, open so freely to children of
families with ample means, are still difficult of access to
children of families with limited resources.
As a result every nation each year loses a large part of
the rarest, most precious vital force. While waiting for
reforms in education to resolve this problem once and
for all, the democratic response in various countries has
hitherto consisted of a partial remedy, the creation of
national educational scholarships, thus enabling higher
education to retrieve some of the young people of whom
it would otherwise he deprived.
These national efforts, highly commendable though
still far from adequate, are not our concern here, but I
would like to point out that the same problem exists
with regard to post-university studies for the young
people who have managed to surmount all the obstacles
encountered up to that point.
At this post-university stage of their lives, young stu¬
dents who contemplate careers in science are brought face
to face with pressing demands. In most cases the family
has done its utmost to help the young man or woman to
come this far and, unable to make further sacrifices, it
now asks them to become self supporting. And even in well-
to-do families the wish to take up very advanced studies
may encounter a lack of understanding, such studies being
considered as an extravagance or a mere whim.
Yet what in fact are the best interests of society in
this matter? Should it not give every encouragement to
those called to a scientific vocation? Is it really so well-
endowed that it can afford to reject the vocations it is
offered?
I believe, on the basis of personal experience, that
the sum total of the aptitudes called for by a true sci¬
entific vocation is an infinitely frail and precious thing, a
rare treasure that it is both absurd and criminal to
throw away, a gift to which great care must be devoted
so that it may grow and fructify.
What, in reality, are some of the qualities required
of the person who aspires to success in the field of inde¬
pendent scientific research? The intellectual qualities
are an intelligence capable of learning and under¬
standing; a sure judgment capable of appraising the sig¬
nificance of theoretical and experimental demonstra¬
tions, an imagination capable of creative effort. Equally
important are the moral faculties: perseverance, zeal
and above all the unselfish dedication that guides the
novice along a path which, inmost cases, will never lead
him to material rewards comparable to those offered
by careers in industry or business.
Thus to foster and safeguard the scientific vocation is a
sacred duty for each society which has the interests of its
future at heart. It is gratifying to sec that public opinion
is becoming increasingly conscious of this duty. I
50
