II
« SALAMANCA
JOSÉ M. G. HOLGUERA
is a Spanish writer and translater who was born in
Salamanca and has taught at the Universities of Stirling
(Scotland), Dublin (Ireland) and Rouen (France).
Salamanca first appears in history
as Helmantiké, in an account 

of
its fail to Hannibal's Carthaglnian army
in 220 B.C. The stone bull on the city's
Roman bridge, which also features on
its coat of arms, is a relie of that period
and was probably the legacy of the Vet-
tones and the Vaccaei, who put their
herds to graze on the banks of the River
Tormes. The bridge itself is thought to
hâve been built by Trajan, but only the
fifteen arches on the city side date from
the Ist century A.D. The others are the
resuit of extensive rebuilding in the six-
teenth and seventeenth centuries after
the bridge had been damaged by flood
waters.
Not much has survived from the
period between the collapse of Roman
rule in the third century and the repop¬
ulation of the city in the eleventh, apart
from sections of Roman and médiéval
ramparts, the bridge over the Tormes
and its bull.
Three people were responsible for
Salamanca's prosperity in the Middle
Ages. The first, Bernardo del Carpio, was
a legendary hero who continued to crop
up in Spanish literature long afterwards.
The second, Raymond of Burgundy,
helped the city to expand considerably
at the end of the eleventh century when
it was repopulated by Castillans, Gali-
cians, Mozarabs, Jews and Franks, and
given the well-defined légal and territo¬
rial structures of the feudal System.
Bishop Geronimo, El Cid's chaplain, was
responsible for the ecclesiastical organi¬
zation of the city and the start of work on
building the cathedral.
Of the many hterary figures associated
with Salamanca, two became household
names: Lazarillo de Tormes and La
Celestina. The Life ofLazarillo de Tormes

The golden stones of
Salamanca
byJoséM. G. Holguera
Famed for its university and its cultural life, the Spanish city of Salamanca
has an outstanding architectural héritage. Its historic centre was registered
on Unesco's World Héritage List in 1988.
Salamanca's Roman bridge is dominated
by the Old Catliedra! (12th century) and the New
Cathedral (16th-18th centuries).
The Patio de las Escuelas. In the centre of this
little square stands a statue of the Spanish writer
Fray Luis de Leôn (1527-1591). In left
background, the main entrance to the University.
Right, the Estudio hospital.
is an anonymous first-person account, pub¬
lished in 1554, of the adventures of a
maverick hero born, as his name suggests,
on the banks of the River Tormes, who
does his best to get through life without
overburdening himself with ethical con¬
sidérations or lofty sentiments. This story
marked the birth of Spanish picaresque
literature and is one of the sources of the
modem novel. As for La Celestina, or La
Tragicomedia de Calisto y Melibea
(1499), it was probably written in Sala¬
manca by Fernando de Rojas. With its
pair of tragic lovers and the unforgettable
character of La Celestina, an aged bawd-
cum-witch, the play is one of the most
important forerunners of modem théâtre.
A third figure who did much to bring
famé to Salamanca is that of the stu-
dent. In the Spain of the Golden Cen¬
tury, the student figure who features in
so many stories and plays always hails
from Salamanca. He is generally quar-
relsome and ne'er-do-well (the meaning
of the word picaro), but above ail
bursting with youthful vitality. He
enjoyed an eventful literary career
which lasted until José de Espronceda y
Delgado's The Student of Salamanca in
the nineteenth century. Even today,
youthfulness is the hallmark of social
and cultural life in Salamanca, where
most of the population is aged under
thirty.
THE OLD CATHEDRAL
The courtyard known as the Patio Chico
affords the finest view of the cathedral of
Santa Maria de la Sede (known as the Old
Cathedral, to distinguish it from the
New Cathedral built next to it three cen¬
turies later). It was erected between the
beginning of the tweifth century and the
end of the thirteenth, which explains
why the original fortress-like building
gradually became lighter, in both sensés
of the word, under Gothic influence.
The monumental lantern-tower known
as the Torre del Gallo (the Cock's Tower),
which tops the building, even has an ori¬
ental quality. Its lower section, which is

Plaza Mayor, a baroque square begun in 1729
to plans by Alberto de Churriguera and
completed in 1755 by Andrés Garcia Quiiiones.
The Town Hall is at centre.
The New Cathedral's Door of the Nativity.
flanked by four turrets, rises to a Byzan¬
tine-style cupola. This almost improvised
arrangement resulted from changes made
to the original plan by master architect
Pedro Pérez with the aim 


of covering the
naves. The élégant solution he devised is a
model of architectural creativity.
The Old Cathedral is remarkable
not only for its wealth of architectural
interest, the abundance of its décora¬
tion (capitals, paintings and sculptures)
and the inventive fantasy of the vault in
the Talavera Chapel (eight semicircular
arches, arranged in parallai pairs, ail of
them différent, which do not meet at
the keystone), but also because it used
to house the Ecclesiastical School, first
mentioned in 1130, which later became
the University. It was there, in the
Santa Barbara Chapel, that examina-
tions and degree cérémonies were heid
for centuries.
THE UNIVERSITY
Patio de Escuelas, a small square over-
looked by the monumental façade of
tha University, is a masterpiece dating
from the early seventeenth century. It is
lined with tha buildings that form the
heart of tha old University complex: the
Escuelas Mayores and Manoras and the
Estudio Hospital (which now housas the
Vice-Chancallary). It was in 1218, at
tha bahast of Alfonso IX, that tha
Ecclesiastical School broadened its cur-
riculum to include général studies.
From 1255 on, the University of Sala¬
manca ranked among the most famous
centres of learning in Christendom,
alongside Oxford, Paris and Bologna.
Tha University's golden aga cama in
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
The Escuelas Mayoras were built
batwaan 1415 and 1433. Tha founda¬
tion stone of tha hospital was laid in
1413. Tha portai of the Escuelas
Menores (an establishment providing
secondary éducation) was built in 1533.
Tha courtyard onto which thesa build¬
ings give includes rows of multifoil
Gothic arches a sophisticated combi¬
nation of curves and countercurves
which rank alongside other hidden traa-
sures to be found in Salamanca's many
innar courtyards (in the Casa de las Cou¬
chas, the Palacio de Fonseca, and the
University's upper cloister).
The Estudio Hospital was built in the
Gothic style on tha spot where Raymond
of Burgundy's palace once stood, and
which was traditionally thought to ba
the site of the anciant Roman pretorium.

Tha Plataresqua décoration of tha
friezes borrowed many stylistic éléments
from tha Itahan Renaissance: fauns (ona



of whom is shown engaged in amorous
activity), cartouches, foliated scroUs and
grotesque masks.
The University's early-sixtaanth-cen-
tury portai, which is also in tha
Plataresqua style, seems to thrust for-
ward its convolutad décoration of
The cloister of the kings (16th
century) in the Convent of San
Esteban.
'1 !
grotesques, coats of arms and médai¬
llons almost defiantly. It contains in coda
an overviaw of Renaissance civilization
with, in its lower section, medallion por¬
traits of tha Catholic kings and, above,
some admirable représentations of Her¬
cules and Venus.
What confers unity on thèse buildings,
as it does on ail thosa in Salamanca, is tha
matarial of which they are built: a red-
dish-gold stone from tha Villamayor
région. Tha statue of the theologian, poat
and phUosopher Fray Luis da Léon, which
stands majastically in the middle of Patio
da las Escuelas seems silently to approva
the Unes of tha poat Miguel de Unamuno:
"Tha stones where your soûl is anclosed/
Ara the colour of ripa aars of corn." The
monumental portai leads to cloisters,
around which ara arranged tha lecture
haUs and tha anciant University Library
(founded in 1254, it is tha oldast univer¬
sity library in Europe). The room where
Fray Luis de Leôn used to teach looks
axactly as it did on that day in 1577
when, after spending many months in the
Inquisitors' jails, ha greeted his students
with tha celabrated "As I was saying the
other day. . . ," thus styUshly drawing a
ved over tha persécution ha had suffarad.
With its twin rows of hanches consisting
Façade of the Casa
de las Conchas, or
House of Sheiis (early
16th century).
simply of squarad-off woodan baams
facing a profassorial chair that is doomed
to ramain empty for avar, this stark room
has a strangely magnetic feel about it.
It was in the adjoining hall that, threa
centuries later, the Vice-Chancallor of
tha University crossed swords with the
Francoist General MiUân Astray, who had
just exclaimed: "Daath to the intellec¬
tuals! Long liva death!" The Vice-Chan¬
callor rose to his feet and said: "This is
the temple of intalligance, and you hava
just desecrated it. Victory will ba yours,
but you shall not carry conviction, for to
convince and persuade you need some¬
thing which you lack: reason and a just
cause." In tha uproar caused by his
ramarks, soldiars had to "saa him home".
The incident took place on 12 October
1936, thraa months after the beginning
of the Civil War, and tha Vice-Chan¬
callor's name was Miguel de Unamuno.
If we leave tha University, after ona
last look at the statue of Fray Luis de
Leôn bathed in tha light of the blua
autumn sky, and take Calla Libraros and
Galle Serranos, we coma to the, cross-
roads of CaUa Compaiïa, an architectural
Crowning glory of
the Old Cathedral.
The octagonal
lantern-tower known
as the Torre del Gallo
(centre).
41

A "grove of lofty towers" (Miguel de Unamuno)
stands out against the Salamanca skyline. In
foreground, the Pontifical University; left, the spires
of La Clerecia, and the New Cathedral (right).
treasure trove that includes La Clerecia
(a former seminary) and tha aarly-six-
teenth-cantury Casa da las Conchas, a
superb mansion whose façade is daco-
ratad with carvings of pilgrims' scallop
shalls. After crossing Plaza de Ben
Benito, tha scène 


of many bloody events
in Spanish history, the baroque outlines
of the Monteray Palace rise before us.
Unamuno wrote as follows about the
palace's tower, which he contamplated
avery day from his window: "Thèse stones
will remain to bear witness to the fact
that, facing Nature, there was a
Humankind, a civilization, a philosophy.
Tfcfee eveais j
220B.C.:TliecttytotâtoflbyHaRniM j
IZl&FwttdatloBoftteUniveKity |
1729: C^struetioHflf the Piaza Mayor j
Three flgares |
Population (1995 censw): 167^16 j
Popuiatfen (i99S, «lofficial ostimate): |
approx. 190,000 !
Nunit>ef of students (1995): approx. 35,000 |
Three exc^îOBal f^^tes i
The Univers!^ (1519) |
Convent of San &teban (1610) |
I The New Cathedra! (1650) |
Three coBrtyarils I
Casa de las Conchas (1512) I
I Las Dueiias Convent (1533) !
j Cloister of the Kings (San Esteban) (1539) j
Three palaces !
Casa de las Conchas (1512)
Monterey Palace (1539)
La Sallna or Fonseca Palace (1546)
They will remain to show the universa
that there was reflection, order and equi-
librium." Unamuno diad on the last day
of the tragic year 1936, but his statue,
like that of Fray Luis de Leôn, continuas
to proclaim loud and clear the right to
think of freedom and tha right to
freedom of thought.
PLAZA MAYOR
A stone 's throw away is the square, as it
is known in Salamanca. Reflection, order
and aquilibrium seem to be the quali-
ties sought by tha architects of Plaza
Mayor, which was built batwaan 1729
and 1735. It is remarkable for its fine
proportions and the élégance of its déc¬
oration, which is at once baroque and
sobar. Plaza Mayor is, in a sensé, Sala¬
manca's opan-air salon, where everyone
likas to foragathar.
It is always thronged with people,
whataver tha time of day or night, or
tha time of yaar. But they do not go
there just to ba seen. Every inhabitant
of Salamanca hastens back to Plaza
Mayor after a trip away from the city,
to maka sure that it has not changed
and that tha colour of the sky above it is
still as pure as avar, and to maet old
friands who also love this unique
square. To cross Plaza Mayor, stroll
around it and enjoy its atmosphère is to
belong to Salamanca.
G argoyies sprout from the capitals
In the cloister of La Dueiias Convent
(16th century).
