The case of the disappearing
dinosaurs
" I s evolution the result of a
pre-established scenario or a
chain of fortuitous events?"
by Gianluca Bocchi
and Mauro Ceruti
The earth's natural history has known many a chapter
of accidents
GIANLUCA BOCCHI,
of Italy, is a member of the
Association for Research into
Knowledge and Learning (ARCA),
Milan. He Is the co-author (with
Mauro Ceruti) of Origin! di storie
(1993; The Origins of the Future,
Adamantine, London, 1994).
MAURO CERUTI,
of Italy, is professor of genetic
eplstemology at the University of
Palermo. His works published In
English include Constraints and
Possibilities, The Evolution of
Knowledge and Knowledge of
Evolution (Gordon and Breach,
New York, 1994). He is the co¬
author (with Gianluca Bocchi and
Edgar Morin) of Un nouveau
commencement (Seuil publishers,
Paris, 1991).
26
Why did the dinosaurs disappear? This
question has intrigued human imagina¬
tion ever since the first fossils of these enor¬
mous prehistoric animals related to the rep¬
tiles were discovered nearly two centuries
ago.
Until now natural historians have tried
above all to marshal arguments to show the
inevitability of the story of the dinosaurs, or
at least of its major turning points and
episodes. In this scenario the disappearance
of the dinosaurs to make. room for the long
chain of mammals from which we emerged
was a natural development.
In terms of Darwin's theory of the sur¬
vival of the fittest, whereby rival organisms
are pitted against each other in an environ¬
ment containing limited resources, there was
a conflict between the dinosaurs and the
mammals. The latter won the day because,
despite the terrifying power of their adver¬
saries, the future was on their side. As warm¬
blooded creatures, mammals were more
adaptable to changing climate, and since they
were smaller, they were more agile and had a
greater capacity for brain development. Thus
the laws of evolution gradually tipped the bal¬
ance in favour of the mammals and con¬
demned the dinosaurs to extinction.
Current research into the extinction of
species has demolished this theory. We now
know that mammals probably had hardly
anything to do with the disappearance of the
dinosaurs, which may have been caused by a
planet-wide crisis in the biosphere. The
mammals inherited a biosphere brutally
impoverished by a great catastrophe, due
perhaps to the impact of an enormous
asteroid, or fragment of a comet, that crashed
into the earth. The history of evolution
would have been quite different without this
unforeseen event, which did not amplify
existing trends but overturned everything
that had gone before and created new rules.
An unforeseen disaster
Mammals did not appear after the dinosaurs
but at the same time as them, at the beginning
of the Mesozoic period (after another major
crisis in the history of the biosphere). In fact
mammals and dinosaurs lived together on
earth for about 150 million years, and there is
no indication that during this very long
period there was any gradual extension of the
ecobiological territory of the mammals into
that of the giant reptiles. On the contrary, it
was the mammals who lived what might be
called a clandestine existence, preferably at
night on the edge of areas occupied and cov¬
eted by the dinosaurs. In the vivid words of

Contrary to what was once
thought, "mammals probably
had hardly anything to do
with the disappearance of the
dinosaurs."
the American palaeontologist Alfred S.
Romer, they were "the rats of the Mesozoic".
Ten million years elapsed after the extinc¬
tion of the dinosaurs before the mammals dif¬
ferentiated into forms as varied as bats and
whales. By that time the emergence of the
primates, which would eventually give rise to
the human species, was not very far away.
Without this turn of catastrophic and
unusual events some 65 million years ago, the
rules of coexistence between mammals and
dinosaurs might have continued indefinitely.
Of course, a catastrophe of the same kind
might have happened later, but there is no
reason to say that it would have occurred in
the millions of years that have gone by since.
So it is easy to imagine other worlds just as
plausible as ours, in which the continuing
domination of the giant reptiles would have
blocked the evolution of mammals, hindered
the multiplication of species and certainly
prevented the appearance of primates and
hominids. This latter event is of major impor¬
tance in natural history, but it is in no way a
foregone conclusion programmed in the bio¬
logical and structural characteristics of mam¬
mals and dinosaurs.
Yehuda Elkana contrasts two kinds of
interpretation of history that he calls respec¬
tively the tragic and the epic. The tragic
interpretation regards the unfolding of his¬
torical events as inevitable. This being so, the
question that historians must answer is
"How did what was due to happen actually
happen?"' They must find the necessary and
sufficient conditions that explain how the
inevitable came about. In relation to the pre¬
sent, history must be rewritten by linking
the facts, the stages and the stops and starts in
a smooth linear progression which ends
coherently and logically in the present
moment. In this connection, the French
philosopher Henri Bergson spoke of truth
moving backwards.
The epic interpretation, on the other hand,
is based on the principle that everything that
has happened might have happened differ¬
ently. In this view, the necessary conditions
27

are not as such sufficient, and the question
asked by historians is: "Why did it happen in
that way, given that the events could have
taken an entirely different turn?"2 With a sce¬
nario like this, "even the past evolves," as Aldo
G. Garganti has rightly pointed out. The past,
but even more the present and the future as
they connect with the past.
The Time Traveller (1993),
acrylic on canvas
by the Brazilian painter
Fernando Barata.
Chance and necessity
These two scenarios for explaining the evolu¬
tion of mammals are good illustrations of the
contrast between a tragic scenario and an epic
scenario. Many other important events and



decisive changes that occurred in the history
of the biosphere before and after the disap¬
pearance of the dinosaurs lend themselves just
as well to this double explanation: from the
extinction of certain species and the appear-
'It is easy to imagine other worlds
just as plausible as ours, in which the
continuing domination of the giant
reptiles would have blocked the
evolution of mammals and prevented
the appearance of primates and
hominids.'
anee of eucaryote cells (those of higher animal
and plant organisms) from simpler and more
"primitive" cells (bacteria), on up to those of
Homo sapiens, endowed with an articulate lan¬
guage that even his most advanced hominid
cousins probably did not possess.
Is the present state of the biosphere the
result of chance or necessity? Is its evolution
the result of a complex project that follows a
rigorously pre-established scenario which it
is up to us to analyse and describe? Or is it the
result of a chain of fortuitous events that can
be described in detail but do not form part of
the framework of logical reasoning that we
have become used to through classical
physics? If we could go back through the his¬
tory of life step by step, revisiting all the crit¬
ical stages of evolution, disregarding what has
really come to pass, and going through all the
decisive turning points again, would we
always end up in worlds with more or less the
same characteristics as our own, or in dissim¬
ilar, even radically different, worlds? That is
the great and decisive question that specialists
in evolution are asking themselves today.
When we consider a turning point in nat¬
ural history that led to a certain result, we can
certainly explain why the change took one
form rather than another. But in most cases
there are not sufficient reasons, at best the tip
of an iceberg atop an invisible mass of facts
whose contingent nature cannot be reduced
to the laws of determinist logic and the calcu¬
lation of probabilities, yet which play an
essential role in the creation of the forms,
structures and laws of our biosphere.
There have been two great revolutions in
our intellectual tradition. The first was the
exploration of space begun when, as a result
of the work of Galileo, Copernicus and
Newton, we turned away from the idea that
the earth is at the centre of the universe. The
second, associated with the work of Darwin,
28

"Ten million years elapsed
after the extinction of the
dinosaurs before mammals
differentiated into forms as
varied as bats and whales."
was the challenge to the anthropocentric
view of the world. Only now are we begin¬
ning to see that these revolutions opened up
two worlds to human thought, the first of
which did not necessarily lead to the second.
The Copernican revolution and the
advances of seventeenth-century science
imposed a rigorous approach. The subject of
scientific research had to be disencumbered
of anything that might lead to a mistaken or
ambiguous interpretation of the results.
Isabelle Stengers has made a good analysis of
the kind of rationality and logic associated
with this process. It is the rationality of the
experimenter, which leads to the creation of
laboratory conditions that eliminate all para¬
sitic elements so that the facts "can immedi¬
ately and non-theoretically impose their own
reading as long as no prejudice clouds the
observer's mind."3
From this point of view the only facts
worth the name are those obtained in perfectly
controlled experimental conditions. The ability
to repeat the experiment is an indispensable
condition. Science can only be based on the
repeatable, and, therefore, on generality.
'The appearance of new life structures
and dimensions is linked to a succession
of unique and non-repeatable events. '
29

The Darwinian revolution and the ques¬
tioning of our traditional conception of time
are not just a follow-on of the "disanthro-
pocentrism" of the universe begun by
Copernicus, Galileo and Newton, any more
than they are mere temporal extensions of
the history of the universe. At a deeper level
they constitute a revolution in our relation¬
ship to knowledge which necessitates a dif¬
ferent approach to the idea of rationality. The
naturalist sees that in world history the
appearance of new life structures and dimen¬
sions is also linked to a succession of unique
and non-repeatable events. For the naturalist,
"facts are positive in the sense that they pose
and impose problems. They cannot be
accepted as such; they must be examined in
the conditions in which they occur."4
In the rarefied atmosphere of the labora¬
tory it is impossible to go back to the dawn of
time and reconstitute the impact of the
asteroid which doubtless led to the extinction
of the dinosaurs. Naturalists must patiently
decipher the chain of events that led to the
present state of the biosphere and at the same
time construct plausible alternative scenarios.
By exploring these possible worlds, they can
hope to reconstitute the complex tangle of
the causes of our universe, the result of both
chance and necessity.
1. Antropología della conoscenza, Yehuda Elkana,
Romc-Bari, 1989, p. 9.
2. ibid., p. 9.
3. Le coeur et la raison, L. Chertok, I. Stengers; Payot,
Paris.
4. ibid.
I n the 16th century, the Copernican system demonstrated
that the earth is not the centre of the universe but revolves
around the sun with the other planets.
»>J3jwii;
30
