LISTENING
A modern Catalan composer whose work deserves to be better known
The hidden voice of
Federico Mompou
Federico Mompou i Dcncausse (1893-1987)
is an emblematic figure of Catalan music.
He was not, as some have claimed, a some¬
what precious miniaturist or a poor man's
Debussy, but one of the most unusual and
important Spanish composers of his time.
His work consists largely of short pieces
for piano and voice, but he also wrote for
guitar, French horn, organ and chamber
orchestra. Mompou's music, often melan¬
choly in tone, and tinged with a poetry that
is at once concise and visionary, reaches
the deepest, most secret recesses of the
listener's sensibility.
"The mystery of Mompou eludes us as
soon as we try to label it or fit it into reflex¬
ive categories," wrote the French philoso¬
pher Vladimir Jankélévitch. "But we can
perceive that secret and inimitable voice,
which is the very voice of silence: we hear
that voice with the ear of the soul when
'loneliness becomes music'."1 In the four
volumes of his restrained and unadorned
musical testament, Música Callada (Music
that Falls Silent, 1959-67), which was
inspired by the great Spanish mystic, St.
John of the Cross, Mompou achieves max¬
imum expression with a minimum of means.
The music in it is silent, he said, because "it
is heard internally. Its emotion is secret,
and becomes sound only by reverberating in
the coldness of our solitude."
Mompou, the contemporary of another
great Catalan artist, Joan Miró, whose
enthusiasm and freshness of inspiration
were similar to his own, was born in
Barcelona on 16 April 1893, to a mother of
French descent and a Catalan father. He
was fascinated during his childhood the
memory was to haunt him all his life by
the sound of the bells in his grandfather's
foundry. He studied the piano at the
Conservatori del Liceu in Barcelona and
attended concerts by the greatest pianists
of the time. He himself gave a recital at
ISABELLE LEYMARIE
is a Franco-American musicologist.
by Isabelle Leymarie
the age of fifteen which included works by
Mozart, Schubert, Crieg and Mendelssohn.
His debut as a pianist suggested he was
destined for a brilliant career. But Fauré's
music, which he first heard in 1909, came as
a revelation to him and made him decide to
become a composer. In 1911, armed with a
letter of introduction from the composer
Enrique Granados (1867-1916), he settled
in Paris and entered the Conservatoire,
where he studied piano and harmony. He
then devised his own harmonic system,
which, with its unexpected chords, was
Impressionistic in atmosphere but governed
by a totally original logic. His motto became
"recomendar", which means returning to the
spiri t of the "primitives" in musical compo¬
sition. He rejected modulation, the bar line
and counterpoint and was fond of "impon¬
derable tones" (Vladimir Jankélévitch).
Between 1913 and 1921 Mompou wrote
some of his most accomplished works for
piano, including Pessebres (Cribs), Escenes
d'Infants (Children's Scenes) and Suburbis
(Sul)tirbs), which sought to express "the
sound of an atmosphere, the gossamer light¬
ness of a feeling, the parenthesis of a quaint
episode," in the words of the Catalan musi¬
cologist, Lluis Millet. While in Paris, then
a hive of musical creativity, Mompou met
the composers Maurice Bavcl and Erik
Satie, among others, and became friends
with several of his compatriots, such as the
sculptor Apelles Fenosa and the painters
Miquel Renom and Celso Lagar.
When the First World War broke out in
1914, Mompou returned to Barcelona and
took part in the Catalan renaissance move¬
ment, Noucentisme. In 1921 he returned to
Paris, where his compositions soon won a rep¬
utation, and remained there, apart from the
occasional visit to his home town, until the
Nazi Occupation nineteen years later. By the
end of the 1920s be bad written the first
cycle of his Cançons i Danses (Songs and
Dances), the first two Preludes, other piano
pieces and a number of songs. Although his
friends included Francis Poulenc and
Georges Auric, he refused to join the Group
of Six2, preferring to remain independent.
During the 1930s Mompou went
through an unhappy patch in which he was
less prolific. He returned to Barcelona in
1941 and joined the Independent Catalan
Composers' movement, while keeping up
his links with French musicians. He mixed
with writers and publishers, and set to
music the poetry of his Catalan friend,
Josep Janes i Olivé. But above all he met
the young pianist Carme Bravo, whom he
married a few years later. lie then decided
to make a fresh start as a composer, and
enjoyed an unparalleled spell of renewed
creativity. The works he composed during
this period included some new Cançons i
Danses, a set of Variations on a Theme by
Chopin, and Cantar del Alma (Song of the
Soul) for choir and orchestra, which was
also inspired by St. John of the Cross. In
1967 he completed the final volume of his
Música Callada, none of whose seven short
pieces is given a faster tempo than tempo
moderato. The pianist Alicia de Larrocha,
the dedicatee of the work, gave its first
performance in Cadaques in 1972.
Mompou was an isolated figure who
rebelled against convention and always
remained true to his own temperament and
sensibility. Freed from the constraints of
bar lines, tonality and established forms, he
is as different from Wagner and Schoenberg
as he is from his Spanish predecessors,
Manuel de Falla, Albéniz and Granados
(the last two were also born in Catalonia,
but belonged to other movements), and
from Debussy. He belonged to an age-old
tradition of Mediterranean music. He some¬
times quotes from his favourite Catalan
tunes in Cançons i Danses, and from work¬
ing-class songs in Suburbis, though he
rejects nationalism and folklore. His Iberian
high spirits, which contrast with his more
incantatory and dreamlike leanings, are
chiefly to be found in Gitano, the last of his
Impressions Intimes, and in some of his
Fêtes Lointaines. Mompou plumbed the
mystical sources of the universe in Cants
Magics and Charmes.
Mompou, who died on 30 June 1987,
wrote his own epitaph:
"Death blesses the union
of the soul with silence.
Sleep and rest, my heart,
Eternity gives you a serenade and
you're lulled by
The greatest love of all." I
1. In Albéniz, Séuérac, Mompou et la Presence
Lointaine, by \ ladimir Jankélévitch, Seuil
publishers, Paris, 1983.
2. A group of six young French composers formed
in Paris in 1918. Its members were Darius M il lia ml -
Arthur Ilonegger, Georges Auric, Francis Poulenc,
Louis Durey and Germaine Tailleferre. They
adopted Frik Satie as their spiritual mentor. Ed.
THE UNESCO lOURIER! NOVEMBER 1996
47
