How the gift idea started
by Claude Lévi-Strauss
*S
The custom of making New Year gifts has both a
simple and complicated history. It is simple enough if
wc merely think of the general meaning of the custom
itself, and examine, for example, Japan's New Year
wish, "O-ni wa soto fuku wa uchi" (Out, all demons!
Let good luck come in). Just as the old year should
take ill luck away with it, so the enrichment and hap¬
piness brought by the exchange of gifts on New Year's
Day are regarded as an omen, almost as a magic spell,
to ensure that the New Year will continue as joyfully
as it has begun.
It is more difficult to trace the exact origin of the
custom of New Year gifts in the Western world. The
ancient Celtic Druids had a ceremony which they per¬
formed on the day which corresponds to January 1.
They cut mistletoe, which was considered to be a mag¬
ical plant with protective powers from the oak trees,
and distributed it to the people. Hence the name given
in certain parts of France, until quite recently, to New
Year gifts: guy-Tan-neuf, corrupted sometimes into
aguignette (from the French gui: "mistletoe" and l'an-
neuf: "New Year").
In Borne during the second half of December and
the early part of January, festivals took place at which
gifts were exchanged; those offered in December were
usually of two kinds wax candles (which we have
adopted for our Christmas trees) and dolls made of
clay or some edible substance, which were given to
children. There were others, too, described in great
detail by Martial in his epigrams; Roman chroniclers
related that the patricians received gifts from their
plebeian dependents, and the Emperors from the cit¬
izens. Caligula took possession of his gifts in person
and spent the whole day in the vestibule of his palace
for this purpose.
Traces of their dual origin in pagan customs and
Roman rites seem long to have been preserved by
New Year gifts. Why otherwise would the Church
throughout the Middle Ages have tried in vain to
abolish them as a barbaric survival?
New Year gifts, as we know them today, are not so
much a relic of these popular customs as the democ¬
ratization of an aristocratic tradition.
It is well known that Elizabeth I of England relied
on her New Year gifts for her pocket money and the
L.
upkeep of her wardrobe; the archbishops and bishops
each used to give her from ten to forty pounds, while
she received dresses, skirts, silk stockings, garters,
cloaks, mantles and furs from her noblemen and such
presents as precious caskets, pots of ginger, orange-
flower and other confections from her doctors and her
apothecaries.
During the European Renaissance, metal pins
became a favourite form of present as they were then
a great novelty; until the fifteenth century, women had
used wooden pins to fasten their clothing. As for New
Year cards with pictures and ornamental texts, they
are known to have been in use from Europe to Japan.
To understand why the practice of exchanging New
Year gifts is so persistent and so widespread we must
look beyond these entertaining details for the under¬
lying significance of the custom. "The manner of giving
is more important than the gift", the saying goes, and
all peoples appear to believe that it is better to receive
objects as presents than to acquire them oneself, as if
the act of giving or receiving has added to the value
of the object. The Maoris of New Zealand believed
that a magic power, which they called hau, entered
into the present and created a permanent link between
the giver and the receiver. Similarly, the Roman
custom of offering gifts seems to have grown out of a
like belief. It originated in the offering of green
boughs to the Sabine king, Tatius, who shared the
royal power with Romulus. These boughs were taken
from the sacred wood of the goddess Strenia, and were
thus called strenae in Latin, from which is derived the
French étrennes.
Strenia was the goddess of strength. For the
Romans and for the Maoris alike, presents were
objects endowed with a special power through the act
of giving. From where did this power come? By the
exchange of gifts, often of mere token value, people
give expression in outward and visible form to the inner
spirit of community life spontaneous acceptance of
interdependence one with another. This annual New
Year festival at which flowers and sweets, ties and
illustrated cards change hands, is not then to be
derided. It is an occasion when all men realize that the
society in which they live is based on this very prin¬
ciple of give-and-take.
=aa
50
