Education for tomorrow
by Jacques Delors
JACQUES DELORS,
former French Minister of the
Economy and Finance, was
President of the Commission of
the European Communities from
1985 to 1995. His published
works include /le nouveau concert
européen (1992) and Our Europe:
France and the European Future
(1994).
In 1993, UNESCO set up an independent International Commission on Education for
the 21st century, chaired by Mr. Jacques Delors. The Commission, whose members
(see inside back cover) and advisors were drawn from the major world regions, has
now completed its work. Here Mr. Delors presents for Courier readers a roundup of
the main issues studied by the Commission and previews some of its conclusions.
I On the eve of the twenty-first century,
I intense thought and discussion are being
devoted to the future of human society.
Whereas advances in knowledge, especially in
science and technology, bring hope of
progress for humankind in the future, events
each day remind us how the contemporary
world is liable to drift off course, how exposed
it is to dangers, in some cases extreme dangers,
and how vulnerable it is to conflicts.
The increasing interdependence of peoples
and nations, which is the hallmark of our time,
is providing scope for unprecedented interna¬
tional co-operation. But the emergence of this
global consciousness also reveals the extent of
the disparities that beset our world, the com¬
plexity of its problems and the number of
threats that are liable at any time to jeopardize
the stock of human achievement.
Great demands are consequently being
made on education, whose contribution to
human progress is so vital. The idea is gaining
ground that education is one of the most
powerful tools with which to shape the
future or, to use more modest terms, to
steer us into the future by taking advantage of
constructive trends and trying to avoid pit¬
falls. What is education doing today to pre¬
pare the active citizens of tomorrow?
UNESCO has taken the initiative of bringing
the light of its international experience to bear
on this issue. Its Director-General, Mr. Fed¬
erico Mayor, asked me to chair an International
Commission on Education for the Twenty-
first Century, mandated "to study and reflect
on the challenges facing education in the
coming years, and to formulate suggestions and
recommendations in the form of a report that
could serve as an agenda for action for policy¬
makers and officials at the highest levels".
The following question from the Com¬
mission's terms of reference formed our
point of departure: "How can education play
a dynamic and constructive role in preparing
individuals and societies for the twenty-first
century?" We were asking it some twenty
years after another Commission, chaired by
Mr. Edgar Faure, had published a report
which is still topical under the significant
title Learning to Be.
Four crucial issues
The Commission did its best to project its
thinking on to a future dominated by global¬
ization, to ask the right questions and to lay
down some broad guidelines that can be
applied both within national contexts and on a
global scale. Here I shall examine four issues
which I believe are crucial.
The first issue is the capacity of education
systems to become the key factor in devel¬
opment by performing a threefold func¬
tion economic, scientific and cultural.
Everyone expects education to help build up
a qualified and creative workforce that can
adapt to new technologies and take part in the
"intelligence revolution" that is the driving
force of our economies. Everyone in
North and South alike also expects educa¬
tion to advance knowledge in such a way that
economic development goes hand in hand
with responsible management of the physical
and human environment. And, finally, edu¬
cation would be failing in its task if it did not
produce citizens rooted in their own cultures
and yet open to other cultures and com¬
mitted to the progress of society.
The second crucial issue is the ability of
education systems to adapt to new trends in
society. This brings us to one of the funda-
6

A high school student in a
Hanoi street (Viet Nam).
mental responsibilities of education having to
prepare for change despite the growing inse¬
curity that fills us with doubts and uncertain¬
ties. Education must take into account a whole
range of interrelated and interreacting factors
that are always in a state of flux, whether it is
dealing with individual or social values, family
structure, the role of women, the status
accorded to minorities, or the problems of
urban development or the environment.
The third crucial issue is that of the relations
between the education system and the state.
The roles and responsibilities of the state, the
devolution of some of its powers to federal or
local authorities, the balance to be struck
between public and private education these
are just some aspects of a problem which,
moreover, differs from one country to another.
The fourth issue is the promulgation of
the values of openness to others, and mutual
understanding in a word, the values of
peace. Can education purport to be uni¬
versal? Can it by itself, as a historical factor,
create a universal language that would make
it possible to overcome certain contradic¬
tions, respond to certain challenges and,
despite their diversity, convey a message to
all the inhabitants of the world? In this lan
guage which, ideally, would be accessible to
everybody, all the world's wisdom and the
wealth of its civilizations and cultures would
be expressed in an immediately comprehen¬
sible form.
The creation of a language accessible to
everyone would mean that people would
learn to engage more readily in dialogue, and
the message that this language would convey
would have to be addressed to human beings
in all their aspects. A message that claims to
be universal one of education's lofty ambi¬
tions must be conveyed with all the subtle
qualifications that take full account of human
beings' infinite variety. This is no doubt our
major difficulty.
Lines of enquiry
Three current crises the economic crisis,
the crisis of the ideology of progress and a
certain form of moral crisis formed the
backdrop to the Commission's work.
With them in mind, I tried to trace out a
few lines of enquiry, taking account of cultural
diversity, the specific nature of different
problems and experiences, and the diversity
of the political and social objectives of
UNESCO's Member States, so as to gain a better

Lifelong education must be rethought and broadened. It should be a
continuous shaping of the personality, of knowledge and aptitudes, but
also of the critical faculty and the ability to act.
An Indian charitable
organization, T.R.A.C.K.S.
( "Training Resources and
Care for Kids"), helps to care
for orphaned and abandoned
children who live on Howrah
railway station in the
outskirts of Calcutta. Above,
morning lessons on
platform 1. Right,
afternoon recreation.
understanding of a number of fundamental
relationships: the connections between edu¬
cation and culture (culture being seen as a
factor in greater self-knowledge and knowl¬
edge of others); between education and citi¬
zenship and, more generally, the sense of
belonging (so that our contemporaries and
descendants do not feel isolated in the world
of exceptionally rapid change which they see
on their television screens); between educa¬
tion and social cohesion (which is weaker than
it was fifty years ago in the countries of both
North and South). And then, of course, the
connection between education, training,
work and employment; the connection with
development; and, lastly, the essential role
which education must play in the progress of
research.
If the proposals that emerged from the
Commission's work were to have a real
impact on education policies, three trans¬
versal problems also had to be tackled. These
were: the effect of modern communication
media on contemporary education systems;
the future of the teaching profession; the sys¬
tems to be set up and the funding to be found.
The pillars of education
The four main pillars that the Commission has
presented and illustrated as the bases of edu¬
cation are: learning to know, learning to do,
learning to be and learning to live together.
The first of these is learning to know.
Bearing in mind the rapid changes brought
about by scientific progress and new forms
of economic and social activity, there is a need
to combine a broad general education with
the possibility of working in depth on a
selected number of subjects. In a sense, such
a general education is the passport to learning
throughout life, insofar as it should teach
people to enjoy learning and also lay the
foundations that will enable them to carry on
learning throughout their lives.
Learning to do is the second pillar. In addi¬
tion to learning to practise a profession or
trade, people need to develop the ability to
face a variety of situations and to work in
teams, a feature of educational methods that
does not receive enough attention at present.
These skills are more readily acquired if pupils
and students have the opportunity to develop
their abilities by becoming involved in work
experience schemes or social work while they
are still in education. Increased importance
should thus be attached to all schemes in
which education alternates with work.
Learning to be was the theme of the Edgar
Faure Report published under UNESCO's aus¬
pices in 1972. The Report's recommendations
are still extremely relevant, for in the twenty-
first century everyone will need to exercise
greater independence and judgment combined
with a stronger sense of personal responsibility
for the attainment of common goals.
Learning to live together, finally, by devel¬
oping an understanding of others, of their his¬
tory, their traditions and their spirituality. This
would provide a basis for the creation of a
new spirit which, guided by recognition of
our growing interdependence and a common
analysis of the risks and challenges of the
future, would induce people to implement
common projects or to manage the inevitable
conflicts in an intelligent and peaceful way.
Some might say that this is Utopian; and yet it
is a necessary utopia, indeed a vital one if we
are to escape from the dangerous cycle sus¬
tained by cynicism and complacency.
Learning throughout life
The concept of learning throughout life advo¬
cated in the Faure Report is one of the keys
to the twenty-first century. It meets the chal¬
lenge of a rapidly changing world, and it is
necessary because of its advantages of flexi¬
bility, diversity and availability at different
times and in different places. It also goes
beyond the traditional distinction between
initial schooling and continuing education.
The idea of lifelong education must be
rethought and broadened. As well as adapting
8

to changes in working life, it should also com¬
prise a continuous shaping of the personality,
of knowledge and aptitudes, but also of the
critical faculty and the ability to act.
The truth is that every aspect of working
life and social life offers opportunities for both
learning and doing. There is a great temptation
to make too much of this, and stress the edu¬
cational potential of the media, the world of
work, and cultural and leisure pursuits, even
to the extent of forgetting a number of funda¬
mental truths. Although people need to use all
these opportunities for learning and self-
improvement, they will not be able to make
good use of all their potential unless they have
received a sound basic education. School
should impart a desire for and pleasure in
learning, the ability to learn how to learn, and
intellectual curiosity. One might even imagine
a society in which each individual would be in
turn both teacher and learner.
The basis for a learning society is a formal
system where each individual is introduced



to the many different forms of knowledge.
There is no substitute for the teacher-pupil
relationship based on authority and dialogue.
This has been said time and again by the great
classical thinkers who have studied the ques¬
tion of education. It is the teacher's responsi¬
bility to impart to the pupil the knowledge
that humankind has acquired about itself and
about nature, and the essence of human cre¬
ativity and inventiveness.
Education should therefore constantly be
adapting to changes in society, and also pass
on the attainments, foundations and benefits
of human experience.
The stages and bridges of learning: a
fresh approach
By focusing on the concept of learning
throughout life, the Commission did not
intend to convey the idea that one could
avoid reflecting on the different levels of edu¬
cation. The fact is that learning throughout life
makes it possible to reorder the sequences
and itineraries of education, ease the transi¬
tion from one stage to another and recognize
the value of each.
The "three Rs" reading, writing and arith¬
metic get their full due. The combination of
conventional teaching and out-of-school
approaches should enable children to experi¬
ence the three dimensions of education the
moral and cultural, the scientific and techno¬
logical, and the economic and social.
Basic education should be provided
worldwide for 900 million illiterate adults, 130
million children not enrolled in school, and
There is no substitute
for the teacher-pupil
relationship based on
authority and
dialogue.
French school pupils
compare handiwork
during an art lesson.
more than 100 million who drop out prema¬
turely. This vast undertaking is a priority for
technical assistance and partnership carried
out through international co-operation.
One major problem area in any reform
concerns the policies to be adopted for young
people after primary education. One might go
so far as to say that secondary schools tend to
be neglected in educational thinking. They are
the target of considerable criticism and pro¬
voke a considerable amount of frustration.
One source of frustration is a demand for
expansion and diversification of secondary
education, leading to rapid growth in enrol¬
ments and congestion in teaching pro¬
grammes. This gives rise to some classic prob¬
lems of mass education which developing
countries cannot easily solve either financially
or in terms of organization. Furthermore,
there is the discouraging problem of school
leavers who face a shortage of opportunities,
their distress increased by a widespread all-or-
nothing obsession with access to higher edu¬
cation. Mass unemployment in many coun¬
tries has exacerbated this malaise.
The only way out of this difficult situation
seems to be a very broad diversification of
types of study available. The latter should
include both conventional education, which
focuses more on abstraction and conceptual¬
ization, and approaches that combine school
and job experience in a way that brings out
other abilities and inclinations. In any event,
there should be bridges between these
approaches so that errors in choice of direction,
which are far too widespread, can be corrected.
Furthermore, the prospect of being able
to go back to education or training would
alter the general climate by assuring each

Local community
participation by means
of a dialogue between
the authorities and the
social groups
concerned is the
first essential stage
in broadening access
to education
and improving its
quality.
Thailand's Hill Areas
Education Project (HAE),
which helps children and
adults in 600 villages of
northern Thailand, was
awarded a Unesco prize for its
innovative educational
programme and its
community-based approach in
1994. Top, an education
centre in an Akha village.
Above, students learn Thai at
the same time as they study
their own history and
traditions in their mother
tongue.
young person that his or her fate is not sealed
between the ages of fourteen and twenty.
Higher education should be seen from the
same angle.
In many countries, other types of higher
education institutions exist side by side with
universities. Some are highly selective, while
others were set up to provide specifically tar¬
geted, quality professional and vocational
training. This diversification obviously meets
the needs of society and the economy, both at
the national and regional levels.
Increasingly stringent selection in order to
ease the pressures brought about by mass
higher education in the wealthiest countries
is neither politically nor socially acceptable.
One of the main flaws in such an approach is
that many young people are expelled from
the educational process before they have
been able to obtain a recognized diploma and
find themselves in the desperate predicament
of having neither a degree nor training appro¬
priate for the job market.
There is a need to manage increasing uni¬
versity enrolment in tandem with reform of
secondary education.
Universities would contribute to this
process by diversifying what they offer: as
scientific establishments and centres of
learning leading to theoretical or applied
research or teaching; as establishments
offering professional qualifications, with
courses and content tailored to the needs of
the economy; as one of the main crossroads
for learning throughout life; as leading part¬
ners in a form of international co-operation
favouring exchanges of teachers and students
and promoting the wider availability of first-
class teaching through international profes¬
sorships.
These proposals have a special significance
in poor countries, where universities have a
decisive role to play.
Long-term strategies for reform
Without underestimating the obligation to
manage short-term constraints or disregard
the need to adapt existing systems, the Com¬
mission emphasized the need for a longer-
term approach if necessary reforms are to
succeed. By the same token, it stressed the
fact that reforms introduced in rapid succes¬
sion cancel each other out, since they do not
allow the system the time needed either to
absorb change or to involve all those con¬
cerned in the process.
Three main protagonists contribute to the
success of educational reforms: the local
community (parents, school heads and
teachers), the public authorities and the inter¬
national community.
Local community participation in assessing
needs by means of a dialogue betweens the
public authorities and social groups concerned
is a first essential stage in broadening access to
education and improving its quality. Contin¬
uing the dialogue by way of the media, com¬
munity discussions, parent education and
training, and on-the-job teacher training usu¬
ally arouses greater awareness, develops judg¬
ment and helps build local capacities.
In any event, no reform can succeed
without the co-operative and active participa¬
tion of teachers. The Commission recom¬
mended that the social, cultural and material
status of educators should be considered as a
matter of priority, along with the tools required
to deliver education of a high standard: books,
modern communication media, and suitable
cultural and economic support for the school.
This being so, one requirement for the
improvement of education systems is respon¬
sible public policy. Policy-makers cannot
assume that the market can compensate for
the failures in the system or that laisser-faire is
sufficient. The public authorities must pro¬
pose clear options and, after broad consulta¬
tion with all concerned, choose policies that
set guidelines for the system and lay its foun¬
dations, and regulate it by making the neces¬
sary adjustments.
All the choices to be made should be pred¬
icated upon the principle of equal opportunity.
During the Commission's deliberations, I
put forward a proposal that may be regarded as
radical. As education throughout life gradually
becomes a reality, all young persons could be
allocated an education voucher at the start of
their education. This would entitle them to a
certain number ofyears of education. Their enti¬
tlement would be credited to an account at a
bank which would manage a capital of time avail¬
able for each individual, together with the appro-
10

priate funds. Everyone could use their capital
for schooling, on the basis of their own choices.
Some of the capital could be set aside to enable
people to receive continuing education during
their adult lives. Each person could increase his
or her capital through deposits at the bank under
a kind of educational savings scheme.
The Commission supported this idea,
though it was aware of potential deviations
that might prejudice equality of opportunity,
and considered that vouchers might be allo¬
cated not at the beginning but at the end of
compulsory schooling so as to enable adoles¬
cents to choose a path without jeopardizing
their future choices.
As far as the international community is
concerned, as agent of the success of educa¬
tional reforms, the Commission framed a
number of suggestions concerning: a policy
of strong encouragement for the education of
girls and women; the allocation of a minimum
percentage of development aid (a quarter of
the total) to fund education; the development
of debt-for-education swaps to offset the



adverse effects on state education expendi¬
ture of adjustment policies and policies for
reducing internal and external deficits; the
widespread introduction of the new tech¬
nologies of the "information society" in all
countries, to prevent the growth of yet
another gap between rich countries and poor
countries; enlisting the outstanding potential
of non-governmental organizations.
These few suggestions should be seen in
the context of partnership rather than aid.
After so many failures and so much waste,
experience militates in favour of partnership.
Globalization makes it inescapable.
Conclusion
The interdependence of nations provides
scope for and requires international co¬
operation on a new scale and in all fields. The
International Commission on Education for
the Twenty-first Century is one of the ways
of asserting the will to achieve this as the turn
of the century draws near.
Without conducting a purely descriptive
exercise or outlining a philosophy of education
systems, its goal was not to construct "sce¬
narios for the future" resulting in a set of pre¬
cepts for educational policy-makers, but to
provide decision-makers with facts to help
them draw up educational policies and to spark
off a debate that would go beyond the world of
education and teachers, and involve parents,
children, business leaders, trade unionists and
associations engaged in giving education a
more effective role.
