FEDERICO MAYOR: COMMENTARY
THE CITY,
ENVIRONMENT
AND CULTURE
Atthe dawn of the twenty-first century
urban living poses a major challenge to
which effective, and above all timely,
responses must be found. No treatment can work
unless a diagnosis is made in good time.
It is true that we produce studies, analyses and
reports on the critical situation in cities and the damage
inflicted on the environment and on citizens, but we
have a moral obligation to deal with these problems
by taking preventive action. This "time ethic" is
important if action is to be effective. Any clinical ana¬
lyst knows that a diagnosis should be good without
aspiring to be perfect, for only an autopsy can provide
the perfect diagnosis, and by then it is too late. The
same applies to the environment. Since any process
is potentially irreversible, we must have the courage
to act, however unpopular that action might be, while
treatment is still possible.
If current demographic forecasts turn out to be
correct, by the year 2000 one human being out of
eyery two will be living in a city. By 2035, three thou¬
sand million more people will be living in the urban
settlements that exist today. These forecasts may
not materialize if we succeed in containing popu¬
lation growth. We cannot tell the 250,000 new¬
comers that our planet welcomes each day that there
is no room for them and that we do not want them.
So how can we slow down population growth?
Education especially the education of women
in urban and rural environments is the key factor.
Education can, independently of ideological or reli
gious belief, help to reduce fertility rates rapidly by
something like 50 to 60 per cent.
In December 1993, at a meeting held under the
auspices of UNESCO, UNICEF and the United
Nations, the world's nine most populous countries
(the home of 72 per cent of the world's illiterates
and 56 per cent of world population) agreed that
only education could enable every woman and
every man to control their own destinies. Some of
these countries, including India, have already
decided to increase the percentage of their gross
domestic product set aside for education. This kind
of measure could restrain population growth while
ensuring respect for individual freedom.
Megacities under fire
It is also necessary to improve the quality of life,
above all in rural areas. This is the only way to pre¬
vent migration from these areas to the outskirts of
big cities and even to other countries seen as more
prosperous. To this end we must mobilize solidarity
between and within nations in order to distribute
resources more evenly. If we can boost education-
doubling investment in it and at the same time
improve the quality of life, we shall succeed in con¬
taining population growth.
If we fail to do this, we shall have to build a thou¬
sand cities of three million inhabitants in the next
forty years, twenty-five a year. These figures starkly
demonstrate the extreme magnitude of the urban
phenomenon.
38

Cities, which have generated such vital concepts dissatisfaction whereas they are actually the result of
and practices as civic virtues, urbanity, civilization, the shortcomings of today's economy and social
politics and democracy, which were once a well- structure. Wc have been unable to reconcile increased
spring of community solidarity, have for many productivity with increased employment, wealth
people become synonymous with disorder, chaos creation with widespread well-being, self-assertion
and radical upheaval, with violence, pollution, inse- with community solidarity, personal self-reliance with
curity, the breakdown of social cohesion, wastage social cohesion. To blame all this on cities is to turn a
and delinquency. Cities, it is said, are machines for blind eye to problems so complex that it is only too
manufacturing poverty and social inequality. They easy to indulge in escapism and find excuses,
are machines for destroying the natural environ- We must face up to the complexity of today's
ment and the human environment. When people problems, drawing not only on our own resources
talk about cities they use such terms as disruption, and imagination but on the experience of others, of
dislocation, dehumanization. those who in similar situations have found appro-
When leading experts look at the megacities of priate responses. Experience is the outcome of suc-
the north and the vast, sprawling conurbations of cesses and failures and it can help save time by
the south, whose identity is precarious or non-exis- diverting us from the false trails that in similar cir-
tent, they even talk of the end of the city, the death of cumstances have led others to grief. Experience
the "polis." prompts us to make use of ideas which initially
nobody believed in and which in the end were the
only ones that proved effective.
A modern scapegoat
I do not share this pessimism. I feci that we arc at the 	
beginning of something new. For centuries we have UlUdll UlldlltMlgC
been living in a war culture. Today we are moving The Earth Summit held in Rio de Janeiro in June
from the argument of force to the force of argu- 1992 launched some of these ideas and invited the
ment. We are at the beginning of a universal cul- international community to promote sustainable
ture the culture of peace. Now we must invent a development in a world at peace, a world in which
new kind of city. access to decent urban housing should also be a
With the destructuring of industrial society, the basic human right. UNESCO, which has made sus-
factory has been replaced as the battlefield of what tainable development and the rehabilitation of cities
was formerly known as the class struggle by the two of its major objectives, is making an important
urban fabric, by the city itself, the place where the new contribution in this field,
new fissures in society appear. But let us not confuse We have enlisted the support of cities, through
cause and effect. The deterioration of community their mayors, in an endeavour to introduce the prin-
living in the fringe areas of big cities is not the reason ciples of a culture of peace into everyday life. We
why their inhabitants are the victims of segregation; must rise daily to the challenge of constructing the
on the contrary, it is the social exclusion of citizens defences of peace in people's minds, and this is why
that is responsible for the precarity of urban life and we have added to the intergovernmental dimen-
the troubled situation in these neighbourhoods. sion of UNESCO the dimension of close contact that
It is tempting to blame the city for our feelings of is found in the local urban environment.
39
