Reflections: Culture first
A follow-up article to last month's issue
("Culture and Development: A life worth living") reports on Unesco's
thinking about the cultural dimension ofdevelopment
by Claude Fabrizio, Unesco consultant
Development policies based entirely on eco¬
nomic considerations and intended to help the
countries of the South to "catch up" with the
industrialized nations encountered many set¬
backs in the 1960s and 1970s. One result of
this was the emergence in the 1980s of a new
concept, the cultural dimension of development.
This Idea, whose importance was recognized
by the World Conference on cultural policies held
in Mexico City in 1982, is based on the observa¬
tion that some features of pre-industrial soci¬
eties are inconsistent with the societal model of
industrialized countries and on the belief that
these features should be taken into account in
development planning.
Although the concept was widely acknowl¬
edged in 1982, it only really began to influence the
working methods of co-operation agencies in the
early 1990s, when these bodies began to take
account of certain cultural characteristics and to
associate local populations more closely with the
preparation and execution of field projects.
During this time, the United Nations system
was engaged In an appraisal of the qualitative
aspects of development which led to the emer¬
gence of the concepts of sustainable develop¬
ment, human development (for which the United
Nations Development Programme became the
permanent standard bearer) and, more recently,
social development.
Meanwhile Unesco, as part of its activities
within the framework of the World Decade for
Cultural Development which it had launched
jointly with the United Nations, began to study
in depth the methods whereby cultural consider¬
ations could be integrated into development.
Two major steps
Two important steps must be taken. Firstly, it
must be recognized that the interaction between
culture and development is the interface of two
cultural models, one corresponding to tradi¬
tional, pre-industrial cultures, and the other
(which is often presented as not belonging to
any kind of society in particular) corresponding
to the dominant industrial culture.
Secondly, it must be accepted that central¬
izing, technocratic methods of promoting devel¬
opment must be replaced by more flexible
approaches tailored to situations in which
countries, populations and communities pro¬
pose to act on their own account, according to
their own needs, possibly with the help of out¬
side institutions.
The importance of two Unesco flagship pro¬
jects may be seen in the light of these two
obstaclesthe work of the World Commission
on Culture and Development (as reported in the
September 1996 issue of the Unesco Courier)
and a methodological project on "The Cultural
Dimension of Development".
After carrying out a series of case studies,
in 1992 Unesco began drawing up an inventory
of ways and means of integrating cultural fac¬
tors into development, exploring the full implica¬
tions of the cultural factors and impacts of
development and outlining a new approach to
the problem based on analysing development
from the cultural point of view.1 Planning meth¬
ods are now being reassessed on the basis of
this new approach, and the resulting proposals
will be published at the end of the year as A
Cultural Approach to Development, Proposals for
a Planning Manual.
An entirely new perspective
The new approach involves a complete change of
perspective. The planning process now starts
on the ground and moves up to the financial and
other decision-making centres. Projects are justi¬
fied essentially in situations (previously called
"contexts") in which problems raised by local
people call for outside intervention. The partici¬
pation process is thus turned upside down.
Local populations have now become the chief
players, and the people from outside have to
establish new partnerships with them.
There is no longer any room for models of
change designed in a vacuum. The variety of cul¬
tures and situations must be matched by a cor¬
responding variety of approaches to develop¬
ment with a human face. Excessively rigorous
timetables clash with the variety of rhythms that
are found in different societies. They are only of
interest to intellectually rigid institutions which
allocate their resources according to results
which may not necessarily correspond to the
underlying effects of innovation on different
human groups.
If these institutions were to set up guide¬
lines associated with conditions that countries
requesting institutional support must meet,
planning could be much more easily adapted to
the unique cultural dynamics of each society.
Projects would then respond to needs
expressed at grass roots level, to the mobiliza¬
tion of local people, and to an Internal rationale
of continuity and change.
These proposals correspond to questions
which are Increasingly being asked, in various
forms, in all the institutions of the United
Nations. I
1 See The Cultural Dimension of Development. Towards a
Practical Approach. Unesco Publishing, Paris, 1995.
THE UNESCO lOURIER . OCTOBER 1906
