RESTRICTED
ENTRY
More and more states are
curbing the admission of
asylum seekers
The following article has
been freely adaptedfrom
a longer study prepared
by Pedro Vianna.
The protection of persons exposed
to persecution has always been a
matter of concern to human soci¬
eties. The history of early Mediter¬
ranean civilizations offers several
examples of writings on this subject.
At the end of the second millennium of
the pre-Christian era, an Egypto-Hittite
treaty set forth the conditions of safety and
impunity that were to be enjoyed by per¬
sons accused of political offences who were
extradited to Egypt. The Old Testament is
full of references to forced exile and the pro
tection of those fleeing persecution. Ancient
Greek literature includes many texts on pro¬
tection as a sacred duty and on places of asy¬
lum (from asulos = inviolable). But the first
literary work to deal directly with the issue is
Aeschylus's tragedy The Suppliants, in
which Aeschylus establishes a link between
the sàcred, politics and social issues.
According to legend, an important event in
the early history of Rome, where there seems
to have been less emphasis on the sacred
aspect of asylum, was the creation of a refuge
at a place dedicated to the god Asylaeus. In his
M camp for east European
refugees in the Federal
Republic of Germany (1953).
THE UNESCO f3>EIRIEF OCTOBER 1996

History of Rome Livy shows how the
founders of cities used the principle of asylum
as an instrument of demographic policy.
In medieval Europe, asylum was essen¬
tially religious. Christian emperors like
Theodosius, Valentinian and Justinian, as
well as various religious councils, strove to
codify the right of asylum, giving it varying
degrees of generosity depending on the
period and the type of offence committed.
During this time, places of asylum included
the university, churches, bishop's resi¬
dences, convents, monasteries and, more
generally, any site of a religious nature,
including wayside crosses.
A sovereign act
The way states were structured in the mod¬
ern era resulted in a secularization of the
right of asylum, which became the sover¬
eign's prerogative and therefore a mainly
political act, even if its sacred and moral
foundations persisted, and tied the hands of
the state authorities.
From the end of the Middle Ages on, the
practice of asylum was common in Italy.
Citizens of one republic who had incurred
their ruler's wrath would take refuge in the
territory of another. Over a period of several
centuries after the expulsion of the Jews
from Spain in 1492 (they found asylum in the
rv
-**
land of Islam), several attempts were made
by the emerging nation-states to codify the
right of asylum, notably in the Villers-
Cotterêts edict of 1539, several other British,
French and German legal and philosophical
texts, and the French Constitution of 1793.
However, these attempts were never of a
universal nature, since the texts concerned
did no more than deal with specific cases,
e.g. the Potsdam Edict of October 1685 on
the admission of French Huguenots, or else
state general principles, as did Article 120 of
the 1793 French Constitution (which was
never promulgated).
| The decision to grant or revoke asylum is
f) s regalian in character. It is the sovereign act of
~>ÍJ » a state which decides to grant the citizen of
° another state who is already in its territory or
| wishes to cross the border into it the right to
THE UNESCO Çsu ).
OCTOBER 1996

reside in that territory. This is territorial asy¬
lum. The notion of diplomatic asylum,
which fell into abeyance in Europe in the late
nineteenth century, became enshrined in
law in Latin America in 1889 with the signing
of the Treaty of Montevideo. It is a practice
which has since then been reaffirmed in
numerous conventions and is still followed
today.
Refugee status
In 1921, the explorer Fridtjof Nansen was
appointed High Commissioner for
Refugees. There followed a series of interna¬
tional agreements applicable to specific cate¬
gories of refugees. But it was not until 1938
that the Intergovernmental Committee for
Refugees, set up that year, first outlined a
more general definition of the refugee
"I know for myself that exiles
live on hope," (Aeschylus,
Agamemnon, 458 B.C.).
Upposite page, asylum
seekers receive advice in the
offices of a refugee aid
organization at Heathrow
Airport (United Kingdom).
extending to "all persons . . . who, as a result
of events in Europe, have had to leave or
may have to leave their countries of resi¬
dence because of the danger to their lives or
liberties on account of their race, religion or
political beliefs".
After the Second World War, European
states had to contend with the problem of
several million refugees and displaced per¬
sons. But the complexity of the way in which
the various categories of refugee were listed
in the constitution of the International
Refugee Organization (IRO) set up in 1946
reflected differences of appreciation between
the eastern bloc states and those of the West.
It was not until the 1951 United Nations
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
(the Geneva Convention) that the issue was
clarified.
The crucial importance of this Convention
lies in the fact that it sets forth a universal defi¬
nition of refugees that has nothing to do with
the origin of the person concerned and can be
applied irrespective of time and place. This
definition (see article page 27) is now binding
on States Parties to the Convention and its
1967 Protocol.
From theory to practice
The 1951 Geneva Convention also defines
the circumstances under which refugee sta¬
tus no longer applies, contains clauses which
exclude a refugee from its field of application,
and determines the guarantees and protection
that states must grant refugees they admit.
However, the Convention does not oblige
states to grant refugees the right of residence,
i.e. territorial asylum, and leaves each country
free to organize its own procedures for rec¬
ognizing refugee status. Since Article 14 of the
1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
which states that "Everyone has the right to
seek and to enjoy in other countries asylum
from persecution", is not binding in law, it
may be safely asserted, whatever the Geneva
Convention may say, that from a legal stand¬
point the right of asylum in fact remains the
right of a state to grant asylum.
In practice, states tend systematically to
grant asylum to those they recognize as enjoy¬
ing refugee status. Moreover, both the
Convention on the Application of the
THE UNESCO (pURIER '
31
OCTOBER 1996

I n the late 17th century many
French Protestants, or
Huguenots, found refuge in
Prussia from persecution in
their own country. Above, The
welcome of the Huguenots to
the court of the Elector
Frederick William. Wood
engraving (circa 1890).
Schengen Agreement,! in its section relating to
asylum, and the Dublin Convention,2 define
the asylum seeker as a person who tries to
enter the territory of a state with a view to
seeking recognition of his or her refugee status.
We may "sum up the essential differences
between the status of a person who has
obtained asylum and refugee status [as
defined by the Geneva Convention] by say¬
ing that the former... provides no guarantee
as to procedure or continuity of residence,
since it is subject [only] to the wishes of the
host state, whereas the latter... provides a
persecuted person with guarantees of protec¬
tion, procedure and continuity of residence,
as well as the minimum rights laid down in the
Geneva Convention3".
How is it, then, that despite the existence
of a universally applicable convention and a
gradual convergence of opinion as to what
constitutes asylum or refugee status, the main
non-governmental organizations dealing with
refugees increasingly accuse the developed
nations of reducing to a trickle the number of
cases where asylum is granted?
Increasing restrictions
In practice, recent developments have
resulted in the subordination of recognition
of refugee status to the granting of asylum,
rather than the other way round. What has
happened is that the developed states have
taken draconian steps to ensure that as few
asylum seekers as possible actually enter
their territory. This makes it extremely diffi
cult for such people to gain access to the
procedures which determine whether or
not they qualify for refugee status.
So as to be in a position to withhold refugee
status from the very large numbers of asylum
seekers from such countries as Algeria, Bosnia,
Somalia, Chechenya, Romania and Turkey,
European states have tended to read into the
text of the Convention what it does not con¬
tain. They claim, for example, that persecution
which is not carried out by state bodies does
not come within the Geneva Convention's
field of application. This means that victims of
persecution occurring in the course of a civil
war or widespread disturbances would not
benefit from the Convention. But in fact the
text of the Geneva Convention sets no condi¬
tions as to the perpetrator of persecution, and
in its Handbook on Procedures and Criteria
for Determining Refugee Status the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner stip¬
ulates that persecution "may also emanate
from sections of the population that do not
respect the standards established by the laws
of the country concerned," and cites religious
intolerance as a case in point.
By way of contrast, the 1969 Convention
of the Organization of African Unity cover¬
ing matters specific to refugee problems in
Africa and the 1984 Cartagena Declaration
on Refugees in Central America, Mexico
and Panama are in accordance with the letter
and spirit of the Geneva Convention and
even spell out the definition in full.
It is well known that arbitrary practices
gain ground surreptitiously and attack the
weakest before taking hold of society as a
whole. Countries which make themselves out
to be champions of human rights should pause
to think for a moment about the example they
arc setting when they slam the door on the
persecuted, whereas the countries of the
South, including the very poorest, have no
option but to take in the vast majority of the
millions of refugees listed by UNHCR.
1. The Schengen Agreement (1985) on free circulation of
goods and persons within the European Economic
Community, now the European Union. Editor
2. The Dublin Convention (1990) supplements the
Schengen Agreement for matters concerning asylum
seekers and refugees. Editor
3. "Les réfugies dans le monde", an article by Pedro
Vianna, Luc Legoux and Frédéric Tiberghien published in
Problèmes politiques et sociaux n" 699, La Documentation
française, Paris, 1993.
THE UNESCO IpURIER .OCTOBER 1996
