A WORLD EDUCATION REPORT OF 25 YEARS AGO
learning to be' in retrospect
by Asher Deleon
Almost a quarter of a century ago, Unesco published the findings
of a world enquiry into education in a report entitled Learning to Be.
How does this landmark study look today?
Above, lesson in a Brazilian
school north of Salvador,
capital of Bahia state.
I In 1972, the International Commission
I on the Development of Education
chaired by the former French prime minister
Edgar Faure published a report entitled
Learning to Be. The title reflected the climate
of euphoria and optimism of the times, gener¬
ated by economic and social achievements, the
ideology of steady progress, the official process
of decolonialization then being completed, the
positive consequences of "peaceful coexis¬
tence", and an enduring faith in international
co-operation. It is true that student revolt and
the "events" of 1968 had revealed a certain dis
enchantment, but the Report was based on
data from the previous decade. The first signs
of what later came to be regarded as an "edu¬
cation crisis" were just beginning to appear.
The key ideas
"Lifelong education" and "the learning
society" were the Report's two key ideas.
The former was considered as the "key¬
stone" of educational policies; the latter as a
strategy aimed at committing society as a
whole to education. The approach was based
12

on the idea of osmosis between education
and society, and sought to steer clear of a
number of misconceptions such as the ideas
of education as a "sub-system" of society, of
instruction as a tool for solving all individual
and social problems, and of the compartmen-
talization of life into "learning time" and "time
for living".
As its title indicates, the Report focuses on
learning, a process that goes beyond educa¬
tion and, a fortiori, teaching. Education and
teaching are described in it as dimensions that
are subordinate to the learning process.
School and out-of-school activities (formal,
non-formal and informal education) are
treated without hierarchical distinction, and
the importance of basic education for all and
of adult education is taken as a premise:
"learning is a process that lasts a lifetime, both
in its duration and in its diversity."
However, the Commission did not regard
lifelong education as a process of permanent
schooling, adult education or continuous
vocational training. It was seen neither as an
educational system nor an educational field,
but rather as "a principle on which the overall
organization of a system and hence the elabo¬
ration of each of its parts, are based". Lifelong
education is a need that is common to
everyone.
Learning must be redistributed not only
in time, but also in space. Thus the Faure
Commission called into question the
monopoly of institutionalized education. All
institutions, whatever their field of compe¬
tence (economic, social, cultural or informa¬
tional) can be used for educational purposes
and thereby help to build "a self-aware
learning society".
The Report focused on personal develop¬
ment and put learners, not teachers or edu¬
cational institutions, at the core of education.
The important thing is not the path followed
by the learner, but the outcome of the
learning process. Each one of us must be free,
as our judgment grows stronger and our
experience becomes richer and more varied,
to choose the ways best suited to our own
needs, expectations and abilities.
Learning
is a process that lasts
a lifetime, both in its
duration and in its
diversity.
Primary school pupils in
Tarascón (France) learn how
to use a computer.
or unjustified barriers and to rid traditional
structures of their excessively formal nature.
I am convinced that the basic ideas of the
Faure Report are still relevant in the final
decade of the twentieth century and that
from their standpoint the education gap the
backwardness, dysfunctions and shortcom¬
ings of education in relation to human
needs can gradually be overcome. The
theory behind these general guidelines is vir¬
tually never contested nowadays. Thousands
of experiments in recent decades have been
carried out along these lines. At the same
time, a battle still has to be waged against con¬
servatism at national level, the inadequate
commitment of international organizations,
external interference in the domestic affairs
of many states, and the rigidity of administra¬
tive, productive and other structures,
including the teaching profession.
Only a few countries (including Canada,
The education gap
Starting from these basic concepts, the Com¬
mission put forward a series of suggestions and
proposals for a new organization of education
systems designed to do away with antiquated
13

Japan, Sweden, Norway and Argentina) have
taken their cue from the Faure Report's sug¬
gestions at the national level. Most experi¬
ments, although frequently interesting and
bold, carried out by local authorities, business
firms, educational establishments and associ¬
ations have been fragmentary and sporadic,
with limited resources. Even countries that
have long-established democratic and educa¬
tional traditions and achievements as well as
substantial financial resources hesitate to stray
from the beaten track and integrate changes
in the overall context.
Utopian leanings
One criticism that could be made of Learning
to Be is that it expected too much of educa¬
tion and did not take sufficient account of
economic and political conditions. It also
overestimated the material resources of the
developing countries and the extent to which
the industrialized countries were really
willing to provide them with substantial aid.
The by-passing of religious phenomena and
their impact on education and the over¬
looking of the ever-widening education gap


Students in Montbéliard
(France) make a video film.
The Faure Report
focused on personal
development and put
learners, not
teachers or
educational
institutions, at the
core of education.
between individuals, and between ethnic
groups, social classes and nations also reflect a
lack of realism that has given rise to disap¬
pointments.
The results achieved in the different
branches of education are far from satisfac¬
tory. The tiny percentage of young children
enrolled in pre-school education (a per¬
centage that is declining in several countries),
the enormous numbers of children who
receive no schooling at all, the figure of one
billion illiterates by the end of the century,
and the almost universal erosion of adult edu¬
cation these are facts that make it impera¬
tive to radically revise objectives and strategic
forecasts in these fields. Although the pri¬
mary responsibility lies with the national and
local authorities, the responsibility of the
international community, and particularly that
of UNESCO, should not be minimized.
Indeed, it might well be asked how far and
with what success UNESCO communicated
the message of the Report.
New parameters
Clearly, at the end of the 1960s it was impos¬
sible to predict the collapse of the Berlin Wall
and the failure of the communist experiment,
and the Faure Commission did not have the
means to study the issues connected with the
problems of indoctrination, education subject
to censorship, and manipulation of and by
education. However, the speed with which
political regimes have collapsed, the slow
progress of the necessary reforms, the
domestic conflicts, both political and armed,
inter-ethnic and religious, and the subjective
obstacles to the establishment of a market
economy cannot be understood without ref¬
erence to the distortions suffered by educa¬
tional practices in previous decades. The
International Commission on Education for
the Twenty-first Century chaired by Jacques
Delors may fill this gap, especially since the
international climate is favourable to it. The
failure of totalitarian regimes has encouraged
the growing ascendancy of the philosophy of
human rights, and it is increasingly clear that it
is in the link between education and democ¬
racy or, better still, between education and
freedom, that we should seek the guiding
principle of our educational policies.
In the field of economics, the Faure
Commission was able to benefit from the
auspicious situation created after three
decades of post-war efforts and the first two
15

It is in the link between
education and
democracy or, better
still, between
education and
freedom, that we
should seek the
guiding principle of our
educational policies.
An Oxfam worker offers a
Mauritanian woman and her
children advice on
environmental and
conservation issues. Oxfam is
a British non-governmental
organization whose aim is to
relieve poverty, distress and
suffering worldwide.
decades of decolonization. The Delors Com¬
mission has had to confront a far gloomier
and more disturbing economic picture: crisis
affecting the South, the debt burden, the col¬
lapse of terms of trade for the main raw mate¬
rials, the ever-widening gap between indus¬
trialized and developing countries (with the
exception of a few Asian countries at an inter¬
mediate stage of development), unemploy¬
ment, the social and economic marginaliza¬
tion of a section of the urban and rural popu¬
lations in the industrialized countries.
Another question concerns the role of the
state. Disenchantment about the principle of
total, and even sometimes partial, state control
over education, budget austerity and the gulf
between educational supply and demand, as
well as dangers arising from the "commercial¬
ization" of education, have sometimes led to
questioning of the role of the state as the sole
manager of education and its main source of
funding. Some have suggested that it should
become a mere regulator, responsible for
maintaining an equitable system for distributing
resources and enforcing national standards for
examinations and qualifications. Others go
even further. The Delors Commission was
bound to take these problems into account.
The changes that have occurred in the edu¬
cational sciences in the last quarter of a century
are so far-reaching that they can be called rev¬
olutionary. The Faure Commission saw the
new educational technologies as a prerequisite
for bringing about most of the innovations.
Today, however, after the explosion of com¬
puter technology, multimedia and interactive
systems, the Delors Commission has had to
pay great attention to what Henri Dieuzeide, a
French authority in this field, has called "a new
visual order". "The audiovisual media present,
information technology organizes, telecom¬
munications brings closer," he notes in Les
Nouvelles Technologies, Outils d'Enseigne¬
ment (UNESCO/Nathan, Paris, 1994). "What is
going to happen when any educational activity
or exercise can be undertaken on a single piece
of hardware containing messages that in the
past were transmitted by an array of different
media? . . .The result will be to force different
and frequently antagonistic educational
approaches to draw closer together and to
work out common strategies for purposes of
presentation, structuring and manipulation."
Finally, humankind has entered a phase of
historical transition marked by the conflict
between human activities and environmental
constraints. We must invent a new paradigm
of development geared to the concept of sus-
tainability and define the ethical rules per¬
taining to it. We have no choice but to build
up new modes of production and consump¬
tion. Far from being masters of the universe,
we must understand that we are but the
guests or stewards of nature. It is through
education that we must "learn to be" nature's
partner and co-pilot.
ASHERDELEON,
of Yugoslavia, ¡s a specialist ¡n
adult education and a former
member of the Unesco Secretariat.
He was the Executive Secretary of
the International Commission on
the Development of Education
(1972) which produced the
"Learning to Be" report.
16
