
MOUNTAINS by Christophe Chiclet
Above, the church
of the Dormition
(19th century).
Upposite page,
Khrelio's tower
(14th century).
Below, colonnades
of the monastery's
west wing.
the monastery its freedoms and prerogatives,
confirmed in the next century by the Sultan's
written order.
THE KLLGARIAN NATIONAL
RENAISSANCE
From the fourteenth to the nineteenth cen¬
turies, as part of the Ottoman empire, the
monastery became the leading cultural centre
of southeast Europe. Books were written
there and then circulated throughout the
Slav Orthodox world. The monastery housed
a library and archives; religious and secular
schools were founded there, and icons and
wood carvings were made. Festivals at the
monastery attracted pilgrims from the whole
Balkan peninsula. Rila had links with the
other great centres of Orthodox Christianity
Constantinople, Mount Athos and Ohrid
and the old Bulgarian liturgy was preserved
intact.
The role of the monastery broadened con¬
siderably from the eighteenth century
onwards. Under the guidance of Neofit Rilski,
a monk and pioneer of what came to be known
as the Bulgarian Renaissance (second half of
the eighteenth and first half of the nineteenth
century), the monastery was enlarged and
modernized. Such famous master-masons as
Pavel Milenko, Alexi Rilek and Kristju
Debirlju helped to ornament it, while pop¬
ular devotion attracted a host of volunteer
workmen. Three wings were added between
1816 and 1820.
But in 1833 these new structures were
destroyed by fire. The catastrophe aroused
intense emotion throughout the country. Gifts,
materials, builders and workmen poured in,
and the damage was repaired in less than two
years. This rapidity symbolized the national
awakeningin Bulgaria, of which the first signs
had appeared at Rila with the publication
in 1762 of the History of the Bulgarian Slavs
by a monk, Paisij.
In the early nineteenth century, the
monastery saw itself as a kind of enclave of
national awareness and attracted the great
thinkers and artists of the Bulgarian Renais¬
sance. This cultural vocation is the main reason
why it still has an important place today in the
collective consciousness of the Bulgarian
people, and enjoys such exceptional prestige.
¡VINE CENTER I ES OF MONASTIC
ARCHITECTURE
There is little trace of the early buildings
erected between the tenth and fourteenth
centuries because of the many fires and suc¬
cessive modernizations. However, a number
of historical layers can be defined.
Between 1834 and 1860, various builders
constructed the monastery complex that can
be seen today. The main building is a rec¬
tangular fortress covering 4,500 m2, with two
43

main entrances for pro¬
tection against hostile
incursions. Its four four-storey
wings are surrounded by great por¬
tico balconies giving onto a vast inner
courtyard (3,200 m-) with polychrome
façades. Each balcony is reached by a series
of external staircases.
The monastery has more than 300 monks'
cells and guest rooms, built and decorated
in the styles of various Bulgarian towns (thus
offering an architectural geography of the
country), four chapels in the wings, the library,
parlours, refectories and other utility rooms.
The ground floor opens onto a gigantic kitchen
where meals could be prepared for hundreds
of persons. The domed chimney is built to a
'bold design; supported by arches, it is 22
metres high.
Lord Khrelio's keep, a stone tower in the
internal courtyard, has survived the fire and
the vicissitudes of history since 1335. It has
five storeys. On the top floor, the family ora¬
tory is adorned with fourteenth-century fres¬
coes representing a circle of dancers and a
group of musicians, a very unusual theme in
mural painting in the Byzantine tradition in
this region.
The chapel which once flanked the tower
was destroyed in the early nineteenth cen¬
tury to make room for the main church of
the Dormition, completed in 1837. The
church has three central domes, three naves
and choirs. The walls and galleries are deco¬
rated with frescoes representing 1,200 dif¬
ferent scenes and a group of portraits. The
carved wood iconostasis (a partition covered
with icons which separates the nave from the
sanctuary) is one of the largest and finest in
the Balkans.
But the Rila site is not confined to the
perimeter and buildings round the inner court¬
yard. Outside the walls is the convent of Orl-
itza. It was built in the fifteenth century and
has fifteenth- and seventeenth-century fres¬
coes. A little further on are the church of
the Presentation in the Temple and St. Luke's
Hermitage with its two little eighteenth-cen¬
tury churches and monastic school. Still fur¬
ther away is the hermitage of Saint Ivan Rilski
with the famous grotto to which the anchorite
retired. In 1795, the monks added a church
with a porch in which the relics of the saint
are kept.
Monasteries are also working communi¬
ties, as is shown at Rila by the Ptchelina farm
complex of outbuildings, peasant dwellings
and a little church (1834), the monastery
oven (1866) and the clandestine powder mill
for the monastery's armed guard.
Nine prestigious centuries
O 10th century: the monastery is founded by the
Bulgarian hermit, Ivan Rilski (876-946) or St.
John of Rila.
O 14th century: 1335, the monastery is enlarged
and fortified by Lord Khrelio. The stone keep, in
a very good state of preservation, is the only
remaining vestige (Khrelio tower).
O 13th-14th centuries: spiritual and artistic
zenith of the monastery
O 14th-15th centuries: start of the Ottoman
occupation
1469: The relics of St. John of Rila are returned
to the monastery.
O 18th-19th centuries: Bulgarian national
renaissance. The monastery is the religious,
intellectual and artistic centre of this
movement.
1833: disastrous fire
1834-1860: the monastery is restored and
rebuilt.
O 20th century: 1961, the monastery becomes a
national museum and protected site.
1983: Rila monastery is placed on Unesco's
World Heritage List.
A MUSEUM COMPLEX
The monastery belongs to the Bulgarian state.
In 1961 it was classified as a national museum
and protected site, and today houses a his¬
torical and ethnographic museum complex.
The rooms have retained their old character
but are equipped with modern technical facil¬
ities. Exhibitions are held here and this is
also a centre for research and study in muscog-
raphy and sociology.
The rich collections of objects and man¬
uscripts bear witness to the centuries-old his¬
tory of the monastery. They include the
famous cross which the monk, Raphail, took
twelve years to make (1790-1802), Lord
Khrelio's epitaph and parchments in tenth-
century Glagolitic script. There are also col¬
lections of goldware, ethnographic objects,
close on 4,000 archive documents, icons, wood
carvings, eighteenth-century illuminated man¬
uscripts, carpets and costumes 41,000
pieces in all.
The communists did not ban the
monastery, which was governed by the codes
of the monastic community. Rila is distin¬
guished among the hundred or so major Bul¬
garian monasteries not only asa centre of the
spiritual and intellectual rebirth of the Bul¬
garian identity, long suppressed by the Byzan¬
tines and Ottomans, but as a holy place where
religious activity has been pursued for almost
ten centuries. I
Frescoes in the northern
a rcade of the church of the
Dormition.
44
