Opening new doors in science
education by François Gros
Science teaching must be rethought from primary
school to post-graduate level
Above, young visitors to the
Science Discovery Centre in
Milford Haven (Wales, United
Kingdom) peer into
kaleidoscopes. The Centre is a
place where people can learn
about science through "hands
on" experience.
In the twenty-first century, humanity
will have an opportunity to achieve an
ambition that has moral as well as technical
implications: it will be able to attain an all-
encompassing view of planet earth. Modern
communication technology, modern means
of transport and satellite-based observation
are already bringing the various parts of the
world closer together, and there are good
grounds for believing that, as a result, there
will be far fewer remaining pockets of polit¬
ical and cultural isolation.
The planet-wide view thus made possible
by scientific and technological progress
nonetheless raises a problem of principle,
indeed almost a philosophical problem:
unless a very lofty purpose is assigned to sci¬
ence, unless the science we produce is more
than merely utilitarian, there will be no means
of surmounting a major cultural conflict that
we have seen developing at the end of this
century, one that is in fact much more serious
than is generally realized.
Decompartmentalizing science
The benefits of science and technology no
longer seem so obvious as they did in the last
century. Before the major conflicts of our
own times, science was expected to solve
most of humankind's individual and general
problems. War has demonstrated that science
has not succeeded in changing mentalities and
17

In order to overcome
the disenchantment
now felt towards it,
science needs to be
set within a far wider
cultural context.
A light-hearted moment
during an anatomy lesson in a
French school (1989).
that barbarism still lurks beneath the surface
of civilization. Current debates over envi¬
ronmental issues and bioethics also reflect a
certain "culture gap" between science and
society. The ecological movement has not
only put science in an awkward position, it
has put it on trial. In order to overcome the
disenchantment now felt towards it, science
needs to be set within a far wider cultural
context.
One of the main dangers threatening sci¬
ence teaching comes from overspecialization.
Although specialization is undoubtedly a nec¬
essary condition for the improved training of
engineers and technicians, overspecialization
is in danger of alienating science from the
general public because it makes communica¬
tion more difficult and raises a serious
problem of social "acceptability". It is already
becoming evident, for instance, that research
in biology is likely to be held back more by
ethical and cultural considerations than by
economic ones.
Overspecialization may also lead to a lack
of "culture". Scientists must learn to respect
and practise other forms of language and
communication, while conversely, it would
be extremely dangerous to reject science on
the pretext of getting back to humanitarian
values. Science is part and parcel of culture,
and the practice of science should lead natu¬
rally on to the idea of international solidarity
and tolerance.
Science teaching is at present in a rut and
needs to be re-examined. This applies partic¬
ularly to textbooks. Physics is taught from
books on physics, and biology from works
on biology, whereas science teaching should
be much more cross-disciplinary. Why not
refer to the underlying problems of physics
when teaching molecular biology or, when
teaching biology, to the ethical questions that
are soon sure to come up?
The problem needs to be tackled both in
general and in specific terms. Due regard
must be shown both for the different cul¬
tures of different countries and for the uni¬


versality of science. This is the only way to
avoid fragmentation of knowledge, which is
harmful in every way. Science education will
SCIENCE AND THE
MARKET
The market plays a paradoxical role in the
spread of scientific knowledge. On the one
hand, more and more databases are being cre¬
ated and their information-processing capacity
is growing. This should facilitate the dissemi¬
nation of scientific data worldwide. On the
other hand, the high cost of accessing these
databases is a serious drawback. The data¬
bases are highly centralized, and are in danger
of becoming the exclusive property of a
restricted number of major scientific or tech¬
nical groups, large industrial organizations
wishing to preserve their market.
Cases in which the possessors of informa¬
tion keep it to themselves for commercial rea¬
sons are also starting to cause problems. The
ferocious competition in the pharmaceutical
industry, however useful it may be in stimu¬
lating research, is open to criticism insofar as
it works against the interests of countries
lacking the resources to participate in it. Here,
as in other fields, the right balance has not yet
been achieved.
Information should be regarded as part of
the common heritage of humanity, and clear
rules as to its dissemination should be estab¬
lished. F. G.
18

Scientists must learn
to respect and
practise other forms
of language and
communication.
A condor from the Andes is
the centre of attention during
an open-air lesson at the
castle of Klntzheim in Alsace
(France), where visitors learn
about birds of prey at first
hand.
FRANÇOIS GROS,
French biochemist, is permanent
secretary of the French Academy
of Sciences and a member of
many scientific committees.
Among his published works are
L'Ingénierie du vivant ("The
Engineering of the Living", 1990)
and Regard sur la biologie
contemporaine ("A Look at Modern
Biology", 1992).
also have to be integrated with other forms of
education literary, artistic, political or even
economic in order that the citizens of the
twenty-first century may see science pri¬
marily as an ally in achieving what they want
done for the good of their country or of civ¬
ilization as a whole.
More open, more diverse higher
education
After going through a period of crisis, in
Europe especially, universities can now aspire
to provide both a general culture and a prac¬
tical training for various occupations. It is,
however, increasingly true to say that the
training of scientists cannot be confined to a
single location.
First of all it will probably be necessary to
rethink the transition from secondary educa¬
tion to higher education. The former sharp
break between them is becoming less abrupt.
Much still remains to be done, however,
because in a way school students today are
more mature than their predecessors. In my
opinion they are far more receptive to sci¬
ence, technology and discussion about social
problems than is generally believed.
They first go to university to learn the
basics, then to laboratories to round out what
they have learned, then into industry to study
the technical applications, and in some cases
to museums or science parks to acquire a
broader overall view of science. This form of
networking, linking the university with other
professional institutions, will need to be rein¬
forced in the future. Perhaps we should also
rethink and diversify the traditional linear
progression from school to university, labo¬
ratory or business.
Furthermore, universities should not all
necessarily teach the same thing nor attempt
to cover all the ground. Although a common
core must be established, i.e. a basic scientific
culture without which studies cannot be car¬
ried forward, universities nevertheless have
to find their own specific roles in keeping
with the aspirations of the societies (and
regions) within which they operate. The
evaluation of universities should, however,
be carried out at international level: while cul¬
tural traditions and national goals vary from
country to country, science is preeminently
universal in character.
The growth of the student population in
universities raises considerable problems, since
it necessitates the training of adequate numbers
of specialist teachers in various fields. Univer¬
sities should therefore have an open-door
policy and should allow scientists great
freedom of movement, both within their "own
country and internationally. Although this
means that they should set their sights high and
have plentiful resources, they cannot restrict
themselves to training an elite. The French
"Grandes Ecoles", for instance, provide an
excellent education and produce some remark¬
able people, but perhaps they fail to take
19

We need to prepare
the ground in
primary and
secondary schools.
account of the diversity of individual talents.
The Grandes Ecoles, in my view to their credit,
are making a real effort to open up to the wider
university system and to the business world.
Thought should also be given to the pos¬
sibly disproportionate importance attached to
mathematics in the selection of students.
Mathematics is one of the highest forms of
intellectual activity and can be used to assess
an individual's capacity for abstraction and
rapid thinking, but it is going too far to take it
as the sole criterion.
Teaching students
to be team players
If we are looking for a system that is fully
appropriate to the needs of the coming cen¬
tury and as receptive as possible to all forms
of cultures, we need to prepare the ground in
primary and secondary schools. By the uni¬
versity level it is already too late. I believe it is
essential to introduce the teaching of the his¬
tory of science from the primary level on, so
as to situate science within a cultural context.
Science would then be gradually integrated
into the teaching process in a pluralist way,
with efforts being made to maintain a balance
with other subjects and outlooks.
In secondary school, hands-on scientific
experiments should be introduced at a very
early stage. This is crucial, since such activi¬
ties bring students face to face with their
responsibilities, teaching them that they must
be able to work as members of a team, must
have an acutely critical outlook and must
realize that there is not just one, but several
possible approaches to the solution of prob¬
lems in short, that life itself puts us in situa¬
tions that constantly require us to solve diffi¬
cult practical problems.
There have long been calls for secondary-
level science to be taught in this way, but it is
not easy to set up. The logistics are expensive,
and teachers are not always adequately
trained for this kind of work. This is one of
the reasons why France has established uni¬
versity-level teacher education institutes
(Instituts Universitaires de Formation de
Maîtres), whose students have the opportu¬
nity to take training courses in laboratory
work. The institutes aim to provide an inter¬
disciplinary training course, showing how
problems are linked to one another, not only
across subject boundaries but also within
society as a whole, while enabling trainees
from different backgrounds to establish a
close relationship with experimental science.
It is, however, too soon to pass judgment on
the effectiveness of these institutions.
The acquisition of knowledge in the
twenty-first century will probably be a
halfway house between computerized mes¬
sages of the highest level of abstraction at one
end of the spectrum and highly specialized,
sophisticated technologies at the other: scien¬
tists will therefore have to be able to move
freely between these two extremes.
A physics class at the
University of Mindanao
(Philippines).
20
