THE RISE OF THE STOCK MARKET
BY EMMANUEL VAILLANT
Paolo Koch © Rapho, Paris
Ihe New York Stock Exchange
EMMANUEL VAILLANT
is a French journalist.
Stock exchanges, also known, as
bourses, came into 'being in Europe in
the middle of the sixteenth century
I when, in conjunction with markets and
trade fairs, places were created for
transactions involving letters of credit and shares in
trading companies. The term "bourse" is thought to
have been first used in 1549 in Bruges (in present-day
Belgium) and to be derived from the Van der Bürse fam¬
ily, whose town house was used by dealers trading in
real-estate securities.
Until the late nineteenth century, Bruges, Antwerp,
Lyons, Amsterdam, Paris and London were succes¬
sively the leading financial markets. Their role at the
heart of the capitalist system was to provide a meet¬
ing place between savers (private individuals and
banks) and investors (states and businesses).
There are two main kinds of securities, shares and
bonds. Shares represent a portion of a company's
capital and offer a return (dividends) that varies in
accordance with the company's profits. Bonds, on the
other hand, are securities issued for a certain period
of time, guaranteeing fixed interest earnings for their
holders. Prices go up or down in accordance with sup¬
ply and demand and are subject to speculation.
In the twentieth century the world's stock
exchanges have made an important contribution to the
financing of national economies. New York's Wall Street
(U.S.A.) is the leading financial market today, in com¬
petition with the stock exchanges of Asia (especially
Tokyo, Hong Kong and Singapore) and Europe
(Frankfurt, London and Paris). On these increasingly
globalized financial markets, which are developing more
and more complex products, the trade in securities is
influenced by economic, monetary, political and psy¬
chological factors.
These markets are sometimes criticized as func¬
tioning like a "financial bubble", generating purely spec¬
ulative profits which are unrelated to the development
of the so-called "real" economy, i.e. industry, trade and
services.
36
E UNESCO Q>OURIERB NOVEMBER! 996
