The roots of a long
by Biancamaria Fontana
Study of corruption's many forms since
Antiquity throws light on the dangers it
presents to modern democracy
Ever since classical antiquity the cen¬
tral problem of politics in the West has
been how to control individuals and groups
inclined to put their own interests before the
common good. For over 2,000 years corrup¬
tion has been perceived as the main factor of
political change, the recurrent cause of decline
for inadequate regimes and of their replace¬
ment by more desirable ones. Only by
bringing historical depth to our understanding
of the problem of political corruption can we
hope to go beyond the superficial response of
bewilderment and moral condemnation.
To some extent the traditional conception
of people as potentially corrupt or corruptible
rests upon a pessimistic view of human nature,
reinforced by religious belief in the imperfec¬
tion of earthly things. But it also goes together
with an appreciation of the density of social
relations hierarchies, structures of economic
dependence, family ties, local solidarities, cor-
poratist or confessional complicities. The world
of classical politics is a crowded universe pop¬
ulated by clients, patrons, courtiers, schemers
and sycophants, whereas the modern demo¬
cratic state (at least in its ideal form) is a neutral,
impersonal machine, set against an anonymous
mass of equal citizens.
As the Scottish philosopher David Hume
noted in 1742, people have a much stronger
commitment to those who are close to them
family, friends, neighbours than to vast,
abstract entities such as a city, a nation or
humankind at large. Similarly, human beings
find it easier to act badly on behalf of a group
such as a clan or a political party than individ¬
ually, since the irregular behaviour of a group
is usually easier to justify on ideological grounds
than that of an individual.
The landscape of corruption depicted in
classical literature is rich and diversified. In
monarchies the main corrupting agent is the
sovereign, and decadence trickles down from
the top of the hierarchical ladder via the
benefices and privileges dispensed by royal
10

tradition
favour. Through the skilful distribution of
bribes, titles of nobility and public offices, or
by threatening disgrace, the king manipulates
those around him, undermining the autonomy
of councils and parliaments and transforming
an independent aristocracy into a class of
courtiers and parasites. Once aristocratic
freedom and honour have been destroyed,
the regime succumbs to the crimes and
excesses of arbitrary rule.
A permanent threat
to stability
Under republican government, on the other
hand, the danger comes from below, and cor¬
ruption takes the form of the horizontal dis¬
integration of the political community. Ambi¬
tious individuals, clans, and political factions
constitute a permanent threat to the unity and
stability of republican institutions. Through
their networks of clients and allies, intriguers
can influence in their favour the decisions of
tribunals, manipulate nominations to the mag¬
istracy and assemblies, or monopolize lucra¬
tive public posts. In democratic regimes,
where the populace enjoys voting rights, the
votes of the poorer citizens can be openly
bought and sold in return for money, food or
gifts, a practice amply documented in Euro¬
pean elections well into the nineteenth cen¬
tury. Sooner or later the degeneration of public
and private morality, popular disaffection and
the sinister designs of the rich and powerful
precipitate the republic into fratricidal war or
dictatorship.
In Western political culture, the traditional
perception of decadence, corruption and the
alternation of regimes changed radically around
the beginning of the eighteenth century with
the transition from "ancient" to "modern"
republicanism.
In ancient republics such as Athens, Rome
or the Italian city-states of the Renaissance,
preventing corruption was essentially a matter
of collective ethos and social control. True,
some artificial devices were introduced to limit
the risks of secret deals and manipulations. The
members of councils and assemblies were
often selected by drawing lots rather than by
election, hazard being considered the best
guarantee of impartiality. The tenure of public
posts was short and re-election occasionally
forbidden. Voting procedures were made
deliberately slow and intricate (in Venice the
rules prescribed for the nomination of the
Doge make it look more like a chess compe¬
tition or mathematical game than a political
event). But everybody understood that these
ingenious measures could have only superfi¬
cial effects.
The true protection against corruption had to
"The world of classical politics
is a crowded universe
populated by clients, patrons,
courtiers, schemers and
sycophants, whereas the
modern democratic state (at
least in its ideal form) is a
neutral, impersonal machine,
set against an anonymous
mass of equal citizens." Above,
photomontage. Opposite page,
a ball at the court of François 1
of France in honour of the
Emperor Charles V. Illustration
by Albert Robida (1909).
BIANCAMARIA FONTANA
of Italy is professor of the
History of Political Ideas at the
University of Lausanne
(Switzerland). Notable among her
recent works is The Invention of
the Modern Republic (Cambridge
University Press, 1993).
11

With the consolidation of the modern nation-state, the idea
that virtue and honour would protect the political order from A
corruption met with increasing scepticism.
A member of parliament
before an election (above)
and after (opposite page).
Illustrations from the French
weekly Le Petit Journal
(1893).
come from civic education, from the surveil¬
lance that the community exercised upon the
public and private behaviour of its citizens; from
feelings of religious obligation, from attachment
to municipal traditions and local identities. Virtue
was, in other words, the only real guarantee of
the preservation of republican institutions fro m
decadence, and virtue went together with patri¬
archal habits, a simple life style, deep-felt patri¬
otism and military commitment. Such views
were not confined to moralists and Utopians,
horrified by the ostentatious luxury and sexual
licence displayed by the Roman or Florentine
nouveau riches, but were shared by writers as
realistic and cynical as Machiavelli. Similarly, in
Ancien Regime monarchy, aristocratic honour
and Christian principles were supposed to com¬
bine to limit the corrupting ambitions of the sov-
ereign. The sacral authority enjoyed by the
monarch by divine right was inseparable from
the constraints of religious morality.
Self-regulating mechanisms
With the consolidation of the modern nation-
state in large centralized monarchies such as
France and England in the late seventeenth
century and subsequently in the new republics
that emerged from the American and French
revolutions the idea that virtue and honour
would protect the political order from cor¬
ruption met with increasing scepticism. For
one thing the population of large territorial
states was more difficult to control, and far
less homogeneous in its religious beliefs and
customs than the inhabitants of the ancient
republics. Local identities were marginalized,
and individual autonomy appeared more
important than conformity to standards of
civic virtue and commitment. But it was above
all the changing attitude towards wealth on the
part of eighteenth-century thinkers which
altered their understanding of corruption.
Wealth and economic prosperity, which clas¬
sical writers had stigmatized as the main cause
of political decline, were now regarded as a
source of independence and stability, the desir¬
able target of public and private efforts. The
modern constitutional monarchy and the
modern republic were not built upon the
ancient ideals of austerity and simplicity, but
on a wider distribution of property and the
development of middle-sized fortunes.
Rather than entrusting the integrity of the
state to the purity of its citizens, modern polit¬
ical theorists believed in the exploitation of
self-regulating mechanisms which should
work independently of the moral properties of
political agents.
Some of these mechanisms were socio¬
logical and played upon the dynamics of inter¬
ests and conflicts within the political commu¬
nity. Since in a large and complex society the
state would not be in a position to control effec¬
tively the influence of different interest groups,
it was easier to allow those groups to organize
and rely upon competition between them to
limit abuses. Naturally political parties would
be inclined to bend laws and rules to promote
their own influence; but several parties (the
12

English political system was built around the
alternation of two, and this model was imitated
by the authors of the American constitution)
would take upon themselves the task of
denouncing the irregularities committed by
their competitors. Where ancient republi¬
canism had consistently fought against factions,
the legitimization of organized parties as vehi¬
cles, as it were, of limited and supervised cor¬
ruption, was one of the great novelties intro¬
duced by modern republicanism. The
scramble of partisans and political climbers to
share out offices and benefits might not make
a pretty sight, still less the scandals that
opposing sides would unleash for electoral
purposes, yet this solution would still be safer
than the concentration of corrupt power in
the hands of a single group, or the disintegra¬
tion of institutions into anarchy and chaos.
Separation of powers and
freedom of information
Other mechanisms introduced to fight against
corruption were legal and formal. They con¬
sisted of a system of checks and balances which
guaranteed the impartiality of the public admin¬
istration by separating its different parts and func¬
tions. Once again, it was not necessary to imagine
that the people entrusted with political power
would prove honest and trustworthy. It was
sufficient to ensure that corruption in one
department would sooner or later run against
the opposition of some other branch of gov¬
ernment, which would react against the abuses.
Baron Charles Secondât de Montesquieu
(1689-1755), a magistrate from Bordeaux who
was one of the inventors of this doctrine,
believed that the essential conditions for the
equitable functioning of institutions were, first,
that the three basic powers of the state leg¬
islative, executive and judiciary should be
rigorously separated and independent from
one another, and second, that all official delib¬
erations should always be taken according to
given forms and procedures, even if this
slowed down the activity of the administra¬
tion. The machine of state power should not be
allowed to move too fast, since delays increased
the chances of detecting and reversing any
arbitrary initiatives taken by political agents.
There was of course a residual possibility
that competition amongst the branches of gov¬
ernment would prove insufficient and that the
different powers would connive in some abu¬
sive practice. The ultimate resort to protect
the impartiality of the state was the trans¬



parency of public acts and the vigilance of
public opinion. In the long run, corrupt politi¬
cians would simply lose the support of the
electorate. And since private individuals were
generally ill-placed to detect the wrongdoings
of their governors, it was the specific function
of public opinion, in the form of an indepen¬
dent press, to uncover them.
This resort to public opinion as final guar¬
antee of the accountability of the political
system introduced an element of circularity
in the reasoning: why should we assume that
opinion itself would not be manipulated or
Modern states continue to confront the issue of
corruption by relying on competition between
political forces, freedom of information,
and the separation of powers.
J
13

corrupt? The answer to these anxieties was
the préservation of pluralism: the protection of
democracy from corruption and decline
depended on breaking any potential monopoly
over information. Again, the motivations of
those who inform the public may be base and
manipulative rather than virtuous. Even stern
defenders of the freedom of the press like Ben¬
jamin Constant or John Stuart Mill knew that
journalists would promote sectarian views, or
simply try to sell papers; but they believed
(rather like the contemporary theorists of post-
modernism) that the flow of information
would prove too shifting and unstable for con¬
sistent manipulation.
It is essentially along the lines of the eigh¬
teenth-century model of checks and balances
that modern democratic states continue to
confront the issue of corruption: by relying
upon competition between political forces,
freedom of information and the separation of
powers. As a model it seems acceptable
enough: where our chances of enforcing a
shared vision of the public good are slighter
than ever, the best we can do is cling on to the
ideal, however thin, of the neutrality of polit¬
ical institutions.
Increased vigilance
The problem is that in preserving the scaf¬
folding of democratic forms and guarantees,
we have lost sight of the historical and human
contexts in which it was first erected. We have
forgotten how pessimistic were its premises;
how imperfect and fragile the protection it
offered; how the very idea of what constituted
corruption depended throughout on the pre¬
carious compromise of conflicting interests.
Recent events in Italy help to illustrate this
reality. A vast network of corrupt complici¬
ties, extending to all levels of government, has
been uncovered and dismantled by the initia¬
tive of a small group of magistrates, repre¬
senting an independent power, the judiciary.
From inside the gloomy walls of the
Palazzo di Giustizia in Milan a handful of young
judges and lawyers nobody had ever heard of
systematically tracked down and brought to
justice the most powerful men in the country,
pulling them down from their pedestal of pres¬
tige and influence. But this is only part of the
14
story. However capable and determined, the
magistrates would have been stopped (as had
happened in the past), had it not been for the
accidental convergence of a series of circum¬
stances: the uncovering of links between the
Mafia and the political regime; growing popular
disaffection such as the desperate and coura¬
geous protest voiced by the Rete, a political
party created in Palermo; the dissatisfaction of
economic interest groups who, after making
extensive usage of corrupt complicities, were
finding them too crippling and onerous to sus¬
tain; the internal division and loss of electoral
support of the governmental coalition.
In the past people used to think of political
regimes as doomed, like all human things, to
decadence and decline. Modern democracies
tend to see themselves as durable, indeed peren¬
nial models: political leaderships, cultures, gen¬
erations may pass on, but the machine will con¬
tinue to run, provided we allow for some regular Palermo jail
where almost
revisions and repairs, for the supply of spare 500 members
parts. It is important to keep in mind that this of the ltalian
Mafia were
view is, at best, just a fiction of theory. tried in 1986
