SCIENCE MADE
SIMPLE
BY JAYANT V. NARLIKAR
The challenge of popularizing science and helping people to
appreciate science as part of their culture can be approached
on four levels.
At primary school the first thing to do is encourage
curiosity about nature. Children generally start with this
curiosity, but educational systems often stifle it. Next they
must be taught the concept of a pattern in natural phenomena,
and then be gradually introduced to the mathematical or quan¬
titative aspects of nature. The teacher should then show how
nature follows certain laws and that therefore predictions can
be made about it. If these aspects are incorporated into pri¬
mary education, children will begin to appreciate the sciences
as an important part of their education.
The main goal of secondary education should be to empha¬
size the experimental verification of scientific laws. Children
should be made aware of the historical development of science
through the interplay of theory with experiment. The history of
science should be taught in a way that shows how scientists
actually learnby making mistakes and correcting them.
The aims of higher education should be to provide students
with access to source material that will supplement classroom
teaching and work with textbooks, and to make sure they have
opportunities to discuss, ask questions, argue and interact
with their teachers. Students should be made aware of the fron¬
tiers of research and should see research being done around
them. They should do projects to find out what interests them
and to add to the content of science. Students often do not dis¬
cover what they really like until it is too late.
One of the chief purposes of science popularization for the
general public is to help people learn to live comfortably with
science and technology. The limitations as well as the powers
of science should be appreciated. Scientists often get carried
away and give the impression that science is a panacea. This
provokes a backlash from those who say: How can you offer
answers to everything when you know that science is incom¬
plete? The solution is to share the failures as well as the tri¬
umphs. These things can be conveyed in books, lectures and
films made for the general public.
JAYANT V. NARLIKAR Is an Indian astrophysicist who is presently director
of the Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics in Pune
(India). His published works include The Lighter Side of Gravity (1982) and
The Primeval Universe (1988).
Students at the Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and
Astrophysics in Pune (India) learn how to use a telescope.

