Anniversary
ean Piaaet
Swiss psychologist (1896-1980)
A foundational
thinker
by Richard Schumaker
¿* This year educational institutions,
professional journals and international
organizations of all kinds are com¬
memorating the centenary of Jean Piaget's birth. Born on 9
August 1896 at Neuchâtel (Switzerland), this biologist, psy¬
chologist and philosopher altered and deepened our under¬
standing of human life. Primarily known as a child psychologist,
he used his research on young children as a springboard to a bet¬
ter understanding of the human personality. As our century
comes to a close, not a single area of the human sciences can
escape the influence balanced, humane and original of Jean
Piaget.
The child as active agent
Piaget is probably best known for his writing on the early life
of children. His importance in this field derives principally
from his innovative methods and ambitious goals. Instead of
applying adult preconceptions and social norms to the study
of childhood, Piaget tried to describe and evaluate the point
of view of the developing child. In essence, he attempted to
reconstruct the daily life of the child in all its confusion, tur¬
moil and anxiety. This methodological innovation resulted in
discoveries that upset some of our most complacently held
beliefs about childhood.
In hundreds of articles and books, Piaget showed that there
is almost nothing absolute or static in a child's mental life. Even
seemingly fundamental notions such as space, time, relation
and causality are constructed through trial and error in the
RICHARD SCHUMAKER,
of the United States, is editor of Focus,
a review of 20th-century literature.
© Keystone. Paris
course of the child's early years. Moreover, the whole edifice
of the adult personality its rationality, its morality, its very
perceptual stability is founded on the physical processes of
the child's early years. Piaget was very fond of the analogy of
"grasping"; before one can grasp an idea, one must learn to
grasp concrete objects. The infant's earliest, faltering move¬
ments prepare and foreshadow its later development.
Childhood as touchstone
Piaget also studied how this early landscape of the child
evolves from year to year. Once again, he emphasized the ten¬
tative trial-and-error nature of the child's world. Although he
charted an intricately structured course from birth to the
assumption of the complex responsibilities of life, this evo¬
lution is discontinuous and constantly interrupted by conflicts
with the child's surroundings. Thus, Piaget's account of the
stages of early life is much more realistic and less tendentious
than the accounts of Freud, Erikson or Maslow.
Piaget's firm grasp of the flux of early life allowed him to
use his studies of childhood as a platform for something even
deeper the identification of the essential traits of life itself.
The processes and structures of early life were used as clues
48
THE UNESCO QlURII1ER! NOVEMBER I99Ö

to the nature of life in all its generality. At this level of study,
Piaget was breaking new ground in Western thought.
Instead of rejecting childhood as beneath the dignity of
serious philosophical study, Piaget, who after all read widely
in philosophy all his life insists that only a close study of
infancy would allow us to slip beneath prejudice and habit
and enable us to see life in something like its true condition.
From Neuchâtel to the international scene
From his earliest years, Piaget demonstrated both interest
and talent in the natural sciences, sending a paper on albino
sparrows to a Neuchâtel journal at the age of ten. By 1916,
he had published twenty papers on molluscs. These papers
were valuable enough to bring him into consideration for a
curator's position at the Museum of Natural History in
Geneva. In an autobiographical sketch,1 Piaget relates that
it was necessary to refuse this prestigious position because
"[he] still had two years to go before finishing [his] secondary
education".
In his twenties, Piaget developed an interest in psychologi¬
cal problems and worked with Theodore Simon, a collabora¬
tor in the Binet scale of intelligence. It was during this time
that he worked in Eugen Bleuler'« psychiatric clinic in Zurich
and became acquainted with the clinical method he would
later use in such an innovative fashion in his own research.
Piaget held numerous academic posts in Switzerland and
France after he received his doctorate in zoology in 1918, but
was never a reclusive or overly specialized researcher. From
the early 1920s he realized that his ambitious intellectual
goals would require collaboration and international dialogue.
For decades he was associated with the Jean-Jacques
Rousseau Institute in Geneva (now the Institute of
Educational Sciences). In 1956 he persuaded the Rockefeller
Foundation to financially assist his International Institute, of
Genetic Epistemology at the University of Geneva. He was
actively associated with UmïSCO as a member of its Executive
Board, as director of the International Bureau of Education
(IBE), and for a short time as Assistant Director-General for
Education.
Jean Piaget may be termed a foundational thinker. He
delved beneath prejudices, biases and encrusted habits in
order to uncover the essential well-springs of cognitive life.
This constituted a liberation of energies which in turn laid
the foundation for growth and renewal in both individuals and
societies. Piaget's work, combining enormous breadth of
learning with a powerful focus on life's essential questions,
is without doubt one of our century's greatest treasures. M

