A LAND OF NO RETUR
Exiles live
between t\
xile is a time when people experi¬
ence, often painfully, an almost
carnal attachment to the territory
(country, native soil, homeland)
and group (family, relatives, com¬
munity, nation) they come from. That area,
which has fashioned each and every one of us,
and which we have ourselves fashioned for
our own purposes, is also an area of nostalgia,
of homesickness. Homesickness is a word
which contains both the cause and the cure.
Nostalgia, feeding as it does on the illusion that
the cure (going home) will cure the sickness
by removing its cause (exile), triggers off an
emotionally charged process of memorization,
reminiscence and imagination. It has the effect
of sanctifying the places on which it focuses
and thus puts time and place on the same
plane, suggesting that the abolition of one will
result in the abolition of the other.
But exile does not always take the same
form. Sometimes it is long, and sometimes
not so long; sometimes it is permanent, and
sometimes temporary. In some cases there is
no choice (as when a person is banished,
deported or forced to flee); in others, exile is
intentional at least apparently so. Sometimes
the outcome depends solely on the person
concerned; sometimes it hinges on the good¬
will of a third party. Nor does nostalgia always
take the same form. A political exile's nostalgia
is different from an immigrant's, an émigré
worker's different from a colonizer's. It varies
depending on the relationship exiles have
with their native country and with their
adopted country.
That dual relationship varies with time,
which itself influences the perception exiles
have of where they belong. Awareness of
links and differences such as place and
milieu, past and present, and the "here" and
the "elsewhere" modulates nostalgic anxiety
and melancholy.
Here, there and nowhere
In the last analysis, nostalgia expresses the
essence of exile: an impossible quest to be
here and there at the same time and all the
time. It is fuelled by the duality of two
simultaneous lives experienced on two dif-
he Isle of the Dead (1880)
by the Swiss artist
Arnold Böcklin.
THE UNESCO COURIER 10.
OCTOBER 1906

BYABDELMALEKSAYAD
© Kunstmuseum, Basel
ferent planes, those of reality and desire
the reality of an active life, lived in the pre¬
sent, pregnant with materiality, immediacy
and everydayness, and the desire that is
inherent in a secret and wholly internal life
consisting of memories and imaginings of
something which is no more, but which may
yet come into being again, a life superim¬
posed on one's actual life.
Even if the "elsewhere" of nostalgia is
constantly being modified and embellished
by exile, it nonetheless remains something
which has already been experienced. It is
familiar and "native". In this respect,
ABDELMALEKSAYAD
is an Algerian sociologist.
Odysseus may be regarded as the prototype
of the exile wandering in search of his or her
country, and The Odyssey as the account of
that exile and the homecoming, in other
words the cure for nostalgia. It seems as if
his return to Ithaca totally compensates for
his departure ten years earlier. But that kind
of homecoming and the ending of nostalgia
that it implies are not as easy or as automatic
as one might think.
A bittersweet
homecoming
Odysseus does not sail the seas because he
likes sailing, or because he responds to the call
of the deep or the attractions of wide open
skies. Homer's hero, unlike Dante's, who
passes through the Columns of Hercules to
venture out on to the ocean in search of new
horizons, could be any emigré who simply
yearns to return home after suffering the
ordeal of absence a notion later expressed
more prosaically by another well-known
exile, Victor Hugo: "One cannot live without
bread; but one cannot live without a homeland
either." There is a difference though: through¬
out his wanderings, Odysseus constantly pre¬
pares the way for his homecoming and
embarks on a series of ordeals, each of which,
as it is overcome, brings him a little closer to
his final goal. What is more, he is determined
to return home as master in his own house, so
he can restore things to their former state, as
though his ten years' absence did not matter.
Odysseus's homecoming causes none of
the disappointment which almost always
THE UNESCO COURIER Jk OCTOBER 1996

Mfar nomads on the
shores of the Red Sea.
replaces nostalgia when the long-awaited
remedy proves incapable of curing the sick¬
ness. When people return home they are
never the same as they were when they
started out; they never return to the place
they think they have left. The homecoming,
for exiles, is a return to themselves, to the
time preceding their departure. It is at once a
retrospective and a time of retrospection. A
return is possible in space but not in time. It
gives rise to all sorts of hopes, but it is a
source of disappointment and frustration.
Disappointment, which is something
Homer's Odysseus does not experience,
dogs his modern successors, such as the
central character of Nikos Kazantzakis's The
Odyssey, a Modern Sequel, a book which
begins where Homer's epic leaves off. As
soon as Odysseus has comfortably settled in
his palace, he is racked by anxiety. He begins
to get bored and dreams of setting off again.
He thinks back to the fabulous lands he
glimpsed and spurned. Departure and
return continually echo each other. There is
the pleasure of having come home. But
there is above all the pleasure of constant
homecoming, which requires one to be
always going away. If nostalgia is not to turn
into disappointment, homecoming has to be
kept in abeyance.
THE UNESCO tOURIER OCTOBER 199Ü
