A family tree with roots in
East and West
by Yi-zhuang Chen
From Lao-tzu
to Hegel,
thinkers from
different
cultural
horizons point
the way to
complex
thought
Complex thought has a long history,
which can be traced in both Western
and Chinese philosophies.
From Heraclitus to Lao-tzu
Some philosophers of Western Antiquity
argued that reality is complex but thought is
simple, and that if people did not realize this,
the essence of reality would escape them
altogether. For instance, the properties of
being, which are contradictory and incom¬
patible according to the categorizations of
human thought, may be in harmony and
simultaneous in real life. This was the key idea
of the Greek philosopher Heraclitus (535-480
B.C.), who taught people "to listen to nature"
in order to find its "invisible harmony".
"Union consists of bringing together and
tending apart, agreement and disagreement;
the One comes out of all things and all things
out of the one."
" By virtue of its dynamism,
the mind, like the self-
organizing being, resists
natural tendencies to chaos
and degradation." Above,
Labyrinth (1993), Indian ink
drawing by the Argentine
artist Christina Martinez.
© Jacqueline Hyde/Maison de l'Amérique Latine,
Pans
According to Heraclitus, the underlying
connection of opposites the transformation
of a thing into its opposite is the principle of
the logos, the universal formula in accordance
with which all natural events occur. But this
concept is difficult to grasp owing to the fixed,
one-sided nature of human intelligence.
Similar ideas appeared at a very early stage in
Chinese philosophy. In the / Cbing ("Classic
of Changes") dating from the eleventh-
twelfth centuries B.C., yin and yang consti¬
tute the two opposite poles of a single reality,
its fundamental duality. In its original sense,
yang meant the brightness of the sun or a
sun-bathed slope, while yin meant lack of
brightness, or a shady slope. Later, all phe¬
nomena came to be classified in terms oí yang
znàyin and to be regarded as comprising two
opposing aspects. As efficient causes, yin and
yang co-operate to produce the universe and
all its constituent parts and to regulate their
1£.

'In proposing a many-
sided version of the
truth, Protagoras
points to the
dimension of thought
that cannot be
simplified.'
The 4th-century-B.C.
Chinese philosopher Lao-tzu,
the father of Taoism.
movement. As the / Ching puts it, "Yang is
the principle that makes things commence,
while yin is that which completes them".
The ancient Chinese believed that the
cosmos is governed by a bipolar principle and
cannot be reduced to a single ultimate prin¬
ciple. Thought is governed by the proposi¬
tion that opposites are exclusive and incom¬
patible, but real life is governed by the com¬
plementarity of opposites. In the Tao-te
Ching (the "Classic of the Way of Power"),
Lao-tzu (fourth century B.C.) explains that
"the movement of tao, " which is at the origin
of the universe and causes order to reign
within it, is "to act in the opposite direction".
The tao encourages what is underdevel¬
oped and represses what is overdeveloped.
This leads to the implacable law whereby
everything that has developed to its extreme
turns into its opposite. "People who have
grown robust, age", for example. This law
maintains the harmony of the world as an
organic whole, but it often goes against the will
and the spontaneous intelligence of human
beings. By claiming that the successful com¬
pletion of an enterprise means starting out
from its opposite, Lao-tzu brings to light a mul¬
titude of paradoxical phenomena and criticizes
the linear nature of human understanding.
Protagoras and Chuang-tzu
Philosophical relativism, which in the West
was introduced by the Greek sophist Pro¬
tagoras (485-441 B.C.), takes account of the
multiplicity of approaches which are the basis
of knowledge. While "matter" is the common
source of human sensations, the images
human beings have of matter are determined
16

by their senses, which change with age and the
constitution of their bodies, so that each of us
sees matter in a different way. However, no
one representation of the true physiognomy
of matter is superior to any other. There are as
many yardsticks for measuring things as there
are people to measure them.
Plutarch tells the story of an athlete who
died of a wound inflicted by a javelin during a
sporting contest. After the accident, the
Athenian statesman Pericles and Protagoras
spent a whole day discussing who or what was
responsible for it, the javelin, the javelin
thrower or the organizers of the event. The
philosopher maintained that it was necessary to
distinguish several different viewpoints: for a
doctor, the javelin was the direct cause of death;
for a judge, the javelin-thrower was respon¬
sible; from the viewpoint of a magistrate, the
organizers of the contest should be charged.
In proposing a many-sided version of the
truth, Protagoras is advocating that diversity
and contradiction should be tolerated and
even legitimized in the process of knowledge.
He points to the unsimplifiable, irreducible
dimension of thought.
These ideas also have an equivalent in Chi¬
nese thought. In the view of Chuang-tzu (c.
369-268 B.C.), people apprehend different
aspects of the same object, depending on
their standpoint. This observation prompted
him to relativize the truth. "The male
monkey seeks the female," he wrote. "The
stag seeks the hind. Moaqiang and Liji are
beautiful creatures whom all men adore, but
when they approach, fish dive deep into the
water and birds fly quickly away. Who
knows true beauty?" Human knowledge is
conditioned and is therefore uncertain.
Kant and Hegel
In modern times, philosophers began to
realize that the human mind is capable of both
simple thought, which abides by the rules of
3 The Greek philosopher
Heraclitus of Ephesus
(6th-5th centuries B.C.).
17

'The roof, which is
at the origin of the
tree, comes from
the seed, which is
itself born of the
tree.'
Fang Yizhi
The circle of yin and yang
(in centre), two
complementary principles of
Chinese philosophy.
'Moaqiang and Liji are beautiful creatures whom all men adore,
but when they approach, fish dive deep into the water and birds
fly away. Who knows true beauty?'
Chuang-tzu
formal logic, and complex thought, which goes
beyond those rules and criticizes, corrects and
improves simple thought. The mind has the
power to criticize itself and improve itself. It
is capable of knowing the complexity of reality,
and also of knowing itself.
Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) held the view
that understanding is concerned with
knowing the relative (or the finite) and reason
with knowing the absolute (or the infinite).
However, the distinction he makes between
these two cognitive faculties prevents him
from arriving at a true paradigm of com¬
plexity. G.W.F. Hegel (1770-1831) combined
the two by making a distinction between
three levels in the human mind: under¬
standing, which is responsible for analytical
knowledge and separates concepts; negative
or dialectic reason, which is concerned with
synthetic knowledge and unites all concepts
by removing the difference that divides
them; and positive reason, which unites ana¬
lytical and synthetic knowledge and grasps
that all concepts are distinctive yet linked, and
certain by virtue of their mobility. These
three cognitive levels are also essential and are
organically welded into a single process. We
thus have a perfect process, capable of self-
perfection.
In Hegel's view, the movement of the
mind follows an ascending loop. It emerges
from its usual form of operation (under-,
standing) in order to reveal the limits of that
form and remedy its failing, and then returns
with all the results of its criticism and correc¬
tion (dialectic) to its usual form of operation,
but at a higher level.
The active nature of the mind brings it
closer to the self-organizing being which, by
virtue of its dynamism, resists natural ten¬
dencies towards chaos and degradation. The
paradigm of complexity thus unveils the
18

©SuperStock, Pans
J apáñese snow monkeys.
essential way in which our mind functions,
while providing us with the means of under¬
standing the workings of reality, of the self-
organizing and self-producing being.
Fang Yizhi
A century and a half before Hegel, the Chi¬
nese philosopher Fang Yizhi (1611-1671) had
formulated very similar ideas. Deeply influ¬
enced by the dialectic arising from Chinese
philosophical tradition and Indian Buddhism,
Fang Yizhi argued that two fundamental
methods of knowledge existed simultane¬
ously: the "investigation of qualities" (identi¬
fying the specific determinants of different
things) and the "embracing of the essence"
(finding the common cause that determines
different things).
According to Fang Yizhi, only through
the fusion of these two methods (analytic and
synthetic) is it possible to know dynamic
reality. The essence of the real is to be found
in self-determination and self-creation. He
takes the example of the tree. The root, which
is at the origin of the tree, comes from the
seed, which is itself born of the tree. Once the
tree has flowered, the seed is no longer its
substance {ti) but its mode of operation
(yong). The functioning of a thing has a
causality that is not linear but recursive.
Fang Yizhi's methodology is based on the
theory of the threefold truth which he took
from Buddhism. He believed in the para¬
mount need to affirm the existence of two
opposing extremes (Heaven and Earth, for
example) and of all the distinctive things of
the world of phenomena. The next step is to
deny the existence of all this in order to grasp
the unitary value of the noumenal world as
nothingness. The synthesis of these two
forms of knowledge leads to complete and
perfect knowledge. In other words, Fang
Yizhi first of all observes the principle of non¬
contradiction and then subjects it to the prin¬
ciple of the unity of opposites, before going
on to comply with both principles at the same
time, each to its relevant degree. Here once
again are Hegel's three cognitive levels:
understanding, dialectical reasoning and pos-
YI-ZHUANGCHEN,
of the People's Republic of China,
is engaged on research into
comparative Sino-Occidental
Philosophy at the Centre for East
Asian Studies at the University of
Montreal (Canada).
19
