JAPAN
BY HIROSHI OKUMURA
Company capitalism
Has Japan's market economy reached a turning point?
Companies are the key players in
Japan's market economy and are
regarded as legal entities in their
own right. The main share-hold¬
ers in large businesses are not
individuals but interdependent companies
with cross-holdings in each other. I call this
system "company capitalism".
Individuals, companies and the state are
the three main components of a market econ¬
omy. A study of this market calls for analysis
of the relations between companies and indi¬
viduals, between companies themselves, and
between companies and the state. One feature
ofJapanese company capitalism is that the vol¬
ume of trade between companies is far greater
than that between companies and individuals,
or between companies and the state. This is
one of the characteristics of Japanese com¬
pany capitalism. Furthermore, private enter¬
prise is by far the largest source of the nation's
wealth. Businesses have a massive superiority
over individuals, which they dominate or
« 1 »
envelop .
On the market for manufactured goods,
which is dominated, as in the United States
and Europe, by an oligopoly of large corpo¬
rations, prices, quality and services are
imposed by companies on individuals on
what is clearly not an equal footing.
Many products (notably in the automobile
and electrical goods sectors) are distributed
according to the keiretsu system (keiretsu are
vertically integrated groups of companies).
THE UNESCO ÏOURIERB NOVEMBER 1996
29

Manufacturers form keiretsu with whole¬
salers and retailers. They give orders and try
to fix prices. The big retailers such as super¬
markets compete with this form of distribu¬
tion by selling at rock-bottom prices, but
they keep well in with the manufacturers all
the same.



The primacy of the company over the indi¬
vidual is most apparent on the job market. The
distinctive features of Japanese management
are "a job for life, wages based on length of ser¬
vice, and company unions", but since relations
between businesses and individuals are not on
an equal footing, the job-for-life system means
that the individual is absorbed by the com¬
pany. Take the question of recruitment. On
April 1st each year, all companies hire new
graduates at the same time, going on to give
them in-house training and teach them the
company culture. Each recruit is given a post
and then moves around within the company
according to its staffing rota. Recruits get "a
company" rather than "a job". In this context
the market mechanism does not function and
the job market is non-existent. The company
calls the tune.
In theory the unions act as a counterweight
to the company, but Japanese unions are orga¬
nized within companies, and not grouped by
trades or branches. In other words they are
not a strong force of opposition, and in fact,
companies use unions to implement their
staffing and other policies. The basic principle
of company capitalism is that the company
comes first. The staff is a hundred per cent
loyal to the company, and even business chiefs
outside the company but associated with it are
under its control. IVIanagers of affiliates meet
at their parent company's
Kyoto Headquarters.
Direct transactions are the most common
form of trade between businesses. A com¬
pany chooses a business partner from among
a mass of potential partners, and then trading
conditions are decided on. This system pro¬
duces latent competition between businesses,
but it cannot be said that the market mecha¬
nism functions fully in it.
Big business
and the banks
In order to choose their partners in these
direct transactions, companies join up in asso¬
ciations of two main kinds: keiretsu (groups
of affiliated companies) and conglomerates
(large industrial groups). Conglomerates are
large corporations linked horizontally, each
one having many affiliated companies. The
companies within each conglomerate are
interdependent via cross-holdings. A club of
the managing directors of the main compa¬
nies meets regularly. Business between the
companies within the conglomerates is co¬
ordinated by sogo shosha (trading companies),
which play a pivotal role.
Whereas trade within the keiretsu results
from a unilateral decision by the parent com¬
pany, in the industrial conglomerates it is car¬
ried out between big companies on a recipro¬
cal basis. This system does not totally exclude
outsiders nor apply to all transactions, but the
fact remains that the mechanism of the market
economy as described in neoclassical eco¬
nomic theory does not function here.
"A business without a lead bank does not
exist," they say in Japan. As a rule, this bank
is the main provider of capital for its business
partners, for which it is responsible. If the lat¬
ter go bankrupt, the bank accepts responsi¬
bility for their debts and acquires the bonds it
has issued. It is also a major shareholder in
these businesses, which have shares in the
bank. So this is a system of cross-holdings.
For the keiretsu, the conglomerates and
the lead banks, share ownership is the best
way of bringing companies together. In Japan,
banks and finance companies own almost 70
per cent of the shares in all companies quoted
on the stock market. Share ownership is lim¬
ited by an anti-trust law, however. The banks
are not entitled to hold more than 5 per cent
of the shares issued by a company.
Companies hold shares in each other in
order to exercise mutual control and create the
conditions for long-term trading between
I r
W THE UNESCO {_OURIER NOVEMBER WÙ

them ("compulsory" trading which flies in the
face of the principles of the market economy).
But this is also a way of preventing take-overs
through share purchases by outside compa¬
nies. After the liberalization of capital move¬
ments in the 1960s, big Japanese companies
organized large-scale stability operations by
their shareholders in order to prevent foreign
capital from taking over their companies.
Business
and the state
These operations had some harmful effects
on the health of companies and particularly
made it more difficult to restructure them.
The banks and the big companies were over¬
come by a fever of speculation in shares and
land. A monetary "bubble" appeared and
grew until it burst in the early 1990s when
there was a sudden collapse in share and land



prices. The decline of Japanese company cap¬
italism had begun.
Japan is said to be ruled by a troika com-
" Japan is said to be ruled by
, .. . , u i i i m a troika comprising the
prising the political world, the higher civil ser- poIitica, worldi the higher civi,
vice and the financial world. In this context, service and the financial
the financial world means the grouping of big
business leaders, who dominate the economy
and are linked to the state, which has made
possible the strong growth of the Japanese
economy by giving priority to business and
setting up many aid and protection policies.
This policy to encourage the development
of private enterprise in the finance, services
and other sectors has often been imple¬
mented via administrative directives, inde¬
pendent of legislation, and this has given
Japanese bureaucrats far-reaching powers.
The troika system has led to financial support
being given to a political party and to appoint¬
ments for top civil servants in the private sec¬
tor, where they embark on a second career.
These links have led to collusion between
politicians, higher civil servants and business,
which has given rise to scandals and corrup¬
tion (and is, in principle, alien to the mecha¬
nism of a market economy).
r 31
the Unesco Courier» novemberi99ó ^i

Compared to countries with a socialist
tradition such as the Soviet Union and China,
and to the countries of Western Europe, the
economic clout of nationalized industries in
Japan is relatively light and the state sector is
less important. In this respect the Japanese
economy is a market economy and not a
planned economy. It could, however, be
described as a market economy directed by
the state since private business is so closely
tied to the state.
A turning point
In addition to these internal contradictions are
the problems raised by the direct investment
made by Japanese companies abroad in
America, Europe and Asia in the 1970s and
1980s. Japan's trade surplus with the United
States has also become a major political prob¬
lem, and there have been many cases of fric¬
tion between Japan and the United States in
the field of co-operation on Japanese-
American structural problems.
Company capitalism is showing its limits.
Where relations between business and indi¬
viduals on the market for manufactured goods
are concerned, oligopolistic domination is
becoming hard pressed, notably because of the
increasing amount of goods imported from
abroad. As far as the labour market is con-
ndividualism, an unusual
phenomenon for Japan, may
emerge in relations between
businesses and people and
replace the principle of
company supremacy."
HIROSHIOKUMURA
isa Japanese economist.
cerned, the job-for-life system and Japanese-
style recruitment are starting to lose ground.
The unions are still company unions and they
continue to give priority to the company, but
their members are less and less interested and
the rate of unionization is going down.
In relations between companies, it can be
seen that the justification for keiretsu is getting
weaker and that companies are starting to leave
them. The need for conglomerates is also start¬
ing to weaken now that industrial structures are
moving away from the model of heavy indus¬
try and the chemical industry. Even the cross-
holding system is becoming less widespread.
The institution of the lead bank is also run¬
ning out of steam. Since the 1980s, the busi¬
ness finance system has diversified. Cross-
holding by companies is starting to be a
handicap for industrialists, and some compa¬
nies are selling their shares to generate profit.
With regard to relations between the state
and business, deregulation has been a major
government trend in the 1990s. After the
appearance of splits in the structure of the
politics-civil service-finance troika (political
scandals, end of single-party domination), it
became increasingly difficult to preserve the
control system which these three entities
exercised by mutual support.
How will the Japanese-style market econ¬
omy develop? Towards an "Anglo-Saxon"
type of market economy or towards some¬
thing entirely new? I would be inclined to say
that the twenty-first century will not be an age
of big companies or of joint stock companies.
Companies will not disappear as such. They
will still even be the mainspring of the econ¬
omy. But because industrial structures will be
increasingly different from those of heavy
industry and the chemical industry, big com¬
panies involved in mass production will lose
ground to small and medium-sized businesses
headed by industrialists of a different kind. I
see them as being efficiently interlinked by
networks and not by the keiretsu and con¬
glomerate system.


Individualism, an unusual phenomenon
for Japan, will emerge in relations between
businesses and people and replace the princi¬
ple of company supremacy. A co-operative
structure or perhaps some radically different
system may take the place of joint stock com¬
panies. These companies will not disappear,
but maybe they will have to coexist with
many other forms of business.
d(oiTHE UNESCO lOURIER« NOVEMBER 10%
