The fact that schools do not at present
enjoy real autonomy in the management of
their resources reduces their power of initia¬
tive and hampers the adaptation of the educa¬
tion system as a whole to the changes made


necessary by its own expansion. Schools
operate on the basis of directives given to
them rather than agreed objectives that would
leave them free to allocate resources in such a
way as to produce results best suited to local
conditions. This makes it particularly difficult
to create a learning environment that would
enable any substantial improvement in pupils'
performance to be obtained and would be
conducive to equal opportunity while taking
account of local factors.
A move towards autonomy for schools has
started in the United States as a result of pres¬
sures from parents, learned societies and
industry, but schools have still received no
indications as to the most suitable types of
organization and management required. Guid¬
ance from outside experts is therefore essential
for the gradual implementation of the changes
foreseen. This alone will enable serious mis¬
takes to be avoided.
The San Francisco Exploratorium is on-line via
Internet: http://www.exploratorium.edu
GOERY DELACOTE
is a French physicist who was a co-founder of La Vlllette Museum
of Sciences In Paris (France) and is presently Director General of
the San Francisco Exploratorium. His most recent published work
is Savoir apprendre: les nouvelles méthodes (1996).
24
The school must
adapt to a world
where it no longer
has a monopoly on
the transmission
of knowledge
Schools at the
crossroads
by Robert Bisaillon
Schools often seem to be standing still
I while the rest of the world moves on.
However, a number of social changes now
look set to challenge educational systems and
the functions of education.
Schools are at a crossroads. On the one
hand, the state seems unwilling to go on
financing and directing education; on the other,
schools and local authorities would like to have
more of a say in these matters themselves.
In these circumstances, the role of
schools and their place in society become less
straightforward than they were. In competi¬
tion with other institutions such as the family

One of the aims of
education is to
provide young people
with the means of
changing the society
in which they live.
and the workplace, which are themselves in



the throes of change, schools no longer have
a monopoly on the dissemination of knowl¬
edge. New information and communication
technologies are putting teachers to the test
and making them re-examine their approach
to education.
The ways by which young people acquire
knowledge have changed. Acquisition by
absorption, a process encouraged by the media,
is taking over from the traditional process in
which the family and the school acted as the
intermediaries. But the media appeal to young
people's curiosity and emotional responses in a
random fashion, and schools find it very hard
to put knowledge acquired from the media into
some sort of order so that schoolchildren can
benefit from it.
The concept of skills has also taken on a
broader meaning. As well as transmitting
knowledge and know-how to their pupils,
teachers must train them to find information
for themselves and to make use of it. Pupils'
skills are now defined in terms of their self-
reliance and their ability to adapt to different
types of training and jobs.
In a society where there is more and more
cultural intermingling and where there are
Otudents in the periodicals
library at the University of Dar
Es Salaam (United Republic of
Tanzania).
fewer and fewer fixed points of reference,
teachers are expected to show children how
to form their own values.
Lastly, the phenomenon of students
"working their way through college" is a typ¬
ical feature of life in North America, where
the school population is drawn from mixed,
multiethnic backgrounds. All these factors
have a strong influence on thinking about
what is required of schools and about ways of
achieving integration.
ROBERT BISAILLON,
of Canada, has been President of
Quebec's Conseil Supérieur de
l'Education ("Education Board of
Governors") since 1989.
Education and politics
The situation raises a number of socio-polit¬
ical questions, such as how to reconcile
elitism with democracy without widening
social cleavages or how to expound a uni¬
versal culture respectful of national identities
without encouraging racism and intolerance.
In this context, how should the roles of the
state, the school and the individual be defined?
A definition of a "common public culture",
encompassing a set of non-negotiable values
that are necessary to social cohesion, is perhaps
called for. This set of values could serve as a
common core for the education of all groups,
minority or majority, sedentary or nomadic,
without infringing the basic rights of any of
25

them. These consensual values could justifiably
be invoked to challenge the authority of
schools designed to emphasize religious or
ethnic differences. Again, instead of intro¬
ducing new subjects into syllabuses, would it
not be better to reorganize existing syllabuses
transversally to encourage knowledge and
understanding of other languages and cultures ?
Education could in this way become truly a
factor working for peace.
On a matter more directly related to the
social and economic context, the kind of gen¬
eral knowledge that opens pupils' minds to
the world around them needs to be com¬
bined with vocational qualifications enabling
them to find a place in economic life. Since
one of the aims of education is to provide
. young people with the means of changing the
society in which they live, they should first
understand how it works and how it can be
improved.
In all these respects teachers have a leading
role to play, which is why one of the most
basic changes to the system concerns the
teaching profession. More emphasis in pre-
service training should be attached to teachers'
individual and collective responsibility, i.e. the
development of professionalism should be the
guiding principle. Next, in view of the length
of teachers' careers, pre-service training, prac¬
tical experience and in-service training should
form a continuum. Success depends on
responsible commitment, by each according
to his or her role and competence, on the part
of all those who determine educational poli¬
cies, who are in charge of schools and whose
daily business is education.
A UNICEF-supported puppet show performed
at a primary school in Bujumbura (Burundi).
The play seeks to encourage reconciliation
and tolerance.

