Nijinsky
On 19 January 1919, in a Swiss hotel, a
dancer dressed in white silk pyjamas
advanced towards an audience of some two



hundred people. The career of Vaslav Nijinsky,
the century's greatest dancer, would shortly
end. Thirty years of mental illness would follow.
As if to signal the catatonic immobility that
^was about to claim him, Nijinsky made a
strange, simple gesture that symbolically
opened dance to the modern world. He
grabbed a chair, sat down facing the audience
and stared at them. The nervousness that elec¬
trified the dancer passed in a hypnotic current,
and the magic of empathy swept over the audi¬
ence. When the pianist began a Chopin pre¬
lude, Nijinsky moved. He began to improvise
a mystical ballet, a kind of requiem, a pacifist
message in the wake of the First World War.
"Overcome by the war, he placed on the
floor a cross made of cloth, then danced on it to
signify the crime that had been committed
against humanity." This, the "combat of life and
death", was Nijinsky's last ballet, the day of
what he called his "marriage with God".
The rebel
On the verge of madness, Nijinsky laid bare his
soul in the diary that he wrote in six weeks and
took with him to the asylum. He insisted that it
should be published.1
The French dramatist and actor Antonin
Artaud called the diary an "exorcism", a cry of
anger, "a metaphysic of word, gesture and
expression", the savage pleasure of scraping off
a veneer of varnish. Since Nijinsky's spectac¬
ular leaps had not taken him beyond the con¬
fines of the stage, since people were incorri¬
gibly worldly and artificial, he would teach
them a lesson or two. He would shake them
up. He was a man of extremes who had long
before broken out of the straitjacket of his cen¬
tury, its bourgeois conventionality and its
numbing, blinding aestheticism. "I don't want
war. I don't want state borders," he wrote. His
choreography, his expressionism and his life all
broke the mould: "My madness is love for
humanity." An ecologist before the word
existed, he felt that humanity was abusing the
earth. "The planet is falling apart," he wrote.
"The earth is suffocating. People are covering it
with ashes."
20
)
*"

by Martine Leca The greatest dancer ofhis time was
a soul in torment
Nijinsky was born into a family of Polish
dancers, brought up in Russia, and worked in
France. Not surprisingly, his Russian was pep¬
pered with Polish and French expressions.
This explains the jagged structure of his writing,
whose raw, direct, expressionistic language has
much in common with his "wild, savage"
dancing. What was important for him was not
phrase-making but "transcribing thought". His
diary is a song, an invitation to all humanity. It is
like Gregorian chant sung in guttural tones. "I
am not a revolver; I am God, I am love."
Nijinsky's work as a dancer and choreogra¬
pher spanned ten years. It was hallmarked by
four ballets which gave birth to contemporary
dance: Debussy's L'Après-midi d'un faune,
Stravinsky's The Rite ofSpring, Debussy'sjeux
and Richard Strauss's Till Eulenspiegel.
Under the leadership of Sergei Diaghilev,
creator and grand master of the Ballet Russe,
and later away from Diaghilev's thrall, Nijinsky
took humanity back to essentials, to its pagan
traditions. Tight embroidered costumes gave
way to looser blouses. What mattered for
Nijinsky, inspired as he was by the Greek tra¬
dition, was "to act as little and feel as much as
possible". Dance was to express inner feelings,
to reveal the inner person.
Once the mould of academic dance was
broken, the day of the nineteenth-century
conventions was over. The music of Debussy
and Stravinsky was an extension of the revolu¬
tion in gesture that would be brought about by
concrete dance. Stravinsky regarded Nijinsky
as the only dancer who could put his music to
movement, a performer who made direct
contact with the audience, had no qualms
about moving against the beat or the tempo,
and rejected aesthetics in favour of expres¬
sionism. Nijinsky was not afraid to translate
into sometimes disjointed movements and
positions the violence that impelled him. After
centuries of imprisonment in ornament and
posturing, body and soul began to speak in the
new vocabulary of dance. Nijinksy tore
romantic smoothness to shreds with his
chaotic and violent rhythms.
The key moment in this revolution was the
performance of The Rite of Spring in Paris on
23 May 1913, which caused a sensation and trig¬
gered a head-on clash between the "old guard"
and the "avant-garde". Nijinsky's innovations
were profound. They sounded the death-knell
of the romantic aesthetic.
The masks of the human comedy were
torn away. Nijinsky asked dancers to transcend
themselves, forcing them to adopt difficult
positions. His choreographic language, which
was more easily described in drawings than in
words, was almost unperformable and puzzled
more than one dancer. "I had a hard time
learning my role by mechanically imitating the
positions he showed me," wrote ballerina
Tamara Karsavina. "I had to keep my neck
twisted to one side and my hands folded back
on themselves, as if I had been born crippled."
The bombshell
This abandonment of traditional form, mixed
with Debussy's impressionistic and Stravinsky's
violent music, made a high-powered avant-
garde cocktail that was bound to arouse strong
feelings. The bombshell of The Rite of Spring
sparked off a revolt against vapidity, subtlety,
chiaroscuro, elegance and refined harmonics.
Nijinsky challenged the established author¬
ities and lifted life and feelings to a more spa¬
cious realm of freedom and creation. His
dancing signalled a return to the primitive magic
of rhythm and a systematic simplification of
construction accompanied by a determination
to do away with hierarchies and privileges.
After The Rite of Spring Nijinsky showed
his taste for independence in another pio¬
neering ballet, Jeux, in which four dancers
obey a quadrangular geometry. "Nijinsky has
given a strangely mathematical twist to his way¬
ward genius," Debussy noted.
His genius cast a huge shadow over the
century and today's dancers and choreogra¬
phers follow in his wake. Nijinsky wanted to
have done with the ballet as a spectacle. He
wanted to bring the audience into contact with
the birth-throes of reality, the fluctuations of
the inner life and the leap towards the absolute.
He brought to an end the day of trompc-l'oeil
and art that copied reality. The eyes of the audi¬
ence became part of the action. The depths of
consciousness began to stir.
1. Nijinsky 's diary was published as The Diary of
Vaslav Nijinsky in 1968 (Berkeley, University of
California Press).
MARTINE LECA
¡s a French journalist and writer.
She is the author of a play, La
soupe et les nuages (Editions Le
Pont de l'Epée, 1983).
21
