tradition and renewa
Nô and Butô are
two very different
forms of
expression united
by a common
philosophy
Above, "Eggs", (1986), a
Butô dance performed by the
Sankai Juku Company.
In Nô, the most typical form of tradi¬
tional Japanese dance drama, there are no
acrobatic leaps, no pirouettes, no movements
intended to surprise the audience. The actor,
whose body is not even fully stretched, moves
about the stage with almost irritating slowness.
It is hard to imagine what Nô could have
in common with Butô, one of the leading
contemporary forms of Japanese dance. On
the face of it the two seem totally different.
But when they are examined more closely it
becomes clear that a conception of the body
rooted in tradition is part of the philosophy
of Butô.



The body in Nô
Zeami Motokiyo (1363-1443), the author of
the finest Nô plays, " metaphorically
described the three essential qualities of a Nô
actor as "skin, flesh and skeletal structure".
The "skin" is visible beauty, the beauty of
physical appearance and movements.
"Flesh" is the range of techniques that the
actor learns to master. "Skeletal structure" is
the most important of the three. It refers to a
physical intensity which must not be relaxed
at any point in the performance.
This intensity is the result of an inner ten¬
sion, not liveliness of movement or physical
strength. It must exist even when the body is
completely immobile, as when the dancer
adopts the fundamental posture of Nô,
kamae. Actor Hisao Kanze says that when a
beginner is trained to practise kamae, "even
in an unheatcd place in the depths of winter,
all he has to do to forget the cold is to adopt
27

A Nô performance in Kyoto.
Actor in foreground is wearing
the mask of an old man.
the posture". No particular psychological
effort is required.
In fact, the exercise is not focused on the



position of the body, but on muscular ten¬
sion and breathing technique. It is said that
the powers of a Nô actor can be assessed
simply on the basis of his kamae. The kamae
of the greatest actors gives an impression of
unshakable balance and a very strong pres¬
ence. The actor must achieve this physical
intensity before he starts to perform on
stage.
For centuries, audiences all over the
world have regarded the movements of the
dancer's body as transcending the everyday
world. Japan is no exception to this rule.
The lineage of traditional Japanese dance
includes certain religious ceremonies during
which a divinity borrows the carnal enve¬
lope of a miko, a female shaman, in order to
appear in this world. During the ceremony,
the body of the miko hovers on the edge of
ordinary space and obeys principles dif¬
ferent from those that are familiar to us.
In everyday life we only exploit the pos¬
sibilities of our bodies to a very limited
extent. In Japan, the traditional martial arts,
especially kendo ("the way of the sword"),
attach great importance to the static "guard"
position which is designated by the same
name as the basic Nô posture, kamae.
Again, it is said that the strength of a budôka
(a person who practises the martial arts) can
be gauged simply from the way in which he
adopts this posture. In the kamae position,
the body of the budôka does not move an
inch. Inwardly, however, all his muscles arc
poised to mobilize the maximum amount of
energy. This does not mean that each
muscle is tense but rather that not one is at
rest. Consciousness is not focused on any
single point of the body, but on all of them.
Kamae is thus defined as a posture open to
all eventualities, as virtual movement.
Virtual movement
In the same way, the kamae of a Nô actor
contains latent energy that the spectator
perceives in the form of corporeal intensity.
This energy is revealed in static postures and
slow movements. When the actor moves,
the economic yield is particularly great
because he knows how to use inertia and
forces of reaction.
Far greater tension and energy are
needed to prevent a stick held vertically in
the palm of the hand from toppling over
than to stop it from falling to the ground. In
the same way, a tremendous amount of
inner control is needed to keep the body on
an even keel while moving horizontally, and
this means controlling the slightest physical
mechanisms and expending considerable
energy. It is important that the spectators
should be able to realize that this inner effort
is taking place. Through this process, which
is not rational in itself, the body appears to
be completely controlled and reveals both
its latent possibilities for movement and the
amount of energy within it. Hence the
impression of intensity that radiates from it.
The prime objective of Nô is not so much
movement as the creation of this corporeal
intensity. Paradoxically, the surest way to
achieve this goal is to restrain one's move¬
ments. This is why Zeami's teaching is based
on the following principle: "Move the mind
28

A Butô dance performed by
Kazuo Ohno.
© Bornand, Pans
AKIRAAMAGASAKI
is a Japanese university teacher
whose published works include
Kotoba to Shintai ("Language and
the Body", 1990) and En no
Bigaku(°Tbe Aesthetics of
Relationships", 1995).
ten tenths, the body seven tenths." The
remaining three tenths constitute potential
movement and give the body its intensity. It
is only later that the "flesh" of virtuosity and
the "skin" of beauty arc engrafted onto the
"skeletal structure" of the body. These arc
the three elements without which Nô dance
cannot achieve fulfilment.
A cultural straitjacket
Butô appeared around 1960, when it was
created by Tatsumi Hijikata, a modern
dancer without any experience of traditional
Japanese dance. He wanted to base this new
form of dance on his experience of life in his
native village. Butô was a reaction against
Western dance and traditional Japanese
dance forms, both of which are part of an
urban and aristocratic culture.
The environment in which the young
village boy grew up was grotesquely frag¬
mented. Everything was imperfect: nature,
home, daily life. The only thing he was sure
of was his vulnerable body. From childhood
on his body was imprisoned in a cultural
straitjacket by education. The prime func¬
tion of dance should thus be to reawaken
the potential of a body stifled by culture.
This is difficult because people cannot
imagine possibilities that they have never
known or imagined. All he knew was that
he had to bring these lost opportunities back
to the surface by a process that had nothing
to do with reverting to childhood or to the
state of primitive man.
Performing and
becoming
"Butô is a corpse which gets to its feet at
great risk to itself," says Tatsumi Hijikata. If
people rejected all the routine movements
imprinted in their bodies, they might find it
hard to stand upright. And yet they have to
get to their feet and then stay upright. This is
how their bodies can discover new possibil¬
ities, and this is the essence of Butô. Pre¬
cisely because it is utterly graceless and the
antithesis of the cultural refinement
achieved by Nô and kabuki, it should
demonstrate the falsity of contemporary
culture. If refined bodies are the products
and victims of culture, the ugly, clumsy
bodies of Butô destroy our conventional
ideas about bodies and thence about the cul¬
tural system itself.
Of course the body of each Butô dancer
is unique. One may skilfully repress a feeling
and let it simmer away inside himself in order
to heighten the impact when it suddenly
erupts to the surface. Another has the trans¬
parent vulnerable body of an angel. A third
changes in response to a given place, time and
audience. This has less to do with style or
choreography than with individual talent. In
every case, however, the Butô dancer must
first kill his cultural body, become a corpse,
and then stand upright. Only then does he
have to know how to move.
Whereas the Western dancer can be
defined as someone who "performs" move¬
ments that are beyond the capacities of ordi¬
nary people, the Nô actor "becomes"
someone on the edge of ordinary life. The
Western dancer is above all a specialist in
29

movement. His training is largely based on
acquiring great virtuosity by subjecting his
body to strict discipline. The Nô dancer, on
the other hand, lives his daily life with a per¬
fectly ordinary body, and on stage brings to
life a body that is out of the ordinary. Con¬
trary to what happens in Western theatre, the
artist does not use an actor's skills to play the
role of someone else or reproduce their feel¬
ings. His body starts to function according to
a different principle.
And so although Butô is at odds with
accepted aesthetic models, it has certain
similarities with Nô in the sense that it is
concerned with becoming rather than per¬
forming. It seeks primarily to bring to the
surface a body which has hitherto been
latent. "Performing" takes second place.
Only the presence of this particular body
(Zeami's "skeletal structure") allows the
"flesh" (movement) and the "skin" (expres¬
sion) to come into play. When they do, says
Zeami, "the instants when nothing is done
become captivating". Both Nô and Butô
dancers thus concentrate entirely on their
inner selves; they try to capture the subtlest
sensations of their bodies and control their
slightest movements. Hence their extreme
slowness.
The elegant movements of Nô, which
are described by the adjective yûgen
(obscure and profound) can only be made
when the dancer has a vigorous body. By
executing these movements the ballet
dancer seems to float weightlessly. The Nô
dancer must be full of intensity before he
can perform yûgen movements. It is clear
that Butô has inherited No's conception of
the body. This approach is not specific to
Butô. Many teachers of modern Japanese
dance, inspired by American and German
schools, are not primarily concerned with
movement but with increasing awareness of
the body.
Discovering the body means concen¬
trating on parts of it that usually escape per¬
ception, consciously making gestures that
are usually made mechanically and thus
becoming alert at every moment to what
the body is saying. As a result of this dis¬
covery, which is neither creation nor
expression, the body must be consciously
repossessed. This is the fundamental goal of
dance. Expression is achieved through
repossession of the body.

