interview
M
Hervé Télémaque
rt tells the story
of our time on earth
Haitian-born artist Hervé Télémaque uses a mixture of
techniques and materialspainting and collage, salvaged
objects and graffitito create works that attempt to infuse
"new energy" into images and words. Here he talks to
Juliette Broussard about his artistic development and his
conception of painting.
Grâce à Dieu (1994),
wood and coffee grounds (127 x 83 cm)
by Hervé Télémaque.
© K. Igniatiadïs. ADAGP 1996. Galerie Louis Carré, Paris
You've been living in France for thirty-five years,
but your work is increasingly evocative of your
Haitian roots and culture.
Hervé Télémaque: I left Port-au-Prince in 1957
when François Duvalier came to power and
went to study painting at the Art Students'
League in New York. I was only in the United
States for three years, hut in a sense I am
American simply because I was horn in the
Caribbean basin, which is close to the United
States and dominated by its models. But in
New York I became afraid of losing my identity.
It was partly because of my quest for identity
that I moved to France in 1961. I wanted to
find myself. Besides, in New York abstract
expressionism was running out of steam and
hardening into an academicism that didn't
interest me. This was just prior to the renewal
THEUNESCoC3URlER" NOVEMBERI996

David Harali. Pans
that came in with pop art. Moreover, France is
an integral part of Haitian culture, its fantasies
and its relationship with language. Since Haiti
is French-speaking, returning to Europe was a
move towards my formative values.
How much have you been influenced by the
surrealists?
H.T.: The surrealists showed me values that still
govern my creative energy. My relationship to art
is defined by psychoanalytical experimentation.
I've remained very close to the plastic values
expressed by Arshile Gorky, Giorgio de Chirico,
Bene Magritte and Marcel Duchamp. The sur¬
realists taught me that art could be a way of
comprehending both the world and oneself. This
self-knowledge naturally leads to all sorts of
moral questions: relationships between people,
love, social organization. One of the lessons of
surrealism that I've always believed in is that the
visual is not only a source of aesthetic pleasure
but that its force lies in expressing a certain
experience and an ambitious perception of exis¬
tence. Art tells the story of our time on earth.
Afeel for language is very apparent in
everything you do.
H. T.: I love Haitian poetry, the work of people
like Jacques Boumain and Carl Brouard, who
define black identity. From very early on
Haitian poetry, tuned in as it was to the history
of the colonization of Santo Domingo, to slavery
and the Haitian revolution of 1804, gave body
to the concepts of négritude and black pride,
concepts which Aimé Césaire later brought to
a white heat in his great poem, Return to My
Native Land. Apart from that, I've remained
faithful to the poets I loved reading when I was
young Bimbaud, Saint-John Perse and André
Breton. I like to quote what Saint-John Perse
said in his acceptance speech for the Nobel
Prize for Literature in 1960, "For if poetry is
not, as it has been said, 'absolute reality', it is
the closest we can get to understanding it, at
that extreme limit of complicity where reality
in the poem seems to inform itself."
How do you work?
H. T.: My way of working can be broken down into
three stages. First of all I play around with the
medium, then this is the second stage some¬
thing clicks, a specific formal idea emerges. The
third stage is when I put it all together.
Technique only comes in at this final stage,
which is subsidiary to the spontaneous original
idea and to playing around with forms waiting to
see what happens. My large charcoal drawings,
which are more lyrical and stylistically unified,
serve the formal idea by trying to capture a fan¬
tasy, a memory or a desire as simply as possible.
In them objects become coats of arms, totems
dQiTHEUNESCO tOURIERB NOVEMBER 1 006 '

interview and emblems. I work with simple materials
wood, glue and screws. I use clamps. I love basic
tools like the saw, which I sometimes use as a
pencil, or the sander.
Take the charcoal drawings and objects that
were shown at an exhibition of my work in 1994,
Fusain et marc de café ("Charcoal and Coffee
Grounds"), Deuil: le dessin, l'objet ("Mourning:
the Drawing, the Object"). For the objects I
used coffee grounds, a natural pigment, but to
ironic effect. The dark charcoal evokes night,
whereas the coffee could symbolize the transi¬
tion from dark to light, from night to dawn it's
also an exotic colonial product that has given a
lot of pleasure to white people.
What about colour?
H. T.: I use colour like a signal. In 1986, when
the Duvalier regime ended, Haitians made sym¬
bolic use of red and blue, the colours of the
national flag. The whole island was daubed with
red and blue as part of a groundswell of popu¬
lar feeling, a symbolic explosion after liberation
from thirty years of dictatorship. I was very
touched by the vulnerability of my people, who
had nothing left but this sign, this simple mark¬
ing in red and blue, as proof of their existence.
I reduced my palette to those two elements, to
that basic signal of identity.
You are movingfrom a ratherintellectual
position towards simpler values.
H. T.: Perhaps one grows simpler with age!
While my works may once have been a bit too
much of a virtuoso performance, I'm more sure
of myself now. Doesn't all art tend towards sim¬
plicity and anonymity? Painters dabble with
objects and ideas, manipulate signs and use
their intuition. Artists are too often lumped
together with intellectuals. My feeling is that
artists should listen to their inner selves, give
expression to their creativity and avoid self-cen¬
sorship. My art is never programmed. What's
best in artists wends its way through them
without any strict programming. I also think it's
a good thing to let memories float to the sur¬
face. I once saw a magazine photo of a woman
in Soweto in South Africa whose fat legs
V.
reminded me of the legs of my old nanny,
Christiane. There was no direct connection
between the two, but it was a moment that
brought a memory back to the surface. I think
there are no lies in art.
As an artist, where do you stand in today's
culture and society?
H. T.: It seems to me there's a crisis in the visual
arts, and it's good to get back to simple, basic
things. My current work is dominated by my
love of drawing. Drawing on a sheet of paper is
simpler than painting. From drawing I go
straight to objects, and that means colour. I am
first and foremost a painter. A painter-assem¬
bler, if you like. I regard painting as the most
advanced, the most complex of the visual arts.
The arts seem to me to be a natural vehicle for
greater understanding between cultures. Just
think how immersed we all are in jazz, without
6
THE UNESCO lOURIER! NOVEMBER 1996

Marc French © Panos Pictures, London
A tailor in Port-au-Prince
(Haiti).
realizing it. Blacks have made a big contribu¬
tion through music. Music is the way to an
understanding of the black character. We all
travel, we all move endlessly from place to
place. What worries me is the bulldozer effect
of world television that broadcasts the same
series all over the planet. I feel we are going
through a schizophrenic period. It's more, nec¬
essary than ever to be receptive to one's inner
self, to be alert to one's own dreams. It makes
me think again of Saint-John Perse, who urged
us not to forget the man of clay.
Do people still think of art as a necessity?
H. T.: Absolutely! But the meaning of culture
must be redefined. Look at the United States.
You might think that such a materialistic soci¬
ety could do without art. But look at all the
great American artists there are! They prove
that there is a need for art, that art is useful
otherwise it wouldn't exist. The museums and
the number of people who go to them are
ample proof of this.
Has contemporary art emerged from an older art?
H. T.: The widespread interest in the art forms
of the past arose at the beginning of this cen¬
tury with the poet Guillaume Apollinaire. In
my case it was during a visit to Egypt that I
found a kind of basis for modern art. In the art
of the ancient Egyptians I saw a justification for
certain major choices stylistic clarity, direct¬
ness and the link with language. With hiero¬
glyphics we move from a painted image to a
written sign, which is very modern, for this
question of moving from writing to the visual is
still highly topical. It was in Egypt that I found
an art that probably heralds all Western cul¬
ture. And has never been bettered. To my mind
its characteristics area very high level of refine¬
ment and a message of great complexity.
Despite this complexity, I am fascinated by the
accessibility of this art, by its regard for essen¬
tials, its lack of any leanings towards naturalism.
Of course I am simply talking about its formal
aspects, since I am not capable of deciphering
the whole Egyptian cosmogony. With its exquis¬
ite draughtsmanship and sense of volume,
ancient Egyptian art is in complete contrast, to
take one example, with the simplicity of
Oceanian sculpture, which is nonetheless one of
the pinnacles of world art. With the Egyptians
a whole world is constructed, whereas in New
Guinea, we're listening to primal humanity,
closer to the earth and the gods.
Does art teaching today succeed in making
students aware of contemporary art?
H. T.: Contrary to what is widely thought, mod¬
ern art even abstract art seems to me more
accessible than the high art of the Benaissance,
for example, which often calls for knowledge of
the great myths and of religion. I think modern
art is a more direct mirror, favourable to an inter¬
change between the work of art and its audi¬
ence. In many cases its questioning of appear¬
ances makes use of irony, perhaps to express the
complexities of our time more accurately. I
THE UNESCO C3URIER" NOVEMBER 1096
7
