commentary Federico Mayo
loetry, an education
in freedom
It is impossible to he indifferent to the situation of opera
in the world today. In the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, this art form which blends in a sublime
alchemy the human voice, instrumental music and
visual effects enchanted the courts and theatres of
England, Germany, Spain and France. The great oper¬
atic works of the last four centuries were moments of
perfection in the story of musical creation. Down
through the ages, Monteverdi, Lully, Scarlatti, Handel,
Rameau, Gluck, Mozart, Beethoven, Wagner, Verdi,
Berlioz, Bizet and Glinka absorbed the heritage of the
past and went on to break new ground. Whatever the
dramatic subject matter, whatever the form, they
brought creative magic to it.
Cassandras predicted that opera would die in the
twentieth century, and it is true that for more than half
a century cinema and television have replaced opera as
a leading source of popular entertainment. Opera is
prohibitively expensive to produce and is dependent on
public or private sponsorship, yet it remains the dream-
medium for most contemporary composers and still has
a public following. I observed this recently in the arena
of Verona in Italy with a production of Bizet's Carmen,
directed by the master Franco Zeffirelli and conducted
by Daniel Oren.
It is impossible, too, not to think of the great voices
that over the past forty years have brought new authen¬
ticity and grandeur to opera. Audiences marvel at the
purity of their timbre, their elegance of phrasing and
their perfect sense of style. I think especially of
Monserrat Caballé, Placido Domingo, Barbara
Hendricks and José Carreras, who have done me the
honour of joining UNESCO's group of Goodwill
Ambassadors. They defend the ideals of UNESCO, espe¬
cially in the context of exchanges between cultures, in
training young people and encouraging their involve-
THE UNESCO^>URlER« NOVEMBER199Ô

My totem ¡s peace (1971), a painting by Algerian artist
Mohammed Khadda (1930-1991).
ment in creative activities. They also support a project
to which I am particularly attached and which I dis¬
cussed at length with the Verona authorities: the cre¬
ation of an international institute for opera and poetry.
The future Institute will be a place to meet and
exchange ideas, to discuss current developments in
opera, its future, its response to new technology, and
the training of young people. Leading experts will be
able to contribute a spirit of scientific rigour and a mass
of specialized data and knowledge. It hardly needs to
be said that special attention will be paid to the tradi¬
tions of non-European opera, whether from Beijing,
Java or Bali.



The Institute's other component will be devoted to
the world of poetry. Whatever official functions I
occupy in my working life, in the silence of the evening
and morning I always return to poetry. I can only live
and I wish only to live in the space and freedom of
poetry. Poetry is an education in freedom. Despite the
barriers and the inequalities that continue to exist in the
world (and I see them at first hand when traveling for
UNESCO), it is writers, poets, novelists and thinkers who
do most to change ways of thinking, banish taboos and
undermine prejudices. Fanned to a white heat, words
have the power to melt chains. Sometimes the word is
all powerful.
All my thoughts are linked to a culture of peace,
which I think brings me close to the original flame of
UNESCO, to the soul of this intellectual and moral arm
of the United Nations system. It is my belief that poetry
brings its pure grist to the mill of an ethical system that
must be rethought. Is it futile to dream of a different
kind of society, one capable of engendering a new
humanity and perpetuating harmonious human rela¬
tionships? Is it mad to want to put an end to a lethally
destructive practice (war) and reinvent another prac¬
tice (peace) that takes experience into account? The
poetry I love is not an empty game. It is an inner link
between poetics, ethics and politics.
History the history of humanity and the history of
language is an unending process. The poet must be a
catalyst in the renewal of active thinking and the values
that are an honour to our species and urge us constantly
to exceed our own self-expectations. Poetry is a bulwark
against the onslaught of barbarity in its many guises: ide¬
ological and technological aberrations, violence, nation¬
alism, religious and political fanaticism, racism, intoler¬
ance and selfishness. Why appeal to poetry, timeless,
immaterial and weaponless that it is? The answer is that
in poetry the word is brought to an incandescent heat
and speaks to each and every one of us. It pulverizes
injustice and hatred; it is akin to love. Yes, poetry is an
Ark of the Covenant, our Ark of the Covenant. For all
of us, poet and reader alike, poetry can make sense of
the world, with all its obscure mysteries, great contra¬
dictions and sublime achievements. I
"The dream within me
I shall keep
as long as I hreathe.
This dream
is my life,
a dream of love
alive at last
in each one of us1."
1 Federico Mayor, Patterns,
translated l>y Rosemary Wiltshire, 1-orcst Hooks, London, 199 1-.
THE UNESCO (oilRlERB NOVEMBER IW6 V
