Dragon Fly (1993-1994),
a watercolour by Diana Ong.



Frontiers of psychotherapy
by Saul FuksPsychotherapy has invented new forms of dialogue
SAUL FUKS,
an Argentine psychologist, is
director of the research
institute of the faculty of
psychology at the University of
Rosarlo, where he teaches a
specialist course in clinical
psychology for postgraduate
students.
I Psychotherapy that takes account of
I complexity must be based on a form of
dialogue that enables those involved to ques¬
tion their convictions and dare to explore
new approaches to reality.
This means that the psychotherapist must
agree to come down from his or her pedestal.
If psychotherapists really want their patients
to rediscover the capacity to assume respon
sibility for their lives, they must reject the
position of power their patients attribute to
them at the outset.
The therapeutic relationship tends to func¬
tion according to a socio-cultural pattern in
which the psychotherapist is regarded as the
heir of the shaman, the healer or the sage as a
person with special powers associated with a
vast and diffuse corpus of knowledge.
23

'Psychotherapists have had to become explorers of the unknown
territories of existence.'
The state of desperation and extreme vul¬
nerability that induces people to consult a
psychotherapist makes them extremely
receptive to the image of the therapist as an
omniscient person with unlimited powers to
cure mental suffering.
Because people who suffer in this way feel
weak, they tend to entrust themselves fully to
the psychotherapist, who is regarded as
someone who can answer all their questions
(and thus, they hope, solve all their problems).
The only way to modify the balance of
power between the person who has all the
knowledge and the person who has none is to
redefine psychotherapy and first of all what
society expects from the psychotherapist.


A co-operative
relationship
Long before psychotherapy became a pro¬
fession, a variety of practices existed to put
right those who "deviated" from the social
norm, either by going too far (agitation, manic
states, madness) or not far enough (loss of
contact, unsociability, inertia).
"Madness" and "delinquency" are the
terms society uses to describe these devia¬
tions from the line it considers to be
"normal" at a given moment in its history. A
penal system and a security apparatus exist to
take steps against delinquency; machinery for
control and isolation exists to deal with mad¬
ness. On the other hand, society makes
allowances for those it regards as "visionary"
or "inspired" people whose ways of life are
accompanied by certain deviant forms of
behaviour.
In the 1960s questions began to be asked
about the power relationships that exist in
psychotherapy, paving the way for explo¬
ration of other aspects of the therapeutic rela¬
tionship.
This relationship gradually ceased to be
considered as a contract between a profes¬
sional possessing a specific body of knowl¬
edge and a patient ready to accept and absorb
that knowledge, but rather as the confronta¬
tion of two different, but equally valid, types
of knowledge. These forms of knowledge
may or may not coincide, but their degree of
convergence or divergence does not affect
the idea that the therapeutic relationship is by
nature co-operative.
This approach has led to a transformation
of the roles, identities, practices, context and
forms that exist in this type of relationship.
Today, those involved in psychotherapy are
no longer simply people telling a story, true
or false as the case may be, but have become
architects of their own lives.
Medicine Man (1994),
an acrylic painting by the
American artist Gayle Ray.
The complexities
of psychotherapy
This new approach to the alleviation of psy¬
chological distress has naturally transformed
the possibilities and the operational capacity
of psychotherapy.
Crises, troubles and disorders are no
longer considered as "risk situations" but as
"fields of possibility". This being so, a rich
array of intensely felt choices, decisions, and
hesitations between "future and possible"
worlds comes into play and obliges psy¬
chotherapists to invent new forms of dialogue.
24

'The idea that each of us is the sum
of multiple identities makes it
possible for both therapists and their
patients to use all the
multidimensional aspects of their
personalities.'
When their inherent complexities are
taken into account, deviant symptoms and
forms of behaviour become part of a contex¬
tual dynamic based on language. Verbal
exchanges bring into play factors large and
small, subjectivity and intersubjectivity, and
all the building blocks of reality available to
the protagonist and to the person who is
seemingly a mere observer.
Before it began to explore these different
ways of being and their contexts, psy¬
chotherapy first had to re-examine the func¬
tion of "social control". This meant that ther¬
apists had to abandon the role whereby they
made a diagnosis based on a system of theo¬
retical knowledge and become explorers of
the unknown territories of existence. They
had to use their ignorance and their capacity
for surprise, in order to explore the mysteries
of what seems "obvious", "natural", and
"common knowledge".
This joint construction of a shared reality
involved the creation of new mechanisms: a
form of dialogue in which the questions are
more important than the answers; an atmos¬
phere of co-operation conducive to the
"Two equally legitimate forms
of knowledge, which may or
may not coincide". Above, Two
Men (1993-1994), a
watercolour by Diana Ong.
" Verbal exchanges bring into
play the building blocks of
reality. . . ." Below, a
computer-generated ¡mage
(1994) by Frank Collyer.
exploration of possible futures and ways
leading to them.
The "essentialist" approach whereby per¬
sons are considered as possessors of an iden¬
tity was based on the coherence and perma¬
nence of a uniform "mode of existing". The
idea that each of us is the sum of multiple
identities, on the other hand, makes it pos¬
sible for both therapists and their patients to
use all these complex and multidimensional
aspects of their personality.
This is not a purely theoretical question:
multiple identities also define our possibilities
and limits in the worlds of the emotions, the
intellect and action. What people allow or
refuse to allow themselves to think, feel and
do is closely linked to the structure of their
identities and to the degree of flexibility, cre¬
ativity and reflection that it allows, and to
their possibilities of further development.
Psychotherapy has become a field in
which all those involved can explore and dis¬
cover their resources in order to redefine
their lives.
25
