FRANCE Friday in Carpentras
An ethnologist describes
what happens on market day in a French provincial town
BY MICHELE DE LA PRADELLE
Friday is market day in Carpentras.
By seven o'clock in the morning
the centre of this old town in
southeast France, once sur¬
rounded by ramparts and today a
complex of twisting alleyways and pretty lit¬
tle squares, is already humming with life as
some 350 itinerant traders set up their stalls
and the local tradespeople lay out their wares
on the pavement in front of their shops.
Motor traffic is forbidden and a throng of
pedestrians is soon pushing its way between
the stalls. From amidst a miscellany of food¬
stuffs, odours and colours, the hawkers shout
to make themselves heard above the noise of
the crowd.
People do not come to the market at
Carpentras for purely economic reasons, since
its prices and its wares are pretty much the
same as those in the local supermarkets. They
come to enjoy the atmosphere, stroll around
and meet other people. The market is a tem¬
porary melting-pot for North African immi¬
grants from the northern parts of the town,
the local bourgeoisie, people from the sur¬
rounding countryside and, in summer, passing
tourists and Parisians who own houses in the
area. As they walk through the town on mar¬
ket day, people visit neighbourhoods where
perhaps they would never venture otherwise.
For a few hours the market brings together
social groups whose members do not nor¬
mally communicate because they live in dif¬
ferent parts of town and have different ways
of life and cultural values. Market traders are
the key players in setting up these encounters.
Everything they do is designed to trans¬
form making a sale into an event. It is impos¬
sible for a customer to make a quick purchase
and slip unobtrusively away. The trader sings
out the order in a loud voice, lauds the qual¬
ity of his or her wares, makes nonsense of the
usual customer-trader relationship and sets
I he pig market at Carpentras
(1841), a watercolour by Denis
Bonnet.
MICHELE DE LA PRADELLE
is a French ethnologist.
24 THE UNESCO Q>URIERB NOVEMBERI99Û

" I he market brings together
social groups whose members
do not normally
communicate." Above, market
scenes in Carpentras.
the ball rolling for an exchange of views in
which everyone around the stall is free to
take part.
The customers need no prompting to join
in. Standing around the pork butcher's van or
the fishmonger's counter, or just drifting
through the crowd, you find yourself bump¬
ing into all kinds of people and creating "mar¬
ket relationships" that are distinct from any
others in your everyday life, private or pro¬
fessional. Any pretext can be used to make
contact and spark off a conversation: a com¬
ment about the weather (it's about time we
had some rain), a touch of rheumatism, the
quality of the artichokes, how time flies. . . .
In this type of situation, you talk for the
sake of talking, to keep the conversation going.
After the opening gambit, you find yourself
making pseudo-confidences, treating some¬
one you have only known for five minutes as
an old friend. You stick to generalizations and
keep quiet about your real situation, which is
often very different from that of the person
you are talking to, and avoid subjects such as
your children's education, your garden, your
house and housework.
Local colour
This sociability is the result of a common
sense of belonging to the locality. When you



go to the market in Carpentras, you reaffirm
or lay claim to a collective identity. The mar¬
ket is one of the town's institutions, and to
buy your mullet or your olives there is a way
of proving to yourself and of showing to oth¬
ers that you are a local whether you really
are or not. If you want to be "somebody" in
France today, you have to be from "some¬
where". If you make remarks that show your
familiarity with the market if you ask the
butcher whether he still makes a certain kind
of pate, for example people will regard you
as a regular. For Parisians who own property
in the region, the market is an opportunity to
build up their stock of local affiliations.
This sociability cannot be divorced from
the historical background of the market,
which has been held in the same place on the
same day for as far back as anyone can
remember. The mere fact of buying your
goat cheese and your shoelaces on the Place
du Palais (a residence of the Avignon popes
in the fourteenth century) has symbolic
overtones. But it must be admitted that the
traditional character of Carpentras market
today is in some ways more apparent than
real. A market of travelling stallholders like
this one is full of reminders of a world that has
disappeared. If you are not careful, the soil on
the potatoes and the green sprigs sprouting
from the carrots might make you think the
hawker picked them only a few hours ago, at
dawn in his garden.
A taste of time gone by
The municipal authorities, as well as the cus¬
tomers and the hawkers, also try to recreate
the atmosphere of the market as it was in days
gone by. The wares are grouped together by
categories, as they were when the market was
also a wholesale market divided into a corn
market, a garlic market, a mulberry leaf mar¬
ket and other small trading posts where the
region's craft and farm produce were sold.
The only surviving trace of this old
arrangement is the truffle market, the biggest
in France. It is attended by truffle brokers and
preservers and by "rabassiers" local people
who look for truffles in their spare time with
their dogs in the hills around Carpentras. It is
a kind of secret ceremony, an unobtrusive
sideshow to the main market, but it gives
Carpentras market its touch of authenticity.
For a few hours a week at least, the citi¬
zens of Carpentras enjoy feeling that they are
shopping at a typical market of old Provence.
In the name of a shared identity, and under
the cover of anonymity they can practise a
generalized friendship which is both joyful
and feigned and has something in common
with philia the friendly spirit which
Aristotle regarded as an essential component
of a political community.
r 25
THE UNESCO (^URIERB NOVEMBER 1996
