A MOMENT OF GRACE
BY STEPHEN P. HUYLER
Millions of Indian women decorate their houses with sacred
paintings that fade within hours
I n nature around us, beauty is fleet¬
ing; it has no permanence. Droplets of
rriorning dew on a leaf, the billowing
I shapes of clouds, the dancing move¬
ments of a bird, the soft eyes of a calf, the smile
of a young child these all change quickly. They
are not frozen in time. Why should art be
frozen, be still? So much of our art here is made
only for the moment. It is beautiful right now.
The artist knows it, and the gods surely know
it. The earth just for this moment is more beau¬
tiful because of it. What more is needed? It
changes as we change, as the day changes, until
again we make something of beauty."
These words, spoken many years ago by
the famous Indian dancer Rukmini Devi, give
insight into one of the fundaments of Indian
creativity: the ephemeral. In India all existence
is believed to be in constant transition. Every¬
thing is in a cyclical state of creation and
destruction, of birth, death, and rebirth. There
is no permanence all is thought to be in bal¬
ance with its opposite. In a country where the
present is layered and infused with untold
generations of the past, history is viewed by
most as irrelevant.
Aside from the Indian concern for social
and cultural traditions, the documentation and
preservation of the ancient is primarily a West¬
ern invention. Even the most substantial of
structures, temples and palaces built and carved
of stone were deserted in the centuries before
the modern era when their original purposes
were no longer deemed pertinent. Tradition is
important only as a means for coping with the
present, not as a way to canonize the past. The
maintenance of inherited traditions enables the
observer to ensure balance and harmony in his
or her life.
Most traditional art is in some way tied to
ritual. The central motivation of many Hindu
rituals is darshan, literally translated as "view¬
ing" or "eye contact". Darshan is that sacred
moment in which the devotee experiences direct
contact with the deity. In Hinduism, darshan
is achieved through the spiritual presence of a
god or goddess who is believed to manifest
materially within a natural or man-made object.
Divine spirit may be invoked to enter any puri¬
fied container a sacred tree or rock, a sculpture
of stone or bronze, or even, in some cases, the
body of a priest or supplicant. To facilitate this
process, both object and devotee must undergo
preparation.
An ornately carved sculpture that has been
in worship for a thousand years will be
adorned each day with fresh milk and butter,
honey, sandal paste and ash and dressed anew
in clean garments and strings of heady-scented
blossoms. The store rooms and treasuries of
major temples are filled with magnificent tex¬
tiles and jewellery in order to provide the
appropriate change of appearance to fit each
day. In this way even the most permanent of
objects is inseparably tied to the transitory.
Each time it is viewed, its presence is different.
Left, walls in Orissa State
are generally painted in rice
paste, a pigment that is clear
when applied but turns white
as it dries.
10 3 Q>WTHE UNESCO lOURIER DECEMBER 1996

vv
The very material of many sacred sculptures
is ephemeral. The most basic of elements, clay,
is considered sacred in India. Hindu legends
abound with descriptions of the magical prop¬
erties of clay (mitti). From earth all creation is
fashioned and to earth it eventually returns.
Mittiis the body of the Mother Goddess, the
Sustainer of Life. It is easily procured and
sculpted and, when purified by fire or other
sacred elements, it becomes an appropriate ves¬
sel for facilitating darshan with the gods.
Once each year for special festivals in eastern
India, potters apply clay to structures of straw
and sticks to create large and elaborate sculp¬
tures of the gods that become the principal
images in community shrines. On festival day
all the sculptures are carried in procession to a
nearby river and allowed to dissolve in the cur¬
rent. The deity has been honoured, the devotees
have received their darshan, the god is requested
to return to the heavens, and the sculptures no
longer have any value. Ephemeral images of the
day of the year this
woman paints a different
design on the brick surface in
front of her home in Tamil
Nadu state, southern India.
Usually the painting only lasts
an hour or two before being
erased underfoot.
gods are created for specific festivals and rituals
throughout India.
Protection
from evil spirits
Most Indian society and ritual is centred on
the home. The deity that protects the home
and all of its inhabitants is generally viewed as
feminine, most often the Goddess Lakshmi,
who governs household activities and ensures
the health and welfare of each family member.
Her worship, usually conducted by women,
is considered essential to the maintenance of
harmony and prosperity. Throughout India
women regularly paint their homes with dec¬
orative designs sacred to the goddess. They
begin by covering the surface with a new layer
of wet clay mixed with cow dung. Upon this
"canvas", they paint designs handed down
from mother to daughter through countless
generations. Almost all of them create a sacred
THE UNESCO ^>URIER DECEMBER I99Ó

In Patna (Bihar) a potter
sculpts a clay image of the
sun-god Surya that will be
worshipped for two weeks at a
temporary shrine before being
immersed and dissolved in the
nearby Ganges River.
Berelow, women in Madurai
(Tamil Nadu) make auspicious
rice-paste drawings on their
doorsteps during Pongal, the
Tamil New Year festival
celebrated by cooking new rice.
decoration at least once a year, but some paint
a new one every single day!
The style and form of decoration is gov¬
erned by the traditions of each subculture. In
most areas the painting is applied to the front
of the house on or around the main entrance.
The door is considered the means of entry
into the home for good and evil spirits as well
as household members. Consequently, the
front door must be protected with symbols
auspicious to Lakshmi and prohibitive to
negative energy. The women of some areas
paint only their doors; others just the thresh¬
old; some paint the exterior walls facing the
street; while elsewhere they paint the ground
in front of the house. Each painting is a private
invocation by a woman to her deity. Although
often very beautiful, its artistic merit is usu¬
ally considered of secondary importance. Cer¬
tainly it would never be signed. It is a form of
personal communication, valuable only for
the moment of its creation. After that, it is
left to crumble or to be rubbed away, its full
function complete.
Exquisite rice-flour
designs
In the foothills of the Himalayas, women
paint their homes only once or twice each year:
for Deepavali, the annual festival honouring
Lakshmi, and for special birthdays or wed¬
dings in the family. They usually use organic
pigments such as rice flour for white, mineral
ochre for yellow and rust for red, vermilion
for bright red, and henna for green. The pow¬
ders are applied directly to the ground for
floor designs, or mixed with water to decorate
windows and doors.
They generally employ floral motifs sim¬
ilar to those that embellish their colourful
shawls. In the extremely dry desert of western
Rajasthan bordering Pakistan, the wives of
camel and goat herders decorate their homes
only once each year for Deepavali. They cover
the entire front walls of their homes in bold
geometric designs reminiscent of (but not
influenced by) mid-twentieth century West¬
ern geometric abstraction. A village which for
most of the year is barely distinguishable fro m
the drab landscape of the surrounding desert
is transformed into a powerful visual invoca¬
tion to the goddess on this important occa¬
sion. The colour will last only a few weeks
until it is bleached out by the incessant sun.
In contrast, the women living in the eastern
section of the same state repaint their homes
often. They resurface their walls and floors with
locally-mined red ochre for every important
occasion (religious festivals and important fam¬
ily events, such as conception, birth, reaching

puberty, betrothal and marriage). They then
cover both surfaces with decorations specific to
the event using pigment made from white lime.
Every single day of the year in more than
a million houses in the south Indian state of
Tamil Nadu women paint decorations on the
ground outside their front doors. On regular
days they use rice flour or ground white stone
powder applied to the dampened surface of
dirt or pavement. Some first mark out a grid
of dots which they connect in fluid designs,
while others work entirely freehand. On fes¬
tival days or during auspicious months, bril¬
liant commercial coloured powders are used
to fill in the complex patterns.
The women pride themselves on never
repeating a design and the streets are trans¬
formed into endless galleries of colourful
artistry. Most paintings are completed before
sunrise, at which time the artist usually walks
past her neighbours to compare their produc¬
tions and to gather inspiration for the follow¬
ing days' paintings. Within an hour or two all
the paintings are gone blown away or kicked
into dust by the ongoing traffic of the day.
In the eastern state of Orissa women grind
parboiled rice into a paste which they apply to
the mud walls of their houses using many dif¬
ferent techniques (by hand, rag and brush).
Many festivals herald the repainting of walls;
but the most important paintings are created
In a village in the western
desert of Rajasthan, women
cover the walls of their houses
with bold geometric patterns
dedicated to the goddess
Lakshmi.
during the two months from mid-December
until mid-February dedicated to the special
worship of Lakshmi. Both walls and floors
are covered with exquisite floral and animal
motifs on the most important day.
Among other symbolic designs, a tempo¬
rary shrine is painted on the floor inside and
a wooden altar set upon it. A terracotta pot
filled with freshly harvested rice is then placed
upon the altar. Encouraged by high-pitched
ululations, the Goddess is invited to invest
her spirit in the pot, thereby blessing the home
and its inhabitants. At the moment when con¬
tact (darshan) with the deity is experienced
by the women, the ceremony is complete, the
Goddess is requested to leave, and the paint¬
ings no longer have any value.
Throughout India women's sacred paint¬
ings are personal expressions within a tradi¬
tional medium, the voice of the feminine in a
male-dominated culture. They are a means of
communication between the soul of a devotee
and her duty, painted prayer which brings bal¬
ance to a woman's life and which creates a bond
to other women throughout the subconti¬
nent. Communion with the Divine, as per¬



ceived in many Hindu rituals, is usually fleet¬
ing: both the work of art and the experience it
produces are ephemeral. They create a moment
of grace and harmony within a cosmos of con¬
stant change.
the unesco »Courier December i99&
