tradition and renewa
GREECE
a living museum
byMkisRaftis
A unique theatre
is preserving
a nation's folklore
A carnival dance from
Náousa, northwestern Greece.
© The Dora Stratou Theatre of Greek Dances, Athens
ALKIS RAFTIS
is a Greek sociologist who is
president of the Dora Stratou
Theatre of Greek Dances, in
Athens. A member of the
International Dance Council, he
has published several works on
dance, including The World of
Greek Dance (1987).
34
I On the pine-covered Philopappus Hill
I opposite the Acropolis in Athens
stands an open-air theatre that has become an
institution now almost as famous as its neigh¬
bour across the road. It houses the Dora
Stratou Theatre of Greek Dances, which was
founded in 1953. Justly called "the living
museum of Greek dances", it is at the same
time a museum, a theatre, a research institute,
a school and, of course, a dance troupe.
The theatre is unique in many ways, not
least in the way it recruits its dancers. Every
year in January, dancers from all over Greece
come to the theatre and rehearse alongside
the older members of the company. They
continue to do so for about three months, by
which time the ones who don't make the
grade will have left, a process which brings
the numbers down to around thirty. From
this group a final selection of new dancers
can be made before performances begin in
May.
Once they are in the company, dancers
are required to work three hours a day
(including rehearsals and performances),
seven days a week for the five months of the
summer season. Since they are paid only a
small fee for expenses, it is obvious that for
the dedicated core of dancers this is a labour
of love.

What the audience sees on stage each
night is the result of months of painstaking
work not only in the form of rehearsals but
also research. Every step a dancer performs
has its roots in history and village culture.
The process begins when the theatre
decides on a particular village or island it
wants to include in its programme. A team of
folklorists is sent to gather information about
the history and folk customs of the area.
Then a team from the theatre, often joined by
a few dancers, goes to the village and stays
there for at least a few days in order to make
contact with the local people and study their
culture.
They conduct informal interviews with
the older members of the village, who are
encouraged to play traditional music and
dance for their guests. The music and dances
are recorded and the recordings are taken
back to Athens to be studied by musicians
and dancers from the theatre.
A group of villagers is also invited to
Athens, where members of the company
have the opportunity to dance and play
music with them and absorb their particular
style of execution. As unofficial "goodwill
ambassadors" for their local culture the vil¬
lagers are usually filled with pride, and feel a
renewed interest in keeping it alive at home.
At present the company has eighty different
villages in its repertoire and each year one or
two more are added to the list.
The principle used for dance research is
applied to music as well. Special attention is
given to the unique style of singing and
playing in each village and the particular
instruments that are popular there. The the¬
atre has two singers and fifteen permanent
folk musicians who play for rehearsals and
performances every day. No recorded music
is used, in order to maintain the personal rap¬
port between dancers and musicians which is
inherent in folk culture.
Great emphasis is also placed on the per¬
formers' attire. The theatre houses the
country's biggest collection of traditional
Greek costumes 2,500 at the last count
half of which are between fifty and a hundred
years old. The costumes cannot be bought in
shops and are cither sold to the theatre by
elderly villagers or else the villagers are asked
to make them, using traditional weaving,
dyeing and embroidery techniques.
As the "preserver of traditional Greek
dance" and a cultural centre for Greek folk¬
lore, one of the most important of the the¬
atre's activities is spreading the dance mes¬
sage via courses for beginners, advanced
dancers and children. Regular weekend
workshops are held featuring dance, music
and costumes from a particular region. The
© The Dora Stratou Theatre of Greek Dances, Athens
Theatre also holds summer courses for non-
Greek dance teachers from other countries
who want to incorporate Greek traditional
dance into their teaching programmes; this is
a particularly good way of ensuring that the
traditions of Greek dance are kept alive the
world over.
Finally, the Theatre acts as a publishing
house. It has produced forty-five records and
cassettes, as well as numerous ethnographic
books, all dealing with the different aspects of
Greek dance, costumes and music.
A couple performing a dance
from Kimi, a village on the
island of Euboea.
