Tlatelolco, shop window of
the Aztec empire
BY MARÍA REBECA YOMA MEDINA
AND LUÍS ALBERTO MARTOS LÓPEZ
M model of the city of
Tlatelolco.
In pre-Columbian Mexico a great
market was held in the Aztec city of
Tlatelolco. Its size and organization
amazed the Spanish-conquistadors,
who had seen nothing like it in six¬
teenth-century Europe.
Tlatelolco was a part of the Aztec capital,
Tenochtitlán which, so legend has it, was
founded on an island in Lake Texcoco in 1325.
The site was ideal for exploiting the lake's
resources, but seed, fruit, vegetables, building
materials and many other essential goods had
to be brought in from outside. In 1337, an
Aztec splinter group founded an independent
city, Tlatelolco, on an island north of
Tenochtitlán. The two cities soon became
r
rivals. Tlatelolco's strategic position and the
extraordinary business acumen of its inhabi-
	- \*
- -
:
\
tants were such that it acquired a formidable
commercial reputation.
A market suburb
At first the market of Tlatelolco dealt exclu¬
sively in primary products, but economic and
social development slowly encouraged the
growth of trade in luxury goods. This became
so important that an institution specializing in
long-distance trade was set up. It was known
as the Pochtecayotl and set up a trading net¬
work that reached as far as the provinces of
the Mayan empire.
In 1473, after a war in which no quarter
was given, Tlatelolco was defeated in battle by
an army from Tenochtitlán. Overnight the
proud city became a suburb of Tenochtitlán.
In view of the market's reputation and size,
however, the victors decided to encourage its
expansion by transporting to it a wide vari¬
ety of rare products from other cities and
regions of the Aztec empire.
The conquistadors'
amazement
When the Spanish conquered Mexico, the
market of Tlatelolco was at the height of its
prosperity. Contemporary Spanish chroni¬
clers describe how the market place was
located to the east of the city's great ceremo¬
nial enclosure on a vast square esplanade with
sides 200 metres long, fully paved and level
14 THE UNESCO QllJRIER« NOVEMBER 1906

I he capital of the Aztec
empire, Tenochtitlán, stood on
the site of what is now Mexico
City. Its rival city, Tlatelolco,
eventually became a suburb of
the great metropolis. Scene
from life in Tenochtitlán
(above) is a detail from a
series of murals by the
Mexican painter Diego Rivera
(1886-1957). The paintings,
which illustrate the history of
Mexico, are in the National
Palace, Mexico City.
MARIA REBECA YOMA MEDINA
and
LUÍS ALBERTO MARTOS LÓPEZ
are Mexican archaeologists.
and surrounded by arcades housing shops. At
the centre of the square was the momoztli, a
kind of truncated stepped pyramid which
was used for celebrations, ceremonies and
other public events.
Hernando Cortes, the Spanish conqueror
of Mexico, wrote that "This city has many
squares where trade and commerce go on all
the time. One square is twice the size of
Salamanca and surrounded with arcades that
more than 70,000 people pass through every
day, buying and selling."
Admirably sited near the quay of La
Lagunilla, where boats laden with merchan¬
dise tied up, the market was also joined to the
mainland by three causeways.



As the shop window of the Aztec world,
Tlatelolco market offered its customers an
amazing variety of exotic products from the
four corners of the empire fruit, animals,
medicines, cloth, hides, pottery, instruments,
tools and materials of all sorts. It also pro
vided many services: public baths, cafés, bar¬
ber shops, porters and slave markets.
Cacao currency
The merchants, known officially as tla-
macaque, were generally also the producers.
Middlemen known as regatonería, who
bought cheap and sold at a profit, did not
appear until the colonial period.
Barter was the normal practice, but some
commodities also served as currency. Cacao
was grown for this purpose in certain parts of
the empire, with the consequence that its
production was strictly controlled by the
government. The basic unit was the bean for
inexpensive items and the sack of 8,000 beans
(xiquipiles) for expensive items.
Handkerchief-sized squares of cotton
known as quachtli were also used as cur¬
rency. They came in three sizes, equalling 65,
80 and 100 cocoa beans respectively. A canoe
was worth a quachtli of 100 beans. A slave
THE UNESCO COURIER« NOVEMBER I906

Irade in Tenochtitlán, capital
of the Aztec empire. Detail
who could sing was worth 30 quachths, and from a mura| pa¡nt¡ng by
an excellent singer and dancer could fetch 40 Die2° Rivera in the Nat'°na'
Palace, Mexico City.
quachtlis, or 4,000 cocoa beans.
Gold dust was another form of payment.
It was poured into feather quills, whose value
was based on their length and diameter. Small
change came in the form of small, thin, T-
shaped copper coins, nuggets of gold, copper
or pewter, chips of jade and even the red shell
from a mollusc now known as the spondylus.
These trading activities obeyed well-
established laws and rules, for the market, like
other institutions in pre-Columbian Mexico,
functioned on a "correct and fair" (in qualli,
in yectli) basis. No business could be trans¬
acted outside the market area, where each
merchant was allotted a place corresponding
to the nature of his wares. Lengths of rope
and receptacles of various capacities were
standardized and used to measure quantities.
The price of each article was fixed in advance,
and any merchant caught cheating on mea¬
sures or price was severely punished.
There was a chamber where twelve judges
sat in permanent session to ensure fair deal¬
ing and settle differences. Superintendents
regularly went on rounds to maintain security
and prevent fraud.
When they founded Mexico City, the
Europeans created two new markets but nei¬
ther ever attained the size or the splendour of
Tlatelolco. But Tlatelolco did not survive the
Spanish conquest.
