Isabelle Leymarie talks to
JOCELYNE BEROARD
singer with the zouk group KASSAV
How did you get into music?
Jocelyne Bernard: My parents loved
music and had pretty eclectic tastes, like
many people in the West Indies. My
brothers and I listened to everything:
opera, jazz, bossa nova, Myriam Makeba,
Edith Piaf. . . . My mother played tangos
and béguines on the piano. Wc listened to
her religiously. But I particularly liked
the songs with words. I studied classical
piano for seven years, but I was lazy; I
would have liked to know how to play
without having to work at it. My brothers
studied the piano too, then one of them
started in on the drums and another on
the guitar. One of them composed and
played béguines and jazz on the piano,
and once in a while I would sing with him
for the fun of it.
How did you get started?
J. B.: The first time I sang in public was
quite spontaneous, at the year-end fes¬
tivities at my high school. I sang a song
I liked the tunc of; in creóle it was
called Maman, la grèv bare moin
("Mom, the strike blocked my way"). It
was a kind of protest song. Strikes
weren't very popular at the time in Mar¬
tinique. I didn't realize it then, but my
mother and teachers were very upset.
Later I settled in Paris, and one of my
brothers introduced me to the music
scene. I worked with several groups
before joining Kassav'.
What kind of music did people
listen to in the Antillesthe French-
speaking West Indieswhen you
were a teenager?
J. B.: Mini-jazz or the compas, styles
that came from Haiti and were imitated
by all the local groups; túmbele too, a
48
Zaire beat imported by the African band
Rico Jazz. Other groups played calypso.
There was even a group that did Otis
Redding slows, imitating his voice with
an awful American accent! And of course
older rhythms like the tango, the
mazurka or the creóle waltz. Rut this
kind of music is no longer played at
young people's zonks (dances) nowadays.
Where does the zouk come from?
J. B.: In the Antilles you first had the
traditional styles of African origin, born
at the time of slavery the belair and
other drum rhythms, as well as music
played by slaves to imitate their mas¬
ters, like the quadrille. . . .
What about city music like the
Saint-Pierre beguine?
J. B.: Far be it from me to put down the
beguine I love it but that's not all
you hear nowadays. While other
Caribbean and Latin American countries
were honing their own styles, music in
the Antilles stagnated, simply copying
salsa, calypso, jazz, the Dominican beat
and other foreign rhythms. Then Pierre-
Edouard Décimus, Georges Décimus
and Jacob Desvarieux, the core of the
Kassav' group, started thinking about
the weaknesses of Antillean music. The
inspiration was there, but the record¬
ings were poorly produced, poorly bal¬
anced and technically defective. What's
more, most of the musicians were self-
taught, and talented though they were,
they needed time to acquire certain
skills. The Antilles still suffer from a
lack of top-flight music schools and con¬
servatories. So Pierre-Edouard decided
to form a really professional group with
a typically Antillean style that corre
sponded to our temperament, and to
concentrate particularly on making
recordings and performing on stage.
With its innovative arrangements
based on traditional rhythms, zouk
has managed to unify Guadeloupe and
Martinique, musically speaking	
J. B.: Yes, maybe because Kassav' was
created in Paris, where the Décimus
brothers and Jacob Desvarieux, who all
come from Guadeloupe, were living at
the time. They wanted to play with the
best Antillean session musicians and so
they joined forces with musicians from
Martinique. Kassav' came out of that
encounter. Some Martiniquans ask me
occasionally why I use words from
Guadcloupian créole, but that's part of
my personal contribution to the group.
Does the use of creóle make it
more difficult for this music to get
an international hearing?
J. B.: No. A lot of people including
me don't understand everything
Michael Jackson sings. Rut that doesn't
stop him from being a hit in non-English-
speaking countries. Our music is strong
enough in itself to reach audiences of
different nationalities. You just have to
know how to listen.
In which countries, apart from
those of the Caribbean, is Kassav'
most successful?
J. B.: In Africa. Throughout the French
and Portuguese-speaking regions of
Africa. Angolan music, for example, is
close to the music of the Antilles, and at
one time the music of the Cape Verde
Islands was inlluenccd by zouk. Some
Cape Verde momas are reminiscent of

.4 leading Caribbean music group, Kassav'
invented zouk (from mazouk or mazurka, a
creóle uord meaning a village dance), a musical
genre that now has fans in many parts of the
world. The group recently made a recording
entitled Difé1, featuring Stevie Wonder and Ray
Barreño as guest artistes. Left, Jocelyne Bernard
and the other members of the Kassav' group.
slow béguines. Rut even in New York,
where we played at the Africa Fest, or
in Japan and Russia, the audience gets
swept up in the joie de vivre of our music.
In New York we had the Haitians
jumping for joy.
Are the different islands in the
Caribbean receptive to one another?
J. B.: If you listen closely, all their music
is similar. All you have to do is slow down
some rhythms and you recognize others.
Jamaican ragga isn't very far from zouk;
nor is bossa nova. I don't think it is pos¬
sible to invent a new rhythm these days.
It's become a matter of combining
rhythms and making arrangements.
Are the words very important for
your fans?
J. B.: Yes, because people who like a
song, like to sing it. When we perform in
the Antilles, the audience sings along
with us. The same thing happens in
Africa; the people don't speak creóle,
but they learn the words phonetically.
That's why it's important not to write
just any old thing.
How does the group get its ideas?
J. B.: Everyone brings along their own com¬
positions. Sometimes they are greeted
enthusiastically, sometimes they're criti
cized pretty severely. We work as a group,
though, even when we're doing arrange¬
ments. Everyone makes a contribution,
and we talk it all through.
Whereas calypso and other forms
of Caribbean music have long
reflected the rivalry between the
sexes, your lyrics are more
conciliatory. Do women in the
Antilles today express their
sensuality more freely than before?
J. B.: Certainly. Even just a short time
ago it was rare in traditional songs for
women to present themselves as "mata¬
dors". All they did was cry over lost
love. A woman who sang late at night at
dances and hung out until all hours
with musicians was looked down on. In
the West Indies there are still men who
don't think much of women. But if I
tease men in my songs and try to make
them understand certain problems, it's
because I want to promote a better
understanding between men and
women. I always try to bring hope and
not to dwell on the negative side of life,
even in the greatest distress. Even in a
small way, it's better to contribute to
happiness and peace in the world,
heartbreaking though it is to see how
violence is spreading everywhere.
Through music we can say what other
people do not always dare to express
but we have no right to fan the flames
of hatred.
Do you agree with certain
Antillean musicians who say that
zouk today is too commercial?
J. B.: Antillean music is in an awkward
position. Many "fake" groups con¬
sisting of a single person playing and
composing on a computer have recently
appeared on the scene, and the public
has heard a lot of mediocre stuff. When
we began, Kassav' disks flooded the
market. The craze, for our disks and
zouk in general was incredible. When
people saw that the formula was suc¬
cessful, everybody jumped on the band¬
wagon. Today the public is spoiled for
choice, but Kassav' still leads the field
for this kind of music. The flame dies
down if we go a long time without
recording, but it comes back to life as
soon as we bring out a quality disc. A lot
of instrumentalists and singers admit
that they wait for a Kassav' recording to
come out and bring them inspiration. H
1. Difé, CI) Columbia 480697 2.
ISABELLE LEYMARIE,
a Franco-American musicologist, has recently published
Du tango au reggae, Musiques noires d'Amérique latine
et des Caraïbes ("From the Tango to Reggae: Black
Music from Latin America and the Caribbean",
Flammarion, Paris, 1996).
49
