British Columbia's shrinking rainforest
(B
The Raincoast Conservation Society
(RCS) of Canada is sending out an
SOS to draw attention to the situa¬
tion of the rainforest in British Columbia,
where entire mountainsides have been
denuded of trees by logging and beaches
are strewn with thousands of logs, blocking
access to the sea. The amount of wood
logged since 1911 amounts to approximately
1.3 billion cubic metres, enough timber to
load 3.7 million logging trucks. Laid end to end
the logs would twice circle the globe. Only
200,000 hectares of this old-growth forest
are protected, in two reserves and four parks.
Clear-cutting is going on at the rate of 40 to
50,000 hectares per year.
The Amazon rainforest attracts a lot of
news coverage, but few voices have been
raised against the massive exploitation of
the world's oldest and largest temperate rain¬
forest, which stretches for 900 km. along
British Columbia's Pacific coast and covers
about 6.5 million hectares. Of 354 coastal
watersheds greater than 5,000 hectares,
two-thirds have been opened to mining and
logging. Vancouver Island is home to the
champions of the Canadian rainforest: one
red cedar with a circumference of almost 19
i
metres could be as many as 2,000 years old;
a Douglas-fir with a broken top is 74 metres
tall and more than 12 metres around; there
¡s a towering 95-metre-tall Sitka spruce. Many
of the biggest trees ever to grow in the rain¬
forest have already been cut down. Any
undiscovered giants that may be hiding in
the remotest valleys are still unprotected.
This exceptionally wet habitat (rainfall
averages from one to two metres per year) is
home to moss, lichen, some 3,000 species
of mushroom and a wide variety of animals
including grizzlies, black bears and the rare Ker-
mode white bear, wolves, deer, wolverines,
pumas, lynxes, stoats, beavers and minks.
Grizzlies are under threat from clear-cutting,
hunting and poaching. Even wild salmon,
which until recently abounded in the region's
rivers, are now less numerous because of
overfishing and the introduction of salmon
hatcheries (the wild fish often get intercepted
in harvests targeting artificially reared salmon).
A dozen Indian First Nation communi¬
ties, which have always occupied these lands,
have organized spectacular demonstra¬
tions far without successat the head¬
quarters of the provincial government which
grants logging licences. One of their tradi¬
tions is to try to conciliate the powers of
nature by carving immense totem poles from
red cedar. Is it too far-fetched to wonder if
some day, for want of trees, they may have
to carve their totems in concrete? I
Raincoast Conservation Society
9-416 Dallas Road, Victoria,
British Columbia,
Canada V8V1A9
Tel: (604) 361-3402;
fax: (604) 383-6240.
E-mail: raincoas@tnet.net.can
47
