Market
globalization
BY MARIE-FRANCE BAUD
-
Phil Huling © Stock Illustration Source, Pans
The major economic phenomenon of recent years, globalization is benefitting the
strong countries and bypassing the weak
MARIE-FRANCE BAUD
is a French economic journalist.
The phenomenon known as the
globalization of the economy,
which tended to be overlooked
during the high-growth years and
the second half of the 1980s, is now
a front-page issue. It is not, however, a recent
development. In response to imperatives of
size and competitiveness, firms from many
countries have long been establishing them¬
selves in areas of the world with strong eco¬
nomic growth. They go wherever they can
improve productivity. Their growth strategy
has been helped by financial globalization (the
free circulation of capital and the lifting of
exchange controls).
This dctermination'to conquer new mar¬
kets by setting up directly in the countries
concerned has of course accelerated the
break-up of the production system. Trade in
manufactured goods has increased at the
expense of primary agricultural, mining and
energy products. As a proportion of overall
trade, it went up from 50 per cent in 1970 to
70 per cent in the early 1990s, according to a
European Community survey of May 1993.
Direct foreign investment has also
increased sharply, though it is confined to the
world's three most developed regions North
America, Europe, and Southeast Asia and
Japan. Markets are tending to become inte¬
grated within rather than between regions. In
1993, for example, Japanese industry invested
$65 billion in Southeast Asia (its main area of
investment), more than the figure for the
United States and Europe combined. Markets
are increasingly open, however. In 1995, the
United States was the main beneficiary of direct
French foreign investment flows.
This rise in the volume of direct foreign
investment has forced industrial groups in the
developed countries to rely increasingly on inter¬
national supplies. These groups are now restru c-
turing their activities on a global scale, upsetting
the competitive environment and the organiza¬
tion of skilled labour by repositioning and relo¬
cating operations in low-wage countries. A
THEUNESCO (^URIERB NOVEMBER1996 ^

Of the $23 trillion of global gross domestic product (GDP) in 1993, $18 trillion was
in the industrialized countries, and only $5 trillion in the developing countries, even though
they have nearly 80 per cent of the world's population.
In the past 30 years the poorest 20 per cent of the world's people saw their share
of global income decline from 2.3 per cent to 1.4 per cent. Meanwhile, the share of the rich¬
est 20 per cent rose from 70 per cent to 85 per cent. In other words, the ratio of the shares
of the richest and poorest doubledfrom 30/1 to 61/1; the proportion of people enjoy¬
ing per capita income growth of at least 5 per cent a year more than doubled (from 12 to
27 percent), while the proportion of those experiencing negative growth more than tripled
(from 5 per cent to 18 per cent).
The assets of the world's 358 individual dollar billionaires exceed the
combined annual incomes of countries with 45 per cent of the world's people.
Source: Human Development Report 1996, UNDP.
growing amount of international trade in inter¬
mediate goods is apparently between compa¬
nies belonging to the same multinational groups.
Trade within the same group is believed to
amount to 25 per cent of world trade.
Globalization and


pauperization
Economic globalization was on the agenda of
the G7 summit of leading industrialized coun¬
tries held in Lyons, France, in June 1996. While
it is beneficial to world trade, it is also having
negative repercussions on social cohesion and
the equilibrium of the monetary and financial
system. Evidence of this is to be found in the
figure of 19 million unemployed in Europe,
where growth is stagnating at below 1 per cent,
and in the upheavals triggered by the Mexican
crisis during the winter of 1994-1995.
According to the 1996 Human Develop¬
ment Report produced by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), average
incomes fell in 70 countries during the 1980s.
During the 1990-1993 period alone, average
incomes fell by a fifth or more in 2 1 countries,
mainly in Eastern Europe and the Common¬
wealth of Independent States (CIS).
Globalization benefits the strong coun¬
tries and puts the weakest at a disadvantage:
"The poorest countries, where 20 per cent of
the world's population lives, have seen their
share of world trade fall between 1960 and
1990 from 4 per cent to less than 1 per cent,"
notes the UNDP report. "Although private
investment flows to developing countries
increased between 1970 and 1994 from $5 bil-
W THE UNESCO Q>URIER1 NOVEMBERI<W6
everish activity on the
Mexico City stock exchange on
5 January 1995, when Mexico
was mired in financial crisis.
lion to $173 billion, three-quarters of this
went to just ten countries, mostly in East and
Southeast Asia and Latin America."
Yet in 1995 the World Bank forecast that
the expansion of international trade and finan¬
cial markets would encourage sustainable
economic growth, and that this growth
would contribute to a considerable improve¬
ment in living conditions in developing coun¬
tries, which, according to these projections,
arc expected to account for 38 per cent of
world production by 2010, as compared with
22 per cent in the 1980s. The developing
countries would in that case account for half
of world consumption and capital formation
in terms of the quantity of goods and services
that can be bought.
Relocation and
unemployment
Many developed countries have realized that it
is in their interest to internationalize the manu¬
facturing process. As a result they are relocating
their industrial production so as to take advantage
of low wage costs and to move closer to the
sources of raw materials and primary products.
Does this mean that relocation is respon¬
sible for the unemployment that has hit the
majority of developed countries? Some
authorities, including Charles Oman, who
heads a working group on these problems at
the Organization for Economic Co-opera¬
tion and Development (OECD), believe that
underemployment is more likely to be due to
the difficulty inherent in moving from a
heavyweight process of industrial production

to more flexible and productive methods
enhanced by new technologies in other
words, in leaving the era of mechanization
and entering the era of automatization.



Some economists argue that what is really
at stake in the relocation process is not so
much the ability to withstand competition
from low-wage countries as the ability to cap¬
ture market share in sophisticated products
and leading-edge technologies. According to
that argument, the real problems have been
masked by lumping together the axing of jobs
and the redeployment of production.
The Washington accords
Under a system of fixed exchange rates,
exchange mechanisms play only a secondary
role. The development of international rela¬
tions and the general liberalization of capital
movements have ushered in a new mecha¬
nism in exchange rate formation. Since the
Washington accords of December 1971,
which caused the collapse of the international
monetary system established at Bretton
Woods in 1944 (under which each currency
had a fixed parity expressed in gold), most
states have stopped setting the official value
of their currency. The observed or antici¬
pated evolution of rates is far more influential
than the value of the currency.
One last unwelcome effect that financial
globalization and deregulation have had is to
introduce a considerable element of fragility
into the world economy. Macroeconomic
trends seem to be influenced more by the
opinion of the market than by political deci¬
sions for which governments arc accountable
to their voters. Worse, financial reactions can
degenerate into cumulative trends, whether
downward or upward, and as a result send
prices spiralling into regions that bear no rela¬
tion to basic economic facts, since markets are
incapable of self-regulation. Every twenty-four
hours, more than a trillion dollars move around
the world seeking the highest yield. This flow
of capital "has opened the world to the opera¬
tion of a global financial market that leaves even
the strongest countries with limited autonomy
over interest rates, exchange rates or other
financial policies," UNDP reports.
This rampant globalization is generating
inharmonious economic development which
is causing mounting pauperization instead of
Rhodn Jones © Panos Pictures, London
creating jobs. Each year the ranks of the
world's poor swell by 25 million. Differences
in economic performance have grown so
huge that two distinct worlds have come into
being, with the gulf between rich and poor
growing continually.
At the close of this year's G7 summit, the
seven leading industrialized countries called for
a new world partnership for development that
would include developing countries, developed
countries and multilateral institutions, so that the
poorer countries can pro fit from globalization.
Were the political decision-makers just con¬
cerned to make the right noises, or have they at
last realized the necessity of such a step ?
M window display of Western
goods in a shop in Kunming,
capital of Yunnan Province in
southern China.
THE UNESCO (¿URI ERI NOVEMBER 1906
35
