As it was...
THE UNESCO G)UR,ER
November 1980
The psychology
of marbles
by Jean Piaget
1 Cahiers Vilfre tic» Parcto, 1966 no 10, Geneva, Diaz. Author s note.
Children's games constitute the most
admirable social institutions. The game
ol marbles, for instance, contains an
extremely complex system of rules which constitute a well-
marked social reality, "independent of individuals" and trans¬
mitted, like a language, from one generation to another.
We simply asked ourselves (1) how the individuals adapt
themselves to these rules, i.e. how they observe rules at each
age and level of mental development; (2) how far they become
conscious of rules, in other words, what types of obligation
result (always according to the children's ages) from the
increasing ascendancy exercised by rules.
During the first part, it is sufficient to ask the children
how one plays marbles. "Teach me the rules anil I'll play with
you." The child then draws a square, takes half the marbles,
puts down his "pose", and the game begins. It is important
to bear in mind all possible contingencies of the game and to
ask the child about each. This means that you must avoid
making any suggestions. All you need to do is to appear com¬
pletely ignorant, and even to make intentional mistakes so that
the child may each time point out clearly what the rule is.
Naturally, you must take the whole thing very seriously, all
through the game. Then you ask who has won and why, and
if everything is not quite clear, you begin a new set.
Then comes the second part of the interrogatory, that,
namely, which bears upon the consciousness of rules. You begin
by asking the child if he could invent a new rule. Once [it] has
been formulated, you ask the child whether it could give rise
to a new game: "Would it be all right to play like that with your
pals? The child either agrees to the suggestion or disputes it.
If he agrees, you immediately ask him whether the new rule
is a "(air rule, a "real" rule, one "like the others", and try to
get at the various motives that enter into the answers.
If. on the other band, the child disagrees with all this, you
ask whether the new rule could not by being generalized
become a real rule. "When you are a big boy, suppose von tell
your new rule to a lot of children, then perhaps they'll all play
that way and everyone will forget the old rulo, riten which rule
will be fairest yours that everyone knows, or the old one that
everyone has forgotten?" The main point is to find out whether
one may legitimately alter rules and whether a rule is fair or just
because it conforms to general usage (even ncwlv introduced),
or because it is endowed with an intrinsic and eternal value.
Having cleared up this point it will be easy enough to ask
the two following questions. (1) Have people always played as
THE UNESCO lOURILKB S'OVIMBER IW;
49

THE PIAGET CENTENARY
Through its International Bureau of Education (IBE), Unesco is
closely associated with many of the celebrations, including sem¬
inars, publications and exhibitions, which are marking the cen¬
tenary of Jean Piaget's birth. An issue of the international edu¬
cational journal Prospects (vol. XXVI, n° 1, March 1996) was
devoted to a study of the topicality of Piaget's educational think¬
ing. The 45th session of the International Education Conference,
which was held in Geneva during the first week of October 1996,
examined the role of teachers in a changing world and included
a round table meeting on Piaget and education. An exhibition on
Piaget's life was shown during the Conference and was later pre¬
sented at Unesco's Paris Headquarters during the 150th session
of the Organization's Executive Board. A symposium on "Piaget
after Piaget", organized with Unesco support, is being held on
15 and 16 November 1996 at the University of Paris-Sorbonne.
(For further information, tel: (33 0) 1 46 33 14 45; Fax: (33 0) 1
40 46 96 51).
they do today? (2) What is the origin of rules: Are they invented
by children or laid down by parents and grown-ups in general?
The main thing is to grasp the child's mental orientation.
Does he believe in the mystical value of rules or in their final¬
ity? Does he subscribe to a heteronymy of divine law, or is
he conscious of his own autonomy? This is the only question
that interests us. The child has naturally got no ready-made
beliefs on the origin and endurance of the rules of his games;
the ideas which he invents then and there are only indices of
his fundamental attitude.
In practice
From the point of view of the practice or application of rules
four successive stages can be distinguished.
A first stage of a purely motor and individual character,
during which the child handles the marbles at the dictation
of his desires and motor habits. This leads to the formation
of more or less ritualized schémas, but since play is still
purely individual, one can only talk of motor rules and not of
truly collective rules.
The second may be called egocentric. This stage begins
at the moment when the child receives from outside the
example of codified rules, that is to say, some time between
the ages of two and five. But though the child imitates this
example, he continues to play either by himself without both¬
ering to find play-fellows, or with others, but without trying
to win, and therefore without attempting to unify the dif¬
ferent ways of playing. In other words, children of this stage,
even when they are playing together, play each one "on his
own" (everyone can win at once) and without regard for any
codification of rules.
A third stage appears between seven antl eight, which we
call the stage of incipient co-operation. Each player now tries
to win, and all, therefore, begin to concern themselves with the
question of mutual control and of unification of the rules. But
while a certain agreement may be reached in the course of one
game, ideas about the rules in general are still rather vague.
Finally, between the years of eleven and twelve, appears a
fourth stage, which is that of the codification ofrules. Not only
is every detail of procedure in the game fixed, but the actual
code of rules to be observed is known to the whole society.
These stages must of course be taken only for what they
W THE UNESCofoUR'ER" NOVEMBER I99Û
are worth. It is convenient for the purposes of exposition to
divide the children up in age-classes or stages, but the facts
present themselves as a continuum which cannot be cut up
into sections. This continuum, moreover, is not linear in char¬
acter, antl its general tlirection can only be observed by
schematizing the material antl ignoring the minor oscillations
which render it infinitely complicated in detail.
Consciousness of rules
Let us turn now to the consciousness of rules, [whose] pro¬
gression runs through three stages.
During the first stage rules are not yet coercive in charac¬
ter, either because they are purely motor, or else (at the
beginning of the egocentric stage) because they are receivetl,
as it were, unconsciously, antl as interesting examples rather
than as obligatory realities.
During the second stage (apogee of egocentric and first
half of co-operating stage) rules are regarded as sacred and
untouchable, emanating from adults and lasting forever. Every
suggested alteration strikes the child as a transgression.
Finally, during the third stage, a rule is looked upon as a
law tlue to mutual consent, which you must respect if you
want to be loyal but which it is permissible to alter on the
condition of enlisting general opinion on your side.
The correlation between the three stages in the develop¬
ment of the consciousness of rules and the four stages relat¬
ing to their practical observance is of course only a statisti¬
cal correlation and therefore very crude. But broadly
speaking the relation seems to us indisputable.
The collective rule is at first something external to the
individual and consequently sacred to him; then, as he grad¬
ually makes it his own, it comes to that extent to be felt as
the free product of mutual agreement antl an autonomous
conscience. And with regard to practical use, it is only nat¬
ural that a mystical respect for laws shoultl be accompanied
by a rudimentary knowledge and application of their con¬
tents, while a rational and well-founded respect is accompa¬
nied by an effective application of each rule in detail.
There would therefore seem to be two types of respect for
rules corresponding to two types of social behaviour. This con¬
clusion deserves to be closely examinetl, for if it holds good,
it should be of the greatest value to the analysis of child
morality.
This article was adapted from "The Rules of the Game", a study carried out by
Jean Piaget (with Mme. V.-J. Piaget and Messrs M. Lambercier and L. Martinez)
which constitutes the first chapter of The Moral Judgment of the Child,
published in 1932 by Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co. Ltd, London.
Text © Copyright. Reproduction prohibited.
