Faces of Sarajevo.
Stills from Hervé Nisic's
fl Im The Height of Silence
(1995).



The Height
of Silence
interview with Hervé Nisic
The Height of Silence, a
documentary filmed by Hervé
Nisic in the beleaguered city
of Sarajevo in 1995, consists
entirely of 'silent interviews'
in which men, women and
children gaze at the camera.
Here, Canadian journalist
Hadani Ditmars asks Nisic
about the meaning of silence
in his film.
What role does silence play in your film?
Hervé Nisic: It is the whole essence of it. When I
first went to Sarajevo during the war, I was struck
by the fact that people were fed up with trying
to explain to foreigners what was really happening
there, the stories that were not told by the mass
media. They also seemed to be fed up with
listening to people promising help and then not
following through.
Sarajevo had become a kind of no-man's-land
of broken promises and inaction. Its people had
reached a point where words were useless and
meaningless, and were being used as a kind of
phony communication, a point where it was
better not to say anything. There was a feeling
that "Everybody knows that the situation is bad,
everybody's tried everything, let's just shut up
aboutit."
Even if they thought that you might be honest
and really wanted to help them, there was still a
feeling of why bother? nothing will change. There
will still be bloodshed and massacres no matter
what we do. Things had reached that point in
Sarajevo.
There was a feeling that I was just visiting people
in a kind of prison, that I could go back home but
that they had to stay there. As the "visitor" I could
go away, but they had to stay there, under siege.
19

Somehow, silence felt like the only possible
basis for real communication with the people of
Sarajevo. But it was also a kind of test. I often felt
that the people were asking me, with their eyes,
"Are you really able to stand the way that I look at
you? If you can do that, then perhaps I might talk
to you afterwards."
All communication was through the eyes.
So is silence a sign of despair or a sign of
defiance in your film?
H.N.: Silence is very ambiguous, and this is why I
chose to use it as a means of communication in
my film. I don't think there is a word in any lan¬
guage that can describe the situation in Bosnia.
Silence is the only way of transmitting its com¬
plexity and the people's feelings. There is an
immense dignity in the people of Sarajevo. You
can see it. I am sure that anyone who looks at the
images in my film will see how dignified those
people are. Everything is contained in those
images. Words don't add anything. You can't
make any further comment on such images. Even
as I'm talking now, what can I add ? If you've seen
those images, then you understand. There is no
need for words.
Does silence play a role in Bosnian
tradition?
H.N.: Silence has always been part of the way that
you're welcomed. It's based on respect. When
you go into a café, for example, if people have any
interest in you, they will stare at you and stop
talking. It can last for quite a while.
But this film is not about the Bosnians. It's a
film about the relationship we Westerners have
with Bosnia. It's a film that implicates the viewer.
The silence of the Bosnians responds to the
silence of the West in the face of the tragedy. It's a
direct reaction to the impotence of the West, to its
apparent inability to act, to its "false presence",
and its official line which is: "We are here, but
we won't intervene, because we don't want to
provoke things."
This official attitude carries in itself its own
condemnation, and there is no better condem¬
nation than silence. The Bosnian people don't
want to be angry with us, with the West, with our
governments. They want to keep their silence. I
suppose that this silence is also a way for the
Bosnians to say "We despise you." But at the same
time the way that they look at us is full of hope.
They are saying with their silence, "Look, here
we are, we're human beings just like you, see
what we are."
20
So in a way, your film bears witness to the
real situation in Bosnia.
H.N.: Yes. The silence in my film was a way of
bearing witness, but also of crying, of shouting, in
a way that is so dignified that it denies any
response or counter-attack. If someone shouts
at you, it's easy just to shout back at them. If
someone shouts at you silently, what can you do?
Is silence, then, a kind of protection for the
people in your film?
H.N.: Yes. It's a kind of protection, but it's also a
way of trying to make the other person think or
reflect. It is as if the Bosnians were saying, "If I
remain silent when I'm a victim, what do you

think of that?" The other person is forced into a
position of re flection. It is also a way of provoking
another level of understanding in the viewer. This
became clear when I was making the film. I
described my project to every person that I
filmed. I told each one, "I want you to look at the
camera as if you were looking at the people who
were beyond the limits of Sarajevo on the other
side of the siege." The gaze of the Sarajevans was
intended as a gaze that would pierce through the
camera, through me who was filming, through
the viewers on the other side through time and
space.
Is it more difficult to twist silences than
words?
H.N.: We all know that, if you consider the amount
of information that goes from one person to
another, perhaps something like 10 per cent goes
through actual words. Perhaps another 20 per
cent goes through the way we express our¬
selves through tone of voice, and so on. And
the rest, that is to say most of the information,
comes from the whole body. When we see or
make films, we tend to think that dialogue says
it all. It's not true. Dialogue says only 1 0 or 20 per
cent of it. The rest is presence. The film under¬
lines the power of non-verbal communication.
But didn't people talk to you, in between
your silent "interviews"?
H.N.: Oh yes, sometimes it took me three or four
hours just to get the right three-minute take.
Sometimes, it took us that long just to get used to
each other. The only rule was that there was only
one shot, one frame, one take. So I had to wait for
the right moment, when everybody had agreed on
when and how we would do the take, when
everybody felt comfortable. There is no artificial
light in the film. Everything was filmed in a very
natural way, to show the people as they are.
In your shots of the landscape of Sarajevo,
there is a sense that the ruined buildings and
the barren fields are also keeping silent, as
witnesses to a tragedy.
H.N.: What I would say is that this kind of silence
is really a basis for dialogue. I hope that my film
will make people talk.
What effect did it have on you to film the
Sarajevan "gaze"?
H.N.: It would have killed me if it were a weapon.
I was hurt by those glances. But I was happy that
they projected such strength. Usually the
Bosnians are shown as victims in the media. And
the more you see people as victims, the more
you accept that they are treated as victims.
I was offered the opportunity to film people
who had been wounded in the war, but I refused.



I wanted to show the Bosnians as beautiful, strong
people, not as victims or complainers. I didn't
want to be a voyeur, either. By giving them the
opportunity to be silent in front of the camera, I
was giving them a chance to show their dignity
and humanity. Using silence was the strongest
way to do this. A film about silence became the
only real means of communication.
HADANI DITMARS
is a Canadian writer and journalist
who writes about issues related to
intercultural dialogue.
21
