on
children
and violence
the screen
by Nils Gunnar Nilsson
NILS GUNNAR NILSSON,
a Swedish publishing and media
specialist, is a member of
Unesco's Executive Board.
Agrowing number of countries are con¬
cerned about violence on the screen
on television or in computer games
and a number of meetings have been held on
the subject in different parts of the world. In
March 1995 a world summit on children and
television was held in Melbourne (Australia),
and an international conference in Lund
(Sweden) in September was totally devoted
to violence on the screen and the rights of the
child.
At Melbourne more than 500 producers,
researchers, media executives and other
experts took part in a number of panels. A
projjosal by Anna Home, Head of BBC Tele¬
vision Children's Programmes, for a "chil¬
dren's television charter" led to a wide-
ranging debate. The proposal suggested cer¬
tain minimum requirements such as balanced
programming, broadcasting in regular slots
when children are able to watch, a wide
diversity of content, and sufficient funds.
After heated discussion, the charter was
revised into a new seven-point version which is
now considered official. The first point
stresses that children have the right to high-
quality programmes which are specifically
made for them and "which do not exploit
them". This is a reference to the fact that
children have become a steadily growing con¬
sumer group in the expanding world of chil¬
dren's television. This was highlighted by
Ellen Wartella, professor of communication
at the University of Texas, who pointed out
that we have learned that children are a
"special" audience, with "special psycholog¬
ical needs and social interests, requiring us to
tailor media production to them". There has
been "a virtual explosion of research studies
on children's reactions to television," she
added, "and we know how to make pro¬
grammes that both entertain and educate
children."
Professor Wartella went on to discuss an
alarming phenomenon, "the increasing com¬
mercialization of children's lives." "The past
twenty-five years have seen media industries
move their target downwards," she noted,
"first to pre-adolescents, then to children in
primary school and younger, and the vehicles
for this have been television and videos.
Today young children all over the world, even
pre-schoolers, are increasingly the target of
commercial messages. Young children's cul¬
ture is a culture dominated by television and
toys." With the rise of privatized commer¬
cial television all over the world, thanks to
satellite and cable, a "remarkably commer¬
cialized media culture for children" is being
created, at a time when public broadcasting
is under attack and declining.
At the Lund conference, more than 140
delegates from twenty-five countries took
part in or listened to the five panel discus¬
sions, ranging from "reports from the
research front line" to artistic depictions of
violence "From Shakespeare to Stephen
King". In one session representatives from
the media were confronted with defenders
of children's rights; another session focused
on the Convention and its implementation,
and the final panel asked the question:
Where do we go from here?
One panelist, ambassador Thomas Ham-
marberg (co-chairman of the United Nations
Commission which is monitoring the imple¬
mentation of the Convention), argued strongly
for a joint UlNESCO-UNICEF commission
which would organize a clearing house where
research and other information could be col-
48

VVS4WSW-
lectcd and distributed, and possibly publish
an annual blacklist of the names of the media
companies with the worst record of violence
on the screen. The Swedish Minister of Cul¬
ture, Ms Margot Wallström, who chaired the
summing up panel, supported the idea of a
clearing-house and was willing to give finan¬
cial support at the outset.
UNESCO will be publishing a full report of
the Lund Conference later this spring. The
ideas that were put forward there are also
reflected in the conclusions of an interna¬
tional survey, Violence in Broadcasting
Worldivide, prepared for UNESCO by the
Broadcasting Standards Council in Britain,
which will also be published in the near
future.
It was clearly stated in Lund that the
answer to the problem of growing violence on
the screen is not censorship. This conclusion
is repeated in UNESCO's recent far-reaching
World Report on Culture and Development.
Freedom of expression is a fundamental
freedom. The best way to cope with excesses
in violence, and even pornography is to use
the power of the consumer. In a free market
economy, where most media are commer¬
cially based, the viewer-consumer actually
has the last word, at least theoretically. You
can push the button and say "no thank you.
We don't buy products which are advertised
in too violent a media environment". If there's
anything big companies are scared of, it's a
bad image.
Ultimately, it's a matter of consciousness
raising. Twenty or thirty years ago, most
people did not know the word "ecology".
Today it's on everybody's lips. Jo Groebel,
professor of mass communication at the Uni¬
versity of Utrecht (Netherlands), and a world
authority on research into violence in the
media, has made the following comparison.
"In the 1960s and 1970s we thought we had
got rid of toxic substances when we dumped
them out of sight in rivers and oceans. Later
on, we learned the hard way that poisonous
waste does not disappear; it reappears just
where wc never expected it."
Perhaps the time has come to start
thinking in terms of "media ecology". fl
Drawing by Terry Sirrell.
49
