transmuted
into poetry
lort Louis, capital of
Mauritius, in 1870



THE COOLIES' ODYSSEY
BY KHALEEL TORABULLY
M Tamil "signature" on the
front of Mauritian business
premises built in 1895.
arge numbers of men and women
left India during the nineteenth
century to work as coolies in
countries where the practice of
' slavery had recently been officially
abolished. Out of their exile grew a pattern
of life and poetics which might be called
"coolitudc".
It is impossible to understand the essence
of "coolitude" without charting the coolies'
voyage across the seas. That decisive experi¬
ence, that coolie odysscy, left an indelible
stamp on the imaginary landscape of coolitude.
As the time to sail drew near, a first taboo
needed to be broken. Hindus who cross the
ocean, which is peopled with hooghlis (mon¬
sters), cut themselves off from the sacred
waters of the River Ganges. They are
doomed to wander eternally and lose any
chance of reincarnation. It seems that the
British placed huge cauldrons of water from
the Ganges on board ship so that emigrants
could perform their ritual ablutions. The
subterfuge apparently induced the most
reluctant voyagers to entrust their souls to
the world beyond the seas.
It was the first time most coolies had
ever seen the sea, the first time they found
themselves on the verge of the unknown,
wrenched away from their traditional view
of the world. An age-old social taboo was
also broken when Indians of every caste
were packed into the steerage, which was
open to the skies. They were equal before
life and death on the ocean even though the
voyage would only last ten days or so they
had been promised. Ten days soon go by.
And yet as the ship cast off its moorings they
all knew deep down that to leave your native
land is a form of death.
An angry silence
There is a parallel between the coolies'
predicament and that agonizing moment
when slave ships weighed anchor off the
African coast, with their cargo of chained
slaves in their holds. That instant was marked
by what the West Indian writer Edouard
Glissant has called "the scream from the
hold", a primal utterance from deep in the
slaves' flesh, which would erupt beyond time
and space, demanding an explanation from
History and reconstructing their History.
Slaves often spent the crossing stretched
out in chains. Coolies enjoyed relative free¬
dom of movement: they could see the
coastline disappearing into the distance and
watch the stars, phosphorescent trails, an
approaching cyclone in other words they
witnessed a slow evaporation of their earlier
THE UNESCO QlURIER OCTOBER 1996

M young coolie woman who
arrived in Mauritius in 1874.



being. The coolie's carefully pondered, vol¬
untary voyage was already a form of inter¬
mixing, physical contact with a different
poetics, a different world-view. Coolies
"knew" where they were going. They
would think about their separation, devise a
strategy for survival and settling down, and
work out their place in the new existential
structure that would take them in.
The Bhagavad Gita
written from memory
The children of "coolitude" shared with the
children of "creolity" the "scream from the
hold", the moment of silence that replaces
the scream at being wrenched away and
then, as in the early days of the slave trade,
develops into amnesia, whether intentional
or not. In any history, the unsaid is often
blotted out or pushed into the background,
as though the best way of censoring a painful
past were to surround it with dense silence.
This is where the coolie non-text, or pre¬
text, comes in: it is, in a sense, a statement
that is repressed ahead of exile.
Slaves experienced that moment knowing
THE UNESCO lOURIERg OCTOBER 1996

Identity cards of Indian
coolies hired to work on the
plantations of Mauritius.
full well that they would have no chance of
advancement in a society that had just reduced
them to the state of objects. They clung to
their beliefs and their languages. They also



thought of suicide. Coolies, on the other hand,
experienced their uprooting in real time, with¬
out bearings between heaven and earth. They
came up against a culture of sailors and a lan¬
guage they did not speak well (except for a few
educated Brahmins). Their voyage had begun
with a piece of trickery: the crossing actually
took almost a month. They had plenty of time
to think about their fate and to understand that
the deceit had already begun with their con¬
tracts. It was there, in a legal framework, that
they would concentrate their efforts to
become emancipated.
Coolies had a culture of the written word,
and they set off on their voyage with books:
the Qur'an, the Bhagavad Gita and the
Ramayana. These sacred texts were part and
parcel of their journey. The Coolie Museum in
Moka, Mauritius, possesses a copy of the
Bhagavad Gita which coolies wrote out from
memory so as to bring a token of their original
culture to the country where they had been
contracted to work. This is indisputable evi¬
dence that a struggle against deculturation took
place. Coolies clung to their founding texts.
The "strategies of deviation" described by
the West Indian writers Jean Bernabé, Patrick
Chamoiseau and Raphaël Confiant1 were
more in evidence among African slaves, who
were imbued with a civilization based on oral
expression. This partly explains the greater lin¬
guistic inventiveness shown by the deseen- 1
/./// ,<fY/£
7 t4fr/tí '
><#/&.....~.~~\jJi /¿s^
THE UNESCO Q)URIER 15.
OCTOBER 1996

THE CONCEPT OF 'COOLITUDE'
The first pages of the history of "coolitude" were written as soon as India
was left behind in the spray of the Indian Ocean. The concept of "coolitude"
is based on two pillars. Firstly, the reconstitution of a memory, which veers
between an imagination drawn back to the atavistic homelandIndianness as
a set of inalienable values bequeathed by India since the beginning of time
and the constellation of signs spawned by the uneasy interaction of the
exiled Indian's values with the cultures of the host country. Secondly, the
contribution of a poetics based on the Indian element and shaped by the
fact that the coolie was chronologically the last arrival to contribute to the
making of diversified societies. D K. T.
Ooolies took with them the
classic texts of their culture.
Below, the feast of Shiva at
Grand-Bassin in the south-
central region of Mauritius.
dants of slaves, whereas coolies were happy
for most of the time to transfer or extend their
texts into a universe other than their own,
Creoles felt they had to invent a cosmogony
and a poetics. Coolies effected a transfer of
their own universe to their host country: they
rewrote and transposed their semiological ref¬
erents to their new country. Thus, anchored
to their founding texts, coolies promised
themselves that if they reached the Promised
Land alive they would repay their fare and
own land in their turn.
A symbolic wound
The Indian worker's pragmatic view of things
had a decisive bearing on literary creation and
on writing, which coolies abandoned in favour
of the Maati, or the earth-mother, a guarantee
of their continuity and a veritable "matrix
text". Their work in exile then took on a cos¬
mogonie value. And it is here that one can
sense that strong and sensual impregnation of
language, that poetics of the diverse in which
creolity and "coolitude" come together.
As soon as the coolies disembarked, their
traumatic voyage at an end, their captain tore
out, usually in great haste, the pages of the
register bearing the names of the new
arrivals. The pages were held in place by
indented metal clips, hence the term "inden¬
tured labourers", from the root dens (tooth),
which was often applied to coolies.
These striated pages were symbolic of
the wound inflicted on Indian patronymics,
which were violated by being Latinized,
forms which are still used for islanders of
non-European origin. This is the most signif¬
icant metaphor of "coolitude" for it sets
the seal on the wound to identity and lan¬
guage and is the visual mark of the coolie's
place in the language. Coolies always felt out
of place and were afraid of making mistakes
in their master's language, and even in creóle,
the language of the emancipated.
Coolie authors often wrote in their
ancestral languages, such as Hindi, Tamil and
Urdu. But they allowed a large number of
outside influences to enter their language.
The mosaic thus created is a trace writ large
of the exile shared by the children of "cooli¬
tude" and creolity.
1. Authors of Eloge de la créolité, Gallimard publishers,
Paris, 1993.
THE UNESCO lOURIER ..OCTOBER 1996
