Henri Atlan
interview
,f è
e tronUers of Hcienee
The French biologist Henri Atlan,
{Tofessor 


of biophysics at the
University of Paris VI and at the
Hebrew University of Jérusalem, has
won an international réputation for
his research on the self-organization of
cells and artificial intelligence.
Notable among his published works
are Entre le cristal et la fumée, Essai
sur l'organisation du vivant (Seuil,
Paris, 1979), A tort et à raison,
Intercritique de la science et du mythe
(Seuil, Paris, 1986), L'Organisation
biologique et la théorie de
l'information {l^ermmn, Paris, 1992)
and Questions de vie, Entre le savoir
et ropinion (Seuil, Paris, 1994).
Hère he talks to Géraldine Schimmel
about some topical matters arising
from the relationship between science
and Society.
Science was vested with an
immense hope that it would explain
everything, help people to live, and
provide a basis for ethics. How do
things stand today?
Henri Atlan: It is now clear to most sci-
entists that this hope is groundless.
Unlike the rehgions, idéologies and
philosophies that claim to give meaning
to the universe and to people 's lives, sci¬
ence owes its successes to its method,
which involves carefully circumscribing
a subject for study and contenting itself
with local explanations that hold good in
a certain well defined field. Science and
technology hâve been effective in domi-
nating matter, but unable to give meaning
to life or solve social, political or moral
problems. There is still a nostalgie hope
that science may provide us with Truth
with a capital T, a single truth from
which it will then deduce individual,
social, political or some other form of
Good; but this is simply nostalgia.
An illusion?
H. A.: Of course. A pièce of nostalgia
based on the illusion of a universal
theory that would explain everything,
things as they are and as they ought to
be. This is what is known in English as
the naturalistic fallacy, deducing what
"ought to be" from what "is". "What
ought to be" is actually the product of
our imagination and of our desires, and
is not usually deducible from "what is".
Knowledge of "what is" enables us to
realize the constraints that impose
limits on our imagination, limits which it
is usually impossible to transgress.
Are science on the onehand and
myths and religions on the other based
on the same rationality?
H. A.: Not at ail. In my book A tort et à
raison I tried to demonstrate that there
are several sorts of rationahty something
which is not seK-evident. Many people stiU
beheve that only science is rational, and
that what is not scientific is necessarily
irrational. But every myth expresses, in its
own way, a kind of rationahty which is dif¬
férent in terms of its method, its objec¬
tives and its means of vérification from
that of scientific thought. It is wrong to
get them mixed up. The same reason is
involved, but the ways in which it is
apphed are différent.
You hâve said that the real
generator of objective Knowledge is
It is wrong to think that onty science is rational. Every
mytii expresses a Ifind of rationality wliicli is différent
from that developed by scientific thought.

H enri Atlan at a Unesco
Philosophy Forum on the
thème "What We Do Not
Know" (Paris, March 1995).
mastery of nature and that ethics is
the motor of mystical and religious
traditions. What happons when ethics
is required to deal with objective
Knowledge?
H. A.: That is a quite straightforward
matter. It's the reverse situation that
raises problems. It is indispensable that
ethics should be concerned with the use
made 


of science-based technology,
insofar as technology raises moral ques¬
tions that the sciences are unable to
answer. Let's take an example from the
field of biomédical ethics: is the real
mother the woman who carries the child
or the one who supplied the egg that is
fertilized and then implanted? This
question did not arise before technology
made it possible to separate the utérine
and ovarian aspects of maternity. In this
field the progress of science and tech¬
nology has created problems of legiti-
macy, of good and evil, of what is per-
mitted and what is not that did not
exist before and that neither biology nor
medicine alone can solve.
You hâve rejected the term
'bioethics'. Why?
H. A.: I don't like the term because it
implies the existence of a new discipline
derived from biology, rather like bio-
physics or biochemistry, and suggests
that via bioethics it may be possible to
find, within biology itself, the answers
to the ethical problems posed by
biology. But this is not at ail the case.
Biology poses problems of an ethical
nature, but it does not solve them, even
if it is clear that we cannot begin to
tackle them without an understanding
of their biological roots. Solutions will
resuit from différent ethical
approaches that vary from person to
person and culture to culture. Thèse
problems are so new that people
belonging to the same tradition often
respond spontaneously to them in totally
différent ways.
Is thinking about the problems
posed by new scientific discoveries
exclusively a matter for specialists?
H. A.: Certainly not. It is vitally impor
tant that questions about the rights or
wrongs of using a given biological tech¬
nique should be asked by people out-
side the field who bave a broader, non-
partisan approach to it. In fact this is
increasingly being doue by so-called bio¬
médical ethics committees. The mem-
bers of thèse committees include
experts who explain to the best of their
ability the scientific background of the
problems, but also philosophers, reli¬
gious leaders, sociologists, psychologists
and especially légal experts, who even
though their answers are, perforée,
fragmentary and incomplète bave to
give an opinion on what is permissible
and what is not.

Henri
Atlan
Thefronîieifi
ofscience
What about the gênerai public?
H. A.: They are faced with two prob¬
lems. On the one hand, biologists don't
bave a big platform on which to make
their science known. On the other, the
média présent problems in a way that is
inevitably incomplète and sometimes
biased. The gênerai public is forced to
decipher a confused message which
reflects a debate between specialists fil-
tered through the média, which try to
explain to their audience the issues
involved in complex questions to which
there are no simple, ready-made
answers.
Do you think that fear about
advances in genetics is justified?
H. A.: It dépends on what kind of fear
you are talking about. Abuses are
always possible, but they existed before
advances in genetics. Don't forget that
the most horrible eugenic policies this
century were implemented by the Nazis
without the help of genetics. Tech¬
nology is not necessarily dangerous in
itself. Its application can be, however,
if it is left to the discrétion of criminals.
This is one of the reasons why a min¬
imum of législation is necessary.
Applying to human beings some of the
genetic techniques that are applied to
animais (making chimeras, transgenic
individuals whose génome is modified in
such a way that it is largely impossible
to know what will corne from it) is obvi-
ously criminal. This must be made quite
clear, so that no geneticists should feel
authorized to go in for such practices.
In any case almost ail geneticists
agrée that a clear distinction should be
made between therapeutic activities in
which the gènes of somatic cells (the
body's non-reproductive cells) are mod¬
ified, and activities designed to modify
the gènes of germ cells (cells trans-
mitted to descendants). The différence
is enormous: modifying the gènes of
somatic cells is no more dangerous than,
for example, x-ray therapy. Treating a
cancer with x-rays entails a lot of muta¬
tion of cells, but not of germ cells. Most
ethics committees hâve completely for-
bidden the use of gène therapy on germ
cells. But how can we be sure that this
prohibition will be maintained unchanged
in future?
Does the same prohibition also
apply to disease-bearing germ cells?
H. 4.; At présent it is strictly forbidden
to try to manipulate sperm, ova and fer¬
tilized eggs to replace disease-bearing
gènes with normal gènes because, I must
stress, cells transmitted to descendants
are involved. A very important distinc¬
tion must be made about the purpose
of genetic techniques. Are we trying to
treat a person with a spécifie disease or
are we trying to modify the human
species? Insofar as we are dealing with
individual therapy, classical standards
of médical practice and biomédical
ethics that are now developing make it
possible to distinguish, sometimes on a
case-by-case basis, between what is and
what is not allowed. But imagining that
we are going to modify humanity is the
same irresponsible fantasy that has been
at the root of ail eugenic disasters.
Can standards of ethical
practice, ethics committees and
législation slow up research and
development?
H. A.: Some people think they should. I
don't agrée with that at ail. In any case
it would be impossible. First of ail
because as soon as you know something,
you can no longer behave as if you didn't
know it. Secondly, because it is impos¬
sible to know in advance what results a
research programme is going to lead to.
Research programmes can't be stopped
on the pretext that they may be dan¬
gerous. Obviously it is always possible
to stop certain spécifie applied research
programmes that do not come under the
heading of basic research. But that is
not the same thing as putting a brake
on research or halting scientific
progress. The ban on applying certain
research techniques to human beings
has always existed; implicitly before the
Second World War, and explicitly after
the trial of Nazi criminal doctors at
Nuremberg. That was when biomédical
ethics began to be established.
The Nobel Prize-winner Albert
Szent-Gyôrgyi once claimed that 'life
as such does not exist'?i Wasn't that
a strange thing for a biologist to say?
H. A,: He said that at the beginning of
the century, but it's even more obvions
today. It simply means that life does not
exist as an object for biological research.
Biologists today are not preoccupied
1



The progress of science and technology has created
problems that did not exist before and that neither .
biology nor medicine alone can solve. ^^

with knowing what life is. They study
Systems, organisms, and try to under-
stand how they work, i.e. the physical-
chemical mechanisms 

of what structures
them and of what they do. This being the
case, life has completely disappeared as
a subject of research for this science that
is still called the science of life! but
this does not mean that it no longer
exists. It is still a matter of subjective
expérience: it's our life. But it no longer
has anything to do with biology.
What différence is there, then, from
a biological point of view, between a
living being and a dead one? Between
the animate and the inanimate?
H. A.: From a physical-chemical point
of view it's merely a change of state.
The same applies to the soûl, which is
no longer a subject of scientific
research. In the past thèse two notions
were inextricably linked: a living being
was living because of having a soûl that
bestowed that particular quality. This
idea goes back to Aristotle. It domi-
nated the West until the Renaissance,
but has now disappeared.
In the view of scientists, what rôle
does chance play in the organization
of nature?
H. A.: When we study Systems that are
not simple (living organisms, some phys-
ical Systems and interlocking chemical
reactions, for instance) we can see
since we don't know everything about
them that the best way to understand
and achieve even a very slight measure
of control over them is to take this igno¬
rance into account. Chance appears in
the form of phenomena that arise at
random. For example, the évolution of
species is considered to be an effect of
genetic mutations supposedly occurring
by chance in individuals. This does not
mean that the mutations do not bave
causes. They do bave causes, in fact,
some of which we know fairly well:
cosmic radiation, natural (or artificial)
Imagining that we are going to modify the human
species is an irresponsible fantasy that has been at the
root of ail eugenic disasters.
radioactivity and exposure to chemical
substances that exist in nature or are
even stored in spécifie kinds of waste.
Mutations always hâve physical causes.
The only random clément has to do with
their possible effect on an organism; in
other words, there is no link between
the cause of a mutation and the change
it will effect in the functioning of the
organism in question.
What is self-organization?
H. A.: The classic example is that of a
hen's egg. When you look at an egg, it
doesn't seem very complicated. Even
when you examine it under a microscope
you find it only consists of one cell. But
the chicken that will émerge from it will
consist of a large number of cells that
are very différent from one other.
The same principle applies to the
development of species. Ail palaeonto-
logical data show that we began with
relatively simple, single-cell organisms,
like seaweed or paramecia. Multi-cell
organisms appeared much later, but
they were still fairly simple with
roughly similar cells. Then more com¬
plex organisms began appearing with
diversified cells performing différent
functions.
What we hâve to understand is how
a pièce of matter that appears poorly
organized to us rightly or wrongly
can evolve using its own properties to a
more complex state of organization.
Vitalist théories said it was the life
force. The French philosopher Henri
Bergson himself said that the organiza¬
tion of living organisms was explained by
what he called an "élan vital". But now
that this kind of explanation is no longer
accepted, we hâve to find a physical
theory capable of describing thèse self-
organizing mechanisms. This is where
chance comes into it. It seems to play a
positive rôle in the sensé that it may
permit a state of things to be modified
in the direction of greater organization.
In the past chance was thought to be
nothing but a source of disorganization.
But certain factors that can only be con¬
sidered as random, as the product of
chance, may on the contrary encourage
the appearance of more organized
States. There is nothing magical about
this. To call something "chance" is only
a way of formalizing factors we are igno¬
rant of.
But this is only a summary descrip¬
tion of one possible form of self-organi¬
zation. There are many others which
use computer models that enable us to
study how complex forms and functions
can be produced by interconnected net¬
works of simple éléments.
Has chance replaced the magie of
the IVliddIe Ages?
H. A.: Not at ail. We're talking about
chance which is formalized and tamed,
and thus forms part of laws laws of
probability that are décisive.
Is there any order in nature?
H. A,: Undoubtedly; and probably more
than one. But the person who could tell
us about it would need to be very bright
indeed. Science is trying to discover cer¬
tain regularities that look like order.
1. See H. Atlan and C. Bousquet, Questions de
Vie, Seuil pubhshers, Paris, 1994.
