FEDERICO MAYOR: COMMENTARY
THE PRESS FOR PEACE
'We shall not let voices
be silenced'
When a journalist is killed, not only
does a person die but a voice is
silenced and a part of democracy dis¬
appears. The silencing of voices is a well-known
way of subverting peace. We shall not allow voices
to be silenced.
It is UNESCO's duty to condemn all violence
against women and men whose only weapons are
their pens, their cameras, their intelligence, their
talent and, above all, their faith in tolerance and the
exchange of ideas.
But human and spontaneous though it may be,
indignation is not enough. We must react, we
must help those who believe in exchange and
practise tolerance, and who want to do their job in
difficult and sometimes dangerous circumstances.
We must step up our efforts to ensure that jour¬
nalists can work in greater security and that phys¬
ical conditions are no longer an obstacle to the
exercise of their profession.
It is also UNESCO's duty to do all it can to pre¬
serve and promote freedom of information and
expression, thereby protecting plurality of ideas
and opinions. UNESCO cannot, for instance, accept
the disappearance of NTV Studio B, an indepen¬
dent television station in Belgrade that it has sup¬
ported ever since the beginning of the conflict in
the former Yugoslavia (notably through a grant of
$450,000 and by including it in a programme to
exchange news items among independent TV sta
tions in Belgrade, Sarajevo and Skopje, which was
organized by UNESCO and World-wide Television
News-WTN). NTV Studio B lost its indepen¬
dence a few months ago. Millions of TV viewers
have therefore been deprived of pluralistic infor¬
mation at a crucial moment in the peace process.
Here again, indignation is not enough. For this
amounts to an attack on the freedom of the press,
which is an integral part of democracy and a cul¬
ture of peace. UNESCO therefore will encourage
the dialogue necessary to restore mutual under¬
standing, without which there can be no democ¬
racy. By "democracy" I mean a general frame¬
work of public freedoms, not a specific govern¬
ment. I am thinking of the only voice that
concerns us, the voice of the people. There can be
no stable democracy if the press does not play its
watchdog role, its vigilant observers describing
not only what is happening but also what may
happen, that is, all future possibilities and choices.
An independent press
But it is our conviction and this is something that
cannot be said too often that the press must give
priority to non-violence, to settling conflicts by
means of dialogue, listening and understanding.
Without an independent press there can be no
lasting peace, no future for democracy, no sharing
of development. A press working for peace is an
essential part of our hopes for everyone.
38

With these ends in view UNESCO has orga- mitted for the prize by institutions, groups and
nized a series of seminars on the promotion of individuals engaged in remarkable efforts to
media independence and pluralism in Africa develop rural communication.
(Windhoek, Namibia, May 1991), Asia (Almaty, Since its creation, the prize has been awarded
Kazakhstan, October 1992), Latin America and to projects in India, Congo, Colombia, Cuba,
the Caribbean (Santiago, Chile, May 1994) and, Jordan and Mauritius. This year the jury decided
earlier this year, in the Arab countries (Sana'a, to honour Tambuli, a community radio project in
Yemen). the Philippines, whose "Barranggyan sa Himpa-
For the same reasons, an International Sympo- pawid" ("The village on the air") has transformed
sium on Copyright and Communication in the the lives of the people of Olutanga island.
Information Society was held in Spain, from 11 to The Tambuli producers move from village to vil-
14 March. At this meeting, leading specialists dis- läge, producing programmes on the spot with
cussed the complex problems linked to telecom- local people, using a simple karaoke recording
munications architecture, cable broadcasting, on- machine.
line information services and the protection of For the moment the Tambuli network consists
authors' and performers' rights. Their work will of six small community stations located in remote
help UNESCO's Member Statesparticularly areas. The project aims to set up twelve. It has
developing countries to acquire high-level tech- been created by local volunteers, who run it
nological and legal data in these fields. through a Community Media Council (CMC)
Developing local radio
stations



whose members are drawn from a variety of pro¬
fessional, ethnic and religious groups and include a
large proportion of women. After receiving basic
Since 1982 UNESCO's International Programme training in radio work, the villagers prepare news
for the Development of Communication bulletins and programmes, giving due promi-
(IPDC), whose purpose is to promote freedom nence to local talent.
of information and expression, has financed some The Tambuli radio stations have had a stimu-
600 programmes in more than 100 countries, lating effect on the towns around them, where life
ranging from the creation of national and regional has become richer and there is greater involve-
press agencies to media training and providing ment in the community. They have given people
equipment. Half of all projects approved by the living in remote regions an opportunity to express
Programme are for private media. Last January their opinions on political, social and cultural
IPDC approved 46 new projects designed to issues, and have become a highly effective channel
develop communication training and infrastruc- of communication for those whose voices had
ture throughout the world and to reduce the gap previously been unheard,
between industrialized and developing countries It cannot be said too often that freedom of
in this field. expression and communication for all are funda-
Every two years IPDC awards a $20,000 Rural mental to democracy and development, and
Communication Prize to encourage the work of hence to peace. For centuries we have lived in a
independent and innovative media and to bring culture of war, and we have learned to pay the
the largest possible number of communities into price for war. Now we must learn and teach a cul-
the "global village". In 1996 18 projects were sub- ture of peace.
39
