THE RUNE-STONES OF JELLING
by Jens Boel
Runic inscriptions and imposing
burial mounds over a thousand
years old record the encounter
between paganism and Christianity
in a Danish village site that was
registered on UNESCO's World
Heritage List in 1994
JENS BOEL
is head of Unesco's Archives department.
The little village of Jelling, in the heart of
the peaceful countryside of Eastern
Jutland, is dominated by two large burial
mounds shaped like truncated cones.
Between them is a typical Danish village
church, a simple white-washed, medieval
stone building. In front of the church stand
two runic stones. The mounds and rune-
stones form one of the most important
Viking sites in Scandinavia.
The rune-stones were raised more than a
thousand years ago, one by the Viking King
Gonn the Old, and the other by his son, King
Harald Bluetooth. Each of them bears wit¬
ness to an ancient culture and to the transition
from pagan Norse religious beliefs to Chris¬
tianity. Today, many centuries later, we do
not know the full significance of the runic
stones and mounds nor why the site was con¬
structed at all. However, we are not com¬
pletely in the dark. The writing on the stones
can be deciphered and archaeological exca¬
vations have lifted part of the mystery.
The mounds and stones date from the
mid-tenth century and are outstanding
examples of the pagan Nordic culture. The
present church was constructed around
1100, but it was preceded by at least three
wooden churches, all of which were
destroyed by fire. The first church was
probably built by King Harald, who con¬
verted to Christianity around 965.
Ilarald's runic stone is three-sided. It
is the biggest of its kind in Scandinavia (2.5
metres high). Unlike the smaller one, it
stands in its original position, exactly
midway between the two mounds. Its
inscription reads: "King Harald bade this
monument be made in memory of Gorm his
father and Thyra his mother, that Harald
who won for himself all Denmark and
Norway and made the Danes Christian."
The inscription is surmounted by a
carving of a typical Nordic dragon in inter¬
laced ornament. On the southwest face of
the stone the earliest depiction of Christ in
40

Scandinavia can be seen. He is standing sur¬
rounded by ornaments from which he seems
to emerge, and beneath him runs the final
words of the inscription: "and made the
Danes Christians".
The original position of the smaller stone
is not known, but around 1630 it was moved
to its present location next to Ilarald's stone.
The inscription on it reads: "King Gorm
made this monument to his wife Thyra,
Denmark's ornament."
The message conveyed by these words
has provoked much debate among scholars,
at least since some local people acciden¬
tally discovered a burial chamber in the
north mound when they were searching for
water during the summer of 1820.
FACTS AND FICTION
Some facts are incontrovertible. During the
reigns of Gorm and his son, Harald Blue¬
tooth, Jelling was a royal manor, although it
is uncertain whether the kings resided there
permanently. Both father and son ruled a
realm known as Denmark, and Harald
claimed to be the ruler of Norway as well.
King Gorm erected a stone in Jelling in
memory of his wife, Thyra, and Harald did
the same for both of his parents after
Gorm's death in 958. There is every prob¬
ability that Gorm was buried in the north
mound.
It may be assumed that the two mounds,
today regarded as excellent feats of engi¬
neering, were laid out by Gorm after
Thyra 's death as a joint funerary monu¬
ment. However, the south mound was only
completed in 972, and it contains no burial
chamber. Archaeological excavations have
led to the discovery of a grave chamber in
the first wooden church, containing the
skeletal remains of a man. The excavations
revealed that the burial and the building
were established at the same time and that
the man in the grave had been buried else¬
where once before. Archaeologists conclude
that King Harald probably transferred his
father's bones to the impressive wooden
church he built after he had officially intro¬
duced Christianity to Denmark. By giving
King Gorm a Christian funeral Harald made
a clear religious and political demonstra¬
tion. As for Queen Thyra, no trace of her
grave has yet been found, and the mystery
of where she was buried remains.
A SITE OF NATIONAL
IM PORTAN CE
Every new generation interprets history in a
different way corresponding to the kind of
world and problems that confront it. In the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries the
national importance of the Jelling site was
stressed. Here could be seen in a clear and
instructive way the emergence ofDenmark as
a unified kingdom with the succession
passing from father to son. Christianization
was also emphasized as evidence of a major
victory for civilization and progress.
Today these views are regarded as far
too simplistic. It is not at all clear what the
notion "Denmark" actually meant at that
time. Although it is generally accepted
that the Christian faith was formally intro¬
duced in Denmark during the reign of King
Opposite page, detail of the runic inscription
engraved on King Harald's stone.
Right, the runic stones of King Gorm (foreground)
and King Harald. The latter is adorned with a
depiction of Christ.
The Jelling site
A. Protected area
B. Church and cemetery
C. The mounds
D. The two runic stones
41

WKÊÊÊÊÊmWKÊM
The northern mound and
church at Jelling.
SOME KEY EVENTS:
The Viking Age: c. 750-1050
First Viking attacks in Western Europe:
before 792
Vikings besiege Paris: 885-886
King Gorm is buried in Jelling: 958
King Harald Bluetooth converts
to Christianity: circa 965
King Sweyn Forkbeard conquers England:
1013
Harald it should not be forgotten that
pagan peasant traditions persisted for cen¬
turies in Christian disguise and continued to
play an important role. The Danes did not
become Christians overnight.
It would be tempting in 1996 to see the
Jelling monuments as evidence of a peaceful
meeting of cultures, a transition to Chris¬
tianity that deliberately included pagan
mounds. After having been received into
Christianity, King Harald may have wished
to establish an awe-inspiring memorial by
fusing the pagan monuments to the new
Christian monument, the church. As the
leading expert on the Jelling monuments,
Knud J. Krogh, has written: ". . . con¬
sciously or unconsciously the new monu¬
ment becomes an expression of continuity in
the midst of religious change".
Tili: VIKING SAGA
Until recently the traditional image of the
Vikings as presented in generations of
Schoolbook» was that of bloodthirsty
invaders who plundered and burned monas¬
teries in England, France or Ireland. This
was primarily due to the fact that the dom¬
inant historical sources were written by
monks and other victims of Viking pirates.
Today it has become widely acknowl¬
edged that the Vikings were much more
than warriors and pirates. Most Scandina¬
vians in the Viking age, c. 750-1050, lived
rather undramatically and peacefully, cul¬
tivating the land, breeding their animals,
plying their trades, doing business and so on.
But it is also true that adventurous travel¬
ling was an important part of the Viking
civilization. Among the Vikings were kings
engaged in high politics, engineers who
built castles and bridges, merchants who
traded with Russia or Ireland, and explorers
who colonized the Faroe Islands, Iceland
and Greenland. Vikings reached America
around the year 1000, the first Europeans
to do so.
The Vikings became masters of the sea
because of their sophisticated ships. They
travelled, bargained and plundered and some¬
times settled in the lands they discovered.
For three centuries they left their mark in
the Northern and Western hemispheres as
far away from Scandinavia as Byzantium.
Ilarald's runic stone in Jelling, on the
other hand, testifies how cultural influence
from the South, in the shape of Christianity, .
changed the Viking civilization by blending
with traditional beliefs and gradually domi¬
nating and taking over from them. Pagan
beliefs were defeated by Christianity
because the latter appeared more powerful
than the traditional religion. For the Vikings
conversion was probably a way of coping with
the strong continental European powers.
Thanks to contemporary written sources it is
possible to date the official Danish conversion
rather precisely and to give a fairly accu¬
rate account of how it happened.
At a feast at King Ilarald's court one
evening around 965 a priest named Poppo
was present. He claimed that the Vikings
worshipped false gods and that there was
only one true God who was one with Jesus
Christ and the I toly Spirit. King Harald asked
whether he was prepared to prove his state¬
ment by undergoing an ordeal. Without hesi¬
tation Poppo said that he was. The King then
ordered the priest to be taken into custody.
The following morning he heated a very heavy
piece of iron and then ordered the priest to
carry it, thus bearing witness to his Christian
faith. Poppo grasped the glowing iron and
carried it as long as the King wished. He then
showed that his hand was uninjured, thereby
convincing everybody present about the truth
of the Christian faith. The upshot was that
King Harald converted to Christianity and
commanded his people to reject pagan idols.
This is the story according to contempo¬
rary accounts. Several historians have argued
that the incident was contrived by Harald
and some of his close advisors in order to jus¬
tify a conversion believed to be a political
necessity. The German King Otto I had been'
crowned as Roman Emperor in 962 and had
thus become the supreme secular master of
Christianity. He had already taken measures
showing that he was not prepared to respect
the sovereignty of King Ilarald's pagan
kingdom. In order to show the powerful
Christian Church that it could count on him,
Harald may have converted as a way of coping
with this potential threat.
42
