As it was... THE UNESCO pURIER AugUSt 1957
A tiny bubble in the silence
of the infinite
by Rabindranath Tagore
Indian writer and poet (1861-1941) Nobel Laureate for Literature (1913)
k n apology is due from me for my intrusion into the
world of pictures, thus offering a perfect instance of
the saying that fools rush in where angels fear to tread. I, as
an artist, cannot claim any merit for my courage; for it is the
unconscious courage of the unsophisticated, like that of one
who walks in dream on a perilous path, who is saved only
because he is blind to the risk.
The only training which I had from my young days was
training in rhythm, rhythm in thought, rhythm in sound. I
came to know that rhythm gives reality to that which is
desultory, which is insignificant in itself. And therefore,
when the scratches in my manuscript cried, like sinners, for
salvation, and assailed my eyes with the ugliness of their
irrelevance, I often took more time in rescuing them into a
merciful finality of rhythm than in carrying on what was my
obvious task.
In the process of this salvage work I came to discover one
fact, that in the universe of forms there is a perpetual activ¬
ity of natural selection in lines, and only the fittest survives
which has in itself the fitness of cadence, and I felt that to
fit the heterogeneous into the balance of fulfilment is cre¬
ation itself.
My pictures are my versification in lines. If by chance they
are entitled to claim recognition it must be primarily for some
rhythmic significance of form which is ultimate, and not for
any interpretation of an idea, or representation of a fact.
I hehe world of sound is a tiny bubble in the silence of the
I infinite. The Universe has its language of gesture, it talks
in the voice of pictures and dance. Every object in this world
proclaims in the dumb signal of lines and colours the fact that
it is not a mere logical abstraction or a mere thing for use, but
is unique in itself, it carries the miracle of its existence.
There are countless things which we know but do not rec¬
ognize in their own dignity of truth, independent of the fact
that they are injurious or beneficial. It is enough that a
flower exists as a flower, but my cigarette has no other claim
upon me for recognition than as being subservient to my
smoking habit.
But there are other things which in the dynamic quality of
THE UNESCO (¿URIER ** BO
rhythm or character make us insistently acknowledge the fact
that they are. In the book of creation they are the sentences
that are underlined with coloured pencil and we cannot pass
them by. They seem to cry to us "See, here I am," and our
mind bows its head and never questions, "Why are you?"
In a picture the artist creates the language of undoubted
reality, and we are satisfied that we see. It may not be the
representation of a beautiful woman but that of a humble
animal, or of something that has no external credential of
truth in nature but only its own inner artistic significance.
People often ask me about the meaning of my pictures.
I remain silent even as my pictures are. It is for them
to express and not to explain. They have nothing ulterior
behind their own appearance for thought to explore and
words to describe and if that appearance carried its ultimate
worth then they remain. Otherwise they are rejected and for¬
gotten even though they may have some scientific truth or
ethical justification.
It is related in the drama of Shakuntala, how one busy
morning there stood humbly before the maiden of the forest-
hermitage a youthful stranger who did not give his name.
Her soul acknowledged him at once without question. She
did not know him but only saw him and for her he was the
artist God's masterpiece to which must be offered the full
value of love.
Days passed by. There came to her gate another guest, a
venerable sage who was formidable. And, sure of his claim to
a dutiful welcome, proudly he announced, "I am here!" But
she did not hear his voice, for it did not carry with it an
inherent meaning, it needed a commentary of household
virtue, pious words which could assign a sacred value to a
guest. Not the value of irresponsible art, but of moral
responsibility. Love is kindred to art, it is inexplicable. Duty
can be measured by the degree of its benefit, utility by the
profit and power it may bring, but art by nothing but itself.
There are other factors of life which are visitors that come
and go. Art is the guest that comes and remains. The others
may be important, but art is inevitable.
CTOBER 1996
