Isabelle Leymarie talks to
The master puppeteer
HUANG HAI-TAI
Ninety-four-year-old Huang Hai-Tai,
who comes from Yunlin in central
Taiwan, bears the secrets of a very
ancient tradition. He is probably the
oldest hand-puppeteer still at work, and
has trained and influenced many others.
His wife and some of his twelve children
work with him, and several of his grand¬
sons are also puppeteers. One of his
daughters is currently in Budapest
studying the tradition of Hungarian
puppetry.
As well as being highly entertaining,
his puppet shows have a sacred pur¬
pose. They are accompanied by catchy
music and are full of symbols that have
profound significance for those who
know their language and context.
"Almost in spite of himself," one spe¬
cialist has written, "the puppeteer is
the High Priest of popular ritual. He is
invited to inaugurate temples, attract
the blessings of Heaven, ward off evil
and generally fulfil his role as a creator
and provider of good things."
In September 1995, at the Maison
des Cultures du Monde, a Paris cultural
centre, Huang Hai-Tai put on several
shows based on two classics of Buddhist
literature, Legends of the Mad Monk
and Journey to the West.
Even for the uninitiated, Huang Hai-
Tai's subtle art has great fascination. In
Paris, the audience was particularly
delighted when, at one point in the
show, the Master came out from behind
his curtain, sat down smiling in front of
the stage and manipulated some of his
puppets. At the end of the evening he
asked the gods to bestow good fortune
and happiness on the audience.
During the following interview I was
struck by his fine, slender hands, the
pride of his hearing and his mobile,
radiant features.
You area singer and musician as
well as a puppeteer. What are the
origins of your art?
My father taught me bei-guan, the
singing style I use to accompany my
shows. It probably originated in the
Fujian region, on the east coast of
China, and crossed the Straits of For¬
mosa in the seventeenth century. The
words are a blend of Taiwanese and Bei
jing dialects, but their origins go back
to very ancient times. They have reli¬
gious overtones, and although this form
of puppet theatre has popular appeal,
its purpose is profoundly moralistic. It
aims to encourage virtue and to teach
values such as kindness, justice and
fidelity. Some of the musicians' instru¬
ments come from Hunan province in
southern China. My father knew how to
play them all, except the violin.
If someone wanted to enter your
profession, what would they have to
do?
First of all, they would have to learn
how to work the puppets' hands, which
are articulated. Then they would have
to learn the dialogue and the different
voices, which are conventionalized. As
in Chinese opera, there arc archetypes:
the female servant, the monk, the
scholar, the devil, the Taoist, the young
bride and the monkey. Each one has a
specific vocabulary and vocal range. You
have to know how to bring the charac¬
ters to life and give them their specific
colour. Then you have to learn the bei-
48

guan style of music, which is the most
widely used today in Taiwan, and how
to play the instruments, first the pei-gu
drum (the drummer leads the band),
then the cymbals and the violin. There
are five musicians, whose role is essen¬
tial although they are hidden behind
the curtain. Then you have to learn how
to sing. As in the Beijing Opera, there
are specialists for each role. I have
three or four assistants, but I'm the one
who does all the voices; this is very rare
in my profession.
It's astonishing that you can vary
your register so much! Could you do
the monkey's voice for me?
[Huang Hai-Tai bounced up and down,
laughing and making the piercing
squeals of a chimp, accompanied with
vivid expressions and gestures.]
During your shows, are you
allowed to create, to introduce new
elements?
Basically, no, because we perpetuate
an ancient and ritualized art form. Pro¬
duction is traditional and gestures are
codified, corresponding to a given pro¬
fession or social class. A mandarin
doesn't act or express himself like a ser¬
vant or a thief. But on the basis of what
my father taught me, I sometimes add
topical touches. I sometimes modify
dialogue or characterization. The audi¬
ence knows the repertoire by heart, and
if we didn't introduce a few changes, we
would be in danger of losing it.
Several scenes feature martial-arts
combat, pitting, for example, a
Buddhist monk against Taoists. The
puppets leap from the street into a
house, diving backwards through the
window as in a kung-fu movie. Is it
hard to get that right?
[He laughed] Jumping through a
window is the easiest part! But fighting,
especially with swords and clubs, is very
complicated and exacting. It takes
about three and a half years of practice
just to rehearse that!
In bunraku, the classic puppet
theatre of Osaka in Japan, the
musician and the narrator arevisible
at the side of the stage. Why are your
musicians hidden?
Because tradition requires it, but
also for aesthetic reasons. With us it is
the puppet that sings, and the puppets
lead the musicians. If the musicians
were visible, it would disturb the
smoothness of the performance. The
puppets' actions and the rhythm of the
singing set the tempo of the music, the
speed of the drumbeat.
[Huang Hai-Tai handed me two pup¬
pets dressed in brightly coloured cos¬
tumes: green, pink, red and blue bro¬
cade with appliqué, inlayed mirror
fragments andfur trimming. They had
aristocraticfaces and thin, delicatefin¬
gers.]
In the past the costumes were made
in southern China. We still have some
of the old puppets, but today, modern
costumes have been simplified and are
made in Taiwan. Unfortunately the
hands are no longer made of wood as
they used to be, but of plastic. You can
buy them anywhere for a small sum.
And what about the monkey?
The Beijing Opera monkey is very
stylized, while this one is more realistic.
Your theatre puts Confucianists,
Buddhists and Taoists on the stage.
Do you belong to one of these
religions?
I believe in all three and practise
them all!
Are you planning to perform
abroad again?
The heavens have allowed me to live
this long. I'd very much like to travel
some more!
ISABELLE LEYMARIE
is a Franco-American musicologist.
49
