Listening
Isabelle Leymarie talks to BERNARD MAURY
A talented pianist and a fine teacher, Bernard Maury is a spiritual son and
disciple of the American jazz pianist Bill Evans1. He hails from southwestern
France, where he grew up in a music-loving family.
You have often said that if rhythm is the
body of music, then harmony is its soul.
Could you enlarge on this?
Bernard Maury: When I first became inter¬
ested in jazz, as a teenager, it was
almost impossible to get hold of scores .
I'd trained as a classical pianist, but
since I hadn't studied harmony, I was
incapable of playing jazz without a
score. Sure, I could always retran-
scribe certain melodies by ear, but I
also had to find the accompaniment,
and my rough and ready chords didn't
sound anything like those I heard on
records by Erroll Garner or Oscar
Peterson, pianists whose tone colours
I admired a lot.
After a bit of practice I managed to
make sense of certain solos, butlearn-
ing chords out of their context wasn't
good enough. I wanted to know the
reason for certain harmonic configu¬
rations. For me a chord is not an iso¬
lated thing but the result of a pro¬
gression. I became interested in
counterpoint as well as harmony
because it deals with the movement of
voices. As Debussy knew, a chord has
its own intrinsic colour, which creates
a particular climate, and I wanted to
construct chords in my own way, by
controlling their tonal colour.
When I was twenty I had a few ele¬
mentary harmonics lessons , but mostly
I studied alone, soaking up textbooks,
following my own lines of research and
analysing classical works. It's very
rewarding to find out basic principles
by yourself. Playing jazz taught me to
see harmony in a different way from
that usually taught in music schools.
Harmony is a matter of logic and ear,
but it shouldn't be made too abstract.
It must live.
How did you come to jazz?
B. M.: When I was around twelve or
thirteen, I went to a lecture given by
the musicologist Hugues Panassié. It
was an eye-opener. I'd already heard
about jazz, but until then no one had
told me anything about its history
and it's part of a very different cul¬
ture from my own. In Toulouse, where
I went to study later on, jazz bands
always played at university dances. I
began to paraphrase around themes,
then I took the plunge. I've got a fairly
analytical mind, and I tried to under¬
stand how the phrases were built; I
imitated the great musicians, and I
chose my masters.
How did you meet Bill Evans?
B. M.: In 1972 he came to Paris for a
concert with his bass player Eddy
Gomez and his drummer Marty Morell .
Bill had been my idol for several years,
and I was dying to meet him. At the
time I was playing in a Paris club with
the saxophonist Johnny Griffin. One
night after our set, a couple of Amer¬
icans who'd been sitting at the bar
came over and started chatting. Pretty
soon I realized they were Gomez and
Morell. The next day a friend invited
me to have lunch with Bill Evans him¬
self! And we hit it off right away.
I had some great times with him.
When he sat down at the piano I never
missed a note. He was one of the great
names of jazz, try as he might to deny
it he was a very modest man. "It didn't
come at all naturally," he told me. "I
had to work darned hard." He would
play certain sequences again and again
so I could really understand them. He
never gave lessons, but if he felt some¬
one was receptive to his music and
could see what he was up to, he would
48 THE UNESCO QsURIER DECEMBER 1996

go out of his way to explain. I had
already been trying to analyse his music
for quite a while. Two years before, I'm
not sure I would have had the faintest
idea about what he was doing.
You spent two years in Brazil. Have you
been influenced by Brazilian music?
B. M.: I loved Brazilian music before I
went to live in Rio de Janeiro the
samba, of course, but above all the
jazzy bossa nova because of its har¬
monic wealth and its poetry. Its unob¬
trusive rhythm brings out the melody
and the harmony, and the different ele¬
ments balance beautifully. Brazil has
produced extremely talented musicians
and lyricists such as Antonio Carlos
Jobim. While I was there I accompa¬
nied the singer Maria Creuza, and when
I was playing in a club in Copacabana
I teamed up with the great pianist
Johnny Alf, one of the precursors of
bossa nova.
What qualities does a student of jazz
need to have?
B. M.: You've got to be highly motivated.
It's fringe music and rarely brings fame
or riches. It's more like evangelism than
a profession. You need to be stubborn
and take the hard knocks in your stride.
You need a musical ear and sensibility,
although it's true that the ear can be
trained. You've got to be rigorous, but
you've also got to know how to let your
imagination take flight, be logical at cer¬
tain times and not at others, and know
how to forget the academic side of jazz
and let creativity take over.
What about teaching jazz?
B. M.: Most of all you have to love
music. It's a bit like religious faith,
which often goes with evangelism; you
want to share something you love. You
learn a lot from teaching because you
have to dismantle mechanisms that are
sometimes unconscious. You can play
interesting ideas intuitively, but you
need to analyse them in order to pass
them on to others, and this opens up
new horizons. Teaching is very reward¬
ing, but it's primarily a matter of giving.
I think if I hadn't taught, there are
pieces I'd have been quite incapable of
playing because I wouldn't have
understood them.
What are your current plans?
B. M.: As a tribute to Bill Evans, I've
just founded the Bill Evans Piano Acad¬
emy in Paris. We don't only teach the
piano. Bill was one of the most important
jazz pianists of the second half of the
century, up there with Bud Powell and
Thelonious Monk. Modern jazz musi¬
cians owe him an enormous debt. In the
world of jazz he's also a direct descen¬
dent of the French school of Fauré,
Ravel, Debussy, Lili Boulanger and
Henri Dutilleux. The Bill Evans Piano
Academy aside, I've got two recording
proj ects : one solo and the other playing
unpublished compositions by Bill Evans
that I'll be choosing with the help of
his family. I
1. Bill Evans (1929-1980) was a member of
the Charlie Mingus band and later recorded
solo albums, e.g. Everybody digs Bill Evans
(1938).Editor
