ITALY The merchants of Venice
BY DONATELLA CALABI
Ihe Rialto Bridge, originally
made of wood, was rebuilt
several times over the
centuries. In the second half of
the 15th century it had a
drawbridge in the centre to let
sailing boats through. It can
be seen (above) in Vittore
Carpaccio's Miracle of the
Relic of the Cross (1494).
s early as the twelfth century
there was a flourishing com¬
mercial district in the cluster of
i islands divided by a canal which
^ wc now call Venice. It devel¬
oped on a site where the land was higher than
elsewhere, affording protection against floods.
Three centuries later, this district the
Rialto had become the financial nerve cen¬
tre of the Venetian Republic. Its tightly
woven urban fabric contained many state
administrative offices. A public clock tolled
the hours of finance and business.
In the night of 10 January 1514 fire swept
through the Rialto, reducing much of it to ashes.
It spread through the wooden warehouses
packed with merchandise and destroyed
immense amounts of public and private trea¬
sure. Rebuilding took almost twenty years.
By the mid-sixteenth century the Rialto
r 17
THEUNESCO ^_pURIERB NOVEMBER 1996 H

was a busy dockland area. Trading activities,
business premises, government buildings and
banks were concentrated around the little
church of San Giacomo (reputedly the oldest
in Venice) and its adjacent square.
At the foot of a wooden bridge, the first
to be built across the Grand Canal, were
many offices. Just opposite the public scales,
cells awaited those who tried to cheat on their
taxes or flout the property laws. On the Riva
del Vino and the Riva del Ferro (the Wine
and Iron Quays), thronged with barges laden
with wine, oil, iron, salt and flour, stood the
Land Customs House, the Wine Toll House
and various valuers' offices which, dark and
poky though they were, were well situated to
supervise water-borne traffic.
Not far away was the great flour ware¬
house set up in the thirteenth century and
run by private officials on the state's behalf.
There was a small portico beneath which
sacks of oats and corn were unloaded. The
Ruga degli Orefici (Goldsmiths' Street),
which led to the Rialto bridge, contained jew¬



ellers' shops, as well as drapers' stalls in a long
building known as the Drapperia. Merchants
selling Tuscan cloth were based in the Rialto
Nuovo square behind the Drapperia.
A number of magistrates' offices were
also situated at the foot of the bridge. Beneath
an open portico nobles and merchants trans¬
acted business, and magistrates regulated the
mooring of boats and the sale of merchandise.
18
9 THE UNESCoQuiRIERB NOVEMBER 1996
iazza San Giacomo di
Rialto in Venice (1730), by the
Venetian painter Antonio
Canal, better known as
Canaletto. A market was held
in the square.
DONATELLA CALABI,
of Italy, is a specialist in urban
history.
The Camerlenghi di Comun, magistrates
responsible for state funds, officiated in an
adjoining building.
The square of San Giacomo was the hub
of the Rialto and the place where international
contracts were negotiated. On the ground
floor of a nearby building were money¬
changers and, later, counters where contracts
were drawn up. In the upper storeys vaulted
rooms contained depositaries and the apart¬
ments of public inspectors known as
Provveditori. In one nearby street, lined by
the ironwork gratings of notaries' offices,
were the headquarters of the marine insur¬
ance authorities. In another were furriers.
Two more contained shops selling cheese,
basketwork and rope.
On a vast quayside area built on piles over
the Grand Canal were the herb market
(Erbaria), the fruit market (Fruttaria) and
other specialized emporia, and a mooring for
members of the nobility. To spare the neigh¬
bourhood the smell of fish, the Pescharia (the
fish market) was banished from San Giacomo
square. The rest of the Rialto consisted of a
few houses, warehouses and shops, tabernae
where the many foreign merchants received
hospitality and other inns frequented by
prostitutes.
A few reminders of the Rialto's historic
importance as a hub of trade between East
and West still survive. The Stagiera pubblica
(public scales) at the foot of the Rialto bridge
and the Pietra del bando (a pink granite col¬
umn where the decrees of the Republic were
read out) on San Giacomo square are still
used.
The architect commissioned to rebuild
the district after the fire of 1514, Antonio
Abbondi, known as Scarpagnino, made the
Rialto a more homogeneous and less con¬
gested district, as we can see in his Old
Buildings (Fabbriche Vecchie), formerly the
headquarters of the superintendants of trade,
navigation and supplies. The trend towards
greater regularity in architecture and town
planning culminated, around the middle of
the sixteenth century, in Jacopo Sansovino's
New Buildings (Fabbriche Nuove), which
follow the curve of the Grand Canal.
The finishing touch to the integration of
the trading centre into the city was made in
1587 when the decision was taken to rebuild
the old wooden bridge in stone.
