The birth of homo
BY ALAIN CAILLE
I as economic man, the selfish, cal¬
culating and rational individual that
economists place at the heart of
their theoretical constructions,
I always existed? Is he universal or,
on the contrary, was he spawned recently by
certain types of social relationships?
In areas where we today think in terms of
bargaining (buying and selling goods), ancient
societies reasoned in terms of gifts (compul-
sorily made, accepted and returned) and
alliances, even if, according to the French soci¬
ologist Marcel Mauss, the personal material
interest that lies at the heart of commercial
exchange can always be detected behind these
practices.
Prices fixed by custom
On the whole, the distribution of goods via
the major trading processes in ancient soci¬
eties did not serve a utilitarian purpose so
much as satisfy a need for the extravagant and
the prestigious. It was not so much a matter
of receiving and accumulating as of appearing
in the most generous and magnificent possi¬
ble light.
Similarly, the countable objects which are
widely regarded as being the forerunners of
modern currency did not enable people to
buy anything they wanted, but only to pay the
debts of life and death. You paid the debt you
had contracted towards those who gave you
wives (and the children they bore) in other
words life and towards those families in
which you had caused a death. Trade grew up
only on the outer confines of those commu¬
nities, as a result of contact with people who did
not belong to them: foreigners.
Evidence of long-distance trade goes back to
prehistoric times, when certain goods travelled
thousands of kilometres from their place of ori¬
gin, but there is nothing to prove that such trad¬
ing was organized in conformity with the prin¬
ciples of the market. The Hungarian-born
economist Karl Polanyi believed that there is
not necessarily any connection between trade
and the market as it is understood in economic
theory, or indeed between trade and village or
local street markets. In Babylon and throughout
economicus
the ancient world of the Middle East, large-scale
trade was run and supervised by government
officials. International prices were fixed by
diplomatic treaties and could not be called into
question or altered by bargaining.
More generally, in what might be called tra¬
ditional markets, prices existed before trading
took place and were not readily affected by the
volume of that trading. They were social prices,
fixed by custom, whereas the modern market
analysed by economic theory is a self-regulated
market where prices are independent of social
relationships between people and result from
the interplay of supply and demand. In
Polanyi's view, it is this divorce between the
market and social relationships in general that
characterizes economic modernity.
Medieval markets, and a large proportion of
markets in France during the Ancien Regime,
when prices were strictly controlled, have lit¬
tle in common with self-regulated markets. It
can also be argued that the kind of trading prac¬
tised by leading merchants in Genoa, Amalfi,
Venice and the Hanseatic ports at the end of the
Middle Ages was venture- rather than
market-oriented. The profits they made,
although sometimes considerable, were uncer¬
tain and attendant on risk. They had no obvious
connection with the law of supply and demand.
By the end of the sixteenth century, inter¬
national trade in cereals and the main metals
amounted to the equivalent of only about 1
»
À
M Sumerian clay tablet used
to record numbers of sheep
and goats (c. 2350 B.C.).
10
THE UNESCO IpURItRB NOVEMBER 1006

per cent of basic consumption. The wealthiest
husbandmen sold only 15-20 per cent of their
harvests. This is still a far cry from a market-
dominated economy.
An obsolete notion?
Let's take the argument further. Even within
economics that are manifestly dependent on
the market, prices are less strictly conditioned
by the law of supply and demand than eco¬
nomic theory requires. Barely twenty years
ago in France, for instance, the fluctuations in
fish prices that resulted from varying catch
sizes were to a large extent tempered by the
need for a stable relationship between the skip¬
per and his crew on the one hand, and the skip¬
per and the fish wholesalers on the other.
Similarly, negotiations conducted within the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) provide ample proof that farm prices
have nothing to do with market prices. It may
even be legitimate to ask whether the prices of
goods in general, whatever their nature, are
IYI embers of the Melpa
ethnic group (Papua New
Guinea) proffer gifts as part of
a traditional form of exchange
known as moka.
not conditioned by power relationships or, if
you like, by the socially recognized value of
the individuals, groups, socio-profcssional cat¬
egories and nations that produce them rather
than by strictly material or economic volumes.
Much recent research has shown that the
functioning of actual markets, which hinges
on a system of networks (monopolies or oli¬
gopolies), has so little connection with what
economic theory says about it that some
authorities believe that the notion of "the mar¬
ket" as such is now obsolete.
Lastly, it is well known that even in the most
capitalist economies actual economic activity
often depends less on market requirements
than on state and administrative norms. The
importance of the market's secondary role is
further diminished by the fact that the bulk of
social life takes place in the field of interpersonal
relationships and not in the sphere of business,
politics or administration. And these relation¬
ships are governed not by money or the law,
but by gifts and debts.
Those who challenge the historic singularity
THE UNESCO l^llKIERl NOVEMBER 1996 U

I he logo of GATT (General
Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade) in 1993. GATT has since
been replaced by the World
Trade Organization (WTO).
M,I erchants of the Hanseatic
League are shown in the port
of Hamburg in this miniature
from a manuscript of the city's
code of civil law dating fro m
1487. The Hanseatic League
was an association of north
German cities and merchants
trading in the Baltic
(12th-17th centuries).
of the market, on the other hand, believe that no
people is unaware of the existence or the pos¬
sibility of self-interested exchange. Woven into
the noble and ceremonial trading process of
the Trobriand Islanders of Papua New Guinea
(kula), for example, is the notion of utilitarian
exchange, or swap (grimwali). Similarly,
according to Marcel Mauss barter was not
unknown among the Kwakiutl Indians of the
northwest coast of North America, even
though they practised potlatch, a ceremonial
feast at which chiefs gave presents to enhance
their status. If primitive cultures as a whole set
such store by gifts, generosity and disinter¬
estedness, it was not because they were
unaware of the existence of utilitarian or self-
interested motives, but rather through a con¬
cern to maintain social cohesion, which would
have been jeopardized if venality had not been
subordinated to the practice of giving.
Supply and demand
in the ancient world
So when did the self-regulated market first
appear? Polanyi admits, in The Livelihood of
Man (1977), that it already existed in Athens
in the fifth century B.C. The detailed descrip¬
tion of a market economy by Plato, which he
calls "a healthy city-state" (The Republic, II),
establishes beyond all doubt that the inner
workings of the market were already well
known in his time.
But even three centuries earlier, in China,
the prime minister of the state of Ch'i, Kuan
Chong (730-645 B.C.), accurately described the
mechanism of supply and demand, and asserted
that the introduction of fixed prices, even if
they were periodically reviewed, "would make
price movements less fluid, hinder production
and inhibit economic activity".
It may therefore be argued that, while the
market can never be reduced simply to an
exchange of a purely economic nature or to a
set of impersonal relations unconnected with
social, cultural or historical factors, there did
emerge, very early on, a logical process gov¬
erning production and consumption which
superseded that governing the reproduction of
social statuses. The essence of the market
resides in the specific momentum which that
process imparts to the circulation of goods
within a given social system.
To abandon the notion of the market on the
pretext that the theoretical model cannot be real¬
ized in its pure form would therefore seem to be
a mistake. A more fruitful approach is to specify,
in each individual case, how trade, the law and
making gifts interrelate as ordering structures.
The political interface
It would seem that for centuries before the
Western model spread throughout the world
the human economy was chiefly notable for
its diversity. Varying forms of self-regulated
market in a more or less pure form appeared at
various points in the world, probably because
they could be reached by natural communica¬
tion routes such as seas and rivers. But in most
parts of the world knowledge of that form of
market remained incomplete and indirect, and
was mediatized by a considerable number of
other factors. Some regions remained totally
unaware of it until very recently.
Geographical diversity has been accompa¬
nied by a historical variability which has meant
that the market appears at one moment, only
to disappear the next. There is evidence of it in
the Roman Empire of the second century
A.D., but it seems to wither away completely
during the following centuries. Although we
find a theoretician of economic liberalism as
far back as the seventh century B.C., in the
person of Kuan Chong, the actual existence
of such a market after the imperial unification
of China seems more than doubtful. In
Europe, what produced the modern market at
the end of the Middle Ages was not large-scale
trade in luxury goods, but the alliance of
embryonic nation states with bankers and a
nascent bourgeoisie. Nation states and the
modern market then became coextensive.
It may then be argued that while the mar-
12 THE UNESCO Q)l!E:LkB NOVEMBER 1996

VT'-'
A 16th-century Venetian
banker is depicted in
this watercolour by
Jan II van Grevenbroeck
(1731-1807).
ket economy existspotentially, in other words
virtually, in all societies, its actualization
depends on specific factors peculiar to each
of them. They are factors which may be
described as political if the term is understood
to mean the way in which a society decides,
in a conflictual relationship, what form its unity
and singularity should take.
Where liberal economists go wrong is when
they contend that the market can be set up at
will, without any concern for how it contributes
to the cohesion or dislocation of societies. The
example of the Third World some time ago and
the more recent example of the former Soviet
Union show that, while there is such a thing as
a logical market process, the crucial question is
how far it can operate freely. And this is a polit¬
ical, not an economic, issue.
ALAIN CAILLE
is a French sociologist.
THE UNESCO COURIER« NOVEMBER I99ô
13
