A new way of
thinking
by Edgar Morin
EDGAR MORIN
is a French sociologist who is
emeritus director of research at
France's National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS). He is
the author of many published
works, including Introduction à la
pensée comp/exe("lntroduction
to Complex Thought", ESF, Paris,
1990) and recently published a
selection of writings entitled La
complexité humaine ("Human
Complexity", Flammarion, Paris,
1994). His most recent work
published In English is Towards a
Study of Humankind. Voll: The,
Nature of Nature (1992).
Complexity represents a shift away
from the simplifying, reductionist
approach that has traditionally
shaped scientific enquiry
Until the mid-twentieth century, most
sciences based their method on spe¬
cialization and abstraction, i.e. reducing
knowledge of a whole to knowledge of its
constituent parts (as though the organization
of a whole did not generate new properties in
relation to those of its separate parts). Their
key concept was determinism, in other
words the denial of random factors and new
factors and the application of the mechanical
logic of artificial machines to the problems of
living beings and social life.
Knowledge must make use of abstraction,
but it must also be constructed by reference
to context and hence must mobilize what the
enquirer knows about the world. Individual
facts can only be fully understood by those
who maintain and cultivate their general intel¬
ligence and mobilize their overall knowledge.
Admittedly, it is impossible to know every¬
thing about the world or to grasp its many
and varied transformations. But no matter
how difficult this may be, an attempt must be
made to understand the key problems of the
world, for otherwise we would be cognitive
idiots. This is particularly true today because
the context of all political, economic, anthro¬
pological and ecological knowledge has
become global. As a result of globalization,
everything must be situated in the planetary
*£HPB?. ^*Ui
context. Knowledge of the world as such is
necessary both for intellectual satisfaction and
for life itself. Every citizen faces the problem
of gaining access to information about the
world, and then of piecing it together and
organizing it. To do this, a new form of
thinking is needed.
In the first place, the kind of thinking that
separates must be supplemented with a kind
of thinking that makes connections. Com-
plexus means "that which is woven together".
Complex thought is a kind of thought that
unites distinction with conjunction. Secondly,
it is necessary to come to grips with uncer¬
tainty. The dogma of universal determinism
has collapsed. The universe is not subject to
10

the absolute sovereignty of order; it is the
outcome of a "dialogical" relationship (a rela¬
tionship that is both antagonistic, concurrent
and complementary) between order, dis¬
order and organization.
Complexity thus connects (contextualizes
and globalizes) and also comes to grips with
the challenge of uncertainty. How does it do
this?
A computer-generated
image created from a fractal
geometry formula.
The three theories
One approach to complexity is provided by
three theories information theory, cyber¬
netics and systems theory. These theories,
which are closely related and indeed insepa¬
rable, emerged in the early 1940s and have
had a far-reaching cross-fertilizing effect on
one another.
Information theory gives access to a uni¬
verse where there are both order (redun¬
dancy) and disorder (noise) and derives
something new from it, i.e. information itself,
which then becomes the organizing (pro¬
gramming) instrument of a cybernetic
machine. For example, information that gives
the name of the victor of a battle resolves an
uncertainty. Information that announces the
sudden death of a tyrant introduces an unex¬
pected new element into a situation.
Cybernetics is a theory of self-controlling
machines. The idea of feedback, introduced
by the U.S. mathematician Norbert Wiener,
11

IVl odel of the double stranded
helix of DNA (deoxyribonucleic
acid), the main constituent of
the genetic material of living
cells.
'Complexity connects (contextuallzes
and globalizes) and also comes to grips
with the challenge of uncertainty. '
breaks with the idea of linear causality and
introduces that of the causal loop. The cause
acts on the effect and the effect on the cause,
as in a heating system where a thermostat
controls the operation of a boiler. This regula¬
tory mechanism makes the system
autonomous, in this case ensuring that an
apartment has thermic autonomy from the
colder temperature outside. The feed-back
loop may act as an amplifying mechanism, e.g.
in a situation where an armed conflict reaches
a critical stage. The violence of one adversary
triggers off a violent reaction which in turn
triggers off another, even more violent reac¬
tion. Very many instances of this sort of infla¬
tionary or stabilizing feedback can be found
in economic, social, political or psychological
phenomena.
Systems theory provides the basis of a
way of thinking about organization. The first
lesson of systems analysis is that "the whole is
more than the sum of its parts". This means
that properties emerge from the organization
of a whole and may have a retroactive effect
on the parts. For instance, water is an emer¬
gent property of the hydrogen and oxygen of
12
which it is composed. The whole is also less
than the sum of its parts, since the parts may
have properties that are inhibited by the orga¬
nization of the whole.
Self-organization
In addition to these three theories are a
number of conceptual developments related
to the idea of self-organization. Four names
that must be mentioned in this context are
those of John von Neumann, Heinz von
Foerster, Henri Atlan and Ilya Prigogine.
In his theory of automata, von Neumann
considered the difference between artificial
automata and "living machines". He pointed
to the paradox whereby the components of
artificial machines, although very well
designed and engineered, deteriorate as soon
as the machine starts to operate. Living
machines, on the other hand, are made of
extremely unreliable components, such as
proteins, which are constantly subject to dete-
rioriation. However, these machines have the
unusual property of being able to develop and
reproduce themselves; they regenerate them¬
selves through replacing damaged molecules
by new molecules, and dead cells by new cells.
An artificial machine cannot repair itself,
whereas a living machine constantly regener¬
ates when its cells die. It is, as Heraclitus put it,
"life from death and death from life".
Von Foerster's contribution is his dis¬
covery of the principle of "order from

'Order, disorder and
organization are
constantly
interacting in the
physical, biological
and human worlds. '
Left, "Complexas means 'that
which is woven together'."
Below, "The universe is the
interplay of an antagonistic
and complementary
relationship between order,
disorder and organization."
noise". If a box containing a haphazardly
arranged collection of cubes, each magne¬
tized on two faces, is shaken, the cubes spon¬
taneously form themselves into a coherent
whole. A principle of order (magnetization)
plus disordered energy have created an
ordered organization. In this way, order is
created from disorder.
Henri Atlan has developed the theory of
"random organization". At the birth of the
universe there was an order/disorder/organi¬
zation dialogic triggered off by calorific turbu¬
lence (disorder), in which, under certain con¬
ditions (random encounters) organizing prin¬
ciples made possible the creation of nuclei,
atoms, galaxies and stars. This dialogic recurred
when life emerged via encounters between
macro-molecules within a kind of self-pro¬
ductive loop which eventually became a living
self-organization. The dialogic between order,
disorder and organization exists in a wide
variety of forms, and via countless feedback
processes is constantly in action in the phys¬
ical, biological and human worlds.
Prigogine introduced the idea of self-orga¬
nization from disorder in a different way. In
so-called Rayleigh-Bénard convection cells,
coherent structures are formed and main-
tened between two temperature levels when a
thin layer of silicone oil is carefully heated. In
order to be sustainable, these structures need
supplies of energy which they consume and
dissipate. Living beings have sufficient
autonomy to draw energy from their envi¬
ronment and even extract information from it
and absorb its organization. I have called this
process auto-eco-organization.
The study of complex phenomena can thus
be seen as a building with several floors. The
ground floor consists of the three theories
(information, cybernetics and systems) and
contains the tools needed to develop a theory
of organization. On the second floor are the
ideas of von Neumann, von Foerster, Atlan
13

Springtime (1573)
by the Italian painter
Giuseppe Arcimboldo. and Prigogine on self-organization. I have
added some other features to the building,
notably the dialogical principle, the recursion
principle and the hologrammatic principle.
'Complex thought
incorporates
uncertainty and is
capable of
conceiving
organization.'
The three principles
The dialogical principle brings together two
antagonistic principles or notions which on
the face of things should repel one another
but are in fact indissociable and essential for
understanding a single reality. The physicist
Niels Bohr believed that physical particles
should be regarded as both corpuscles and
waves. Blaise Pascal said that the "the oppo¬
site of a truth is not an error but a contrary
truth." Bohr put this in the following terms:
"The opposite of a trivial truth is a stupid
error, but the opposite of a profound truth is
always another profound truth". The
problem is that of combining antagonistic
notions in order to envisage the organiza¬
tional and creative processes in the complex
world of human life and history.
The principle of organizational recur¬
sion goes further than the feedback principle;
it goes beyond the idea of regulation to that
of self-production and self-organization. It is
a generating loop in which products and
effects themselves produce and cause what
produces them. Thus we, as individuals, are
the products of an age-old system of repro¬
duction, but this system can reproduce itself
only if we ourselves become its producers by
procreating. Individual human beings pro¬
duce society in and through their interac¬
tions, but society, as an emerging whole, pro¬
duces the humanity of individuals by confer¬
ring language and culture on them.
The "hologrammatic" principle high¬
lights the apparent paradox of certain systems
where not only is the part present in the
whole, but the whole is present in the part:
the totality of the genetic heritage is present in
each individual cell. In the same way, the indi¬
vidual is part of society but society is present
in every individual, through his or her lan¬
guage, culture and standards.
Conclusion
Thinking in terms of complexity is clearly not a
mode of thought that replaces certainty with
uncertainty, separation with inseparability, and
logic with all kinds of special exceptions. On the
contrary, it involves a constant toing and froing
between certainty and uncertainty, between
the elementary and the global, between the
separable and the inseparable. The aim is not to
abandon the principles of classical science
order, separability and logic but to absorb
them into a broader and richer scheme of
things. The aim is not to set a vacuous all-pur¬
pose holism against systematic reductionism,
but to attach the concreteness of the parts to
the totality. Linkage must be made between the
principles of order and disorder, separation and
connection, autonomy and dependence, which
are at one and the same time complementary,
concurrent and antagonistic.
In short, complex thought is not the oppo¬
site of simplifying thought; it incorporates sim¬
plifying thought. As Hegel might have put it, it
unites simplicity and complexity and ulti¬
mately reveals its own simplicity. In fact, the
paradigm of complexity can be described just
as simply as that of simplicity. Whereas the'
latter requires us to dissociate and reduce, the
paradigm of complexity requires us to connect
as well as to distinguish.
Complex thought is essentially thought
which incorporates uncertainty and is capable
of conceiving organization. It is capable of
linking, contextualizing and globalizing but
can at the same time acknowledge what is sin¬
gular and concrete.
14
