<#
/
^
5> NEW HORIZONS OF ARAB MUSIC
Isabelle Leymarie talks to
ARCEL KHALIFE
What kind of music do you remember
hearing as a child?
Marcel Khalife: My paternal grandfather,
who was a mason, played the ney a reed
flute with seven holes superbly and had
a beautiful voice. When I was a child I
would climb on his shoulders and shake
the tassel of his tarbush to the rhythm of
the Lebanese folk songs that he hummed.
The soft sounds he produced from his
ney during family gatherings filled me
with joy.
In the streets of the village where I
was born, Amchit, near Byblos, gypsies
danced and played to the sound of the
bouzouk, a string instrument, and the
tabla, a drum. My father and grandfa¬
ther would invite them home to drink
arak, and then the fun would begin. My
grandfather accompanied them. I always
awaited these occasions eagerly and
longed to learn their songs.
My uncle gave me a record-player and
that opened up all kinds of possibilities
for broadening my musical horizons. I lis¬
tened to Beethoven, Mozart and other
classical composers but also to songs by
the Egyptian musician Sayed Darwish,
and recordings by the Rabbani brothers,
who were of Lebanese origin, and many
other tunes.
Religious music also had a very strong
influence on me. St. Elisha's church
echoed to splendid a capella monodic
chant; that of the Marist brothers to rich
polyphonic melodies. I belonged to the
choir, which was accompanied by a har¬
monium. And then, of course, I would
hear the vibrant voice of the muezzin
rise from a nearby mosque.
I have always felt nostalgic for the
sounds of my village, and in my composi¬
tions I try to rediscover their melodies,
which are buried deep within me.
When did you form AI Mayadine?
M. K.: I had just completed my studies at
the National Conservatory of Beirut when
the Lebanon war broke out. I wondered
whether there was any point in writing
music at a time when death was sweeping
through the country. However, I was
looking for a way of saving myself and
others from the horror around us. I regis¬
tered my protest through music. I got
some other musicians together and started
Al Mayadine (plural of the Arab word
midan, the name for the village square
where festivities are held). We have per¬
formed in the world's most war-torn
regions. Our music rose above the cannon's
roar, and I'd like to think we were able to
bring solace to a few wounded souls. On
the world's theatre stages it was also a way
of communicating with another language
than that of violence.
How do you see the role of the udin
Arab music today?
M. K.: The evolution of Arab music is
forcing us to redefine the functions and
possibilities of our musical instruments.
How can we get them to express them¬
selves in an original, modern fashion? What
musical paths should we trace out for our
contemporaries and future generations?
Why shouldn't we re-examine our methods
of writingmusic and our itd-playing tech¬
niques? How can we improve the instru¬
ment? I am trying to create a family for it
comparable to that formed by European
string instruments such as the violin, the-
mandolin or the balalaika. It would, for
example, be possible to widen the neck
to take as many as twelve strings, which
would extend the instrument's possibili¬
ties. Could we obtain a more "musical"
sound by playing the ud with the fingers
instead of a plectrum? What new timbres
or registers could be produced by changing
the size of the body or the soundboard,
or by lengthening the neck? We could also
create a bass ud, with longer and thicker
strings like those on a bass guitar, and by
getting rid of the double strings. That
would make writing music for the ud dif¬
ferent. I have tried my hand at some of
these experiments in my most recent com¬
position, "Jadal"1, which is an ud duet.
The two uris in the group are tuned dif¬
ferently and their registers are distinct.
Since I proposed new ways of using the
ud, we had to rehearse a lot.
What are you doing at the moment?
M. K.: Al Mayadine is continuing its inter-
national tour, first in London, then in
Tunisia and Japan before returning to
Beirut. Recordings of three of my com¬
positions, "Elegy for the Orient", "Return
Symphony" and "Concerto for ud and
orchestra" will be appearing soon. The
score of "Jadal" is going to be published
in Lebanon, as well as an ud handbook
which will present new forms of writing
for ud solos, duets, trios and quartets.
'Jadal' contains sophisticated
counterpoint and occasional unexpected
harmonies. Is that your personal
contribution or are similar techniques
found in traditional Arab music?
48

Lebanese-born Marcel Khalife is one of the greatest
living exponents of the ud (a lute tcith strings that
are plucked) und the architect ofu revival of
traditional Arab music. His group, Al Mayadine
(Marcel Khalife: ud, Charbel Rouhana: ud, Ali El
Khatib: riqq, Abboud El Saadi: bass guitar), is
currently on an international tour. Left, Marcel
Khalife in concert (Paris, February 1996).
Arwad Esber © Maison des cultures du monde. Paris
M. K.: Harmony and counterpoint have
long existed in Arab music. In the four¬
teenth century the Arab historian Ibn
Khaldun described, in the chapter of his
Muqaddima devoted to music, a musical
ensemble consisting of a hundred-odd
instruments, including woodwind, brass,
plucked or bowed strings, percussion,
etc, which played harmonies like a sym¬
phony orchestra.
But Arab music, like all other kinds of
music, has been exposed to a variety of
influences. When I began to study musi-
cology, I applied Western analytical tech¬
niques to the different forms of tradi¬
tional Arab music. I discovered that these
forms had already achieved a certain
degree of perfection before reaching
Europe. Music schools already existed
in the ninth century: the composer and
singer Ziryab, the head musician at the
court of Cordoba, founded the first con¬
servatory of music in Andalusia.
How do today's Arab composers see
the future of their music?
M. K.: One of the questions we are asking
is to what extent we are still worthy of
our musical heritage. Studying it again
may teach us much that would be useful
for the future. If our music had con¬
tinued to make progress, as it did in the
past in Andalusia, we would be riding
high today. The loss of Andalusia caused
a profound break in continuity.
After that there was a long period
when nothing moved in the closed world of
Arab music. "Jadal" reflects my interest
in all kinds of music. I have tried to open
up new horizons, but with a familiar land¬
scape as my starting point. I draw inspi¬
ration from maqams (modes) and tradi¬
tional Arab rhythms, while moving
towards new forms of expression and aes¬
thetic concepts. "Jadal" is a very free
composition which ignores the technical
restrictions imposed by the rid.
Your music sometimes brings to mind
Renaissance madrigals and motets. Is that
because the guitar is a derivative of the ud
and that some European traditions spring
from the Arab-Andalusian tradition, or is it
a deliberate choice on your part?
M. K.: There has always been an interpén¬
étration between Oriental and Western
music. In music, melody, rhythm and
musical and cultural traditions in general,
it is impossible to put civilizations in a hier¬
archical order. Composers such as Borodin,
Mussorgsky, Rimsky-Korsakov, Bartok,
Ravel, Saint-Saëns and Debussy dug deep
into the folklore of Oriental peoples . The
German lied, for example, came from the
Arab muashah it is an instrumental
muashah. Even symphonic composition
has been influenced by Arab music. At the
same time, great Oriental composers such
as Aram Khachaturian, who knew the
Western tradition as well as their own, con¬
tributed to the enrichment of their national
culture. Music knows no frontiers.
My life in music has been shaped by a
variety of influences and I am receptive to
everything beautiful and new that music
from anywhere in the world can bring me.
But the starting point of my work is an
ancient language, that of the Lebanese tra¬
dition. I try to strike a balance between
two trends that are threatening Arab
music: on the one hand extreme conser¬
vatism, which rejects all forms of change,
and on the other extreme modernism which
tries to cut itself off from tradition. My
music is generally considered to be clas¬
sical Arab music, but of a new kind. I
1. Marcel Khalifé/Al Mayadine
"Jadal ud duo"
Box of 2 CDs
Nagam Records NR 1009
PO Box 820706
Houston, TX 77282-0706 U.S.A.
ISABELLE LEYMARIE,
a Franco-American musicologist, recently published
Du tango au reggae, Musiques noires d'Amérique latine
et des Caraïbes ("From the Tango to Reggae: Black
Music from Latin America and the Caribbean",
Flammarion, Paris, 1996).
49
