A RECIPE FOR DISPOSSESSION
INTERVIEW WITH SMITU KOTHARI
THE UNESCO lOURIER .
You believe that current patterns of
development are inimical to cultural pluralism
in the Third World. Why is this?
Smitu Kothari: In most Third World countries,
the kind of development that has been pursued in
the last five decades has widened the gap between
those who have benefited from it and those who
have become its victims. Structural inequity within
and between nations, discriminatory and racist atti¬
tudes and the politics of natural resource use are at
the core of this polarization.
Take the question of natural resources. The
unsustainable extraction of natural resources is con¬
trolled by and benefits a privileged few, while the
millions who depend on these natural resources, not
SEPTEMBER 1996

only for their subsistence but also as a source of their
identity, are marginalized. Global cultural and eco¬
nomic hegemony, supported by new communica¬
tion technologies, is radically altering or threatening
biological and cultural diversity. These issues arc at
the heart of the relationship between development
and culture.
Has nothing been done to halt these trends?
S. K.: Significant efforts have been made to deal
with these structural causes of inequity and there
have been many plans to alleviate poverty, and yet
the gap between rich and poor has grown wider.
In India, my own country, for instance, in 1990, 20
per cent of the population controlled 60 per cent
of the assets and the bottom 20 per cent only con¬
trolled 1 per cent. The polarization of wealth is
even more striking in countries like Mexico,
where the top twenty- four families in 1993 owned
more assets than 150 million people at the bottom
of society. It could be argued that despite a growth
in national and global middle classes, most national
and international development has reproduced
and intensified powerlessncss.
Inequality of access to productive resources
and widespread lack (and loss) of control over deci¬
sion-making among a majority of the world's popu¬
lation is one of the strongest threats to the diversity
of cultures and the wisdom and knowledge
enshrined in them. Market rationality and profit
maximization arc fundamentally incompatible with
ecological sustainability, cultural plurality and social
justice. And yet the fact that poverty and scarcity
can be induced by development is not even grudg¬
ingly acknowledged, and there continues to be an
almost spiritual belief that the market is a panacea.
What effect are the emerging global
alignments between multilateral banks,
transnational corporations and economic and
political elites having on cultural diversity?
S. K.: Many people are arguing that these align¬
ments are rccolonizing much of the planet in order
to sustain and widen their economic dominance.
Newer, more sophisticated forms of colonialism,
including the colonialism of the mind, may be a far
greater threat than the colonizations that occurred
in the past.
Current trends suggest that multilateral regimes
like the World Trade Organization, though seem¬
ingly non-partisan, are bound to further capitalist
accumulation by transnational corporations, indus¬
trialized countries and Third World elites.
Transnational corporations (TNCs) exercise
phenomenal influence over the global economy.
The top fifteen corporations now have gross
incomes that are larger than the GDP of 120 coun¬
tries. TNCs control 70 per cent of world trade and
own or control 80 per cent of the land that grows
crops for export. TNCs have been the main agen¬
cies that have aggressively pushed for deregulation
and privatization not only in national economies
but also in multilateral agreements and conven¬
tions in the world economy as a whole. Efforts to
make TNCs accountable and to develop a regime
of social control have floundered under the might
of the TNC lobby.
If the marketplace is the arena where ethical
and moral questions of our role on this planet are
sorted out, then culture will be restricted to
accepting the dominant trends and to displays of
theatre and dance during national festivals and
visits by foreign dignitaries.
How do the governments of developing
countries react to this?
S. K.: They hope that the dynamism and impetus
generated by "development" projects will lead to
progress and prosperity from which all citizens
will benefit through a trickle-down process and
that the fruits of science and technology will
spread to all. This presumption is proving difficult
Mbove, a ceremonial dance
during a meeting between Zunl
Indian communities at Gallup
(New Mexico).
Right, Muscovites queue on
Pushkin Square outside a
newly-opened fast food
restaurant.
THE UNESCO lOURIER(o I . - SEfTEMBER 1996

to justify. Experience from countries across the
world suggests that the bitter medicine of struc¬
tural adjustment favours the privileged and
devalues or destroys those cultures, knowledge
systems and ecologies that stand in the way of
maximizing productivity and profit. At a time
when the desire for democratic process and
democratic institutions is growing, these countries
continue to be largely dominated by processes and
institutions which remain unaccountable and
undemocratic.
Most Third World states operating under a
dependent, capitalist mode of production have
gradually dispensed with traditional institutions
and spiritual ideologies, and seek legitimacy instead
through economic growth and the doctrine of
national security. In turn they endorse structures
of economic development and hegemonic com¬
munications both national and global and priv¬
ilege a corpus of dominant languages at the expense
of a vast pluralism of "people's languages".
And how are people, rather than
governments, responding?
S. K.: Faced with growing economic and cultural
insecurity, communities are reverting back to pri¬
mary or primordial loyalties. These are often rede¬
fined and manipulated by politicians to serve their
own ends. Resurgent ethnicities do not necessarily
become secular and egalitarian, still less do they pro¬
mote a truly democratic framework of diversity and
pluralism. States have, often successfully, tried to
selectively involve members of these ethnic groups
either to win their favour, to nurture dissension, to
retain control or seek political concessions.
The past decade has also seen states absorb
potentially "disruptive" associations, as well as other
dissenting activity. Competing claimants have been
absorbed into the machinery wherever possible.
When routine controls have been ineffective,
repressive measures have often been used. All this
makes the task of nurturing political and cultural
pluralism more difficult. Despite these trends, mil¬
lions of people are involved in diverse forms of col¬
lective action from linking the blocks of an eco¬
logically and socially just society to mass mobiliza¬
tion in the form of social movements.
What role should the state play in cultural
life?
S. K.: Serious problems arise when the state has
responsibility to interfere in culture. But then,
should this be better left to civil society? In this
case, who will be involved and how can represen¬
tation and participation in cultural life be ensured?
Won't the state always have to play some kind of
non-partisan mediatory role? If not the state, then
who will create the conditions that will nurture a
plurality of languages and literature? Who will pre¬
serve and vitalize the folk heritage?
This is a highly delicate issue since the insensi¬
tive handling of cultural identities creates an atmos¬
phere of mistrust resulting in clashes between dif¬
ferent ethnic groups and fomenting or resuscitating
recessive and hostile memories.
Paradoxically, there is a convergence between
a majority of Marxist and liberal opinion which
'Most national and international development so far has
reproduced and intensified powerlessness.'
SMITU KOTHARI,
of India, is a co-founder of
Lokayan, a centre promoting
exchange between intellectuals
from India and the rest of the
world.
argues that culturally defined groups must be inte¬
grated into the "mainstream", either to hasten the .
"proletarianization" of the rural areas or to achieve
a more "integrated" and homogeneous national
society. In fact, most development literature in
both these traditions fails to adequately acknowl¬
edge and explain both the homogenizing steam¬
roller effects of development and the persistent
vitality of culturally based movements and their
effects on people.
The situation becomes more complex when,
over the years, elites emerge from cultures that
have previously been subjugated and discrimi¬
nated against and seek power or legitimacy by inte¬
grating themselves into the institutional main¬
stream. In some cases, these elites have abused
their power and collaborated in the exploitation of
the natural resource base that is the source of the
identities and subsistence economies of their
ethnic group.
It is a tragedy that, in most parts of the Third
World, popular cultures, particularly those of
indigenous peoples, have been marginalized and
subjected to an unequal conflict with powerful
external political, economic and cultural forces.
Cultural symbols that give meaning to lives are
being lost, and to compound this loss, the newer
cultural experiences that people are exposed to,
such as television, advertising and consumerism,
give rise to a structure of meanings and values that
further undermine social and cultural security.
What specific impact are these processes
having on languages in developing countries?
S. K.: In countries like India there is still a phe¬
nomenal range of languages, but most ruling elites
regard this diversity as pre-modern and inefficient,
as leading to political instability and technical back¬
wardness. Their attitude reflects an obsessive con¬
cern with standardizing societies and streamlining
their activities, jeopardizing the maintenance of
variation as a vital reality of everyday life.
Is there a connection between
environmental and cultural issues?
S. K.: For many culturally and economically mar¬
ginalized people whose lives are critically dependent
on the natural resource base, the struggle to preserve
biodiversity forms part of the struggle for cultural
diversity. For them, nature is not merely a biological
entity a repository of forest, mineral and water
but a cultural entity. What they are defending is not
pristine nature but "social nature." Their position as
defenders derives not so much from the concept of
"nature under threat", as from an integral and inte¬
grated relationship with the land, water and forest as
the fundamental basis for their own elemental
THE UNESCO IpURIER I SEPTEMBER 1996

M traditional mutual aid
group ploughs, sows and
applies fertilizer in Zimbabwe. struggle to survive. Nature, for a vast majority of
them, is the basis of their cosmology.
Unfortunately, what is also being witnessed all
over the world is a pervasive feeling among the
middle class and those who defend a strong cen¬
tralized state structure that politically and cultur¬
ally "underdeveloped" people lack political matu¬
rity, rationality and efficiency to play a central role
in modern times.
What can be done to maintain cultural
diversity?
S. K.: There is a need to break the prevailing belief
that national and global elites are the cultural van¬
guard, that knowledge defined by them is liber¬
ating. There are some signs that this may be
starting to happen. The past two decades have seen
a gradual build-up of popular initiatives on the part
of those who have been marginalized and who
seek the democratization of the state and the estab¬
lishment of an egalitarian social order. These
people articulate an ecologically-sensitive, locally-
rooted system of governance. In India, for
instance, the rise of the Dalit movement and the
'There is a need to break away from the prevailing belief that
knowledge defined by elites is necessarily liberating.'
growing self-confidence and asscrtiveness of the
tribal people (of whom there are 60 million from
over 200 different cultural groups) are evidence of
fundamental shifts that are taking place in cultural
and political life.
It is, in fact, becoming increasingly evident
that, despite advances in urbanization and com¬
munications, there is little likelihood that cultur¬
ally diverse ways of living can be homogenized,
little chance that a single culture can be woven
from such disparate strands. Nevertheless, there
is no room for complacency, even though a diver¬
sity of subcultures will prevail. These subcultures
will need understanding and committed represen¬
tatives to contest the hegemony of the authori¬
tarian (though increasingly sophisticated) state or
reductionist economic development.
The fundamental challenge is that of creating
the political space in which the diversity of cul¬
tures can evolve democratic processes of mutual
understanding and tolerance. It is a formidable
challenge since it calls on us to reverse the con¬
quest of society by the economy, restore an ethic
of self-discipline and recognize that positive values
involve dignity as well as modest material security.
We must commit ourselves to a struggle based on
the belief that development is not feasible without
restoring ethics to economics, without returning
to a symbiotic relationship with nature, without
taking into account in all we do every person on
our fragile and beleaguered planet.
23.
THE UNESCO lOURIER SEPTEMBER 1906
