e children of Confucius
by Zhou Nanzhao
Olivier Vidal© Unesco, Pans
Education has played a central role in Asian tradition ever
since the time of Confucius
Ibove, on the way to school.
ZHOU NANZHAO,
a Chinese educator, Is Vice-
President and professor at the
China National Institute for
Educational Studies in Beijing.
32
I In Asia learning has been cherished
I ever since the time of Confucius, who
believed that human beings are perfectible
and can be led along the right path through
education. He emphasized the power of edu¬
cation to improve society and to teach citi¬
zenship, and for centuries education was the
foundation of the political, social, economic
and cultural life of Asian peoples.
Attention has often been drawn to this pro¬
found appreciation of the value of education.
Working Asian mothers, bending low in the
rice fields, have always hoped that education
would enable their children to escape from
poverty. Stories and images from many coun
tries record Asian women's aspirations for their
children, ranging from the well-known figure
of the Japanese mother who regards educating
her offspring as her prime duty, to the Chinese
mother who for years travelled long distances
to evening classes and taught her disabled son
with the notes she took, and Korean mothers
who would sell their cows to pay for their chil¬
dren's schooling. The writings of Mahatma
Gandhi and the great Indian poet Rabindranath
Tagore offer further testimony of the value
attached to education by Asians.
Not surprisingly, therefore, Asian parents
and teachers have high expectations of the
young, and studies have shown that these
expectations go hand in hand with high cur¬
riculum standards, long hours spent on
learning, strict training in intellectual skills, a
high degree of parent-children interaction at
home, close teacher-pupil relations at school
and high educational achievement, especially
in such intellectually demanding courses as

mathematics. Since there is no substantial dif¬



ference in the intelligence quotient of most
children and no children are ineducable, it is
clear that this cultural factor helps to account
for the relatively high scholastic achieve¬
ments of many Asian students.
Learning to be team players
Traditionally, collectivism has taken prece¬
dence over individualism in Asian cultures.
Confucianism emphasized the development
of the individual as a member of the family
and of society at large, and learning the rules
of social relationships was considered an
essential step towards becoming a mature and
responsible person. For centuries Chinese
intellectuals upheld the moral ideal of
"bearing the worries of the world before
anyone else and enjoying the pleasures of life
after all others". This group-oriented attitude,
classically displayed in the "team spirit" of the
Japanese, has been conducive both to eco¬
nomic productivity and social cohesion. It
partly explains why many Asians tend to dis¬
like the concept of competition among indi¬
viduals yet display a high degree of competi-
tivity in a collective setting.
Another cultural tradition that has shaped
the Asian approach to education is an
emphasis on the spiritual rather than the
material dimension of development. Tradi¬
tional Chinese culture, for example, was
essentially based on ethics, stressing the
moral cultivation of the personality. Today it
is still widely recognized in Asia that educa¬
tion cannot be value-free, and in many coun¬
tries the building of both "spiritual" and
"material" civilizations is the twin goal of
national development.
The idea of a meritocracy based on per¬
formance in state examinations rather than on
inherited wealth has long been accepted in
Asia. Whereas the theoretical goal of Confu¬
cian education was the cultivation of the
person in the ethical sense, in practice it
tended to be more concerned with the
preparation and selection of a ruling elite. For
Confucius, education was a powerful instru¬
ment which this elite could use to govern the
state. By education the ruler should "learn to
care for the people" while the ruled "learned
to be obedient". Care from above and obedi¬
ence from below were supposed to lead to a
stable social order. The authority of the
parent at home and that of the teacher at
school went a long way to explain the disci¬
pline of most Asian students.
Extended to the political and economic
sphere, the authority of the state favoured a co¬
operative, harmonious relationship between
baptagram is a women's
organization in Bangladesh
whose work has been cited by
the joint Unesco-Unicef
programme Education for All:
Making it Workas a model for
women's education in
developing countries. Right, a
Saptagram course in Faridpur.
33

Some features of traditional cultures partly
explain why an industrial economy was so
slow to take off in many Asian countries.
business and government and facilitated the
implementation of government policy.
Authoritarian modern government has been



said to be one of the factors accounting for the
economic miracles of East Asian countries.
But if this is so, why have economies with
cultural traditions that are supposedly so con¬
ducive to development only recently
embarked on rapid growth? Some scholars
have seen Confucianism as a conservative,
anti-modernizing force. This might be an
exaggeration, but it is safe to say that, apart
from more fundamental economic and polit¬
ical factors that have hampered development,
some features of traditional cultures partly
explain why an industrial economy was so
slow to take off in many Asian countries.
These features include:
the "politicization" of educational- cul¬
tural values and lack of governmental com¬
mitment to economic modernization. Educa¬
tional institutions were used as mere instru¬
ments in political strife and as an appendage
to the government apparatus;
neglect of individuality. The collective
interest was grossly over-emphasized and the
individual was reduced to the status of an
instrument;
focus on interpersonal relationships rather
than on the conquest ofnature. Over a long
A computer class in a Tokyo
high school (Japan).
Schoolchildren in Thailand
bow to their teachers when
leaving at the end of the
school day.
period this resulted in the underdevelopment of
science, engineering and applied technologies;
over-emphasis on classics-oriented exami¬
nations. Meritocracy based on success in
examinations could be a motivating force for
learning and career achievement irrespective
of class, but over-emphasis on examinations
in the Confucian classics suppressed the cre¬
ativity of many brilliant young minds.
contempt for pragmatism, utilitarianism
and business. Confucian idealism neglected
science and technology. It separated brain
from hand and scholarship from craftsman¬
ship. The educated elite were entitled to rule
simply by virtue of their "superior morality",
without having to acquire practical knowl¬
edge or skills. Matters of utilitarian value were
despised, and business was regarded as an
occupation of low social status. It is partly due
to these cultural attitudes that vocational and
technical education are neglected even today
in many developing Asian countries.
gender bias. For centuries women were
relegated to household drudgery and played a
negligible role in society. This explains why
girls received much less schooling than boys
and also helps to account for the persistently
high ratio of girls in the numbers of school
dropouts in Asia (two-thirds during 1985-
1992). Low educational levels among Asian
women have resulted in high infant mortality,
high population growth in rural areas, worse
conditions for children's nutrition and health
and a stagnant economy.
Education for a global ethics
Asian nations today, while determined to pre¬
serve their cultural identity and traditions, are
becoming increasingly aware of the need for
interdependence. In response to increasing
34

In the coming century humankind
may find that elements of the wisdom
of Confucianism are as relevant as
they were long ago.
globalization their educational systems have
begun to advocate the teaching of a core of
universal values. These values include: aware¬
ness of human rights combined with a sense
of social responsibilities; social justice and
democratic participation in decision-making
and government; understanding and tolerance
of cultural differences and pluralism; caring
and co-operation; a spirit of enterprise, cre¬
ativity,' sensitivity to equality of the sexes,
open-mindedness to change and a sense of
obligation to environmental protection and
sustainable development.
Most of these values are rooted in time-
honoured cultural traditions. The "spirit of
caring" is embedded in Confucian "benevo¬
lence" and Buddhist "mercy". Sensitivity to
environmental protection was expressed in
ancient China by the Taoists' concern about the
destructive consequences of technology on
natural resources. Altruism has been respected
as the highest human value in Asia for hundreds
A village school in the
Shanghai (China) region. The
girl's red scarf indicates that
she is a model pupil.
Above, a health training
course for village women of
Tilonia in India's Rajasthan
state as part of the Barefoot
College Programme, a
community education project
for the development of needy
rural areas.
Right, a village school in
Chan State (Myanmar).
of years. In the coming century humankind
may find that elements of the wisdom of Con¬
fucianism are as relevant as they were long ago.
One way of fostering universal values for
future centuries, therefore, is to educate the
young with great books of the past.
Another approach that should be fostered
is educational bridge-building between East
and West. Culturally East and West are com¬
patible and complementary. The Confucian
scholar-official selected according to merit
rather than hereditary privilege is close to the
ancient Greek idea of "government by the
best". If East and West can learn from each
other and integrate each other's cultural
strengths individual initiative with team
spirit, competitiveness with co-operative-
ness, technological skills with moral quali¬
ties then universal values and a global ethic
will gradually develop. This renewal of cul¬
tures is a great contribution that education can
make to humanity.
35
