Race, history and culture
by Claude Lévi-Strauss
Oneoftheworld's
leading
anthropologists, Claude
Lévi-Strauss twice set
forth his ideas on
racism for Unesco, first
\n Race and History
(1952) and later in
Race and Culture
(1971). On the
following pages we
publish long extracts
from thèse two
important studies.
The development of human life is not everywhere
the same but rather takes form in an extraordinary
diversity of societies and civilizations. This intel¬
lectual, aesthetic and sociological diversity is in no
way the outcome of the biological différences, in
certain observable features, between différent
groups of men; it is simply a parallel phenomenon
in a différent sphère. But, at the same time, we
must note two important respects in which there
is a sharp distinction. First, the order of magnitude
is différent. There are many more human cultures
than human races, since the first are to be counted
in thousands and the second in single units. . . .
Second, in contrast to the diversity of races, where
interest is confined to their historical origin or their
distribution over the face of the world, the diver¬
sity of cultures gives rise to many problems; it may
be wondered whether it is an advantage or a disad-
vantage for human kind	
Last and most important, the nature of the
diversity must be investigated even at the risk of
allowing the racial préjudices whose biological
foundation has so lately been destroyed to
develop again on new grounds. . . . We cannot
therefore claim to hâve formulated a convincing
déniai of the inequality of the human races, so
long as we fail to consider the problem of the
inequality or diversity of human cultures,
which is in fact however unjustifiably closely
associated with it in the public mind	
Collaboration between cultures
... A culture 's chance of uniting the complex
body of inventions of ail sorts which we describe
as a civilization dépends on the number and
diversity of the other cultures with which it is
working out, generally involuntarily, a common
A culture's chance of uniting the complex body of inventions ofail
sorts which we describe as a civilization dépends on the number
and diversity oftbe other cultures with which it Is working out a
common strategy.
30
strategy. Number and diversity: a comparison of
the Old World with the New on the eve of the
latter's discovery [in 1492] provides a good illus¬
tration of the need for thèse two factors.
Europe at the beginning of the Renaissance
was the meeting-place and melting-pot of the
most diverse influences: the Greek, Roman,
Germanie and Anglo-Saxon traditions combined
with the influences of Arabia and China. Pre-
Columbian America enjoyed no fewer cultural
contacts, quantitatively speaking, as the various
American cultures maintained relations with one
another and the two Americas together represent
a whole hémisphère. But, while the cultures
which were cross-fertilizing each other in Europe
had resulted from differentiation dating back sev¬
eral tens of thousands of years, those on the more
recently occupied American continent had had
less time to develop divergencies; the picture
they offered was relatively homogeneous. Thus,
although it would not be true to say that the cul¬
tural standard of Mexico or Peru was [in 1492]
inferior to that of Europe at the time of the dis¬
covery (we hâve in fact seen that, in some
respects, it was superior), the various aspects of
culture were possibly less well organized in rela¬
tion to each other. . . . Their organization, less
flexible and diversified, probably explains their
collapse before a handful of conquerors. And the
underlying reason for this may be sought in the
fact that the partners to the American cultural
"coahtion" were less dissimilar from one another
than their counterparts in the Old World.
No society is therefore essentially and intrin-
sically cumulative. Cumulative history is not the
prérogative of certain races or certain cultures,
marking them off from the rest. It is the resuit of
their conduct rather than their nature. It repre-
sents a certain "way of life" of cultures which
dépends on their capacity to "go along together".
In this sensé, it may be said that cumulative his¬
tory is the type of history characteristic of
grouped societies social super-organisms
while stationary history (supposing it to exist)
would be the distinguishing feature of an inferior
form of social life, the isolated society.
The one real calamity, the one fatal flaw which
can afflict a human group and prevent it from
achieving fulfilment is to be alone.
We can thus see how clumsy and intellectu-
ally unsatisfactory the generally accepted efforts
to défend the contributions of various human

races and cultures to civilization often are. We list
features, we sift questions of origin, we allot first
places. However well-intentioned they may be,
thèse efforts serve no purpose for, in three
respects, they miss their aim.
In the first place, there can never be any cer-
tainty about a particular culture's crédit for an
invention or discovery. ... In the second place, ail
cultural contributions can be divided into two
groups. On the one hand we hâve isolated acqui¬
sitions or features, whose importance is évident
but which are also somewhat limited. . . . At the
other end of the scale (with a whole séries of
intermediates, of course), there are systematized
contributions, representing the peculiar form in
which each society has chosen to express and sat¬
isfy the generahty of human aspirations. There is
no denying the originality and particularity of
thèse patterns, but, as they ail represent the exclu¬
sive choice of a single group, it is difficult to see
how one civilization can hope to benefit from the
way of life of another, unless it is prepared to
renounce its own individuality. Attempted com¬
promises are, in fact, Hkely to produce only two
The one flaw which can afflict a human
group and prevent it from achieving
fulfilment istobe alone.
results: either the disorganization and collapse of
the pattern of one of the groups; or a new combi¬
nation, which then, however, represents the
émergence of a third pattern, and cannot be
assimilated to either of the others. The question
with which we are concerned, indeed, is not to
discover whether or not a society can dérive ben-
efit from the way of life of its neighbours, but
whether, and if so to what extent, it can succeed in
understanding or even in knowing them. . . .
Claude Lévi-Strauss In 1971,
lecturlng on "Race and
Culture" at Unesco's Paris
headquarters.
CLAUDE LEVI-STRAUSS
is a French social anthropologist
and university teacher whose work
has exerted considérable influence
on the development of the
contemporary social sciences. His
works published in English
include: The Savage M/nd(1968),
Elementary Structures ofKinship
(1969), Structural Anthropology I
and //(1974 and 1981), and Myth
and Mean/ng (1987).
World civilization
Finally, wherever a contribution is made, there
must be a récipient. But, while there are in fact
real cultures which can be localized in time and
space, and which may be said to hâve "con-
tributed" and to be continuing their contribu¬
tions, what can this "world civilization" be, which
is supposed to be the récipient of ail thèse contri¬
butions? It is not a civilization distinct from ail the
others, and yet real in the same sensé that they
are. . . . [It is] an abstract conception, to which we
attribute a moral or logical significance moral, if
we are thinking of an aira to be pursued by
existing societies; logical, if we are using the one
term to cover the common features which
analysis may reveal in the différent cultures. In
both cases, we must not shut our eyes to the fact
that the concept of world civilization is very
sketchy and imperfect, and that its intellectual and
emotional content is tenuous. To attempt to
assess cultural contributions with ail the weight
of countless centuries behind them . . . by référ¬
ence to the sole yardstick of a world civilization
which is still a hollow shell, would be greatly to
impoverish them, draining away their life-blood
and leaving nothing but the bare bones behind.
. . . The true contribution of a culture consists,
not in the list of inventions which it has personally
produced, but in its différence from others. The
sensé of gratitude and respect which each single
member of a given 


culture can and should feel
towards ail others can only be based on the con¬
viction that the other cultures differ from his own
in countless ways. . . .
We hâve taken the notion of world civilization
as a sort of limiting concept or as an epitome of a
highly complex process. If our arguments are
vahd, there is not, and never can be, a world civi¬
lization in the absolute sensé in which that term is
often used, since civilization implies, and indeed
consists in, the coexistence of cultures exhibiting
the maximum possible diversities. A world civi¬
lization could, in fact, represent no more than a
worldwide coalition of cultures, each of which
would préserve its own originality.

[In 1952,] in a booklet written for UNESCO, I sug¬
gested the concept of "coahtion" to explain why
isolated cultures could not hope to create single-
handed the conditions necessary for a truly
cumulative 


history. To achieve this, I said, dif¬
férent cultures must, voluntarily or involuntarily,
combine their respective stakes in the great game
of history, to increase their chances of making
that long run of winning plays by which history
progresses. Geneticists are at présent [1971]
putting forward very similar views on biological
évolution, in pointing out that a génome is in
reality a System within which certain gènes func-
tion as regulators and others act in concert on a
single characteristic (or the contrary, if several
characteristics dépend on a single gène). What is
true of the individual génome is also true of a
population, in which the combination of a
number of genetic inheritances in which until
recently a "racial type" would hâve been identi-
fied must always be such as to allow the estab¬
lishment of an optimum equilibrium and
improve the group 's chances of survival. In this
sensé, it might be said that in the history of popu¬
lations, genetic recombination plays a part com¬
parable to that played by cultural recombination
in the évolution of the ways of life, techniques,
knowledge and beliefs by which différent soci¬
eties are distinguished	
The nature-culture debate
[But] one fact cannot be too strongly emphasized:
while sélection makes it possible for living species
to adapt to their natural environment or to resist
its changes more effectively, in the case of man
this environment ceases to be natural in any real
sensé. Its characteristics arise from technical, éco¬
nomie, social and psychological conditions
which, through the opération of culture, create a
particular environment for each human group.
We can go a step further, and consider whether
the relation between organic évolution and cul¬
tural évolution is not merely analogical, but also
complementary	
In the dawn of humanity, biological évolution
perhaps selected such pre-cultural traits as
upright posture, manual dexterity, sociability, the
capacity to think in symbols, speech and the
abihty to communicate. But once a culture
4 world civilization could represent no more than a
worldwide coalition of cultures, each of which would préserve its
own originality.
existed, thèse traits were consoHdated and prop¬
agated by cultural factors. When cultures became
specialized, it was again cultural factors which
Consolidated and encouraged other traits, such as
résistance to heat or cold for those societies
which had willy-nilly to adapt themselves to
extrême cUmatic conditions; aggressive or con¬
templative dispositions, technical ingenuity etc.
None of thèse traits, as perceived at a cultural
level, can clearly be attributed to a genetic basis,
although we cannot exclude the possibility that
such a connexion even if partial, remote and
indirect may sometimes exist. In that case, it
would be true to say that every culture sélects
genetic aptitudes which then, by reflex action,
influence those cultures by which they were at
first stimulated.
An Ideological cover
By pushing back the earliest beginnings of
humanity to an ever more remote past
according to récent estimâtes, some millions of
years ago physical anthropology has under-
mined one of the principal bases for racialist
theory, since the number of unknowable factors
concerned thus increases much more rapidly
than the number of landmarks available to stake
out the paths followed by our earhest ancestors
in the course of their évolution.
Geneticists delivered even more décisive blows
to thèse théories when they replaced the concept
of type by that of population and the concept of
race by that of the genetic stock, and again when
they demonstrated that there is a gulf between
hereditary différences attributable to a single gène
which are of little significance from the point of
view of race, since they probably always hâve an
adaptive value and those attributable to the com¬
bined action of several, which makes it virtually
impossible to détermine them. . . .
Only in the last ten years hâve we begun to
understand that we were discussing the problem
of the relation between organic and cultural évolu¬
tion in terms which Auguste Comte would hâve
described as metaphysical. Human évolution is
not a by-product of biological évolution, but nei¬
ther is it completely distinct from it. A synthesis
of thèse two traditional points of view is now pos¬
sible, provided that biologists are not content with
answers not based on fact, or with dogmatic expla¬
nations, and realize both the help they can give
each other and their respective limitations.
The unsatisfactory nature of the traditional
solutions to the problem perhaps explains why
the ideological struggle against racialism has
proved so ineffective on a practical level. There
is nothing to indicate that racial préjudice is
declining and plenty of évidence to suggest that,
after brief periods of localized quiescence, it is
reappearing everywhere with increased intensity.
It is for this reason that UNESCO feels called upon

Ail true création implles a certain
deafness to outside values, even to the
extent of rejecting them.
to renew from time to time a battle whose out¬
come appears uncertain, to say the least.
But can we be so sure that the racial form
taken by intolérance results primarily from false
beliefs heid by this or that people about the
dependence of culture on organic évolution? Are
thèse ideas not simply an ideological cover for a
more real form of antagonism, based on the will
to subjugate and on relations of power? This was
certainly the case in the past, but, even supposing
that thèse relations of power become less
marked, will not racial differentiation continue to
serve as a pretext for the growing difficulty of
living together, unconsciously felt by mankind,
which is undergoing a démographie explosion
and which . . . is beginning to hâte itself, warned
by a mysterious prescience that its numbers are
becoming too great for ail its members to enjoy
freely open space and pure, non-polluted air?
Racial préjudice is at its most intense when it
concerns human groups confined to a territory so
cramped and a share of natural resources so
meagre that thèse peoples lack dignity in their own
eyes as well as in those of their more powerful
neighbours. But does not humanity today, on the
whole, tend to expropriate itself and, on a planet
that has grown too small, reconstitute, to its own
cost, a situation comparable to that inflicted by
some of its représentatives on the unfortunate
American or Oceanic tribes? Finally, what would
happen to the ideological struggle against racial
préjudice, if it were shown to be universally true
as some experiments conducted by psychologists
suggest that if subjects of any origin whatever are
divided into groups, which are placed in a com¬
pétitive situation, each group will develop feelings
of bias and injustice towards its rivais ?
Minority groups appearing in various parts of
the world today, such as the hippies, are not dis¬
tinguished from the bulk of the population by
race, but only by their way of life, morality, hair
style and dress; are the feelings of répugnance and
sometimes hostility they inspire in most of their
fellows substantially différent from racial hatred?
Would we therefore be making genuine progress
if we confined ourselves to dissipating the partic¬
ular préjudices on which racial hatred in the
strict sensé of the term can be said to be based?
Tlie mirage of universal entente
In any case, the contribution ethnologists can
make to the solution of the race problem would
be derisory; nor is it certain that psychologists
and educators could do any better, so strong is
the évidence as we see from the évidence of the
so-called primitive peoples that mutual tolér¬
ance présupposes two conditions which in con¬
temporary society are further than ever from
being realized: one is relative equality; the other is
adéquate physical séparation.
. . . No doubt we cherish the hope that one day
equality and fraternity will reign among men
without impairing their diversity. But if humanity
is not to resign itself to becoming a stérile con¬
sumer of the values it created in the past and of
those alone . . . , it will hâve to relearn the fact that
ail true création implies a certain deafness to out¬
side values, even to the extent of rejecting or
denying them. For one individual cannot at the
same time merge into the spirit of another, iden-
tify with another and still malntain his own iden¬
tity. Intégral communication with another, if fuUy
realized, sooner or later dooms the créative origi¬
nality of both. The great créative epochs in history
were those in which communication had become
adéquate for distant individuals to stimulate each
other, but not fréquent or rapid enough for those
obstacles, indispensable between individuals as
they are between groups, to be reduced to the
point at which diversity becomes levelled out and
nullified by excessively facile interchange.
. . . Convinced that cultural and organic évolu¬
tion are inextricably linked, [biologists and ethnol¬
ogists] know, of course, that a return to the past is
impossible, but they know, too, that the course
humanity is at présent following is building up ten¬
sions to such a degree that racial hatred is a mère
foretaste of the greater intolérance that may hold
sway tomorrow, without even the pretext of
ethnie différences. To forestall the dangers threat-
ening us today and those, still more formidable,
that we shall hâve to face tomorrow, we must
accept the fact that their causes are much deeper
than mère ignorance or préjudice: we can only
hope for a change in the course of history, which is
even more difficult to bring about than progress
in the mareh of ideas.
Claude Lévi-Strauss
in 1988.
1 . Extract from Race and His¬
tory, first published in The
Race Question in Modem Sci¬
ence, Paris, Unesco, 1952.
2. Extract from "Race and
Culture", published in
Unesco's International
Social Science Journal, Vol.
XXIII, No. 4, 1971.
