Painting the void
Silence is central to your creative work as
a painter. How would you define it?
Kumi Sugai: As a state of inner emptiness and
fullness, to which speed is an effective mode of
access. When I drive my sports car at almost 200.
kilometres an hour, my mind becomes extremely
vigilant. I know that the slightest error could cost
me my life. As I hurtle along in a straight line, I
feel a sense of void and at the same time absolute
joy. Suddenly I feel free and infinitely powerful.
In 1967 I had a very serious accident I was
nearly killed with my first sports car, which was
red. The one I've got now is white.
It was around that time that you started
painting red and black circles on a white
background . . .
K.S.: I draw them and paint them by hand, taking
all the time I need for them to be perfectly
formed. Alone in my studio, I rediscover the
void that I experienced when driving my car at
top speed.
Working slowly in the studio, do you try to
prolong the heightened experience you have
on the road? Does the straight line of the road
become on your canvas a spiral sucked in by a
black hole, a kind of orbit of silence?
K.S.: You could say that. I need two conditions to
be able to paint: plenty of light and complete
quietness. For me, the ideal studio would be four
white walls, silence, isolation. Even if I accept that
the sight and sounds of nature are beautiful, they
do not inspire me. When I fly above the clouds in
a plane I sometimes admire the colours of the
sunset, but the sight does not give me a creative
shock. What does, is the aircraft's landing on the
runway, the speed of the car on the highway, or
28

interview with Kumi Sugai A Japanese painter who finds a
creative shock in speed
the sight of any man-made perspective with pure
lines the architecture of the La Defense neigh¬
bourhood in Paris, for example. My friends say
that being in my dream studio would soon drive
anyone crazy. But I am sure that it is there, in that
bare and silent space, that I could best express the
inner void that inspires me.
B Could you tell us what you try to express?
Do you want to capture delirious states of
mind, like Rimbaud, the delirium of an age
taken over by speed? Or do you want to make
contact with the 'other world', like a shaman?
K.S.: There are no words to define what I do. My
paintings have something in common with road
signs which are in my opinion a model of imme¬
diate and total communication. On the highway,
road signs transmit a clear message that any driver,
irrespective of nationality or culture, can grasp
Traffic, Mexico City (1963).
Top, Espace 84
(1984,202 x689 cm.),
acrylic on canvas, a diptych
by Kumi Sugai.
29

Alejandra Pizarnik (1936-1972), Argentine poet
in a fraction of a second. In the same way, I only
want to use the most direct terms, like the indi¬
visible elements of modern physics. This is why I
use basic primary colours.
Cadmium red, white and black, which are
also the colours of your sports cars. In what
sense are these colours 'basic' for you?
K.S.: Red, black and white are colours that
everyone knows. Even though the light may
change according to time and place, in our hearts
red stays the same. Blue or violet on the other
hand change with the light and so do my states
of mind! I will always present white, red and black
as they are. Straight, without any frills. What mat¬
ters, finally, is not so much the colours particularly
as the way in which my canvases fit together.
S-Circles (1994, 200 x 113 cm.), acrylic
on canvas by Kumi Sugai.
They form a totality, like a body, in which I am
fully myself. In the past, before I changed styles,
before I acquired my first red sports car. . . .
. . . before your terrible accident in 1967?
K.S.: Yes. At that time I "voided" myself in certain
works, I gave them everything I'd got, whereas I
stayed on the surface with others, in which I put
less of myself. I felt divided. I needed to stand
back. And so I decided to stop doing things that
did not flow from the depths of my being. It was
more honest for other people and for myself.
Since then, with the aid of my brushes and my
primary colours, I have given to others "some¬
thing" that does not yet have a name. Something
that can be immediately given and received, not
only today but in three hundred years' time, or
later. Something that is beyond current human
language. It is impossible and even useless to
express anything in front of one of my paintings.
You can only absorb the shock in silence.
So what you do has little in common with
art, pastor present?
K.S.: Modern society is a society of gadgets, of
the superfluous, where only certain needs such as
food and shelter are considered useful and there¬
fore necessary. Everything else is an extra,
including art, including a painting by a great master.
I am convinced that we are entering a new age
whose first inklings are these buildings with right
angles, pure lines.
This futuristic architecture regarded
by its detractors as the reflection of an inner
void. . .
K.S.: It is in a completely denuded and perhaps
even speechless universe where people will only
communicate via signals that art as I sec it will
become indispensable. When we have got rid of
everything that is unnecessary, art will become
necessary: it alone will be able to support a world
reduced to its simplest form of expression.
Interview by MYRIAM SMADJA
30
