A mystic journey
by Kudsi Erguner
"' «1
1 ^1
EE' L^
1 .
-JM
^ ^' T
%
-
v>
A still from Mevlevi (1970).
a film by Pierre-Marie
Goulet about the dervish
Muslim brotherhood,
founded in the 13th century
by the great mystic poet
Jalâl ad-Dîn ar-Rûmî.
© Marisa Duhalde. Niépce Films

The Sufi musician draws
his notes from a well of silence
Silence is the spring from which the Sufi
musician draws his music. In that he is
akin to the earth in labour. The musician does
not know what will emerge, or when, but he
cannot let the moment go by; he must be there
when the seed sprouts.
Likewise, no one can know in advance what
will come from the seed buried within them.
Only the sound of the ney a reed flute can
reveal the face of this other person who is one's
real self. The sound of the ney re-opens in us a
wound from a past time when wc were totally
at one with plants, stones, water and stars. The
memory of this union vanishes at our birth.
But when, in silence, we hear the first notes of
the ney, memories rise up in us, and we
remember this lost homeland.
"We have all heard this music in Paradise,"
wrote the thirteenth-century mystic poet Jalâl
ad-Dîn ar-Rûmî. "Although the water and clay
of our bodies have cast doubt over us, some¬
thing of this music drifts back into our
memory."
According to Islamic tradition, the ney has
this power to command memory because "the
reed quill was the first thing created by God".
Like humankind, the ney was cut from its
roots, the reed-bed by the pond's edge. "Ever
since then," complains the ney in Rûmî's
words, "my dirge makes men and women
lament. I call to a heart torn by separation to
show it the pain of desire."
The ney is thus man's double. Both have
wounds on their chests and are enwrapped in
bonds. Both are empty and desiccated because
the earth no longer nourishes them. Each is
voiceless without the other. The reed flute is
made to sing; it only comes to life at the musi¬
cian's lips. Hearing its notes, the musician
glimpses the inaudible vibration of the celestial
vault and remembers the time when he was
wedded to its movements. The time when,
unveiled, he contemplated the shining face of
God. "Wc are the flute," sings Rûmî. "Our
music comes from Thee."
The sama is the spiritual concert where the
ney is accompanied by the daf (a frame-
A dervish and his reed flute,
the ney.
mounted drum), the tanbur (a long-necked
lute), the kanun (zither), the ud (short lute) and
the kemence (violin). It takes place in the
evening in a tekke (a large room in half-light).
The musicians, who are gathered on one side
and surrounded by an audience on carpets and
couches, only begin to play after several hours
have elapsed, when a long silence has settled in.
KUDSI ERGUNER
is a Turkish architect and
musicologist who himself plays
and teaches the ney. He founded
the Mewlana Association in Paris
(France) where he teaches the Sufi
tradition and classical music.
Among his many recordings is
The Turkish Ney (Traditional
Musics of Today Collection,
Auvidls/UwEsco, 1990).
Listening
Sama means "listening". During the sama the
musicians play compositions from one of the
modes (maqam) in the repertoire or impro¬
vise on this mode. Some maqam belong to a
tradition that may go back to the fourteenth
century. They vary little in their form and are
well known to the audience. But they are never
played or listened to twice in the same way.
23

1
Persian proverb
A flute player
in a Turkish village.
During a sama, the listeners are invited to
embark on a journey of the soul. The route is
spiral-shaped, and each stage of it is marked by
a silence, as if wishing to test the solidity of the
foothold reached before continuing the ascent.
The musician, said Rûmî, provides the foot¬
prints. The ney player indicates a direction and
creates a favourable environment for the
journey. A specific atmosphere goes with each
musical mode.
No one at the beginning of a sama can guess
how the journey will end. Perhaps in a joyful
meeting with the Beloved? Perhaps it will not
be long, or the traveller will have to turn back.
. . . Everything depends on the hal (state of
mind) of the audience and the musician. But
the two are so intertwined that it is impossible
to know which influences which.
The word hal does not denote a vague
feeling caused by a vagrant mood but the
degree of elevation which a person with a
"pure heart" achieves at the end of a period of
inner asceticism. If he aspires to the divine, he
must control his instincts without repressing
them. The horseman who listens to his mount
rather than guiding it has little chance of going
far. In the same way, we must silence our inner
sounds our carnal passions and concen¬
trate our listening powers so that they become
sharper and more watchful, sensitive to the
slightest change of tone.
Sometimes the silence of the audience may
be so complete that it feeds the silence from
which the ney player draws the force and soft¬
ness of his notes. At these moments the mir¬
acle of breathing becomes palpable for
everyone, musician and listener alike. Inhaling
and exhaling seem virtually automatic. In an
almost unreal silence, the sound of the ney is a
reminder that an instant of life is won with each
breath. The musician's ear is schooled in the
harmony of the celestial vault. By filling the
reed's tube, his breath prolongs the contin¬
uous rhythm of the universe. He becomes the
echo of its unending movement.
24
