*
.^
¿y
&
V The temple
of Apollo
the Helper
by Takis
Theodoropoulos
On a grandiose and lonely site in the
Péloponnèse, the majestic ruins of an
ancient Greek temple registered on the
World Heritage List in 1986
HSSPS
©Andritsaina/ICOMOS
I I first set eyes on the temple of
I Apollo Epicurius (the Helper), at
Bassae in Arcadia, in the late 1970s. At
that time it was not covered by the tar¬
paulin which shrouds it (luring restora¬
tion work today.
Its columns came into view at a bend in
the road that climbs from Andritscna to
Bassae. A set of slender shadows in a
lonely place, silhouettes designed to cap¬
ture the essential relationship of the
human body with space, they seemed pre¬
destined to occupy this lofty site which
dominates the surrounding countryside.
But had not the temple of Segesta in
Sicily inspired the same thoughts? Do I
not feel the same whenever I see the
ruins of Delphi appear beneath the
Castalian rocks? Do I not always come
to tlie same conclusion in summer when
I sit on the tiered seats of the theatre at
Epidaurus and contemplate the sunset
while waiting for the performance to
begin? Before they devoted themselves
to the joys of arithmetic and geometry,
the ancient Greeks had carefully
observed the landscape around them.
But in choosing to build the temple
of Apollo Epicurius on this isolated site,
devoid of any trace of human presence,
they faced a particular challenge. This
is a far cry from Byzantine monasteries
perched on the edge of steep cliffs or
hidden away in remote places, seemingly
at the mercy of a landscape ready to
engulf them.
The temple's architect whether it
was Ietinus, the architect of the
Parthenon, as is widely thought, or
someone else did not feel that kind of
humility. He had no need of a mediator
to converse with his god, a god of light
and observation.
A MOMENT OF HARMONY
On my way to the summit, among the
builder's rubble a jumble of rocks left
by time and the elements I discovered
the surrounding countryside. In the dis¬
tance I could see the massif of
Taygetus, and beneath it the oval bulk
of Mount Ithomus, then a stretch of the
Ionian Sea, and the peaks of Arcadia
beyond. Through some miracle of light,
this immense landscape had become
accessible.
This impression is familiar to those
who know and love the rugged outlines of
the Peloponnesian landscape. If you see
it steadily and see it whole, then the
horizon, without ever losing its depth, is
never far away. But on the pitted floor of
this ancient temple, through columns
which seemed to have absorbed into their
42

flesh the shadows of the setting sun, the
phenomenon was at last explained. The
temple seemed to have been designed to
be the virtual centre of a world which had
become circular and complete.
Built in grey Arcadian limestone and
not in the white marble from Pcntelicus
which gives the Parthenon its trans¬
parency and brilliance, the temple of
Apollo Epicurius sharpens your powers
of observation and whets your curiosity.
Its architecture encourages one to
look at the landscape in a new way. Seen
from this temple built 1,100 metres
above sea level, mountain peaks, sea,
and patches of dark green stipple the
harsh grey-green tones of the Arcadian
landscape, so that a world which a
moment earlier seemed indifferent, like
© Studio Manos Gallegos, Athens
Opposite page,
the temple of Apollo the Helper near Bassae in the
Arcadian mountains of Greece.
Above, one side of the Doric outer colonnade.
Above right, a tentlike tarpaulin covers the
temple during restoration.
a story without beginning or end,
becomes an open book and can at last
be properly observed.
The French philosopher Alain
described ancient architecture as "the
moment of harmony between the view¬
point of everyone and the unique world
which is common to all and different for
all."
AN OUTBREAK OF PLAGUE
But without their history, without the
many histories that jostle behind their
barrier of silence when we discover them
in an undulating landscape, ancient ruins
would doubtless be no more than beau¬
tiful objects. That is why I have always
preferred archaeological sites to
museums. In their native disorder, in the
midst of their natural surroundings, old
stones are redolent of human activity,
reminding us that they arc the traces of
a bygone age which can be conjured up
by looking at them with care.
As I look at the temple of Apollo
Epicurius and as I learn about Ictinus, I
find myself imagining the Parthenon's
exiled architect walking the paths of
Arcadia, a region set apart from his¬
tory's great highways, where stories of
werewolves were still told and the local
goat-legged god, Pan, held sway.
Why did Ictinus have to leave
Athens? Perhaps he was afraid of
meeting the same fate as his ailing col¬
league Phidias, whom the Athenian
democracy, suspicious of those who had
the temerity to distinguish themselves,
accused of stealing gold from the statue
of Athena Parthenos and then threw
into prison where he died. Perhaps he
simply needed work. Perhaps, as he saw
the Peloponnesian War drag on and state
money being spent on building more and
more ships, he decided to leave Athens
and earn his living in Arcadia.
Whatever the truth may have been,
it is known that in 420 B.C., around the
time when the temple was built, there
was an outbreak of plague in Arcadia.
In order to escape the danger of
infection, the inhabitants of the nearby
city of Phigalia sought protection from
Apollo. Like other Greek divinities, this
god from the north, who had learned
the art of divination from Pan and
ordained the fate of the Greek world by
returning the Pythian oracles to Delphi,
had many, sometimes contradictory,
functions. One of his leading roles was
to protect medicine, and it was in grati¬
tude for his qualities as a healer that
the Phigalians referred to him as "the
Helper". To thank him for delivering
them from the plague, they built a
dwelling for him at Bassae.
"The city of Phigalia is surrounded
by mountains. . . . Mount Kotilion is
located about forty stages from the city
where there is a place called Bassae,
and the temple of Apollo Epicurius",
43

wrote the 2nd-century-A.D. Greek trav¬
eller and historian Pausanias {Arcadia,
XLI, 7). Pausanias noted that the
temple was more harmonious and beau¬
tiful than all others in the Péloponnèse,
but only devoted a few sentences to it. A
little further on he admits that he jour¬
neyed to Phigalia to make a sacrifice to
Demeter in her sanctuary.
AN UNUSUAL SANCTUARY
I wonder whether Pausanias actually
went as far as Bassae. If he had, would
he not have written a few lines to
describe the low-relief sculptures on
the pediments and the frieze inside the
temple showing Greeks fighting the
Amazons and Centaurs fighting the Lap-
iths? Would he not have been surprised
by the building's unusual orientation,
which breaks one of the ground-rules of
the sacred architecture of Antiquity,
namely that the entrance to a temple
should be in the east and that the
statue of the god should be at the far
end of the building, on the western side,
looking towards the entrance?
Built on a narrow platform in a moun-
AN ORIGINAL TEMPLE
Built at Bassae (altitude 1,130 metres) in
the Péloponnèse on the territory of the Arca¬
dian city-state of Phigalia.
Begun in the second half of the 5th cen¬
tury B.C. by Ictinus (according to the Greek
geographer Pausanias) and completed by
another architect in the first quarter of the 4th
century B.C.
A peripteral temple (I.e. with a single row of
columns around it), with an extremely elon¬
gated ground-plan (39.87 metres by 16.13 and
6 x 15 columns), and an unusual north-south
alignment; built largely in local grey limestone.
Most remarkable innovation: first recorded
use of a Corinthian capital.
An outer Doric colonnade surrounds the
inner portico (pronaos) and the celia (naos),
interspersed at regular intervals by engaged
Ionic columns acting as buttresses. A long
frieze of sculpted marble (now in the British
Museum) adorned the interior of the naos, por¬
traying combat between Greeks and Amazons
and Lapithae and Centaurs.
The temple had a considerable influence on
the monuments built in the 4th century B.C. at
Delphi and in the Péloponnèse, especially at
Epidaurus.
tainous valley (the ancient meaning of
the place-name Bassae or Bessae is
"small valley") the temple is aligned
from north to south. This unusual ori¬
entation, imposed by the lie of the land,
confirms the ancient Greek adage
whereby one should not break the rules
unless compelled to do so.
When the temple was finished, the
Phigalians and their architect faced the
tricky problem of where to put Apollo.
They had chosen this lofty site so that
the god could dominate the surrounding
countryside, but they could not have
him look towards the remote and
sombre north whence he had come. This
seems to have been why they chose the
most economical solution. The statue
was duly placed at the far end of the
temple, but facing the east wall, where
a hole was pierced so that the god could
see the sunlight, and, I imagine, present
a fine Greek profile to visitors.
I fear that Apollo may have felt
slighted at having to endure this
unusual location for so many eenturies.
It is certain that these stories, these
infringements of the rules, reveal the
1
1 0
'
_
^^^^^^
1
III <é
^^
m m
! m m
m m
0 i
m
riV^
I>
10 M
ritual of a religion whose laws were not
recorded in writing, which left the
sweet smell of anarchy behind it as well
as great works of art, thus confirming
the impression that it was designed to
accept life on a human scale and not cut
it down to size in Procrustean fashion,
or magnify it to emulate the gods.
A WOUNDED BODY
Today, beneath its white tarpaulin, the
temple of Apollo Epicurius looks like a
massive wounded body lying in an oper¬
ating theatre while it receives emergency
treatment. It has many wounds, and for a
life that has lasted so many eenturies
intensive care may take decades.
Many of the Doric columns on the
outside are dangerously askew. Inside
the temple, the engaged Ionic columns
forming buttresses rest on ground rav¬
aged by time, winter snow and earth¬
quakes. The last two frame a single
Corinthian column, perhaps the oldest
specimen of its kind, near to which the
statue of the god once stood.
This isolated temple long remained
in the shadows. It was not until 1765
that it was discovered by the French
architect Joachim Bocher. In 1812 the
site was visited by the Society of Dilet¬
tanti, a group of antiquarians from
Britain and other European countries.
The visitors drew the bas-reliefs of the
metopes and any transportable object
that came to hand including the
marble parts of the wooden statue of
Apollo and returned two years later to
remove them, on the orders of the
future King George IV. Since then their
booty has been in the British Museum,
near the Parthenon friezes. Fortunately,
the temple columns were solidly
implanted and were too massive to be
carried by the mules which transported
the bas-reliefs to the port of Kyparissia.
The columns have stayed where they
are, stubbornly resisting the passage of
time, pillars of authenticity amidst the
luminous lines of the landscape which
saw their birth.
TAKIS THEODOROPOULOS
is a Greek journalist and novelist.
44
