TRAVELLERS FROM A FAR COUNTRY
Writers are
nature's exiles
he question that writers living in a
foreign country are most often
asked is: "Now that you live away
from your home country, do you
write in the same way as you did
In other words: "Did you bring
your source of inspiration with you, or do
you need a new one?"
Ingenuous questions are often the hard¬
est ones to answer. As if infected by their
naivety, writers answer them naively.
The best answer would be another ques¬
tion: "In our little universe on earth, can you
really be far removed from your country?"
My answer is: "No."
For a true writer, the world is immedi¬
ately perceptible in its entirety, like the view
that opens up when you stand at a window.
This is so not only because of television, as
might be expected, but for a more profound
reason: the full extent of the world is always
present in the consciousness of writers,
whether they like it or not. If it were other¬
wise, their artistic vision would be mutilated,
I he rhapsode,
a Minoan bronze statuette
(2600-1200 B.C.)
severed, and perhaps inoperative. It would
be like using a language without the syntax
that is vital if words are to relate properly to
the expression of ideas.
In various layers of our consciousness
are the Egyptian pyramids, the icecap of the
North Pole, the winds of Siberia, the scorch¬
ing heat of the desert, New York skyscrap¬
ers and Tibetan monasteries. It requires no
effort of the imagination to conjure up these
images, or others such as the crucifixion of
Jesus or Genghis Khan's caravanserai. They
are as familiar and natural to us as the local
post office or the shop around the corner.
It could be argued that the human brain
spontaneously encompasses the full extent
of the world and the course of events which
have fashioned it over thousands of years.
From earliest childhood, people get used to
this scheme of things as if to exorcise their
fears and avoid distress. They often add
other boundless spaces, such as the flames
of hell.
Distance and exile are not just a familiar
condition for the writer. To a large extent
they are part of the creative mechanism
itself.
They are part of the screen of mist with¬
out which it is impossible to draw the divid¬
ing line between the appearance of reality
and its artistic reflection, the necessary dis¬
tance between the creator and life.
Absence has always been part of the cre¬
ative process.
Before writing existed, before even the
concept of "the writer" existed, there were
rhapsodists travellers who came from afar
bringing stories about unknown peoples in
distant lands. They were also the first authors.
Distance stimulated their imagination and
encouraged them to modify landscapes and
to invent human beings different from those
who had existed, or even from those who
had never existed in other words, to create
characters.
In the end, distance meant that they were
not subject to control and thus ensured the
freedom of the creator for the first time.
It could almost be argued that it was in
the nature of creators to create distance in
one way or another.
A combination of political and ideological
factors and writers' quarrels and conflicts
with society probably influences their choice
of exile. But there is also a mysterious quest
THE UNESCO IpURIER . OCTOBER 1996

BY ISMAIL KADARE
MiB^i"fl^i"fl^iM
ISMAIL KADARE
is an Albanian writer.
which is closely connected with the creative
process.
Yet there is not the slightest contradic¬
tion between exile and a writer's cultural
identity.
On the contrary, exile can strengthen cul¬
tural identity, and at the very moment when
the latter seems to be languishing it becomes
even more real thanks to the universal
dimension it derives from exile.
In general, writers or creators of cultural



values who move to a foreign country are
like the travellers of ancient times, bringing
from afar the more colourful and surprising
aspects of their own country. As for the for¬
eign country that takes them in, the immo¬
bile country that takes in migrants, it is at
least as interested in their fantasies as in their
view of everyday life, if not more so. Thus,
the mechanism works reciprocally: on
either side there is a quest for distance. And
on either side that quest is satisfied.
Looked at from this angle, it could be
argued that writers seek exile when some¬
thing goes awry in their inner creative
processes. Other motives then become less
important. Homer, who in all likelihood did
not settle permanently anywhere, left no
explanation of his movements.
Wandering seemed a natural way of life to
bards and rhapsodists.
The reason why a second great writer,
Aeschylus, emigrated remains obscure, or at
least seems rather poorly justified in purely
political terms. An inability to come to terms
with Greece, or indeed with his times, or
perhaps a row with the jury of a drama con¬
test, may have strongly motivated him, but
that alone cannot explain why this genius
was forced to leave Athens at the age of
sixty-seven.
Dante Alighieri had the bright idea of
opposing the political wrangling between
two hostile clans in his city with the result
that he went into a long exile (in a neighbour¬
ing city). While in exile he wrote one of the
most powerful works of world literature,
the Divine Comedy. Perhaps this was the
real reason why he went into exile.
Political turmoil, especially in the twenti¬
eth century, has prompted thousands of
writers and artists to leave their countries
and scatter to the four corners of the globe.
But even in the fever of politics there is
always something that remains immobile
and in abeyance, "like stars during earth¬
quakes" (as one poet put it). And that is the
fever of creation.
This fever partly explains the reasons for
exile. It decides the fate of exiled creative
artists. It keeps them alive or it destroys
them for ever. During the communist
period, and above all during the transitional
phase before it was swept away, thousands
of writers and artists left the East European
countries, some with clearly-defined objec¬
tives, others driven by a collective psy¬
chosis, a yearning for a more interesting life.
Although the dust of that storm has now set¬
tled and it is easier to see things more clearly,
we are still in no position to identify the real
reasons for a migration on that scale. In any
case we shall need a little more time before
we can appreciate the artistic treasures it
made possible.
In the nineteenth century, when the
Balkan states were in the iron grip of the
Ottoman Empire, their ideologues, leading
thinkers, poets and philosophers left the
Balkans and settled in Western Europe.
From there, they called on their compatriots
to join them in exile. At that time, exile was
an understandable consequence of repres¬
sion. But as the years went by it became
clear to readers of the works they wrote in
exile that exile was necessary to those writ¬
ers primarily so that the importance of the
countries they had left behind could grow
within them.
In such a situation, exile becomes sustain¬
ing and redemptive. When your country
becomes impossible to contemplate, you are
forced to look away. It is said that the Greek
philosopher Democritus blinded himself for
that reason.
Somehow there always comes a day
when, each in our own way, we replicate that
age-old and definitive act.
THE UNESCO QîURIE t OCTOBER 1996
