COSMETICS AND CULTURE
BY VIVIANE BAEKE
The cultural
significance of
body painting
ody painting and scarification are,
like jewelry and costume, ways of
covering, disguising and trans¬
forming the body. But although
the aim is almost without exception to beau¬
tify the body, aesthetic considerations are usu¬
ally ancillary to social, religious or political
preoccupations. However different the motives
of the societies that engage in these practices,
the common denominator is an attempt to
dissociate the human body from its purely
biological condition and endow it with a cul¬
tural dimension.
Body painting lies somewhere between
scarification, which leaves lasting marks, and
accessories that can be put on, taken off and
replaced at a moment's notice. Unlike jewelry
or clothing, it alters the appearance of the skin;
unlike the effects of scarification, the alter¬
ation is only superficial and temporary.
At one end of the spectrum between per¬
manent and temporary markings are the
I hese two Angolan tundanji
(newly circumcised youths)
have been dressed in finery
and painted with ritual red
and white patterns on their
return to the village after a
period of seclusion prescribed
by tradition.
THE UNESCO lOURIER« DECEMBER 1996 19

eft, a member of the
scarifications made by theBobodcof Mali and (Papua New Guinea).
Burkina Faso on the heads of babies when they D. Ui ,
J flight, a Tuareg woman
are a few days old. The scarifications are etched from Niger,
on to the still malleable skull tissue as well as the
skin and last until the subjects die, enabling
the corpse to be identified by the dead person's
ancestors. At the other end of the spectrum is
the ritual during which married women of the
Mfumte-Wuli people of western Cameroon
wrap the red leaves of an ornamental plant
around their hips once a year, on the day when
a great annual feast is held to celebrate the mar¬
riages that have taken place during the year.
Some body paint can last for a very long
time. When the Mfumte-Wuli rub their skin
with the leaves of a plant they call mahiyeru,
they obtain a black pigmentation that lasts
for two years. Penetrating deep into the sub¬
cutaneous tissue, this technique bears some
resemblance to tattooing, although unlike tat¬
tooing it is not permanent. Among the young
. women and children it is replacing scarifica¬
tion, which has fallen into disuse.
At the great annual feast marking the tran¬
sition from the maize season to the sorghum
THE UNESCO fpuR'ER DECEMBER 1996
season, the Mfumte-Wuli decorate their bod¬
ies with a black pigment made from the juice
of a local fruit mixed with ash. It lasts for sev¬
eral days, sometimes even several weeks, like the
henna used in North Africa. The effects of
charcoal make-up, which can be as easily effaced
as watercolour, are more transient.
Appearance
and reality
The Kayapo Indians of the Xingu region of
Amazonia (Brazil) arc inveterate body-
painters. Not to wear body paint seems out of
the question, except in such exceptional cir¬
cumstances as an illness during which the sick
and their kinsfolk withdraw from commu¬
nity life. Like scarification in sub-Saharan
Africa, body painting is here an emblem of
the group's cultural and ethnic identity. It is as
if the Kayapo have chosen to indicate a person's
membership of the group by using ephemeral
signs which are painted again and again,
whereas in Africa permanent, ineradicable
markings are used for this purpose.
The Kayapo distinguish between body

Fulah woman from Niger.
painting for everyday use and body painting
for specific rituals. The former, which can be
likened to clothing, consists mainly of black
designs, covering almost the entire body, traced
with genipapo, a dye extracted from the fruit
of Genipa americana which remains visible
for several days. Only the extremities (feet,
ankles and head) are painted in red or rucu (a
dye extracted from the seed oiBixa orellana),
a colour associated with energy and vitality.
When called for by particular circumstances
or certain rites, the everyday designs arc replaced
(or painted over) by special patterns drawn with
charcoal or genipapo. Although these two forms
oí genipapo painting (daily patterns and ritual¬
istic patterns) use the same techniques and look
very much alike, only the everyday painting is
specifically described as "fine painting".
The designs used on special occasions are
almost always drawn with the fingers and sym¬
bolize transient, preliminary, in some cases
dangerous situations, such as mourning, birth,
hunting or war. As ephemeral as charcoal, rucu
is associated with certain precise situations.
Returning warriors, for example, smear it all
over their bodies and remain slightly apart
from the rest of the community before enter¬
ing the men's house in the centre of the village.
Among the Kayapo, as ethnologist Claudine
Vidal reports, to be is primarily to appear m a
culturally appropriate way.
M Kayapo Indian
from the Mato Grosso
Plateau of Brazil.
THE UNESCO (jïURIERB DECEMBER 1996 fl
