INSTALLATION ART BY MICHAEL ARCHER
Provocative artworks designed for spectator involvement
Once upon a time there was paint¬
ing and there was sculpture. But
that was a long time ago. The tech¬
nologies employed by artists now
include film, video, slide projection, sound
and computers, and there is no limit placed
upon the materials that may be used. The pre¬
sent-day visitor to a gallery or museum of
contemporary art can expect to be met by
almost anything.
At the Dia Foundation in New York there
is a room filled to waist height with earth. Wal¬
ter de Maria's 50m3 Earth, made at a time in the
late 1960s when artists were beginning to exam¬
ine the relationship between the industrial and
natural landscapes of the world and the ways
in which they were represented in the gallery,
has to be carefully tended and watered to keep
it looking and smelling fresh. Although one can
only stand at the doorway and look in, the
physical presence of the work is impressive.
At the Saatchi Gallery in London there is
a room filled to waist height with used car oil.
A channel let into the tank allows one to enter
the gallery which, because of the perfect reflec¬
tive qualities of the still, black liquid seems
to dissolve as the strong illumination from
the skylight also appears below one's feet.
However opposed their ultimate effects,
these examples of what has come to be known
as installation art share the idea that an art¬
work is not an object in the gallery but some¬
thing that extends throughout, thoroughly
occupies and is to some extent congruent with
its space.
It has been more than a quarter of a century
since art some art at least required its spec¬
tators to experience it differently. The term
"installation" covers a huge variety of art¬
works, a variety of form, materials, content
and effect so broad that there seems little that
could justify giving them all the same generic
name. However, it is possible to identify a
number of factors, principally concerning a
new perception of the space and time within
which the relationship between spectator and
30
» THE UNESCO Q_OURIER DECEMBER 1996
orte-chapeaux(1917), a
ready-made by French artist
Marcel Duchamp. work of art takes place, which go some way to
explaining why this word has become so com¬
monplace in recent years.
Ready-made art
If we needed a historical precedent we could
look to Marcel Duchamp who, in the early
years of the century, offered a series of mass-
produced artefacts a bicycle wheel mounted
on a stool, a urinal, a snow shovel, and oth-

ers as "ready-made" works of art. These
defied the idea that the artist's touch, as the
sign of a unique expressive act, was essential to
art. They also demonstrated that it is the con¬
text in which we encounter things that largely
determines how we behave towards them. If



we come across something in an art gallery,
whatever it is, we are predisposed to treat it as
if it were art. By extension, to talk about the
meaning of the work is to speak of what arises
out of this encounter and not to refer to
something that lives in the work waiting to be
unlocked and released. Contrary to conven¬
tional wisdom, this is not merely the justifi¬
cation that the charlatan seeks in order to pass
off just anything as art, but an opportunity
to reflect upon the particular qualities of one's
experience here, now.
A good illustration of this is given by Gary
Hill's Tall Ships. As the viewer walks down a
broad, darkened corridor, other figures appear
to close in from left and right. Whenever the
spectator pauses to take a closer look, they
too stop and stare back, making one feel
extremely self-conscious, before turning and
walking away. The figures are video projec¬
tions triggered by the presence of the specta¬
tor: in other words, there is only something
there to look at because you are looking.
However varied installations are, the thing
they have in common is the fact that their mean¬
ings depend upon a relationship between the
objects and images of which they are consti¬
tuted and the space that contains them. This
space is also the space inhabited by the spectator,
and as such it is an environment subject to the
r light (1SS5) by German
artist Joseph Beuys.
"The silent piano with its
closed lid emphasizes a
synaesthetic equivalence
between the stifling of sound
and the containment of heat
in a room lined with thick
rolls of felt."
vagaries and contingencies of daily existence.
Things occur in our lives over which we exercise
little or no control. Chance plays a large part in
what happens to us, and the same is true to a
greater or lesser extent in installation. Even some¬
thing as simple as stipulating that a work must
be viewed in natural light, as the Welsh artist
Bethan Huws does with her painstakingly pre¬
pared but apparently empty interiors, is suffi¬
cient to place one's endeavours in the hands of
fate. The gallery environment is not stable, but
prone to change according to the season, the
time of day and the amount of cloud cover.
One is not exactly seeing a different room when
the sun comes out or goes in, but one is expe¬
riencing an environment whose full potential
cannot be revealed in one instant.
Reled on Green (1992) by Anya
Gallaccio. A carpet of 10,000
red roses in an area measuring
six metres by four.
THE UNESCO (¿URIERB DECEMBER 1996 31

Another contrasting example of the way in
which chance acts within the structure set up
by the artist to make the work could be seen
in Zurich's Shcdhalle in the late 1980s when



Christian Marclay carpeted the floor with
blank-grooved records. Visitors could only
"see" the installation by walking on the discs,
an eventuality which inevitably led to their
becoming scuffed and scratched. The very act
of viewing leaves its trace.
Perishable materials
Installations unfold in time, their significance
develops out of the spectator's being with and
in them. It is as much in this the importance
of duration that their unfixable, ephemeral
quality lies as in the fact that they may physi¬
cally change or degrade. Of course, some do
change. Anya Gallacio's use of perishable mate¬
rials such as flowers, fruit, chocolate or ice,
means not only that her work will change from
day to day, but also that she can never be certain
how those changes will affect the way the work
looks. Flowers fade, dry out and shrivel, ice
melts, oranges rot. Painting the gallery walls
bove left, German artist
Wolfgang Laib collects
dandelion pollen as the first
step towards creating a work
of art. Above right, Laib works
on Sifting Hazelnut Pollen
(1986) at the CAPC-Museum of
Modern Art in Bordeaux
(France).
Were are leaving here forever
(1991) by Russian artist llya
Kabakov represents a school
that its students, teachers and
administrative staff had to
leave without warning and
without hope of return.
with chocolate, as she first did in Vienna in
1 993, created an ambience that could be smelled
as well as seen: sweet-smelling chocolate box
art for a world that prefers as far as possible to
avoid confronting unpleasantness. (Those who
were not too squeamish could lick and taste
the surfaces too.)
One can also sec this mixing together of
input from different senses at work in the
German artist Joseph Bcuys's Plight, now part
of the collection at the Pompidou Centre in
Paris. The work comprises a blackboard and a
thermometer lying on top of a grand piano in
a room entirely lined with thick rolls of felt.
It is impossible to consider the various refer¬
ences suggested by this work without taking
account of the full range of its sensory impact.
The cosy, insulating warmth of the felt
quickly becomes suffocating, a point made
both by the presence of the thermometer and
the closed lid of the piano. The silence of the
instrument emphasizes a synaesthetic equiva¬
lence between the stifling of sound and the
containment of heat, just as the work's Eng¬
lish title indicates the somewhat contradic¬
tory notions of a pledge and a predicament.
With installation, then, the experience of art is
inflected with sensorily rich, tactile elements.
It is still visual art, but the eye that appre¬
hends is unequivocally and inescapably housed
in a body.
Duchamp explained his works as being
things that interested or amused him, and it is
this quality of being interested in or fasci¬
nated by things rather than struck or absorbed
by their beauty that characterizes installation.
Many installations are, of course, beautiful,
but the manner in which they are viewed is
akin to the way in which we watch television,
go for a drive, or fill a supermarket trolley.
Our involvement in these activities is distracted
in the full sense implied by the critic Walter
THE UNESCO IpURIER DECEMBER 1996

\Jermania (1993)
by German artist Hans Haacke
is a work containing
allusions to 20th-century
German history.
Benjamin, a sense that includes the polarities
of being fully attentive and thoroughly
diverted, as well as everything in between. This
is a far cry from the ideal, detached position of
the contemplative, dispassionate viewer of the
more traditional art forms.
Awkward questions
Beuys's ambiguity and Marclay's chance appear
in other situations as uncertainty. The kind of
reflection we are triggered into by installation
can as well be broadly social and political as
poetic or spiritual. At the Venice Biennale of
1993, the U.S.-based German artist Hans Haacke
broke up the stone floor of the German pavil¬
ion. A photograph of Hitler making a pre-war
visit to the Biennale was mounted at the door
while on the gallery's back wall the word "Ger¬
mania" was written up in a Fascist typeface.
Picking one's way across the fractured, loose
and uneven floor was a precarious venture,
appropriately symbolic of the difficulties inher¬
ent in the country's own task of economic and
social integration after reunification.
In a comparable vein, the Russian Ilya
Kabakov has, since the break-up of the Soviet
Union, made a series of profoundly affecting
environments that pose awkward questions
about the transition to a new model of social
organization. For the 1991 Carnegie Interna¬
tional he created an entire "school" complete
with pupils' work and meticulously kept
attendance and academic records. The pupils
and staff had been told they had to abandon
these fruits of their earlier endeavours and
move to another establishment. There was,
though, no information on exactly where they
were to go or what to expect when they
arrived. Why, Kabakov asks, need so much of
our former lives be jettisoned? It has been and
remains of value in making us what we are and
without it our sense of self-worth and our
very identity as people is profoundly under¬
mined. And here we recognize that what, in
installation, might strike us as transient, con¬
tingent, diffuse or unresolved is itself expres¬
sive of the character and qualities of contem¬
porary life.
THE UNESCO r^iURl ERB DECEMBER 1996
33
