BRAZIL Open market or closed shop?
BY MARIE-FRANCE GARCIA-PARPET
M refinery and workers'
dwellings on a sugar
plantation in northeastern
Brazi
n 1938 the owner of Serro-Azul sugar
plantation in Brazil's Pernambuco state
set up a market on his estate. Typical of
many that were established on planta¬
tions in the sugar-producing region of north¬
eastern Brazil, the market came into existence
at a time of large-scale expansion at Serro-Azul
triggered by the introduction of modern
refinery techniques. The resulting changes
made the master, who until then had person¬
ally supervised work in the cane fields, more
remote from the moradores, the labourers
who lived on his estate. Power came to be
exercised by intermediaries, the managers of
the plantation's various domains.
The master set up the market because he
wanted to reproduce on his larger and more
complex plantation the atmosphere of the
smaller world that had been centred on the
old steam mill. The market would be a place
where the people who worked on the plan¬
tation could meet at regular intervals. Like the
church, the cinema and the school, it would
act as a focus for social life.
A site was found for the market in the set¬
tlement which had grown up around the
refinery, which was itself marooned in the
midst of an immense 14,000-hectare expanse
of sugar cane fields. There was no regular
means of transport to the nearest town,
Palmares, 25 kilometres away. The settlement
consisted of the casa grande the master's
imposing residence, the comfortable homes
of the refinery managers and office workers,
THE UNESCO (plJRIERB NOVEMBER 1996 m

and the little shacks in which the workers and
some of the moradores lived (most of the lat¬
ter lived out in the cane fields).
The market was held on Saturday evenings
and Sunday mornings. At first glance it
seemed like a market in any other small town.
The same foodstuffs (fruit, vegetables, meat,
manioc flour, clothes and household linen)
were on sale and it was divided up in lots in
the same way. However, a sharp eye might
have noted that there were no cattle or pack
animals in the market. Stock-rearing was the
privilege of small, independent producers.
The company store
People with goods to sell could come from
outside the estate, but most of them were
from the plantation moradores with pro¬
duce from their plots of bad. refinery work¬
ers, women office staff and labourers. Each
vendor was assigned a pitch by the master or
the market superintendent. This arrangement
could be rescinded at any moment, for
whereas in towns the right to set up a market
stall is normally paid for in the form of a
municipal tax, here it was a reward for a loyal
morador, like the grant of a plot of land on
which to grow a few vegetables.
The customers were moradores from nearby
domains, refinery workers and employees'
wives. It would never have crossed the minds
of people from outside the plantation to do
91)
W THE UNESCoQ)URIERB NOVEMBER 1996
.ayout of the Serro-Azul
refinery
1. Workers' dwellings
2. Plots of land
3. Covered market
4. The market square
5. Spare parts warehouse
6. Fertilizer shed
7. Dwellings of moradores
(cane cutters)
8. Distillery
9. Factory
10. Sugarcane shed
11. Offices
12. Casa Grande (the owner's
house)
13. School
14. Church
15. Cinema
16. The manager's house
17. Barracäo (store)
MARIE-FRANCE GARCIA-PARPET
is a French sociologist.
their shopping at Serro-Azul. Prices were not
very competitive with those in town. This was
above all a place where the plantation-owner
could show that he was the boss. All the peo¬
ple who lived on the plantation patronized the
Serro-Azul market, but the managerial staff
only went there when they had no time to go
to the town.
"We buy at Serro-Azul because we have
to," people said. "There's nothing else we can
do; but it's not a market, it's a barracäo, a com¬
pany store." For both the cane field workers
(the poorest of whom were not even allowed
into the market) and the refinery workers the
market was a symbol of their subjugation. The
plantation managers, who rode through the
market on horseback, talked down from the
saddle to any moradores they wanted to see.
The presence of the master and his family was
"natural" because his house was so near.
Unlike farmers from the region, moradores
and workers could only buy and sell during
"free" time (granted at the owner's discretion)
from their work on the plantation.
An instrument of control
Traders from outside the estate were hawk¬
ers and small producers who had already
worked on the plantation on a seasonal basis.
They owned small plots of land in the sur¬
rounding region, and made ends meet in this
way. The owner was well disposed towards

them because during the harvest they had
lived in the outhouses of the refinery and had
assimilated the rules of the big plantation.
They all knew him and greeted him in the
marketplace.
Officially the market came under the
municipality of Palmares, but it was the plan¬
tation-owner who fixed the time and place
for business and oversaw the distribution of
produce for the barracäo. Meat, dried fish, oil
and coffee on sale at the barracäo could not
be sold by outsiders. The market superinten¬
dent who collected the stand taxes on behalf
of the municipality was a functionary but he
was also the master's right-hand man.
The master thus controlled every square
inch of the market without needing to be
physically present. By providing an opportu¬
nity to buy goods on the estate, he could
supervise trade and social life on the planta¬
tion, keep tabs on the financial situation of his
moradores, control their relations with the
outside world and restrain alcohol abuse and
fighting. The market tightened his links with
the workers and asserted his power over
them.
The existence of a market on the planta¬
tion did not give the moradores, labourers or
employees an opportunity to achieve auton¬
omy from the landowner. Bringing people
together was a gift to the community in
return for which the community was kept
M arket day on a plantation
in northeastern Brazil
Mn abandoned shop on a
plantation in northeastern
Brazil.
/
under the owner's vigilant eye. Although
strictly speaking the market was not directly
controlled by the land-owner, it was orga¬
nized so that it corralled the people who lived
on the plantation into an area dominated by
him, narrowed their mental horizons and iso¬
lated them from the world without any need
to draw up formal regulations or even build
a fence around the plantation.
This was how things were until the day
when traditional relationships on the planta¬
tion finally came to an end. In the 1970s,
when we carried out the survey on which
this article is based, the Serro-Azul market
was winding down. Most of the moradores
did their shopping in town, where goods
were cheaper and they could meet all kinds
of people, leave a closed world and have
access to a union. The focus of social life had
moved from inside the plantation to outside.
When the flow of exchange (work, med¬
ical aid, protection) between master and
morador ceased to have the trappings of a rec¬
iprocal gift and became a more objective
employer-employee relationship as a result of
unionization, plantation owners gradually
disengaged from their obligations to their
workers.
The lesson of Serro-Azul is that the con¬
cept of the market does not always go hand in
hand with freedom.
© AN rights reserved
IE UNESCO Q)UR1ERB NOVEMBER 1996 21
