COURIER December 1951
' Culture must be one of the foundations for world
understanding'
by Albert Einstein (1879-1955)
In order to grasp the full significance of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, it is well to be fully aware
of the world situation that gave birth to the United
Nations and to UNESCO. The devastation wrought by the
wars of the last half century had brought home the fact
to everybody that, with the present-day level of tech¬
nical achievement, the security of nations could be based
only on supra-national institutions and rules of conduct.
It was understood that, in the long run, an all-destroying
conflict can lie avoided only by the setting up of a world
federation of nations.
So as a modest beginning of international order
the United Nations was founded. This organization, how¬
ever, is hut a meeting ground for delegates of national
governments and not for the peoples' representatives
acting independently on the basis of their own personal
convictions. Furthermore, U.N. decisions do not have
binding force on any national government; nor do any con¬
crete means exist by which the decisions can be enforced.
The effectiveness of the United Nations is still fur¬
ther reduced by the fact that membership has been refused
to certain nations, whose exclusion seriously affects the
supra-national character of the organization. Yet, in itself ,
the fact that international problems are brought up and
discussed in the broad light of day favours the peaceful
solution of conflicts. The existence of a supra-national
platform of discussion is apt to accustom the peoples grad¬
ually to the idea that national interests must be safe¬
guarded by negotiation and not by brute force.
This psychological or educational effect I regard as
the United Nations' most valuable feature. A world fed¬
eration presupposes a new kind of loyalty on the part of
man, a sense of responsibility that does not stop short at
national boundaries. To be truly effective, such loyalty
must embrace more than purely political issues. Under¬
standing among different cultural groups, mutual eco¬
nomic and cultural aid are the necessary additions.
Only by such endeavour will the feeling of confidence
be established that was lost owing to the psychological
effect of the wars and sapped by the narrow philosophy
of militarism and power politics. No effective institution
for the collective security of nations is possible without
understanding and a measure of reciprocal confidence.
To the U.N. was added UNESCO, the agency whose
function it is to pursue these cultural tasks. It has in a
greater measure than the U.N. been aide to avoid the
paralyzing inlluencc of power politics.
Realizing that healthy international relations can be
created only among populations made up of individuals
who themselves arc healthy and enjoy a measure of inde¬
pendence, the United Nations elaborated a Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which was adopted by
the U.N. General Assembly on 10 December 1948.
The Declaration establishes a number of universally
comprehensible standards that are designed to protect
the individual, to prevent his being exploited economically,
and to safeguard his development and the free pursuit
of his activities within the social framework.
To spread these standards among all U.N. Member
States is rightly regarded and aimed at as an important
objective. UNESCO has accordingly instituted this third
celebration for the purpose of drawing attention far and
wide to these fundamental aspirations as a basis on which
to restore the political health of the peoples.
It was scarcely to be avoided that the Declaration
should take the form of a legalistic document, which in
its rigidity may lead to endless discussion. It is impossible
for such a text to take the great diversity of conditions
of life in the different countries fully into account; in
addition, it is unavoidable that such a text admits various
interpretations of detail. The general tendency of the
Declaration, however, is unmistakable and provides a
suitable, generally acceptable basis for judgment and
action.
To give formal recognition to standards and to adopt
them as the guiding lines of action in the teeth of all the
adversities of a changing situation are two very different
things as the impartial observer may see particularly in
the history of religious institutions. The Declaration will
only exert effective influence, when the United Nations
itself shows by its decisions and actions that it does embody,
de facto, the spirit of this, its own Declaration. I
50
