Heleads held high,
a group of Grameen Bank
members in a village near
Dhaka, the capital of
Bangladesh, give a
purposeful salute that
symbolizes their refusal to
accept poverty and
submission.
I n 1972, the year after Bangladesh became
I independent, I began to teach economics
I at one of the country's universities. Two
I years later the country was hit by a dev¬
astating famine. On the campus I was teaching
complicated theories of development while
outside people were dying in hundreds. Con¬
ventional economics suddenly seemed hollow.
The classroom was a world apart from the real¬
ity of poverty and struggle outside. I left it
and stepped out into the villages of Bangladesh.
I started talking to people for whom life
was an endless struggle for survival and learned
things that I had never encountered in text¬
books. I met a woman who worked hard mak¬
ing bamboo stools. At the end of each day she
had made only two pennies, hardly enough
to buy two decent meals. I could not under¬
stand how anyone could work so hard for so
long and receive so little. I found out that to

small amounts of money to the poor. They
did not think it was possible to hand out
money without collateral. Since poor people
by definition had no collateral, the banks
refused to deal with them. I went from one
bank to another. They all said the same. I
offered to act as guarantor for the loans. This
was acceptable to them for a few more loans,
amounting to a few hundred dollars.
All the poor people who contracted these
loans repaid the money. I went back to the
banks, showing this as proof that poor peo¬
ple repay their debts and that there was no
need to insist on collateral. The bankers said,
it may work in this one village but it wouldn't
work in many. I tried the same scheme in many
villages. All the poor people who borrowed
paid back. I went back to the banks. They said
it may work in a few villages but it won't
work in an entire district. So I extended the
scheme to an entire district. It worked. The
banks remained unpersuaded.
I said to myself, why am I running after the
bankers? Why don't I solve the problem by
setting up my own bank? And so I asked the
Central Bank and the Government for per¬
mission to set up a special bank for poor peo¬
ple. It took a long time but the Government
finally gave permission in 1983. Grameen Bank
was born as an independent bank, a bank for
the



A BANK FOR THE POOR
poor
BY MUHAMMAD YUNUS
M weekly meeting of Grameen
Bank members in a
Bangladesh village.
Banks that lend only
to the rich
The conventional banking system has been
deliberately designed to be anti-poor, gender
biased, and anti-illiterate.
The idea of "collateral", which bankers
regard as sacred, is to push the poor away fro m
banks. But any good banker who looked at
buy her raw material she had to borrow from
a trader, who took most of the money and left
the woman with very little. I realized that if
the money she needed were available at normal
interest rates the woman would earn enough to
reinvest and make higher profits. She could earn
a decent living and escape from poverty.
I spoke to forty-two other people in the
village who were trapped in poverty because
they were dependent on loans from traders
and money-lenders. Their total credit require¬
ment was only thirty dollars. I lent them the
money out of my own pocket. I thought that
if normal banking institutions would do like¬
wise, these people could leave poverty behind.
However, conventional banking institutions
do not make loans to the poor, especially to
rural women.
The bankers I met laughed at me. They did
not think it was their business to hand out
HE UNESCO ÇïURIERB JANUARY 1997 21

our banking system in Bangladesh would be
horrified. Millions of dollars are lent to very
rich people who never bother to pay back. The
repayment rate of our industrial banks, which
lend money to rich people in the name of
industrialization, has been less than 10 per
cent over the past fifteen years. "Why call your¬
self a bank?" I ask them. "Why not take your
signboard down and put up a new one saying
something like 'Charity Organization for the
Rich'?"
Banks do not like women. They do not
want to lend money to women. There are
"Ladies' Branches" all over Dhaka city designed
to serve women only i.e., designed to get their
money. Lending to them is a very different
story. In a Bangladeshi bank, if a woman wants
to borrow money, she is asked whether she has
discussed it with her husband. If she says "Yes"
she is asked, "Is he supportive of your pro¬
posal?" If the answer is still "Yes", she is asked
to bring him along to talk the matter over. No
male borrower is asked whether he has dis¬
cussed the idea with his wife, or whether she is
supportive of it, or whether he would like to
bring her along to discuss the proposal. I would
think that less than 1 per cent of borrowers in
Bangladesh are women. There must be some¬
thing wrong with the system.
Banks demand that clients write everything
down. In Bangladesh, where 75 per cent of the
people cannot read and write, this is a ridicu¬
lous situation. Even when people bring money
to deposit in the bank, they have to write
down every detail on paper. I asked why banks
cannot simply take money and issue a receipt
saying "received such and such an amount of
money from such and such a person?" Why
must the depositor have to do all this writing?
When I first challenged this notion, bankers
asked me how records could be kept without
reading and writing. My reply was that banks
could issue receipts for amounts received or
disbursed, and that all the necessary account¬
ing could be done by the bank. Why punish
the illiterate person?
The Grameen system
Grameen Bank now operates in over half the
villages of Bangladesh. It has over two million
members, 94 per cent of whom are women. Over
$1.7 billion have been disbursed so far, and more
than 300,000 houses have been built with
Grameen housing loans. Depositors, saving only
one or two taka per week, have managed to save
over $120 million. This has been achieved because
Grameen Bank is pro-poor, pro-women and
supportive of the illiterate.
Grameen Bank rejected collateral-based
banking as a structural impediment to the par¬
ticipation of the poor, and introduced instead
group-based lending and peer monitoring to
ensure both the selection of needy clients and
2?
the maintenance of high repayments. Groups
of five are formed with members from homo¬
geneous backgrounds who know and trust
each other. Six to eight groups are integrated in
one centre. Each village will generally have one
or two centres. Instead of making people come
to the bank, Grameen goes to the people. All
financial transactions take place at weekly cen¬
tre meetings. This lowers transaction costs as .
well as making the banking institution sub¬
ordinate to people's needs.
Ninety four per cent of Grameen mem¬
bers are women. This emphasis on women is
based on the fact that women arc the most
oppressed within the ranks of the poor and,
more importantly, because giving credit to
poor women translates into greater welfare
within the household. Unlike men, women
in rural Bangladesh spend almost all their earn¬
ings on the family and plan for the family's
future. There is also a social dimension to the
emphasis on women group members. Women
who had earlier rarely ventured out of their
houses now come to group meetings; women
who had previously never handled cash now
keep accounts and engage in financial transac¬
tions; women who had never been visible in
public now become assertive and confident.
Most Grameen members have no formal
schooling. At Grameen they are taught to sign
their names, to count and keep accounts. Bank¬
ing procedures are simple and transparent.
Members discuss among themselves and learn
to keep track of their money without having
to use difficult forms. Simple receipts arc
issued so that record keeping is simplified.
With her fourth loan from
the Grameen Bank this
Bangladeshi woman bought a
dairy cow.
THE UNESCO QjURIIER JANUAR1 ]<>97

I hanks to a loan from the
Grameen Bank, Angurl (above)
is no lorigar dependent on
middlemen for the bamboo she
uses to weave baskets.
Grameen has led to a virtual transforma¬
tion of rural society. Numerous studies on the
Bank have shown that it has increased the eco¬
nomic well-being of its members. Grameen
loans have contributed to the building of
sturdy houses, to better health and sanita¬
tion, and to higher school attendance. Studies
have also pointed to the increasing power of
women, to their challenging of conventional
norms discriminating against them, and to
their greater political participation. While
much remains to be done to alleviate poverty

and end inequality and gender discrimina¬
tion, microcredit in Bangladesh, as practised by
the Grameen Bank, has provided one simple
strategy that works.
Poverty alleviation
initiatives
We at Grameen, however, are not content to
stop here. We dare to dream of microcredit
paving the way for poverty alleviation once
and for all. The Grameen family is thus work¬
ing on expanding agricultural productivity
through environment-friendly integrated agri¬
cultural methods. We arc promoting the devel¬
opment of fisheries. We are expanding local
markets by linking weavers from the heart¬
land of Bangladesh to retail outlets in the
United States and Europe through the export
of "Grameen check" clothing.
We strongly believe that the most advanced
technology should be appropriated by the poor.
We are thus working on harnessing solar and
wind energy, and on providing telecommuni¬
cation facilities to every village in Bangladesh.
This will not be organized by wealthy corpo¬
rations. Access to credit will ensure that poor
rural men and women arc both the owners and
users of such products and services.
1 Muhammad Yunus talked about the Grameen Bank
in an interview published in the September 1995 issue
of the Unesco Courier. Editor
THE UNESCO ^_OURIERB JANUARY l<)97
