meó
Johan Galtung
Professor Johan Galtung, of Norway, is one of What is the educational purpose of peace
the founders of modern peace studies. He studies?
established the International Peace Johan Galtun9: A maJ"r Wl,s «r.H-aee education
is to enable and empower people to handle con-
Research Institute, Oslo (PRIO), in January
1959 and the Journal of Peace Research in
diets more creatively and less violently. This is
what I mean hy peace; education, and a lot of



1964. He has published Over 70 books, the knowledge and skills, theory and practice are
most recent Of Which is Peace by Peaceful required for it. Peace studies is an applied social
Means: Peace and Conflict, Development and science, just as medicine is applied anatomy,
Civilization (Sage Publications/PRIO, 1996). Vty and pathology. It is only meaningful
if it leads to action. The goal is not more hooks,
hut more peace.
Here Johan Galtung talks to the Courier
about the guiding principles of his career as
a peace theorist anda peace field-worker. How are Peace stud1es structured?
Interview by Natascha Batic J.G.: To understand peace and violence we need
to consider hasic human needs for survival,
well-being, freedom and identity. Development
aims to promote those needs: violence insults
them: peace preserves them.
As I see it there are three types of violence
and hence three types of peace: direct, struc¬
tural and cultural. Direct violence insults human
needs with the deliberate, intention to hurt and
harm; structural violence does so more indirectly.
Cultural violence is symbolic, and refers to those
aspects of our cultures that are used to legit¬
imize direct or structural violence.
These three notions can be taught dialecti-
cally, with their negations direct peace, struc¬
tural peace, cultural peace. It makes no sense to
focus on only one of them. Conflict is part of a
double, yin/yang totality: both Creator and
Destroyer. Deep inside a conflict there are one or
THE UNESCO IpURIER« |ANUARY 1997

© Lenzenwenger, Schlaining, Austria
more contradictions or incompatibilities. When
handled creatively they can be the driving force
of human social and moral development. Gandhi
is a rich source of creative and non-violent inspi¬
ration for the theory and practice of both sides
of conflict.
When did peace studies become a university
discipline?
J.G.: Sometime around the late 1960s and the
early 1970s. Today the subject exists in some
form in at least 500 universities and colleges
around the world, but mainly as a theoretical, lit¬
erature-oriented subject.
Two leading centres for peace studies arc the
European University Centre for Peace Studies
(EPU) and particularly the courses in civilian
peace-keeping at the Austrian Study Centre for
Peace and Conflict Resolution in Schlaining
south of Vienna (which won the U.MiSCO prize
for peace education in 1995), and the Institute
for Conflict Analyses and Resolution at George
Mason University in Fairfax, Virginia (U.S.A.).
Theory and practice go hand in hand in each of
these institutions. Rut many other places are
coming up. We need at least 1,000 of them with
at least 10,000 graduates a year.
What teaching methods are used?
J.G.: They are not so different from those used in
medicine. Theoretical work has to be combined
with case studies and practice, but students
should only go into the field when they are ready.
Many do this too early, as amateurs or dilettantes,
sometimes causing harm. Most never get closer to
reality than some university library. (There is
room for those, too.)
Rut it cannot be said too strongly that peace
studies must be action-oriented and empowering
for ordinary people in civil societies.
What do you think of the idea that conflicts
should not necessarily be avoided or suppressed, but
that violence and destructiveness call for positive
intervention?
J.G.: This is a truism. In a sense it's a bit like say¬
ing "weather should not necessarily be avoided
or suppressed, but destructive, violent weather
calls for some protection". It makes me think of
politicians and diplomats who talk about "con¬
flict" when they actually mean "violence", and
"peace" when they mean "cease-fire". Such sloppy
talk makes people fail to see a conflict before it
erupts into direct violence and then they only see
its negative, destructive aspect. There is also a
common failure to see that the situation after a
cease-fire is usually worse than before the vio¬
lence because of the invisible damage of violence,
for instance to structure and culture.
Is there a difference between 'positive
intervention' and peacekeeping, peacemaking or
peacebuilding?
J.G.: There certainly is! I would prefer people
to be empowered for self-intervention rather
than some managerial top-down intervention by
others. Positive intervention should be creative,
non-violent and empathie. People should know
how to do it.
What do you feel about peace enforcement?
3.G.: This is a very last resort, like a surgeon car¬
rying out an amputation. The term stands for
violence, and in my experience violence breeds vio¬
lence, regardless of how many Security Council
THE UNESCO COURIER JANUARY 1997 %

n t e rvi e w
f
Johan Gattung
resolutions and "advanced democracies" stand
behind it.
One definition of conflict resolution is to use
conflicts non-destructively and creatively 'to
promote needed social change'. Is social change an
inherent part of human experience?
J.G.: To me daoism gives the answer to this ques¬
tion. Contradiction is inherent in all life, and
hence conflict is ubiquitous. Human needs and
wishes are enormously complex. Society is sim¬
pler, structured in response to formulas deep in
the culture, and incapable of catering to all these
needs and wishes. Some of them will be repressed
and hence contradictions will germinate. Sooner
or later they will surface in attitudes and behav¬
iour and lead to social conflict. Social change will
be demanded to solve some problems, at the
expense of creating others. And so on. That
process is called history.
When is social change necessary?
J.G.: When the basic needs of human life and life
in general have been insulted or there is a threat
thereof, and when this is a structural/cultural
process, i.e. not just the result of the whims of
some ruler or ruling group. Democracies handle
this better than non-democracies. That is why we
need human rights, the whole repertory of the
International Bill of Human Rights, to intervene
at the bottom of societies and protect minori¬
ties. The problem is that so far we have only
heard from the West; we also need the contri¬
butions of other civilizations.
What is your own theory of social change?
J.G.: I could never be the slave of only one theory;
I try to be eclectic. Peace studies take you along
all kinds of highways and byways. Ars longa,
vita brevis. My theories are relatively complex,
and in any concrete situation I would use as many
of them and others eclectically, as I would
find necessary.
In the late 1950s and early 1960s I worked on
rank-concordant, feudal and -discordant systems
in order to locate sources of social change and on
ways in which concordant world structures com¬
bine into highly rigid, imperialist structures.
Since then I have been working on various
forms of violence, visible and invisible, and their
peace counterparts; and on the theory and prac
tice of reconciliation after violence. And also on
deep cultures in various civilizations or social
cosmologies as I call them, in an attempt to trace
their impact on macro-history, particularly for
peace and conflict and development, including
the destruction of the social fabric, values and
norms which is so rampant today. I have also
been concerned with pathological cosmologies
and possible therapies; with the collective sub¬
conscious of various nations, and with hard-soft
and transcendent-immanent aspects of religions
and other cultural manifestations.
In philosophy I have been concerned with apo-
dictic thinking in the Occident and its role in
utopianism and fundamentalism; especially as
this is expressed in the leading ideology of the
West today, economism based on egocentric cost-
benefit analysis. In political science I have worked
on the origin of the state system from feudal times
and its pathologies. In economics I have been par¬
ticularly concerned with externalities and how
they can be internalized in an equitable manner,
both within and between countries in new trade
theories. As a futurist I have been concerned with
better, less violent social and world systems. All of
these are or can be read as theories of peace and
social change.
As a peace and conflict worker 1 have also been
concerned with the fascinating steps involved in
putting theory into practice; including my own
efforts in twenty-five conflicts. So far.
Can social change arise from a natural,
spontaneous movement rather than force?
J.G.: Sometimes it is natural, spontaneous; some¬
times it is very deliberate. Sometimes it is non¬
violent, sometimes violent. I believe in deliberate
change to reduce dukkha (suffering) and bring
about sukha (happiness, enlightenment) as a
Ruddhist would say. It does not come by itself.
Working for this is itself sukha.
Is humankind doomed to live in a perpetual
state of crisis?
J.G.: No. Problems yes, crises no. There is no rea¬
son to be apocalyptic. Some problems, even
crises, are solved; others arise, hopefully at a
higher level, although I am far from sure of that.
How should we learn to discard the old and live
with the new peacefully?
6 THE UNESCO ÇlURIERi JANUARY I

3.G.: I don't think we should. The point is not
old/new but dukkha/sukha. Monks in a monastery
often know more about this than people sur¬
rounded by possessions. And yet I do not think
their truth is universal. I am a strong believer in
pluralism, not only in ideas but in social forma¬
tions, as long as they are nonviolent. The basic
problem is not to do things that cannot be undone.
Our action should be reversible. We may be wrong.
If we do something irreversible that is also wrong,
we create violence for those who come after us.
Reversibility is for me a much better guide than
universalizability. Non-violence follows from this
principle since we cannot recreate life.
When traditionally determined role
relationships are disrupted, what is the role of
culture as a means of understanding and
communication?
J.G.: That kind of disruption happens all the
time, and the result is what Durkheim called
anomie, an absence of compelling values and
norms. People then seek old or new sources of
meaning, and many find them in what others call
sects and try to discredit as "fundamentalism".
We shall get much, much more of this as we go
on destroying not only cultures hut old social
fabrics in the name of globalization, creating a
society of empty monads, what 1 call "atomic".
What role should international organizations
play in this situation?
J.G.: I see more possibilities for non-governmen¬
tal organizations (NGOs) than for inter-govern¬
mental organizations, given the pathologies of
the state-system, particularly the narcissistic
and paranoid behaviour of certain "big powers".
I think it was an act of genius on the part of the
United Nations to give NGOs a voice during major
UN conferences. This is our world civil society,
our world public space. The NGOs will have to
come to grips with the devastating impact of
what passes for free markets, including labour
flexibility on a global scale. The system is now
creating mass unemployment and misery on a
hitherto inconceivable scale, trying to destroy
all alternatives. On the other hand, as I pointed
out above, the alternatives will themselves bring
in their wake new problems that will also have to
be taken seriously. Such is life.
B
Johan Galtung conducts
a seminar.
What can be done to make education for justice
and peace efficient at grassroots level?
J.G.: I think most of this education is invisible.
The major teachers are still the mothers, the
kindergarten workers, the millions teaching in
elementary and other schools, the religious peo¬
ple in their churches, mosques and temples, peo¬
ple running organizations in a participatory man¬
ner, and many others. Rut often their messages
are harsh, exclusive, filled with hatred.
What is the impact of a worldwide form of
communication to which there is no equal access?
J.G.: There never has been a form of communication
with perfectly equal access. The range, speed and
volume were always unequally distributed. Rut, if
other social goods like education and money are
reasonably distributed, then communication will
follow, like the red telephones that dot the Japan¬
ese land- and city-scapes and are accessible to
almost everyone. I am more worried about one-way
communication like TV, and the enormous amount
of disinformation traveling on those famous high¬
ways, all the virtual realities we are encouraged
to confuse with the reality where real people meet
their real dukkha andsukha. That is the world we
live in and peace studies try to come to grips with
one bundle of problems: violence. Communication
is one of the tools. Education, formal and infor¬
mal, is another. I see that as a source of light in our
dark century. M
THE UNESCO Q^^R" JANUARY 1997
