Rules made to be broken
BY JEAN-PIERRE GUINGANÉ
Below, a show staged to alert
street children to the threat of
Aids. This example of social
action theatre was performed
in Kinshasa (Democratic
Republic of the Congo)
with support from Médecins
Sans Frontières, a
humanitarian aid agency.
F Theatre people only became an accepted
part of African society sometime in the
1980s. It was on European stages that most
of them, like the Congolese poet Sony Labou
Tansi and his Roccado Zulu Theatre, first won
recognition and fame. Then, largely as a result
of democratization and the spread of educa¬
tion, theatre took root in African soil and
endeavoured to become involved in African
society. This change can be seen in the flower¬
ing and spread of social action theatre, a form
of drama which has different names in differ¬
ent countries (it is known as "Useful The¬
atre" in Mali, and "Forum Theatre" and
"Debate Theatre" in Burkina Faso) and is
staged in local languages for grassroots audi¬
ences in villages and urban working class neigh¬
bourhoods. Social action drama attempts to
change attitudes about specific questions such
as hygiene, customs or relationships with
community property (a well, for example).
Signs of this change can also be seen in the
increasing number of facilities for production
and performance across the continent. The¬
atres, private cultural centres and festivals reveal
a strong determination by African artists to
produce theatre tailored for their public. What
impact has this had on the sources of inspira¬
tion used by creative artists ?
During the 1980s, political life was the pri¬
mary source for African playwrights, who
concentrated on describing what they saw as
the bankruptcy of African political regimes.
Plays like Sony Labou Tansi's Anthony Sold
Me His Destiny (1986) and The Street ofFlies
(1985), Zadi Zahourou Bernard's The Secret of
the Gods (1985), Senouvo Agbota Zinsou's
The Singing Turtle (1985) and my own The
Entranced Savannah (1990) and The Mad¬
man (1987) were highly popular.
With the advent of the 1990s politics were
replaced by three other main sources of inspi¬
ration: traditional dramatization, religious
ritual and folk art.
Traditional drama
Traditional African society is highly codified
and the individual is subject to such a wide
range of social, professional and religious rules
that he or she ends up thinking that only the
community counts.
Yet almost everywhere these rules provide
for moments of rcleasewhcrc the individual is
allowed to transgress the social code, often
through acting. In Mali, for example, the
avowed goal of the kotéba, a form of folk the¬
atre organized once a year by young people,
was to give the young a chance to criticize their
elders. This was the only occasion in the year
when they could do this without risk the
young people were in duty bound to have
their say about society, while their elders were
in duty bound not to hold it against them.

Africa's social action theatre taps a heritage of traditional games
designed to help people let off steam
Scene from the Congolese
playwright Sony Labou Tansi's
Antoine m'a vendu son destin
("Antoine sold me his
destiny"), directed by Daniel
Mesguich (France).
Everything said in this form of theatre was
above the law.
In Burkina Faso certain Mossi societies held
a market at night-time once a year. During the
night, all established rules especially sexual
taboos were consigned to limbo, and a person
could go with the person he or she had dreamed
about all year long, even the wife or husband of
a close relative. When dawn came, however,
everything returned to normal.
These two examples are interesting because
they can be considered as forms of play, of
social dramatization or dedramatization. The
protagonists were aware that they were acting
because they knew that at a specific moment
the rules would change again. The current suc¬
cess of African social action theatre has roots
in social games of this kind.
Although this form of theatre was created
and tested in Latin America, especially Brazil,
by Augusto Boal, it has not simply been lifted
from Latin America and transplanted in Africa.
African society has changed so much that a
tool had to be found to enable ruling classes,
whether African or non-African, which are
often out of touch with everyday life, to com¬
municate with local communities in order to
involve them in development. African social
action theatre is far less political in its inten¬
tions than Boal's "theatre of the oppressed"
and is effective because it knows so much
about the mindset of those it wishes to reach.
It is intended for popular, often illiterate
audiences which can only be reached by deal¬
ing with things that are important to them
in their daily lives. Social action theatre draws
inspiration therefore from community life in
its raw state. The skill of the organizers lies in
getting the audience to identify with the char¬
acters before going on to achieve critical detach¬
ment from its own behaviour. They do this via
the process whereby traditional societies peri¬
odically call themselves into question by turn¬
ing social rules upside down as an encourage¬
ment to self-criticism.
From a formal point of view, social action

A performance of Guiñean
playwright Williams Sassine's
Légende d'une vérité ("Legend
of a Truth") directed by Fasou
Siba (Guinea).
theatre achieves very close contact with its
audience by adopting the acting techniques of
traditional artists such as the West African
griot. The goal of each performance is to cre¬
ate an atmosphere that will encourage com¬
munication between the different groups in
the audience. The audience and the audience
alone will make the decision whether or not to
change its behaviour.
Religious ritual
We have also seen a flowering of religious sects
and a strengthening of mysticism in tradi¬
tional religions Animism, Christianity and
Islam. As a mirror to life, the theatre could
not afford to ignore this movement.
Firstly we are seeing a return to traditional
ritual. In Côte d'Ivoire, for example, so-called
ritual theatre has been one of the main avenues
of experimentation in theatre, opened up by
studies carried out by Jacques Schcrer and
Werewcre Liking on the ritual and staging
techniques of the Basa people of Cameroon.
Since then, the presence of ritual in the theatre
has become commonplace. In 1985 Sony
Labou Tansi was already noting in the intro¬
duction to The Street ofFlies that "This play
is in the tradition of a theatre that is as old as
the Kongo world, the Kingizila or theatre of
healing." Zadi Zahourou Bernard has based
his entire theatre aesthetic on a ritual of the
Bete people of Côte d'Ivoire from which his
troupe, Didiga, takes its name.
W THEUNESCO ^JURIER NOVEMBER 1997
But these borrowings arc not limited to
traditional rituals; theatre has also drawn inspi¬
ration from imported religions. Concert Party,
for example, a form of popular theatre staged
in Togo and Ghana, owes its form to Chris¬
tian church rituals in those countries.
Nowadays most big African theatre shows
have their share of "rituality " either in the set¬
ting and the acting or in the words themselves.
Ritual seems to be necessary to win over the
Jean-Pierre Guingané's Le
baobab merveilleux ["The
Wonderful Baobab Tree")
staged by the Théâtre de la
fraternité of Ouagadougou
(Burkina Faso).

Members of Côte d'lvoire's
Ymako Teatri Company in a
performance of La légende de
Kaidara ("The Legend of
Kaidara") directed by Claude
Gnakouri and Luis Marques.
The play is based on a work by
the Malian writer Amadou
Hampaté Bâ.
audience. Perhaps that accounts for the success
of Mwambayi Kalengayi's (of the former Zaire)
production of La passion selon Pier Paolo
Pasolini ("The Passion According to Pier Paolo
Pasolini"), a play that depicts with fascinating
realism the lives of the many preachers who
haunt African cities without anyone knowing
whether they are politicians or men of religion.
In a different way, the costumes, make-up
and plot of Fasou Siba's Guinea National The¬
atre production of Williams Sassine's Legende
d'une vérité ("Legend of a Truth") bear a
strange resemblance to a ceremony of exor¬
cism in a village.
Traditional arts
At present, however, playwrights draw most
of their inspiration from folk tales.
Of a total of some twenty plays staged in
African theatres in 1996 and 1997, more than
half were based on folk tales. Some plays such
as Akonio Dolo's Zinimo . . . Zinimo Zi,
Souleymane Koly's La colère de la brousse
("The Anger of the Bush") and Habib Dem-
bclé's Fidélité cravachée ("Horsewhipped
Loyalty"), stay very close to classic tales
although they attach more importance to the
use of space and movement. They contain two
characteristic features of folk tales elements
of fantasy combined with an outlook on the
world that always makes a moral point. The
work of the African sage Amadou Hampaté Bâ
is also beginning to be adapted to the stage.
Through use of folk sources community
life, folk plays, religious ritual and folk tales
African theatre has confirmed its goal of
addressing itself above all to the audience it
wants to reach, an African audience. And that
is a good thing, for it is by translating the
deepest aspirations of this audience that
African theatre will earn credibility and some
day have a chance of attracting wider audiences.
Togo's Dana'i Puppet Theatre
(Togo), whose repertory is
largely taken from folk tales.
