MICROFINANCE IN INDONESIA
BY MARGUERITE S. ROBINSON A nation-wide banking netw
: " '
A branch of the Bank Rakyat
Indonesia.
Wn ithin the last two decades, the
Bank Rakyat Indonesia
(BRI), a large state-owned
commercial bank, has shown
via its "unit desa" or local banking system
that the demand for microfinance can be met
sustainably on a large scale.
BRI has traditionally been specially
assigned by the government to provide bank¬
ing services to the rural areas of Indonesia with
particular emphasis on agricultural credit. In
the early 1970s it developed its unit desa sys¬
tem in order to provide subsidized govern¬
ment credit to rice farmers. More than 3,600
local bank units were established, function¬
ing primarily as channelling agents for subsi¬
dized rural lending programmes.
The long-term results were similar to those
found in many other developing countries.
First, the low-interest, and therefore desir¬
able, loans tended to reach local elites who had
the influence to obtain them. Secondly, lower-
income people typically did without credit
or borrowed on the informal commercial mar
ket for much higher interest rates. Thirdly,
both arrears and losses were high.
Savings accounts began to be offered in the
unit banks in the mid-1970s. However, annual
interest rates were set by the government at
12 per cent for loans and 15 per cent for most
deposits; given this negative spread the bank
could not cover the operating and other costs
required to attract voluntary savings. By 1983
the unit banking system had reached a point
at which it would have to be either closed
down or converted into a fundamentally dif¬
ferent system.
Wrong assumptions
During the 1970s, the unit banking system
had mobilized deposits of only about $17
million nation-wide. This was widely attrib¬
uted within the government and the formal
financial sector to the lack of local demand for
financial services, absence of "bank-minded-
ness" and mistrust of banks that were assumed
to characterize Indonesia's rural population.
These assumptions were wrong.
In June 1983 the first of a series of major
financial reforms was announced. Government
banks were now permitted to set their own
interest rates on most loans and deposits.
Among its other purposes, this deregulation
served to provide an enabling environment
for the transformation of BRI's local banking
system. Following the reforms, the govern¬
ment decided that the subsidized unit banks
would be converted into a sustainable system
of commercial banking at the local level, and
that a programme of general rural credit at
commercial interest rates would be imple¬
mented through the unit banking system.
After an initial period, the loan programme
would be financed by locally mobilized sav¬
ings. Commercial microfinance in the unit
THE UNESCO QïURlCRB |ANUARY1997

«* m <gimi « n
" It is estimated that
institutionalized finance is
unavailable to over 80 per cent
of all households in developing
countries."
banks began in 1984 in the rural areas. In 1989
the unit banking system was extended to
urban areas as well.
In January 1984 BRI began its new pro¬
gramme of general rural credit, called
KUPEDES', offered throughout its unit
banking network, and by 1986 a new set of
savings instruments had been introduced pro¬
viding, for the first time at local level, the much-
in-demand combination of security, conve¬
nience, confidentiality, liquidity, and returns.
These instruments, along with the KUPEDES
credit programme, were offered in BRI's unit
banks throughout the country. The spread
between loan and deposit interest rates was set
to cover all costs and to return a profit.
Since 1984, BRI's unit banking system has
performed spectacularly. As of the end of 1995,
it held deposits of about $2.7 billion in about
14.5 million deposit accounts, and there was
about $1.4 billion in KUPEDES credit out¬
standing to about 2.3 million borrowers. The
KUPEDES long-term loss ratio was 2.3 per
cent. In 1995 return on assets for the unit
banking system was 6.5 per cent. Unit bank
deposits, a highly stable source of funds,
finance all KUPEDES loans.
A 1996 report by the World Bank states
clearly the reasons for the success of BRI's
unit banks:
"The programme succeeded because the
banks loaned at market rates, used income to
finance their operations, kept operating costs
» low and devised appropriate savings instru-
I ments to attract depositors. By mobilizing
£ rural savings, [the unit banking system] was
A MASSIVE GAP BETWEEN
SUPPLY AND DEMAND
Despite widespread demand, it is estimated that institu-
tionalfinance is unavailable to over 80 per cent of all house¬
holds in developing countries. This, of course, includes
the vast majority of the poor peoplein the developing world.
The massive gap between supply and demand occurs for two
primary reasons. Those who hold the power do not see the
ubiquitous microfinance demand; those who see the demand
do not hold the power.
In the former case, local demand for microfinance is
eitherinvisibletoitspotentialinstitutionalsuppliers, orthe
latter believe that it would be unprofitable for them to meet
this demand. Misunderstandings about local financial mar¬
kets are widespread on the part of many governments, finan-
cial institutions and donor agencies. It is generally
assumedwronglyboth thatthe cost of delivering finan¬
cial services at the local level is too high for non-subsi¬
dized institutions, and thatthe informal market satisfies
demand.
Since there is little incentive to meet an unrecognized
demand, or one that is considered unprofitable, the level of
institutionalcommercial microfinance globally has remained
very low. M.R.
THE UNESCO Q51"11"" JANUARY 1907 25

\J raftswomen hand-paint
cloth in a Balinese (Indonesia)
workshop.
not only provided with a stable source of
funds, it also kept financial savings in rural
areas, thus helping development growth in
the countryside. Other reasons for success
included: the simplicity of loan designs, which
enabled the banks to keep costs down, effec¬
tive management at the unit level, backed by
close supervision and monitoring by the cen¬
tre; and appropriate staff training and perfor¬
mance incentives."2
There are three main reasons why BRI's
experience is important.
First, it has shown that the high cost of
small loans can be substantially reduced and
that financial institutions can profitably pro¬
vide microcredit to large numbers of bor¬
rowers, delivered locally with low client trans¬
action costs, at much lower interest rates than
those normally paid by lower-income bor¬
rowers for informal commercial credit.
Informal commercial lenders in many
developing countries typically charge lower-
income borrowers a "flat" monthly interest
CREDIT IS NOT
A PANACEA
Poverty alleviation requires a toolbox. Credit is a powerful
tool, but it cannot be the only one. It is used effectively
when it is made widely available to the working poor.
Among the poor, the hungry, the destitute, the aged and the
ill, those who live in regions severely deprived of resources,
and those escaping from natural or man-made catastro¬
phes have prior needs: food, medicine, shelter, employment.
M.R.
A small textile business
funded with a loan from the
Bank Rakyat Indonesia.
rate ranging from about 5 per cent to over 40
per cent on the original loan balance. Money¬
lenders may offer lower rates to better-off and
more influential borrowers, but in general the
higher rates are charged to the poorer bor¬
rowers who have the fewest alternatives. In
contrast BRI's local banking system offers a
flat monthly interest rate that is at or below 1.5
per cent on the original balance of the loan.
No additional fees arc charged to borrowers
who pay on time.
A self-sufficient institution providing
microfinance must, of course, charge higher
interest on loans than those charged in the
same country by large urban banks provid¬
ing commercial and corporate loans. This is
necessary because it is much more expensive
to deliver financial services locally to many
customers in thousands of locations than it is
to deliver these services to relatively few clients



with much larger loans and deposit accounts
in large urban branches. However, sustainable
microfinance institutions provide loans at far
lower interest rates than lower-income bor¬
rowers can normally receive otherwise.
Secondly, BRI has made credit widely avail¬
able. Various institutions in developing coun¬
tries supply credit at the local level in the form
of subsidized loans, but since subsidies are
capital constrained by government or donor
budgets, this form of credit can meet only a
small fraction of demand. Being cheap and
desirable, it tends to reach local elites, not the
26 THE UNESCO ^)URIER« JANUARY 1997

that on-going subsidies are required for micro-
finance in developing countries. The institu¬
tions that on-lend donor funds at subsidized
interest rates, that combine social and financial
services and that do not mobilize voluntary
savings effectively have not (and cannot)
become self-sufficient. Some arc highly effec¬
tive at providing credit to large numbers of
poor people and in recovering loans. How¬
ever, institutions of this type have been depen¬
dent on large amounts of continuing donor or
government injections of low-cost funds. The
demand for institutional microfinance is too
large for this approach on a global scale.
1 KUPEDES is an acronym for Kredit Uraura
Pcdcnnan, or general rural credit. Editor
2 World Bank News (1996).
poor. From the borrower's point of view, the
key words in microcredit arc access and cost.
Subsidized loan programmes do not provide
wide access, and while moneylenders provide
access it is generally at a cost that precludes
microcnterprise growth.
The third lesson to be learned from BRI's
experience is that voluntary savings promote
institutional viability. Institutions that pro¬
vide microcredit on a commercial basis have
an incentive to make arrangements that are
appropriate for small saver demand. These
institutions can meet a high demand for sav¬
ings services. They set a spread between loan
and deposit interest rates that is adequate to
cover all costs, including the non-subsidized
cost of funds, and to enable institutional pro f-
itability and growth in equity. Such institu¬
tions can become fully self-sufficient. There is
much evidence to show that they can mobilize
massive local savings, in amounts that are small
on average, but large and stable in aggregate.
The necessary although not sufficient
conditions are an enabling macro-economic
environment, a reasonable level of political
stability, an appropriate legal and regulatory
framework, an adequate degree of monetiza-
tion and infrastructure development, and suit¬
able demographic conditions. Given these con¬
ditions, institutional microfinancc can achieve
both profitability and wide coverage.
The new institutional commercial micro-
finance challenges the widespread assumption
he owner of this grocery
shop took out a loan from the
Bank Rakyat Indonesia (BRI).
'THE BANK IS A SERVANT,
NOTA KING'
The relationship between microfinance and socialand eco¬
nomic development is best understood-and best
expressedby the clients of commercial microfinance insti¬
tutions. The comments below were made to the author by
microfinance clients of two banks.
Savings services are the subject of many comments by
clients. As this comment by a BRI client living in rural
Java, shows:
"Before, we did not have so many employment oppor¬
tunities. We kept our savings in animals or gold, and we kept
cash in the house. Now, except for a small amount, we do
not like to keep money and gold in the house. Because we
are working, there is not always someone at home. There is
a security problem, and we cannot sleep peacefully at night
if we keep money and gold in the house. We can keep sav¬
ings in up to eight goats. After that there is too much
work to care for the goats, and the shepherds are all in
school. But we have more savings than eight goats. We
could buy a cow, which is less work than eight goats. But
we cannot cut off the ear of the cow when we have to pay
the school fees. We preferto put our savings in banks."
One long-term client of Indonesia's oldest microfi¬
nance bank, the Bank Dagang Bali, said:
"I grew up poor and without education. I learned,
though, that I could improve myself, and thatthe bank
would help me. The president of Bank Dagang Bali is a
great man. Why do I say that? Not because he is a bank
president; thereare many bank presidents. Because he knew
that poor people fear banks, and he taught us not to be
afraid. BDB taught us something important that we never
knew before. BDB taught us thatthe bank is nota king. It
is a servant." M. R.
THE UNESCO QjUR'ER« |ANUABYI997 27
