Deciphering
an age-old
language
inscribed in the
world around us
T !
lerrace farming northwest of °
Sanaa (Yemen). © I
w the UNtsco Kurier may iC"J7
i

ÄSSr
Treading the
BY YVES BERGERET
landscape
T:here is always an interaction between
people and the places where they live
and move and have their being. Wher¬
ever you arc, on familiar or unfamil¬
iar ground, other people have been there before
you or are there with you, silent or noisy
companions. Wherever you go, there are signs
of human presence. You are surrounded by
an all-pervasive language, speaking with one
or many voices, dead or alive. The physical
sediment of that language, deposited on
objects and scenery, constitutes what I mean
when I use the word landscape.
Seashells in the sand
Looking down from the aircraft window as
you cross the Atlantic coming from Europe,
you see tiny islands and great white filaments
of cloud stretched above the distant surface
of the ocean, an abstract spectacle dreamlike
in its ever-changing beauty. You land on a
Caribbean island. Immediately you arc
enveloped by the sultry heat. You drive to a
small town, not far from the sea. It is already
dark, and the chorus of insects and frogs is in
full swing. Eventually you drop off to sleep
in this completely alien world. When you
wake up early the next morning, the sun is
already beating down with all its force. You
walk around the town. The trees are quivering
in the sea wind. Leaving behind the fish mar¬
ket and a knot of huts buried in the vegetation,
you come to a cemetery at the sea's edge. You
walk along rows of graves covered in white
tiles. Suddenly the cemetery gives way to the
near-black sand of volcanic islands. In a plot a
few yards square there are a series of mounds,
each the length of a human body, around
which "lambis" large conch-like seashells
have been driven into the sand, the pointed
end downwards and the big, ochre-coloured
end upwards and open to the air. Under these
simple mounds some of the town's poorest
people, penniless old sailors, have unceremo¬
niously been laid to rest, naked, with only
the sea and some of its creatures, and the black
sand over them.
These unadorned graves speak volumes.
The seashells are the loudhailers of the dead
and the ear-trumpets with which they listen to
the voices of the living and hear the sea wind.
Until quite recently, the same kind of shells
were used by fishermen as loudspeakers as they
drew near to the shore at night. There is some¬
thing admirable about these graves: the dead are
respected and their spirits arc addressed via
one of the most beautiful and natural objects
the landscape has to offer. You arc on one of
those groups of islands between English-
speaking North America and Latin America,
between the Old World which has left its colo¬
nial imprint, and the faint memory of pre-
Columbian populations exterminated by set¬
tlers from the Old World, between a
remembered past in Africa whence, because of
the slave trade, most of the population is
descended, and a present of ethnic intermin¬
gling. You are on a volcanic island subject to
eruptions and cyclones. In this environment of
chronic instability and general rootlcssncss,
the landscape is a medium of human dialogue.
I Waymarks in the mountains
I would like to cite mountains, supposedly the
wildest of the world's wild places, as an
extreme example of the human quality of the
landscape. I have climbed many mountains,
trekked across many wastelands, from Iceland
to Chile, from Afghanistan to the Sahara,
from the Troodos mountains of Cyprus to
Mount Pelée in Martinique. Having had this
practical experience and having got to know
THE UNESCO CniRIIER MAY I9Q7 m

> mountains as they really are, I have observed
that a mountain is never virgin territory.
Everywhere there are visible signs of human
presence and human labour that were specifi¬
cally designed to be visible tracks, embank¬
ments, terraces, dwellings, markers of all kinds.
Even in barren desert uplands you will sec
where animals have grazed. You will come
across a tent whose occupants will greet you
and invite you to share their food or drink
and join in their conversation. In another place,
when you thought you were completely
alone, you suddenly come upon a few piles
of stones or a heap of round pebbles in a dry
river bed put there as landmarks or bound¬
ary stones to show the limits of the grazing
grounds. In desert regions and places where
there is little agriculture, these practices still
continue. In the mountainous regions of
Europe they have a different function. The
mounds of stones known as cairns now serve
to show hill-walkers the way in the absence of
a track. These "waymarks" arc living things.
If you remember, you add another stone to
the pile for the benefit of the strangers who
will come this way after you.
Sometimes landscape has religious rather
than secular associations. Mount Sinai is the
place where the God of the three great
monotheistic religions spoke with a human
M statue of the Virgin Mary
and votive offerings on a
Corsican peak.
voice to give humankind ten rules to live by.
In this case we have a monologue rather than
a dialogue: God issues commands. On some
mountain tops there are small shrines, stupas,
crosses or votive tablets. The summits of the
Italian Alps provide a particularly vivid illus¬
tration of this. On many of them there is a
small statue of the Virgin, affording protec¬
tion from lightning and misfortune. The
Christian traveller should thank her on reach¬
ing the summit.
I know some mountain peaks, not only
those in the Italian Alps, where a recess is hol¬
lowed out of the great cairn surmounted by a
religious statue. In the recess is a metal box
inside which is a school exercise book or sim¬
ply some scraps of paper, on which those who
have made the ascent have jotted down their
names, the date and a few comments. I always
make a point of reading them, for however
commonplace the ideas expressed, they have a
merit of their own by virtue of the authors'
long, exhausting climb, beneath a wild sky,
to look out on this vast horizon. I feel as if I
am shaking hands with the person who a week
before wrote these perhaps naive words at the
bottom of the final page, and I may even shake
the hand of someone whose name has become
almost illegible, who left the brief account of
his or her ascent thirty years ago, and who
HE UNESCO COURIER MAY 19*17

.... ti- ti M cairn built by travellers
may now be dead and gone. In this way 1 have m t. CMm ,
1 a j marks the summit of a pass in
recovered from deep within the landscape a northern India.
record of the weariness and the joy of
strangers.
After days of trekking through the moun¬
tain wilderness of the Jbel Sarho in Morocco,
I climbed one evening to the highest summit
in the range, where I found cairns of all shapes
and sizes scattered about. Three days later, a
nomad explained to me that this was a holy
place to which pilgrimage should be made once
a year. The proliferation of cairns, as I under¬
stood it, represented individual prayers, or
possibly quarrels between rival tribes. Above
all, however, it bore witness to the survival of
a pre-Islamic polytheism that has left many
traces in Berber country. Here there was no
question of an agreed religious significance;
on the contrary, the principle of dispersal, of
multiplication, was at work. A few months
later I saw another of these, so to speak, decen¬
tralized shrines, at the top of one of the tough¬
est mountains in the High Atlas, Jbel
Anghomar. The ascent is difficult, involving,
after days of walking, several hours of scram¬
bling up a slope of orange-coloured scree. At
the summit, buffeted by the wind and with a
sweeping view over the Sahara and the High
THE UNESCO (oURIEl

Atlas range, was a mass of cairns, "kcrkours"
as the local Berbers call them, and fresh traces
of the blood of animal sacrifices.
Mountaineering is supposed to be a dis¬
interested activity and as far as commercial
gain is concerned so it is, certain media-ori¬
ented antics apart. But it too does not regard
landscape as a blank backcloth devoid of
human signs. The mountaineer, far from
climbing a featureless slope, is engaged in read¬
ing a history book written in various "regis¬
ters" of language. First comes the geological
register: the climber has to use one kind of
technique and equipment on limestone and
others on granite, snow or ice. Then comes
the register of sport: climbers "rehearse" a
route already "opened" by some predecessor or
other, work out a timetable and train to get
themselves in shape for specific moves and spe¬
cific feats of acrobatics. There is also an aes¬
thetic register to what I call the "composi¬
tion" of the ascent: climbers' senses and
thought processes are attuned to savour a par¬
ticular shape of mountain, a certain light at a
certain time of day; thorough gymnastic
preparation enables them to perform a kind of
effortless-seeming dance in the middle of a
rock face or even experience rapture up there in
the sky. The boldest climbers of all, those who
"open" new routes, arc able, before starting
out, to sight-read the signs of the rock face
and their aim is to make the route as elegant
and rigorous as possible. Thus, even an uncon-
qucrcd peak is first regarded and then scaled as
a form of technical and ethical language in
which the climber enters into a dialogue with
his or her fellow human beings.
One of the finest acts of communion with
landscape I ever saw took place in a small oasis
I he heads of 4 American
Presidents are carved from the
granite cliff face of Mount
Rushmore (U.S.A.). Left to
right: George Washington,
Thomas Jefferson, Theodore
Roosevelt and Abraham
Lincoln. They measure up to 18
metres tall.
in the Atacama desert of northern Chile. I had
been trudging over those waterless high
plateaux, some of the barest scenery I know. In
the distance volcanoes rose to over five thou¬
sand metres. One afternoon I came upon a few
houses huddled around a spring in a hollow of
the plateau. An annual pre-Columbian rite for
the purification of the irrigation channels was
in progress. Three days of ceremonies were
culminating in a meal which had to start with
a glass of fiery corn spirit. Custom required
that the first drops should be poured on the
ground to salute Mother Earth, to quench
her thirst and to make her fertile. After the
libation and invocation, the drinking could
begin, the ceremony could be brought to a
close, and people could return to their daily
work.
Thus, as we see, humans fulfil themselves
by transforming the place where they live into
landscape. They humanize it, first discovering
and then creating signs of human life there.
Landscape is a mirror in which people can see
themselves, interacting with others of their
kind through signs scattered about in town
and country.
I A sermon in stone
Drive through the wooded hills of Burgundy
along winding roads that pilgrims in the Mid¬
dle Ages travelled on foot, until you come to
the little town of Vezelay. Climb the narrow
main street along the backbone of the hill.
Enter the dark narthex of the basilica, and sud¬
denly there looms above you the great mas-
terwork of anonymous medieval sculptors.
They dragged limestone quarried from the
surrounding hills to the top of the slope, chis¬
elled patiently away at it until it took on the
form of a Christ rather too big for the man-
dorla within which he sits enthroned, his
knees pressed together and turned to one side
in a kind of dancing posture, and of the apos¬
tles who are receiving from Him the gift of
tongues. Pass through the door beneath the
tympanum and into the full light of the nave.
This Pentecostal scene carved into the grey
stone of Vézelay is a response by those who
lived here to their landscape, a hard, unsmiling
land where the dark woodlands, the succes¬
sion of hills and the difficult communications
make for a certain heaviness, a certain monot¬
ony. All this they accepted, but at the same
time yearned for something else, an escape, a
transformation.
THE UNESCO (ou RIERB MAY 1997

reed shelter in
an Algerian wadi.
At the beginning of this century, Victor
Segalen made a telling contribution to the
establishment of this concept of landscape,
especially in his essay with the tongue-in-
cheek title oí Equipée (Jaunting). He pretends
to be making preparations for a voyage to
China, which in fact he already knows well. He
describes the country, travels down its rivers,
visits its towns and presents a wonderful pic¬
ture of a vast, inorganic natural landscape,
when suddenly the description takes strange



poetic wings. Two eyes are watching the nar¬
rator, the two eyes of a young girl about
whom nothing else is known. The traveller
observing the landscape is in fact being
observed by the landscape. Further on in his
essay, Segalen defines what he calls the "Esthé¬
tique du Divers", which entails recognizing
the existence of a proliferation, a destabilizing
turbulence, in the real world; landscape is
indeed a proliferating human language.
As the ancient Greeks could hear the orac¬
ular pronouncements of Zeus in the rustle of
the great oak groves of Dodona, so we for our
part can read the meaning of the gnomon's
shadow on the face of a sundial.
r 15
THE UNESCO ^_OUR1ERB MAY I9<>7
