THREE GOLDEN RULES BY MARIA OTERO
Mbove, women tea pickers on
a plantation in central Sri
Lanka.
iny economic units operating at the
margin of the "modern" sector or
outside it are the major source of
employment in urban areas through¬
out the developing world. In some cities, more
than half of the economically active popula¬
tion are employed in these "microenter-
prises"as carpenters, shoemakers, street ven¬
dors, trash recyclers, and in innumerable other
businesses of varying sizes and sophistication.
Microenterprises operate outside the laws
and regulations that govern formal business
activity. They are not licensed as businesses,
generally do not fulfil the legal labour require¬
ments (social security, benefits, taxation), and
operate informally, often employing non-
paid family members. Other characteristics
include a lack of division of labour or special¬
ization in the workplace, lack of accounting
procedures, serious limitations in accessing
capital, the prevalence of businesses located in
the owner's home, and more important, the
lack of access to information, technology,
training and bank credit.
Although some microenterprises belong
to relatively well-to-do individuals, the vast
majority of their owners come from the poor¬
est sectors of the population and have seldom
completed secondary education. Most
microentrepreneurs live in the slums of large
cities and therefore lack access to public services
and to adequate housing.
The technology for lending to microen¬
terprises has improved greatly in the last few
years through the work of such institutions
as Bank Rakyat Indonesia (see page 24), the
Grameen Bank (see page 20) and ACCIÓN
International (see page 28). The lending
16 THE UNESCO ^URIER JANUARY 1997

schemes run by these institutions share the
following core characteristics that make them
highly effective:
* Familiarity with the market. Microenter-
prise institutions know that the poor are will¬
ing to pay for access and convenience. Their
major need is for small short-term loans to
cover working capital needs and liquidity con¬
straints.
Microentrepreneurs need these loans
quickly with little paperwork or other time-
consuming requirements. Microenterprise
institutions locate branches near the client,
provide simple application procedures and
disburse funds quickly. The institutions charge
interest rates that are higher than commercial
banks, but much lower than the moneylenders
who are the major source of credit for the
poor.
* Techniques to cut administrative costs.
Successful microcnterprise institutions use
the simplest procedures to distribute very
small loans. Loan applications often fit onto
one page, and approval processes are decen¬
tralized. Most institutions use group lending
techniques in which borrowers guarantee each
others' loans and also assume part of the loan
processing burden. These groups are often
comprised of three to five individual microen¬
trepreneurs and are modeled on the informal
savings and loans groups that exist through¬
out the world. The group known as a soli¬
darity group or peer group receives a loan
via one transaction, divides it among its mem¬
bers and assumes responsibility for managing
the loan.
*" Techniques to motivate repayment.
Microenterprise institutions also use small
groups as mechanisms to assure repayment by
everyone in the group. The promise of repeat
loans in increasing amounts is available to
those whether in individual or group lend¬
ing schemes who pay back on time. This
assurance of continued access to credit is a
powerful incentive that has enabled effective
microcnterprise institutions to maintain very
low loan loss rates, often below 2 per cent.
The application of these lending principles
enables microenterprisc institutions to accom¬
plish two key goals: to expand their outreach
so they can reach tens or hundreds of thou¬
sands of borrowers; and to cover their costs
through the income earned, thereby becoming
self-sufficient in the long term. The most
advanced institutions have demonstrated that
they can cover their operational and financial
costs and therefore are able to make the tran¬
sition from donor money to borrowed funds
from commercial lending institutions.
