commentary Federico Mayor
ater and
Water and civilization are indissociable. The earliest civiliza¬
tions arose in the great river valleys of the Euphrates, the Nile,
the Indus and the Yangtze, where the transition could be made
from subsistence farming to agricultural surplus. Today, the
future of the world's water supplies depends on the civilized
use of this finite and vulnerable resource.
Human civilization is a response to challenge, and I take a
more optimistic view of the water crisis than the prophets of
doom who speculate on the prospect of resource wars in the cen¬
tury to come. Water scarcity can be a source of conflict among
competing users, particularly where combined with other fac¬
tors of political or cultural tension. But it can also be an induce¬
ment to co-operation, as evidenced by the growing number of
water allocation agreements today being signed and imple¬
mented, even in high-tension areas. I believe that human civi¬
lization can find within itself the resources to respond suc¬
cessfully to this global challenge.
To say this is not to underestimate the scale of the challenge
facing us. The warning signs are clear: severe water scarcity in many
regions of the world, falling water tables, shrinking rivers and
lakes, widespread pollution, creeping desertification. To these we
must add the human cost of water shortage malnutrition, dis¬
ease, abandonment of rural areas, swollen urban settlements and
the increased burden placed on women in water-scarce environ¬
ments. All this and the need to remain alert to the threat of
climate change adds up to a challenge of the first magnitude.
In this century, total world demand for water has increased
seven-fold. This compares with a three-fold increase in world
population over the same period. The fact that demand for
water in this century has increased at twice the rate of popu¬
lation growth underlines the point that changes in lifestyle
linked to socio-economic development are the principal source
of increased water use. This is bad news inasmuch as demand
will continue to accelerate as living standards worldwide hope¬
fully improve. But it is good news inasmuch as it points to a sub¬
stantial margin for water savings through the modification of our
priorities, policies and practices.



civilization
Fresh water represents 0.26 per cent of the total water
mass on the surface of the earth 0.007 per cent if we discount
groundwater resources and polar ice. This scarce resource,
essential for life, must be seen asa natural treasure, as part of
the common heritage of humankind.
To provide for foreseeable future needs, water resources
development must be placed at the top of national and inter¬
national agendas. New water projects conceived in an eco¬
logically sensitive way take from fifteen to twenty years to
plan and implement. If we delay, the pressure to quench the
thirst of needy people in water-scarce environments may force
the recourse to ecologically or otherwise unsound projects. In
many parts of the world, the solution of water problems should
orient the formulation of socio-economic development goals.
Integrated river basin and watershed planning and manage¬
ment at scales ranging from the regional to the international are
an important element in such a strategy.
A new ethic
Everywhere, water resources development must go hand in
hand with energetic policies for conservation, re-use and the
elimination of all forms of wastage. Better technical informa¬
tion and the deployment of new technologies have an important
part to play in the more rational management of water use.
Yet it is doubtful whether technical solutions alone are suffi¬
cient to achieve a sustainable relationship between supply and
demand. The challenge posed by the water crisis is ultimately
one of values.
This has important implications for our decision-making
processes in the environment and development field. I am a
strong believer in the need to increase scientific input and the
participation of scientists in policy making at all levels. But we
should not entertain the illusion that the solution to problems
lies in perfect data. In a world of uncertainty, data are never
complete. In the hydrological field, for example, there is an
increasing awareness that our emphasis on measures of averages
and trends has led us to underestimate the impact of extreme

events and random climate changes. To put off making urgent
decisions on the grounds that all the data are not available is
to forget that time in the form of irreversible events has an
ethical dimension. The perfect diagnosis is an autopsy. But a
post mortem review of water and civilization is something we
cannot afford.
Dealing with uncertainty and risk is part of the human con¬
dition. This is why, while daring without knowledge is risky,
knowledge without daring is fruitless. Daring, caring and shar¬
ing are among the human parameters within which solutions to
the water crisis will be found.
One aspect of technological progress that is worth noting is
its role in the creation of transboundary networks of co-oper¬
ation and solidarity. New forms of software and visual display
are now facilitating the joint creation of water resource mod¬
els by political and technical stakeholders. Satellite technol¬
ogy gives countries and authorities the ability to build a fairly
accurate picture of water flow in other jurisdictions. This tech¬
nological capability is transforming the relationships and nego¬
tiations among jurisdictions and is being disseminated and
democratized faster than anyone could have foreseen.
To address the problem at source, we need to promote a new
attitude to water I would go so far as to speak of a new water
ethic. Pricing policies and market mechanisms although they
pose some difficult problems of social equity and public
accountability clearly have a role to play in the revaluation of
water and a reduction of demand. But so too does education.
Cross-frontier agreements
Education for water awareness has a rich imaginative heritage
on which to draw. Water connects us. It connects us by flowing
across imposed boundaries, by linking diverse terrains and set¬
tlements. In religion, myth and legend, water is a universal sym¬
bol of wholeness and purification. It is the original element, a
source of life, a metaphor for natural and mental process, the
image of all that unites us in time and space. This civiliza-
tional inheritance is one that education can and must turn to
account.
Of course, the problems with which water management has
to contend are very complex . They include a whole range of com¬
peting interest groups and established structures of rights,
values and priorities. Reconciling differences and reforming
structures to take account of new realities implies difficult
legal, administrative and investment changes. It risks pitting dif¬
ferent constituencies such as urban and agricultural com¬
munities against one another.
The situation is even more complicated at the international
level, where differences of perceived interest may be greater,
traditions more divergent, and the search for agreement vitiated
by political tensions. Here, we need to be aware of the water-
sharing rules and traditions to be found in most cultures. The
sharia Islamic law embodies precepts for water use and
public water management as well as community-based conflict
management strategies. The Jewish tradition includes similar
prescriptions for not prejudicing the interests of other river-
dwellers. Shared principles of this kind can provide a useful
basis for the building of cross-frontier agreements.
Throughout history, human beings have responded to the
need to pool their efforts and share resources in the interests
of larger security. Water, in particular, has been one of human¬
ity's historic learning grounds for community building, and we
should see it as a potential source not of conflict but of agree¬
ments that can serve as a paradigm for the constructive shar¬
ing of knowledge and resources essential for the transition from
a culture of war to a culture of peace.
A resource to be shared
UNESCO's International Hydrological Programme (HIP), which
was launched some twenty years ago and is the only science
and education programme within the United Nations system
devoted to freshwater problems, addresses most of these issues
in association with its many governmental and non-governmen¬
tal partners. Its main concern is with the promotion of techni¬
cal co-operation worldwide: upgrading hydrological knowledge
and research capacities in our Member States; working with
bodies such as the World Climate Programme to understand the
links between hydrological processes and climate change;
studying with our Man and the Biosphere programme factors
of vulnerability in the land-water system; assessing problems of
groundwater contamination; examining hydrological processes
in arid zones and the humid tropics; and supporting post¬
graduate hydrology courses for participants from the developing
world.
At the same time, taking advantage of UNESCO's position at
the crossroads of science, education, culture and communica¬
tion, the IHP also ranges more widely. For example, it analyses
needs for integrated urban and freshwater resources develop¬
ment as in the case of our recently launched project in the his¬
toric city of Essaouira (Morocco). Under its auspices, we are also
instituting a new interdisciplinary programme entitled Water
and Civilization. Conceived as part of UNESCO's broader Culture
of Peace programme, it will include among other things a com¬
ponent aimed at providing technical support for water-related
conflict resolution.
The water issue is vast and diverse in its implications. Water
is life, and life is sharing. Let water be a source of life , of mutu¬
ality, of progress. Let it irrigate the smiles of our children and
their children, testifying that we, the inhabitants of planet earth
on the threshold of a new millennium, have proved equal to the
ethical, political and scientific challenges of our time. M
