interview Alain de Libera
naissance
French historian and philosopher
Alain de Libera, an authority on
medieval thought, talks to Ra chid
Sabbaghi about some unjustly
neglected chapters in the history of
Western philosophy.
How did you first become interested in Arab-
Islamic philosophy?
Alain de Libera: It was when I embarked on my
work asa historian of medieval philosophy. I rea d
a hook by the French philosopher and historian
Etienne Gilson called L'Etre et l'Essence ("Being
and Essence"), which contained two extraordi¬
nary, thought-provoking chapters on Avicenna and
Avernies. Ever since, my interest in Arab-Islamic
philosophy has been indissociable from my inter¬
est in medieval philosophy.
The received wisdom at the Sorbonne when
I was a student there was that the Middle Ages
were a kind of long parenthesis in the history of
humankind. The nineteenth-century French
scholar Ernest Renan called it an appalling
period, a "1,000-year disaster". The traditional
view insisted that nothing happened between
Aristotle and Descartes. As a philosophy stu¬
dent, then, I saw the Middle Ages as a neglected
period of history.
When I read Gilson's book, I realized that
at the core of this neglect was neglect of the
Arab-Islamic dimension within medieval philos¬
ophy. I then became convinced of two things:
first, that medieval thought as a whole had a
contribution to make to philosophy that was as
important as that of Greek or classical philoso¬
phy; and secondly, that a key reason why it was
overshadowed was the overshadowing of Arab-
Islamic philosophy, which I then approached
from the most difficult philosophical angle, the
metaphysical angle.
Was the contribution of Arab culture to the
making of modern Europe not overlooked as well?
A. de L: Yes, without doubt. But it must be said
THE UNESCO f^URUERB FEBRUARY 1907

The medieval European university, tchich came into being
in the 13th century, ivas based on the map ofknoivledge
drawn byAl-Farabi.
that there was something diabolical in this
neglect, since it went hand in glove with the
recognition of a certain debt. This debt is often
referred to as though it should be taken for
granted, as when people say: "The existence of
an Arab-Islamic legacy is so obvious that there's
not much point in discussing it." The debt is so
patent that it distracts attention from the
neglect. People say: "Of course the Arabs passed
on the bulk of Greek science to the Christian
West." But we must be careful here: when it is
admitted, objectively and dispassionately, that
the Arabs were "transmitters", they are denied
any other role or any other contribution to the
overall history of Western thought. Recognition
of this kind, through a process of total assimi¬
lation, turns the Arabs into the continuation, in
another form, of the Greeks, into people whose
only role was to pass on what they had received,
just as relay runners hand over a baton or torch.
They passed on a science that was not theirs, a
science they simply reproduced and perpetu¬
ated. They passed it on, then stepped aside;
their job was done. They withdrew from the
European stage, where they had no business to
be and where they had never had anything to do
but serve as intermediaries.
Now this image is fallacious. The Arabs made
a much more important contribution to the his¬
tory of European thought than that.
How would you define this contribution?
A. de L: I should find it very hard to answer the
question: "What contribution did Greek phi¬
losophy make to the forming of a European iden¬
tity?". The question you have asked has equally
wide implications. The influence of such thinkers
as Avicenna and Averroës on European culture
is as vast a subject as that of Plato's or Aristotle's
influence. One is tempted to treat the subject
comprehensively, and looking at it in detail it is
hard to know where to begin. But I will try to sug¬
gest some basic guidelines.
Perhaps the simplest thing would be to start
with the notions of science and scientificity. In
the twelfth century the Christian world realized
that there existed a considerable corpus of sci¬
entific work in Antiquity (which had up to then
been lost or known only in a very fragmented and
indirect form) a systematic organization of
knowledge, a division of the sciences, a classifi¬
cation of scientific disciplines, an articulation, a
system, a hierarchy of disciplines. The West made
this discovery when the catalogue of sciences
drawn up by Al-Farabi was translated into Latin.
With Al-Farabi the Christian world obtained
its first signposts to the corpus of knowledge
bequeathed by late Antiquity organized so as
to provide a kind of map of the knowable. The
West then went on to make a detailed examina¬
tion of each of these sciences, which ranged from
5 Daniel Mordzmski. Pans
THE UNESCO COURIER» FEBRUARY 1997

interview astronomy and metaphysics to psychology, biol¬
ogy, botany and meteorology. In each case it dis¬
covered an Arabic text which, if it was not always
a founding text, had the effect of accompanying,
boosting or accelerating knowledge.
Between the end of the twelfth century and
the middle of the thirteenth century, the Latin
West became scientifically literate as a result of
two great batches of translations of Arab scien¬
tific works, which became the very foundation of
the university system. The medieval European
university, which came into being at the beginning
of the thirteenth century, was in a sense the insti¬
tutional manifestation of the map of knowledge
drawn by Al-Farabi. The Arab learning that was
translated and passed on to the West formed the
basis and the scientific foundation of the uni¬
versity in its living reality the reality of its syl¬
labus, the content of its teaching.
The historical paradox is that this Arab learn¬
ing, which never spawned a university in the
Islamic world itself, provided the Latin West
with the substance of an institution that enabled
it to develop rapidly and acquire a growing ascen¬
dancy over the rest of the world. The influence
ofthat learning was therefore quite inestimable.
It was not just a case of progress in this or that
field or discipline, or a specific contribution to
this or that aspect of an existing or nascent sci¬
ence. It was the very idea of the university and its
reality as an institution that grew out of the
Arabs' systematization of knowledge. If you want
to talk about the profound influence of Arab-
Islamic philosophy on the Latin West, you have
to approach the phenomenon from this angle,
from the notion that science, ideology and, to
some extent, history, the history of thought,
took shape in a unique institution, the university.
What about the disciplines themselves?
A. de L: I think a distinction needs to be made
. between two aspects of this question. As far as
the Middle Ages are concerned, one aspect of
the medieval output of knowledge is linked to an
activity which today seems very outmoded: the
commentary. There was a phenomenon that
might be called medieval "eommentarism";
medieval culture was based on texts. It is rea¬
sonable to assume that about half the texts read
and commented upon in medieval universities
were of Arab origin. There was the corpus of
Aristotelian physics and its Arab sequel, the cor¬
pus of Aristotle's De Anima (On the Soul) and its
Arab sequel, and the corpus of his Metaphysics
and its Arab sequel.
But the manner in which knowledge was trans¬
mitted is only one aspect of the question. It is
more important to see how new disciplines
emerged, how new knowledge was acquired, how
sciences came into being. At this point we leave
behind the aspect of "eommentarism" and the
transmission of texts, however interesting it may be,
as a phenomenon of another kind begins to emerge.
What kind of phenomenon?
A. de L: I deliberately referred to Aristotle's De
Anima. It would be stretching a point to describe
this as the founding text of psychology as a sci¬
ence. It presents an extraordinarily complex doc¬
trine of the soul, which was adapted, annotated
and partly rewritten over the centuries. In this
context, a work such as Averroës's great com¬
mentary on the De Anima is not just another
piece of annotation, but one that raises fresh
problems that bring out inconsistencies and gaps
in Aristotle's discourse. And the realization by
Averroës that Aristotle's work led nowhere, that
there were residual difficulties in his system
or what was assumed to be a system and that
the very formulation of his founding principle
was faulty means that Averroës had something
more to contribute than annotation or commen¬
tary. He caused the very foundations of philos¬
ophy to be questioned.
This being the case, the issue cannot be
approached from a purely quantitative point of
view. One cannot simply say that Averroës added
200 pages to Aristotle's 100. What Averroës
added was the astute perception that Aris-
totelianism is something that had to be built, that
it was not "ready-made", and consequently, that
the science of the soul had to be built. Its funda¬
mental tools and its broadest concepts needed to
be defined. As soon as Averroës became known,
there was a debate about what the science of the
soul might be. Before Averroës, what Aristotle
had said was simply repeated and reproduced.
I insist on this point because Averroës is usu¬
ally made out to be no more than a commentator
on Aristotle. In fact he was more than this, lie
In ancient Greece, the wise man tried to grasp eternal verities, by detaching himself to some
extent from the material world. For Averroës, the ivise man should know things as they are,
going into the detail of a changing ivorld. . . .
the Unesco Courier February 1997

certainly repeated what his predecessor said in
some areas, but always with the aim of develop¬
ing a body of knowledge that obeyed the model
of science as Averroës defined it a model that
was essentially demonstrative and strongly argued
from a logical point of view, a model that sought
to be consistent and systematic. It may conse¬
quently be said that it was Averroës who, in a
sense, invented the science of psychology,



The European individual as a type came into being at the
heart of the medieval world, prompted by the notion
which is not Greek but Arabicthat work liberates.
whereas all Aristotle did was pass on the corpus
and the terms on which the science would be
built.
What did Averroës contribute to psychology apart
from the idea that it could become a science?
A. de L: He contributed the basis on which he
tried to create that science, namely the critique
of materialism. It was important in his eyes to rec¬
ognize psychical reality as such, as something
thoroughly independent, autonomous and sepa¬
rate from the biological sphere (what today we
would tend to call the materialist sphere). He
made a distinction between the theory of thought
and the theory of cerebral functions. He believed
there was an absolute moral irreducibility
between the physical world and the "noetic"
world i.e. the psychological and cognitive
processes, scientific thought itself. He strove to
put across a view that preserved Aristotelian
empiricism as far as possible, but diverged from
it when that empiricism tended to reduce
thought to its material elements alone.
Averroës posed the question of the psycho¬
logical subject, the thinking subject. And he
posed it by criticizing any interpretation that
might reduce the soul and thought to products
of the body, to forms secreted by the body. lie
regarded the psychological subject as indepen¬
dent of its corporal substratum.
What theory did he propose?
A. de L: He set up a model that the history of psy¬
chology has shown to be immensely fruitful
what might be called a topological model. He
tried to see the act of knowing in terms of ele¬
ments that are neither corporal nor non-corporal,
but purely psychical what he called the intel¬
lect. In the intellect, he distinguished between
a passive dimension which receives concepts, and
an active dimension which produces those con¬
cepts. There is therefore an interaction between
three agencies imagination, receptiveness and
activity.
So Averroës proposed a theory which,
although it broke away from materialism, was
not a theory of the individual subject, of the
thinking ego, of what Descartes would later
describe as "the thinking being". Averroës did his
best to steer clear of the twin pitfalls of materi¬
alism and psychologism.
When students say to me: "What on earth is
all this talk of active intellect and passive intel¬
lect? What does it mean?", I reply: "What is
the ego, what is the super-ego?" They are not
entities that can be located in the brain, nor arc
they egos within the ego. They are agencies that
form part of a dynamic vision of the psyche. I
believe that if people could think in this way
about Averroës, they would appreciate his rad¬
ical novelty: the introduction of a model that
was unknown before him. His approach involved
finding a space which is neither that of materi¬
ality (the corporeal), nor that of an ego entirely
in control of itself and of its conscious acts. It may
be a little difficult to grasp, but it does seem to
me that this topological model of the soul, which
was unknown before Averroës, has not yet yielded
all its riches.
In your book Penser au Moyen-Age, you even put
forward the theory of an Arab contribution to the
appearance of the European mentality. You suggest
that Arab culture could have made possible the
emergence of that curious creature which
subsequently conquered the world: the modern
individual.
A. de L: Let's start with the notion of the intel¬
lectual. An intellectual is someone who lives in a
specific institution, the university, and has a spe¬
cific task, which is to understand, to find out, to
know and to act within the general framework of
a practice which is that.of the scientist. In the
ancient Greek world, the wise man adopted a con¬
templative attitude. He wanted to find out the
intelligible structure of reality by detaching him¬
self to some extent from the material world, the
world of sensations and appearances. This is the
thoroughgoing Platonism of ancient philosophy,
which is found even in Aristotelianism, since the
ideal of the wise man, as expressed by Aristotle in
his Nicomacheun Ethics, is summed up in a sin¬
gle Greek word: theoria, i.e. "contemplation". A
man of this kind lives a life of leisure: he is wealthy
and has a small circle of friends. He does not work
and he is free.
What fresh contribution does the Arab-
Islamic vision of the wise man make to this
' Cou|THE UNESCO IpURIERB FEBRUARY 1997

interview model? I would say that in a sense it rehabili¬
tates the work of the intellectual. Intellectuals
no longer contemplate eternal intelligible struc¬
tures, but know things as they are, going into
the detail, reality and substance of a changing
world that has its own reality and consistency
and is subject to a number of laws. Not a sepa¬
rate and eternal world, but this world, in all its
cohesion, beauty, organization and structure. So
where is the dividing line between work and con¬
templation? It does not exist, because it is impos¬
sible to be involved in the science of optics or
medicine, or to investigate certain meteorologi¬
cal phenomena, without observing, seeking, inves¬
tigating, looking, working and organizing. This is
particularly true of optics, which was the great
triumph of Arab science and its finest export to
the Latin world.
Was this change of perspective also a change in
the way people related to work?
A. de L: Yes. Finding out about things is work.
But it is not a constricting experience. Far from
it, it has a liberating effect. It does not belong to
what were known as the mechanical arts, those
"adulterous" arts which ended up enslaving
humans to matter instead of liberating them.
The whole relationship between scientific work
Avicenna contributed an idea of extraordinary novelty
the reconciliation in one and the same person of the
scientist and the prophet. Knowing in order to gain
foresight. Natural, not supernatural, prophecy.
and the contemplative attitude is thus radically
altered. And it was in the universities that this
new type of intellectual most thrived.
I would say that the emergence of the indi¬
vidual began when the relationship between wis¬
dom and knowledge, and between contempla¬
tion and work, was completely redefined.
Universities were able to expand because they
were societies of individuals effectively linked by
a whole series of reciprocal services and social
obligations. The scientific ideal, the ideal of
shared knowledge, of a community of lives based
on the communication of knowledge and on the
joint discovery of the reality of things all these
went far to shape the individual. In this context,
individuals are neither aristocrats living off their
resources and savouring from time to time the
joys of intellectual contemplation, nor wretches
enslaved by the demands of their jobs, but mem
bers of a society of human beings who have gath¬
ered to share a moral code, a task and an ideal.
Obviously this ideal does not at first concern
the whole of society. But it is already a model.
The modern notion of the individual does not
really come into its own until there is an overall
social dimension, until there is a general society
of individuals, a civil society which parts company
with the medieval world of hierarchies, obliga¬
tions and highly codified social roles.
Universities helped to bring about the tran¬
sition from one world to the other. They were
laboratories in which the notion of the European
individual was invented. The latter is always
defined as someone who strikes a balance
between culture, freedom and enterprise, some¬
one who has the capacity to show initiative and
innovate. As it happens, and contrary to a widely
held view, this new type of person came into
being at the heart of the medieval university
world, prompted by the notion which is not
Greek but Arabic that work liberates.
Can you be more specific about this non-Greek
notion?
A. de L: It is the idea, developed notably by Al-
Farabi and Avicenna, which holds that the act of
knowing, the work of the scientist, generates
wisdom. After Avicenna, the Latins eventually
adopted this theory, according to which the
philosopher and the prophet come together in a
single temperament. It is the idea of natural
prophecy. For the Latins it becomes synonymous
with knowing in order to gain foresight. It is not
prophetic revelation; it is the ability to say what
must happen on the basis of one's knowledge of
the reality of things. In other words, it is nat¬
ural, not supernatural, prophecy.
This is an extraordinary novelty: the recon¬
ciliation in one and the same person of the sci¬
entist and the natural prophet. It takes us to
the origins of the new conception of European
science, science which is neither purely con¬
templative nor purely technical, but presup¬
poses a reconciliation of the two.
Could you briefly outline for us the successive
stages of your philosophy as expounded in your three
major works, Penser au Moyen-Age, la Philosophie
Médiévale and Averroës et l'averroïsme?
A. de L: In/lrerroës et l'uverroïsme, I wanted to
write a little book that would show more sympa¬
thy for its subject than Renan did when he wrote
about Averroës in the last century. My idea was to
give an account of the multiplicity of Averroës's
legacies and filiations. I devoted a lot of space to
Jewish Averro'ism, because I wanted to show that
while Averroës's influence on posterity was wide-
8
THE. UNESCO ^>URIIER FEBRUARY 1197

The idea that philosophy originated in Greece and made its way directly to the minds of 19th-
century German thinkers does not hold water. I have tried to rehabilitate the Arab and Jewish
contribution to that historythe forgotten legacy.
1. Penser nu Moyen Age, Seuil,
Paris, 1991.
2. ¡ai philosophie médiévale,
new edition, I'll F, Paris, 1993;
Averroës et l'averroïsme,
(eo-author), PUF, Paris, 1991.
ranging, it was particularly strong on Jewish think¬
ing. It could be said that a good deal of medieval
Jewish philosophy, and certainly its most original
side, came in Averroës's wake. Penser au Moyen
Age was written in a different, freer and more
personal way. Sometimes it is more aggressive,
and sometimes more ironical.
What is the book's thesis?
A. de L: After making a diagnosis of the
deplorable state of political debate in France
as regards Islam and the Arab world, based on
observation of the devastating effect on people's
minds of Jean-Marie Le Pen's ideology in partic¬
ular and of xenophobic ideology in general, and
on a realization that the Arab world was being
mixed up with the Muslim world, and both of
them associated with a hotchpotch of fanati¬
cism, intolerance and ignorance, I said to myself
that the prime task of the historian was perhaps
to recall what the "forgotten legacy" had been.
That is the subject of one chapter of the
book, and although there are other chapters I
think it represents the core of the book. My aim
was to draw attention to European culture's pro¬
found and usually overlooked debt to the Arab-
Islamic legacy, or Andalusian model, as it has
also been called. As a result my book, which
aimed to give the Middle Ages a new place in the
history of European culture and in the making of
the European identity, focused on a crucial
moment in history the Arab-Islamic moment.
La Philosophie Médiévale is an academic
account of what Penser au Moyen Age sets forth
in a polemical form. It is based entirely on the
notion that philosophy did not die out with the
Greeks. The history of philosophy between late
Antiquity and the end of the Middle Ages needs
to be seen in terms of a shift in the centres of
study, a kind of migration. Philosophy was a
migratory bird which left the East Baghdad
in the ninth century A.D. and, after making its
way along the Mediterranean, moved up through
Andalusia into northern Europe, where it finally
reached the land of its choice. But it never died
out in any of the places it traversed during its cen¬
turies-long journey.
Basically I wanted to show that the history of
philosophy based on the Graeco-German myth,
which holds that philosophy originated in Greece
and made its way directly to the minds of nine
teenth-century German thinkers simply does
not hold water. Embarking on a perfectly nor¬
mal process of academic research, I set out to
rehabilitate the Arab and Jewish contribution to
that history, in other words the forgotten legacy.
How does your most recent book, Saint-Thomas
d'Aquin contre Averroës, fit into this scheme of
things?
A. de L: It throws light on a particular moment
in the process whereby Averroës was accepted by
the Latin West, the moment when two models
of psychology openly confronted each other
Averroës's model, which I attempted to describe
above (and which is based on a rejection of both
materialism and the Cartesian cogito), and
Thomas Aquinas's theory, which was closer to
Aristotle. Aquinas defended Aristotle against
Averroës, whom he accused of having been a cor¬
rupter as well as a commentator, and turned back
to Aristotle as someone who exalted the person
and personal thought, the ego and the I, against
what Aquinas regarded as Averroës's scandalous
claim that there is such a thing as transperson-
ality of thought.
What I wanted to do was to give an account
of probably the best and most powerful critique
of Averroës produced during the Middle Ages.
And, because I so much enjoy working on Aver¬
roës, I also wanted to describe what form anti-
Averroism could take.
What are your plans for the future?
A. de L: I have several projects. The main one
that concerns us here is a translation of Aver¬
roës's commentary on Aristotle's De Anima. As
you know, the commentary has survived only in
Latin. The original Arabic version has been lost,
and the Hebrew translation is based on the Latin.
The Latins pass on to us something that was
passed on to them and which no longer exists
anywhere else: there could be no better illus¬
tration of the silences of history. When trans¬
lating the text, I shall do my best to make sure
that it does not come across as a kind of anti¬
quated curiosity, but as a high point in the his¬
tory of psychology. I shall try to make a modern
interpretation of it, using the instruments appro¬
priate to the kind of debate and discussion that
currently focuses on the relationship between
body and soul.
) ÇjUTHE UNESCO tO RIERB FEBRUARY 1997
