n invisible river
BY SHIGENORI NAGATOMO
[n the Oriental
tradition,
meditation can
detect the elusive
energy-flows
that sustain the
bodv
Tl 'MiJA' .^
IYI onks meditating before the
ruins of Ayutthaya, the capital
of ancient Slam (now
Thailand), north of Bangkok.
I
n order to understand the East Asian also recognizes a dimension of being that
idea of the body, particularly that of the escapes our everyday understanding. This
Chinese and Japanese, we must imag- is important, because our perception of our
ine that instead of having a body, we body influences the method of healing we
are our body and more importantly, that think to be appropriate and effective for it.
our body lives us. The East Asian tradition Without a clear understanding of the body,
rthe unesco Courier« april 1997

In April, Laotian women
celebrate the start of the new
year in a Luang Prabang
temple.
we cannot understand how the body can be
healed.
The idea of the body which has been
cherished in the East Asian tradition is
based on the philosophy of self-cultiva¬
tion and is derived mainly from experi¬
ence obtained through meditation. In Bud¬
dhism, Daoism and Shintoism, meditation



is a technique for observing and becoming
attuned to the intricate workings of the
life-supporting energy system that exists
beyond or beneath the psycho-physio¬
logical activity of the living human body.
i The flowing body
A characteristic image of the East Asian
meditational perspective is that of the
"flowing body". The body is likened to a
river whose water is, ideally, in pristine
condition and transparent but cannot be
seen by the naked eye or be detected
anatomically as blood vessels and nerve
fibres can. The body that flows is a "sub¬
tle-body" and since it is invisible to the
senses in everyday life, most of us are rel¬
atively unconscious of it.
It can, however, be detected through
heightened awareness during meditation.
When the threshold of self-consciousness
is lowered in conjunction with the reduc¬
tion of respiration, an advanced medita¬
tor can become aware of a subtle flow of
energy throughout his or her body. This
energy, which is called & ¿in Japanese (Chi¬
nese, qi), is the source from which both,
the psychological and the physiological
emerge.
Ki- energy flows through a network of
16 > CouruTHE UNESCO IpUftlER" APRIL 1907

I he 12th-century Bengali poet
Jayadeva, author of the
Gitagovinda ("Song of the
Cowherd") bows in respect to
the Hindu god Vishnu. Indian
miniature from the Pahari
school (1730).
circuits, or "^¿-meridians", beneath the
skin. According to psychologist Motoyama
Hiroshi this network is located in the water-
rich area of the connective tissues of the
dermis, the deep inner layer of the skin,
where such chemical substances as sodium,
potassium, calcium, chloride and collagen
are found. Since these substances exist as
ions in the bodily fluids, the flow is electro-
physiologically detectable, so that the flow¬
ing body is more than just a metaphor. Ki-
energy literally flows beneath the
psycho-physiological body of which we
are ordinarily aware.
The flowing body knows no bound¬
ary between the interior and the exterior,
between mind and matter. For this rea¬
son acupuncture medicine maintains that
absorption and release of ^¿-energy
occur though for most of us, uncon¬
sciously between the flowing body and
its surroundings, and between one flow¬
ing body and another.
The second idea of the body which is
relevant for religious healing within the
East Asian tradition is that of the spirit-
body, a concept which brings us into the
domain of religion proper. Each human
spirit-body has a certain form which is dif¬
ferent from that of the individual's physi¬
cal body and also from other spirit bodies.
It is defined primarily by the pattern of
emotions such as love, hate and anger, and
their existential repercussions. Whereas
the flowing body is confined to the imme¬
diate ambience of its physical body (the
exernal emission of ^/-energy having a
four- to five-metre range), the spirit body
is believed to possess relative freedom
from spatial and temporal confinement.
In addition to the hierarchy of spirit-
bodies, however, Buddhists believe that
there is a hierarchy of divine spirits, whose
nature and attributes vary, their experien¬
tial correlates depending on the colour of
their light, which ranges from the primary
colours such as red and blue, to complete
transparency. They arc deified and wor¬
shipped under different names in different
belief systems.
The most significant point about these
different ideas of the body is that the "vis¬
ible" and the "invisible" are, in principle,
reversible. Without this reversibility no
religious healing is possible.
1 Religious healing
The crucial difference between religious
healing and other kinds of treatment is in
their respective goals. The former
addresses a pathological condition and
seeks to achieve higher religious cogni¬
tion; the latter are content to restore the
body to its normal everyday state.
Another significant difference between
17) ÇlURI ERB APRIL 1997

religious and other forms of healing is that
the pathological condition that calls for
religious healing is functional in nature,
and not an organic disorder.
In religious healing, a pathological con¬
dition is regarded as a necessary step on
the way to spiritual growth. It strength¬
ens the living psycho-physiological body
and prepares it for encounters with spirit
bodies and spiritual beings, and eventu¬
ally for emancipation from this world.
Acupuncture
Acupuncture medicine is particularly
effective in treating both functional and
^chronic disease. It considers that a patho¬
logical condition is engendered by the stag¬
nation of &z-energy flowing in the merid¬
ians. The "water" in the flowing body
becomes polluted, accumulates debris,
and departs from its ideal pristine condi¬
tion and transparency. This stagnation
causes an excess or lack of ^¿-energy and
an inversion of complementary forces
(yin-yang phases). There is a departure
from the harmonious, natural distribution
of ^¿-energy between the right and left
sides of the body, and between its upper
and lower parts.
Three interrelated kinds of factor may
contribute to this stagnation.
The first is a psychological condition
brought about by emotional instability.
People process emotional stimuli differ¬
ently in accordance with "likes" and "dis¬
likes" that originate in their unconscious.
In their interpersonal relationships and in
dealing with things around them, this LV*.WVVy
\
1
> if
1. m
M Korean shaman or
mudang. Early 20th-century
painting on paper.
I he head of a bronze statue
used for teaching acupuncture
(Korea, 15th century).

unconscious propensity unknowingly
creates emotional distortion and instabil¬
ity, affecting, for example, the proper func¬
tion of the autonomic nervous system.
The theory of stress and adaptation devel¬
oped by the Canadian scientist Hans Selye,
when interpreted physiologically, captures
the significance of this condition.
Secondly, environmental conditions,
especially climatic conditions, may help
to cause stagnation. Acupuncture medi¬
cine warns against the inadaptation of the
human body to its surrounding "climatic"
ambience, although in the modern world
the environment is becoming less and less
appropriate for the living human body.
The third factor is our attitude towards
our health, including such factors as irreg¬
ular lifestyle, negligence, and exhaustion, all
of which are rooted in the ethical orienta¬
tion of our lives.
I Curative images
Another category of healing involves
manipulation of the flowing body and the
spirit-body by means of an image-experi¬
ence. Religious healing in Daoism, Bud¬
dhism, and to some extent in Shintoism
uses visualization techniques of this sort.
This psychological approach, based on the
curative effect an image can have on the
body, is employed because a religious
image carries transformative power. Jung's
"active imagination" is an application of
this method.
A general feature of visualization is to
learn to experience a "sacred" image, ini¬
tially by creating it within one's psyche.
THE UNESCO COURIER" APRIL 1997 J

But as one advances in this practice, one
relies on the spontaneous generation of
the luminous form within one's psyche
and beyond, until one comes to the free
generation of any kind of image one
wishes. Using this method, self-healing
occurs in the course of a spiritual journey.
However, since this is difficult for the inex¬
perienced to achieve, a healer is called in to
help. For instance, if possession by a
malevolent spirit is deemed to be the cause
of a pathological condition, the healer will
negotiate with the spirit and try to per¬
suade it to awaken from its fixation on the
sufferer's spirit-body and leave it alone.
In Buddhism, emptiness-meditation
may be employed in order to counter pos¬
session by a malevolent spirit by bringing
about its non-substantiality. Significantly,
possession by either a benevolent or
malevolent spirit is closely connected with
spiritual development or lack thereof.
I Enlightenment
A third kind of religious healing in the East
Asian tradition is the Kharmic reconfigu¬
ration of the ripe, kharmic body. This idea
is predicated on an Indian belief that a
human being comes into this world in
virtue of his/her own kharma, and dies in
virtue of the same, i.e., the human as a con¬
tingent being. This kind of healing, how¬
ever, is reserved only for the few who
have become "god-men," or who have
achieved the highest satori (enlighten¬
ment), by transcending the temporal
demarcation. Healing of this type is linked
with the creative power to effect a change
in the psycho-physical world, something
which is still a mystery for most of us.
What is prescribed to a sufferer in such a
case, as is true with all religious suffering,
is daily prayer and/or meditation, along
with the strengthening of faith, in order
to nurture spiritual growth.
The philosophical background to the
idea of the body and healing in the East
Asian tradition is that human beings cohabit
the world of nature with other living beings.
By transforming their everyday mode of
consciousness they can become one with
the creative activity of nature and awaken
in themselves a natural healing power.
Sometimes affirmed, sometimes
denied, the body has always occupied a
central place in Jewish thought
hudying the Talmud in a f
synagogue in Israel. ®
THE UNESCO lOURIERB APRIL 1997
