What individuals
and societies can
do to cut the toll
ofhuman and
economic loss
he do's and don'ts of risk reduction
Above, the European
Laboratory for Structural
Assessment in Ispra (Italy). T
JL r
fhe most effective disaster mitigation
measure that can be taken at commu¬
nity level is for people not to build in
high-risk areas such as unstable slopes, river
beds or flood plains. Local knowledge about
these hazards is usually good, especially among
older people. Sometimes though, a hazard such
as a geological fault is not obvious or visible, and
surveyors and geologists have to be called in.
BY BARBARA CARBY
People can also ensure they reduce risks in
their houses. Roofs should be secured against
hurricanes. Roof shape is important for wind
resistance. A flat roof is much more likely to
be blown off than a pyramid-shaped one.
Some worry about the cost of such measures,
but they are no more than a small percentage
of the total cost of the building and are well
worth the investment.

Map showing earthquake
monitoring centres in southern
California (U.S.A.).
17
- ¿SJt-"^^
i
. .. 1 I \-A
Earthquake mitigation focuses on building
codes, including correct use of steel and the
strength of concrete mixes. Wooden build¬
ings can be reinforced by braces and tying cor¬
ners so as to make the structure react as a box.
Hazards in the home are not all structural.
If you live in an earthquake-prone area, you
should check the following:
*- Are heavy objects like cabinets, TV stands
and entertainment centres attached to the
wall?
*- Are heavy objects on the lowest shelves?
Are water heaters and gas cylinders bolted
to the wall?
Do household members know how to
turn off the gas, electricity and water sup-
ply?
* Are hanging objects such as fans and ceiling
lights securely fastened?
Are shelves fitted with wire or board to
prevent objects falling off them during
tremors?
*- Are dangerous substances like fuel, poi¬
sons and chemicals secured against spillage?
*- Are plate-glass windows and doors covered
with safety film to prevent shattering?
At the national level, governments should
include mitigation in their disaster manage¬
ment policies. Zoning and land use laws should
ensure there are no buildings in an area likely to
20
be flooded, say, once every thirty years. Golf
courses and parks could be built there instead.
Steep slopes would be left as wooded areas.
But planners and policy makers do not
usually have this freedom. Many rivers already
flow through towns, so mitigation will take
the form of reducing loss of life and damage
after a flood. Ground floors can be designated
non-sleeping areas, levees can be built and flood
warning systems and evacuation plans can be
developed.
Building codes should be drafted and
where they already exist, should be reviewed
and strengthened. They should ensure that
buildings can survive a 7 magnitude earth¬
quake or 200 km/h winds.
Standards ofsafety
Many buildings were put up before codes were
drafted, so they need to be "retrofitted" by
strengthening. This is more expensive than
building to resistant standards. Large public
buildings and bridges are prime candidates for
retrofitting. But small traditional buildings
should be strengthened too. Much work has
been done on this in India and Peru. Chicken
mesh and mortar has been effective in rein¬
forcing walls of adobe-type buildings against
earthquake damage. 5tf*r^

Emergency facilities such as hospitals,
police stations and shelters, along with water,
electricity and sewage systems, must also be
able to remain functional after a disaster. They
should be designed to a higher standard of
safety than other buildings and retrofitted
where necessary. This especially applies to hos¬
pitals crucial after a disaster as they can be
knocked out of action without structural
damage. So non-structural mitigation mea¬
sures are vital.
Cost is one of the reasons cited for lack of
mitigation measures in poor countries. But one
could say that such countries cannot afford not
to take measures. Tropical Storm Debby set off
extensive flooding and landslides in the small


Caribbean island of St. Lucia in 1994. Agricul¬
tural losses alone were about 12 per cent of the
island's 1993 Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
Vulcanologist Maurice Krafft
measures the temperature of a
lava flow using a device called
a thermocouple.
Even reducing direct damage by one per
cent through mitigation would have been
worthwhile. But political support for miti¬
gation is hard to drum up because little work
has been done on quantifying the benefits of
mitigation as opposed to cost.
I Hurricane-resistant roofs
Bangladesh is a mitigation success story how¬
ever. Improved warning systems and the build¬
ing of cyclone shelters has sharply cut loss of
life and livestock. In Jamaica, Hurricane Gilbert
in 1988 showed the benefit of roofs shaped
for wind resistance. Many specially-designed
buildings which went up after a hurricane in
1951 kept their roofs in 1988, while more
modern and expensive structures with fash¬
ionable flat or slightly-sloping roofs which
went up in the 1970s and 1980s, did not.

A Sri Lankan engineer
inspects coastal hurricane
defences south of Colombo.
Recent earthquakes in California and Japan
have successfully tested earthquake-proof
buildings. In California, many old masonry
structures which had been retrofitted survived.
But little is heard about this success since news
is about buildings which collapse. However
the media can do a lot to publicize the advan¬
tages of mitigation, especially just after a dis¬
aster when mitigation measures should be
included in repair work.
Mitigation is also very important in the
natural environment. Action taken in water¬
sheds in the mountains will eventually affect
the marine environment, especially in small
countries where the distance between water-
Damage in a San Francisco
(U.S.A.) store after an
earthquake in October 1989.
shed and sea is small. Eroded soil washing
down into the ocean results in silting which
kills off coral and fish. Coral reefs help control
beach and coastal erosion, and if they are dam¬
aged the coast is more vulnerable to flooding
which will in turn cause more erosion. Coral
reefs are also important fish hatching grounds,
so loss of reefs will harm the fishing industry,
especially in island states. Destruction of reefs
and beaches also harms countries which live
off tourism. Chemical spills into waterways
eventually reach the sea and also damage coral
reefs and marine life. Damaged or stressed reefs
are more vulnerable to natural hazards because
they arc less resistant to wave action.
Dialogue between environmental and dis¬
aster managers is essential. For mitigation to
work, the entire society must be involved. Pro¬
grammes should ensure local communities take
part in planning at the same time as they ensure
political and financial support at national and
international level. Mitigation must be part of
our daily life. If the present century "invented"
mitigation and moved disaster management
beyond mere response, the next must see that
mitigation becomes an integral part of plan¬
ning at all levels of society.
