Symbolic
gateways in the
Japanese
landscape mark
the boundary
between the
realm of human
experience and
the world of the
gods
hresholds ofdivinity
BY MASAYUKI NINOMIYA
No visitor to Japan can fail to be
impressed by the many torii sim¬
ple yet highly remarkable gatc-
_ ways which adorn the landscape
in town and country, in field and forest, on
riverbanks and even in the sea. Although
unmistakably gateways, they consist simply
of two pillars set in the ground, surmounted
by two horizontal beams, one just above the
other. A number of variations on this basic
form may be encountered, but the principle
of construction remains the same. Virtually
devoid of decorative elements, the gateways
arc characterized by austerity and purity of
line. Constructed of wood, stone, porcelain,
metal or even reinforced concrete, they may be
left bare or be painted red and black. The
height and width of the gateway may vary
from one metre up to twenty or more.
Composed of a few elegant strokes, the
torii resembles an ideogram, a signature affixed
to nature by human hand. A gateway without
a gate, it cannot be closed nor docs it form an
16 > G>uTHE UNESCO lOURIER MAY 1907

I his immense torii arch
stands between the little
Island of Itsukushima and the
coastline of Hiroshima Bay. At
high tide its feet are in the
water.
opening onto an otherwise closed space. How¬
ever, its very presence carries meaning. It is an
emblem of faith. The torii stands as a clear
pointer to the essential relationship between
humanity and nature which has existed since
ancient times. It forms a symbolic boundary
between two realms which are fundamentally
different in human experience: the sacred
province of the gods (kami) and the profane
sphere of everyday human activity.
The torrii constitutes an almost intangible
threshold across which nature and human¬
ity may communicate. A thirteenth-century
painting depicts a sacred mountain at the foot
of which one of these gateways may be seen.
The mountain is the sanctuary, and the torii
is the only visible sign of human presence.
I Sacredpillars
In addition to their aesthetic qualities, torii
also have an ethical significance which extends
far beyond the doctrinal framework of
Shinto, which is the foundation of religious
belief in Japan. In Shinto belief, the gods arc
neither omniscient nor omnipotent. These
far-from-perfect entities arc natural forces
which bear a striking resemblance to human
beings, although their behaviour sometimes
defies human understanding. It is only by
their works that the gods differ from mere
mortals. As if to stress this proximity, Shinto
conceives of the link between heaven and earth
in a very concrete manner, as the "August
Celestial Pillar" on the island of Onogoro.
In a more general sense, the pillar plays an
important role in Japanese mythology. The
architecture and rituals of Shinto consider
some pillars to be sacred. Anyone may pass
through a torii at will, it is always open to
wind, light and sound, and to animals and
humans alike.
The Suwa trail
To escape from the oppressive summer heat of
Tokyo, I spent a few days in a mountainous
region in the centre of Japan, staying in a
small house situated in a forest of pine trees,
silver birches and lacquer trees, the sap of
which is an irritant to the skin.
At the point where the path to the house
departs from the main road stands a torii built
of grey stone. The rectangular plaque hanging
from the centre of the horizontal beams is
inscribed with a name of great resonance: Suwa
Jinja. The Suwa sanctuary, situated near the
Suwa lake on Honshu island, is particularly
renowned for the four sacred pillars (tree
trunks stripped of their bark) set at its four
corners.
But this roadside torii does not lead
directly to the sanctuary. The three or four-
mctrc-high stone gateway, in perfect keeping
with its natural surroundings, simply marks
the entrance of the path leading to one of the
subsidiary areas of Suwa Jinja. The feet of the
pillars sprout from a clump of miniature
bamboo, while maple leaves brush the tips
of the beams. As I make my daily passage
through the torii, the structure makes no par¬
ticular impression on me; I perceive it as I
Mt the Ise Shinto shrine, in
the south of Honshu island,
young women perform a dance
symbolizing the creation
of Japan.

11! J |pi
I%tT1Irrr
perceive the surrounding vegetation. It is like
a guardian spirit, discreetly preparing the vis¬
itor for the realms beyond.
Leaving the house, I may choose to
descend towards this first portal, or to climb
a fairly steep path and move deeper into the
forest. On summer days, a continuous flow
of nightingale song accompanies my foot¬
steps like a meditative chant, occasionally
punctuated by the repeated tapping of a
woodpecker. Nature is bursting with life. A
few hundred metres on, this winding path
comes to a clearing where stands another torii,
this time set apart from the vegetation. There
is no central plaque, no decoration of any
kind. The bark has been roughly stripped
away to leave the bare pine, dappled with
irregular knots. In spite of its state, it per¬
fectly commands the surrounding space,
undoubtedly marking the entrance to a spe¬
cial domain. Built by human hand, it signifies
a space that may be described as "sacred". Its
massive pillars can be seen as evoking the
"August celestial pillar."
The surprisingly small scale of the central
shrine, hardly bigger than a postbox, makes
this "sanctuary" all the more intriguing. In
18
wnow-capped for// arches at
Takayama, on Honshu island.
comparison to the size of this building, the
space created by the torii appears immense. A
sizeable bottle of rice wine sits, half-empty,
along with a few small coins, before the
miniature temple. The divine spirit obviously
enjoys a drink and needs money. The modesty
of this sacred dwelling reminds one of the
humorous touches in some of the more
down-to-earth passages of the Kojiki1
(Chronicle of Ancient Times) and the
naivetyof the gods who created this world.
I The 'cloak' on thepillar
Japan boasts far more spectacular torii; at the
entrance to the Itsukushima sanctuary in the
bay of Hiroshima, for example. Here, the ris¬
ing tide laps at the feet of the red pillars, while
the main buildings also standing in the
water are fleetingly reflected in the undu¬
lating swell. This sanctuary is a perfect exam¬
ple of harmony between sky, sea and moun¬
tains, which form an ideal stage for the
appearance of the deities. It seems as if all these
elements were infused with a single breath of
life.
Also worthy of special note are a number
of white wood torii at the Ise sanctuary, in the

south of Honshu island. The pure, unclut¬
tered forms, the exceptional quality of the
wood and the sheer size of these torii are such
that they deserve an article all to themselves.
However, I have chosen to evoke my per¬
sonal torii which, in their own modest way,
represent a fundamental aspect of Shinto phi¬
losophy. Through them, I may understand
in the midst of a forest or on the side of a
mountain how humanity has entered into
a relationship with nature in order to escape
the bounds of a "natural" animal existence.
Out for a walk one morning, I discovered
on one of the pillars the discarded skin of a
cicada that had moulted. Perhaps the deity had
left behind its diaphanous cloak, and had
hopped off to return momentarily to its celes¬
tial home.
1. This collection compiled in 712 A.D. is considered
the first classic ofJapanese literature, and is a reference
work of the Shinto religion. Ed.
i Shinto shrine in Tokyo's
Ueno Park.
