throughout the world is rising every day.
A PUBLIC
SERVICE
BYKNUDEBBESEN
Public service broadcasting means providing a service to the
public in all its diversity, not only to important or interesting
parts of the public.
Its implications were well defined by the President of the
European Broadcasting Union, Professor Albert Scharf, when
he said: "Public service programming calls for such duties as
accuracy, reliability, objectivity, truthfulness in disseminat¬
ing facts, honesty and fairness of comment, impartiality in all
matters of public controversy. Majorities have to be reflected
as such; silent minorities must also be respected as such, i.e.
the right balance must be found. This does not, however, exclude
commitment to new ideas and unthought thoughts; it does
not prohibit provocation. On the contrary, the trust that broad¬
casters must serve includes a commitment to promote inno¬
vations and new trends, to advance the creativity that is hid¬
den within society."
For the British broadcaster David Attenborough, "Public
service broadcasting is not just a schedule with a peppering of
good programmes, nor is it a broadcaster with claims to a
social conscience. It is a system which strives to provide the
widest possible range of programmes and is enabled to do so
by being beholden neither to commerce on the one hand nor gov¬
ernment on the other. . . . Public service broadcasting, uniquely,
can thus be free from pap on the one hand and propaganda on
the other".
The editorial and political freedom of a public service broad¬
casting organization has to be defined in its charter and secured
by legislation. Its funding also has to be considered carefully and
no method or combination of methods is ideal. Even limited
dependence on advertising revenue creates a conflict of inter¬
est, diverting broadcasters from public service standards. Licence
fee funding has fewer drawbacks than other methods but can only
be introduced in countries where the general public has suffi¬
cient paying power.
Even where appropriate legislation has been passed and
an adequate funding mechanism exists, governments some¬
times find it difficult to abandon control of the media. They fear
public criticism and find ways to encourage self-censorship
among broadcasters and management.
The public service concept of radio broadcasting has proved
to be a valuable toolin supporting the continuing struggle for
democracy and people's participation in social development at
both local and national level.
THE UNESCO (¿URI ERB FEBRUARY 1997
27
