COMMENTARY
I ro
to action
UNESCO-AN IDEAL IN ACTION
by Federico Mayor
in collaboration with Sema Tangjiane.
UNESCO Publishing
"CJtures of Peace" series, Paris, 1997. 124 pp
(French version, 1996, 131 pp).
In his latest book, Unescoan ideal in action, The continuing
relevance of a visionary text, Federico Mayor takes the Constitution
of the Organization he has headed for almost ten years as the
starting point of a wide-ranging inquiry into the meaning and
future of international intellectual co-operation. We publish below
the introduction to this work.
Docs it take a cataclysm on the scale of "the great and ter-
rihle war" that ended in 1945 to stir the conscience of the
world and hring those who hold the levers of political,
economic and spiritual power to summon up the same
dedication, drive and determination as inspired those
who, at that time, undertook to build a better world?
Is humanity fated to find the willpower and the
strength to take vigorous collective action only when it
is treading the very brink of the abyss? Is it only in times
of acute crisis that it is capable of relegating short-term
interests and concerns to second place and encouraging
the leaders of the nations, the most powerful nations in
particular, to be inspired by a historical and global vision?
The twentieth century is drawing to a close. It has
witnessed brilliant triumphs of human ingenuity and a
succession of unprecedented technological revolutions
that have made possible the production of goods and
services in a quantity and a variety that woidd have been
unimaginable at the end of the previous century. Sub¬
stantial progress has been made in education, health,
communication and many other fields. This century has
seen the liberation of scores of peoples, and political and
geopolitical upheavals whose scope and impact have
scarcely any parallels in the past. On the other hand, it
has been scarred by wars whose scale, ferocity and sheer
destructive power are also without historical precedent.
URIER JUNE 1997


Seen overall, the direction in which the world is moving the world and men and women of goodwill to work
on the eve of the twenty-first century is still disturbing, together for world peace and the common welfare and
despite the hopes aroused by such developments as the well-bring of all peoples. Not the least among those mech-
end of the cold war, the ending of apartheid and the anisms is UNESCO itself,
peace achieved in El Salvador and Mozambique. What is lacking is the determination to overcome
The spread of violence and of lethal conflicts, claim- national self-interest and short-term concerns and to set
ingmany victims every day, arouses terror, causes large- out upon the road of solidarity, the courage to proclaim
scale displacements of populations andlays waste whole and to convince others that, in an increasingly interde-
regions. The riseof fanaticism of allkindsandintolerance pendent world, peace and prosperity are unsure and
in its various manifestations have left people in a state of fragile unless shared by all.
shock and pose a threat to peace even when they do not This determination is something that has to be cre-


degenerate into civil war. Acts of genocide "announced" ated. The United Nations system bears a great responsi-
well in advance are committed while institutions that bility in that resjiect; and the organizations of which it is
should prevent or put a stop to them but are unpre- composed likewise need to show courage and perscver-
pared to do so look on in resignation. Although some anee in bringing this determination into being and exert-
succcsses have been achieved in efforts to protect and inga greater influence on the major decisions affecting the
regenerate the environment, the general tendency world world. By virtue of its ethical mission, UNESCO probably
wide has been towards a deterioration that ultimately has a pioneering role to play in this undertaking,
presents a serious threat to human survival. Growing Most of the organizations making up the United Nations
inequality creates tensions between groups of countries system are celebrating their fiftieth anniversaries, mak-
and cleavages within nations. Poverty, far from dimin- ing this an opportune moment to launch initiatives to
ishing, is worsening both in the industrialized and in the help restore to the system the strength of eon viction, the
developing countries. Entire peoples are faced with a vigour and commitment it had in its early days. An effort
situation where the general trend is towards impover- to rediscover the spirit, the will and the hope so remark-
ishment while a minority grows richer. ably expressed in UmíSCO's Constitution, and to educe
Despite some undeniable progress, democracy remains from it pointers for the action to be undertaken in this time
a tender plant, and it is far from having become a normal of transition, certainly counts as one such initiative,
feature of the daily life and political culture of citizens. The political, ethical and philosophical message of
Human rights and fundamental freedoms are still regularly the Constitution is contained in its Preamble and its Arti-
violatcd, and broad swaths of the population, young peo- ele I. The whole message, one might say the whole secret,
pie in particular, are marginalized and excluded from of a great text and UNESCO's Constitution, by the last-
debates about the future in many countries, including ing relevance of its humanist message, is one is not
some that set themselves up as champions of human rights. revealed at a first reading. What we read into such a
Failure to live up to ideals and values that formerly text is largely determined by the historical context, and
gave hope to millions of men and women, spurred them what holds our attention is usually only what appears in
on and helped them to look beyond short-term interests, the light of current events to be particularly important
and the misappropriation or erosion of those ideals and and what is of prime concern at that given time,
values have left people with a sense of emptiness, disil- To read the Constitution and the records of the Con-
lusionment, confusion and bitterness. Growing feelings ference that drafted and adopted itis,inthecircumstances
of frustration and humiliation are in danger of causing vio- of today, to have one's eyes opened to certain aspects of the
lent explosions, if nothing is done to calm them. message contained in the text that have not always received
It is clear that no nation is entirely exempt from a cri- the attention they deserve. Thus, in the present context the
sis of values, or perhaps one should say a moral crisis. principal ideas proclaimed and the key concepts contained
And yet	 Humanity possesses the knowledge and therein take on an even wider applicability and even greater
resources with which it could put an end to most of these forre than before. This is the case, in particular, with such
crises, and could eliminate, reduce or at least consider- concepts and ideas as peace, the democratic principles of
ably dilute the causes of these instances of appalling the dignity, equality and mutual respect of men, theintel-
inequality, injustice, discrimination, exclusion, frustration lectual and moral solidarity of mankind, the ideal of equal-
and humiliation. On emerging from "the great and terri- ¡ty of educational opportunity for all, the free exchange of
ble war", it provided itself with a set of mechanisms for ideas and knowledge, the eonimon welfare of mankind and
concerted action such as would enable the nations of increasing and diffusing knowledge.
THE UNESCO (^OURIER |UNE 1997 ^
