interview Mstislav Rostropovich
To celebrate his seventieth
birthday, in May 1997
Mstislav Rostropovich, the
great Russian cellist and
conductor, invited his
musician friends from all
overthe world to join him
atthe Rencontres
Musicales (Musical
Encounters) at Evian in
France. Among those who
attended were the St.
Petersburg Symphony
Orchestra, Isaac Stern,
Jean-Pierre Rampai, Itzhak
Perlman, the Orchestra of
the Nations and the Ballet
of Lithuania. Isabelle
Leymarie interviewed
Rostropovich during the
celebrations.
Are your exuberance, your enthusiasm and your
generosity innate or have you developed them over
the years?
Mstislav Rostropovich: Innate. I was born happy!
H How did your love for the cello originate?
M. R.: Little by little. At the age of four I began
to learn to play the piano, then three years later
my father said to me: "You are going to play the
cello." My father was a cellist himself so he prob¬
ably wanted me to perpetuate the tradition, lie
realized that 1 was very gifted musically. I was
already composing at the age of four.
Do you still compose?
M.R.:No.
Is it difficult to play both the cello and the
piano?
M. R.: I don't play the piano any more. My wife
won't let inc.
Why?
M. R.: I accompanied her on the piano for thirty-
five years. When she stopped singing, other
famous singers asked me to accompany them,
liut my wife put her foot down. "You're already
lucky that I allow you to conduct orchestras!"
Russian women are very forceful!
M. R.: Oh yes, very powerful. Very powerful. [Sal¬
vador] Dali's wife Gala, a Russian, had a very
forceful character just like my wife in fact.
They were friends and got along very well. I
remember one day my Calina said to Gala: "That
blessed moustache oí your husband's! Why don't
you cut it off while he's asleep':" Gala replied:
"Because he'd drop dead when he woke up and
saw it gone!"
Do you enjoy conducting an orchestra as much as
playing?
M. R.: Yes, the happiness and joy are just as
intense. Perhaps even more extraordinary
because the music 1 conduct is better than what
I play myself.

7 regard my interpretation of a work as a
kind of improvisation. I put myself in the
composer's place.9
And yet you do not have the same physical,
sensual contact with an instrument.
M. R.: That's true, but when I conduct sym¬
phonies by Beethoven, Mahler or Shostakovich,
I'm in heaven.
Do an ear for music and musical tastes become
more refined over the years?
M. R.: Yes. Musical tastes develop, but gradually
and imperceptibly. I recently heard a recording
of the Dvorak concerto that I made as a young
man. Today I don't like it.
H How do you approach a new musical work?
M. R.: First (pf all by reading through the score
without an instrument. I bear all the music in
my head, the phrasing, the nuances, all the
details. Of course, when I pick up my cello,
changes may occur, but 1 always have a clear
idea in my head of what I'm going to do.
Improvisation has practically disappeared from
the classical repertory. Do you miss creating your
own music?
M. R.: Don't forget that interpretation to some
extent invol\ es improvisation.
And yet when Chopin or Liszt sat down at the
piano they created impromptu music at the drop of a
hat.
M. R.: Hut they were composers of genius! In their
day there were also pianists who were incapable
of improvising even on two notes. 1 regard my
interpretation of a work as a kind of improvisa¬
tion. It's as though I myself were composing it.
I put myself in the composer's place.
So we're talking about a re-creation.
M.R.: Exactly.
What qualities are needed to play well?
M. R.: First of all a tremendous love of music.
This is the only thing that can overcome the pre¬
concert emotional stress, the nerves, the stage
fright. If you don't love music, you feel naked on
the stage and just want to run away.
Despite your love of music, have you ever
suffered from stage fright?
M. R.: Yes, at a recital given by my wife in New
THE UNESCO t^UR'ERB JUL Y-AUGUST 1997
7 can only
V
by m\ love
York. I sat down at the piano without having
been able to practise beforehand. I was terribly
uncomfortable. Sitting there at the keyboard I
thought: "There are lots of critics out there in
the audience, waiting to pounce like a pack of
wolves. They'd just love to chew me up and spit
me out." I made mistakes right from the start
and played the first two love songs terribly badly.
Then I thought: "What the heck! I've already
made some terrible mistakes, they can tear me to
pieces if they want to, so now I might as well
play for my own pleasure." Then I started to
play really well.
In any case, you don't make musicforthe critics,
many of whom aren't musicians anyway! You play for
the love of it, because it responds to an inner need.
M. R.: That was the problem; I had been dis¬
tracted. If you think of something else instead of
concentrating fully on the music, you won't play
well. That's what I was driving at. I forgot the
[pleasure I should have been feeling while I was
playing and my performance; was affected. I can
only ] ) I a y well if I am totally possessed by my
love (pf the music.
At the concert yesterday evening, when you were
playing Brahms's Quartet for Piano and Strings opus
25 with Isaac Stern, Eugène Istomin and Yuri
Bashmet, I was struck by your concentration. While
your partners often exchanged glances or signalled
discreetly to each other, you were completely
absorbed by your cello and your score, although you
heard everything.
M. R.: Yes, my ears were particularly sharp yes¬
terday.
Ifelt thatyouwere putting all yoursoulinto the
beauty of the sound and that your relationship with
yourinstrument was one of love.
M. R.: Ah! Love, love, tra la la la! (Rostropovich
starts singing).
Afewyearsago,you played Bach's suites for
unaccompanied cello in the church of La Madeleine
at Vézelay in France. How did you come to do that?
M. R.: By chance. I had always thought that if I
were to record Bach, it would have to be in a
beautiful church. Not because it's religious
music: for me the important thing was to play
play well if I am totally possessed
of the music'

'When the orchestra plays the last chord,
I slowly go down to Romeo and Juliet and
join their hands.9
Bach in an enijpty room and in a place that would
encourage concentration and spirituality. A lot
goes (Pii in an empty church. Subconsciously, 1
was looking for a church that would meet my
criteria, and until then I hadn't found one. Then
I visited the restaurant of a noted chef, Marc
Meneau, in Vézelay. My wife and I had a feast.
We wen; due to leave on the Monday morning,
but Marc said to me: "You mustn't leave the
area until you've seen this church I want to show
you." 1 told him that I was in a hurry, that I
didn't have a minute to spare. He insisted that 1
should see it that very day. When I entered the
church of La Madeleine; I crossed myself from the
sheer joy of discovering it. And I began prepar¬
ing to record there.
Romanesque churches are magical. They are
round, Like Bach's music.
M. R.: Yes, and what's more, the columns in this
church are rhythmical.
You are going to close these Musical Encounters
in Evian by playing Prokofiev's Romeo and Juliet
with the Ballet of Lithuania and the Orchestra of the
Nations, which you will also conduct. What made you
choose this work?
M. R.: When I was a student at the Moscow Con¬
servatory, I attended all the performances of
Romeo and Juliet at the Bolshoi. I knew how to
play all the music on the piano, from beginning
to end. It's wonderful music, an absolutely fan¬
tastic ballet. I have dreamt of conducting it for
years. But to do that I needed special choreog¬
raphy. 1 didn't want the dancers dictating the
tempo to me with their feet. 1 wanted there to be
a real give-and-take and I also wanted to set the
rhythm. So Vladimir Wassiliev, who started at
the Bolshoi, produced a new choreography spe¬
cially forme.
It's exciting because; the; sccnography is
highly inventive: the orchestra is eni stage, ne>t in
the pit, anel se> the; music itself is the; heart of all
the action. The; orchestra is placed se> that I can
conduct it while facing the audience. In front
of the orchestra is a stage; epn which all the street
activities go em. Above the orchestra is a kind epf
bridge em which Juliet's bedroom is placed, anel
e»n which all the inside scenes are; set. It's an
excellent idea.
In Wassiliev's latest ¡production it's impossi¬
ble to restrain one's tears. When Juliet is elying,
she bedels e>ut her hands tet Bepmeo, who is already
dead, without being able te) touch hi in. When the
orchestra j)lays the last chord, I slowly go elown
to them and join their hands. It's wonderful!
Wonderful! When I conduct the; scene with Friar
Laurence, when the twep young lovers ge) te) the
church, the music is in four-lour time. And se) I
make; the; arm movement lor 4/4 time, from left
to right anel from up te> down, identical to the; sign
e>f the cross. Romeo anel Juliet come to me as if
I were a priest, and I appear te> be; blessing them.
So you become Rostro-pope-vich!
M. R.: The; pre>eluctie>n is full of original ideas and
the score is admirable.
In spite of your cosmopolitan existence, do you
have a special affection for Russian music?
M. R.: Yes, of course. Above all for Shostakovich
because he was my great friend. I j)lay his music
with intense feeling.
Is the musical scene in Russia still as lively as
ever?
M. R.: Yes, very much se). Thine are many young
composers. There are; oidor e>ne;s too, who are;
still relatively unknown, which is a pity because
they are; great musicians.
Do you intend to record their works?
M. R.: Yes, I've been thinking about it for a long
time. For example, there; is a woman named Sofia
lîidiaïdulina, who is composing a j)ie;e;e fe>r me.
She lives in Germany at present and she; is mak¬
ing a name for herself in the; West. In Paris, Raelio
France elevoteel a major festival te> her. Galina
Utsvolskaya, another woman composer, lives in
Russia. She is immensely talented. She has a
considerable reputation, especially in the
Netherlands. The; Dutch are; wilel about her.
You are a citizen of the world and travel without
a passport. Howwonderfulit must be to do away
with frontiers like that! But where do you live most
of the time?
M. R.: In planes.
Apartfrom music and your family, what are your
other passions?
M. R.: J seek beauty everywhere and in every¬
thing. The beauty of nature, like Lake Geneva
elown there beneath us. Magnificent! The beauty
of women, magnificent! The; beauty of music,
magnificent! I
