HERITAGE
the divine faces of
EOHHUACÁN
by Cécile Romane
After a century of archaeological
investigation, the remains of the city-state of
Teotihuacán (Mexico) still guard many of their
secrets. This pre-hispanic site, the largest in
Mesoamerica, was included on Unesco's World
Heritage List in 1987.
In the absence of written
I records, the history of
Teotihuacán, the former capital
of the greatest pre-Columbian
urban civilization in the Valley of
Mexico (2nd to 7th centuries),
lying forty kilometres north of
Mexico City, is still shrouded in
mystery.
It was founded late in the first
century A.D., although the date
cannot be definitively confirmed
in the present state of archaeo¬
logical excavations. It extended
over 40 square kilometres and
boused a sizeable ¡population. The
number of inhabitants is esti¬
mated to have ranged from
100,000 to 160,000, depending
on the period.
After reaching its apogee
between the fourth and fifth cen¬
turies, it suddenly faded away,
according to recent datings (1996),
in the first half of the seventh cen-
Ceramic statuette of a woman with
moveable arms and legs (400 A.D.).
tury. We do not know the exact
reason why this culture died out,
but its decline is thought to have
been hastened by changes in the
ground water level and hence in
the availability of water supplies.
The original name of ihe city is
unknown. The Aztecs called it
Teotihuacán (the "city of the
gods") when they discovered its vast
nuns centuries later. It seemed to
them so imposing that only the gods
could have built it and that they
had created the Fifth Sun there
(see the ÜMW.O Courier, "The sun,
ancient myths, new technologies",
January 1995, p. 12).
THE CEREMONIAL CENTRE
A straight 40-metre-vvide high¬
way, known as the Avenue of the
Dead, runs for more than two kilo¬
metres in a clearly visible succes¬
sion of rectangular squares, all on
the same level with access stair¬
ways. It then continues for
another three kilometres, still
straight as a die, but with less for¬
mally structured adjoining archi¬
tecture. This grandiose prospect
was flanked on either side by over

HBMHM>mM>^l
Left, the Avenue of
the Dead and the
Pyramid of the Sun
(at left) seen from the
Pyramid of the Moon.
2,000 residential properties
divided into many "apartments",
forerunners of the modern housing
block.
Most of the monuments in
Teotihuacán's ceremonial centre
which, vast though it is, represents
only 10 ¡percent of the city's total
area, stood on this Avenue. The
most imposing of all, the Pyramid
of the Sun (225 x 222 metres at
the base), is the world's third
tallest pyramid. Located on the
east side of the Avenue, it now
rises to a height of around 63
metres (it was originally 75 metres
tall) and has a volume of one mil¬
lion cubic metres.
The less colossal but equally
massive Pyramid of the Moon (150
x 140 metres at the base and 42
metres high) stands at the northern
end of the Avenue of the Dead and
consists of four superimposed plat¬
forms, each set back from the oth¬
ers. The palace of Quetzal jiapalotl,
the mythical Bird-Butterlly, lies
on a square precinct in front of
this ¡pyramid. The bird-butterfly
is represented in bas-reliefs on the
¡patio pilla rs. This edifice, one of
A stone sculpture of
Huehueteotl, god of
fire (c. 200 A.D.).
the few which is not a temple,
may have been the living quarters
of the Moon ¡priests.
South of the Avenue of the
Dead rises the immense quadran¬
gular structure of the "Citadel"
with a side length of around 400
metres and a total surface area of
just under seven hectares. The
square which it forms is delimited
by four ¡platforms (mistakenly
believed by the Spaniards to be the
walls of a fortress). It could easily
accommodate 100,000 ¡persons.
Here stands the Pyramid of
Quetzalcóatl, or the Plumed Ser¬
pent. The monumental steps of
its Western facade have been ¡pre¬
served in excellent condition. The
typical feature of Teotihuacán
architecture is clearly visible
here. This is known as the "talud-
tablero" (slope-and-panel) system,
i.e. an alternation of inclined
embankments and vertical ¡panels,
generally adorned with bas-reliefs.
On its four sides, the ¡pyramid
bears 366 heads of Quetzalcóatl.
These take the shape of circular
¡projections with impressive gap-
ingjaws.
AN INFLUENTIAL CIVILIZATION
The city was designed to harmo¬
nize (dosely with the surrounding
('ountr)side. From the. centre of
the Avenue of the Dead, the sum¬
mit of the nearby mountain, the
Cerro Gordo, can be seen tower¬
ing up above the apex of the Pyra¬
mid of the Moon. The city has a
rigorously geometrical layout. The
ceremonial centre was built around
the North-South axis of the
Avenue of the Dead. The adminis¬
trative ('entre, the market and the
"citadel" lie on an East-West axis.
The layout of the religious and
¡priestly monuments, all lying in the
axis of the Pyramid of the Sun,
which coincides with the sun's rise
to its zenith, respects an astro¬
nomical logic. The cult of the sun

H £ R I T A G E
and the study of the ¡planets must
have been of very great importance
to Teotihuacán society.
This rigidly hierarchical soci¬
ety, which lived from trade, was
headed by a theocratic govern¬
ment. The city derived its wealth
from vast deposits of obsidian and
fertile soil. The social classes were
clearly separated according to
their ¡profession: potters, ¡painters,
gemstone ¡polishers, farmers, fish¬
ermen, etc. Teotihuacán was a cos¬
mopolitan centre, its population
consisting of different ethnic
groups living in different districts.
The most important economic,
religious and ¡political centre of
all Mesoamerica, it reveals a
sophisticated knowledge of geom¬
etry, architecture, astronomy and
art. The mythological scenes fig
uring in the ¡paintings which adorn
the ¡palace walls, the layout of the
buildings, reflecting astronomical
rather than military concerns, lead
us to supposes that this civiliza¬
tion, founded on the cult of ter¬
restrial and agrarian deities, was a
peaceful one.
Its influence was felt through¬
out Mesoamerica: two-thirds of
Mexico as we now know it.,
Guatemala, Honduras and Belize.
The art of ¡tottery and ceramic
ware, in ¡particular, left a lasting
mark on the cultures of the Mayas
and Oaxaca. This influence lasted
for a long time. For centuries,
other populations continued to
adore the gods of Teotihuacán:
Quetzalcóatl, the Plumed ser¬
pent, god of humidity and fertil¬
ity, and Tláloc, the rain god.
Some key dates
2ND TO 1ST CENTURY B.C.
The Valley of Teotihuacán is occupied by
a scattered population. There may
already have been a very active pilgrim¬
age centre (perhaps around a grotto).
1-200 A.D.
Concentration of the population and
gradual construction of a holy city. First
sanctuary: the Pyramid of the Sun. The
processional route, known as the Avenue
of the Dead, is laid out perpendicular
to the main axis. Construction of the
Pyramid of the Moon, the "citadel" and
the temple of Quetzalcóatl.
300-650 A.D.
The high point of the City State, cover¬
ing 36 square kilometres. With 125,000
inhabitants it is the largest metropolis
of the New World and the world's sixth
largest city. Its influence extends to
other civilizations: the Totonac culture
around the Gulf of Mexico, the Zapotee
culture in Oaxaca and the cultures of
Western Mexico and the Mayas to the
South.
AROUND 650 A.D.
Collapse of Teotihuacán and end of its
dominance.
Above, the Pyramid
of the Sun (63
metres), the world's
third tallest pyramid
Mh
38* -^
Above, one of the 366
carved heads of
Quetzalcóatl, the
Plumed Serpent, that
stud the pyramid
dedicated to this
divinity associated
with moisture and
fertility.
Left, high-relief heads
of the rain god Tlaloc
(left) and
Quetzalcóatl the
Plumed Serpent
(right) on the
Pyramid of
Quetzalcóatl.

Excavation and restoration
The first excavations began in 1884. In 1905-1910, some monuments were restored, e.g. the Pyra¬
mid of the Sun to which the architect, Leopoldo Batres, arbitrarily added a fifth level. The
"citadel" was discovered and restored in 1917-1920.
Since 1962, archaeological research has been co-ordinated by Mexico's Instituto National de
Antropología e Historia (INAH). More systematic exploration of the site led to the discovery of
the Palace of the Quetzal Bird-Butterfly and other edifices. In the early 1970s, a natural cave orga-
nizedinto rooms joined by tunnels was discovered beneath the Pyramid of theSun.This was a cer¬
emonial setting, but the symbolic function of the edifice, which played a central role in the reli¬
gion ofTeotihuacán, is still unknown. Perhaps it symbolized the mythical centre of creation.
In 1980 Mexico began a far-reaching excavation and consolidation campaign, the Teotihuacán
Archaeological Project, in which 600 people worked for two years under the direction of Ruben
Cabrera of the Mexican National Institute of History and Anthropology. The project, concentrated
mainly on the south of the Avenue of the Dead, revealed vestiges of later strata than theTeoti-
huacán civilization.
Excavations confined to the Pyramid of the Plumed Serpent (1917, 1925, 1939 and 1982) led
to the discovery of tombs containing skeletons and offerings-obsidian objects, figurines in hard
stone and sculpted shells. In 1988-1989 the QuetzalcóatlTemple project, a joint ventureinvolv-
ing Mexican and American archaeologists, explored previously unstudied parts of the citadel. Then
in 1994-1995 strata subsequent to the Teotihuacán period were removed during a new Mexican
campaign. About 200 tombs were discovered in the pyramid itself, at its exact centre, in graves
under the floor and at the corners.
In 1973 René Millón of the University of Rochester (United States) began mapping the
entire site as part of the Teotihuacán Mapping Project. In his opinion the Pyramid of the Moon
may contain an inner structure, but the monument has not yet been decoded. C R.
Alternating slopes and vertical panels are typical features of
Teotihuacán's monuments. Above, the Pyramid of the Sun.
Below, a ceramic statuette with an open niche in its chest
containing a small idol in place of a heart (c. 500 A.D.).
