Bruno Barbey © Magnum, Pans
BOMBAY
BY LAJPAT RAI JAGGA
Bombay, the gateway to India, is a city
of contrasts. On the one hand, the
dazzling interiors of its five star
deluxe hotels; on the other the
poverty and squalor of its slums. The capital
of Indian finance and films, it is a city of hope
and despair, evoking desire and promising a
future, however illusory, to all who come to
its shores. The rags to riches stories that
abound in Bombay films recreate the myths of
its dream world.
I The European connection
Legend has it that Bombay, or "Mumbai",
derives its name from Mumbadevi, the goddess
worshipped by the Kolis, the earliest inhabi¬
tants of the archipelago on which the city is
situated. It is probable, however, that the city



one and many
derived its modern name from the Portuguese,
to whom it was ceded in 1534 by the Sultan of
Gujarat, and who called it "Bom Bahia", the
beautiful bay. In 1661, it was given as a marriage
gift to Charles II, the king of England, by his
queen, Catherine of Portugal. Its territories
then consisted of seven islands, interspersed by
swampy, low-lying areas, eighteen kilometres
long and seven wide, with Malabar Hill rising
to sixty metres above the sea, and the island of
Colaba as a narrow jutting headland. A nine¬
teenth-century traveller wrote that, "Bom¬
bay harbour presents one of the most splen¬
did landscapes imaginable", with "its gemlike
islands reflected in the broad blue waters" of
the Arabian Sea.
Evidence of human activity in the archipel¬
ago goes back a long way. The early Buddhist
19THE UNESCO COURIER MARCH 1997

grottoes of Kanheri date from the second cen¬
tury A.D. Hindu grottoes and the sixth-eighth-
century caves of Elephanta testify to a rich cul¬
tural heritage. However, the region owes its
early economic development to the coming of
the Parsis, who arrived there from Iran in the
eighth century.
Starting in the seventeenth century, Euro¬
pean settlement on the west coast of India
the French in Cochin and Mahe, the Por¬
tuguese in Goa, Dieu and Daman, and the
English in Bombay, Baroda and Surat trans¬
formed the landscape, architecture, economy
and life-style of the inhabitants. The English
presence was the main catalyst of cultural and
economic transition in the Bombay region.
Rich merchant communities that had been
settled for centuries in the hinterland moved
to the ports, and Bombay became the focus of
this movement of indigenous culture and
wealth. The opening of the Suez Canal in 1 869
greatly enhanced Bombay's status as a port on
the Arabian Sea, and its rail links with the hin¬
terland made it the hub of all India.
Since the 1860s the Bombay economy has
been based on cotton its export and the man¬
ufacture of cloth. With the outbreak of the
American Civil War in 1861, and the conse- Victoria Station. "Mogul"
features complement the
Victorian neo-Gothic style.
quent "cotton famine", Bombay suddenly
emerged with a virtual monopoly of the world
cotton trade. Its merchants acquired wealth,
land and prosperity surpassing that possessed
by the colonial masters. Here in Bombay,
amongst its culturally diverse merchant com¬
munities and its modern cosmopolitan intel¬
ligentsia, was born the idea of freedom.
A blend ofarchitectural styles
While the growth of indigenous business and
finance made Bombay a hub of trade, the avant
garde movement in nationalist ideas, films and .
architecture made it the cultural capital of
India. In the course of the nineteenth century
Bombay evolved a typically Indian style in
architecture, and later in films and in the devel¬
opment of a composite culture that no other
city of the British Empire could boast of. In
architecture the Raj tried to impose its heavy
Gothic style, as can be seen in the gigantic
façades of the Victoria terminus and the city
hall. The merchant communities, mainly the
Parsis, tried to blend modern European and
traditional forms. The American historian of
urbanism Norma Evenson has pointed out
that a striking feature of nineteenth-century
20 THE UNESCO COURIER > MARCH 1907

&Wfl
private building in Bombay was "its decorative
carving, a quality that linked it with the tra¬
ditional Gujarati architecture", while its fivc-
or six-storied buildings reproduced "the char¬
acter and charm of older centres of popula¬
tion" such as Amritsar, Lahore or old Delhi.
The creativity of this style is illustrated by
"airy balconies enriched with graceful carvings
and painted in all colours of the rainbow".
The façade style of older houses, with tradi¬
tional woodwork, has been "compared to that
of the Ionian Greeks"."" This blending of archi¬
tectural styles in nineteenth-century Bombay
was a part of the modern movement and the
city has continued to be an open window to
the outside world.
bove, the Hindu market
near Victoria Station.
light, a Bombay street
scene.
For over a century, Bombay has attracted
people from all over India, from all walks of
life to come to live and share the gentle sooth¬
ing winds of the Arabian Sea and the melodies
of the Hindi film song. Bombay today has a
population of nearly twelve million inhabi¬
tants, but it has always been a city of crowds,
a mix of many communities, cultures and lan¬
guages. Land was always scarce, and as early as
the 1 890s the Back Bay reclamation was started;
it still continues today. Reclamation and the
intermixture of socio-cultural groups may
sum up a century of Bombay's social history.
Apole ofattraction
Each social group has brought to the city its
richness and diversity, creating an environ¬
ment of tolerance and sharing. A person may
come from anywhere in India or the world,
here he or she is a Bombaywala, and speaks a
mixture of many languages. Whether people
sleep on the pavement, live in the slums or
reside in a Bungalow (big house) in Bandra,
they all share the city, its dreamy films, its
walks such as the Marine Drive, and its
beaches the Chaupati and Juhu. Over the
years, however, differences of community,
religion and social class have begun to plague
Bombay, as much as they have other cities of
northern India.
Nearly 70 per cent of the people of Bom¬
bay arc Hindus of diverse castes, sects and
beliefs. In recent years, however, the Maharathi-
speaking 45 per cent have begun to dominate
s "
HE UNESCO ÇiURIER MARCH 1997 21

the city's political life. Nevertheless, the
Gujarati, Sindhi, Punjabi or Marwari Hindu
merchant communities play an important role
in the city's economy. Nearly 1 5 per cent of the
population is Muslim. The Bohras and Kho-
jas are the more important business groups,
and their leader, Prince Aga Khan, is an inter¬
national figure. The Parsis, once Bombay's
most important community, are now in
decline, but still have a national presence in
the Tatas, India's most powerful industrial-
financial group. There are large numbers of
Christians, mainly Catholics, and there is also
a small Jewish community. Although the Jains
and Sikhs intermarry with the Hindus, they
have a separate cultural identity and exercise
considerable influence. Bombay's population
also includes oil-rich Arab sheikhs, Buddhists,
Armenians, Chinese and Europeans, who have
made the city their home and contribute to its
cultural texture
Bombay is not only a city of the rich or the
middle classes. It has attracted millions of
aspiring young people from all over the sub¬
continent. They speak different languages,
Konkani, Tamil, Kanard, Behari, Punjabi and
the beautiful tribal dialects. They all come to
Bombay in search of a livelihood, to live close
to the sea, and be a part of the dance, drama and
colour of its film world.
Necessary contradictions?
Each socio-cultural group has brought to the
city its place of worship, lifestyle, social cus¬
toms and habits, and has left historical monu¬
ments as a testimony of a composite culture.
The Hindus Marathi and Gujarati mer¬
chants gather at the ancient temple of
Walkeshwar (god of sand) on Malabar Hill, or
the temple of Mahalakshmi (goddess of
wealth), near which there is a mosque built in
the memory of Haji Ali, a Muslim saint. In
Worli is a Buddhist temple and the basilica of
Mount Mary, one of Bombay's twenty
Catholic churches. On the Back Bay, near the
Dhabi Hat, is the principal temple of the Jains.
In another part of Malabar Hill are the
Dakhmas, "towers of Silence", the place of dis¬
posal of the dead of the Parsis. Bombay also
has many Gurudwaras, Sikh places of worship.
Each community celebrates its religious fes¬
tivals: the Hindu Diwali, the festival of light
and Ganesh Chaturthi; the Muslim Muharram;
the Catholics' annual festival of Mount May.
For over a century these communities have lived
a shared life of mutual respect for each other's
religion and belief, but cracks have begun to
appear in this tightly woven social fabric.
The partition of India in 1947 left
wounds riots, internecine killings of Hindus
and Muslims which the passage of time has not
healed. Communal tensions elsewhere in India,
as in the case of the demolition of the Babri
Mosque in Ayodhya in December 1992, have
sparked off sectarian religious emotions and
riots. But more alarming is the growth of a sec¬
tarian organization, the Shiv Sena, which has
used political rhetoric Bombay only for the
Maharashtrians to win votes. A narrow
regionalism, coupled with sectarian religious
sentiments, could destroy the healthy mix of
cultures that Bombay has come to represent
for the rest of India. Bombay, a recent Hindi
film directed by Mani Ratnam, shows the
predicament of this city of cultural intermix¬
ture. It depicts the love story of a Muslim boy
and a Hindu girl, a saga of the reconciliation
of cultures of which Bombay is a living sym¬
bol.
* Norma Evenson, Indian Metropolis, A View Towards
the West, Yale University Press, 1989.
i improvised ball game
in the Panier district during
a day off school.
M<lodern buildings in
Bombay's waterfront
business district.
THE UNESCO f^URIERB MARCH 1
