sounding the
From tolling bells to remote sensing
by satellite, disaster warning
systems have come a long way
BY FABRIZIO FERRUCCI
Hurricane Fran (September
1996) as seen from a weather
satellite.
rhe tolling of bells was once the usual way
to warn people of impending disasters
like floods, fires or approaching armies.
Warnings based on eye-witness reports
were passed on from town to town. The fur¬
ther away the town was from the disaster, the
longer it had to prepare its defences. These
days, the approach is much the same even
though the technology is very different. Warn¬
ings are still issued at one point and propa¬
gated across a network of users who deploy
skills to mitigate the impact of the event.
Today's warning systems rely on measure¬
ment techniques, mostly from physics and geo¬
physics, and on communications technology.
The science of risk prediction is young, and the
systematic observation of natural processes is
not much older. Quantitative meteorology dates
back to the 1 940s, quantitative seismology to the
1960s, and quantitative vulcanology is only
about twenty years old. Remote-sensing fro m
space only began in the late 1970s. Meanwhile,
advances in communications technology have
made it possible to speak to people anywhere on
earth from a disaster site.
I Technological risks and
natural risks
Technological, or human-made risks are usually
limited in time and place, even if they cause
dramatic and long-term effects. Warning
THE UNESCO lOURIER OCTOBER I9SJ d

systems are built into industrial plants and are
based on all possibilities of failure known to
the designers. Natural risks are much more dan¬
gerous because they involve the biggest energies
on earth, and because we have less access to risk
sources that were not designed by human
beings.
The concept of warning implies forecasting
in space, time, or both. In some cases warnings
can be issued if we can foresee the short,
medium- and long-term evolution of an
impending event, and its consequences. In oth¬
ers they are possible if we can identify minor
events that are precursors of a much bigger one.
Good examples of early warning are the fore¬
casting of weather conditions twelve, twenty-
four and forty-eight hours ahead, and of extreme
meteorological events such as hurricanes, their
path and timing. A bad example is earthquake
prediction, which is seldom attempted and when
it is all too often fails. The Table on this page
shows today's capacity to forecast the occur¬
rence of some major natural events.
As a general rule, the capacity to issue reliable
early warnings requires: good approximate
knowledge of the specific source of the hazard
in question; availability of one or more mod¬
els allowing description of the event in time
and place; appropriate surveillance systems being
in operation; transmission of information
ahead of the development of the hazard.
Sometimes one type of risk is linked to
Houses in flames as fire
spreads through a city block
following the January 1995
earthquake in Kobe (Japan).
Opposite page,
decontaminating a building at
Chernobyl (Ukraine) in 1986.
another. Extreme meteorological events may
lead to flash floods, plain floods and land¬
slides. Industrial fires may lead to explosions,
severe chemical pollution of air, ground and
water. If there is full control of the source of
primary risk, warnings about secondary effects
are possible.
How do we stand in practice with regard to
warning techniques of some natural phe¬
nomena today?
A mother and daughter look
on helplessly as their house
burns down.
Weatherforecasting
Weather forecasts are generally reliable because
meteorologists can model in detail the behav¬
iour of large masses of air and because a very
As the Table below shows, we must answer a categorical "no" about the reliability of many
types of forecast in time. This does not exclude the possibility that, locally and sometimes,
correct forecasts are issued. However, these cannot be "generalized" and extended
successfully to other places and other scenarios. F. F.
IS IT POSSIBLE TO FORECAST THE OCCURRENCE OF DISASTROUS NATURAL EVENTS?
IN SPACE IN TIME
Long term
(a year or more)
Medium term
(month to weeks)
Short-term
(days to hours)
Earthquakes Yes Yes, almost No No
Extreme meteorological events Yes No No Yes
Flash floods Yes No No Yes/almost
Forest fires Yes No No No/almost
Landslides Yes Yes Yes Yes/almost
Plain floods Yes No No Yes
Volcanic eruptions Yes Yes Yes No/almost
THE UNESCO ipURIER OCTOBER 1997

complete set of worldwide observations at all
scales is available. Weather satellites provide a
flow of images of cloud distribution over con¬
tinents and oceans, while a dense network of
ground stations reports continuously updated
information about temperature, humidity
and wind direction and speed at ground level
and in the troposphere (the lowest level of
the atmosphere).
Earth observation from space and efficient
telecommunications on land and with space
make it possible to combine national forecasts
into a global system which can predict extreme
events in time for precautions to be taken.
Weather forecasts can warn of heavy rainfall
which may lead to flooding because of its con¬
centration in space and the structure of river
basins. Ground-based weather radar plays an
important part in short-term flood warning
by making it possible to estimate the location
and amount of rainfall, whose effect on a river
basin can be monitored by sensors which make
it possible to issue short-term warnings and
take steps to avoid or limit overflows. A good
topography of the river basin and the river
bed are needed to predict the behaviour of
flood waters on the basis of rainfall density
and duration and soil type.
Although flood warnings are not always
timely, many recent instances show that lack
of co-ordination rather than lack of warning
is the weak point in flood risk mitigation.
Volcanic eruptions
It is relatively feasible to predict volcanic erup¬
tions because the volcanic process is condi¬
tioned by many physical and chemical factors
that can be individually monitored. Eruptions
are always preceded by intense seismic activity
and ground inflation, and the reawakening of
a dormant volcano can easily be detected by
just a few seismic instruments, making it pos¬
sible to issue a long-term warning.
As the magma makes its way to the sur¬
face, ground inflation will begin and new gas
vents will appear, along with changes in the
gas composition and local disturbances in the
earth's gravity and magnetic fields. The appear¬
ance and growing intensity of these phenom¬
ena make it possible to issue a medium-term
warning based on data provided by a complex
blend of instruments including a seismic net¬
work, networks for monitoring the hori¬
zontal and vertical components of the ground
deformation, a network of magnometers, a
network for measuring very small changes in
the local gravity field, and instruments for
analysing volcanic gases.
At this point forecasting becomes more
complex. Firstly, as the magma gets close to
the surface, its effects are concentrated in an
ever-smaller area, so many more and closer
spaced instruments are needed to pinpoint the
highest area of risk.
Secondly, the shallow part of the earth's crust
(2-3 km) is much weaker than the intermediate
crust where the magma was earlier and so erup¬
tion is easier. The moment of eruption is pre¬
ceded by much more rapid physical and chem¬
ical changes. The closer we are to eruption time,
the greater the forecasting uncertainties.
Short-term warnings of eruptions are
therefore still rare and mostly unreliable, how¬
ever, because the complete range of measure¬
ment networks is only available for one per
cent of the world's active volcanoes.

In the case of explosive volcanoes, which
pose a major threat to people living nearby or
to aircraft flying into the dense volcanic ash
thrown up a medium-term warning should
lead to the establishment of no-go zones but
this is difficult to enforce for understandable
social and economic reasons, especially in
densely populated areas.
Earthquakes
The accuracy of earthquake prediction is poor,
the main reason for the failure of short-term
forecasting being the abundance rather than
the lack of events that precede an earthquake.
Many earthquakes are preceded by tremors,
sizeable ground deformation, local changes in
the earth's electrical or magnetic fields, changes
in the level of water wells, and emissions of
radon, carbon dioxide and other gases along
fault lines. But these events also occur inde¬
pendently of earthquakes, and in the case of
big quakes have never all occurred together or
been observed on the right scale by use of a sin¬
gle instrument network.
Although we know a lot about the source
of earthquakes these days, we do not know
much in detail about the earthquake prepara
tion process nor about the exact meaning, at
any given moment, of a hundred or so poten¬
tial earthquake precursors. So it is easy to
understand why governments and scientists
are reluctant to risk their credibility by issu¬
ing warnings. The most reliable warning that
can be given for earthquakes today is in fact
simply to note where and when they have
occurred and act accordingly.
Regional networks of seismographs can be
set up in these earthquake-prone areas. Data can
be processed in real time or near-real time
through automated systems which make it
possible to pinpoint the time, magnitude and
epicentre of a quake a few minutes after the
event. In this way rescue services can be alerted
and directed to the places where they are most
needed.
Today early warning of natural disasters is
either possible or else we know why it is not.
There is every reason to believe that through
technology, our disaster-warning capacity will
improve and that soon it will be possible to
organize a timely response to all natural risks.
Until then, keep an ear cocked for the
tolling bells. It may be just a wedding, but
you never know.
A demonstration provoked by
the escape of toxic fumes
(dioxin) from a chemical plant
in Seveso, near Milan (Italy),
in 1976.
