ovement
BYMARIEKEKUIPERSI
20th-century art and architecture are still without
their rightfulplace in the heritage listings
Brasilia, the capital of Brazil,
was created in central Brazil in
1956 by town planner Lucio
Costa and architect Oscar
Niemeyer. Above, the cathedral
(in background) and statues of
the four apostles by Alfredo
Ceschiatti. The city was added
to the World Heritage List as a
cultural site in 1987.
The heritage of the period since the
industrial revolution, especially that
of the twentieth century, is still barely
^represented on the World Heritage List.
It is hard for the recent heritage to compete on
equal terms with prestigious works from the
more distant past, and it is also particularly
difficult to make a well-considered choice
from such a vast field.
In addition, the use of experimental build¬
ing techniques and materials such as iron, rein¬
forced concrete, steel-framed windows and
various kinds of cladding gives rise to new
conservation problems that have yet to be
solved. Some recent buildings and neigh¬
bourhoods have not been critically evaluated.
They may be in bad condition or have been
radically altered; in some cases they are associ¬
ated with the destruction of monuments and
sites of previous ages.
On the eve of the new millennium, it is
high time to regard twentieth century archi¬
tecture as part of our heritage and to protect
it. Fortunately, interest in this new category is
growing, as shown by a number of recent
nominations for the World Heritage List.
A thematic approach
As of today the List contains properties in 108
states. To achieve a well balanced selection it
would be a good idea to introduce a certain
thematic approach, especially within the vast
field of twentieth-century heritage. Three inter¬
national specialist organizations are currently

working towards this goal. An International
Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS)
working group is studying Art Nouveau build¬
ings dating from around 1900, which often
incorporate decorative ironwork, curved lines
and floral patterns (e.g. the Casa Milà and the
"Guëll Palace" designed by Antoni Gaudi in
Barcelona, Spain). The International Commit¬
tee for the Conservation of the Industrial Her¬
itage (TICCIH) is studying the industrial her¬
itage (e.g. Ironbridge, in the United Kingdom).
And DOCOMOMO is working on the func¬
tionalist heritage of the Modern movement."'
^Functionalist architecture
,.As well as the Bauhaus sites in Weimar and
Dessau (Germany), which were included in
1996, two other modernist sites already feature
on the World Heritage List: the serene Wood¬
lands cemetery in Stockholm (Sweden)
designed by Erik Gunnar Asplund (1918-
1 940), and the capital of Brazil, Brasilia, which
was inaugurated in 1960. More nominations,
however, can be expected, including that of
the Schröderhuis in Utrecht (Netherlands), a
fine example of De Stijl architecture built in
1924 by Gerrit Rietveld.
The Modern Movement is still influential
today by virtue of its fundamentally innov¬
ative and international character and its con¬
centration on the essential functions of a
building instead of merely its outer appearance.
Functionalism, which originated in Europe
at the beginning of the twentieth century, had
its heyday during the 1920s and 1930s and
soon spread across the Americas and elsewhere.
Its rapid expansion was made possible by col¬
lective action and organizations such as CIAM,
whose international congresses were attended
by architects and town planners, and by mag¬
azines, exhibitions, world-wide commissions
and emigration.
The international figures associated with
the Bauhaus also played an important role in the
spread of modernist ideas on all aspects of
design. With its dynamic composition of clear,
flat roofed blocks, its spectacular and artistic
use of a curtain-glass-wall and its wealth of
carefully designed interior and exterior details
(including furnishings and colouring), the
white plastered building built by Walter
Gropius in Dessau (1925-1926) might be
regarded as a modern work of total art
(Gesammtkunstwerk) and a characteristic exam¬
ple of functionalist, almost abstract architecture
Modernist architects combined idealism
and rationalism and tried wholeheartedly to
improve living and working conditions by
The visionary work of Antoni
Gaudi (1852-1926) in
Barcelona extended from
architecture to garden design,
sculpture and the decorative
arts. Below and right,
decorative details from Güell
Park which, with the Güell
Palace and the Casa Milà were
added to the World Heritage
List as a cultural site in 1984.

From its premises in Weimar
and then in Dessau (Germany),
the Bauhaus School
revolutionized contemporary
architecture and aesthetics
between 1919 and 1933. Left,
the glass-fronted Bauhaus
school in Dessau (1925-1926),
designed by Walter Gropius.
Below left, the stairwell of the
school. The Bauhaus and its
sites in Weimar and Dessau
were included on the World
Heritage List as a cultural site
in 1996.
using the resources of modern architecture.
They were particularly interested in housing
schemes and urban planning in some cases
working on entirely new towns. They intro¬
duced new types of housing, including high-
rise apartment blocks, and sought a new aes¬
thetic, expressing function and construction
in a pure and poetic style without any refer¬
ence to the past.
These models of modernity now have his¬
toric value, and at least a selective group of
them are worth conservation as examples of
our varied world heritage.
* These examples are already on the World Heritage
List. DOCOMOMO, an international working party
for Documentation and Conservation of buildings,
sites and neighbourhoods of the MOdern MOvement,
was founded in 1990 after the first international
conference on this subject, held at the University of
Technology at Eindhoven (Netherlands). It now
comprises 35 national/regional working parties.

