Ancient and modern Egypt
come face to facebySamirGharib
Prestigious archaeological sites
threatened by urban encroachment
Above, the pyramids
and the nearby outskirts of
Cairo.
! In the last few years rampant population
growth and urban sprawl have combined
to pose an increasingly serious threat to Egypt's
archaeological monuments and sites. The ugly
side-effects of urban development water, air
and noise pollution, constant vibrations and dam¬
age to the environment are well known to all
the world's city-dwellers.
Cairo's older inhabitants remember that only
fifty years ago the main road to the pyramids,
beginning in Giza Square, ran through fields
before reaching the pyramids in the desert. At
that time the pyramids could be seen eight kilo¬
metres away. Now only a forest of buildings is
visible from Giza Square.
Traffic congestion choked the road so severely
that another road was built parallel to it,
encroaching on farmland which was replaced by
more bottlenecks and anarchic ribbon building.
There are no ear park facilities or garages in
these settlements and in some cases there is no
running water. In the absence of any kind of town
planning, using these two roads can be a hair-
raising experience.
To improve the links between Cairo and the
new towns around it, the idea was raised of build¬
ing a huge ring road, 95 kilometres long and 42
metres wide, at a cost of one billion Egyptian
pounds. The route of the highway would take it
very near the Giza pyramids an area which has
been on UlMîSC.o's World Heritage hist since 1979.
Nonetheless work on the ring road began in 1986,
without prior consultation with the World Her¬
itage Committee and in flagrant violation of
Egyptian heritage law, which protects land that
might contain historic monuments.
The alarm was sounded in 1 994 hy the British
daily The Independent, which drew attention to
the risks posed by the road to any monuments
that might be buried in an area where no archae¬
ological research had yet been done. As a result of
the debate triggered by the press and subsequent
3 Courier |une 1997 nthe unesco

> TJlNUSCO intervention, work was suspended until An obelisk at Luxor,
the completion of a study by an expert committee.
This was not the first round in the fight to
preserve the plateau of the Pyramids. In the
late 1980s UlNIÏSCO sent an expert committee to
draw up a project to protect the area, including
restoration of the Sphinx and construction of a
wall between the archaeological site and the
nearby villages of Nazlet Essallab and Kafr Elga-
bal, which had been joined together by urban
growth. The project was abandoned, however,
in face of a storm of protest from local interest
groups.
THE THREAT TO LUXOR
The pyramids are not the only pharaonic remains
harmed hy urbanization. Luxor, one of the
world's most prestigious historic cities, is also
threatened. The site includes the temple of Kar-
nak, the temple of Luxor itself and the Road of
the Rams that joins them on the east bank of
the Nile, and on the west bank the Valley of the
Queens, with the temple of Ilatshepsut and the
tomb of Nefcrtiti, and the Valley of the Kings.
Until recently, pedestrians had to take a ferry
to cross the river and motor traffic had to make
a detour through the distant town of Esna where
a bridge spans the Nile. The idea of building a
bridge at Luxor was first raised in 1972 and was
adopted in 1982. The chosen site was located
north of the town, seven kilometres from the Val¬
ley of the Kings.
Supporters of the project poirtted to the many
services the bridge would perform for the com¬
munity and especially its role in encouraging
industrial development in the nearby town of
Armante, the centre of the region's sugar indus¬
try, hy making road haulage possible for the
enormous output of the sugar cane fields. The
bridge would also reduce the distance between
Aswan and Cairo by almost 100 kilometres.
The project was decreed to be in the public
interest in 1990, and work began. Five years and
25 million Egyptian pounds later, with the bridge
nearly complete, came a bombshell. It was
revealed in the press that the bridge's existence
might destroy all the archaeological remains on the
west bank. Egyptian artists and scientists joined
forces and called for the work to be halted.
The pharaohs and their builders chose the
site of their final resting place with very great
care. The tombs are on high, dry ground, out of
reach of the floodwaters of the Nile in an area
composed of two overlaid geological strata, a
limestone layer containing the tombs, and a layer
of clay which retains rainwater and atmospheric
humidity in its cracks. Inside the tombs, broad
pillars afford protection against earthquakes.
By saturating the lower clay layers with water,
construction of the bridge exposed them to the
danger of slippage, causing movement of the
upper limestone layers and the collapse of the
temples.
Other arguments drew attention to the risk
that this historic site, whose beauty and
grandiose solitude attract tourists, would be dis¬
figured by commerce and building which would
ultimately discourage tourism. But it is too late;
the bridge has been built.
Strict laws now forbid the encroachment of
urban settlements onto farmland and building on
the west bank of the Nile. The protected area
around monuments has even been extended. But
will these measures be enough to prevent urban
expansion so uncontrolled that it indiscriminately
destroys everything in its path, whether it is crop¬
land or archaeological heritage? M
46 3 QuiTHE UNESCO tpURIER JUNE 1997
