interview Youssef Chahine
Youssef Chahine is a major Egyptian film
director with an international reputation.
Earlier this year he was awarded a special
prize by the Cannes Film Festival on the
occasion of its 50th anniversary, asan
accolade for his lifetime's work in the
cinema. Drama, emotional intensity and
humanism are the leitmotiv of his films. As a
man Chahine has championed the cause of
democratic and progressive intellectuals
against the currents of fundamentalism and
conservatism.
Interview by Michel Fargeon
Youssef Chahine at the Cannes Film Festival (May, 1997).
After the presentation of your latest film.
Destiny, the 1997 Cannes Film Festival jury awarded
you its 50th anniversary prize for your life's work. You
thus join film-makers like Orson Welles and Luchino
Visconti who were honoured with 20th and 35th
Cannes Festival anniversary prizes respectively.
Youssef Chahine: For me, the greatest reward of all
was the love and warmth expressed by the film pro¬
fessionals from all over the world who gave me a
standing ovation in Cannes's huge Louis Lumière
theatre. When I walked up to the microphone to
thank them, I almost broke down. All those people,
who are supposed to be so tough, were opening
their hearts to me and love is nev er a one-way feel¬
ing. I couldn't find words to describe the feelings
they had aroused in me.
As for recognition of my life's work, I have to say
that none of the 33 films I have directed to date has
been easy to do. At first I had a hard time winning
recognition and acceptance, and I owe a lot to for¬
eign critics like Jean-Louis Bory, who organized
screenings of my films at UNESCO Headquarters in
Paris. It was a way of paying tribute to the work
being done in a country like Egypt, whose cinema
was usually regarded with condescension rather
than admiration. Many people in Europe thought
that all we could do was make light comedies
with belly dancing scenes, obviously though some
of us were working hard and making more worth¬
while films, often on shoestring budgets. That is
why I feel I am sharing my prize with all the film¬
makers from poor countries who are still having
great difficulty in making films in their own coun¬
tries. In view of my age I was born in 1926 I feel
that I am in a sense their elder statesman, and it
gave me tremendous pleasure to have been to some
extent their representative in Cannes.
Have the film festivals that have made you
known outside Egypt also enabled you to present
your own culture to others?
Y. C: For a long time people like me were largely
used as cultural alibis. We were second-string guests
at festivals, an extra Hag for them to fly and a token
of their internationalism. We got what we could out
of them. We were working flat out simply to exist as
Third World film-makers, and those festivals were,
despite it all, wonderful ways for us to make our cul¬
ture and our hardships known, to break down the
walls of ignorance. Knowledge knows no boundaries.
It travels from one country to another via sharing.
That is, incidentally, one of the themes of my most
recent film, Destiny. Without memory, we are
doomed to repeat the mistakes of the past, which
have sometimes led humanity to its worst excesses.
All golden ages have emerged from periods of toler¬
ance, sharing and love for one's neighbour.
Yourfilm The Emigrantwas banned in Egypt
shortly after its release. . . .
Y. C: A fundamentalist group sued me and man¬
aged to convince the court that the film was blas¬
phemous. I had spent two years working on it and
was very upset by the court's decision, which I con¬
sidered unacceptable and repellent. The greatest
humiliation for an artist is to feel gagged. I don't
make films to hide them away. Apart from my own
disappointment, a lot was at stake in that trial: the
descent into intolerance always has terrible results.
It has to be countered at all costs, especially since
THE UNESCO (llURI ERB SEPTEMBER 1907
47

the fundamentalist approach is found everywhere,
in all religions. Only minorities are involved, hut the
press often unwittingly sen es their interests by giv¬
ing them a lot of publicity. That's the kind of thing
I had in mind when I thought oí Destiny. There was
also another, more private reason. I had a friend a
charming fellow, open-minded, tolerant, to some
extent my alter ego who acted in several of my
films but who suddenly went over to the fundamen¬
talists. I couldn't help but wonder about the deep-
rooted causes of such a change of direction.
In Destiny an intellectual is confronted by
fundamentalists. What resources does he have to
combat them?
Y. C: It is often said that violence begets violence.
Television assails us with scenes of violence, gratu¬
itous, ugly violence, whose only purpose is to fill the
pockets of certain producers. As if stories about
psychopaths and criminals were the only ones worth
filming! But the worst kind of violence is perhaps
to say to someone: "Everything you write will he
burned." To fight that violence I use. joie de vivre,
music, dance and, of course, reason. InDestiny the
main character, who is at first conditioned by sec¬
tarian thinking, recovers all his yoie de vivre when
he hears the film's theme song. He also dances, and
as he does so, his intolerance and pettiness melt
away. Dance is as generous as love.
As far as you're concerned, does the rise of
fundamentalism begin when freedom of thought is
forbidden?
Y. C: No doubt about it. But no one today seems to
be really thinking about the. reasons for the rise of
fundamentalism in different parts of the world. Why
do so many young people, in many cases college grad¬
uates, support these ideas from another age? Eco¬
nomic globalization devours people. Young people
today are excluded from the social process and are
replaced by machines. Yet a person's dignity is pri¬
marily defined by work. I am revolted when I see
countries sometimes rich countries let a whole
section of their population languish in ignorance on
the sidelines of society. But some day or other, some¬
how or other, people eventually start to think and
express themselves, overcoming their hesitations and
defying censorship. And then things change. . . .
Music and dance play a prominent part in
Destiny. Does this represent a return to yourfirst
love, the days when you made musicals?
Y. C: Music and dance are ways of handling tragedy
with a light touch. Dance is an invaluable form of
expression for comniunicatingj'oie de vivre. And I
love flamenco. It is music that links East and West.
The first films I saw when I was young were French
music-hall comedies. Music is the opposite of arro¬
gance. It is a form of sharing. Everyone loves to sing
and dance. It is always possible to say important
things without boring one's audience, and even to
give them pleasure in the process.
M Of allyourfilms, which is yourfavourite?
Y. C: Alexandria . . . IF/13? First of all because I
was born in that city. Secondly because it depicts
two aspects of my Alexandria the Alexandria I
knew thyt are dearest to me: friendship and tol¬
erance. All religions, all cultures, all kinds of ideas
lived side by side in that Alexandria. There were no
barriers between people: Arabs, Greeks, Armeni¬
ans, Italians, Jews, Russians and French, were all
friends. No one despised anyone else. We spoke
almost all these languages, not very well perhaps,
but we made ourselves understood with a few words
and phrases. Everyone, accepted everyone else.
Friendship was the rule. This melting pot of peo¬
ple and cultures has vanished today, and this is
something I bitterly regret. In Alexandria . . .
Why ? the city is a character in its own right and has
its own identity and vitality. This explains the title.
Yet you left Alexandria for Hollywood where you
went to learn your profession.
Y. C: Hats off to American technique! In America
I learned rules straight out of Aristotle and Plato,
which American scriptwriters use to produce see-


narios that are very well constructed but which,
unfortunately, often tell trashy stories. They're
always well packaged, well edited and well acted,
hut the stories themselves are mediocre. You see
films that are remarkably well directed, but devoid
of content: a bit of sex, some stunts, explosions,
violence and brawling, but when I come out of the
cinema, I feel I've seen nothing at all. I don't go to
the cinema to waste my time.
And yet we have a kind of complex about the
United States. We think that if our films are not dis¬
tributed there, they don't exist. Hut the Ameri¬
can market will never be open to us; protectionism
in disguise prevails there. Basically, the Americans
aren't interested in films from abroad. Of course
this doesn't stop them flooding our screens with
their own productions. We sometimes even man¬
age to invent revolutionary techniques, hut they
don't want to know. I actually directed the first
chase scene in cinema history filmed using a hand¬
held camera, an enormously heavy old "Derbie". I
followed the actors down the narrow corridors of an
ancient temple. And yet my films, like those of
many other film-makers from countries of the
South, have been sidelined from major interna¬
tional distribution circuits.
You started out making light entertainment
productions before going on to more demanding
films.
Y. C: I prefer to talk in terms of cinema that is
' aware". There was a time when my friends
w ere leav ing Alexandria , and I asked myself why. In
The Land (1969) I tackled the theme of the fel-
lahin, who possess nothing but whose work pro¬
vides food for us all. But most of all it was after the
defeat of the Egyptian army in the Six-Day Warin
1967 that I really became aware of the situation in
my country. The final scene in The Sparrow (1973),
where the women take to the streets to express
their refusal of defeat, was a major turning point in
my life. Later, when I was faced with death, I said
to myself: "What have you done so far?". I have
expressed opinions and portrayed feelings which,
in the last analysis, encapsulated an experience
and reflected a truth. It is very hard to step back
and look at yourself, to see yourself as you really
are. As long as you don't give way to self-absorption,
when you talk about yourself in a social and human
context, you talk about other people too.
What about your experience in theatre?
Y. C: What a wonderful memory! It was one of the
greatest joys of my life! It was an incredible gamble
on the part of Jacques Lassalle, the then Director
of the Comedie Française in Paris, to ask me
someone from another planet who hadn't produced
anything in the theatre for forty years to put on
| a play of my choice. I chose Albert Camus's
| Caligula. You can imagine what an honour it was for
© me to work with the highly professional actors of
the Comédie Française. I threw myself body and
soul into this production, I gave it all I'd got. It
was a tremendous success: seventeen curtain calls
on the first night. An unforgettable experience.
Is it hard for Youssef Chahine to make films in
Egypt?
Y. C: It's getting more and more difficult for every¬
one. Once upon a time we made 120 films a year in
Egypt. Then eighty. Now we're down to sixteen.
Without French support even I could no longer
make films there. French TV channels buy the
advance rights to my films, which is a wonderful
show of support. Egyptian television on the other
hand stifles talent by only promoting mediocre
series. They even dare to use excerpts from my
films without my permission! I say to my Egyptian
students: "Freedom must be fought for nonstop; it
isn't handed out on a plate." Technique is not
important; you can learn that from books. What
needs to be taught is freedom. 1 also tell them that
in order to make films you must have a vision of
the world. To the actors, technicians and camera¬
men who start out in my films I say it takes courage
to lau ncli yourself and create y our own experience.
As for inspiration, that can be found by observing
people with a sympathetic eye. If you love other
people, every story is interesting. Everybody has a
magnificent story somewhere inside them. The
important thing is to know how to listen to the story
and then to tell it.
THE UNESCO QpURI ERBSErTEMBER 1997
49
