BY THE PEOPLE, FOR THE PEOPLE
Self-reliant low-cost community radio stations at
the heart of rural development
BY CARLOS A. ARNALDO
M young member of a street
theatre group in Sri Lanka
invites villagers to come to a
show that will be broadcast
on radio.
T| he concept we developed was very
simple: a radio built by and for the
community that would be small and
effective, and capable of being main¬
tained, repaired, programmed, produced and
aired by the people themselves.
There would be no large freight cases, no
need for heavy trucks to meet the shipments
at the pier or the airport, no tall shiny metal¬
lic cabinets to hold electronic gear. The whole
station would fit in a suitcase. So successfully
were these specifications met that our consul¬
tancy visits to prospective community radio
stations often began with, "Yes, welcome, but
uh, where is it?"
The beginnings
Historically this kind of community radio
arose from a combination of two factors: lim¬
iting transmitter power so as to keep costs
down, and using radio constructively to get
members of a community to work with each
other for social and economic improvement.
Technically the concept became feasible in
the late 1970s, when silicon chips were taking
over the tasks (amplifying, fine tuning sig¬
nals, selecting frequencies, controlling low-
power electric currents) of vacuum tubes in
transmitter design. This meant that the basic
transmitter (the exciter) could be the size of a
small book instead of a bookcase; it could be
assembled in a few hours instead of a few days
or weeks; it would not heat excessively and
therefore did not need large and noisy cooling
fans; it would cost less to ship, to maintain,
to replace and to handle. '
An FM (frequency modulation) trans¬
mitter of this size, designed for UNESCO by
Martin Allard, produced only 10 to 15 watts.
But with a 1 0-metre mast and a simple antenna,
and with no interference from other FM sta¬
tions in the immediate area (which is the case
in many developing countries), this trans¬
mitter could cover an area up to 15 kilome¬
tres in radius. Given the dispersion of rural
populations in many countries, this would
32
THE UNESCO lOURIER FEBRUAR" 1997

mean from about 20,000 to a maximum of
100,000 people.
The prototype:
Homa Bay
Homa Bay Community Radio, which was
installed on the shores of Lake Victoria in
Kenya in 1982, was UNESCO's first attempt to
set up a station based on this newly designed
low-cost, low-powered equipment. Engineers
assembled a small transmitter and a six-channel
mixer designed by the former Director of Tech¬
nical Operations of the Ghana Broadcasting
Corporation. Microphones, tape recorders and
other components in the semi-professional
range could be purchased at reasonable prices.
Later, engineers also designed an FM receiver
and an amplitude modulation/short-wave
(AM/SW) receiver adapter, both presented in
kits for local assembly.
Homa Bay Radio primed the enthusiasm
of the local folk for their "own radio", and
sparked their interest in local affairs. But the
station was short-lived. After two years, it
was dismantled. Independent FM community
radio in 1984 was a little ahead of its time in



Kenya, but the experience was valuable to
many other countries. It showed that radio
could be made by the community and that it
did not have to cost millions. It cost only
$25,000 to finance Homa Bay.
Village
volunteers
In Sri Lanka, the opportunity for another
experiment arose when Guirandurokotte, a
newly established township in the heart of
the Mahaweli Development Area, was chosen
to be the site of a new development centre and
a community radio station. In 1979 when the
project was launched, Guirandurokotte was a
grassy field crossed by a feeder road lined with
a handful of shanties where saronged old men
sold tea and cakes to weary travellers. It was
located in an upstream area of Sri Lanka where
there were fertile valleys and vegetable gardens,
small temples set amidst majestic coconut trees
and rich green rice terraces. Downstream, where
the river dried up before it could reach the
plains, the land was hard-caked and dry. The
cattle were thin and mortality rates for infants
and farm animals were high. Dirt roads octo-
pussed into the interior, where there were more
dried mud and shrivelled crops.
The basic plan of the Mahaweli Develop¬
ment Authority was to build a network of
reservoirs upstream, store water, and then
release it regularly through newly constructed
canals to ensure all-year-round irrigation to
the downstream regions. When the valleys
were flooded, some one million settlers would
have to move downstream to the drylands
which would eventually be watered by the
new canals. One could imagine the anguish of
farming families at having to uproot their
homes, farm implements and religious shrines
and settle in some unknown dry region down¬
stream. Whole villages with their sacred tem¬
ples would soon be underwater.
Alongside the Mahaweli Plan, a joint
UNESCO-Danish International Development
Agency (DANIDA) project aimed to create
and train a team of mobile radio producers
who would visit the villages both before mov¬
ing and after resettlement and would produce
programmes to smooth the transition to their
new homes.
The Guirandurokotte Community Radio,
Sri Lanka's first permanent FM Station, was a
key feature of this project. From this station,
built by its own technicians, the production
team related to the immediate community. The
technicians also designed and built their own
mobile audio mixing console for fieldwork,
and when the transmitter developed faults,
they altered the design themselves and kept
the station on the air. With the exception of a
few weeks during the critical stages of the civil
disturbances in Sri Lanka in 1988 and 1989,
Lbove, a news producer of
the Bhutan Broadcasting
Service (BBS) prepares her
programme.
Top, recording a quiz for
Bhutanese farmers. The BBS
received aid under a Unesco-
Danida multilateral project
between 1989 and 1993.
M recording studio at the
Guirandurokotte community
radio station (Sri Lanka).
>C°uTHE UNESCO lOURIER» FEBRUARY 1997
33

the station has been on the air continuously
since 1986 and is still operating today.
The team recruited a number of volunteer
producers and assistant technicians from
among the villagers. One volunteer, a farmer's
daughter, opens the station every day with
the sign-on announcements; others assist in
announcing duties and production tasks. The
station has also sponsored a clinic where village
folk were taught the basics of health and
hygiene and spread this learning both by radio
and person-to-person campaigns. The station
regularly promotes income-earning activities,
such as breeding goldfish for sale in the town
market and recording music cassettes of local
songs and poems. Guirandurokotte has been
eminently a people's station.
New targets
Now after more than ten years of experience,
new targets have been set, using community sta¬
tions in Welikande, Batticoloa, Trincomalee and
further north, possibly as far as Jaffna, to sup¬
port the peace accords which are seen as a major
springboard to rural development nationwide.
The basic philosophy behind this work has
been to encourage communities to undertake
their own communication tasks and run their
local media facilities to further development,
catalyse their evolving culture and bring about
a lasting peace. In many ways, radio brings
power to the people of these communities.
34
THE UNESCO lOURIERB ÍEBRUARY 1997
llenya's first community
radio station, operational
from 1982 to 1984, was set up
by Unesco at Homa Bay.

