FORMER USSR
From ideology to love
BY JULIA PROSALKOVA
Mn illustration by I. Bilibin
from a 1900 edition of Lovely
Vasilisa, a Russian folk tale.
rThe picture of women in Russian chil¬
dren's literature before the October
Revolution of 1917 is similar to that found in
Western Europe. At the same time it has its
roots in Russian history, culture and Ortho¬
dox Christianity.
After the Revolution critics rejected this
image almost totally on the grounds of its
extreme sentimentality, and in the 1920s and
1930s made attempts to put children's litera¬
ture on a new footing, using stories inspired
by traditional folklore and classical Russian
literature
These critics, who were themselves out¬
standing writers, had very firm ideas about
the range of themes and styles and the aes¬
thetic and ethical criteria that should be used
in children's books. Writers such as Kornei
Chukovsky dismissed prc-Octobcr children's
literature as "commonplace and bourgeois",
objected to the image of women it projected,
and blackballed the themes of family, parents,
motherhood and love.
These guidelines were dictated by a strong
insistence on a culture dominated by political
and social considerations. The Soviet state
regarded children's books as a powerful instru¬
ment in the ideological education of the rising
generations. "The purpose of Soviet children's
literature is to shape a communist personality,"
wrote I. Motyashov. This was the drawback:
authors had to follow an ideological and edu¬
cational line and were obliged to write within
the official framework.
i Hard-working
mothers
Until the 1960s female characters were por¬
trayed in children's books with a complete
absence of psychological realism, as revealed
in a classic poem by the talented Soviet poet
Sergei Mihalkov, And what about you? A
group of children are sitting in the street on a
summer evening. They are at a loose end, and
to pass the time they start making all kinds of
boasts. One of them brags that his mother is
a pilot. This does not faze the other children,
who in their turn start boasting about their
own mothers' jobs. The mother of one child
is a doctor, another's is a policewoman, a
third's an engineer, a fourth's a teacher, and so
on. Finally the children agree that "We need
all kinds of mothers, they are all important".
But nothing is said in the conversation about
mothers as such, only about their work and
their jobs.
This is not surprising. The new ideology
had liberated women from some of their tra¬
ditional tasks by making the community
responsible for the upbringing of children,
in nurseries, kindergartens, youth clubs and
other institutions. The collectivist mind-set
imposed a pattern of behaviour exemplified
in heroines whose lives were dominated by
their sense of social duty.
Only a handful of books do not conform

«
£.oya Kosmodemianskaya, a
victim of the Nazi invaders
during the war of 1941-1945,
was held up as a model for
Soviet youth. Above, two
illustrations from a
fictionalized biography (1951)
show her as a girl (in 1937)
and as a heroine honoured
with a statue.
Photos taken (rom The Story ofZoya and Shura
by L Kosmodemianskaya © State Youth Literature
Publishing House, Moscow 1951
to this model and succeed in bringing their
characters to life. Among the schoolteachers,
youth leaders, and two-dimensional mothers
and grandmothers the reader sometimes comes
across a girl or young woman of noble birth,
who experiences all kinds of trials and tribula¬
tions before finding a niche in the new society.
But the critics usually gave this type of heroine
a frosty reception.
From the 1920s to the 1950s women tended
to be portrayed as conventional, insignificant fig¬
ures. There were very few exceptions, the most
remarkable being Arkadi Gaidar's novel Timur
and his Squad. Even today children still love
Timur and his girl-friend Zhenka, a tomboy
who hides the depth of her feelings for Timur.
IHeroic figures
Faithful to the poet Mayakovsky's famous dic¬
tum, "Build life by example", the critics wanted
women revolutionaries and heroines who had
distinguished themselves during the Civil War
or the Second World War, or by "constructive
labour", to be displayed as models for the
younger generation. Authors wrote fictional
versions of the biographies of girls from rich
aristocratic families who had chosen to throw in
their lot with the people and the Revolution.
In the real world, these women led tragic
lives, but in children's books they were
depicted as cardboard figures. Their portraits
were drawn superficially and conformed to a
physical and psychological stereotype. In
appearance they are round-faced, short-haired
and clear-eyed, with resolute chins. In charac¬
ter they are bold, courageous and obstinate.
Little is said about the stirrings of love.
The most notable exception is Ruvim Fraer-
man's The Dingo: A Story of First Love, a
picture of everyday life in the Soviet Union
presented through the story of a teenage girl
and her mother, who is divorced from a hus¬
band whom she still loves. One day the hus¬
band arrives with his new family in the town
where the mother has settled with her daugh¬
ter, who falls in love with her father's step¬
son. The author convincingly shows how
envy, jealousy and the girl's initial hostility
towards the young man gradually turn into a
shy and touching first love.
Lyubov Voronkova, Valentina Osceva and
Maria Prilezhaeva are among the few women
writers who tried to create female characters
that would be credible to the younger genera¬
tion, only to be accused by the critics of senti¬
mentality, antisocial tendencies and philistinism.
The thaw
More realistic portraits of women began to
reappear in the 1 960s, the years of the "thaw".
Female characters started to ask themselves ques¬
tions, to have feelings and to act unpredictably.
From now on their image obeyed a creative
logic and was drawn with greater literary skill.
Authors became more responsive to their per¬
sonal inspiration rather than to the official line.
Women ceased to be merely iron-willed crea¬
tures faithfully performing their social duty
and began to be depicted as tender, homely and
absorbed in their children's affairs. Women
teachers became more feminine and Young Pio¬
neer leaders stopped speaking in slogans.
The change was largely due to the arrival on
the scene of a new generation of young writers
born after the Revolution. They kept official
ideology and the educative conception of chil¬
dren's literature at arm's length, and introduced
a new style and new subject-matter. Their por¬
traits of women were closer to everyday life,
more profound and more authentic.
In "The Thirteenth Year of Life", Sergei
Ivanov created two original female characters,
a good-hearted and pretty thirteen-year-old
girl and her mother, an intelligent woman.
The mother, who has married for the second
time, loves "the free life" more than anything
else, and thinks of herself as an attractive young
woman absolved from family obligations. The
selfishness of the mother is contrasted with her
daughter's attachment to the family home.
\Neglected children
In the 1970s and 1980s, the completeness of
women's involvement in working life gave rise

to psychological stories in which women and
children are presented as victims. Mothers'
lack of participation in the upbringing of their
families is seen as a cause of juvenile delin¬
quency and the cruelty of neglected children
left to their own devices. Problems such as
extreme poverty and family conflicts are
described for the first time.
Many female characters in books by N.
Dubov make the best they can of life with
ulia Korolleva, who fell in the
struggle against the Nazi
invasion, was another heroic
figure featured in postwar
Soviet literature for young
people. Left and above, 3
photos from a book about her
published in 1975: at the age
of three, as a budding actress
and as a sergeant in the Soviet
army.
Photos taken from Higher than the Example by
Elena llyina © Government publications for young
people's literature, Moscow 1975
^^ rtn illustration from a 1987
edition of Khavroshechka, a
»- -C"1 Russian folk tale.
their drunkard husbands, work as cooks and
do dirty jobs. Real-life experience in the Soviet
Union is here seen in a bitter light.
In the 1980s women's personal problems
and their relations with the world around
them come to centre stage. Girl heroines are
portrayed with greater physical realism and
psychological complexity.
The awakening of adolescent feelings is the
theme of R. Pogodin's The Oak Grove. In
this story whose gawky young heroine is not
yet a woman, but has ceased to be a child, the
author describes all the complexities and con¬
flicts of a teenager who is at once lighthearted
and frank, lyrical and lucid.
One of the best children's books published
in the late 1980s, Yuri Koval's Wormwood
Tales was inspired by the author's memories of
his mother and grandmothers. Written in sim¬
ple, poetic language, it vividly evokes the hap¬
piness of childhood, when mother and her
love arc always there.
Grandma's return
The symbolic popular figures of Russian folk¬
lore have also made a comeback, notably the
grandmotherly figures who are called "babas"
in our villages. In Russia, the "baba" has always
been associated in children's minds with the
idea of stability, and serenity, warmth and
patience, generosity and kindness.
One of the characters in Pogodin's novel
"Where the Goblin Lives", a lonely old
woman named Vera, would have been incon¬
ceivable in a book written between the 1930s
and the 1 960s. She spends her life looking after
other people's children, wherever they come
from, as if they were her own. Her last act,
when she is almost blind and is starting to
lose her mind, is to save the novel's young
heroes, who are on the verge of starvation, by
sacrificing for them her beloved rooster, the
only living creature in her dilapidated home.
With great generosity and love, an old peas¬
ant woman in Pogodin's story "Where do the
rainclouds come from?" rescues a city boy
from the solitude of orphanhood. She shares
with him her sense of the oneness of human¬
ity and nature. "I have killed a toad," the boy
tells her one day. "How can it live when it is so
ugly?" She docs not scold the child, but goes
out of the cottage, returns with a big stone
and puts it on the bench in front of him.
When he asks what it is for, she says: "You
might need it. I too am ugly."
