The defences ofovercrowded cities with fragile buildings and vulnerable infrastructures
must he strengthened
making v>ities safer BY MUSTAFA ERDIK
All over the world, economic expansion,
use of new technologies and growing
interdependence are boosting the risk
of natural disasters. Cities need to draft mas¬
ter-plans to cope with them assessing threat,
predicting its effects and proposing action.
Earthquakes, which cause most natural dis¬
asters, can set off chaos in the crowded slums
of poor countries and topple badly-con¬
structed, badly-located buildings. In rich
countries, ageing populations and a growing
reliance on technology are weakening the
defences of towns and cities. There is also more
of value to be destroyed.
Landslides are another big cause of urban
disasters, often related to earthquakes, when
housing is built on steep or unstable hillsides:
Volcanoes are more predictable than earth¬
quakes, but because they lie dormant for hun¬
dreds of years, the danger from them is often
ignored and people build and live on their
slopes. Severe flooding threatens towns and
cities which are set among denuded mountains
where there are frequent thunderstorms.

The aftermath of
the Kobe (Japan) earthquake
of 18 January 1995
Natural disasters can wreck social structures,
production, employment and income, as well as
cause physical damage. Building regulations are
crucial. In the 1995 Kobe earthquake in Japan,
countless buildings were destroyed because of
inadequate rules. Where they exist in developing
countries, such regulations are seldom enforced.
In the Erzincan (Turkey) quake of 1992, half
the medium-sized reinforced-concrete build¬
ings were destroyed. This is four times more
damage than at Kobe and twelve times more
than at Northridge (California) in 1994. Even
where modern buildings are only slightly dam¬
aged, their movable contents in the case of lab¬
oratories, hospitals, offices, museums and art
galleries can be destroyed.
A rescue team extracts a
survivor from the ruins of a
Mexico City building after the
1985 earthquake.

Roads and bridges are vital in an emergency.
But earthquakes move and damage them. At
Northridge, ten viaducts and 157 overpasses
were heavily damaged, costing some $1.5 bil¬
lion. At Kobe, the loss was from four to five
times greater and the urban transport system
was damaged in 1 ,257 places. Rescue and recov¬
ery from a major earthquake in Istanbul would
depend heavily on vulnerable roads and bridges
linking the city to Europe.
Underground pipelines can also break, leak
ing water and gas and setting off fires. This
hampered rescue work at Kobe, where more
than 150 fires could not be put out because
the water supply to fight them failed, as did
the damaged road network.
In human terms, single-parent families,
women, handicapped people, children and the
elderly are the first victims of a natural disas¬
ter. Indirect economic damage from an earth¬
quake includes loss of production and tax rev¬
enue and increased unemployment payouts.
Northridge was the most costly earthquake
in U.S. history. At $200 billion, Kobe was the
most expensive urban disaster of modern times.
In both, the damage worked out at between
$40,000 and $50,000 per affected person. At
Erzincan, it was only about $10,000 because of
the very limited infrastructure and industry.
Such huge losses will occur again. A big
quake in Istanbul would probably cost about
$50 billionabout a fifth of Turkey's 1996
Gross National Product (GNP). A repeat of the
1923 Kanto earthquake in the Tokyo region
would cost perhaps sixteen times more than
Kobe, or two-thirds of Japan's 1994 Gross
Domestic Product (GDP). Another San Fran¬
cisco quake as big as the tremor of 1 906 (8.3 on
the Richter scale) would cause losses seven times
greater than at Northridge.
Vehicles were crushed when an
apartment building collapsed
onto its parking lot during the
Northridge (California, U.S.A.)
earthquake in January 1994.
An old house in a Turkish
village which collapsed after
being weakened by several
earthquakes.
