A ritual canoe race on Iriomote
in Japan's Ryukyu Islands. It
takes place during Shichi, a
festival held to obtain a new
year blessing from gods and
ancestors.



Creation myths
and ancestor
worship are
widespread in the
Pacific islands
o 10 GUERREIROBY
a ecoming of
a e
The world of islands that is the Pacific
Ocean embraces very many different
cultures. But from the Ryukyus of Japan, to
Samoa and Tahiti, local mythology largely
agrees on how the islands came into being.
In the Japanese archipelago of Yaeyama,
rituals and oral tradition recall the customs
of Oceania. A myth current in one of these
islands, Ishigaki-jima, tells how the gods and
the ancestors created them.
Once upon a time, it goes, the sun god
ordered another god, Amang, to come down
from the sky to create an island on earth.
Amang did so and mixed sand and earth with
the end of his spear. From this mixture, the
first island sprang. Then, in the pandanus palm
forest which grew up on the island, he created
the hermit crab, amang-cha. Next he gave the
crab human seed, and a pair of human beings,
a man and a woman, eventually emerged fro m
the crab's hole in the sand.
On the west coast of the neighbouring

island of Iriomote-jima, the inhabitants use
annual events, such as the year-end sabani canoe
races, to invoke the blessing of the gods and
the ancestors for the coming year. Such bene¬
diction is in the form of theyuu, which brings
prosperity and plant growth from beyond
the horizon, from the sky or from the deep
vague places where the gods and the ancestors
also live.
At the festival of Soru (in the seventh lunar
month), the dead and the ancestors are invited
back to the village, to the houses where they
were born. There they receive offerings, and cel¬
ebrations in their honour go on for three
nights. A group of masked young people, the
Anggama, conjure up through dance the com¬
munity of the dead and the ancestors.
From nature to culture
The man and the woman from the story of the
creation are the ancestors of those who set¬
tled in the Yaeyama islands. Many variants of
this myth are to be found in the islands of
Hateruma, Taketomi and Miyako. Among the
Austronesians of Belau, Samoa and Tahiti, the
creation is seen in a similar way out of chaos,
with life descending from the sky to the earth
A modern wooden figurehead
from an Asmat dugout canoe.
The Asmats are a fishing people
of New Guinea.
© Charles Lénars, Pans Jayapura University museum
A canoe race held during a folk
festival in Papeete harbour,
Tahiti (French Polynesia).
or the sea. In the stories, small sea creatures
such as fish, crabs, worms or shellfish give
birth to a child or to the first human couple.
Often the couple consists of a brother and
a sister, whose incest becomes the foundation
of human society. The couple's first child is
usually an aquatic creature or an incomplete
human being.
In the Ryukyu Islands as in Polynesia, these
myths go along with stories about floating
islands or floating lands that the gods have
immobilized through various stratagems to cre¬
ate the world of islands which humans gradu¬
ally settled. The creation myths usually present
this settlement as a transition from nature to

Ritual offerings are made to
the tutelary god on the island
of Iriomote (Ryukyu Islands,
Japan). Far left, the offerings
being prepared by the
priestess. Left, the "divine
family"the priestess, her
brother and two assistants
during the prayer ceremony.
Below left, a stone tiki on
Huahine in the Society Islands
(French Polynesia). The tiki, a
highly schematic engraved or
sculpted portrait of a man, is a
widespread feature of
Oceanian art.
k culture. They hark back to the way of life of
ancient maritime communities in Southeast Asia
^ and on the edges of the East China Sea, based on
fishing and gathering seaweed and shellfish.
The original link
For the Pacific peoples, genealogy, traced fro m
a founding ancestor, establishes an order of
precedence among all the clans and descendants
or "houses" which make up an island society.
Such genealogy is part of the "framework of
origins" which brings together the status of
communities, social ranks and individual titles
according to criteria legitimized by myths and
ancient stories about settlement of the islands.
The Polynesians "remember" the ancestral
migrations which brought them to the islands
where they now live. Oral history preserves
the names of major ancestors who came from
the other side of the ocean and are revered as
gods. All the details of these voyages (the
names of canoes, the chiefs, priests and the
famous artists, as well as the objects, plants
and animals they brought with them) are
familiar to the descendants of the founders.
In the minds of the indigenous peoples,
the origins of the islands and their settlement
are connected. This link is ritually reaffirmed
at great annual festivals. Veneration for ances¬



tors permeates all social life. Once upon a time
they came from the sky and the sea, and now
they turn up in the islanders' dreams, enabling
the living to communicate with the spiritual
world of gods and impersonal natural forces.
These relationships with the ancestors take
many forms. Some prestigious goods, like cer¬
emonial objects or those used in rites such as
births, marriages and funerals, have a collective
value, because they make the link between the
ancestors and the living the transmission of
spiritual power (mana), the ancestors' bless¬
ing of the living.
Depictions of ancestors, whether full-face,
sitting or standing, are among the most pow¬
erful works of art in Oceania. In wood, stone
or ivory, they are found from eastern Indone¬
sia to Polynesia. The finest and most dramatic
examples are on the eastern edge of the Pacific,
on Easter Island, where the huge moai erected
on dry-stone terraces by the shore recall the
mana of the divine ancestors to which the
inhabitants of the island once gave sacrifice.
The long-eared moai look out across the sea
whence the spirits of the ancestors came, sen¬
tinels of the route they took. H
Opposite page, the shores of
Whitsunday Island,
Queensland (Australia).
© Yann Arthus-Bertrand/Tarth from /Iboire/UNESCO
