Outward-looking pioneers in the 19th century set the scene
for contemporary theatre in the Arab world
The Lebanese playwright
Roger Assaf wrote, directed
and acted in Samar, above
(1997).
I In February 1848, a Beirut merchant
I named Marun Al Naqqash (1817-55),
put on in his own home a performance of 'Al
Bakhil, a play based on Molièrc's L'Avare.
When the curtain rose he stood before the
audience and delivered a prologue in true eigh¬
teenth and nineteenth century European style.
He promised to introduce his people to a new
artistic form, "a literary theatre . . . which shall
be Western gold in an Arab mould". This
form, he added, was of two kinds: drama and
opera. "It would have been much easier for
me," he said, "to start with the former but I
decided to take the harder course . . . because it
is more likely to meet with the approval of
the audience and delight them. I trust that I
have made the right choice . . . and that you will
benefit from this theatre, for it teaches . . .
proper manners, proffers good advice, pol¬
ishes and refines."
Al Naqqash went on to develop his adap¬
tative approach, still embryonic in Al Bakhil,
in plays which were based on The Arabian
Nights and performed in a playhouse which
he built for the purpose. After his death, his
brother Nicolas and his nephew Salim contin¬
ued his work, taking French theatre as their
major source of ideas and material. But faced by
what they considered insufficient appreciation
for their efforts they left for Egypt where they
contributed to a budding dramatic movement.
Meanwhile another merchant, Sheikh
Abou Khalil Qabbani (1836-1902), was doing
in Damascus what Marun Al Naqqash had
started in Beirut, although unlike Al Naqqash
he was not versed in foreign languages and had
not travelled abroad. He may have seen per¬
formances of Italian operettas by visiting
troupes and plays staged by Turkish actors,
but on the whole he was solidly rooted in the
local tradition. His major source was The Ara¬
bian Nights.
Al Qabbani set out to establish theatre in
Arab society as a form of entertainment that
was deeply rooted in tradition yet open to
new ideas and to the outside world. He failed
because conservative forces plotted against him
with the authorities in Istanbul and did not

give up until orders were given for his theatre
to be closed.
Like Salim Al Naqqash and others from
Beirut, Al Qabbani packed up and left for
Egypt, where a young man named Ya'coub
Sannu' (or Abou Naddara as he preferred to
be called) had launched a new theatre move¬
ment. As a young man Ya'coub Sannu' had
been sent to Europe, where he learnt languages
and developed a passion for the theatre. On his
return to Egypt he worked with European
troupes whose repertoire consisted mainly of
operettas and farces and decided to emulate
them. Initially using these two Western forms,
he drew upon aspects of local tradition that
were conducive to the development of musical
drama. His characters were deeply rooted in the
social fabric and used the vibrant spoken Ara¬
bic of everyday life. With Sannu' the Western
gold and the Arab mould merged very well
although one sometimes wonders which is the
gold and which is the mould. The written text,
the form, and the Italian frame stage were West¬
ern-inspired innovations, but everything else
was deeply rooted in popular tradition.
Sannu' wrote scores of plays, most of
which were performed with him as principal
actor, director, producer and prompter. The
majority of his plays dealt with contemporary
issues, often in a comic vein. Many had polit¬
ical overtones which made him enemies and
alienated some of his former friends and spon¬
sors including the Khedive himself. His theatre
survived for only two years until it was closed
down by the authorities.
Traditional shadow theatre
Further west, traditional Arab forms were
holding their own in Tunisia, Algeria and
Morocco. All three countries had an active
shadow play theatre tradition. One form, fea¬
turing a satirical figure called Garaguz, was
banned by the French authorities in Algeria in
1848 on account of its anti-French political
bias. In addition to Garaguz, shadow theatre in
both Morocco and Tunisia featured a raivi or
narrator who told stories to a musical accom¬
paniment. In Morocco the Islamic Ashura fes¬
tival was celebrated with performances remi¬
niscent of medieval miracle plays. Western
forms, except for Sicilian marionettes, were late
reaching the Maghreb countries, and Western
influence only began to make itself felt when
travelling Egyptian companies visited Tunisia,
Algeria and Morocco at least half a century after
Al Naqqash, Al Qabbani and Sannu'.
Until the middle of the twentieth century,
successive generations of theatre practitioners
carried on where the pioneers had left off. The
end product almost invariably appealed to
local taste, speaking the language of the audi-
A Midsummer Night's Dream
by William Shakespeare,
directed by Khaled Galal
(Egypt).
ence, which was often drawn into the action
despite the increasing impact of the distance
imposed by the Italian frame indoor stage
earlier traditional performances usually took
place outdoors in courtyards.
Many translations were made of works by
European dramatists such as Racine, Corneille,
Shakespeare, Sheridan and Goldoni. Most of
them were adaptations in which translators
and directors "improved" texts or adjusted
them to suit contemporary taste. Romeo and
Juliet, for example, rendered as Martyrs of
Love, ended happily and was full of song and
music. During this productive period Arab
theatre professionals considered the world
drama tradition as their own and used it freely,
often shaping it to their needs. There were
perhaps more theatres per head of population
in the Arab world then than there are today
and intejise activity in the theatre generated
widespread interest and debate about the
objectives of drama and the forms of Arabic
that should be used in it.
George Abyad (1880-1962) was one major
figure in the history of the Arab theatre in
this period. He became widely known for the
formal style and eloquent literary language of
his adaptations of Western plays, mainly

French classics, but soon turned to Arabic
plays. By virtue of his foreign training which
dictated the kind of plays he chose and his
exaggerated acting style he helped to move
Arab theatre away from its traditional popu¬
lar audience to a more cultivated and more
intellectual public.
For much of the first half of the twentieth
century there were two types of play in Arab
theatre. On the one hand therewere "serious"
literary translations of Western plays and orig¬
inal Arabic "literary" compositions; on the
other therewere the situation comedies, farces
and musicals which constituted the daily fare
of the commercial theatre. With a few excep¬
tions, notably Tewfik Al Hakim, there was
very little creative talent at work in Arab the¬
atre by the mid-1950s. Much had been
achieved, however, particularly in Egypt, where
a Higher Institute for Dramatic Art and a
national theatre company had been established.
The call ofmodernity
A new era in the history of modern Arab
drama began in the late 1950s with the devel¬
opment of a type of communal drama which
could contribute to the wider socio-political
A dramatization of Crime and
Punishment, based on Fyodor
Dostoyevsky's novel, directed
by Farid Al Zahiri (Yemen).



awakening. The entire Arab world was
responding to the call of modernity by devel¬
oping its academic and cultural institutions,
interacting with the outside world and react¬
ing to its challenges.
The fifth of June 1967, marking defeat in
the Six-Day War, brought home to many Arabs
the need for political stability and transparency,
democracy, dialogue and debate, objective analy¬
sis and freedom from rhetoric. It was thought
that drama could contribute to this process by
drawing on and contributing to national iden¬
tity, without however excluding foreign cul¬
tural influences. Direct imitation of Western
plays was to be shunned, but translation was
encouraged and assimilation promoted.
In countries such as Egypt, Syria, Lebanon
and Iraq, specialist drama magazines were
started, national or state-supported theatres
were promoted and national theatre compa¬
nies formed. Artistes were sent abroad for train¬
ing and foreign troupes were warmly welcomed.
In the universities student drama throve. The
coming of television brought performers an
additional source of income which further con¬
solidated their financial and social status. Cul¬
tural co-operation agreements with other coun¬
tries, socialist countries in particular, opened
important venues for the study of such arts as
puppetry, ballet, folk dance, music, acting,
directing and film-making. Altogether, the
1960s were a time of intense activity in the per¬
forming arts not only in Egypt but practically
everywhere else in the Arab world.
Representative figures of the effervescence
of the 1950s and 1960s included Nu'man
Ashur, Yusuf Idris, Alfred Farag, Mikhail
Roman and Mahmoud Dyab, all playwrights
working in Egypt; Roger Assaf and Nidal
Ashkar (back from France and England respec¬
tively), Yacoub Shadrawi (back fom Moscow)
and the Rahbani brothers (pioneers of the
operetta revival in Lebanon and the Arab
world) in Lebanon; Saadalla Wannous (back
from Cairo and Paris) and Rafiq Sabban (back
fom Paris) in Syria and Yusuf El Ani in Iraq.
Audienceparticipation
They all believed in the theatre as a moral and
political force and shared a determination to
produce good theatre based on tradition with¬
out being inward-looking. Yusuf Idris led the
call for "an Egyptian theatre", arguing that
most of the plays produced were Egyptian in
dress, dialogue, characters and situations but
Western in structure and style. He advocated a
return to AlSamer, that combination of one-
man chorus, narrator, entertainer and Shake¬
spearean fool, who worked alone or with one
assistant and perhaps a dancer, drawing on the
circle of onlookers around him.

Al Samer, Idris argued, always achieved the¬
atricality, meaning the active participation in
the action of all the people present, actors and
audience alike. "If the action involves dancing, all
must dance; if it involves singing, all must sing.
Sender and receiver, actor and audience, must
become one; both sending and receiving". The
performance should be based on a text but
should allow for much improvisation on the
part of both cast and audience. Breaking through
the barrier between stage and audience is a feature
of ancient Egyptian and Mesopotamian rites,
classical Greek theatre, of the age of Shakespeare
and of course of contemporary European and
Eastern theatre. Idris knew this but did not
seek to use audience participation as a mere tech¬
nique or device; he wanted it to permeate the
whole performance, expressing the collective
folly, or wisdom, of the community.
A few years after Idris had put forward his
theory about Al Samer and put it into prac¬
tice in Al Farafir, Saadalla Wannous (1940-
1997) published his Manifestos for a New
Arab Theatre in which he, like Idris, but per¬
haps more forcefully, put the emphasis on the
public and the relationship between the pub¬
lic and the stage. The ultimate aim of a per¬
formance, he wrote, is to make us "come out
of our skin, unite in one group, and become
aware of our common destiny as a group, and
of the laws governing that destiny."
A chaque parfum, une fleur,
written and directed by
Rida Drira (Tunisia). Wannous translated his ideas into a play,
An Evening Entertainment for the Fifth of
June, that was a major landmark in his career. In
this play the line between actors and audience
gradually disappears until the director/actor
shouts in fear and consternation "what is all
this leading to? Has the theatre turned into a
public square or what?" This is exactly what
Wannous wanted: the theatre turns into a pub¬
lic square regardless of the consequences, which,
in the play, are the detention by the authorities
of the entire audience.
Wannous used the play-within-a-play
device in several of his later works, often in
conjunction with the device of the café story
teller. He explored history simultaneously
through the eyes of narrators and listeners,
who are the audience both within and out¬
side the play-within-thc play. He wanted to
generate this kind of dialogue in what he called
the theatre of politicization, which is in many
respects both total theatre and theatre as enter¬
tainment.
Much of what Wannous advocates may
echo Brecht, Piscator, Peter Brook or Peter
Weiss, but much of what he practised is also
reminiscent of the work of the three major
pioneers, Al Naqqash, Al Qabbani and Sannu'.
Wannous repeatedly calls on us to turn to
them since he feels they represent an outward-
looking approach to theatre.
