VILLAGE BANKING: A REPORT
FROM 5 COUNTRIES BY RUPERT SCOFIELD
HONDURAS
For as long as anyone can remember, the
women of Siguatepeque, a rural pueblo in cen¬
tral Honduras, have produced ceramics. You
can see them for sale on the side of the high¬
way that runs between the capital city of Tegu¬
cigalpa and the northern city of San Pedro
Sula: great stacks of flower pots, urns, plates
and ornamental pieces in the shapes of roost¬
ers, parrots, dogs, cats and caimans.
Six years ago, most of the women worked
for a man let's call him Don Alejandro
who purchased the pottery the women made,
and resold them to a wholesaler who trucked
them to retail markets in Tegucigalpa. The
women of Siguatepeque were poor, and dis¬
organized. Most of them sold the pieces as
fast as they made them, for a fraction of what
Don Alejandro and the retailers earned on
them. They had no choice: they needed the
money to buy their daily food.
Kaabong women of Uganda
make bricks with which to
build a Women's Enterprise
Centre, assisted by the World
Food Programme's Food for
Work programme.
32
m THE UlNESCO ^_OURIERB JANUARY 1997

In 1990, when I was looking for a suitable
place for the first village bank to be organized
by the Foundation for International Com¬
munity Assistance (FINCA) in Honduras, a
friend of mine suggested I go to Siguatepeque.
The organizational meeting took place with
about thirty women, in Don Alejandro's
house. Our host was quite chagrined when,
halfway through the meeting, I explained that
the bank was for women only. Still, Don Ale¬
jandro was a good sport, and supported the
idea that FINCA would make $50 loans to
the assembled women to invest however they
felt best, and that, four months later, they
would repay the loan with interest of 3 per
cent per month. Another condition of the
loan, I explained, was that they would save at
least 20 per cent of it, or $10.
I kept waiting for some of the women to
drift away, or to be scared off by the interest
or the savings requirement, but they all
remained, nodding solemnly, as if they under¬
stood and were in complete agreement. I didn't
tell them it was only the second time I had
organized a village bank. But as I was to learn
from this and subsequent organizing meet¬
ings, they all go this way. It was as if the
women already knew how the system worked.
It was that simple.
In those days, FINCA had few resources,
and I was unable to return to Siguatepeque to
conduct the follow-up meetings with the
women. Fortunately, the village banking man¬
ual I had left behind with the women fell into
the hands of an enterprising Peace Corps vol¬
unteer, and one month after I had left I received
a letter from the women of Siguatepeque which
read: "Dear Mr. Scofield: Carolina, the volun¬
teer, has helped us organize our village bank,
which we have named "Pinos del Porvenir"
("Pines of the Future"). We have had our four
meetings, and we all understand how the bank
works. Please send us a check for $1,500."
It was almost four months before I could
return to Siguatepeque. I watched as the Pres¬
ident, Graciela, ran the meeting. The first thing
I noticed was the palpable change in attitude.
In sharp contrast to my first meeting with
the women, today they were all smiles. Check¬
ing the books, I saw that all the loans were
current, and that the group had savings of
almost $1,000, after only three months.
I asked the women what they had done with
the loans. "I spent it on food for my family,"
woman after woman said. I was appalled. "But
how can you be paying off the loans?" Graciela
explained to me that the FINCA loans had
enabled them to purchase a month's supply of
food, which had taken the pressure off them to
sell their ceramics as fast as they produced them.
Instead, they produced a month's stock, with¬
holding it from Don Alejandro and the other
middlemen until the price was more favourable.
The village bank loans had given them power in
the marketplace.
Another satisfied customer!
A lender receives a loan at a
village bank in Uganda. Today, "Pinos del Porvenir" is independent
of FINCA, and has several thousands of dol¬
lars in savings, which capitalize the bank's loans
to its members. The women no longer sell to
middlemen, but have their own retail store.
FINCA Honduras, meanwhile, has grown
from a shoestring operation to a financially
self-sufficient lending institution servicing
1 3,000 low-income borrowers in several regions
of the country. The experience of the women of
Siguatepeque has been repeated many times.
Some of the village banks in Siguatepeque, in
fact, went on to "graduate" and become clients
of the local commercial bank.
FINCA has derived a number of lessons
from the Siguatepeque experience. Most impor¬
tant, perhaps, is the fact that a mere $50 loan can
catalyze a process of individual and commu¬
nity development, which appears to be self-
sustaining. Second, is the idea that the bor¬
rowers, in possession of far more information
regarding local conditions than we outside
"experts", arc better prepared to determine how
to invest that loan. Finally, there is the evidence
that village banking can create a three-tiered self-
sufficiency: at the borrower, community, and
even national levels. If this kind of result can be
replicated on a massive, worldwide scale, then
rescuing many of the over one billion people
living in poverty today may not be as daunting
a challenge as we imagined.
IPERUI
The village bank "Union y Progreso" ("Union
and Progress") is located in a crime-ridden
shanty town on the southern border of Lima
(Peru). Like many other "pueblos jóvenes"
("young towns") surrounding the Peruvian
capital, this one was established by squatters
fleeing the violence of the "Shining Path" Guer¬
rillas, and the impossibility of scratching out
THE UNESCO ^>UR1ER |ANUARY 1997 ^

a living from agriculture on the rapidly eroding,
parched soils of the Andean highlands. From
the outside, the village bank President's house
bears little resemblance to a bank. The walls are
a conglomeration of scavenged lumber, card¬
board, and corrugated metal, and the roof is a
patchwork of the same, weighted by stones to
prevent the strong winds from blowing them
away. As a deterrent to housebreakers, the top
of the wall is crested with an intimidating glaze
of broken glass, barbed wire and nails.
Inside, the eighteen members of "Union
and Progress" are holding their meeting. The
Treasurer and President are giving the financial
report, with the aid of two large sheets of
paper, upon which the bank's "vital signs"
have been recorded with a pink magic marker.
After two years, the eighteen members of
"Union and Progress" have saved a total
$12,322, or almost $700 apiece. An examination
of the bank's records reveals that, through
active relending of their savings, the members
have generated an additional $55,278 in loans
over the past four months. This dwarfs the
mere $7,200 which FINCA Peru has lent to
the group. The interest income from these
"internal account" loans is $1,100.
Other income has been generated from fines
on borrowers whose payments were made late.
A late payment on cither an internal account
loan or external account carries a fine of 10 soles
(about $4.50). This goes into a pot shared by
only those who had perfect payment records.
The women of "Union and Progress" came up
with this carrot-stick system themselves. It
strikes me as ingenious. An institutional
approach would be to focus exclusively on the
punitive side, the fines. I intend to sec that this
idea gets disseminated to the other 3,000 village
banks in the FINCA network. Most of the



good ideas incorporated into village banking
methodology have arisen in this way, from the
borrowers themselves. The concept of the
"internal account" the relending of the bor¬
rowers' savings, among themselves and to the
community at large came from a village bank
in the border town of Sasabc, Mexico.
Now it is the turn of the borrowers, to
ask questions or to make comments. I listen to
the testimony of Maria Ponte, aged sixty-five,
who is leaving the bank, returning to the
mountain town of Puno to live with her son.
She thanks FINCA Peru for bringing the vil¬
lage bank to their community, and the mem¬
bers for trusting and supporting her. "I used
to be thin as a stick. Now, thanks to FINCA,
I have meat on my bones (she holds up her
biceps and squeezes her flesh). I can afford to
take vitamins. I have $683 in savings. I used to
be afraid to borrow money. When I got my
first loan from FINCA, I was shaking. This
cycle, I borrowed and repaid $1,867 from the
internal account in four months. We used to
be afraid of dollars. In FINCA, I learned to
save and borrow."
V THEUNESCO QiURIER« JANUARY 1997
M grocery shop in Honduras
funded by a loan from FINCA.
The Honduran affiliate of
FINCA is the foundation's
second largest.
With an average savings rate of $281 .57 per
member, Peru has the largest savings-to-loans
ratio in the FINCA network. In all, FINCA's
68,000 borrowers have saved $3.6 million over
the past ten years, up 80 per cent from just
two years ago. This money has not been fun-
neled off to commercial banks in the capital,
or sent offshore to Miami or Switzerland. It
remains in the poorest communities of the
world, working to create jobs and income on
the bottom floor of the economy. Clearly,
microcnterprise has great potential for what
my economics professor used to call "capital
formation: the engine of development."
EL SALVADOR
In 1991, Maribel Escobar Avalos' situation
seemed desperate. Having witnessed the destruc¬
tion of her first home in an earthquake in 1 985,
and her second in a guerrilla offensive in 1 989,
she had few possessions other than the clothes
on her back. At the same time, she was sup¬
porting a family of nine, including an unem¬
ployed male companion, her scventy-three-
year-old father, an invalid brother, two
daughters, a son, a son-in-law, and a niece. But
Maribel had learned from her mother in the
markets of El Salvador how to sell. In a bold
gamble, she sold what little she had left to make
the down payment on a corner house lot in
the western El Salvador town of El Sunsa.
The first year in El Sunsa was one of sacri¬
fice and struggle. Totally decapitalized, the Esco¬
bar family spent the year in a makeshift shack
of cardboard, with palm fronds for a roof.
Their food budget was so small that often their
only nutrition came from a concoction Mari¬
bel calls sopa de monte ("weed soup").
It was in these conditions that Maribel dis-

covered the FINCA Micro-Enterprise Sup¬
port Center. The MSC made Maribel the first
loan of her life, $50, which she invested in the
purchase and sale of used clothing. Over the
next two years, through her skill in selling,
and access to ever-larger loans, Maribel began
to diversify. First she established a small gro¬
cery store. Then a restaurant. Finally, she began
to supply fruit and vegetables to other traders
in El Sunsa. Eventually, these activities pro¬
vided employment for the entire family. Along
the way, Maribel accumulated $805 in cash sav¬
ings in her village bank. Today, on the corner
lot which used to host a ramshackle choza of
cardboard and palm fronds, a comfortable
four bedroom brick house stands. The store
front room houses the store and restaurant,
with an electrified "Orange Crush" sign fea¬
turing the name "Restaurante y Pupuseria El
Canalito."
As she sends her children off to high school
(she herself never progressed beyond third
grade), Maribel explains her formula for suc¬
cess. "My whole life, I've worked hard, getting
up at 5 a.m. and going to bed at 9 p.m. But
the difference is, now we are saving. The more
we save, the more we can borrow. The more we
borrow, the more we can sell. The more we
can sell, the greater our income."
UGANDA!
Prior to 1992, the women of Kimantu village
in southeastern Uganda, near the sources of the
Nile, had never managed their own money or
run a business, let alone received credit. What
little money did pass through their hands had
to be begged from their husbands, even to
buy food for their children. When I first
described how the village bank would work,
one of the women in the village asked me how
much money FINCA would lend them.
"Fifty thousand shillings," I replied, which
was the equivalent of $50. This was a tense
moment for me: I had been assured by the
Executive Director of another non-govern¬
mental organization working in Uganda that
the women would turn up their noses at such
a paltry sum.
The woman gasped and nearly fainted. She
assured me that 50,000 shillings was too much;
she could never take responsibility for paying
back such a princely sum. In the end, at the
urging of her neighbours, she agreed to accept
half that amount, splitting the loan with
another woman in the bank.
When I returned to Kimantu, four months
later, I found the women, and the village,
transformed. They had repaid their loans, 100
per cent. They had saved in excess of the
required 20 per cent. "The thing I like best
about the village bank," one woman told me,
"is that I have learned to start a business and to
manage money." The woman who had been
too timid to borrow 50,000 shillings now
told me she intended to borrow 100,000.
I he treasurer of a village
bank in Kyrgyzstan in central
Asia records repayments. The men in the village, who had initially
viewed the village bank with suspicion, now
welcomed it. As the Kimantu village chief told
me: "When the women first started to hold
their meetings, we men were concerned. We
thought they were talking about divorcing
us. But then, when we saw them earning
money, and they no longer came to us for
money to buy salt, and pay school fees, we
saw that the village bank was a good thing.
But Mr. Scoficld, I have one question." "And
what is that?" I asked. The chief grinned. "Can
you create a village bank for us men?"
In many communities of Uganda, Aids
has left its brutal imprint, sweeping away hus¬
bands, wives, and sometimes entire families. In
most cases, however, the children survive, to be
raised by the village as a whole. Many Ugandan
village bankers are supporting not only their
own children, but those orphaned by deceased
relatives and neighbours. It is an intensely sad,
but at the same time inspiring experience to
meet these selfless, struggling mothers.
"Women who are in village banks are seen as the
most responsible members of the commu¬
nity," was the way one observer put it. "It is
natural that people look to them, when they
THE UNESCO ^URIERB |ANUARY1997 35

want a secure future for the children they leave
behind."
IKYRGYZSTAN
Can microcnterprise succeed in a country
where, until recently, private enterprise was
officially discouraged, considered immoral,
and, in some cases, even outlawed? In 1994,
FINCA established the first village banks in
the newly independent state of Kyrgyzstan,
Central Asia, in the capital city of Bishkek.
With the snow-capped Himalayas as a back¬
drop, Bishkek is a city just coming to life,
economically, after years of surviving on sub¬
sidies from mother Russia. Today, an esti¬
mated 15 per cent of the population is unem¬
ployed, and more expected as state-run
enterprises are privatized or closed altogether.
Increasingly, the population is moving to self-
employment as an alternative to the meagre
wages of the public sector.
Today, the village bank Bereke ("Bless¬
ing") is receiving its first loan. Village banks are
smaller in Kyrgyzstan than in other countries
in the FINCA network, reflecting an added
cautiousness on the part of the members
towards their neighbours, the vast majority of
whom have never operated a business. FINCA
has learned to respect the members' apprecia¬
tion of local conditions as being far superior
to its own, and seldom intervenes in decisions
regarding the selection of the bank's mem¬
bers, or in the loan approval process. In this
case, most of the fifteen borrowers will be
investing their loans in consumer goods, to be
sold in the local market. A great feast for the
visitors was laid out on a gorgeous, hand-
woven rug in the village bank president's liv¬
ing room. Other rugs, of equally dazzling pat¬
terns, adorned the walls. These rugs, which
sell domestically for less than $10, can com¬
mand over $100 in export markets. Though
it was only mid morning, glasses of brandy
were offered and accepted.
The meeting began, presided over by a
democratically elected President, Treasurer and
Secretary. The President followed the standard
village bank agenda: financial report, approval
and disbursement of loans, and collection of
obligatory and voluntary savings. Besides the
small size of the village banks, the methodol¬
ogy has suffered little modification in its adap¬
tation to the Kyrgyz context. Contrary to
initial warnings that no one would be inter¬
ested in small loans in Kyrgyzstan, FINCA has
found the demand to be strong. To date,
FINCA Kyrgyzstan has reached 2,300 bor¬
rowers, and, in a country of five million, the
word is just beginning to spread.
