Ideas have always followed in the wake of trade,
war and religion
UN THE ROAD
BY FRANÇOIS-BERNARD HUYGHE
Isetail of an early
16th-century Venetian map of
the African coastline.
How do ideas travel? It may seem
incongruous to ask such a question
in a magazine that is published in sev¬
eral dozen languages and is read all
over the world. If we make no distinction
between the notions of representation, belief
and information, and regard "ideas" very
broadly as all those products of a human mind
that can be appropriated by another mind,
then we see that ideas do nothing but travel. It
is no more surprising to find that there are
practising Buddhists in California, that
Euclid's theorems are studied in China and
that Latin American politics are debated in
Australia than it is for a European to watch a
Japanese-made television or wear cloth woven
in Pakistan.
Globalization, a notion which attempts
to describe recent changes and which has itself
travelled, designates the circulation of mater¬
ial goods as well as the intangible circuits of
knowledge, patterns of thought and judge¬
ments. Current philosophical and political
trends in the West strongly approve of the
m
indach
: x>3 JZAJigv
: -

creative potential of the free flow of ideas that
technology seems to promote. True, there is
debate about which views ought not be
allowed to spread, whether control of the
media does not sometimes lend itself to intel¬
lectual manipulation, and whether, metaphor¬
ically speaking, the bad money of stereotypes,
disinformation and triviality does not drive
out good. But the question of how ideas travel
arouses relatively little interest, so completely
docs it seem to have been solved.
This is to pass lightly over the fact that an
idea is an invisible entity made visible by traces
left by its passage and that it cannot change
the world unless it travels. Except in the nec¬
essarily limited case of direct verbal commu¬
nication, obstacles and intermediaries come
between the inception of an idea and the brain
of the person who picks it up, sometimes
much later or in a faraway place.
To conquer time and space an idea must
endure and it must move. It must be stored in
a memory and be transported. Of course, dur¬
ing the performance of these operations,
which may take a few fractions of a second
on the Internet or centuries in the case of cer¬
tain religious beliefs the idea changes. There
may be many reasons for this change, includ¬
ing the vagaries of translation, distortions
introduced by intermediaries or copyists, the
format required for transmission, and other
factors such as loss, censorship, interference
and interpretation. Movement has changed
the message.
* Intellectual highways
Ideas spread along routes which are changed by
technological innovation. Printing increased
the number of books and made the preserva¬
tion of ideas less dependent on the risks of



copying, destruction, censorship or a broken
journey. With the invention of the telegraph,
messages for the first time travelled faster than
people. On the airwaves words (and soon after,
images) no longer travelled from place to place
but covered whole territories, defying fron¬
tiers and walls. With telematics and the inter¬
connection of millions of computer memo¬
ries, recording, researching and transmitting
data has become almost a single operation.
During most of human history ideas were
conveyed in small numbers and with diffi¬
culty, peddled with a human escort moving
slowly in dangerous conditions. In short,
along roads. For centuries there was no dif¬
ference between the movement of people and
the movement of ideas and material goods.
Consigned to manuscripts and illustrated by
images or simply memorized by scholars or
the Adoration of the Magi
(detail), by the Italian painter
Andrea Mantegna (1431-
1506).
religious believers, ideas travelled on horse¬
back or by camel, in the holds of ships or at
walking pace. The range, the cadence of prop¬
agation and ultimately the success of the tech¬
nology, scientific conceptions and religious
ideas we have inherited can be explained by all
the factors that have stimulated or handi¬
capped travel by land or sea.
Unesco has rightly adopted the theme of
routes to bracket together projects connected
with cultural dialogue and cross-fertilization.
These very ancient routes owe their names to
a precious commodity that was transported
along them: silk, iron, and even slaves. Other
routes were determined less by trade than by
the centre towards which they converged, e.g.
Jerusalem, the holy city of the three monothe¬
istic religions, and al-Andalus, the province
where three cultures lived in peace.
The metaphor is unequivocal: by road comes
all that is new, all that is exchanged and that
changes us, all that transcends and transforms us;

I exico City's first printing
. press was set up in 1539. It Is

because of the road there is always a little of shown here ¡n a contemporary
someone else in us and any attempt to make engraving,
identity an isolate can never succeed. Such con¬
tacts are not, of course, necessarily pleasant or
peaceful: invaders, persecutors, prisoners and
deportees also arrive by road. But if movement
distorts or alters ideas, the opposite is also true:
conquerors assimilate the civilization of the
defeated and the victims of slavery fertilize the
cultures of the lands to which they are exiled.
And so, just as there arc memorable places
which symbolize the common past of com¬
munities, there are also memorable routes:
geographical itineraries where traces of phys¬
ical movement associated with mental change
have survived. As well as the chronological
mystery veiling the preservation from gener¬
ation to generation of beliefs, patterns of
thought, knowledge, references and other
forms of representation, there is the geo¬
graphical mystery associated with their move¬
ment, the movement of intangible things. The
question of time is connected with that of
geographical range. By following the tangible
traces of intellectual transmission or the routes
taken by groups of travellers we can learn more
about the spread of iron or paper technology,
of astronomy or the figure zero, of Buddhism
or Islam, a legend or a form of music. We can
also find out about what happened to them
during their journey.
All thinking about the origin of cultures,
their complexity, the dialogue between them,
and cultural intermingling raises very precise
questions. What kind of people travelled?
How long did it take to travel and at what
cost in terms of loss of human life? What lan¬
guages did they speak? What kind of archives
did they keep? What letters did they write?
What images did they carry ?
Tinker, tailor, soldier, sailor. . .
Some of the greatest travellers were soldiers.
War encourages technological invention and
stimulates mechanisms of transmission. As
the victors settle in new lands, some popula¬
tions arc put to flight and others arc deported.
War also causes the intermingling of peoples,
beliefs and knowledge. The conqueror is some¬
times the first to understand the value of new
information. Alexander the Great's troops
were accompanied by scientific expeditions.
The Umayyad armies brought paper-makers
back from Central Asia. Tamerlaine spared
from massacre the scholars, writers and artists
he wished to enroll in his service. If espionage
is considered as warfare waged by other means,
we are beholden to it for the spread of many
secrets in the field of technology (the most
famous being that of silk manufacture), car¬
tography and the sciences.
The routes taken by ideas also dovetail with
those taken by merchandise. The quest for
products yielding profits compensating for
the time and risks involved in travel to dis¬
tant parts has always been one of the main rea¬
sons for scattering to the ends of the earth
people who were interested in setting up net¬
works and organizing safe and frequent travel,
and were in many cases adept at writing and
curious about novelty.
Merchants do not seek to change the world
or to describe it, and what they say or sec is not
always recorded or broadcast, but they spread
ideas and information as a kind of by-product
of their travels. More specifically trade has indi¬
rectly been one of the great vectors of religion.
Getting together in foreign lands and practising
their faith, traders have often made converts.
Arab traders propagated the Qur'an farther
afield than any of the Arab conquests of the
first century of the Hegira. For reasons of secu¬
rity it was often wise for the preacher's itiner-

ary to coincide with that taken by the merchant.
It is safer to travel with caravans or merchant
ships to cosmopolitan cities where the religious
message will get a better reception from an open-
minded public. This also explains why Bud¬
dhist monks also followed trade routes.
The universalist religions arc the third great
medium whereby ideas travel, in this case with
a deliberate purpose. Buddhism, Christianity
and Islam define the corpus of canonical texts,
the type of images and the kind of community
whereby the preachers of the faith should
spread salvation throughout the world. Such
questions foment doctrinal disputes and even
heresies. Should the Buddha's body be
depicted? Should the Prophet Muhammad be
painted? Should icons be allowed? Should the
Qur'an be translated or the Bible be propa¬
gated? Which Sutras belong to the accepted
canon? Who should interpret the word of the
Prophet? Should monks devote themselves
to their own personal nirvana or should they
be responsive to the concerns of laymen? To
what extent should Jesuits adapt the evangel¬
ical message to Chinese culture? The form
taken by a religious "idea" transposed thou¬
sands of kilometres results from the theoret¬
ical and practical answer to these questions.
Ideas are imported as well as exported. A
map of spiritual and intellectual poles of attrac¬
tion, starting with centres of pilgrimage, must
be overlaid on that of the propagation and
transformation of ideas. People from all over
the world meet and mix in Jerusalem, Mecca
and Santiago de Compostela. There, and on
much-used routes invested with a strong sym¬
bolic meaning, important cultural changes
come about. For centuries students converged
on the universities of Taxila, Bologna and the
Sorbonne. Sometimes the inclinations of a
prince or caliph attracted talented individu¬
als, gifted scientists or rare manuscripts. Those
who journeyed to the Library of Alexandria,
the "house of wisdom" in Baghdad, and the
court of Cordoba and the court of Roger II of
Sicily, were not seekers after salvation or the
fount of knowledge but bringers of ideas,
philosophers, physicians, astronomers and
translators who found material security and
intellectual stimulation.
What we see here is a complex set of phys¬
ical and mental barriers, topographical lines
of force and human strategics which decides
whether or not an idea crosses time and space,
whether a piece of writing produced in a par¬
ticular place and culture has an impact at the
other end of a continent. Was propagation
deliberate or accidental, due to expansion or
attraction? Did an idea travel from one place
to another slowly or as the result of a histor¬
ical cataclysm? Was its journey governed by
geographical constants or by the fortunes of
war, by the attraction of ancient crossroads
of civilization or by the discovery of a new
route? To understand where we have come
from, we still have far to go in retracing the
highways and byways of the past.
Ihe Mongol ruler Tahmaras,
the "fully armed", with an
Arab scribe. Detail of a
miniature from the Universal
History, a classic work by
Rashîd ad Dîn (1247-1318).
tt
