The theatre of the oppressed
BY AUGUSTO BOAL
Above, scene from a street
theatre show staged by the Luz
de la Luna company in Bogotá
(Colombia).
I Some people do theatre because it's their
I job, their craft or their calling. But all
men and women on Earth arc a theatre in
themselves. It's second nature to them.
In every one of us there's an actor some¬
one who acts and a spectator, who watches
the actor acting. We have the ability to watch
ourselves doing things. The other animals,
even in front of a mirror, don't recognize their
own reflection, so don't use it to improve
their own appearance. Cats don't look at them¬
selves in a mirror to smooth their whiskers
and lions don't comb their manes in front of
one. But we humans, even without mirrors,
can watch ourselves watching.
But we aren't content, any of us, to be just
actors and spectators of ourselves. We also
write our own scripts for every scene we are
involved in. We are in charge of the wardrobe
of costumes to be worn wherever we are (at
home, at work, during time off). We are also
the directors who stage our own actions.
So every human being is a miniature theatre.
The "theatre of the oppressed" is based on
this simple notion of elementary theatre,
where everyone is involved, whether trained
for it or not.
On stage, actors experience passions and
emotions just as wc do in real life. And we, in real
life, express ideas and feelings through dialogue,
movements and voice intonations, just like
actors. With one difference: the actor on stage is
aware of using theatrical language whereas wc
use language without this awareness (which is
why we aren't so good at using it).
Everybody, not just orators, is capable of
speaking. If we don't know how to swim in an
Olympic swimming pool, we can all splash

The conviction that there is an actor in each of us
is the driving force behind a form of drama that
seeks to awaken consciences and change lives
about in the bath. We have all kicked a football
around our backyards, even if we haven't
played at Wembley or Maracaná.
Some sports engulf entire nations like
football in Brazil, baseball in the United States
and table tennis in China but only some
athletes attain excellence. So it is with the the¬
atre. There are professionals, but everyone can,
and should, take part.
First steps
The theatre of the oppressed springs from
these basic ideas. It was born some years ago in
Brazil and elsewhere in Latin America when
military dictators first censored plays and
shows and then cracked down on theatre com¬
panies and actors.
At the time, I was running the Arena The¬
atre of Sào Paulo. They began by telling us
what plays wc should put on. The ones we
chose were all either banned or censored. Then
wc lost the theatre itself when they forced us
to make pointless alterations to it which wc
couldn't afford.
Each time, wc responded by devising new
kinds of activity. Wc ended up doing street
theatre and staging plays in trade union halls, A Salvadorian theatre group
in a play about domestic
violence (1996).
schools and churches. We had no money, so wc
had to do without scenery and costumes. We
acted in ordinary clothes.
In the end, we lost everything when the
police banned us from playing anywhere at
all. It was only then, when wc had neither the¬
atre, repertoire, scenery, costumes nor stars,
that we discovered the essential thing. Face-
to-face with our audiences, we realized how
like them we were, and also how different.
Wc had lost the rings on our fingers, but
not our fingers; our costumes but not our
bodies; our illusions but not our dreams. We
were like our audiences because we were human
beings like them. But we were also different
because we were specialists in a craft. We could
help the public make use of our craft.
This is how the first version of the Theatre
of the Oppressed was born. Wc called it
"Newspaper Theatre". We invented and devel¬
oped thirteen ways of turning newspaper arti¬
cles (or any other apparently non-dramatic
material) into plays. Then we went to our
audiences to tell them what we'd learned and
to help them write and produce their own
plays from texts they chose themselves.
For the first time, we were teaching our
public the "means of production" instead of
presenting them with a finished product. Wc
weren't telling them "what to do" but "how
to do it".
After we had set up dozens of popular
groups, wc had to stop because the dictator¬
ship was becoming harsher and harsher. After
many incidents, I had to leave the country
myself.
Fact orfiction?
The next version of Theatre of the Oppressed
surfaced in Argentina in 1971 and was called
"invisible theatre." The "El Machete" troupe
that I led put together a play about hunger
which was to take place, ironically, in a restau¬
rant. The script, a joint effort, was ready and
the production seemed OK. At first we wanted
to stage it in the street, but Brazilian friends
warned us. Argentina was going through a dif¬
ficult transition to democracy and as a Brazil¬
ian, I risked getting deported and handed over
to the Brazilian police.
In the end, my actors insisted that I should
take part in the show. One of them suggested
doing the play in a restaurant and having the
actors come in incognito as if they were genuine

customers and without revealing that it was
part of a play. I would go in before the others
and sit at a table in a quiet corner to eat my
steak. The actors would then come in and the
various scenes would follow. There was one
problem though. The play involved two wait¬
ers and a maître d'hôtel who would have to be
played by actors. How would the real waiters
and maître d'hôtel react to that?
We began the play while the other cus¬
tomers were eating and chatting. To our sur¬
prise and delight, at the very moment the
actors were supposed to speak, a real waiter
and the maître d'hôtel himself stepped up to
say almost exactly the words in our script.
We were fascinated by this experience where
Coup de poing sur la pointe du
couteau, a play written and
staged by Augusto Boat in
Paris in 1980.
fiction mingled with reality and became just as
real, at the same time as reality became a kind
of fiction. But what worried me was that the
audience took part in the action without real¬
ising they were in a play which itself was inside
a piece of reality. So where exactly were they, in
fiction or reality? For them, how far was fic¬
tion real and reality fictional?
Spectators on stage
I continued doing this kind of theatre in sev¬
eral countries, always very successfully but
always with some anxiety and also regret that
it could not be done in an open manner.


We entered a new phase in Chaclacayo, Peru ,
where we devised "Forum Theatre" as part of
the Alfin integrated literacy programme which
was based on the ideas of Paulo Freiré. I was
promoting literacy through the theatre. Oth¬
ers did it through film, silk-screen printing,
local languages or Spanish.
It was here that we first came up with a
play in which the main character didn't know
what he was supposed to do or else made
wrong or unsuitable decisions. So I asked the
audience what they would have done instead.
There was a lot of response. So I suggested
doing the play again with the same script, with
the addition that if a member of the audience
wanted to change something, they could stop
the play there and then. The person would
then take over from the actor and instead of

Opposite page, Augusto Boal
(centre) directs a workshop.
Right, warming up the
audience before a performance
(1980s).
just speaking, could explain his or her idea in
dramatic form.
So the audience could use the same stage
language as the actors to convey what they
thought, what they wanted and dreamt about,
and what they proposed. Everyone, freely and
knowingly, would be "talking theatre".
"Forum Theatre" has become the most pop¬
ular version of the Theatre of the Oppressed. At



the eighth International Festival of the Theatre
of the Oppressed, recently organized by the
Mixed Co. in Toronto (Canada), as well as at an
earlier festival put on in Rio de Janeiro by the
Centre for the Theatre of the Oppressed there,
more than thirty countries were represented
by theatre groups or "professional" users of
the Theatre of the Oppressed, such as teachers,
psychotherapists and social workers.
Internalized oppression
Later on, in exile in Europe, I came across
forms of oppression more insidious than
those in Latin America. My European friends
told me of the oppression of feeling empty
inside, of being unable to communicate, of
being afraid of the future. At first I didn't
take these kinds of problems seriously. Then
I found that the suicide rate in the richest
countries was far higher than in Latin Amer¬
ica, and understood that if someone chose
death rather than loneliness, it was a kind of
oppression as real as any other.
At the Centre for the Theatre of the
Oppressed in Paris, over two years, Cecilia
Thumim and I developed elaborate ways of
expressing internalized oppressions, the ones
we carry around inside ourselves. As the fif¬
teenth-century Portuguese poet Sá de Miranda
put it, "my biggest enemy is the one inside
me, the one I carry in the core of my being."
When I got back to Brazil, I was elected a
Vereador (city councillor) in Rio de Janeiro.
I hired all the staff of my Theatre of the
Oppressed centre, and throughout my four-
year term wc worked with needy communities
(favelas), trade unions, schools, neighbour¬
hood associations and old people's groups,
landless peasants, black students, street chil¬
dren, Aids sufferers and others to create a sort
of "legislative theatre".
We helped our audiences-cum-playwrights
to write and produce their own plays, first in
their own communities and then as part of
"dialogues" between communities, so that
everyone could sec the oppression others suf¬
fered, and not just their own. Three times a
year, we put on an outdoor festival to let the
public know about us and give them a chance
to take part in our "forum" shows.
For each show, one of us wrote a proposal
which was sent to the "city council" where it
was studied by our lawyers. Sometimes, the
solution they recommended was an approach to
the mayor's office or else a street event. Or our

team would draft a law which I would present
to the real city council.
An opportunity for dialogue
In all, we presented about fifty proposed laws,
all of which came from the grassroots. They
were about protecting old people, children,
handicapped people and witnesses to crimes
(to put an end to impunity, one of the
scourges of Brazilian society), as well as mea¬
sures against racism and all other forms of dis¬
crimination.
Thirteen of them were taken up by the
council and became laws. So thirteen times we
managed to make wishes come true, in the
form of laws now in force all over Rio.



Why is the Theatre of the Oppressed so
amazingly successful? First, we don't try to
expound a message or a revealed truth. We try
to ask the right questions instead of giving
what wc think are the right answers. Next, we
offer a simple system of exercises, games and
methods which anyone can handle but which
can also be used for very complicated things
like psychotherapeutic introspection. Thirdly,
we create an opportunity for freedom which
produces dialogue. All of us want to talk with
people, to know their views and have the
chance to express our own.
We know our identity is the result of what
we are, but also of what others are and of what
we are not. I am a man because there arc women,
white because there arc black people, a father
because I have children. Pluralism, differences
and diversity are at the core of our existence.
Because of them, we know who wc arc
So the Theatre of the Oppressed is neither
a closed dialogue with itself nor a collection of
rules and obligations. It's a language. As such, it
involves all areas of human activity, not just
politics. It concerns teaching the young, psy¬
chotherapy, literacy and even the theatre itself.
In 1997, 1 shall be having a new experience in
Stratford-upon-Avon in England. With the
Royal Shakespeare Company and using the
play Hamlet, we arc going to see if we can apply
the psychotherapeutic methods described in
my book The Rainbow of Desire to helping
the actors get to grips with their roles.
This fascinating experiment has a great sym¬
bolic meaning for me. It means official recog¬
nition (for Shakespeare, I don't know how
much more official you can get than the Royal
Shakespeare Company) that the Theatre of
the Oppressed is truly theatre.
