REACHING
THE UNREACHED
BY SAYEEDA RAHMAN
vcr the past two decades, local
I institutions in different parts of
the world have developed innov¬
ative mechanisms to provide credit
and savings facilities for those who were tra¬
ditionally excluded from the formal financial
sector. These "microfinance institutions"
(MFIs) have devised original financial services
delivery systems for the very poor and have
succeeded in reaching segments of the popu¬
lation previously unreached by such facilities.
They have demonstrated that, contrary to
conventional wisdom, the poor are good credit
risks and have high savings propensity.
MFIs are now operating in rural and urban
areas of Asia, Latin America and Africa within
a wide range of social, cultural and economic
environments. They use different methodolo¬
gies, have a number of institutional arrange¬
ments and exist in a variety of policy settings,
but share a common concern: the alleviation of
poverty.
The methodology most frequently used
by the leading MFIs is that of "group lending"
to units ranging in size from small thrce-to-
tcn member "solidarity groups" to village
banks composed of approximately thirty to
fifty members. Group members collectively
guarantee loan repayment, and access to sub¬
sequent loans is dependent on successful
repayment by all of them. Risks and admin¬
istrative costs per borrower are thus reduced
and the group guarantee serves as a substitute
for collateral requirements.
Growing demand
MFIs provide very small short-term loans,
usually for twelve months. The prospect of
subsequent larger loans is a strong motivation
for repayment. Although most MFIs charge a
relatively high rate of interest, the repayment
rate is notable and demand is increasing, sug¬
gesting that it is not the cost but the timely
and continual availability of microfinancc
which is important for poor clients.
The initial focus was on micro-credit facil-
10 THE UNESCO ^)URIER JANUARY 1997

itics, and it tended to be forgotten that pro¬
vision for saving can be as important as credit
if not more so, for poor rural households. In
more recent programmes, however, increased
attention is being paid to mobilizing volun¬
tary savings in order to make loans more
widely available.
MFIs are based on the principle that provi¬
sion of financial services for the poor must be sit¬
uated in localities close to the clients, and func¬
tion as a set of small local units linked by a
central body. Several of them have made a specific
policy decision to target poor women, first
because access to resources and services is even
more difficult for them than it is for men, and
second because of their stronger repayment per¬
formance and willingness to form groups.
Although successful MFIs in different parts
of the world have removed conventional mis¬
conceptions about the "bankability" of the
poor, it must not be forgotten that their ser¬
vices do not reach the majority of the world's
poor. Having overcome the initial obstacles to
M loan from the Grameen
Bank enabled this family in
Dhaka (Bangladesh) to build a
new house.
obtaining funds and authorization to set up
their programmes, the MFIs thus face the chal¬
lenge of expanding their operations. With this
in view they are trying to reach a stage where,
independent of external funds or subsidies, all
their costs arc met from interest charges, and
loan capital requirements are met by borrow¬
ing from local commercial sources.
So far, only a handful of commercial banks
have shown interest in taking on the microfi¬
nance client group. This is because the legal
and regulatory framework within which the
formal financial institutions operate is not
favourable to microfinance practices. Policies
which maintain interest rates artificially low,
especially for credit to the poor, do not allow
the banks to cover their costs and so they have
remained outside this field. A fresh approach
to this question would encourage the formal
banks to extend their reach to sections of the
population they have hitherto ignored.
Social and cultural
support programmes
Non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
have played a vital role in channelling credit
and other services to the poor, and growing
numbers of them arc moving towards trans¬
forming themselves into full-fledged institu¬
tions specializing in finance. NGOs working
at the grassroots level can help commercial
banks to reach the poorest clients in remote
areas and, where required, monitor, supervise
and collect loans.
But in order to alleviate poverty for more
than a billion people today, progress in the
field of microfinance will have to be comple¬
mented with supporting programmes and ser¬
vices, notably taking into account the social
and cultural dimensions of development. The
responsibility for devising mechanisms to
ensure that these additional services also reach
a maximum number of poor households
resides not with the MFIs but with other
development partners.
UNESCO is exceptionally well placed to take
up this challenge. It can contribute to the cam¬
paign to explore ways and means of increasing
access to microfinancc for the poor on a com¬
mercially viable basis and to develop new tech¬
niques for providing appropriate services to
this difficult-to-reach population. With this
in view, UNESCO has entered into a co-operation
agreement with the Grameen Bank (see page
23). It envisages similar forms of collaboration
designed to support the clients of other suc¬
cessful MFIs with complementary programmes
in the fields of education, science and technol¬
ogy, and culture and communication.
THL UNESCO f3>URILRB JANUARY 1097
