Islands of the imagination
BY ROBERT BAUDRY
A guided tour of some of world literature's many
fictional islands
Islands occupy a special place in our
mythologies, often as the scene of mys¬
terious or extraordinary occurrences. Being
cut off from the rest of the world, they are
depicted as sanctuaries where human contact
can be fled and danger escaped, or as places of
réclusion where atonement may be sought.
Clustered together, they offer many a bay and
inlet where boats can land. They may be the
abodes of monsters. Upon their shores tem¬
ples may be erected for the performance of
bloody sacrifices; there, pirates may alight,
bearing stolen treasures. Or they may be the
last gateway to paradise.
Because of all these associations islands have
always enjoyed special favour in the eyes of
storytellers, particularly those who write of
the supernatural.
But what is the supernatural? It may be
defined as that which arouses in us a sense of
mystery, a fascination before the revelation of
Another World. This is the first theme of
interest to us here the division between our
world and another world. But this other
world is itself ambiguous: like Janus, it has
two faces, one magical, the other monstrous.
Two different worlds
Detached from the mainland, islands mark a
separation from the everyday world. By their
very nature, they suggest an individual iden¬
tity, standing in opposition to a collective
destiny. Representing in each case a world apart ,
turned in on themselves, islands are governed
by laws different from those that hold sway
in other lands.
Already in the thirteenth-century parody of
Romance epic Aucassin et Nicolette, the place
chosen to represent the very opposite of our
world was an island, the island of Torelore,
where women make war, where men give birth,
and so on. J
The mainland is the place of ordinary life; |
islands are where extraordinary things hap- %
pen. They are the theatre of fabulous dreams, S
far removed from reality. Then again, where the i
mainland is represented in secular terms, |
islands embody the sacred, being the site of ¡
temples where sacrifices are performed with !
good or evil intent. And in contradistinction |
with our world of the living, islands often
symbolize the inaccessible realm of the dead.
The solitude of islands
The word "island" comes from the Latin in¬
sula and carries a sense of solitude, isolation,
loneliness. A patch of land surrounded by the
sea, a motionless boat washed by the waves, it
is the perfect symbol of man, at once pro¬
tected from his fellows and unhappily separate
from them. Ambivalence again!
One thinks of course of all the Robinsons
shipwrecked on a lonely shore, confined
within a universe closed in upon itself. But,
tellingly enough, the supreme example may
be said to be Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Ill at ease
in company, a lover of solitude, he sought
refuge on the island of Saint-Pierre in the mid¬
dle of Lake Biel in Switzerland, but found
that the spot still was not isolated enough for
his taste. So, having dispatched his lunch, he
cast off in a boat which he left to drift upon
the current. And there, in this floating island,
lulled by the lapping of the waves, he gave
himself up to daydreams that gradually devel¬
oped into a trance of ecstasy (Rêveries du
promeneur solitaire, 1782).
A place of refuge
Small wonder then that this place of solitude
has so often been seen as a refuge for those who
wish to flee human society and all its trials.
What better illustration of this could be
"The embarkation of Tristan
and Iseult", a miniature from a
15th-century manuscript of the
Tristan romance.
A longer version of this
article has appeared in Ile des
merveilles, Mirage, miroir,
mythe, Actes du Colloque
organisé à Cerisy-la-Salle
parle CERMEIL (Centre
de Recherches sur le
Merveilleux), L'Harmattan
publishers, Paris, 1997.

A detail from L'île
rieureuse("The Happy
Isle") by the French
artist Paul Albert
Besnard (1849-1934).
found than that offered by the French writer
Henri Bosco in L'Enfant et la rivière (1945).
Borne away by the current to an island on the
Durance river while asleep in a boat, the young
hero discovers a quarry where cruel nomads are
torturing a boy of his age. He sets him free and,
stealing a boat, escapes with him to an oxbow
lake off the river. There they shake off the fears
aroused in them by their sinister pursuers. They
thus find themselves doubly on an island: in
stagnant waters protected by a wall of brush¬
wood amidst hostile lands; and in a boat
moored in those waters, forming so to speak an
island within an island. What surer refuge fro m
the fury of those who would do them harm ?
The island as a stepping-stone
Such places can be reached only at the end of a
long journey. This embodies a process of initi¬
ation which often leads the hero from one island
to another, each representing a different experi¬
ence, until he reaches the ultimate island, the
ultima Thule, a fabulous land that the early
European geographers regarded as the further¬
most northern limit of the known world.

Everyone knows Homer's Odyssey and
Sindbad the Sailor, one of the episodes in the
famous collection of Arabian tales known as
The Thousand and One Nights. Fewerpeople
know the early Irish epic known as The Voyage
ofBrendan, which recounts the maritime expe¬
dition of the ancient Celtic god Brendan,
threading his way through a labyrinth of fab¬
ulous islands, each more extraordinary than
the last, or the later Voyage de Maëlduin. Sur¬
prisingly, The Voyage of Brendan was to be
adapted into Latin in the ninth century under
the title of the Navigatio sancti Brandini, with
the Celtic god becoming a Christian saint; and
then, around 1121, into Anglo-Norman, by
an archdeacon of Rouen, Benoit, before being
widely translated and circulated in Europe.
Aplace ofatonement
But islands are not always shelters, refuges,
havens of grace; nor momentary halts on the
way to some other destiny. Enclosed by the sea,
they can naturally serve as places of atonement.
What better example is there of this than
Robinson Crusoe (1719)? It tells the story of a
young man who, instead of minding his own
business in England and earning a living like
his parents, takes it into his head to follow a
perverse bent for adventure. Providence there¬
fore punishes him for the crime of scorning
the pursuit of honest trade at home by casting
him upon an inhospitable desert island, unin¬
habited by man or beast, without food or
tools. Such is the real meaning that Daniel Defoe
wished to give to his story. However, the old
myth of the blessed isle exercised so powerful
a hold on his readers' imaginations that before
long this place of purgatory came to be seen as
a paradise and inspired a score of imitations,
known generically as "Robinsonnades".
The home ofmonsters
Offering as they do a setting different from
that of the ordinary world, remote islands
naturally lend themselves to visions of mon¬
sters who are assumed to be their denizens.
Thus it was that Ulysses was at one
moment exposed to the danger of being
turned into a swine by the perfidious but
enticing enchantress Circe and, at another,
shipwrecked on the island of the Cyclops
where he ran a serious risk of ending up like his
companions as the one-eyed giant's breakfast.
But perhaps the most fabulous catalogue of
island monsters created by the fertile Celtic
imagination as embodied in the visions of sea¬
farers is to be found in The Voyage of Bren¬
dan and, in particular, in Le voyage de Maël¬
duin, which speaks of one island inhabited
by starving ants as big as ponies and another
by a fearsome horse with razor-sharp hooves
bristling with blue claws.
Following this tradition of island monsters,
later writers added their own: the creatures
devised by a mad scientist in The Island ofDoc¬
tor Moreau (1 896) by H. G. Wells; the charming
cannibals in Typee (1846) by Herman Melville on
Nuku-Hiva in the Marquesas Islands; the loath¬
some figure of the sadist Vorski sacrificing and
crucifying his victims on the sinister island of
Sarek at the far end of the earth in L'île aux
trente cercueils (1920) by Maurice Leblanc.
Right, detail showing Iceland
(top left) and marine monsters
from a map of Scandinavia by
Olaus Magnus (1490-1557), a
Swedish ecclesiastic and
scholar whose history of the
northern peoples appeared in
many editions and
translations.

And in our own time, was it not on an
island that the safari hunters discovered the
abominable King Kong, the giant ape in the
famous American film (1933) directed by Mcr-
ian Cooper and Ernest B. Schoedsack?
The home offairies
But just as, in the world of the imagination,


islands may be depicted as being the abodes
of monsters, so they may also be regarded as
the home of fairies. The bewitching, terrifying
Circe in the Odyssey finds a counterpoint in
the friendly and helpful Calypso. The dan¬
gers and horrors encountered during Le voy¬
age de Maëlduin alternate with wondrous
experiences. On one island grow magical apples
whose sweet juices provoke an ecstasy akin to
death. On another there is a palace reached by
a crystal bridge where a fairy woman dwells.
She offers the companions a cheese in which,
as in the legend of the Graal, each one finds the
taste he most prefers in the world. For them,
the three months they spend in the palace last
three years and end only with the appearance
of a fantastic bird, the bird of their regained
youth	
And what fabulous figures have been imag¬
ined by storytellers and writers: the fair Iseult,
worker of miracles in Ireland, towards whom
Tristan lets his coracle drift at the will of wind
and waves; or the Fair Queen ruling over
Andersen's The Garden ofParadise who per¬
fumes with flowers the Island of Bliss, a
delightful place where death is unknown and
where the hero is carried by the cast wind; or
again, the charming female Robinson por¬
trayed by Jean Giraudoux in Suzanne et le
Pacifique (1921).
Treasure Island
The secret wonders so readily associated with
islands may thus be embodied in places of
enchantment or fairy figures, but they may
also take the form of fabulous treasures. The
most perfect examples of islands containing
such treasures are of course depicted in The
Count of Monte-Cristo (1845) by Alexandre
Dumas and Treasure Island (1883), by Robert
Louis Stevenson.
This powerful myth still exercises its full
fascination today. Pierre Mac Orlan in Le chant
de l'équipage (1918) sends his hero to the
West Indies in seach of pirates' treasure, which
he finally discovers much nearer home an
adventure similar to that which befalls the
protagonist ofJean-Marie Gustave Le Clézio's
recent novel Le chercheur d'or (1985). And
why not also mention Red Rackham 's Trea¬
sure, the strip cartoon adventure featuring
Tintin drawn by Hergé, ever keen to revive
the old legends that haunt us?
A 17th-century Persian
miniature depicting a voyage
by Sindbad the Sailor, a hero
of The Thousand and One
Nights.
The last stage in an initiatory
journey
So numerous are the horrors and obstacles
bestrewing the path of the hero, so many
exploits must he perform in order to reach
his goal, that his progress towards his island
destination often resembles an initiatory jour¬
ney which culminates in a revelation.
Ulysses, embarked upon his circuitous
journey that leads from one island to another,
finally returns home where he is able at last
to address the shade of his dead mother.
Gilliat, by surmounting all the tribulations of
cold, water, hunger, thirst and fear, achieves
merit, only to be disappointed before finding

a consummation in his fatal union with the
sea, as related by Victor Hugo in Les Tra¬
vailleurs de la Mer (1866).
Elsa Morante's L'Isola di Arturo (1957)
also ends with an initiation which includes
the ultimate ordeal, the revelation of the last
and cruellest mystery of life. And in his alle¬
gorical tale AlHayyibn Yaqzàn, the twelfth-
century Moorish philosopher Ibn Tufayl
describes a kind of Muslim Robinson Crusoe
who, after being abandoned as a child on an
island close to India, is able by himself, in this
place conducive to meditation, to discover the
laws of nature and to penetrate intuitively to
the mystic truths.
The other side
We now come to the very edge of the world,
where the other face of reality is revealed.
In Homer's Odyssey, the island of the
Phaeacians, skilled seafarers accustomed to
rowing from one world to another, embodies
this idea of passing over, of moving from one
reality to another. In Le voyage de Maëlduin,
what the hero perceives is also an island, but a
strange island divided by a wall. On one side
of the wall are black sheep, on the other, white
sheep. When a white sheep is moved to the
other side, it at once turns black. When a black
sheep joins the white sheep, it immediately
becomes white. The wall is clearly a bound¬
ary separating two worlds.
Paradise
All these islands are but ports of call, last out¬
posts, places of initiation, gateways to the
island of the Other World, final goal of the
Adventure and of the Quest, crowning point
of this labyrinthine journey. Islands of the
Blessed in the Hesperidean gardens of Greek
mythology; Emain Ablach, the Faery Isle of
the Celts, the Island of the Dead, from Pro-
copius to Maurice Leblanc such are some of
the myriad guises assumed by the same theme.
It is always an ideal island, the island of
another world. Where else indeed does Gil-
gamesh, the earliest Babylonian epic, place the
terrestrial paradise, other than on a remote
and inaccessible island, at the furthermost lim¬
its of the Earth, beyond the waters of death?
Why, from Plato to Aldous Huxley, from
Thomas More to Tommaso Campanella, have
the perfect cities of so many Utopias been
located on islands? Surely for no reason other
than a desire to leave behind the paltry routines
of everyday life and recreate elsewhere the ideal
city to which we aspire.
Journey's end
We have been able to do no more here than
touch on some of the huge number of works
centred on islands.
It is none the less clear from the few exam¬
ples cited that the myth of a wondrous isle has
enjoyed such exceptional favour because it nat¬
urally lends itself to the traditional themes of
the narrative art, particularly adventure stories
and tales of the supernatural: escape away fro m
and out of the world, sea and mountain, soli¬
tude and shelter, treasure, fairies and monsters,
paradise and ecstasy, and many others.
All these themes form a kind of constella¬
tion with the island at the centre, around
which they gravitate as though by magnet¬
ism, like so many planets around the sun. And
these planets may in turn suggest other themes
which, by association, cause us to envelop in
mystery any island at all, no matter how ordi¬
nary in itself, and to identify it with the fab¬
ulous realm of myth.
A print by the Japanese
artist Andô Hiroshige
(1797-1858). It is one of a
series entitled Tôkaidô
gojûsan tsugi ("Fifty-three
Stages of theTokaido"),
published in 1833-1834.
