ANNIVERSARY
ALEKO KONSTANTINOV
(1863-1897)
Happy and glorious
BY GEORGI DANAÏL0V
Still going strong a century after his creator's death,
a hero of Bulgarian literature who stepped out of the pages
of fiction into real life.
It is a rare occurrence for a hero of literature to leap off the page, turn
his back on the writer who created him, and go off and live his own life.
I only know of one such case in Bulgarian literature. His progenitor
was Aleko Konstaiilinov, who was born in Svishtov in 1 863 and met his
end on the road between l'eshlera and Pazardhzik in 1897. Konstan-
tinovvvasa lawyer, publicist and journalist, who signed bis works with
the pen name "I hippy". Democrat, musician, nature-lover, mountaineer,
traveller and bohemian, he was an intellectual aristocrat and perhaps
Bulgaria's most brilliant writer.
After producing a travel hook about America, Do Chicago i nazad
('"To Chicago and Back", 1891) Konstantinov used a blend of love,
hate and satire to create a character of a type we come across every «lay
of our lives, a character we thoroughly detest and with whom at the,
same time we feel a secret complicity. Ostensibly we expel him from our¬
selves but at the same time we leave the back door wide open for him,
because when we are in a light spot we need his inventiveness and his
extraordinary adaptability. We loathe his impudence and braggadocio,
his crudencss and lack of sophistication, but we know that we have the
same intolerable quirks as he does.
Aleko Konstantinov created his character effortlessly, with aristo¬
cratic nonchalance. He gave him the name Ganyu, that of a merchant
> Con RIER B MAY 1997
49

ANNIVERSARY AUTHORS
of attar of roses he had met in Chicago, to which he added the name
Balkanski, meaning "Balkan" a bold yet justified generalization
and made him the central character of a series of short stories.
The Bulgarian public has taken Ganyu Balkanski so much to heart
that it has virtually forgotten his origin as a fictional character. This
earthy, authentic figure is so successful, active and alive that he is at
home in all kinds of settings and plots. He crops up in Prague and
Vienna, in Switzerland and Russia, where he has picked up the secrets
of journalism, the principles of unprincipled politics, election-winning
tactics.
Some critics have seen Ganyu Balkanski as the archetype of the Bul¬
garian petty bourgeoisie which was to he almost squeezed out of exis¬
tence hy half a century of socialism. To the amazement of the Marxists,
however, Aleko's hero did not go under with the bourgeoisie but con¬
tinued on his sprightly way, marching at the side of demonstrators
brandishing the red flag.
In the popular imagination, Ganyu has acquired a heroic dimension.
He has become a man worth two, a sexual titan, a lively mind who can
find original solutions to all kinds of problems. Like many undying
heroes of world literature, Bai Ganyu has a strong sense of humour and
the capacity to laugh at himself.
Someone once asked Aleko Konstantinov what was the happiest
day of his life. "The day when I had the idea of writing Bai Ga/iyit,"
was his answer. Ganyu Balkanski's creator was murdered hy hired
assassins on 21 May 1897. There is a theory that he was killed by mis¬
take and that the bullets were intended for his friend, the politician
Takev, with whom he was travelling in a coach. They had changed
places a few minutes before the coach reached the spot where it was
ambushed. Many years later, the Bulgarian artist Ilya Bechkov drew a
widely applauded cartoon of the scene. Aleko Konstantinov is shown
lying on the ground riddled with bullets and saying to Ganyu Balkan-
ski, who is leaning over him, "Did you do it, Bai Ganyu? You've shut my
trap, eh?"
In spite ofthat, I refuse to think of Ganyu Balkanski as a parricide.
In spite of all his faults and odious characteristics, I regard him as an
extremely resourceful man and do not see why he should always be pil¬
loried. He was a great survivor, and that's all. Perhaps the Bulgarians
would not have survived several centuries of domination without the
vitality, powers of endurance and flexibility ofAleko Konstantinov's hero.
And so Mr. Balkanski is still going strong. As for his creator, all that
survives of him in the house where he was born is his heart a hard piece
of yellowish muscle patched up hy pathologists and [»reserved in alco¬
hol exhibited in a glass case. As well as this relic visitors can see the
clothes Konstantinov was wearing when he was killed. His shirt bears
rust-coloured bloodstains. Imprints of his killers' footsteps are moulded
in plaster.
A superb bust of Konstantinov by Jcko Spiridonov can he seen in the
municipal gardens at Svishtov. Aleko is holding a cigarette and a hint
of a smile plays about his features as he gazes transfixed at some won¬
derful sight. "To Aleko!" says an affectionate inscription engraved
beneath the bust. What writer, politician or public man could boast of
being so close to the people?
In 1995, Chicago University also decided to erect a bust to Aleko
Konstantinov. A copy was made of Jeko Spiridonov's work but with¬
out the hands! It was said that moulding the hands would have made
the reproduction too expensive. And perhaps that cigarette would
have made a had impression. So only Aleko's smile made the journey to
America. B
